A Seasonable VINDICATION OF THE Truly Catholic Doctrine OF THE Church of
England: IN REPLY TO Dr. Sherlock's ANSWER to Anonymus his three Letters
concerning Church Communion.

Errare possum, Haereticus aut Schismaticus esse nolo.

LONDON: Printed for Jonathan Robinson, at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1683.

Anonymus his REPLY to Dr. Sherlock's Answer to his Three Letters about
Church Communion.
SIR,
BEING neither Prophet, Dr. Sherlock 's Letter to Anonym. page 54.
nor Prophet's Son, nor having any outward Sign, whereby I might judge of your
pleasure to teach me my Catechism in private; I, by publishing my Objections
against your Discourses about Church Communion, have given you the opportunity
of glutting and satiating your Revenge, Sherlock 's Discourse of the knowledge
of Christ 2d ed. p. 32. and 43.
(according to your own decent Expression of Divine Justice) and insulting over
the Ignorance of an illtaught Layman, who knew not what it was to press Dr.
Sherlock to explain himself, in a Matter wherein his own Brethren, such as are
as far from the Imputation of Deism or Socinianism as himself, See his Letter,
p. 55.
and are not likely to contemn the Notion of a Church, and of the Evangelical
Priesthood and Sacraments, have been highly dissatisfied, as he himself well
knows.

You blame me, Ibid. p. 57.
for offering no Argument to disprove any Thing you say, nor showing wherein
lay the Weakness of your Arguments: As if it were nothing to urge to a Man the
plain Consequences of his Doctrine, Sherlock's Answer to Danson, p. 6.
which (as you know who teaches us) is a plain way of Reasoning, which all Men
allow of, to convince Men of the Vnsoundness of their Doctrines.

This perhaps I may have done in the first and second Letters: And for my
third, where you say, I run nothing but Dregs and Lees, His Letter to Anonym.
p. 33.
and where you think little new, but Repetitions of old Queries; perhaps some
will belive, it was not altogether impertinent to show wherein your Art lay, in
applying that to a Church in one Sense, which belonged to it in another.

But admit all this were nothing to the disproof of what you undertook; Ibid.
p. 57.
I think it had been enough, if I had only put such Questions as might oblige
you to explain your self: And if your Discourse stood in need of it, Ibid. p. 5.
you may well think your self concerned in my Queries, and ought to thank me
for putting you upon a Purgation.

Which you have made in such a manner, as if your Trial had been by Fire.

Truly I should have been glad to have found it done with such Charity and
Candor, as becomes a Messenger of the Prince of Peace, and might have given
some reasonable satisfaction, that you aim at something better, than running
down at any rate those who have the misfortune to think otherwise than you do.

You complain indeed, Ibid. p. 53.
that I have not treated you with that Civility which I owe your Person, or
your Profession; nay, as good as tell me, I have been scandalously rude, when
you wish for my own sake I had carried my self better. Truly, if it be such
Rudeness to charge a Clergyman with what one takes to be the Import of his
Doctrine, and calling it uncharitable, or owing to ill Principles, where he
believes it so, I confess my self guilty. Yet I appeal to all unbiased Men,
whether those foul Representations of Christianity, which I still conceive to
lurk within the former general Assertions, were animadverted on with that
Severity which ought to have been.

But yet it seems you were resolved to be even with me in the worst Sense.
Wherefore, to pass by the telling me in effect, His Letter, p. 57.
that a Fool may ask more Questions than a wise Man can answer, but that mine
are very foolish and impertinent Questions, generally nothing to the purpose,
(which is such a Rebuke, as if you should bid me ask no more with a dirty Face)
you insinuate, Page 56.
That I espouse a Schism or Faction, only to show my Wit in defending it, and
to make my self considerable by espousing a Party, Page 21, and 56.
and am no hearty Lover of the Church of England; Page 53.
that it is not in my Nature to be civil to a Clergyman.

That I disown part of the due Authority of Bishops: Page 54.
That I think of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, as a very indifferent
Ceremony: That I designed to affront Dr. Stilling fleet, and Dr. Tillotson,
whom I greatly reverence; Page 48, and 50.
and particularly, would charge the former with endeavoring to prove all
Church Communion needless.

That I excuse Dissenters upon such Principles as tend^ to undermine
Christianity, Page 56.
etc.

But these Insinuations, to which I shall not give their due Epithete, were not
enough for your purpose; but you must come to a positive Charge, which you
scatter up and down your Answer, as that I never spare any Man's Reputation to
serve my Designs; His Letter, p. 50.
and that my Reproaches and Commendations are but different Ways of Abuse.

Nay, you are so indiscreet to charge upon me what I chiefly write against, and
blame you for, which is, Page 45.
That where two Churches are not in Communion with each other, they cannot both
belong to the same Body, but that it is evident, that one of these mast needs
be cut off from Christ's Body.

Where you take advantage of the Printer's Mistake, Anonymus's 3d Letter, p. 26.
putting it is, for is it? which I made by way of Question, as manifestly
appears by the Coherence.

But the dreadfullest part of your Charge is in the ghostly Counsel which you
vouchsafe me, where you tell me, Page 53.
It is evident I have a great Spite at the whole Order of the Clergy: That I am
guilty of too plain a Contempt of all Church Authority: Page 54.
That tho I pretend to be in Communion with the Church of England, I make the
Church it self a very needless and insignificant Thing, for I know no necessity
of communicating with any Church: That I will not allow it to be Schism, to
separate from the Church: And that I think it a pretty indifferent thing,
whether Men be baptized, or not, or by whom. Then, to deal plainly with me, you
think I have more need to be taught my Catechism, than to set up for a Writer
of Books: And that the Consequence of the Way I am in, is no less than a
Contempt of all revealed and instituted Religion. And what, of most Men, I
should not have expected from Dr. Sherlock, my Notions are condemned, as owing
to Deists and Socinians. Page 55.


And thus, Sir, in the Spirit of Meekness and Charity, you have drawn up a very
fair Charge.

You may treat me with as much scorn and contempt as you please, and I shall
consider it but as your natural Infirmity; where God Almighty makes allowances,
we ought: But I ought not to be silent under such Reproaches, of which your own
Conscience cannot but acquit every Thing that I have said or wrote to you.

And further, no reasonable Man can think me concerned to vindicate my self:
The most solemn Protestations concerning my more private Thoughts, would be but
scoffed at, by them who are resolved to believe the worst.

And my Comfort is, no Orthodox Clergyman, that knows me, will be so
uncharitable: But to bring Compurgators of such, (whose Friendships, as they
are dulce decus meum, so they are praesidium too against such fatal
Miscarriages) would but expose their venerable Names to such Usage as I have
met with.

But be that never so hard, for once I will set an Example to a Clergyman, and
show, that I can contain my self after all these causeless Calumnies, tho you
cannot bear to be told of the Truth.

Wherefore I shall calmly show, I. How groundless both your open and implied
Accusations are against me. II. What cause I had to put you upon explaining
your self. III. How unsatisfactory your Explanation is in its own Nature.


So much of your Charge as I am concerned to answer particularly, resolves it
self into these general Heads.

1. My Want of Love to the Church of England, and taking part with Dissenters,
out of Zeal for their Cause, or Vainglory. 2. That I have a Spite at the whole
Order of Clergymen, and disown part of the Power of Bishops. 3. That I
designed to affront Dr. Stillingfleet, and Dr. Tillotson. 4. That I discover a
Contempt of all Church Authority, and think the Church it self an insignificant
Thing. 5. And lastly; That I am guilty of Deism and Socinianism. And,
That my Principles tend to undermine Christianity, and to the Contempt of all
revealed Religion.

First Article.

In the first Article you would argue me guilty of Hypocrisy, in pretending to
be in constant Communion with the Church of England, when I want that Love for
it, which is essential to Union and Communion with it; or of a great deal of
Vanity, in laboring to show my Wit in the Defense of a Cause, which I my self
know to stand in need of Wit and Artifice.

But if it happen, that the Church of England is no more concerned in your
Censures, than perhaps you may think your self to be in the Doctrine of its
Articles or Homiles.

And that it gives you no warrant to call the Dissenters Schismatics, and such
as are deprived of the Influences of the Divine Spirit, while they scruple
Conformity.

My taxing you with want of Charity toward Dissenters, will be as far from the
suspicion of such a Zeal for them, as implies a Dis-esteem of our Church, or
such a Defense of their Cause, as may be imputed to Wantonness or Vanity, Luke
10.
that it may be more like the Act of that Samaritan, who took care of the poor
Man, who had been most barbarously used by Thieves, and could meet with no pity
from the Priest and the Levite, who past by on the other side.

Whatever you think of this Matter, I am bold to affirm, that our Church
nowhere warrants your Assertions, either in its Articles, Homilies, or Canons.
Indeed in the Canons of King James, the Authority of which, as to us Laymen, I
need not here enquire into, I find Schismatici mentioned in some of the Titles,
but not in any of the Canons, to be sure by no means applied in your manner.

But then you tell me, His Letter, page 21.
No Man who had any kindness for the Church, with which he pretends to hold
Communion, would make such a vile Insinuation, as if professed Atheists were
admitted to Communion. But certainly there may be a professed Atheist, tho he
does not profess himself so at the time of his communicating, (...) for want of
that Euphemia, which one cannot greatly offend against by one single Word, of
no ill signification.

I am sure you, of all Men, have no reason to press hard upon me in this
Particular.

Third Article.

That I may be deprived of the Patronage of two such great Luminaries of our
Church, as Dr. Stillingfleet, and Dr. Tillotson, Page 49.
you tax me with a Design of affronting Dr. S. and dealing with the other great
Man at the same rate. Page 50.


Secret Things belong to God; but I am sure you could have no Revelation from
above of any such Design; nor can any thing that I have said look that way.

Assure your self, I cited the Words against the absolute Necessity of
Church Communion, (whence you ground your Reflection) in the same Sense as I
receive them, which is in their utmost Latitude, but by no means as if they
would set aside all Government in the Church. But you are certainly guilty of
the Affront against them, if you think there is any harm in the Quotations, or
as if I expose their Failings thereby. I will not here return upon you, That
you never spare any Man's Reputation, to serve your Design, etc. which would
come as properly from me, as it did from you.

But when you were upon such Authorities, you would have done well to have
reconciled your self to Dr. Stillingfleet's Sense of Schism, which, if his
Judgment be valuable in competition with Dr. Sherlock's, Vid. Preface to the
three Letters.
lies not in a voluntary Departure out of any particular Church, but the true
Catholic Church. And the Reason which he gives for it, is the Ground which I
go upon. If you will teach me my Catechism better in this Point, I am very
ready to learn.

Fourth Article.

The fourth Article has many in the Belly of it; for under the supposed
Contempt of Church Authority, are, in your Sense, contained:

1. The thinking the Church it self an insignificant Thing, and that no
causeless Separation from it can be a Schism.

2. A despising the Evangelical Priesthood, as you call it.

3. The looking upon the Sacraments as very indifferent Ceremonies. Page 54.


1. In the first, you (as is usual with you) would take advantage of your own
Confusion, in blending together the Notion of the Catholic, and of a
particular Church; For tho one may think that it signifies not much, or is not
one's Duty to communicate with every particular sound Church; yet it is, no
doubt, always his Duty to communicate, actually, or in Inclination, with the
Church of Christ, in that which essentially constitutes it his Church: Nay, and
there may be a Schismatical Separation, even upon the account of lesser
Matters. But my Question is, Whether there may not be a Separation, causeless
in the Nature of the Thing occasioning it, tho not in relation to the Party's
Conscience who scruples it, and that without Schism.

But as* Dr. Stillingfleet rightly distinguishes, Preface to the three Letters.
between what is necessary to Salvation, and what is necessary to the
Government of the Church; my receiving his Sense, has sufficiently anticipated
and removed this Imputation, unless you will fix it upon him too.

2. But for the second; If by an Evangelical Priesthood, you mean such as is
necessary to offer up Sacrifices for us; I know of no such upon Earth, by the
Gospel-Institution.

3. For the third, which may take in what may seem omitted on the foregoing
Head; I desire to be informed, what one Passage has fallen from me, which looks
like an excusing the Contempt or Neglect of the Sacraments, or of them to whom
ordinarily it belongs to administer them. Yet methinks you do not duly
consider, that a Thing may be one's Duty by virtue of a positive Command, and
consequently ought to be done, when fit Circumstances concur; yet not being
enjoined as the necessary Means to Salvation, when such Circumstances are
wanting, the actual Exercise is not required; yet it does not follow, that
therefore it is indifferent.

What the Judicious Hooker says of Baptism, is doubtless equally applicable to
the other Sacrament, and all the Parts of the Office of the Ministry.

That God ( says he) has committed the Ministry of Baptism unto special Men;
Hooker's Eccles. Pol. p. 332.
it is for Order's sake in his Church, and not to the end that their Authority
might give being, or add force to the Sacrament it self. To this purpose I did
before cite the deservedly esteemed Authors, Dr. Stillingfleet, Dr. Tillotson,
and their Forerunner, Mr. Chillingworth; yet certainly this does not overthrow
the Necessity of a settled Ministry, Answer to Anon. p. 49.
and a regular Authority in the Church.

It were an easy matter here to make a pompous show of Reading; I shall only
observe to you, that some of my Questions related to the supposed absolute
Necessity of receiving the Sacrament of Baptism; others, to the Authority of
them who administer it. Indeed that of the Lord's Supper was not mentioned by
me, because, as you had handled the Matter, the chief Dispute was about the
forming of a Church, Resolut. of Cases, p. 10.
and Church Communion, which you tell us, is something antecedent to all the
Acts and Offices of Communion.

I must tell you, I had my Warrant for such Interrogations as I made upon both
Heads, from very great Lights in our Church.

Mr. Hooker, when he was to argue against the Dissenters of his Time, found
them to stand much upon the Authority of their Ministry, which they contended
to be by Divine Right, and that others could not duly administer the
Sacraments. Hooker, f. 317.
Now tho that great Man asserts, That it has been constantly held, as well
touching Believers as Martyrs, that Baptism taken away by Necessity, is
supplied by desire of Baptism, and to Children, by a presumed Desire: Ibid. f.
320.
Yet he chiefly addresses himself to prove, That Baptism by any Man, in case of
Necessity, is valid; which, he says, was the Voice of the whole World
heretofore.

But a learned Oxford Professor, Mr. George Abbot, in a Theological Lecture
there, de Circumcisione and Baptismo, goes to prove it unlawful, for any of the
Laity to usurp upon the Ministerial Office in this, because Baptism is not
absolutely necessary in it self. Questiones in Schola Theol. per G. Abbot,
edit. 1598, p. 106.
He concludes his elaborate Reading thus: Interea tamen ista sunt, quae
hodierna oratione accepistis: Externo Sacramento non sic astringi and alligari
Dei gratiam, ut sine ipso salvare aliquando nolit. Ideoque and diffidenter
quoad Deum, and audacter quoad se, Faeminas Laicosque facere, qui baptizare
aggrediuntur. Tertio, tamen cum sigillum sit impressum, non esse iterandum.

Fifth Article.

The fifth Article, which is not so explicit as the foregoing, of being guilty
of Deism, Socinianism, and what not, is laid but as a Consequence of the
former; wherefore that Imputation being wiped off, I fear no Man's charging me
with this.

And to deal as plainly with you, as you, I think you, have done with me, I
should have expected this sooner from another Man. Whatever you or I say, the
World will judge, whether he is most likely to be guilty of Deism, undermining
Christianity, and contemning all revealed Religion, who calls your Opinions in
question; or he who will argue, Res. of Cases, p. 9.
that it is as necessary to communicate with every sound Part of the Catholic
Church, Gods Coven. is with the whole Body of Christians, as united in one
Communion.
as with any; and that one is as much obliged to communicate as a Member with
some particular, visible, sound Part, as to be a Christian; and that not only
by joining in the Purity of Faith and Worship, (for that he tells us Heretics
might do) but in all other Acts or Terms of Communion: Ibid. p. 30. Vindicat.
of Def. p. 70.
And that notwithstanding the Efficacy which God Almighty has promised to a
true lively Faith in the Merits of Christ Jesus, it is as necessary to
Salvation to know which of the Churches, divided in Accidentals, is in the
right, and with which we are bound to communicate, Resolut. of Cases, p. 37, 38.
rejecting all divided Communions for Schismatical, as it is to be of the
Christian Religion. Such sort of Mediums must needs do as great Disservice to
Christianity, as counterfeit Miracles to the true; and he who imposes the
Belief of both, as of equal Authority, or under equal Necessity, to my
thinking, bids pretty fair for the undermining and contempt of all.

For Socinianism, His Letter to Anonym. p. 35.
not knowing upon what account I should come to be cautioned against it, I
should think it used merely as a Term of Reproach, to be given of course when a
Man is angry, and wants better Arguments, were it not that perhaps you might do
it designedly, to prevent my joining in that Charge, which others have in this
respect undertaken to make good against your self; and crying Whore first, as
they say, would oblige me to find another Addition for you.

Truly I shall not go about to retort it, not being at leisure to tell you,
wherein you may seem not to have answered fully, Vid. his Defense and
Continuat. p. 534.
or to have slighted many Things as Buffoonry, which have been very closely* as
well as acutely urged.

I shall only observe upon good Authority, Mr. Chillingworth's Pref.
that the Socinians give themselves a greater Liberty of enquiring into the
Modes of Existencies, and the Nature of Divine Mysteries, than becomes
short-sighted Mortals. And if other Men, equally full of themselves, happen to
differ from them, when they adventure upon their own way of explaining those
sublime Truths, which retire to be the Objects of our Admiration, rather than
of a distinct Perception; If the Scripture-Account which the Homilies of our
Church afford them, be looked on as too great a stinting of their Spirit of
Enquiry, they have no great reason to expect, that God's Grace should be
engaged to protect them from dangerous Errors, seeing they attempt to be wise
above what is written.

And perhaps he who will reproach as magical any Notion of the Union of true
Believers with Christ Jesus, Vindic. of the Def. of Dr. Stilling. p. 46.
and with each other, which does not agree with his Political Scheme, or with
the visible Connection of the Parts of a natural Body, may take to himself as
dangerous a Latitude; and then we need not wonder, if he apply to the Church of
Christ what he has observed of a natural Body, Viz.

That the Union of every Member with the Body, Vindic* p. 38.
is its Union with that part of the Body which is next, etc.

Had he but made Provision for the Clothes too, and had argued, that that part
of the Body which is naked, cannot be united to that which is clothed, it
might have come up more fully to his purpose of proving a necessity of Union in
Accidentals, as well as in Essentials.

Pray the next time you see our loving Friend W. S. tell him so much is
expected from him.

Having said what I conceived fitting, for an Antidote against the spreading of
your Reflections upon me, I shall here justify the Pertinency of my Questions
to you, and show,

II. What Cause I had to put you upon explaining your self, concerning the
Notions of Church Communion.

My apparent Design being to do this, you have no reason to blame me for not
giving you your own Words, Letter to Anonym. p. 2.
with that dependence and connection, in which the whole Strength of the
Discourse consists; for had that been never so well laid together, I ought to
believe it to proceed upon some false Ground, Vid. Dr Still. The Faith of
Protestants reduced to Principles, p. 487.
as being contrary to those Notions, which must be antecedent to the Belief of
all revealed Religion.

You know one, who thinks himself not concerned what Consequences are charged
upon his Hypothesis, Vid. Mr. D's Reply to Mr. Baxter.
so that he prove it positively true. Perhaps you may may be as confident of
yours, as he was of his.

'Twas enough for me to oblige you to speak plainly what your Notion was. I
must confess, I did suspect it of D -- lism, which indeed you overthrow in that
Book to which you refer me for my Satisfaction; but would establish one much
weaker, and with less show of Reason.

That which made me suspect your Principle to be that way, Resol. of Cases of
Consc. p. 38
was, Your asserting the absolute Necessity for every Man who lives here, as he
would be a Member of Christ's Body, to communicate with the National Church,
because of its being a sound part of the Catholic Church.

To which end you held,

1. That it is as necessary for every Man to communicate with some particular
visible sound Church, Vid. e contra B. Morton's Apol. Cathol. p. 32, and p. 40.
Resol. p. 31.
as to be a Christian.

2. That the only visible way God has of forming a Church, Ibid. p. 5.
is by granting a Church Covenant, which is the Divine Charter whereon the
Church is founded, N. B. When I had charged the Consequence of your Opinion to
be such as Church Governors please, you opposed it not.
and investing some Persons with Power and Authority to receive others,
according to the Terms and Conditions of the Covenant, and by such
Covenant-Rites, and Forms of Admission, as he is pleased to institute, which
under the Gospel is Baptism, is under the Law it was Circumcision.

3. That no Man can be a Member of the Church, or in Covenant with God, Vid. 3d
Letter, p. 28.
who is not visibly admitted into God's Covenant by Bapptism. Resol. of Cases,
p. 5.


4. That which makes any thing in a strict Sense an Act of Church Communion,
Ibid. p. 33.
is, that it is performed in the Fellowship of the Apostles, or in Communion
with the Bishops and Ministers of the Church.

(...) supposes, that we ought to communicate with a sound Church, whether it
has Authority over us or no; which wants no more to expose it, than to retort
some of your own Words: Letter to Anon p. 8.
For your way of arguing is, as if a Man should say, there is a divine Law to
obey Civil Magistrates. Therefore into whatever Government you come, whether as
Ambassador from a Foreign Prince, or otherwise, you are bound to live according
to the Laws of that Government, Ibid. p. 41.
in every respect, as much as a Native. And for Foreigners to enjoy several
Immunities from Taxes, and the like, is contrary to the Fundamental Laws of
Government.

But you are positive, that Obedience to the Church of England is a Duty
incumbent on those which are, Ibid. p* 6.
or ought to live in Obedience to this particular Church: That is, they who
ought to live in Obedience, ought to live in Obedience; which is a greater
Blunder surely, than my speaking only of Power and Censures, Ibid. p. 7.
when I was talking of Communion: For surely the submitting to the Churches
Terms of Communion, is submitting to its Power. Well, however, this Submission,
you say, may be called a Part of the Divine Covenant. Which gives me occasion
to mind you of what our Homilies say about Obedience to Human Laws.

God has appointed his Laws, Homilies. 2d Sermon. of good Works, f. 35.
whereby his Pleasure is to be honored: His pleasure is also, that all Men's
Laws, not being contrary unto his Laws, shall be obeyed and kept, as good and
necessary for every Commonweal, but not as Things wherein principally his
Honor rests.

And all Civil and Man's Laws either be, or should be made to bring Men the
better to keep God's Laws that consequently or following, God should be the
better honored by them.

Howbeit the Scribes and Pharisees were not content that their Laws should be
no higher esteemed than other positive and Civil Laws, nor would not have them
called by the Name of Temporal Laws, Or part of the Divine Covenant.
but Holy Traditions; and would have them esteemed not only for a right and
true worshipping of God, as God's Laws be indeed, but also for the most high
honoring of God, to which the Commandments of God should give place.

St. Paul, speaking of those who scrupled eating some Meats, upon their
apprehension that they were unclean, which he tells them was a causless Scruple
in the Nature of the Thing, tho not as to their Consciences, assures them, that,

He that doubts is damned if he eat, Romans 14. 23.
because he eats not of Faith; for whatsoever is not of Faith, is Sin.

If you will say, this was spoke where there was no humane Law to determine its
Indifference; I desire you to consider, whether such an Answer savours not of
that Pharisaism which our Church condemns.

But certain it is, if active Obedience in the Matter which one scruples, which
is Submission to the Power of the Church, be or may be called Part of the
Divine, Covenant, which unites us to God, and to each other, there can be no
Suspension of Communion because of doubt; but he is out of God's Covenant, and
must be damned, continuing so, who does not actually conform to those very
Things which he conscienciously scruples; nay, and the Church may excommunicate
him while he is under this Doubt: For you know who teaches us, that it is
impossible that a Church, which is not Schismatical in its Terms, Vindic. of
the Def. of Dr. S. p. 416.
that is, (as seems there meant) which imposes nothing in it self contrary to
God's Law, can excommunicate schismatically. Indeed the Excommunication,
according to that Notion, does but declare the State he was in before; for by
not actually obeying that part of the Divine Covenant, the Man was deprived of
all other possible Means of Salvation; agreeably to which the Defender of Dr.
Stillingfleet says:

When our Savior so expressly asserts, Ibid. p. 116.
Whatsoever thou shall bind on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven; and whatsoever
thou shall loose on Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven: If by binding and
loosing, we will understand putting out or receiving into the Church, (which
that Author plainly does but immediately before) it makes the Communion of the
Church absolutely necessary to Salvation. This shows that my Consequence was
rightly inferred, when I argued,

That if Submission to the Power and Censures of the Church be part of the
Divine Covenant: then, as he who is not admitted into this Church, is no Member
of the Catholic, and has no Right to any of the Benefits of being a Member of
Christ's Body; so it is with every one who is excluded by Church Censures, tho
excommunicated for a slight Contempt or Neglect, nay, for a wrongful Cause.

Your Answer to this, Letter to Anonymus, p. 24.
is of one who lives in England, and renounces Communion; when the Question is
of withdrawing, or refusing, because of real Scruples, which you will have to
be an adhering to their own private Fancies, and to proceed from Pride and
Opinionativeness, because they don't believe as the Church believes.

But then you say in general Terms, Page 7*
Whoever is excommunicated from one sound Part of the Catholic Church, is
excommunicated from all.

Whether this be upon the Supposition, that every sound Church is bound to
ratify the Censures of another; and that he who divides from his Bishop's
Altar, divides from a Mystical Head, answering to the Jewish High Priest, as is
taught by him from whom you borrow the Notion, That Christianity is nothing but
Mystical Judaism; perhaps one may know hereafter.

But if a Man excommunicated from one sound Part, be, as you would have him, by
consequence cut off from the whole Catholic Church, that Church to the Unity
of which you say the Influences of the Divine Spirit are confined; Resol. of
Cases of Consc. p. 48.
to what purpose is your Distinction between a Judicial Sentence, Letter to
Anonymus, p. 7.
and an Act of a Man's own Choice? For you suppose, the Man chooses that which
justifies the Sentence. And how can you say, you will not pretend to determine
the Final State of Men? Whereas he who dies after such a Sentence, unrestored
to the Church Communion, dies in a Condition, as you tell us, deprived of all
the Influences of the Divine Spirit, and consequently of all Means of
Salvation. And it is but small Comfort for such a Man, that the Church did not
design his Damnation, Vid. Vindic. of the Def. p. 4.4.
Because the Church casts no Man out of a State of Salvation; that this
excludes them from a State of Salvation, is not the Act of the Church, but
God's Act. As if you should say, that when you cast an innocent Man out of your
Ship, into the vast Ocean, where he is sure to perish; that this excludes the
poor Wretch from the State of Life, is not your Act, but God's.

Truly, Sir, how much soever you may slight the way of asking Questions, I
think it better to ask you, Whether you believe a Man, thus put out of the
State of Salvation by God himself, can be saved of his own natural Power,
without the Influence of the Divine Spirit, which it seems he is deprived of by
a fallible Sentence? than to charge you with Pelagianism, Letter to Anon. p. 7.
when you think you determine nothing of the Man's Final State.

But I am sure, Homily, f. 209
Our Church teaches us, that, It is the Holy Ghost, and no other Thing, that
does quicken the Minds of Men, stirring up good and godly Motions in their
Hearts, which are agreeable to the Will and Commandment of God, such as
otherwise, of their own crooked and perverse Natures they should never have.

The other Horn of my formidable Dilemma, Page 8.
as you slightingly call it, you avoid with becoming Caution; and supposing it
to be aimed against all manner of Obligation to Communion with this Church,
Letter, p. 8.
take not its real Force, which is, That if this Submission or Obedience be no
part of the Divine Covenant, then it may so happen, that a Man living here may
be a Member of the Catholic Church, tho he is not in Communion with this sound
Church. To which you give not the least colorable Answer.

And I believe by this time you see, Letter, p. 8.
or at least, others will see, that the Supposition that he ought to
communicate, if Communion may be had, is not to the Question, Whether this be
part of the Divine Covenant, or no? For if it be part of the Divine Covenant,
then I must confess, 'twill not be a sufficient Excuse, that the Submission is
not neglected or contemned; for it ought to be actual, whatever be the Scruple;
especially if the Thing enjoined be not unlawful in it self, tho it be in the
Conscience of the Party.

But then to the Query, Letter, p. 9.
Whether Dissenters may not reply, that they are ready to communicate, if the
Communion be not clogged with some Things, which are no part of the Divine
Covenant? You say, The Reply is weak and impertinent, because Obedience in all
lawful Things is in a large Notion part of the Divine Covenant; and the
Supposition is, of communicating where Communion may be had.

Now the Question being put of their scrupling the Lawfulness, I leave it to
your self to consider, whether our Church does not condemn this Opinion as
Pharisaical.

3. The third Head or Query, Letter to Anon. p. 9.
which concerns the Derivation of Church Power from Christ himself, you suppose
not to belong to you.

But surely, at first sight, before one hears your learned Answer, Letter, p.
4* 5.
one would think it strange, how it should come to pass, that you should admit
the Dissenters to have full Church Power amongst them, and yet charge them with
Schism, for not communicating with us; while you suppose, that whoever
communicates with them will be guilty of Schism.

Methinks Mr. D.'s Ground of charging them herein as much more plausible; which
is, That they are Schismatics in dividing from them, who derive all
Church Power within this Nation from our Savior, and his Apostles, exclusively
of all others. But pray, is the Church Power in the hands of our Conformists,
by reason of the Divine Law, or because of the Civil Law, which makes them the
governing Part?

If it be by reason of the Divine Law, Mr. D. is in the right, notwithstanding
all that you say against him. If it be by the Civil Law, then the Reason why I
ought to communicate with Conformists, and not with Dissenters, is by reason of
a Difference made by Human Laws. And then see if you can answer what you say
against Mr. Humphreys his peaceable Design of uniting the Episcopal Men,
Vindicat. of Dr. Stilling. p. 4, and 5.
Presbyterians, and Independents, under one Civil Government; where you say, If
the Evil and Sinfulness of Separation consisted only in Obedience to Humane
Laws, I should think it a barbarous Thing to make any Laws, which shall ensnare
Men in so great a Guilt.

But in Answer to my Question,

You own that a Layman may preach the Gospel, Letter, p. 10.
where there is none of the Clergy. But since you here set aside the Question
of the Derivation of Power from under our Savior, and his Apostles, or from
the Divine Law; how come dissenting Ministers to be Schismatics for preaching
the Gospel? or they not to be Schismatics, who refuse to communicate with
them, even where they require no Terms of Communion, not only not unlawful, but
perhaps which are no way differing from what Christ himself requires?

The first Query here was upon supposition, that you would in no case allow a
Church to be gathered without a constant Succession of Church-Ministers; which
tho you deny to follow from your Doctrine, is but the Consequence of many of
your Assertions, particularly of these two: Resol. of Cases, p. 7, 22.
(1.) That it is absurd to gather a Church out of a Church of baptized
Christians, and divide Neighbor-christians into distinct Communions. Ibid. p.
42.
(2.) That there cannot be two distinct Churches, for distinct Communions, in
one City or Nation.

Taking it for granted, as I had reason, that you went herein upon the
Authority of the Church Officers, I asked,

Whether this would not put the Being of our Church upon an hazardous Issue,
and oblige your self to prove, that 'twas a true Church before the Reformation?
Which surely is no remote Consequence from the Supposition that the
Church Power was lodged with them of the Church of Rome before, in opposition
to which our Church was erected, and out of which it was gathered.

But then you say to my second Query upon this, That there was not the same
Necessity for private Christians, reforming from an Antichristian Church, to
usurp the Ministry, Letter, p. 10.
as there is for a Layman in an Heathen Nation.

But you do not observe, that the Force of this lies in the Supposition, that
the Power was lodged with the Popish Clergy; upon which account the Acts of the
Reformed Ministry, in opposition to them, would be but like the Acts of Laymen.

And you know who has asserted,

That Recourse ought to be had to the Intention of the Church-Governors, Vid.
Mr* D's Reply to Mr. Baxter, p* 43, 81, 22.
Ecclesiastical Power being their Gift: And this does oblige all to a strict
dependence on the supreme visible Power, so as to leave no Place for Appeal
concerning the Practice of such Government: And they are the most certain, as
well as the most competent Judges of their own Intentions.

But should we have recourse to such Church Governors, pray do you think they
would say, you have Power of keeping up a Form of Church Government in
opposition to theirs, or that your Officers are better than Laymen? To put
this home to you, I shall here subjoin a Passage of your own.

Should a Company of private Christians, Vid. Def. of Dr* Still. p. 369*
on their own choice, separate themselves from their Bishops, and unite into a
Church-Society, this were a Church-Faction and Schism, and all they did were
null and void.

Here you must admit, that a Minister Episcopally ordained, may possibly join
with them in this Separation from the Bishop; or else you will allow of what
will overthrow your Assertion, as to Separation, even from the most sound
Church.

Wherefore this being admitted, and it being laid generally, show me, if you
can, wherein this differs from Mr. D. at least, how Separation from Papists, or
from whatever unlawful Terms of Communion, can upon your Hypothesis be freed
from Schism.

You assure us, you do not charge our Dissenters with Schism, Letter, p. 11.
from the Invalidity of their Orders, but from their causless and sinful
Separation. And tho they have true Orders, and are true Churches, but yet
divide Christian Communion, by separating from any sound Part of the Christian
Church, they are Schismatics; nay, if it were only in separating from each
other.

Wherefore since Separation, and ordinarily refusing to communicate where one
never did, but as you suppose, ought, come to the same thing, you cannot blame
me, if I represent your Notion to be, That where there are several Churches
within a Nation, which here you admit of, whether one of these Churches has
Authority over the Members of the other, or no; yet he who refuses to
communicate with any one of these, is a Schismatic: And so you make it in
relation to Churches in several Nations.

If this be your meaning, as I take it to be, then you have no reason to cry
out of Mis-representation, Page 11.
and blending together Things of a different Nature, when I ask,

Query 4. Ibid.
Whether from the Supposition, that there is to be but one Church Covenant
throughout the Catholic Church, that there cannot be one true Church within
another? And that the Nature of Catholic Communion is such, that one ought to
be ready to communicate with any sound Church, from which one is not hindered by
reason of the Distance of Place?

It does not follow.

Here you stop me before you make an Answer, as if I did not fairly, to take
every one of these Propositions for yours, or in tacking together some Things
not very consistent with each other. Because you had in some place asserted,
Page 12.
that there could be but one Church in one Place; therefore it seems, not only
our Dissenters, but also Foreigners living here, are without any Church. Tho to
avoid the Force of my Questions, now you would admit, that the Dissenters may
have sufficient Church Officers and Power, but however, that they are
Schismatics, Answer to Anon. p. 11.
if it were only for dividing from each other.

You had said further, that nothing can justify the Distinction of Christians
into several Churches, Ibid. p. 12.
but only such a Distance of Place, as makes it necessary and expedient to put
them under the Conduct and Government of several Bishops.

What that Distance of Place is, which makes this necessary and expedient, you
are not pleased to inform us. But nothing, it seems, but Distance, can with you
justify a Distinction of Churches, be the Terms never so unlawful; which is but
the same in effect with what you had said elsewhere, as that it is absurd to
gather a Church out of a Church of baptized Christians. Nay further, here is
more wholesome Doctrine, which is, That no Distinction of Churches is
justifiable, but under Bishops. Yet alas! Letter to Anonym, p. 4.
you do not dispute against the Dissenters Form of Church Government, or deny
their being rightly invested with Church Power, no, not you.

But it lies not upon me to reconcile you to your self; nor can you deny the
having said a Thing in one place, because of the contrary in another.

The only Proposition which you can seem to deny with any color, is, That one
ought to be ready to communicate with any sound Church, from which one is not
hindered by distance of Place. But surely it is full enough to this purpose, that,

The Exercise of true Christian Communion in a particular Church, Discourse
concerning Church Communion, p. 14, 15.
is nothing else but the Exercise of Catholic Communion in a particular
Church, which the Necessity of Affairs requires, since all the Christians in
the World cannot meet together for Acts of Worship. But there is nothing in all
these Acts of Communion, which does more peculiarly unite us to such a
particular Church, than to the whole Church.

Again, Ibid. p. 26.
To be in Communion with the Church, signifies to be a Member of it; and that
not of any particular Church, as distinguished from the whole Catholic Church,
but to be a Member of the one Body of Christ, and of every sound Part of it.

Wherefore as a Man is a Member of every sound Church, sure he may communicate
with any sound Church, if Distance do not hinder; nay, the refusing Communion
in such Case, is the very Schism which you all along declaim against.

Having thus fixed upon you every one of these Propositions, Viz. but one
Church Covenant.
(for the first of them I cannot believe that you will yet deny.)

I shall consider with you what follows.

Wherefore I still assert,

Either that the French Protestants have no Church here, Three Letters, p. 13.
but are Schismatics, in not communicating with ours; Or that ours is guilty
of Schism, in making the Terms of Communion so straight, that it is not the
Duty of every one, tho a licensed Stranger, to communicate with this Church.

Now to avoid the Question here, you have a pretty Notion, whereby you would
make French Protestants to have no Church, calling them an Ecclesiastical
Colony, belonging to the Church abroad. But all Church Power being exercised
amongst themselves here, you have no more ground to call them an Ecclesiastical
Colony, in respect of the French Church, than you may call ours so in respect
of any other, to which we might have formerly belonged, Resol. of C^ses, p. ^5.
especially since they cannot meet with the Mother Church in France, for Acts
of Worship; and therefore have your own allowed Distinction from that.

But if these refuse to communicate with our Church, you make Schismatics of
them, only excuse them, as being exempted from the Jurisdiction of this Church.

But this you condemn, Letter to Anon. p. 14.
as being contrary to the Practice of the Primitive Church; and besides,
consider not what you said to Mr. Humphreys his Project; nor your charging the
Dissenters with Schism, for not communicating with each other, notwithstanding
that one cannot pretend Jurisdiction over the other; and so must be in the same
case with those that are privileged or exempted.

Wherefore the French Protestants are beholden to you for a good Lift.

But taking it for granted, that it is the Duty of these French Protestants to
communicate with our Church, when ever they are required, you take no notice of
the Consequence from your Tenent, which is, that they ought notwithstanding an
Exemption; for else it follows, that our Church is too straight in its Terms of
Communion: And you cannot surely but remember where we are taught, Vindic. of
the Def. of Dr. Still. p. 360.
That Union to the Body consists in Union to that Part which is next.

2. But I asked you further, Whether it does not follow, from the Obligation to
communicate, or to be ready to communicate with any true Church, where Distance
does not hinder, that a Member of the Church of England is not obliged to
constant Communion with that Church, but may occasionally communicate with the
French Church, nay, with Dissenters too, if he believes that any of their
Congregations is a true Member of the Catholic Church.

Here I lie under your sore displeasure, Page 16.
for turning your own Artillery upon you. Page 18.
And you think, No Man in his Wits ever understood this Question in any other
Sense, than that whatever Church I can occasionally communicate with, I am also
bound to communicate constantly with, whenever such Reasons as are necessary to
determine my Communion to a particular Church, make it my Duty so to do.

And a very doughty Question this is; for surely it is beyond dispute, that
whatever necessarily determines my Communion to a particular sound Church,
makes constant Communion with it my Duty; and is no more, than that what makes
it my Duty, makes it my Duty. But the Question is, Whether any thing
necessarily determines my Communion to a particular Church, and what it is? And
thus I might leave you upon your Mistake of the Question. But,

I think it is demonstrable, from what you your self say, that the Place does
not determine my Communion with a sound Church, no, not so much as ordinarily.

You distinguish between a State of Communion, and Acts of Communion: But
unless a Man, tho he has sufficient Opportunities, may be in a State of
Communion, without any actual Communion, I know not what is meant by saying,
Resol of Cases, page 15.
No Act of Communion more peculiarly unites us to any particular Church, than
to the whole Christian Church; Letter, p. 15.
and that it is no Interruption of our Communion with the Church of England, to
communicate actually with any Church that is in Communion with it: And yet a
Member, as a Member, is in constant Communion.

Perhaps indeed, if the Communion of Churches is supposed to be upon the
Catholic essential Terms, actual Communion with a Church, which is in
Communion with this, is no Interruption or Suspension of Communion with this.

But admit now, that the French Church, which you say is in Communion with
ours, would be ready, if required, to hold communion with us in every Point
wherein we may seem to differ, but yet should keep up their separate Meetings
or Assemblies; and an English Protestant, believing that he may receive most
Benefit from their Preachers, should never actually communicate with our
Church, but always with that; would he be in a State of Communion with our
Church, or no? And tho the Civil Power has made a Distinction of Parishes, and
some other Places appointed or allowed by its Laws, in one of which it requires
the Sacraments to be received at such and such times: If they receive not in
any of these Places, will the receiving with the French Church justify them,
and free them from the danger of being excommunicated as Schismatics? If it
will not, as you must acknowledge, then either the French Church is not in
communion with us, whereas you say, they are in communion with us; or else
communicating with a Church in communion with ours, is not a Communion with our
Church.

Nay, Page 15.
and you say, that according to the Laws of Catholic Communion, nothing but
Distance of Place can suspend our Obligation to actual Communion.

But if I may communicate with the French Church, as being in communion with
us, then the Place does not determine even my ordinary presential or actual
Communion to ours; nor does it yet appear what does.

But you offer at it, when you tell us, it is separate Power and Jurisdiction,
Page 20.
which determines this Matter; but separate Communion would be Schismatical.

But still what Jurisdiction can there be to oblige me, contrary to the Terms
of Catholic Communion, which (according to your own concession) will suffer me
to wander? Is it the Civil Power, as it unites us under a National Church? Pray
remember how you run Mr. Humphreys down, upon the Supposition that the Civil
Power should take off the Obligation to Episcopal Communion.

Is it the Divine Right? Pray consider Mr. D. again, and then you may think
your self beholden to me, for bringing your Notions under the Protection of so
ingenious a Person.

In the mean while be pleased to show wherein you differ from him, Defense of
Dr. S. p. 585.
when you suppose you have found a National Church antecedent to any Human
Authority.

For this is either as you make the Union of the Bishops to be the National
Church, or the Union of the Clergy and Laity together. If you make it to
consist in the Union of the Bishops, then certainly to make that antecedent to
Human Authority, you must betake your self to D -- lism; at least, you have not
yet invented any other way, who a working Head may do Wonders.

If the Union be of Clergy and Laity together, then it is by Consent, which is
Humane Contract or Agreement, and is the same with Humane Law, by you exploded.

And Consent, Page 566, supra.
you say, is all that is necessary to unite a Body or Society in one Communion.

But then this Consent you hold to be necessary by a Divine Law. And here
indeed is Cardo rei.

Well then, this Consent, which is necessary by a Divine Law, is either in
Fundamentals only, or in Fundamentals and Accidentals too.

Whatever Church differs from a sound Church in Fundamentals, is certainly ipso
facto cut off from Christ's Body, without Excommunication.

But the Question is, Whether if in Accidentals only the danger be the same?

Dr. Stillingfleet says, Vid. Preface to the 3 Letters.
it is not; and you have not yet proved it is.

Indeed you talk very wisely of the Catholic Church, which is the Root and
Fountain of Unity, Vindic p. 24.
and was antecent to particular Churches.

But I would gladly know whether these Accidentals were antecedent too; or
whether it is not the Fountain of Unity, only upon the account of the
Fundamentals essential to it.

Speak home to this, and shame all the Orthodox Writers before you, and of this
Age, if you please. Assure your self, my concern was only to admonish your
self, and your unthinking Hearers, of the Danger I conceived to lie in your
way. If neither you will retract, nor they distrust your Authority, however I
have discharged my self.

But it not being improper for me to make some Enquiry into the Political
Constitution of a Church, viz. as it is founded on Consent, which, as was
before cited, is all that is necessary to unite a Body or Society into one
Communion. Here it is presumed, that the Consent of the Minor Part is so
included in the Major, that every one is bound, as he would avoid the damnable
Sin of Schism, to conform to that sound Church, or particular Way of Worship,
which carries it by most Voices. But suppose, that according to Mr. Humphreys
his Model, several Ways should be left indifferent; or that the Number of
Voices should be equally divided; or where there are three Negatives, it could
not be agreed by all three, dividing by a National Act from a false Way of
Worship; which of the distinct Communions in the true Way should be the
National? Would not more than one Church in such case be consistent with one
Civil Government? And can it be made appear, which of these is the Root and
Fountain of Unity, according to your Cabalistical Terms, to which the others
ought to unite.

But suppose one of the Churches carries it by plurality of Votes, and looking
upon all others as Schismatical, and therein as Heretical too, should, with the
African Fathers, Vindic. of the Defense, p. 14:
deny these Schismatics, their Communion, unless they should be rebaptized,
which you own to have been a Mistake in those Fathers: Pray, would they still
continue Schismatics, who would refuse to come in upon those Terms? Or would
the prevailing Party, which vigorously insisted on this, be Schismatical?

But as you say, that there ought to be but one Church, and one Communion in
one place; and that Dissenters are Schismatics in separating from each other,
as well as from the Church of England, while they live in England. I desire you
to resolve me one Question; which is this.

Whether the Christian Church at Rome, gathered out of the Gentiles in the time
of the Apostles, or that distinct Church which was gathered out of Jews, was
the Church of the Place?

You will say, No doubt that the Church gathered from among the Gentiles, was
the only sound Church. But what think you then of those poor Jews, who through
the Misfortune of their Education were so wedded to the Jewish Rites, that
they thought them necessary to be retained along with Christianity; which (as
you do) probably they thought to be nothing else but mystical Judaism; and
would not communicate in those Christian Congregations, which believed those
Rites to be abolished by the Christian Religion?

Were these poor Men Schismatics, and as bad as Murderers and Adulterers?

If they were, they might well argue, that our Savior introduced a very hard
Law, which not only obliged them to a severer Mortification of their Appetites
and Desires, but required of them upon pain of Damnation, to act against their
Consciences in those very things which they scrupled, as they thought by Divine
Warrant.

But as to their Case, Dr Still. of the Mischief of Separ. p. 172.
Dr. Stillingfleet tells us, that, It was agreed by all the Governors of the
Christian Church, that the Jewish Christians should be left to their own
Liberty, out of respect to the Law of Moses, and out of regard to the Peace of
the Christian Church, which might have been extremely hazarded, if the Apostles
had presently set themselves against the observing the Jewish Customs among the
Jews themselves.

But if it had been absolutely necessary to Catholick-Communion that there
should be but one Church in a place. The Apostles, who were the Governors,
would never have suffered this: Which since they did, I conceive it directly
conclusive against your Notion.

Nor is it to be supposed, that these Jews had no distinct Church Officers. For
Timothy might have been over a Church of converted Jews, being circumcised,
which for ought we know was for that very end.

Nay, Gal. c. 2. 13.
St. Peter himself withdrew, and separated himself from the Gentiles: And, as
St. Paul told him, would compel ( to wit, Verse. 14.
by his Example) the Gentiles to live as do the Jews.

But will you say, (as you must, if you are consistent with your self) that St.
Peter was a Schismatic by this?

You say, There cannot be any competition betwixt two Churches; because there
must be but one in the same place.

How far this agrees with the foregoing Instance, you would do well to
consider.

If in this matter I have fastened many absurd Proposions upon you, page 18.
it is not, I conceive, for want of due regard of my own Reputation, or the
common Principles of Honesty; you well know the old Observation, uno dato
absurdo sequuntur mill.

5. As to my Query about virtual Baptism, you say, You speak only of the
necessity of visible Communion in visible Members: And these you suppose not
capable of Communion with the visible Church, not being made Members. But the
Question is, Whether they be not made Members of the invisible? And if they be,
your Notion, of the absolutle necessity of being visibly received into
Communion, falls.

6. As to that of a professed Athiest; Answer to Anonym. p. 21.
you here place both him and a Schismatic in the same state of Exclusion from
the Catholic Church. Yet it may be a Question, Whether by our unwary wording
things, you do not suppose that the Atheist is entitled to Acts of Communion,
but the Schismatic is not. The first you seem to suppose to be in a State of
Covenant with God.

For a Church State and a Covenant-State you make the same thing: Resol. p 6.
And if it be not, or that Baptism does not give us this, you argue that, then
a Man may be in Covenant with God through Christ, and yet be no Member of
Christ: or, he may be a Member of Christ, viz. as baptized, and yet no Member
of his Body, which is the Church.

Nay, in your glorious Vindication, you number Schismatics among them who you
say, shall at the last day be judged, not as Infidels, but as wicked and
Apostate Christians.

7. The seventh Query, Vindic. of the Defense of Dr. Still. p. 62.
which goes upon that Ground (which you give, and do not yet recede from) for
the Belief of your lodging Church Power so with the Clergy, Vid. 3 Letters to
the Dr. p. 8.
that they who conform not to them, or who incur their Displeasure, would be in
a woeful Case; you answer only with a Scoff; but say not whether the Clergy are
the Church Representative, or whether what I urge would follow from that
Supposition, or no.

These were the general Questions; and whether most of them were impertinent,
or are now fairly answered, it is for others to determine.

From hence I am obliged to follow you to my three Sets of Queries, Letter to
Anon. p. 22.
as you call them, relating to sveral Propositions and the parting-blow of four
Queries relating to the Text.

Because of my asking Questions concerning your Sense of our Savior's Promise
to his Apostles, which you seem to suppose to go along with Church Governors
in Succession, Vid* his Answer to Owen, in his Defense of the Discourse of the
Knowledge of Christ, p. 107.
as distinguished from the Body of Christians, and without allowing private
Christians that share which the Words of the Promise import; you intimate my
designing to confute our Savior, and burlesque his Institution.

But to use mostly your own Expressions, if my design of Charity, and to
deliver that blessed Institution from the Freaks of an Enthusiastic Fancy, and
to expound it to a plain and easy Sense, such as is agreeable to the
Understanding of Men, and worthy of the Spirit of God, be to burlesque
Scripture, I acknowledge the Charge.

To my first Qustion:

Whether our Savior's Promise of Divine Assistance, did not extend to all the
Members of the Church, considering every Man in his respective Station and
Capacity, as well as to the Apostles as Church Governors?

You answer; Letter to Anon. p. 23.
That there are Promises which relate to the whole Church; and Promises which
belong to particular Christians, as well as Promises which relate particularly
to the Apostles and Governors of the Church.

Well, for the comfort of us poor Laymen, there are some Promises which relate
to us.

It being so, then I may well ask,

2. Whether it signifies any thing to say, there is no Promise to particular
Churches, provided there be to particular Persons, such as are in Charity with
all Men, and are ready to communicate with any Church, which requires no more
of them than what they conceive to be their Duty, according to the Divine
Covenant?

You think it hard to know what this Query means. But surely it is material to
know, whether or no such Men may be saved, otherwise than under
Church-Governors. And truly you tell us pretty plainly, (I wish for your own
sake, it had been a little more covert) that such have no Promises, but as
Members of the Church, that is, of the visible Church, under Church Officers,
if you answer to the purpose. You add indeed, When Communion may be had upon
lawful Terms; I hope this implies, that it is possible the Terms may be unlawful.

Which yields me my fourth Question upon this Matter. Vid. Query 4.
But it likewise yields, That if the Terms are unlawful, private Christians are
entitled to these Promises, tho not visibly admitted into a Church State; which
is contrary to what you all along drive at.

But it seems however, your Charity to these Men, who think the Terms such as
they ought not to comply with, is so great, Letter to Anonymus, p. 24.
to believe them guilty of Schism, as adhering to their own private Fancies, in
opposition to Church Authority, out of Pride and Opinionativeness; which God
alone can judge.

3. The third Query is, Whether if the Promise you mention be confined to the
Apostles, as Church-Governors, it will not exclude the Civil Power?

To which you answer, Letter to Anonym. p. 24.
That the Civil and Ecclesiastical Power are very distinct, but very
consistent. But such a Power in the Church Officers, as would make them the
Church-Representative, and prevent a National Reformation, tho by the Civil
Power, is of another Nature. Nor do you think fit yet to declare, what the
Power is which you would have lodged in Church Officers.

But for fear you should go beyond your Warrant in this Matter, I shall mind
you of what our Church teaches us, which is, that,

We must not think, Homily concerning the Holy Ghost, f. 212.
that this Comforter was either promised, or else given only to the Apostles,
but to the Universal Church of Christ, dispersed through the whole World. And
speaking of Christ's Promise, that the Spirit of Truth should abide with them
for ever, and that he would be always with them; he means, says our Church,
by Grace, Virtue and Power; and that ( it says) was indifferently to all that
should believe in him, through their ( the Apostles) Words, that is, to wit,
for his whole Church.

To my Inferences from the second Proposition, which I consider apart:

You make such an Answer, as if we had been at cross Purposes.

For my Questions were grounded upon your asserting, without any limitation,
That it is absurd to gather a Church out of a Church of Baptized Christians. And
indeed it is but a Golden Aphorism, wherein you epitomize a great Part of your
Discourses on this Subject.

And you answer, Letter to Anonymus, p. 25.
That the Independents are out in their way of gathering Churches; and that we
separated not from the Papists upon their Principles. Which is nothing to the
purpose. But you do confess indeed, that we may separate from any Church of
baptized Christians, if their Communion be sinful.

But wherein the Difference lies, I know not; except by Separation, you would
only have a withdrawing from Communion, but will not allow the setting up a
distinct Church Communion, be the Cause of withdrawing never so just. Which
unless you mean, I hope you will be so ingenuous to confess, Vid. the Case of
indifferent Things.
this was not so warily worded, and so sound as might have been. But if you
have a Patent to make Words signify what you please, besides their natural and
presumable Intendment, to make generals particular, or vice versa, much good
may it do you; provided they afford you not a Loop-hole for the most
uncharitable Censures.

Yet give me leave, before I quit this, to demonstrate, that you have not
answered fairly in restraining this, as if spoke only of Independents. These
were your own Words:

When there is one Church within the Bowels of another, Resol. of Cases of
Consc. p. 21.
a new Church, gathered out of a Church already constituted, and formed into a
distinct and separate Society; this divides Christian Communion, and is a
notorious Schism. This is the plain case of the Presbyterian and Independent
Churches, and those other Conventicles of Sectaries which are among us: They
are Churches in a Church, Churches formed out of the National Church; by which
means Christians, who live together, refuse to worship God in the same
Assemblies.

Pray, Letter to Anonym. p. 46.
Sir, would you have me fancy some general Scope and Design, which no Man can
understand, from the Words you utter in any particular Place.

This, I suppose, may satisfy reasonable Men, that all my Queries under this
Head are not impertinent.

The third, which was still under the same Head, tho you would divide it, was
this:

Whether, as in the Primitive Times, there was but one Bishop, and consequently
one Church in a City, there are not now as many Churches within the National,
as there are Bishoprics?

To which you answer, Every Bishopric is a distinct Episcopal Church. Well
then, how does that agree with the Primitive Rule, from which in another place
you had occasion to argue?

And you know, to mention no more, St. Ignatius, who lived in the first
Century, says,

Every Church has but one Altar, S. Ignatii Ep.
and one Bishop, with the College of Presbyters, and the Deacons; which Bishop,
the People, with the Magistrates, (...), nay, and Caesar himself must obey. Now
except you will make all the Bishops, and the Archbishop of York, but Pastors
to the Metropolitan of Canterbury, it may be a Question how that Rule would
hold good here. And how will this correspond with what you say in the Book you
would have your Notions tried by, where you say, Every particular Bishop is the
supreme Governor in his own Diocese? Defense of Dr. Stilling. p. 568.
When, according to this, he would be but one of the College of Presbyters? And
that seems in your own Sense, Vid. Vindic. of the Def. p. 57.
to have been the Heresy or Schism of the Novatians, that they would pretend to
a Bishop of their own, independent upon him whom the Catholics supposed to
have been lawfully possessed of the Church. Vid. Mr. D 's owe Priesthood.
And you know in that case Occupancy is adjudg'd to be a good Title.

But then you say, Def. of Dr. S. p. 568.
Every Bishop has relation to the whole Christian Church, and is to take care
of Neighboring Churches; and therefore those Bishops should govern their
Churches by mutual Advice and Counsel.

But suppose they will not, any more than one Prince will be governed by the
Advice of his Neighbor; do not you make Independent Sovereigns of them? But
admit the Civil Power should not interpose to the uniting of them.

4. Would not that which was the fourth Query prove to be not very impertinent?

Which is, Letter, p. 10. Dr. p. 26.
Whether it is more absurd that there should be Independent or Presbyterian
Churches within the National, than that there should be so many Bishoprics.

But further as the Primitive Fathers made Schism to be in a dividing from the
Bishop; that is, as you will have it, were it only upon the account of
Accidentals (tho St. Ignatius particularly goes upon a Schism, Ignat. Ep. ad
Phil.
(...), or dividing from Truth). How, even upon the Notion of dividing in
Accidentals, will he that divides from one Bishop, but yet communicates with
another, be guilty of Schism?

5. And then my 5th Supposal, which you here admit, that the Independents or
Presbyterians have among them sufficient Church Officers and Power, as much as
clears them from the Imputation of Schism, as it does that Bishop and his
Flock, who will not be imposed upon by his Neighboring Bishop, but will have
Rites and Ceremonies different from the other, and with which he expects that
all should comply that communicate at his Altar. Vindic. of the Defen. p. 433.
And if it be lawful for him to determine indifferent Circumstances and
external Solemnities; you know, it is necessary to make them the Terms of
Communion.

6. Then the 6th Query relates to the Charitableness of your Censure of such
honest-minded Men, as communicate with them. Where you say, Indeed you know not
what Allowances Christ will make for the Mistakes of wellmeaning Men.

Tho elsewhere, Vid. Page
as I have shown, you deprive them of all the means of Salvation.

The Queries upon your Supposition, Page 27.
that the Independents exclude themselves from Catholic Communion, by
requiring of their Members a new Covenant, no part of the Baptismal Vow; I need
not take any great pains to re-assert.

1. The first was, Whether any Obstacle to Catholick-Communion brought in by
Men, may not be a means of depriving Men of it, as well as Covenant or Contract.

2. If it may, ( which you do not deny) will you not upon this account make our
Church more guilty than the Independants. Baptism you own, is the only thing
which admits into the Catholic Church; but they require no new Covenant at
Baptism; ergo, they admit into the Church without any clog or hinderance of
human Invention.

Now you, who it seems have been better acquainted with the ways of Separation
than I can pretend to, deny my Minor, and say that they baptize no Child but of
such Parents as were in Church Covenant with them.

Having no time to be at present instructed in their way, I will admit all this
to you, and will admit them faulty: But then the Question is, Whether your
Argument will not equally concern our Church.

For it being put, Vid. proved from Dr. Still. Mischief of Separat.
as I do it just after, concerning an Adult Person that would be received to
Baptism; he finds this Rite of Admission instituted by our Church.

Upon which he scruples:

1. Whether the Rite of Admission into this Church being made necessary to his
Admission into the Catholic Church, the Rite ought not to have been only of
Divine Institution.

2. Whether the Canon declaring that it is used as a lawful outward Ceremony and
honorable Badg, whereby the Infant is dedicated to the Service of him who died
upon the Cross; there is not, according to the common and natural Intendment of
the Words, as much Efficacy ascribed to this Rite as there is to Baptism it
self, of which our Church Catechism has it.

Wherein I was made a Member of Christ, the Child of God, and an Inheritor of
the Kingdom of Heaven. Wherein, seems here of like Signification with whereby,
and to be so taken by our Church, when it says;

By holy Promises, Homily of swearing, f. 47
with calling the Name of God to witness, we are made lively Members of Christ,
when we profess his Religion, receiving the Sacrament of Baptism. Wherefore,

Quest. 1. Whether such a Man may not honstly scruple this?

2. Whether it ought to be made a Term of Communion to such an one?

3. Whether in such case the enjoying this under a Penalty would not
sufficiently answer the end of Church Government, without making it a Term of
Communion, which you suppose necessary in every lawful Injunction.

But waving this, Page 29.
till you know my own Exceptions against the Sign of the Cross (which it is not
likely I shall ever have occasion to except against upon my own account, or my
Child's, since I think there can be no Magic in it to affect the Infant). You
would avoid the Suspicion of yielding to the like Accusation against our Church
with that which you set up against the Independents, by this Distinction.

That the Independent Church is schismatical in its Constitution; for admit
this an unlawful and sinful Term of Communion, yet, say you, the Frame and
essential Constitution of the Church is not Schismatical.

But except you yield to me that a matter enjoined, tho it be not sinful in its
own nature, may be so to the Party of whom it is required, and call this a
sinful Term in that Respect: be pleased to consider again how a Church
commanding things sinful, and admitting none into Communion with it but upon
those sinful Terms, can avoid the Imputation of being Schismatical in its Frame
and essential Constitution, any more than the Independents for requiring a new
Church Covenant.

If you say, the Church may quit those Terms, and still continue a sound
Church: so may they and yet continue Independent.

But if I ought to learn my Catechism from our Church it self, rather than from
any Doctor in it, I should think that wherever there is any Congregation or
Fellowship of God's faithful and elect People, Homilies, f. 213.
built upon the Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ being the
Head Cornerstone; that must be such a Church as cannot possibly differ in its
essential Frame and Constitution from any other sound Church.

But when you say, It Is impossible that a Church, which is not Schismatical,
should excommunicate Schismatically; it is worth enquiring, whether you mean,
That tho it does enjoin Terms sinful and unlawful in themselves, and
excommunicate them who cannot comply in such Matters, it has, by that exercise
of its Power of the Keys, deprived those Dissenters of Catholic Communion, as
not being Schismatical in its essential Frame and Constitution.

Being excellent good at leaving out the Force of any Question, to which you
are loath to give a direct Answer, you say, my three first Queries relating to
the meaning of the Text, come only to this,

Whether every particular Church may not be called the Body of Christ?

Whereas it was, Whether it might not be an entire Body? And you yield my
Question; yet you say, all the Churches in the World are but one Body, and must
be but one Communion. Which if you will allow to be by virtue of a mystical or
spiritual Union, need not be disputed.

Yet it being a Question, Whether you would yield a particular Church to be a
proper Body of Christ; why might I not ask, Whether it may not at least be
taken so in a Metaphorical Sense?

And surely you, Vid. his Def. and Continuation, p. 119.
who have been charged to turn the Priesthood of our Savior from proper into
Metaphorical, might well enough understand what I meant by this Word.

But if you consider the Force of the Question upon the Text, it is to know
your Warrant for arguing, that it is always Schism to refuse the Communion of
any sound Church, wherever you find it, whether it has Authority over you, or
no; from a Text, which only charges Schism upon Members of the same particular
Church, or Body of Christ, with which they did actually communicate.

For my 4th Query from the Text, of the Nature of Schism, you condemn me to the
Drudgery of examining the Defense of Dr. Stillingfleet: But as you speak not
directly to it, I shall here take it for unanswered; yet I shall not deny it
some Consideration in its due time.

But thus you say, you have honestly answered all my Queries in my first
Letter: And truly the Judgment of Charity obliges me to hope that you have,
according to the Intention of your own Mind. And yet it is a very difficult
thing to believe, that you should not have discernment enough of your self, to
see through all your false Colors.

If they are Errors of your Understanding, I hope God will not call you to so
severe an Account for them, as you threaten to well-meaning Dissenters.

My second Letter you may, if you please, term peevish, for conjuring you, as a
Protestant Divine, to answer my Doubts categorically, and that without
referring me to what Mr. D. or any professed Papist had writ on that Subject. But
perhaps very few Men, that observe the Neighborhood of the Doctrines, through
Mediums not far differing, leading to the like End, will much condemn the
Caution which I there gave you.

Wherefore to vindicate my self to you, I shall give a taste of your Agreement
with Popish Mediums. And since you disown D -- lism, shall as much as
conveniently may be, strip your Positions of what is directly his way.

And perhaps it will not seem improbable, that you should have borrowed some of
those Arguments, which I look upon as tending to, or proceeding from
Uncharitableness, from the Author of Charity maintained by Catholics.

His Labor is, Vide Chilling-worth, cap. 5.
to prove all Protestants Schismatics, because they withdrew from the
Communion of the visible Church; that is, in his Sense, the Church of Rome, and
those that were in Communion with her. And he cites St. Austin, to prove, That
not a diverse Faith, but the divided Society of Communion does make
Schismatics: From whence he argues, That the Catholic or Universal Church is
one Congregation or Company of Faithful People, and therefore implies not only
Faith, to make them faithful Believers; but also Communion, or common Union, to
make them one in Charity; which excludes Separation and Division.

He goes on: By the Definition of Schism may be inferred, that the Guilt
thereof is contracted, not only by Division from the Universal Church, but also
by a Separation from a particular Church or Diocese, which agrees with the
Universal.

You would prove, That Men, as they would avoid the Sin of Schism, must
communicate with the National Church, or with some Church that is in Communion
with it, and reject the Communion of all other Parties and Sects of Christians.

Indeed you will say, Page 39.
that you qualify it, if the National Church be sound, Page 38.
that is, if there be nothing sinful in its Constitution and Worship.

Yet it is a Question, whether your Arguments go not as far as the Jesuit's.

For you suppose with him, that there must be some particular Church, with
which we must communicate, under Church Officers: Or, to use your own Words, We
must of necessity join in the actual and visible Communion of the Church.
Reply, p. 34.


Suppose the Dissenters say, with Mr. Chillingworth, We don't leave the Church,
but only its external Communion; You look upon that as absurd, and wonder that
they should assign Reasons why they cannot communicate with us, Reply, p. 22.
and yet at the same time will not own that they have made any Separation. Nay,
you affirm, That for two Churches to renounce each others Communion, Page 23
or at least, to withdraw ordinary Communion from each other, from a professed
Dislike, and yet still to continue in a State of Communion with one another, is
a downright Contradiction. Well, be it so, then it seems Protestants, by
withdrawing from the Communion of the Romish Church, put themselves out of a
State of Communion with the Christian Church, just as Dissenters do. Yet our
great Champion thought he had furnished us with a little Armor, Chillingworth
p. 265.
which might repel all the Jesuit's Batteries; and could not understand it to
be a Contradiction, to say, One leaves the Church by ceasing to be a Member of
it, by ceasing to have those Requisites which constitute a Man a Member of it,
as Faith and Obedience: But we leave the external Communion of a Church, by
refusing to communicate with any Church in her Liturgies and Worship.

What tho, Resol* p. 30.
according to Mr. Chillingworth's Rule, it is possible to be a Member of the
Church without actual Communion? You say, Page 31.
It Is as necessary actually to communicate with some Church or other, as it is
to be a Christian.

Wherefore it seems those Protestants in Popish Countries, who did actually
communicate with no Church, had not what essentially constituted them
Christians.

You will say, that you make allowance for Cases of Necessity, when Communion
cannot be had but upon sinful Terms: But surely it is absolutely necessary to be
a Christian.

Nay, Vindicat. of Dr. Stilling. p. 116, 117.
in that very Book which you refer me to, for your Thoughts at large, you
assert from your own, and the Popish Notion of the Power of the Keys, that the
Communion of the Church is absolutely necessary to Salvation.

Wherefore methinks many of your Expressions would make no improper Sound out
of a Papist's Mouth.

We are the Visible or National Church; Letter to Anonimus p. 32. Vindic. of
the Def. of Dr. Still. p. 6.
your Division from us is Schism, and Separation from the Church; and every
Separation is a Schism on one side or other.

Nay, you renounce our Communion; Resol of Cases, page 2^.
for to withdraw your selves from ordinary Communion with the Church in which
you live, into distinct and separate Societies for Worship, is to renounce
their Communion. Page 13,
And, he who disputes the Authority, or destroys the Unity of the Church,
renounces his Membership and Communion with it.

Besides, Page 7.
it is enough that it is a Separation, and gathering a Church out of a Church,
which did before consist of baptized Christians. page ^7.
Ye are Schismatics, in dividing your selves from the Body of Christians; and
all your Prayers and Sacraments are not Acts of Christian Communion, but a
Schismatical Combination.

You may pretend, that if you do not divide upon the account of sinful Terms,
page 44.
yet you do it for greater Edification, and purer Ordinances: And that at least
it is very doubtful, whether the Church on Earth has power of clogging God's
Ordinances with such Rites, as shall be made Terms and Conditions of receiving
them.

Well, it is no matter for all this: Doubt, and divide from us, and be damned.
It Is pleasant, that you should pretend Edification, to break the Unity of the
Church: Be assured, that the Influences of the Divine Spirit are confined to
this Unity. What Allowances Christ will make for the Mistakes of well-meaning
Men, Letter to Anonym. p. 26.
who divide the Communion of the Church, I cannot determine; but his Mercies in
such a Case are uncovenanted; and such an one is no Member of the Invisible
Church, that we do or can know of. And if he separate from the Visible Church,
tho upon the account of sinful Terms, the Thread of this Reasoning affords him
no Clue to lead him to the Gate of Life: For having no visible Church that he
knows of, with which to communicate; or by Misfortune being deprived of the
Opportunity, he was thereby denied the ordinary Means of Salvation. And it may
be said in your Words, Resol. of Cases of Consc. p. 5.
I do not now speak of the invisible Operations of the Divine Spirit.

Truly, Sir, to my thinking, either I have rightly represented your Agreement
here, or Words are to be governed by some Authority which you have not yet
produced.

The half Answer, Letter to Anonymus, p* 30.
which you suppose already given to the Question, with which I closed my second
Letter, had, I doubt not, its due Consideration, wherever 'twas met with.

But the Question was this:

Whether if the Nature of Catholic Communion requires a readiness to
communicate with any sound Church; and yet a Church obliges us to communicate
with that alone, exclusive of other sound Churches, while Distance does not
hinder the occasional and frequent Communion with others; is not that Church
guilty of Schism in such an Injunction, contrary to the Nature of Catholic
Communion? Your Answer is, Page 30.
That no Church can be supposed to forbid Communion with any Church, which is
in Communion with her.

But it is its Duty to forbid Communion with Schismatical Conventicles.

Which is as much as to say, that the French, the Greek Church, or any other,
that is not in Communion with our Church, is a Schismatical Conventicle.

And such you observe, that I am pleased to call sound Churches, wherein you
intimate, That no Church, which is not in Communion with ours, that is, not
ready actually to communicate in all its Accidentals, can be sound and Orthodox.

But then the frequent Communion with another Church being in the Question,
what provision does your Answer make for so much as the ordinary Communion,
which you call constant, with the National Church. But then you having
admitted, that Dissenters have proper Church Officers and Power, what Answer
will you make to what follows? Letter to Anon. p* 31.
Or at least, is it not impossible, that he who communicates sometimes with one
true Church, sometimes with another, can be a Schismatic, or any more than an
Offender against a positive Humane Law?

You say indeed, Answer to Anon p 31.
he is an Offender against the Unity of the Church, and the Evangelical Laws of
Catholic Communion; but you have not yet been pleased to produce those
Evangelical Laws, which oblige Men upon the pain of Damnation, consequent upon
Schism, to communicate with the Church Officers allowed of by the Civil Power,
rejecting others as Schismatical, tho admitted to have the same Evangelical
Institution.

Indeed you look upon it as self-evident, Resol. of Cases of Consc. p. 38
That wherever there is a Church established by Public Authority, if there
be nothing sinful in its Constitution and Worship, we are bound to communicate
with that Church, and to reject the Communion of all other Parties and Sects of
Christians; for the Advantage always lies on the side of Authority.

But how this is made out by any thing you say, I cannot find.

In my Judgment you afford no other Notion of Catholic Communion, but as an
Agreement and Readiness to communicate in Accidentals, as well as Essentials,
with any sound Church, be it National or otherwise.

Indeed you suppose Dissenters to have no sound Church, for want of a National
Establishment; but then you make no manner of provision for so much as the
ordinary actual Communion in any Episcopal Church, where one lives, if so be
that one communicates actually with any other Church which is in Communion with
that.

But if it should happen, that the true Notion of Catholic Communion consists
only in a Communion in Essentials, and being united by the Christian Bond of
Charity, notwithstanding Separations for lesser Matters; then by the same
reason I may communicate with any sound Church, and nothing but Humane Law can
restrain me, Vi^^ic of the Defense, p. 5:
which, by your own Confession, can neither make nor cure a Schism.

And indeed what should hinder, but that Humane Law may as well confine me to
the Communion of the Bishop of the Diocese where I live, which you know were
but according to the old Rule, of One Altar, one Bishop; as well as to give me
a Latitude for any Diocese, provided I do not straggle into a Church, which is
not in Communion with our Bishops? This Confinement to one Bishop, you must
say, upon your grounds, would be contrary to the Nature of Catholic Communion;
but we have your Authority for it, that the other is not.

Yet it seems, if Presbytery should have the Advantage of Authority, they who
refuse Communion with the National Church, upon pretense of purer Ordinances,
and the Belief that Episcopacy is the Ordinance of God, must be as bad as
Murderers and Adulterers, that is, very Schismatics.

And judge you, Ibid.
whether 'twould not be a barbarous Thing to make any Laws, which shall ensnare
Men in so great a Guilt.

But here you take notice of a Passage or two in my Preface: The one, Vid*
Preface to the 3 Letters.
That perhaps it is no Absurdity to suppose, that Men may as well continue
Members of the National Church, notwithstanding their breaking many positive
Laws, made for the outward management and ordering of it, tho not fundamental
and necessary to its Being; as he who incurs the Penalty of any Statute of the
Realm about Civil Affairs, may however be a sound Member of the State, if he
keep from Treason, or other Capital Crimes.

This you answer by a begging, and indeed mistaking the Question, and will have
it of a Schismatical Separation, which you elsewhere express by renouncing
Communion.

And this you may compare to Treason and Rebellion in the State, if you think
fit. But the Church is not much beholden to you, for making that in which
Conformity is expected, fundamental and necessary to its Being. And when you
compare a Man that communicates sometimes with one true Church, sometimes with
another, to a Man that joins sometimes with his Prince's Forces, and sometimes
with his Enemies; the Comparison is either very impertinent, or very
uncharitable, in supposing that a Church, which differs from this in what is
really accidental, how essential soever you make it, is Antichristian, or an
Enemy to Christ, which surely no true Church is; yet I must confess, herein you
agree with your self, when you say, There may be a true Church, Vindic* p 70.
which is no Catholic Church, that is, no true part of the Catholic Church.

I add;

Nay, possibly, that there should be several Religious Assemblies, living by
different Customs and Rules, and yet continuing Members of the National Church,
is not more inconsistent, than that particular Places should have their
particular Customs and Bylaws, distinct from the Common Law of the Land,
without making a distinct Government.

This you condemn, without vouchsafing it a fair Hearing, as nibling at that
Healing Project, Letter to Anon* p. 32.
for which you think you have sufficiently exposed Mr. Humphreys. But I shall
choose the Protection of the great Protestant Champion, Mr. Chillingworth; and
if you are resolved to wound him through my Side, I will bear the Brunt of it
as well as I can.

To reduce Christians to Unity, Chillingworth, ed. anno 1664, f. 187.
there are but two Ways that may be conceived, probable: The one, by taking
away Diversity of Opinions touching Matters of Religion; the other, by showing
that the Diversity of Opinions, which is among the several Sects of Christians,
ought to be no Hinderance to their Unity in Communion. The first he looks on as
not likely, without a Miracle.

What then remains, says he, but that the other way must be taken, and
Christians must be taught to set an higher value upon those high Points of
Faith and Obedience, wherein they agree, than upon Matters of less moment,
wherein they differ; and understand, that Agreement in those ought to be more
effectual to join them in one Communion, than their Difference in other Things
of less moment to divide them.

When I say, One Communion, I mean, in a common Profession of those Articles of
Faith wherein all consent, a joint Worship of God after such a way as all
esteem lawful; and a mutual Performance of all those Works of Charity, which
Christians owe one unto another.

And to such a Communion, what better Inducement could be thought of, than to
demonstrate, that what was universally believed of all Christians, if it were
joined with a Love of Truth, and holy Obedience, was sufficient to bring Men to
Heaven: For why should Men be more rigid than God? Why should any Error exclude
any Man from the Churches Communion, which will not deprive him of eternal
Salvation?

To the same Sense is the Passage I had in that Preface cited out of Dr.
Tillotson's Sermon; Letter to Anon. p. 50.
and you may as well ask him, as me, Is the Catholic Church then, and
Communion of Saints, no part of our Creed?

Your Notion of Communion is a new Article.

But to re-assert what I had observed of your managing the Charge of Schism.
page 33.


I had said, People might not well understand what it is, unless it be taken to
lie wholly in want of Charity: And in the Errata, Resol. of Cases, p 47.
to avoid the Cavil of its being common, such as we have for all Mankind, I had
added the Epithete of Christian.

I say further, to my thinking, as St. Paul speaks of it: He supposes a
continuance still of the same Body, and ascribes it to Christians, continuing
such, nay, and communicating with each other.

And this you were not able to deny; nay, you well know, that not only the
Thing, 1 Cor. 1. 10.
but the very Word, (...), had by that Apostle been applied to such.

Hence you would argue, Letter to Anon. p. 33.
That I will not allow causless Separation from a sound Part of the Catholic
Church to be Schism, but place Schism wholly in want of Charity.

But it is obvious, that I do it no more than the Apostle himself does.

But besides, it induces the Belief, that Schism is not such a Crime as you
imagine: For if the Corinthians were Schismatics, whilst they continued in
Communion with each other, and yet were particular Members of Christ's Body;
then Schism does not cut off from Christ's Body, nor do you rightly apply the
Addition of Apostate Christian.

Further, by what Authority do you apply that to a refusing Communion with any
sound Church whatever, upon your supposed Notion of Catholic Communion, from a
Text which mentions no other Schism, but what was between them who lived in the
same Communion?

And still, beyond all this, it seems demonstrable from the Text, that the
Causa formalis, or that which constitutes Schism, is not Separation, tho it be
causless, unless it be accompanied with want of Charity.

For since there may be Schism, where there is no Separation of Communion, then
it must be something which consists with joint Communion; and find out
something, besides Want of Charity, if you can.

The Apostle's Notion of Schism we have seen; but I wonder by what Authority
you affirmed, Defense of Dr. S. p. 59.
That Schism is nothing else but a Breach of Christian Communion; Ibid. p. 60.
and that where the Unity of the Church is broken by distinct and opposite
Communions, there is the full Nature of Schism; and where this is not, there is
either no Schism, or only a partial Schism, which is like a great Wound in the
Arm, which does not sever it from the Body. It Is not every Quarrel or
Contention, ( agreeably to your Notion, you might add, tho it be such as the
Apostle calls Schism) which makes a Schism; but the Breach of Christian
Communion.

Let me desire you to consider, whether, by departing from the
Scripture-Account of this, misled perhaps by the Disputes of some of the
Ancients, thundering against each other, you will not enter at least into the
Confines of Donatism. You say of those Heretics, Defense of Dr. S. p. 61.
They confined the Church of Christ to Africa, and to their own Communion.

Mr. Chillingworth gives us a fuller Account wherein their Heresy lay, in these
Words:

That upon a vain Pretense of the Corruption of the Church, Chillingworth* f.
151.
they separated themselves from the Communion of other Parts of the Church; and
that they required it as a necessary Condition to make a Man a Member of the
Church, that he should be of their Communion, and divide himself from all other
Communions, from which they were divided.

It seems according to them, Vindic. of the Defense, p. 70.
to use your Words, Tho a Church retained the Purity of the Faith and Worship,
and was so far true; yet it was not every way sound and Orthodox, nor a
Catholic Church, unless it observed those Conditions of Catholic Communion,
which were two:

1. That it must be in Communion with theirs.

2. That it must divide from all other Communions, from which they are divided.

1. For the first, you teach us, that,

The visible Union of all Churches in and to Christ, Ibid. p. 51.
consists in their visible Communion with each other, Ibid. p. 59.
and Communion with a particular Church, which is it self in Catholic
Communion, is as necessary as Communion with the Catholic Church.

Whoever lives in England, Letter to Anonym. p. 7.
and renounces Communion with the Church of England, is a Schismatic from the
Catholic Church.

And if occasionally we communicate with some other sound Part of the Catholic
Church, Resol. p. 29.
in the same Communion, we may do it without Schism, so this be as owning our
selves Members.

But an ordinary withdrawing upon a professed Dislike, Resol. p. 23.
you make as destructive of a State of Communion, as a formal Renunciation.
Letter, p. 9.
Wherefore, as you hold, that we are bound to maintain Communion with all sound
Parts of the Catholic Church, Resol. p. 19.
and that in other Matters, besides the Agreement in all the Articles of Faith,
and Essentials of Worship; it does follow, that it must be in those very
Matters which distinguish one Communion from another. And the National Church
being that sound Part, wherewith every Christian here is to communicate, herein
you have found out a Root, Vindic. of the Defen. p. 23.
Fountain, and Principle of Union, or Beginning of the Catholic Church, Ibid.
p. 26.
to which all particular Churches are, or ought to be united, and by virtue of
this Catholic Unity, are one Catholic Church.

If it be asked, What it is which brings one with safety to this Beginning of
the Catholic Church? Resol. of Cases, p. 27.
It Is not humane Law, as it has placed us under such a Government and
Discipline, and which makes the only Distinction of Churches, you allow of; but
the Principles of Catholic Communion, against which whatever Church offends,
you will not yield it to be sound and Orthodox. Resol. p. 19.
And you assure us, We have nothing else to do, but to judge whether that part
of the Church wherein we live, be so sound and Orthodox, that we may
communicate with it according to the Principles of Catholic Communion: If it
be, we are bound to communicate with it, under peril of Schism from the
Catholic Church, if we do not.

And consequently, whatever Church refuses our Communion, it is not sound and
Orthodox, or any part of the Catholic Church, as not retaining the true
Principles of Catholic Communion. Thus far Donatus might have gone, taking it
for granted, that his Church was the Beginning of the Catholic Church.

2. This first Point being settled, it is no wonder if it be likewise required,
that we must divide from the Communion of all that are divided from this sound
part of the Catholic Church. And methinks Donatus himself might argue, That
it is evident the pretended Catholics understand not the true Principles of
Catholicism; for if they did, they would never proffer a Composition with us,
and yield that the surviving Bishop should govern these, which are now distinct
Communions: They must own, either that they are not any part of Christ's Body,
Answer to Anonym. p. 45.
or else that we are not; for it is impossible, that two Churches, which are not
in Communion with each other, can both belong to the same Body. And therefore
the Obligation to Catholic Communion, Ibid. p. 15.
does equally oblige us to renounce the Communion of Schismatics.

You in effect justify Donatus his Terms of Communion; and when you say,
Vindic. p. 70.
Their Churches were in all Things like the Catholic Churches, excepting
Catholic Communion, you as good as tell us, he only mistook the Church, which
he should have made the Beginning of the Catholic Church. If he had been with
St. Austin, he had been no Heretic, for refusing to receive Heretics into the
Church without Re-baptization, and damning all that were of a Communion divided
from his, or that would not consent to have them excommunicated, who without
proof had been accused of being Traditors.

But as you teach us, that that Church is not sound, which keeps not to the
Principles of Catholic Communion; Mr. Chillingworth shows, wherein they
swerved from that sound Principle: Chillingworth f. 151.


The Condition of their Communion ( says he) was both unnecessary, and unlawful
to be required; and therefore the exacting of it was directly opposite to the
Churches Catholicism.

For ought yet appears, Donatus and you are pretty well agreed in the Notion of
Catholic Communion, and of the Breach of this Unity, Def. of Dr. S. p. 60.
wherein we are taught that the full Nature of Schism lies. He, with you,
confined the Influences of the Holy Spirit to this Unity.

Yet whether he would have intreagu'd this Business of Church Communion, as you
have done, I cannot tell. All the Sense which I can gather out of your Notion,
as the Leaf-Gold is spread out, is this:

That to be a Member of the Christian Church, and in a State of Communion with
it, it is not enough to be admitted into the Church by Baptism, nor to exercise
any Acts of Communion with a particular Church, unless it be in Communion with
every sound part of the Christian Church, and that so, as to own your self for
a Member of every such sound Church. And tho you do own your self a Member, as
perhaps every one will that agrees in Essentials; yet if you ordinarily
withdraw from that sound Church where you are, which must always be the only
sound Church on the Place, upon any professed Dislike, or communicate with them
that are of a divided, and consequently a Schismatical Communion, you forfeit
your Membership, Resol. p. 43.
even tho that other Church has nothing sinful in its Communion: Which in one
place, you think enough to make any Church sound and Orthodox; whereas in
others, it serves your purpose to have it believed, that it cannot be sound and
Orthodox, unless it maintain Communion in Accidentals with every other sound
Part.

Upon the erecting this Scheme, and observing the Rules of Art you have already
given, one may be able to resolve a great many nice horary Questions: Yet some
of them must stay for your own Solution, or Elias's.

Quest. If Baptism lets one into the Church, and entitles one to all the
Privileges of Church Membership, how comes it to pass, Resol. of Cases, p. 12.
that one who ordinarily dissents, is an Intruder, when he exercises an Act of
Communion?

Answ. You had your Answer already, if you had Eyes to see it: Answer to Anon.
p. 33.
He who despises the Authority, or destroys the Unity of the Church, Resol. p.
13.
renounces his Membership and Communion with it.

Quest. What tho he does actually communicate?

Resp. Yes, Answer, p. 17.
thou Man of perverse Understanding; Church Communion does not consist in
particular Acts of Communion, Resol. p. 13.
but in Membership.

Quest. Well then, if neither Baptism, nor particular Acts of Communion, are
enough to make, or at least continue me a Member; pray how many Acts of
Communion will do the Business?

Resp. Why, I tell you, it must be constant Communion.

Quest. What do you mean by constant Communion?

Resp. I mean ordinary Communion, Page 29.
that is, always sometimes.

Quest. Well, what is it that obliges me always sometimes to communicate with a
particular Church? Does Baptism do it?

Resp. No, Page* 7.
we know no Church, but all Christians are made Members of by Baptism.

Quest. What then, if I choose ordinarily to communicate with another Church?

Resp. If you divide your self from this Body, Page* 9.
and set up distinct and separate Societies, which you call Churches, but which
are not Members, nor live in Communion with the one Catholic Church, you
cannot carry your Right and Title to the Covenant, out of the Church with you.

Quest. But do you not tell us, Page* 11.
that our Communion with the Church consists in being Members of the Church,
which we are made by Baptism: And they being baptized into the same Faith, I
should think they hold Communion with the Church?

Resp. But let me tell you, tho sometimes I maintain, That Baptism makes us
Members of the whole Church, Page* 28.
and gives us a Right to communicate with every sound part of it; yet in spite
of Contradiction, I hold, That Baptism at most gives Men only a Disposition to
be Church Members, but does not make them Members of any Church. Vindic. of the
Def. p* 6.
Besides, where there are two separte Churches, one, if not both, must be
Schismatical. And the National Church having the Advantage of Authority, Resol.
p. 38.
you are bound to reject the Communion of all other Parties and Sects of
Christians, as Schismatical: If you do not, you renounce your Membership, and
by destroying the Unity of the Church, forfeit your Interest in the Divine
Charter, Resol. p* 9.
and cannot carry your Right and Title to the Convenant out of the Church with
you.

Quest. Suppose I do not communicate with any other Church, yet ordinarily
withdraw from Communion with yours, at the Times appointed for Worship, or
other Acts of Communion; is it enough to own my self a Member? Or if not, how
long Suspension will amount to a Forfeiture?

Resp. It Is not enough to own your self a Member; for to withdraw from the
visible Communion of the Church, Resol. p. 35.
is Separation. Now if Separation from Religious Assemblies, be to break
Cowmunion; then to live in Communion with the Church, requires our actual
Communion.

Quest. Well then, thus far I have learnt my Catechism, that there must be
actual Communion, and that actual Communion must be constant or ordinary;
otherwise a Man wilfully separates himself, and forfeits his Interest in the
Divine Charter.

So it seems, tho Acts of Communion are but Effects and Applications of
Church Membership, yet the Non-user of them forfeits the Right one had by
Baptism, even tho one be not cast out of the Church by any Sentence; and
nothing but ordinary Communion amounts to owning a Membership. How many Acts
are necessary to avoid the Forfeiture, we are yet to learn.

And further, if we live where Communion may be had with another Church, in
communion with that which expects our constant Attendance, we as well own our
selves Members by a constant Communion with the other, as with that: For, as
you inform us, there is nothing in Baptism, nor in all the Acts of Communion,
Resol. p. 14, 15.
which does more peculiarly unite us to such a particular Church, Letter to
Anon. p. 16.
than to the whole Christian Church: And it is no Interruption of Communion to
communicate actually with any Church, that is in Communion with another sound
Part.

But if it should fall out, that notwithstanding the Division of Communions
upon lesser Matters, a divided Communion may continue a sound part of the
Christian Church, the Necessity of constant Communion with a Church, where
occasional is lawful, will stand in need of some other Medium to support it.

Resp. O but there is a differene between being a Member of the Universal
Church, Answer to Anon. p. 18.
and of all particular Churches, which are Parts and Members of the sniversal
Church.

Quest. Why so? may I not communicate with any sound Part, which is in
communion with this Church, and professing no dislike of its Communion, thereby
own my self a Member, especially since my communicating with the one, does not
interrupt the Communion with the other; and neither Baptism, nor all the Acts
of Communion, unite me more to one than another?

Resp. I care not for that, Ibid. p. 19.
for constant Communion in a particular Church, confines Church Membership to
that particular Church in which you communicate.

Quest. If I may not offend, I should say my Question is, What obliges to
constant Communion? But you seem to say no more, than that constant Communion
obliges to constant Communion; or in your own Phrase, confines
Church Membership to that particular Church.

So it seems, if constant Communion be omitted, that Obligation or Confinement
ceases.

I shall trouble you but with one Question more in this place; and that is,
Whether the Necessity of re-baptizing those who were of a separate Communion,
does not follow upon your Grounds, as well as upon Donatus's, and that tho the
Party had not been baptized in a Schism? Certainly this is no remote
consequence from the Supposition, that Separation makes a forfeiture of all the
Privileges acquired by Baptism: For if they were forfeited, how can they be
restored without a new Grant? Resol. of Cases, p* 8.
Nay, they are your own Words, that the guilty Divider forfeits his Interest in
the Covenant, without a new Grant.

But a little to examine the Foundation of your charitable Positions.

You suppose, that Christ's Body being but one, whoever separates from any
sound Part, separates from the whole.

But is it not equally evident, that whoever separates from any true Part,
separates from the whole? Surely a true Member is a Member, tho it be not
sound. Yet you say, there may be a true Church, Vindic. of the Def. p. 70.
tho no Catholic Church; that is, according to your Argument, no part of the
Catholic Church. Is Christ's Body made up only of sound Members? Are all that
are unsound, divided from the Body? But if a true Member be of the Body, as
well as that which is sound, do not you, by refusing to communicate with any
true Member, upon your own Principles, refuse to be of the Body; especially
when the only Unsoundness is, that it differs by reason of some Accidentals,
from that Church where you exercise the Acts of Catholic Communion? And it
might be well to know, whether you own that there is any sound Church, besides
the Church of England, with which you can communicate, how much soever you talk
of Catholic Communion? Or at least, whether you are not Schismatical, in
dividing from some true Churches? Def. of Dr. St. p. 139.
And may not you be charged with denying the very Notion of a Catholic Church,
and asserting that Christ has not one, but twenty, or a hundred several Bodies?

But whereas you affirm, that he who divides from one sound Part, divides from
all: is it not rather demonstrable, that he who communicates with one sound
Part, or one true Part, communicates with all, as being united to Christ's
Body? As he that touches a Man's Finger, touches his Body; but it does not
follow, that one cannot touch his Body, unless he touch his Finger.

But since you are so fond of this Notion, give me leave to turn your own
Artillery upon you; and if you have condemned your self, or the Church in which
you live, of Schism, and dividing from Christ's Body, you may thank your self.

If it follows from the Identity of Christ's Body, that whoever is divided from
any sound Member, is divided from the whole, being that Member is united to the
Body; so it must necessarily be, if you divide from any true Member, unless a
true Member is no Member.

And you your self being sensible of this, have taught, that it is absurd to
gather a Church out of a Christian Church, Resol. p. 22.
and divide Neighbor-christians into distinct Communions. Nay, you left your
self no possible Evasion, when you affirmed, that the only thing that can give
us in particular a Right to the Blessings of the Covenant, Ibid. p. 10.
is, that we observe the Conditions of this Covenant, Resol. p* 16.
and live in Unity and Communion with all true Christian Churches in the World.

If therefore there be any true Christian Church, with which you refuse to
communicate, have you not made a good Rod for your own Back?

The Church of Rome, Answer to Anon. p. 10.
as you own, is a true, tho a corrupt Church; but you, I suppose, refuse to
communicate with this true Church; are you not therefore cut off from Christ's
Body?

You will say perhaps, you cannot communicate but upon sinful Terms: Vindic. p.
50.
But what is that to the purpose? If this is still a true Church, and Member of
Christ's Body, you know Christ has but one Body, one Spouse, one Flock, one
Church: And if we be no Members of this one Church, we are not united to Christ.

The Parts of this Body must be united to each other, that they may be united
to Christ; else it would be as if the Parts of the natural Body should divide
from each other, Ibid. p* 46.
and hang together by a magical kind of Union with the Soul.

And Union to the Body consists in being united to that part of the Body which
is next.

You have foreclosed your self from saying, that you are united in what is
essential to its being a Member of Christ's Body, and have a participation of
the same vital Heat, and animal Spirits; but think it hard, that one Member
should be charged with the putrid Sores or Wounds of another; and to speak
plainly, that you forsake it only in its Uncatholick Terms. This would come too
nigh that very Fanaticism which you deride.

And you having told us, that a Compliance with the Order, Government, Vindic.
of the Defen. p. 396.
Discipline, and Worship, as well as the Doctrine of the Catholic Church, is
absolutely necessary to Catholic Communion. It Is upon your own Grounds
necessary to comply with every true part of the Catholic Church in all these,
as well as with every sound Part.

Wherefore might not the Papists beat you into their Church, with those Weapons
which you have forged against others?

Might not they tell you, that you want Christian Charity, unless you are
united in one Communion with this one Body? Vindic* p. 90.
That you want the chief Branch of Holiness, Ibid. p. 91.
without which none shall see God; Ibid. p. 100.
That all the Blessings of the Gospel are promised to us in a Church State;
That the Effects and Application of the Grace, Merit, and Satisfaction of
Christ Jesus is confined to this Body, page 104.
( consisting of Members sound and unsound); That the Gospel Covenant is
confined to the Communion of the Christian Church; page 1^7.
That to remit Sins, is to restore Men to the Peace and Communion of the
Church; and to retain them, is to cast Men out of the Church, or keep them
under Church Censures; which is a plain Demonstration, that Sins are forgiven
only in the Communion of the Church.

But yet further, it is a Question, whether you are in Communion even with every
Church, which requires nothing sinful as a Term of its Communion, Resol. p. 43.
and is upon that account sound and Orthodox?

You say indeed, you should make no scruple to communicate with the Lutheran
Church, Vindic. of the Defen. p. 725.
if it did not require of you the Belief of Consubstantiation: Yet certainly
you did not attend to your own Grounds, when you said so.

For if that be not in Communion with our Church, you know you would be a
Schismatic, if you communicated with it.

But that their Church is not in Communion with ours, appears upon your own
Rule, for that the Governors are not in Communion with each other, Resol. p. 25.
which you make essential to the Communion of particular Churches.

And for this it is not necessary to show, that the Governors of each side
condemn the others Constitution: It Is enough if the Governors of that Church
which you are of, do condemn the Constitution of the other, or of any part of
it.

You say indeed, Vindic. of the Def. p. 396.
that our Church is so far from condemning Foreign Reformed Churches for the
want of Bishops, that it has always lived in Communion with them.

If this be so, Ibid. p. 148.
then as a Bishop in the same Communion with us, might, with the leave of
English Bishops, exercise his Episcopal Office in any Church in England; so
might a Protestant Minister ordained abroad without Episcopal Ordination. But I
take it, you will not say, that he may: If he may not, this is a condemning
with a witness: Page 338.
For if any of them have no Orders amongst them, where is their regular
Church-Society? Nay, as you believe the Right of Episcopal Government, it is
questionable, whether you do Divine not deny that such have any proper
Church Officers.

And further, that you may not take the Difference about the Constitution of
Churches, or the Validity of a particular kind of Ordination, to be merely
between the Bishops of our Church, and the Presbyters of another; I take leave
to inform you, that the Stat. 14. of this King, cap. 4. has provided, that
every Person which was not then in holy Orders, by Episcopal Ordination, or
should not be so ordained before a Day prefixed, should be utterly disabled, and
ipso facto deprived from all manner of Ecclesiastical Promotions; and that none
for the future should be admitted to any such Promotion, nor should presume to
consecrate and administer the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, unless
Episcopally ordained.

The Penalty indeed is not made to extend to Foreigners of Reformed Churches
allowed here; but quere, whether the Declaration of Disability does not?

If you say, by the Lutheran Church, you mean only those religious Societies of
Lutherans, Defense of Dr. S. p. 332.
which are in Sweden and Denmark, under Bishops, or at least, that have
Superintendents or Generales, ordained and ordaining Episcopally, which surely
some Lutheran Societies want: you may avoid the Consequence, as to such, and
all others of the Reformation, which are without Episcopal Orders, by denying
them to be Christian Churches, if you please; for then indeed it would not
follow, from your condemning such Societies, that you thereby refuse Communion
with a sound Church.

This brings me to our Churches Sense and Application of this Matter.

O, Homily against Contention, f. 9.
says it, how the Church is divided! O how the Cities be cut and mangled! O how
the Coat of Christ, which was without Seam, is all to rent and torn! O Body
mystical of Christ, where is that holy Unity, out of which whosoever is, he is
not in Christ! If one Member be pulled from another, where is the Body? If the
Body be drawn from the Head, where is the Life of the Body? We cannot be joined
to Christ our Head, Vid. where it places the Unity.
except we be glued with Concord and Charity to one another: For he that is not
of this Unity, is not of the Church of Christ, which is a Congregation or Unity
together, not a Division. St. Paul says, that as long as Emulation, or
Envying, Sects for Doctrine, as well as distinct Communion.
Contention, and Factions, or Sects be among us, we be carnal, and walk
according to the fleshly Man. And St. James says, If ye have bitter Emulation,
or Envying and Contention in our Hearts, glory not of it; for where Contention
is, there is Vnstedfastness, and all evil Deeds. And why do we not hear St.
Paul, which prays us, whereas he might command us: I beseech you in the Name
of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you speak all one Thing, and that there be no
Dissension among you; but that you will be one whole Body; of one Mind, and of
one Opinion in the Truth? If his Desire be reasonable and honest, why do we not
grant it? If his Request be for our Profit, why do we refuse it? And if we list
not to hear his Petition of Prayer, yet let us hear his Exhortation, where he
says, I exhort you, that you walk a becomes the Vocation in which you be
called, with all submission and meekness, with lenity and softness of Mind,
bearing one another by Charity, studying to keep the Unity of the Spirit by the
Bond of of Peace: For there is one Body, one Spirit, one Faith, one Baptism.
There is, says he, but one Body, of the which he can be no lively Member, that
is at variance with the other Members. There is one Spirit which joineth and
knitteth all Things in one; and how can this Spirit reign in us, when among our
selves we be divided? There is but one Frith; and how can we then say, He is of
the Old Faith, and he is of the New Faith? There is but one Baptism; and then
shall not all they which be baptized be one? Contention causes Division;
wherefore it ought not to be among Christians, whom one Faith and Baptism
joineth in an Unity. If all Differences in Opinions be here forbid, as cutting
Men off from Christ's Body, it may be said perhaps, that Schism cannot possibly
be avoided. But what seems intended by the Apostles, and by our Church, is,
That notwithstanding such Differences, Men should be united in the same Faith,
by the Bond of Charity, which you may call a magical Union, when Men divide
from each other in their Opinions, if you please. Certain it is, neither the
Scriptures, nor our Church speak of dividing Communions; yet there is no doubt,
but that may be Schism in a divided Communion, which is in a joint. And whoever
want true Christian Charity, they are the Schismatics, whether in communion
with a Visible Church, or withdrawing from it.

Having shown what Account the Scriptures and our Church give of Schism, Vid.
Mr. Hales of Eaton his Tract of Schism, in his Remains, edit. Anno 1673.
it may not be improper to show in what sense it has been taken, by some of the
greatest Eminency in our Church.

I had before shown, how Dr. Stillingfleet had defended our Church against the
Imputation of Schism, in dividing Communion from the Papists; and how the
Primitive Fathers ought to be understood, Vid. Prefaced to the 3 Letters.
when they write of this; That Schism did not lie in a voluntary Departure out
of any particular Church, upon the account of any Thing extrinsecal and
accidental: (Christian Charity, to be sure, is essential.)

I shall only subjoin the Testimony of Mr. Hooker; and if I have these two on
my side, I shall think my self sufficiently well backed.

The Apostle affirms plainly ( says he) of all Men Christian, Eccles. Polit.
f. 83.
that be they Jews or Gentiles, bond or free, they are all incorporated into
one Company, they all make but one Body; the Unity of which visible Body and
Church of Christ consists in that Uniformity, which all several Persons
thereunto belonging have, by reason of that one Lord, whose Servants they all
profess themselves; that one Faith, which they all acknowledge; that one
Baptism, wherewith they are all initiated. The Visible Church of Christ is
therefore one, in outward Profession of those Things, which supernaturally
appertain to the very Essence of Christianity, and are necessarily required in
every particular Man. Let all the House of Israel know for certain, faith
Peter, that God has made him both Lord and Christ, even this Jesus whom ye
have crucified. Christians therefore they are not, which call not him their
Master and Lord.

But this extraordinary Person could not think himself obliged in Charity to
his own Soul, Answer to Anonymus, p. 5^*
and to deliver himself from the Guilt of the Blood of Dissenters, to instruct
them in the Necessity of one Communion in Accidentals, if they would continue
Christians: Nay, he thought, that although they should be excommunicated, yet even
that could not cut them off from Christ's Body. His Words are these:

As for the Act of Excommunication, Eccles. Polit. f. 88.
it neither shuts out from the Mystical, nor clean from the Visible Church,
but only from Fellowship with the Visible in Holy Duties.

But you, it seems, have considered this Matter better than Mr. Hooker, Def. of
Dr. St. p. 208.
and affirm, That every Bishop and Presbyter shuts out of the Catholic Church
by Excommunication.

And this leads me to the Notion of a true or sound Church. And surely it was
not impertinent for me to desire you to define what you meant by it, when
considered as Catholic and Universal, when in a more restrained Sense, seeing,
as I had shown, you seem to have no other Idea of it, Vid* 3 Letters p. 18, 23.
but as particular, visible, nay, and that national too; or at least, as being
the only true Church within the Nation or City where one resides.

Here I showed, that you applied that to the Visible National Church, which
belongs to the Invisible, as well as Visible Church; where it lay not upon me
to prove that the Influences and Operations of the Holy Spirit are not confined
to the Visible Church: Letter to Anon. p. 34.
'Twas enough to have shown, that you had no ground for what you had said from
the Text, which will not bear that restraint.

And the same thing is obvious of what you call my Attempt to prove
Congregational Churches, from 1 Cor. 14. 23. For how can you prove, that one
ought to communicate with the National Church and not communicate with any
other Congregation, from what proves no more than that you ought to meet in
some public Place of Worship, even according to your own Argument in the
Defense of Dr. Stillingfleet, which is no beter than to argue, that because you
must go to some Church, therefore you must to this.

Not being concerned for Congregational Churches more than others, I should not
give my self the trouble to examine what you say against them, did not you
oblige me to a small Diversion to observe how wonderfully you prove that it is
very plain that the Apostle in 1 Cor. cap. 14. means no more but that all the
Members of the Church do worship God in the public Assembly of the Church,
Def. of Dr. Still. p. 393.
tho not all in the same Assembly and Congregation; where to oppose aright, you
should have made it [in those public Assemblies which meet together in one
place] for there is no doubt but successive Assemblies must be meant, or else
there could be no Provision for more than one Meeting, and then how can you,
without begging the Question, maintain that when the Women are commanded to
keep silence in the Churches, (...), it might not be spoke of several
successive Assemblies still in one place?

Nor are you more happy in encountering the difficulty upon (...). Ibid. p. 394.


You say indeed, it is very plain that it does not always signify one place.

And who says it does, when Circumstances determine it another way: but how can
you affirm it to be so here without still begging the Question?

For your purpose you instance in Acts, 4. 26, 27. (...).
The Kings of the Earth stood up, and the Rulers were gathered together, (...),
against the Lord and against his Christ, etc.

This you say well, signifies no more than an Agreement and Conspiracy in one
Design.

But would not the most proper Inference from this Quotation be that as a
Conspiracy may by a Figure be called a Meeting together, (...), therefore it is
not to be proved from that Text which prohibits a forsaking the assembling
together, that those who live in a Church need actually to assemble together;
but if they agree in the same Lord, the same Faith, the same Baptism, they may
be said to gather together (...).

You cite another Text, Acts 2. 44. And all that believed were together (...);
it is in the Greek, (...): indeed this signifies no more then that they were
together, and being together may be granted not to refer to their religious
Assemblies, but their common Abode: but what is this to (...);

If therefore the whole Church come together, (...), where one would think
(...) is not added for nothing, but must signify the same place. And to my
thinking there is another Passage in this Epistle to the Corinthians, which
regards them as a Church that used to assemble together in one place, which is
where the Apostle directs them to excommunicate a notorious Sinner (...). 1
Cor. 5 v. 1^.


When ye are met together, and my Spirit, etc.

Do you think that there was any need of a Miracle to pronounce the Sentence of
Excommunication and that it must be done in the very same moment in distant
Congregations?

I may be bold to say, that neither Scripture nor the Homilies take notice of
your fancied Catholic or National Communion.

If you say that what we find in the Homilies to this purpose, being spoke in a
Church already constituted, must relate to the present Constitution; so may it
be said of the Apostle's Exhortation to that Church to which he wrote, which
for ought yet appears, was a single Independent Congregation.

Yet it may be a Question, whether such Limitation can be supposed to have been
intended in the following Words, which you may read in the Homilies.

Churches are not destitute of Promises, for as much as our Savior Christ
says, Hom. for reparing to Churches.
Where two or three are gathered together in my Name, there am I in the midst
among them. A great number therefore coming to Church together in the Name of
Christ, have there, (that is to say, in their Church) their God and Savior
Christ Jesus present among the Congregation of his faithful People, by his
Grace, by his Favor and godly Assistance, according to his most and
comfortable Promise.

Now, Hom. of the place and time of Prayer, fol. 126.
concerning the Place where the People of God ought to resort together, and
where especially they ought to celebrate and sanctify the Sabbath Day, that
Place is called the Temple or Church, because the Company or Congregation of
God's People, Dr. Stilling.
which is properly called the Church, does there assemble themselves. The holy
Patriarchs for a great Number of Years had neither Temple nor Church to resort
unto. In the time of Christ and his Apostles there were no Temples nor Churches
for Christian Men; Ibid. p. 127.
for why, they were always, or for the most part, in Persecution, Vexation, and
Trouble, so that there could be no Liberty nor License obtained for that
purpose; yet God delighted much that they should often resort together in one
Place, etc.

But then speaking of the building of Churches afterward, it says, And to
these Temples have Christians customably used to resort, etc.

True it is that the chief and special Temples of God wherein he has greatest
Pleasure, Ibid.
and most delights to dwell, are the Bodies and Minds of true Christians, and
the chosen People of God, according to the Doctrine of Holy Scriptures, etc.

Yet this notwithstanding, Fol. 120.
God does allow the material Temple made with Lime and Stone, etc.

How far this agrees with your Notion, That such Temples of God cease to be so,
if they are divided from, or shut out of these material Temples, Vid. Pref to 3
Letters.
I cannot see; nor how you have brought your Notion of a Church into Conformity
with the 19th Article, which I before mentioned, but you thought fit to slight,
as not worth your Notice.

And therefore it is not likely that the Homiles should be any more regarded.

Yet however it may not be amiss to mind you of what our Homilies teach us of a
sound or true Church. The Passage before cited proves, that a particular
Company or Congregation of God's People is the Church in proper speaking. And
then for the Catholic visible Church, we have its Definition or Description in
these words.

The true Church is an Universal Congregation or Fellowship of God's Faithful
elect People, Hom. f. 213.
built upon the Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus himself being
the Head Cornerstone. And it has always three Rules or Marks whereby it is
known. (1.) Pure and sound Doctrine. (2.) The Sacraments ministered according to
Christ's Holy Institution. And, (3.) The right use of Ecclesiastical
Discipline. These Notes tho ascribed to all in general, are manifestly to be
applied respectively to select Congregations, or Fellowships of Christians: For
it is not possible that all can be joined in actual Communion. But in these
things they are to be ready to communicate with each other as if they were one
entire Body, in the first without any Limitation; in the two last as the Church
says of the Sacraments, in all those things that of necessity are requisite to
the same. 9th Article.


And to prevent all affected Ignorance of our Churches Sense in this
particular, it assures us that Christ makes Intercession not only for himself
and his Apostles, but indifferently for all them that believe in him through
their Words, Homilies.
that is to wit, for his whole Church.

I leave it to you run to the Parallel between what the Church teaches, and
what you would impose on us in this matter. I shall not repeat the Particulars,
but shall only observe upon your Notion of Discipline.

1. That according to you the Power of the Keys is absolute in Church-men's
Hands, Vindic. of Dr. Still. p. 116.
from whose Power of binding and loosing you infer, that Church Communion is
absolutely necessary to Salvation.

Whereas our Church says,

Christ ordained the Authority of the Keys to excommunicate notorious Sinners,
Hom. f. 213.
and to absolve them that are truly penitent.

2. And secondly, Resol. of Cases, page 6.
Whereas you affirm, That every professed Christian, who is received into the
Church by Baptism, is a Churchmember; Page 10.
and all Church Members have a common Right to Church Priviledges: That teaches
otherwise.

Why, Hom. of the Sacram. f. 205.
says it, cried the Deacon in the Primitive Church, if any be holy let him draw
near? Why did they celebrate these Mysteries the Quire-door being shut? Why
were the public Penitents and Learners in Religion, commanded to avoid; Was it
not because this Table received no unholy, unclean, or sinful Guests? And this
it enforces from the Example of our Blessed Savior, and the conforming
Practice of the Primitive Church in these words:

According to this Example of our Savior Christ, Homily of the right use of
the Church, f. 9.
in the Primitive Church, which was most holy and godly, and in the which due
Discipline with Severity was used against the wicked, open Offenders were not
suffered once to enter into the House of the Lord, nor admitted to
Common Prayer, and the use of the holy Sacraments with other true Christians,
until they had done open Penance before the whole Church. Here I might well
leave you to bethink your self of returning into the Bosom of our Church, after
you have divided from the Unity of its Doctrine. And I might advise you to have
a care of contending too eagerly in the maintaining your own Opinions, for fear
of running into the Formality of that which you take such pains to fright
others from. Tho it may be a good way to convert Schismatics, to convince them
of the Error of their Ways, Page 51.
yet even that may be done schismatically, at least the causless Imputation of
it may return upon the forward Censurer.

But lest you should think I say this to avoid the notice of my shameful Baffle
in the Story of Pope Victor, Page 36.
which you will have to be a feigned Case, told me by some body.

Be it known to you, Hen. Gutherit p. 235.
that the Authority which I had next at hand was a late learned* Chronologist;
who has these words; Romanae Ecclesiae Episcopus fuit Victor qui ab Anno
Christi 192 sedit Annos 10, in Concilio statuit ut Pascha semper die Dominica
celebraretur, atque adeo excommunicavit omnes Episcopos and Ecclesias in Asia
quae eadem die Pascha non celebrabant.

Here I might as well think that the Bishop pronounced the Sentence of
Excommunication in Council, as he alone is said statuere, what was done by
common Consent; and so we know Rex statuit is often used.

The Excommunication you contend to have been only his own Act, not the Act of
the Council. And you cite Eusebius, which calls* that, which I should take for
an Exemplification of the Act of the Council, his Letter.

I am sure Socrates his Expression of this favors me, Socrat. lib. 5. f. 695.
when he says, (...), he sent them the Sentence of Excommunication. And the
matter having been agreed on in a Council at Rome, where he presided, it is
certainly most probable that this was not of his own Head.

Nor is it in the least any Argument against me, that other Bishops in
Communion with him resented it ill: Being those other Bishops, Irenaeus
particularly, were not at that Council: For, as Eusebius himself shows, as
Victor presided at Rome, Irenaeus did in France.

So that those of the same Communion were only such as agreed in that Doctrine
of the account of time; about which I shall not dispute whether Arithmetic was
concerned or no: Yet I find it a long while since, Antigonus Palaeologus.
by an old Emperor, called Question temporis non Fidei.

But I find not in Eusebius that Irenaeus prevented this from taking effect,
Letter, p. 36.
as you affirm; for the Sentence was actually pronounced, as both Eusebius and
Socrates inform us. But when retracted, or whether at all, appears not.

But be it as you contend, that this was only the Act of a Schismatical Bishop;
how comes it to pass that his Church was not concerned in this?

St. Cyprian says, Cyprian, lib. 4. Ep. 9.
Qui cum Episcopo non sunt in Ecclesia non sunt.

And St. Ignatius, Ignat. Ep. ad Philadelph.
(...).

Both agree that there is no being in the Church, or in Christ, unless they side
with their Bishop.

And a Gentleman whose Authority I hope you will not except against, One
Priesthood, one Altar, p. 253.
says of St. Cyprian;

He makes all Bishops equal, to have the whole Power in Solidum, to be absolute
Judges of their own Acts, and be accountable to none but God. Nay you your self
have told us that it is essential to the Communion of particular Churches that
their Governors should be in Communion with each other. Resol. p. 25.


Wherefore the Asian and Latin Churches were in a State of Separation, and the
Laity of one side or other were necessitated to communicate in a Schism.

This, Sir, may supersede my enquiry into your Niceties upon a Case of your own
making.

But the same which you suppose Victor 's to have been, you say, Resol. p. 43
was the Case of St. Chrysostom, and Epiphanius, and some other Bishops in
those Days, who separated from each other: as Mr. Chillingworth has it of them,
Chillingworth f. 255.
Diverse times it has happened, as in the Case of St. Chrysostom and
Epiphanius, that particular Men, and particular Churches, have, upon an
overvalued Difference, either renounced Communion mutually, or one of them
separated from the other. Letter to Anonym. p. 42.
Herein you agree with that great Champion, that however they maintained
Communion with the Catholic Church.

Yet how that is possible upon your grounds, I cannot imagine.

But it seems poor Tertullian, Vid. Preface to 3 Letters.
and his Followers, were not worth your Pity, and you would not vouchsafe them
a taste of your Skill.

I should think upon your own Principles, since two Churches, Answer to Anonym.
p. 45.
which are not in Communion with each other, cannot both belong to the same
Body, or the one Catholic Church; that the Bishops, with their Followers, on
the one side or other, were extra Ecclesiam foris. Letter to Anon. p. 45.


The Contradiction which I charged you with, Three Letters, p. 26.
about occasional and constant Communion, you would avoid, by affirming, that
you nowhere assert, that the Communion of the Church does not make us Members
of any particular Church, Page 46,
you having added [ as such]: Page 14.
These Words I find elsewhere explained by [ as distinguished from the
Universal Church.] And a little before you had said, Vid. 3 Letters, p. 25, 26.
that this Membership may extend to the remotest Part of the World, if the Body
whereof we are Members, reach so far. This I think comes up to what I urged,
which I find no reason to retract.

I had produced Mr. Chillingworth to prove, Letter to Anonym. p. 47.
that it may happen, that one is not obliged so much as sometimes to
communicate with a sound Part of the Catholic Church, because you live where
there is such an one.

And this, because such a sound Church may impose upon you the Belief of some
Error, not destructive of the Faith, or some unnecessary Conditions of
Communion, if not unlawful.

And you Sarcastically call me a subtle Arguer, for calling such a Church
sound; as if it might not however be sound in its Vitals, and such an one as
our Homilies would call a true Church.

Surely you do not consider what Advantage you give Dissenters in this.

But however, a Man of your Parts knows how to bring himself off in any case.
And methinks it is a wonderful Instance of your Art, that what Mr. Chillingworth
says, in opposition to the Necessity of communicating with a corrupt Church,
having all the Face of Authority; and that however Christ may have a visible
true Church on Earth, Letter to Anon. p. 48.
a Company of Men professing so much as was necessary to Salvation; should be
turned into his meaning a formed and visible Church-Society, and pleading for
the corrupt Church, when he was justifying the Separation of private Christians.

When I had said, that if our Church required Conformity to its Rites and
Ceremonies, as necessary to Salvation, it could not blame Men for dividing from
it; you say, The Church could and would blame Men in such case; Ibid. p. 51.
and whether you do not put the Church in Christ's stead, may be worth a
Thought.

The last Passage in my Letters, which you thought worth your Notice, was this:

He who tells us, Answer to Anon. p. 51.
or he says nothing, that the Divine Spirit confines his Influences to the
Unity of the Church in such Conformity, not only makes such Conformity
necessary to Salvation, but imputes to the Church the Damnation of many
thousands of Souls, who might expect to be saved upon other Terms.

I am persuaded, that there are very few of our Orthodox Clergy, that will not
concur with me in this; and think, that whoever makes such Conformity necessary
to Salvation, and will affirm, that our Church warrants him in so doing, brings
the greatest Reproach upon it, and gives the greatest Advantage to Separation
imaginable; and therefore will be far from thinking that he encourages the
Dissenters in their Non-communion with us, who removes so great a Bar to an
entire Communion.

Before the Book of Common Prayer, there is a Declaration, the Authority of
which I hope you will not dispute, which is, That some Ceremonies are retained
in our Church, for a Discipline and Order, which upon just Causes may be
altered and changed, and therefore are not to be esteemed equal with God's
Laws. Where I take it, the Reason why they are not to be esteemed equal with
God's Laws, is not merely because of their Mutability, for God's own positive
Laws have been changed; but because they are enjoined only for Discipline and
Order, some Determination of which may be necessary to Government, tho not to
Christianity. This (I conceive) may be a good Warrant for the abovementioned
Remark.

To serve which, as you did that of the Divine Covenant, you would have it
spoke in relation to those that live elsewhere in any part of the World: But as
to them who live here, to whom the Subject Matter related, Answer to Anon. p.
52.
you do own, that Subjection to Church Authority in all lawful Things, (that
is, such Conformity) is necessary to the Unity of the Church, and necessary to
Salvation.

Tho some may not know what Idea to form of the Church of England, distinct
from other sound Churches, but as incorporated with the State, and relying on a
Civil Sanction; you cautiously confine this Question to Church Authority.

Wherefore, admitting that our Bishops have possession of the Churches by a
Right antecedent to any Humane Authority, Defense of Dr. S. p. 585.
and consequently may exercise Episcopal Jurisdiction within their respective
Diocesses without any such Authority.

What will you say to that Statute, which enacts,

That all Archbishops and Bishops of this Realm, 28 Hen. 8. cap. 16.
or any of the King's Dominions, consecrated, and at this present time taken
and reputed for Archbishops and Bishops, may, by Authority of this present
Parliament, and not by virtue of any Provision, or other Foreign Authority,
etc. keep, enjoy, and retain their Archbishopricks, and Bishoprics, in as
large and ample manner, as if they had been promoted, elected, confirmed, and
consecrated, according to the due Course of the Laws of this Realm. Was this
impertinent, or presumptuous?

But as that very Act permits them to minister, use, and exercise all and every
Thing and Things, pertaining to (...) Office or Order of an Archbishop and
Bishop.

Quere, Whether our Savior himself did not set the utmost Bounds of their
Power, Mat. 28. 20.
when having commissioned his Apostles to teach all Nations, baptizing them, he
adds, as it were by way of necessary Caution, teaching them to observe
whatsoever I have commanded you.

How extensive soever the Civil Power is, it may be a Question from hence, What
Right they who claim to be lawful Successors to the Apostles, have to command
Things not forbid by Christ, without being tied up to his positive
Institutions? And how comes it to pass, that they who are entered into Christ's
Church by Baptism, and continue in the Profession of his pure Religion, should
be Schismatics, and cut off from his Body, merely for disobeying Additions,
the Authority of which they soberly dispute? Answer to Anon. p. 32.


You say, in one part of your Answer to me, That whatever Variety and
Difference in the Rules of Worship, is consistent with one Communion, may be
granted, when the Prudence of Governors sees it fit and expedient.

Where as you condemn such Indulgence, as is inconsistent with one Communion,
it may be thought to be equally conclusive against the Imposition of any Thing
inconsistent with one Communion, Ibid. p. 40.
or the great Law of Catholic Communion. And when you confess, that the
Government of the Church since the Apostles Days, was never so entirely in the
Bishop's Breast, that what he did should be thought the Act of the Church, any
further than he complied with those Laws, Ibid. p. 4.
by which the Church was to be governed. You having likewise set aside the
Civil Authority, and admitted that Dissenters have sufficient Church Power
amongst them, I again ask, How they can be Schismatics for dividing from the
Bishops, upon the account of suspected Rites and Ceremonies, which they believe
not to agree with those Laws by which the Charch was to be governed, as being
greatly prejudicial to, if not inconsistent with one Communion?

And I would willingly be satisfied, how you can bring within the foregoing
Rules, Answer, p 40.
what you assert but within three Pages, where having held, that there was no
Schism between the Latin and Asian Churches, yet you will have it, that private
Christians at Rome, could not receive the Asians into the Communion of the
Church, without the Bishop's Authority.

But to word this Matter according to your Hypothesis; Ibid. p. 52.
Tho Conformity to the Church of England, that is, Obedience to the
Church Governors, the Bishops, is not essential to the Unity of the Catholic
Church; yet it is for all that live here.

I should have been contented to have the Controversy confined to Persons
living here, but that you tempt me further.

You say indeed, Ibid. p. 52.
That Christians, who live under the Government and Jurisdiction of other
Churches, may, and do preserve the Unity of the Church, without Conformity to
the Church of England.

But pray, can they preserve the Unity of the Church, without Catholic
Communion, Vindic. of the Defen. p. 396.
to which, as you have told us, a Compliance with the Order, Government,
Discipline, and Worship, as well as the Doctrine of the Catholic Church, is
absolutely necessary? And then, Ibid. p. 36.
All the Churches of the World are but one Church, or one Society, and have the
same Right or Obligation of them to communicate with each other, as Opportunity
serves, in all those Duties, for the sake of which Christian Churches are
instituted, as the Members of a particular Church are.

There are some other Passages in my third Letter, which perhaps might want to
have something said to them; but I shall only refer the Whole, with what I have
here wrote, to your second and cooler Thoughts. But I must confess, I wonder
how I escaped unrebuk'd, when I observed, that you your self made a sufficient
Excuse for some even causless Separation. And if the Sinfulness of Separation
lies in not observing your Terms of Catholic Communion, the Dissenters would
think themselves pretty sake under Mr. Chillingworth's Defense against the
Papists, Chillingworth, f. 56.
not only when he affirms, That the Gospel of Christ is the whole Covenant
between God and Man; nor when he blames the Papists for making Salvation depend
on Things Ibid. p. 79.
casual, and in the Power of Man to confer, or not to confer.

But if it were only because of the Obscurity and Doubtfulness, if not
Inconsistency of the Grounds, whence the Obligation to constant Communion with
the Church is inferred; for he thought it Demonstration, Chillingworth f. 92.
that nothing is necessary to be believed, but what is plainly revealed.

Now, Sir, I take leave to tell you, that I have faithfully followed you in all
your subtle Windings; I am sure I have nowhere perverted your Discourses,
Letter to Anonymus, p. 5.
how much soever I may have mistaken them. And it is no easy matter to take his
Sense rightly, who is inconsistent with himself.

It has not been the least, nor perhaps the least pertinent part of my Task, to
fix your own Principles upon you; some of which need no other Exposure, but to
be set in their proper Light, where, like the Cadmoean Issue, they may be left
to destroy each other.

If you forget in one place, what served your purpose in another, or go to
prove too little, or too much, for what possibly might be your general Scope
and Design; Answer to Anon. p. 46.
I hope you will for the future be more cautious of condemning Men for
Dishonesty, in arguing upon what they find.

By this time it is likely I may in a double Sense have tired your Patience,
which you value your self upon. I must confess, the Substance of what lies in
Dispute between us, might be brought into a much narrower Compass. But perhaps
it was no more than requisite, to put several Questions to you, to prevent all
colorable Evasion, that one might take up what might be artfully slipped over
upon another.

And certainly, any one that observes what Skill you use in the management of
this Controversy, will think that many Things, which might have seemed
superfluous, were but necessary to oblige you to speak out.

Thus when I had asked, 3d Letter to Dr. S. p. 18.
Whether a Man has a Right to be of a particular Church, as he is a Christian,
that is, ( as I then thought, and still do) a true Member of the Catholic
Church; I should not have added, [Or becomes a Christian, only as received into
a particular Church.] were it not that I wrote to one* who seems to think no
Man can be a true Member of the Catholic Church, before he has been actually
received into some particular Church. Answer to Anonymus, p. 34.
But you, taking no notice of the last Branch of the Question, wonder I should
ask you, Whether a Man has a Right to be of a particular Church, as he is a
Christian? when you say, The whole Design of your Tract is, to prove that every
Christian, by being so, is a Member of the Catholic Church, and has a Right to
communicate with all sound Parts of the Catholic Church, and bound to
communicate with that Part of it in which he lives.

Now it is odds, but it may be as evident upon this your whole Design, that
every particular Church is bound to receive every Christian, as such, into its
Communion, without imposing any Terms but mere Christianity; as that a
Christian must communicate with that sound Part where he lives, even in other
Terms.

Yet here you speak not one Word to the Question, how a Man becomes a
Christian, whether it be only as received into a particular Church: Indeed you
had said in your Resolutions, which I thought you might have either justified
or retracted, That no Man can be in Covenant with God, Resol. p. 5.
or a Member of his Church, who is not at least visibly admitted, which must be
by some particular Church; and surely no Man can be a Christian, who is not in
Covenant with God: Wherefore, according to you, no Man can be a Christian,
before he has been received into a particular Church.

Nay, further; either every Christian, as such, has not a Right to communicate
with all sound Parts of the Catholic Church; or else he who is excommunicated,
tho for a wrongful Cause, ceases to be a Christian.

But alas! Sir, it were endless to insist upon all the Advantages which I might
take from your Assertions, assure your self, I have not wittingly shunned the
Encounter of any Thing, that might look like an Argument for you; many Things
have had a particular Consideration, merely as they were yours.

And since for a more large Account of your exterminating Hypothesis, Def. of
Dr. Still. and Vindic.
you directed me to certain oracular Writings, formerly published, I was
willing to be at a little pains to pick out the choicest Flowers from every
Place, and having sorted them together, to present you with a Nosegay out of
your own Garden; you know even the same Flowers yield some variety of Scent,
according to their different sortings.

Finding (which before I was ignorant of) that your Sermons were but the
Gleanings of those Notions, which you have been cultivating for some Years; I
have not the Vanity to believe that I should, Aliud agendo.
by the mispending a few Hours, oblige you to condemn them, and the Books out
of which they were extracted, for waste Paper.

Wherefore all that I can now expect, besides the undeceiving some, and
provoking others to lay your Errors more convincingly before you, is, to have
fairly rid my hands of this Controversy, in which I shall not willingly engage
further.

However, if pressed to it, I shall not decline the Honor, as far as my mean
Abilities, and many Avocations will permit, to vindicate the Catholic Doctrine
of our sound and Orthodox Church, from such Misrepresentations on this Point,
as tend to the giving Men ill Impressions concerning it. And what I have
already done, perhaps may not appear more to answer the Obligation of Christian
Charity to Dissenters, than of Gratitude that indulgent Mother, which requires
nothing of me, but what I can cheerfully and readily obey.

Let Men teach no other Doctrine but what that warrants; and very few at least
will be likely to stray for better Edification.

Sure I am, it is not the Thundering of Damnation against Men, that convinces
them, tho it may fright them out of their Wits. They may listen to mild
Instruction, from one that not only preaches up humble Obedience to its
Authority, but practices it, and had rather read an Homily to his Parish, than
have the Glory of leading a Sect after his profound Notions, and of giving
Authority to the severest Censures upon Men, who are suff^ciently unhappy that
they cannot conform.

The truly Pious (and such both you and I ought to believe there are amongst
them) will, as far as they are able, submit to the Authority that is over them;
and in the mean while, will use all diligence to inform their Understandings of
the Lawfulness of what is required of them.

For them who are not so, it is enough that humane Law has made Conformity their
Secular Interest; and if that will not drive them within the Church-Walls, nothing
will.

And now, Sir, lest you or I should be carried too far in the heat of Dispute,
I shall, instead of that Ghostly Counsel which you gave me, in great Charity,
set down that of our good Church:

If any Thing be necessary to be taught, Homily against Contention, f. 91.
reasoned, or disputed, let us do it with all meekness, softness, and lenity:
If any Thing shall chance to be spoken uncomely, let one bear another's
Frailty: He that is faulty, let him rather amend, than defend that he has
spoken amiss, lest he fall by Contention, from a foolish Error, into an
obstinate Heresy.

As you seem careful to clear Novatianus from the Guilt of Heresy, Vindic. of
the Def. of Dr. St. p* 57.
in believing that they who had once through Infirmity communicated with
Idolaters, Not excluded, etc. for any Error or Heresy in Faith, but for a
Schismatical Separation from the Catholic Church.
could upon to Terms whatever obtain God's Pardon: I cannot tell how far I may
have offended beyond the hopes of yours, tho I am,

Reverend Sir, Yours to serve you, ANONYMUS.

ERRATA.
PAge 34. line 32. dele sound. P. 39. l. 6. read rigorously. Ibid. l. 13. r.
the Jews and Gentiles uniting. Ibid. l. 17. r. Jews and Gentiles. P. 71. l. 15.
r. Divine-Right; l. 16. dele Divine. P. 73. l. 1. r. Faith.


