AN ENQUIRY INTO THE Power of Dispensing WITH PENAL STATUTES.

Together with Some Animadversions UPON A Book writ by Sir EDW. HERBERT, Lord
Chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas, ENTITLED, A short Account of the
Authorities in Law, upon which JUDGMENT was given in Sir Edward Hales 's Case.

By Sir ROBERT ATKYNS, Knight of the Honorable Order of the Bath, and late one
of the Judges of the Common Pleas.

Digna vox est Majestate Regnantis, Legibus Alligatum se esse Principem
profiteri.

LONDON: Printed for Timothy Goodwin, at the Maidenhead against St.
Dunstan's-Church in Fleet Street. 1689.

ADVERTISEMENT.
January the 21st, 1689.
TO Morrow will be Published by Tim. Goodwin, at the Maidenhead against St.
Dunstan 's Church in Fleet Street, The Power, Jurisdiction, and Privilege of
PARLIAMENT: And the Antiquity of the House of Commons asserted: Occasioned by
an Information in the King's Bench, by the Attorney General, against the
Speaker of the House of Commons. As also a Discourse concerning the
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in the Realm of England; occasioned by the late
Commission in Ecclesiastical Causes. By Sir Robert Atkyns, Knight of the
Honorable Order of the Bath, and late one of the Judges of the Court of
Common Pleas.

AN ENQUIRY INTO THE Power of Dispensing WITH Penal Statutes.
25 CAR. II. Cap. 2. An Act for preventing Dangers which may happen from Popish
Recusants.
FOR preventing Dangers which may happen from Popish Recusants, and quieting
the Minds of his Majesty's good Subjects, Be it enacted, etc. That every person
that shall bear any Office, Civil or Military, etc. or shall have Command or
Place of Trust from or under his Majesty, etc. within the Realm of England,
etc. shall personally appear in the Court of Chancery, or of the King's Bench,
or at the Court of Quarter Sessions in that County where he shall reside within
three Months next after his Admittance into any of the said Offices, and there
in open Court, take the several Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, and shall
also receive the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, according to the Usage of the
Church of England, in some Parish Church, upon some Lord's Day, immediately
after Divine Service.

And every the person aforesaid, that does or shall neglect or refuse to take
the said Oaths and the Sacrament in the said Courts, and at the respective
times aforesaid, shall be ipso facto adjudged incapable, and disabled in Law to
all intents and purposes whatsoever, to have, occupy, or enjoy, the said Office
or Employment, and every such Office and Place shall be void, and is hereby
adjudged void.

And every person that shall neglect or refuse to take the said Oaths or the
Sacrament as aforesaid, and yet after such neglect or refusal, shall execute
any of the said Offices, after the said times expired, wherein he ought to have
taken the same, and being thereupon lawfully convicted upon any Information,
etc. in any of the King's Courts at Westminster, or at the Assizes, every such
person shall forfeit 500 l. to be recovered by him that shall sue for the same.

And at the same time when the persons concerned in this Act shall take the
said Oaths, they shall likewise subscribe the Declaration against the Belief of
Transubstantiation under the same Penalties as by this Act is appointed.

Paschae 2 JAC. II. In the King's Bench. Arthur Godden Plaintiff, in an Action
of Debt of 500 l. grounded upon the Act of 25 Car. 2. for preventing Dangers
from Popish Recusants.
Sir Edward Hales, Bart, Defendant.
THE Plaintiff declares, That the Defendant after the First day of Easter-
Term, 1673. sc. 28 Nov. 1 Jac. 2. at Hackington in Declaration.
Kent, was admitted to the Office of a Colonel of a Foot-Regiment.

That being a Military Office, and a Place of Trust under the King, and by
Authority from the King.

And the Defendant held that Office by the space of three Months next after the
28 Nov. 1 Jac. 2.

And from thence, till the time of this Action begun, he was and still is an
Inhabitant and Resident of the Parish of Hackington.

And the Plaintiff taking it by Protestation, that the Defendant within three
Months next after his Admission into the said Office of Colonel, did not
receive the Sacrament in Manner as the Act directs, but neglected to receive
it.

Avers, that the Defendant did neglect to take the Oaths of Supremacy and
Allegiance, either in the Chancery, or in the Kings Bench, or at any
Quarter Sessions in Kent, or in the Place where he was resident, either the
next Term after his admission to his said Office, or within three Months after.

And that the Defendant after such neglect, sc. 10 Mar. 2 Jac. 2. at Hackington
in Kent, did exercise the said Office, and still does, contrary to the Statute
of 25 Car. 2. for preventing Dangers from Popish Recusants.

Whereupon the Defendant at Rochester, at the Assizes held 29 Mar. 2 Jac. 2.
was duly Indicted for such his neglect, and for executing the said Office
contrary to the said Statute.

And thereupon duly Convict, as by the Record thereof appears, whereupon the
Plaintiff became entitled to this 500 l. as forfeited by the Defendant.

The Defendant pleads, that the King within the three Months, in the
Declaration mentioned, and before the next Term or Quarter Sessions, after Plea.
his admittance to the said Office, and before his Suit began, sc. 9 Jan. 1
Jac. 2. by his Letters Patents under the Great Seal, and here produced in
Court, did dispense with, pardon, remit, and discharge (among others) the
Defendant from taking the said Oaths, and from receiving the Sacrament, and
from subscribing the Declaration against Transubstantiation or Tests in the Act
of 25 Car. 2. for preventing Dangers from Popish Recufants, or in any other
Act, and from all Crimes, Convictions, Penalties, Forfeitures, Damages,
Disabilities, by him incurred by his exercising the Office of Colonel.

Or by the Act entitled, An Act for the Preserving of the King's Person and
Government, by disabling Papists from sitting in either House of Parliament. Or
by the Acts made in the first or third Years of King James the First, or the
Acts made 5 Eliz. or 23, or 29, or 35 Eliz.

And the King, by his Letters Patents, granted, that the Defendant should be
enabled to hold that Office in any Place in England, or Wales, or Berwick, or
in the Fleet, or in Jersey, or Guernsey, and to receive his Pay or Wages.

Any Clause in the said Acts, or in any other Act notwithstanding and non
obstante, that the Defendant was or should be a Recusant convict.

As by the said Letters Patents does appear.

Whereupon the Defendant prays the Judgment of the Court, whether the Plaintiff
ought to maintain this Action.

The Plaintiff demurred generally to this Plea.

The Defendant joined in Demurrer.

Judgment is given for the Defendant.

THE Order I shall observe in speaking to this Case, as to the (Order.)
Point upon the Dispensation, shall be this:

First, I shall open this Act of 25 Car. 2. and show the great Occasion The Act
of 25 Car. 2.
and Necessity for the Making of it; the Scope and Design of it; the excellent
Remedy it does prescribe; and the great Benefit and Security that might arise
to the Nation from it, were it duly observed.

Secondly, I shall then discourse briefly of the Nature of Law in general, Of
the Law in general.
as far only as may be useful and pertinent to our present Case, and of the
great Force and Authority that a Law ought to have, and of the great Veneration
that should be paid to it, especially if the True Religion, and the Honor of
Almighty God, the Safety of the Government, and the Public Good and Peace of
the Nation depend upon it, as they all do upon this Act of 25 Car. 2.

Thirdly, In the next place, I shall give an Account of the True Nature Of a
Dispensation.
(as near as I can) and of the Original and Growth of the Notion or Invention
called a Dispensation, and who were the first Authors of it, and about what
time it began, I shall endeavor to show the right use of it, (if there be any)
and where the just Power of granting Dispensations does reside, as also the
abuse of it, and how that according to the late Practice, these Dispensations
are contrary and repugnant to the Nature and Properties of Law, though they
pretend themselves to be Law, they have a different Original and Foundation,
and do indeed subvert Law.

First, For the Occasion and Necessity for Making of this Act of Parliament, Of
this particular Act of 25 Car. 2.
and the Scope and Design of it, and the Ends aimed at, they all appear in the
Preamble.

The Preamble distinguishes the King's Subjects into two sorts:

1. Some from whom there are great Dangers. 2. Those who are the Persons
subject to those Dangers.
The Dangers are from Popish Recusants; those who are threatened by those
Dangers, the Act terms them his Majesty's good Subjects.

It would be needless to tell what those Dangers are, and whence they arise.

All the times since the Reformation, have abundantly discovered Dangers from
Papists
what the Dangers are. There have been a multitude of Acts of Parliament made
that have still been fencing against those Dangers, which do sufficiently point
them out: so do the frequent and incessant Addresses to the Protestants.
from every Parliament for many Years, setting forth the Dangers; and all our
Histories and Public Writings, and especially those written and published by
his now Majesty's Royal Grandfather, King James the First, and a multitude
more, but above all, the sad event of things, and what we all see is come to
pass; these disclose to all the World, what the Dangers were, and the great
need of a further Remedy.

Their destructive Principles, and their desperate Designs and Practices, do
abundantly testify the Danger from the one sort, and the just fears of the
other sort of Subjects.

The Scope therefore, and the great End that our Act of Parliament had, is to
prevent the Dangers from the one, and to quiet the Minds of the other; many
former Acts of Parliament which had the same end and purpose proving
ineffectual.

The Remedy provided is very suitable, and the likeliest and most effectual
that either the Wisdom or Supreme Authority of the King and Parliament could
devise, and the very Remedy points out the danger.

The Danger would be at the height of it, if the dangerous Principles and
Practices should but arrive at the Power and Authority, and gain that into
their hands, (and it was growing apace toward it).

The wise and proper Remedy therefore provided by the King and Parliament, is
first to discover who are Popish Recusants; to offer a Trial and Test to all
that should be in any public Trust and Authority, for it was suspected that
there were many Papists under the disguise of Protestants.

And in the next place, so to Fence and Guard the Power and Authority and all
Public Trusts in the Nation, that they might by no means come into the hands
of the Papists.

Persons entrusted with the Power and Authority over the Nation, had need give
a signal Testimony of their Loyalty and Fidelity to the King and Government,
and of their true Zeal for the Religion established by Law.

The Test, as to their Loyalty, are the two Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance,
(and neither of these are new Tests). The Test.


The Test, as to Religion, and the true Worship of God, are likewise two, the
Receiving of the Blessed Sacrament, and the Subscribing a Declaration against
the Doctrine of Transubstantiation.

The Temper and Moderation shown by his late Majesty and both Houses, in this
Act of Parliament, deserves to be observed: It is not like the Leges Draconis,
written in Blood; this is no Sanguinary Law. It does not proceed against them
with Fire and Faggot.

It does not disturb them in their Estates and Possessions; it does not deprive
them of the Liberty of their Persons. Nay, it does not hinder them from the
Exercise of their own Religion (if it may be so called) (I speak as to our
present Act of 25 Car. 2. only).

It lets them live quietly in their Habitations, without so much as putting any
Oath or Test upon them, so long as they live private men. It only requires,
that if they will be entrusted with Power and Authority they should give some
just and reasonable Security and Assurance, that they will be true to the
Religion and the Government established.

If they will be meddling with the Power, without giving such security, then at
their Peril be it: The Law pronounces them incapable, and disabled, and
inflicts Penalties upon such as shall presume to violate this Law.

And it is worth the noting, how sollicitous and intent the Makers of this Law
were, that this Test and Trial might be taken and performed with great
solemnity, and that the Law might not be eluded with any Arts and Tricks, that
no Cheat might be put upon it. All this shows, that the Lawmakers had great
expectation from this Law.

The Oaths are to be taken in one of the two highest Courts of
Westminster Hall; the very Hours of the Day are limited when they must be
taken, that is when the Courts are usually fullest; during the taking of them,
all Pleas and Proceedings are to cease.

There is the like care taken concerning the receiving of the Sacrament, and of
the certifying of it, and plentiful proof to be made of it, and then the
recording of it. And the like for subscribing the Declaration against the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation.

It were great pity, that after all these pains, they should signify just
nothing, and that so high an Authority should be made ridiculous.

But after all this securing against the Danger from Popish Recusants, how
shall we do to secure against the Danger of Dispensations? Suppose this Act had
contained a Clause in it, declaring, that all Dispensations and Grants, with
Non obstante's to the contrary of this Law, should have been ipso facto void,
and had inflicted Penalties upon such persons as should have procured them,
would this have made it stronger?

No: several Acts of Parliament have been made in diverse Cases, with express
Clauses incerted in those Acts, to make void all Non obstante's to the contrary
of those Laws, (which one would have thought would have been strong enough) and
yet they all came to nothing: for the Judges heretofore have resolved, that if
the King grant a Dispensation from such Laws, with a Special Non obstante to
any such Special Law, mentioning the very Law, that presently the force of that
Law vanishes.

Therefore, beside the Disabilities and Incapacities put upon them, further to
obviate this Mischief also, and to frustrate all contrary Judgments, and to
prevent the Allowance of any such Grants and Dispensations with this Act, by
the Opinion of the Judges, or future Resolution of any Court in
Westminster Hall to the contrary, (as if the Lawmakers had foreseen this
Danger too) and to give a Rule to Judges in such Cases, when any should happen
to come before them,

There is this further Provision made by this Law, that the granting Judgment
given by Parliament.
or conferring of any such Office and Place is by express words adjudged void.
The words are, And is hereby adjudged void.

It does not leave the Courts below to Judge it, but this Law beforehand gives
the very Judgment. It directs the way of trying the Matter of Fact by
Indictment, etc. and then declares the Judgment upon it, and leaves it only to
the Judges to apply that Judgment to the particular Case.

May the Judgment of any Inferior Court control the Judgment of the Supreme
Courts.

Here is more then a threefold Cord to tie it. An Oath, a Sacrament, a
Declaration subscribed. I look upon the two Oaths as one Cord. And these two
Oaths are so much alike, and to the same effect, that Cardinal Bellarmine,
purposing to refute the Oath of Allegiance, by a gross mistake, bent all his
forces against the Oath of Supremacy, not minding the difference. As King James
the First, in his Answer to The Pishop of Winchester's Collections.
the Cardinal, has observed in the Collection of his Majesty's Works, fol. 263.

The next Cord is the Sacrament. The third subscribing a Declaration, to remain
on Record to all posterity.

And at last, a Judgment in the very point by the King and Parliament, (the
supremest Court of the Nation) which must not be contradicted by any other
Court, nor by all the Courts of the Nation put together; this Supreme Court
exercises its Legislative and Judicial Power both at once, and shall it all at
last be lost labor?

Secondly, Having given an Account of this particular Law, upon Of Law in
general.
which the present Case does arise, I shall in the next place briefly speak
concerning Law in general, of what Force and Authority it ought to be, which
will make way for those Arguments that I shall raise from it.

For when we know the true Nature of a Law, the Nature and Use of a
Dispensation will be better understood.

The Name does oftentimes denote the Nature of a thing.

The truest derivation is that of Lex a Ligando, from its binding quality and
the obligation it puts upon us; and this is most pertinent to the Matter in
hand.

The Laws of England (as all just and righteous Laws) are grounded Laws made by
consent of the People.
originally upon the Divine Law, as their Foundation or Fountain. The Supreme
and Sovereign God among the Heathen is supposed to have the Name of Jupiter
quasi Juris pater: But more immediately Humane Laws have their Force and
Authority from the Consent and Agreement of Men.

All Public Regimen, (says learned Hooker in his Ecclesiastical Polity) of
what kind soever, seems evidently to have arisen from deliberate Advice,
Consultation and Composition between Men. To live, says he, by one Man's Will
becomes the Cause of all Men's Misery; this constrained Men to come to Laws.

A People whom Providence has cast together into one Island or Country, are in
effect one great Body Politic, consisting of Head and Members, in imitation of
the Body Natural, as is excellently set forth in the Statute of Appeals, made
24 H. 8. c. 12. which styles the King the Supreme Head, and the People a Body
Politic, (these are the very words) compact of all sorts and degrees of Men,
divided into Spiritualty and Temporalty. And this Body never dies.

We our selves of the present Age, chose our Common Law, and consented to the
most ancient Acts of Parliament, for we lived in our Ancestors a 1000 Years
ago, and those Ancestors are still living in us.

The Law is the very Soul that animates this Body Politic, as learned Hooker
describes it, the Parts of which Body are set to work in such Actions as Common
Good requires. The Laws are the very Ligaments and Sinews, that bind together
the Head and Members, without which this Body is but a Rope of Sand, or like
the Feet of Nebuchadnezzar's Image, Iron mixed with Clay, that can never cleave
one to another, nor cement.

And so properly Laws have their name, a Ligando, in this respect too, viz.
from knitting together, for as they bind by their Authority, so they unite in
Affection and strengthen.

And these Laws are made by Public Agreement, not imposed upon Men against
their Wills, but chosen by the Prince and People: They are (that I may express
it in our familiar and ordinary Terms) the Articles of Agreement, chosen and
consented to by Prince and People, to be the Rule by which all are to square
their Actions. Hence the Law is termed, The Act and Deed of the whole Body
Politic. The Rule by which the Prince Governs and the Subject Obeys.

From whomsoever the Designation of the Royal Person is that governs, whether
from Heaven or of Men, be it the one or the other, Grotius de Jure Bell. and
pacis, f. 151.
The Consent and Agreement of the whole Body Politic, both Head and Members,
is the Rule of the Government.

David was made King by God's immediate appointment, yet he himself called all
Israel together to Hebron, and there they made a Covenant with him: King James
the Firstin his Speech to the Lords and Commons at White Hall, 1609. f. 531.
This is that I am now speaking of, (the Law of the Nation) made by general
consent; or a Scheme for the Government, as a late Lord Chancellor terms it in
his Survey of the Leviathan. Every Just King in a settled Kingdom is bound to
observe the Paction made to his People by his Laws.

But nothing can more lively describe it then the Preamble of the Statute of 25
Hen. 8. c. 21. where the Lords and Commons addressing themselves in their
Speech to the King, thus deliver themselves: Namely,

WHere this your Grace's Realm recognizing no Superior under God, 25 H. 8. c.
21.
but only your Grace, has been and is free from subjection to any man's Laws,
but only to such as have been devised, made and obtained within this Realm, for
the Wealth of the same, or to such other, as by sufferance of your Grace, and
your Progenitors, the People of this your Realm, have taken at their free
liberty, by their own consent, to be used amongst them, and have bound
themselves by long use and custom to the observance of the same, not as to the
observance of the Laws of any foreign Prince, Potentate, or Prelate: but as to
the customed and ancient Laws of this Realm originally established, as Laws of
the same, by the said sufferance, consents and Customs, and none otherwise.

Upon the same ground it is that learned Hooker says, that the lawful Power of
making Laws to command whole Politic Societies of Men, belongs so properly
unto the same entire Leges nulla alia causa nos tenent quam quod judicio populi
receptae sunt. Ulpian de Lege, 32. Tum Demum Leges humanae habent vim suam cum
fuerint non modo institutae sed etiam firmatae approbatione Communitatis. Sir
Wall. Ral. in his Hist. of the World, 245.
Societies, that for any Prince or Potentate of what kind soever upon Earth (I
use his very words too) to exercise the same of himself, and not either by
express Commission immediately and personally received from God, or else by
Authority derived at first from their consent, upon whose persons they impose
Laws, it is no better than mere (Tyranny Fol. 531.
). King James the First, in his beforementioned Speech, speaks much the same
words.

Laws therefore (says Hooker) they are not, which Public Approbation has not
made so. Approbation may be declared (says he) either by a personal Assent, or
by others, by a Right derived from them, as in Parliaments. This has the more
Authority, being the Judgment in a Point of Religion, not of an Historian or
Lawyer, but of a Reverend Divine, and such an one as has been so great a
Champion for Authority and Government, and for exact Conformity to
Ecclesiastical Laws.

Some of our late Writers and Preachers have discoursed quite in another
strain. The Noble Author I just now cited, calls the Laws, Condescentions and
Voluntary Abatements of the King's Original Power, (supposing his Power at
first was absolute). Now that Preamble of that Statute which I just now read,
is directly contrary in the very word (Original.)

Another, (a certain Lawyer, a Knight) in a small, but bold, Treatise of his,
will by no means allow of any limitation of Power, and holds it absurd, to say
a Government can be mixed or limited.

A certain Divine and Geographer, in his History of the Life of a late
Archbishop, declares himself much of the same mind with both these, and many
others have trod since in their steps.

I therefore thought it very proper and seasonable, to show the Judgment in
these Matters of an eminent Divine too, a Person in all respects Mr. Hooker.
without exception, and his Judgment is concurring with all the ancient Authors
in our profession of the Common Law, who being so learned and so ancient, are
therefore the most Competent Witnesses of our English Constitution.

That ancient Author of ours, whose Book is styled Fleta quia in Cartere Fletae
de jure Anglicano conscripsit, in the time of King Edward the First, (as
learned Mr. Seldom has noted in his Dissertatio ad Fletam, c. 10. sect. 2, 3.

This Author, L. 1. c. 5. tells us, Superiorem non habet Rex in Regno nisi Deum
and Legem. Per Legem factus est Rex temperent Reges potentiam suam per Legem.
Non quod principi placet Legis habet potestatem. Non quicquid de voluntate
Regis sed quod magnatum suorum Consilio Regia authoritate prestante and habita
super hoc deliberatione and tractatu Fol. 17.
recte fuerit diffinitum.

Bracton, who was a Judge in the time of King Henry the Third, but wrote his
Book in the time of King Henry the Second, styles the Laws of England, the
ancient Judgments of the Just. And Briton, Bishop of Hereford, who published
his Book 5 Edw. 1. by the Command of that King, and as written in the King's
Name. And Sir Gilbert de Thornton, who was a Chief Justice in Edward the
First's time, and reduced the Book of Bracton into a Compendium. And Sir John
Fortescu, another Chief Justice, and afterward Chancellor in the time of Henry
the Sixth, writ all to the same effect, and almost totidem verbis.

These Authors discourse altogether of the Imperia Legum, as Livy calls it.

And Laws thus made by an universal consent, must needs be most equal, and have
a far greater veneration paid them by all sorts of men.

The best men are but men, and are sometimes transported with passion.

The Laws alone are they that always speak with all persons, high or low, in
one and the same impartial voice. The Law knows no favorites.

Hence it is, that Aristotle most significantly and elegantly says,

That the Law is a Mind without Affection; that is, it binds all alike, and
dispences with none, the greatest Flies are no more able to break through these
Cobwebs than the smaller.

Imperatoria Majestas Legibus armata est, says the Introduction to Non eget
Mauri jaculis nec Arcu.
the Imperial Law, These are the surest Arms and Guard about a Prince.

Baldus, the great Lawyer, says, Digna vox est Majestate Regnantis Legibus
alligatum principem se profiteri.

Sir Edward Cook, in his 2 Inst. fol. 27. observes, that the Nobility of
England have ever had the Laws of England in great reverence, as their best
Birthright, and so (says he) have the Kings of England, as their principal
Royalty belonging to their Crown.

He there mentions our King Henry the First, (the Son of him that is styled
Conqueror.) He wrote to Pope Paschal in this manner:

Notum habeat sanctitas vestra quod me vivente (auxiliante Deo) dignitates and
usus Regni nostri Angliae non imminuentur. Et si ego (quod absit) in tanta me
dejectione ponerem, Optimates mei and totus Angliae populus id nullo modo
pateretur.

And fol. 98. there is mention of the Letters which all the Nobility of
England, by assent of the Commonalty, in the time of Edward the First, wrote to
Pope Boniface, viz. Ad Observationem and Defensionem consuetudinum and Legum
Paternarum ex Debito prestiti Sacramenti astringimur quae manutenebimus toto
posse totisque viribus (cum Dei auxilio) defendemus.

Nec etiam permittimus aut aliquatenus permittemus tam insolita indebita
prejudicialia and alias in audita Dominum nostrum Regem (etiam si vellet)
facere seu quomodo libet attemptare: Sealed with the several Seals of Arms of
104 Earls and Barons.

And the Noble King Edward the First took no offense at the stout and resolute
penning of this Letter: but wrote himself to the Pope to the same effect.

And yet it contains in it a kind of a Non obstante to what the King should do
by way of submission and compliance with the Pope.

Nor is a Just Law any restraint to a Just Liberty, it rather frees us from a
Captivity and Servitude, viz. to that of our Wills and Passions. It is true,
this obligation and binding of the Law is very uneasy to such Men as will be
slaves to their Lusts and Appetites.

They cry out, let us break these Bonds asunder, and cast away these Cords from
us; but to such as are virtuous and just and pious, the Laws are a Direction
and Protection.

The Orator truly says, Legum id circo omnes servi sumus ut liberi esse
possimus. The true English of which is, that such service is perfect freedom.
Hence our English Laws in Magna Charta are called Liberties. Concessimus
omnibus hominibus regni nostri has libertates subscriptas, (says King Henry the
Third, in the first Chapter of Magna Charta) which Sir Edward Cook expounds to
be meant of the Laws of England; quia liberos faciunt, (says he).

And though this Statute of Magna Charta run in the style of a Grant from the
King, in the word concessimus, for the honor of the King; yet as he says, they
were the Common Laws and Rights of the People before, and it was made by the
King, Lords and Commons, as is recited by the Statute of 15 Ed. 3. c. 1.

Thus it appears what the true Nature and Properties of a Just Law are; of how
great Force and Authority a Law ought to be; how dear and precious Laws have
been heretofore to Prince and People, and whence they have their Birth and
Original.

Thirdly, I come now to that Notion or Invention of a Dispensation, The
original of Dispensation.
the Power of relaxing or dispensing with a Law, and enquire into the Original
and Nature of it, and the great Mischief that has arisen from it.

The Pretense for the Use or Need of a Power of Dispensing is this, viz. There
is no Providence or Wisdom of Man, nor of any Council of Men, that can foresee
and provide for all Events and variety of Cases, that will or may arise upon
the making of a new Law.

But a new Law may sit heavy upon some particular persons, or in some
extraordinary Case that may happen, let what care can be taken in the penning
of it.

It is enough to commend a Law, if it be beneficial to the greater number, and
be for the public good; Laws are fitted Ad ea quae frequentius Accidunt, and
not for rare and extraordinary Events and Accidents, as the Romans had no Law
against Parricide.

And the Law says, better is a Mischief than an Inconvenience.

By a Mischief is meant, when one Man or some few Men suffer by the hardship of
a Law, which Law is yet useful for the Public.

But an Inconvenience is to have a Public Law disobeyed or broken, or an
Offense to go unpunished.

Now from this supposed and imaginary defect of Law, or some particular
mischief or hardship sometimes (though very rarely) happening to some Men, which
hardship was not foreseen by the Makers of the Law, (although this is oftener
pretended and feigned then happening in truth) occasion has been taken to assert
a Power in the Prince or chief Ruler, to dispense with the Law in extraordinary
Cases, and to give ease or relaxation to the person that was too hard bound or
tied to a Law; for, as I observed before, the Law is of a binding and
restraining nature and quality, It has the same specious pretense as a Law
made 31 H. 8. c. 8. had, which was of most desperate and dangerous consequence,
had it not speedily been repealed by the Statute of 1 E. 6. c. 12.

The Title of that mischievous Act of 31 H. 8. is this: An Act that
Proclamations made by the King's Highness, with the Advice of the Honorable
Council, (meant of the Privy Council) shall be obeyed and kept as though they
were made by Act of Parliament.

The Preamble recites the King, by Advice of his Council, had thentofore set
forth sundry Proclamations concerning Articles of Religion, and for an Unity
and Concord to be had among his Subjects, which nevertheless many froward,
wilful and obstinate persons, have wilfully contemned and broken, not
considering what a King by his Royal Power may do: and for lack of a direct
Statute and Law to coherce Offenders to obey those Proclamations, which being
still suffered, should encourage Offenders to the disobedience of the Laws of
God, and sound too much to the great dishonor of the King's most Royal
Majesty, (who may full ill bear it.)

Considering also, that sudden Occasions fortune many times which do require
speedy Remedies, and that by abiding for a Parliament, in the mean time might
happen great prejudice to ensue to the Realm: and weighing that his Majesty
(which by the Regal Power given him by God, may do many things in such Cases)
should not be driven to extend the Supremacy of his Regal Power, by wilfulness
of froward Subjects: It is therefore thought necessary, that the King's
Highness of this Realm for the time being, with the Advice of his Council,
should make Proclamations for the good Order and Governance of this Realm of
England, Wales, and other his Dominions, from time to time, for the Defense of
his Regal Dignity, as the Cases of Necessity shall require.

Therefore it is enacted, that always the King, for the time being, with the
Advice of his Council, whose Names thereafter follow, (and all the great
Officers of State are mentioned by the Titles of their Offices only) for the
time being, or the greater number of them, may set forth at all times, by
Authority of this Act, his Proclamations, under such Penalties, and of such
sort as to his Highness and his Council, or the more part of them shall seem
requisite. And that the same shall be obeyed, as though they were made by Act of
Parliament, unless the King's Highness dispense with them under his Great Seal.

Here, at one blow, is the whole Legislative Power put into the King's hands,
and there was like to be no further use of Parliaments had this continued.

Then there follows a Clause, that would seem to qualify and moderate this
excess of Power, but it is altogether repugnant and contradictory in it self.

And the Conviction for any Offense against any such Proclamation, is directed
not to be by a Jury, but by Confession or lawful Witness and Proofs.

And if any Offender against any such Proclamation, after the Offense
committed, to avoid the Penalty, wilfully depart the Realm, he is adjudged a
Traitor.

And the Justices of Peace are to put these Proclamations into execution in
every County. And by another Act of 34, and 35 H. 8. c. 23. Nine of the Great
Offices are made a Quorum, etc. for they could not get half the number to act
under it.

The Act of 1 E. 6. c. 12. (which repeals the terrible Law) begins with a mild
and merciful Preamble, and mentions that Act of King H. 8. which as this Act of
E. 6. does prudently observe, might seem to Men of Foreign Realms, and to many
of the King's Subjects, very strict, sore, extreme and terrible; this Act of
King E. 6. does therefore, by express mention of that Terrible Act, wholly
repeal it. And so that Law (to use the Lord Bacon's phrase) was honorably laid
in its Grave.

And God grant it may never rise again.

It is very probable, that this Terrible Law was drawn by King Henry the
Eighth's own hand, by that expression in it, that the King may full ill bear
the Disobeying of his Proclamations, and the dishonor done to him by it; and
by several other Clauses. The History of the Reformation, fol. 262. mentions
the Draught of a Bill intended for an Act of Parliament, concerning giving the
King Power of Erecting many new Bishoprics, by his Letters Patents; upon which
the Author of that History says, that the Preamble, and material parts of it,
were drawn by King H. 8. himself, and the first Draught of it, under his hand,
is still extant; and this passed the Lords, and was sent down to the Commons:
and this is the very same Parliament of 31 H. 8. when this terrible Law passed.

Sir Edw. Cook, in his first Inst. fol. 99. defines a Dispensation thus:
Dispensatio est mali prohibiti provida relaxatio utilitate seu necessitate
pensata.

So that great utility, or necessity, are at least pretended for the granting
of them; now public utility and necessity are the true grounds and foundation
of all Laws, (which I have already shown, bind all Men alike, without respect
of person) But a Dispensation does untie that Knot, or slackens and lets loose
that Obligation, as to some particular persons, and in some cases, and for some
limited time, at the will and pleasure of the Prince that exercises that Power.

It looks like a Dispensation which Naaman the Syrian obtained from the Prophet
Elisha. In this thing (that is in one particular) the Lord pardon thy servant
to bow down himself in the house of Rimmon, when his Master the King did so. He
calls it a Pardon, but it rather was an Indulgence or Dispensation that he
craved. A Pardon is properly of an Offense already committed. See Dr. Field,
Dean of Gloucester, in his Treatise of the Church, printed at Oxford, 1628.
fol. 475. what a Dispensation is, viz. It is in respect of certain persons,
times, places, and conditions of men and things. So that a Dispensation,
permitting the Law to retain her wonted Authority, only freeth some particular
person or persons, at some times in some places, and in some condition of
things from the necessity of doing or leaving undone that which (unless it be
in consideration of such particular circumstances) ought to be done.

A Dispensation is of a thing future, to allow of a thing to be done, that it
may not be accounted for a Crime, and makes the thing prohibited lawful to be
done. And thereupon the Chief Justice Vaughan, in his Argument of the Case of
Thomas and Sorrel, seems to take it in its right Notion, when he says a
Dispensation obtained, does Jus dare Though he quarrels with Sir Edward Cook's
Definition of it, and says, it is Ignotum per Ignotius. But, under his favor,
if he disliked that, he should have given us a better. Carpere vel noli nostra,
etc.

1. I know very well, that there are some of late, that do ground this Power
upon the Sovereignty of the Prince, as if to be Sovereign, and to be Absolute,
and Solutus a Legibus, were one and the same thing. As if it were inconsistent
for a Sovereign Prince to be bound to Law.

A Prince may be a Sovereign, i. e. no subordinate or subject Prince. Rex est
qui Regem Maxim not habeat, and yet not absolute and unlimitted in Power. It
is a frequent Argument, and often disputed in our Books, what Law the King is
bound to, and where he is not included in the Law.

2. It has been argued, that because the Laws are the King's Laws, that
therefore the King may dispense with the Laws: this Argument is of a vast
extent in the consequence, as that of the Sovereignty is. But it is not the
King alone that makes the Laws, and though they are indeed his Laws per
Eminentiam, and Denominatio sumitur a majore, yet others have an hand in the
making our Laws, and a Propriety and Interest in them when once they are made.

We shall be best instructed in the Use and Nature of a Dispensation, if we
give some Instances of particular Cases, wherein Dispensations have been
allowed good by our Judges, against the Penalties of some particular Acts of
Parliament. For example,

By a certain Statute, Gascoign Wines and other Foreign Goods were Instances of
Dispensation.
prohibited to be imported into this Kingdom, but in English Ships, under the
penalty of forfeiting the Goods, and it was a profitable Law for the increase
of our Navy and employment of our own Mariners, wherein the strength and safety
of the Kingdom is concerned. This importing of Foreign Goods in Foreign Ships
was the Malum, but it was only Malum prohibitum; that is, it was no offense
till the Law made it so. It was not Malum in se. It was therefore resolved by
all the Judges, 2 R. 3. fol. 12. that the King might dispense with this Law,
Cum Clausula non obstante, and might give License to some particular persons to
import such Foreign Goods in Foreign Ships.

That which before this Act of Parliament was a common Liberty and Trade, by
occasion of this Law, applying the Prerogative of dispensing to it, was now
engrossed into some few hands, from whence a Revenue it is likely was raised; so
that it might be said, Sin took occasion by the Law.

By the Statute of 17 R. 2. c. 5. no Aulnager or Weigher of Wool shall have any
Lease for Life or Years of his Office, and if any Charter or Letters Patents be
made to the contrary, (the Statute says) they shall be null and void: so that
the Makers of this Law did not allow of any Dispensing Power, but provided
against it, which shows what Opinion a Parliament has of Dispensations. Yet it
was resolved, Dyer 303. that the King, by a Non obstante, might dispense with
this Law. The Judges indeed were of that Judgment, but the Parliament, who are
the supreamest Judges, plainly appear to be of a contrary judgment.

By a Statute made 1 H. 4. he that petitions to the King for Lands, etc. in his
Petition is to mention the Value of the thing, etc. or else the King's Letters
Patents, etc. shall be of no effect: and yet Letters Patents to the contrary,
are good with a Non obstante.

By the Statute of 33 H. 8. c. 24. for avoiding Partiality and Favor in
administering Justice, no man is to exercise the Office of a Judge of Assize in
the County where he was born or dwells, under 100 l. penalty; and diverse former
Acts had been made to the same purpose, as 8 R. 2. c. 2, etc. yet this we know
is frequently dispensed with by a special Non obstante; so that these Statutes
are seldom or never observed, and are of little use. So likewise is the Statute
of 7 Ed. 6. c. 5. for Retailing of Wine, according to the Resolution in the
Case of Thomas and Sorrel.

These may suffice to show what is meant by the Term Dispensation, and what the
Nature of a Non obstante is.

It is an Indulging of a Privilege to some particular Person, or to a The
Definition of a Dispensation.
Corporation, allowing him or them to do a thing that is prohibited by some Act
of Parliament, (under a Penalty) without incurring the Penalty. The doing
whereof was lawful to all, till that particular Law did make it an Offense to
do it.

The Chief Justice Vaughan, who argued in his turn the last but one of all the
twelve Judges, in the late great Case of Thomas and Sorrel, (and there was
hardly a Case in all the Books under that Title, but what had been cited by one
or other, and all the Rules and Distinctions were there remembered) yet that
Chief Justice, after all, says, that not one steady Rule had been given either
by the Books, or any of the Judges, (that argued before him.) And for that
trite Distinction, so generally used of Malum in se and malum prohibitum, the
Chief Justice Vaughan professes, that Rule has more confounded men's judgments
than rectified them: yet he himself gives us no other.

Which shows, that the Notion of Dispensation is not very ancient with us in
our Law, and is but rare, and as yet unformed, not licked into a perfect shape,
(I mean still Dispensations with some Acts of Parliament, such as this of 25
Car. 2. not the granting Non obstante's as to mis-recitals or non-recitals in
Grants of Lands, etc.)

It having yet no steady Rule, and yet being frequently used, it is the more
fit for the Supreme Court to give some certain Rule in it, that may regulate
and guide the Judgment of Inferior Courts: and this is the proper work of the
King and Parliament.

And because we find it a growing Mischief, and getting ground upon the Law,
and every day brings forth new Precedents, it is high time that a stop were put
to it. So much for the Nature of a Dispensation.


I shall in the next place endeavor to trace out the Original of this
Invention of a Dispensation, when it first began, and who was the Author The
Original of Dispensation.
of it, and show, that it was looked upon as a Monster, and exclaimed against
by Kings and States and all Good Men, and yet the Precedent was followed, and
the Abuse of it spread and increased, and has been ever since growing.

I am not the first that have undertaken to make this discovery: In the
Argument of the Case of Comendam, in Sir John Davy's Reports, fol. 69. b. It is
said, that the Non obstante was invented and first used in the Court of Rome,
and they bring an Marsilius Patavinus, in the 14 Cent. (of Padua) in his
Defensor. pacis.
Author that denounced a Woe against that Court, for introducing so ill a
Precedent, mischievous to all Commonwealths in Christendom; for the Temporal
Princes perceiving the Pope to dispense with his Canons, in imitation of him,
have used it as a Prerogative to dispense with their Penal Laws and Statutes,
where before they caused their Laws to be religiously observed, as the Laws of
the Medes and Persians, which might not be changed. Thus says that Report: Here
we see from whence 'twas borrowed.

The late Chief Justice Vaughan, in his Report of the Case of Thomas and
Sorrel, fol. 348. does acknowledge, that the use of Dispensations was
principally derived to us from the Pope.

Now, to make some conjecture about what time it began, that we may discover
how old it is, and which of the Popes was the Author Its Antiquity.
of it.

The History of the Reformation, fol. 101. says, this Power of Dispensing with
the Laws of the Church by the Popes, was brought in, in the latter Ages. Popes
Zozimus; Damasus, Leo, Dr. Barrow of the Pope's Supremacy, 316. See there the
unreasonableness of Dispensations.
and Hilarious, do freely acknowledge they could not change the Decrees of the
Church.

It is supposed, it was first invented by Pope Innocent the Third, about the
beginning of the thirteenth Century, and about the times of our King John, and
his Son King Henry the Third; and it is observable, that in this Pope's time
the Doctrine of Transubstantiation was first decreed to be an Article of the
Faith, and this at the Council of Anno 1215.
Lateran: that Doctrine, which by this very Act of ours, is to be declared
against, and is now dispensed with. This is that Pope that excommunicated Otho
the Emperor, and our King John, and forced him at last to resign his Crown,
and to take it back from him again to hold it of him at the Rent of 1000 Marks:
What good issue can we expect from such a Father?

After the time of this Pope, Dispensations began more frequently to be
practiced by the Successors of Innocent the Third, by Honorius, and by Pope
Gregory the Ninth, and Innocent the Fourth, but they were exclaimed against by
all Kings and Princes, and by all the good and learned Writers of that Age,
which shows, that they had not been ancient, and that the Kings and Princes
themselves had not then followed the ill example in Dispensing with their Laws;
for had they done so, they could not with any confidence have condemned the
Pope for using them.

And we may see how odious these Dispensations were, by the vile Epithites the
Learned and Good Men of that Age gave them.

We have a full Relation of it from one of their own Order, a Monk, but an
Historian of very good esteem, that is, Matthew. Paris; he tells Page 646, 647.
us, that our King Henry the Third sent Earl Bigod and other Nobles to the
Council at Lions, and amongst others, one William de Powic, one of his
Procurators and a Clergyman, who made an Elegant Oration, ripping up the
horrible Oppressions used by the Pope upon England, and then delivered in an
Epistle, directed to Pope Innocent the Fourth, by the Magnates and Universitas
Regni Angliae, to the same effect. After this had been openly read in the
Council, and a mighty silence followed, and the Pope gave no answer to it. The
King's Proctors, Prioribus addebant querimoniam gravem and seriam videlicet de
violenta Oppressione, intolerabili gravamine, and impudenti Exactione, and
injuria, quae per hanc Invisam Adjectionem papalibus Literis frequenter
insertam (Non obstante) etc. exercetur per quam Jus pro nihilo habetur and
Authentica scripta Enervantur, says that Historian.

The same Author says, that the Reformation of many things was obtained from
Pope Innocent: Sed omnia haec and alia, per hoc Repagulum (Non obstante)
infirmantur ubi vero fides! ubi jura, quae scriptis solebant solidari?

Our King Henry the Third convened his Parliament, and spread before them the
Articles of the Grievances which he had so sent to Rome, and amongst others one
in these words: (viz.) Gravatur Regnum Angliae Mat. Paris, p. 677.
ex multiplici adventu illius infamis nuncii (Non obstante) per quem Juramenti
religio, consuetudines Antiquae, scripturarum vigor, concessionum autoritas,
Jura and privilegia debilitantur and evanescunt.

We find it frequently termed (Detestabilis Adieclio Non obstante) and we find
the form of his Dispensation running in these words: viz. Indulgentia quacunque
vel privilegio quolibet, aut Constitutione in Generali Concilio edita, Non
obstante.

The Pope afterward required a third part of the Goods of all beneficed
Clerks, and (says that Historian) Multis adjectis durissimus Conditionibus; and
(amongst other) per illud verbum and adjectionem detestabilem (Non obstante)
quae Omnem Extinguit Justiciam. Sir Robert Cotton's Abridgment of the Records
of the Tower, amongst the Petitions of the Commons, 51 E. 3. Numb. 62.
Dispensations from Rome, are said to be the chief Grief.


In another Bull he requires the payment of a Sum of Money from the English
Clergy, Quocunque Privilegio seu Indulgentia Non obstante, Licet presents
expressam de ipsis non faciant Menconem. This very Phrase is grown most
familiar in Letters Patent with us, and we see from whence it has been
borrowed.

That Temporal Princes at that time did not practice the like, does evidently
appear, not only by their frequent Complaint of them; but the Historian tells
us, It was then grievously feared, that the Kings and Great Men would in time
be infected with the ill Example of the Pope: his words are, Quod multi
formidabant vehementer. Ne Principes Laici and Seculares exemplo Papae Edocti
Non obstante talis, vel talis Chartae tenore: would revoke their Concessions
too. Therefore as yet it was not in practice by Temporal Princes, no not in
Letters Patent, much less in Laws.

I shall give one instance, wherein we shall find the Pope teaching this very
Lesson to the King of England, (K. H. the 3d) and instructing him as his
Scholar, to write after his Copy.

King H. the Third had made several Grants to his Subjects (Bishops, Noblemen,
and others) and had obliged himself by Oath never to revoke them.

Pope Gregory the Ninth, by his Bull, (which Mr. Prin (who had the keeping of
the Records in the Tower) says he found in the White Tower, Prinn's Second
Tome. Fol. 504.
under Seal) the Pope commands the King to revoke these Grants, Juramento and
Instrument is predictis nequaquam obstantibus.

King Henry the Third was easily taught this Lesson, and did soon put it in
practice; and being reproved by some about him, for using of Non Obstante's,
the King justified himself by the Example the Pope had given him: Nonne Papa
(says he) facit similiter, subjungens in Literis Ibidem, 760.
suis manifest Non Obstante aliquo Privilegio vel indulgentia. But as yet it
was not exercised as to Acts of Parliament, till a long time after.

What sad Apprehensions it raised in good Men, may appear by an Example or two:
When one of these Patents with a Non Obstante in it, was produced in the Courts
of Westminster, one Roger de Thurkeby, (who was a Judge of the Court of Common
Pleas, in the time of King Henry the Third) upon the hearing of it (says the
Historian) Ab alto ducens suspiria (he fetched a deep sigh) and, De predictae
adjectionis appositione: That is concerning this Clause or Addition of Non
Obstante. Dixit heu! heu! hos ut quid dies expectavimus ecce jam Civilis Curia
exemplo Ecclesiasticae Coinquinatur and a Sulphureo font Rivulus intoxicatur.

This plainly shows the time when the use of them was first introduced into
England in Civil and Temporal Cases, they were not used before the time of King
Henry the Third, which is not ancient enough to make a Prescription by the
Rules of our Law, and we see from whence they learnt it.

I shall now cite the Judgment of a Famous and Learned Bishop of those times,
concerning these Non Obstante's: that of Robert Grostest, or Greathead, who per
excellentiam, was generally styled no more, but (Lincolniensis) in the Book of
his that is Entitled, De Cessatione Legalium, Published by the late Dean of
Windsor (Dr. Reeves): There are some Testimonies given of the Bishop, out of
Authors in the beginning of that Book: Among others, it is remembered of him
that he sent a smart Epistle to the then Pope, wherein he does cry out upon the
Pope, for that the Pope's Bulls did superaccumulate (as he terms it) the words
(Non Obstante) Innocent 4th.
which words, says that good Bishop of Lincoln, did, Christianae Religionis
puritatem and hominum tranquillitatem perturbare: And he does thereupon affirm
the Pope to be Antichrist: Nonne (says he) Antichristus merito dicendus est?
And to prove him to be Antichrist, he further charges him: Privilegia Sanctorum
Pontificum Romanorum praedecessorum suorum Papa impudentur annullare, per hoc
Repagulum (Non Obstante) non erubescit, sic diruit, and Reprobat, quod tanti
and tot Sancti aedificarunt.

When Innocent the Fourth read this Bishop's Letter, he fell a swearing by
Peter and Paul, that he would Confound him: In tantam confusionem praecipitaret
ut totius mundi fabula foret, stupor and prodigium: And that he would command
the King of England, (whom he there insolently termed, Noster Vasallus, (a
Tenant, or Vavasor): Et ut plus dicam Mancipium (his Property) illum nutu
nostro in carcerare.

But the Cardinals then about the Pope, advised him to consider better of it;
for (said they) Ut vera fateamur vera sunt quae dicit, Catholicus est, imo and
Sanctissimus.

Of this Bishop (says Mr. Camden in his Britannia) he was, Terrificus Papae and
Regis Redargutor manifestissimus, and veritatis amator. Henry de Knighton adds
this of him: Ad Innocentium Papam misit Epistolam satis tonantem, (a thundering
Epistle) qua de re ad curiam vocatus and Excommunicatus appellavit a Curia
Innocentii ad Tribunal Christi.

And this Usurped Power, though used with more modesty at first, yet in a short
time it grew to that height, that it proved intolerable and insolent.

The Bull of Pope Pius the Fourth, publishes Decrees, Non obstantibus
Constitutionibus and Ordinationibus Apostolicis.

Another Dispensation of the same Pope's runs in these words, viz. Licet
Christus post coenam instituerit sub utraque Specie Panis and Vini Venerabile
Sacramentum; tamen hoc Non Obstante, etc. The Pope takes upon him to Dispense
with that Sacred Institution: A conficientibus (for so he profanely expresses
it) sub utraque and a Laicis tantum modo sub Specie Panis suscipiatur.

In the Dr. Barrotti in the Pope's Supremacy. 31.
Oath of a Bishop to the Pope (extant in the Roman Pontifical, set out by Pope
Clement the Eighth) the Bishop upon his Oath does acknowledge amongst other
Regalia Petri, That the Pope can make void Promises, Vows, Oaths, and
Obligations to Laws, by his Dispensations.

Dr. Marta de Jurisdictione affirms, That Papa de Plenitudine potestatis potest
Dispensare contra jus Divinum, and contra Apostolum, est super omnia Concilia,
quae interpretatur, tollit and Corrigit.

The Glossator upon the Canon Law (avowed by the Rota of Rome (as the History
of the Council of Trent does quote him) holds the Pope can Dispense against the
Old Testament, and the Four Evangelists, and against the Law of God.

Bishop Jewel, in his Defense of The Apology of the Church of England, against
Harding, brings in one of their Canonists that holds, That the Pope,
Privilegium dare potest contra jus Divinum, Papa Dispensare potest de Omnibus
preceptis veteris and Novi Testamenti. It is part of the Description given of
Antichrist, by the Prophet Daniel, chap. 7. He shall think that he may change
Times, and Laws, and they shall be given into his hands.

Bishop Jewel's Exposition upon the Epistle to the Thessalonians, fol. 131.
Antichrist (says the Bishop) is there called O. Anomos, a Man without Order or
Law, that Man of Sin; which is one of the peculiar Notes of Antichrist. He
shall seek to be free and go at liberty, he shall be tied to no Law neither of
God nor Man. Hence it is said of the Pope, that he is solutus omni Lege humana.
In iis que vult, est ei pro ratione voluntas nec est qui dicat illi, Domine cur
ita facis? Ille potest supra jus, dispensare and de Injustitia facere justiciam
Corrigendo jura and mutando.

Pope Martin the Fifth dispensed with a Man that married his own Sister.

In this last Instance the Pope did directly write after the Copy of an Heathen
King. The story of Cambyses is the same Case in the very point with this last
of Pope Martin. Sir Walter Raleigh mentions L. 3. c. 3. sect. 10.
it in his History of the World. Cambyses inquired of his Judges whether there
were any Law among the Persians, that did permit the Brother to marry his own
Sister. It was the intent of Cambyses to marry his own Sister too. The Judges
(who as Sir Walter Raleigh observes) had either Laws or Distinctions in store
to satisfy Kings and Times, they make a subtle answer, that there was not any
thing written allowing any such marriage: But they notwithstanding found it in
their Customs, that it was always left to the Will of the Persian Kings to do
what best pleased themselves. This was a Non obstante with a witness.

This surely, and the Popes practice together, gave the occasion to Mr.
Chillingworth's observation. He that would usurp (says he) an absolute Fol. 39.
Lordship over any People, need not put himself to the trouble of abrogating or
disannulling the Laws made to maintain the Common Liberty, for he may frustrate
their intent, and compass his design as well if he can get the power and
authority to interpret them as he pleases, and to have his Interpretations
stand for Laws. If he can Rule his People by his Laws, and his Laws by his
Lawyers; therefore (says he) there is a necessity of a frequent resort to be
had to the Lawmakers, not only to resolve Difficulties of Judgments, but to
keep the Power of Interpretation within its due bounds; which is excellent
advice.

I shall give but one Instance more, and that is of the most impious sort of
Dispensations that could possibly be devised; I find it in the History of the
Church of Scotland, written by Archbishop Spotswood. He tells us, that in Anno
1580. Dispensations were sent from Rome into Scotland, whereby the Catholics
were permitted to promise, swear, subscribe and do what else should be required
of them, so as in mind they continued firm, and did use their diligence in
secret to advance the Roman Faith.

Thus we see the monstrous Abuses brought in by Dispensations: I have been
something long upon this Subject, but it was necessary to show how that it is
in the very nature of it, to be stretching and growing, and at last to be
altogether unlimitted, and will totally subvert the Law.

Having thus laid my Foundation, I shall now proceed from thence to raise my
Arguments against Dispensations in general, to prove, that they are not Law,
but indeed contrary to Law and destructive of it.

I hold there is no just nor lawful Power of Dispensing with any Act of
Parliament, in any other hands than in those that are the Lawmakers, that is,
in the King and Parliament in conjunction: (I confine my self to Dispensations
with Acts of Parliament.)

1. My first Argument shall be from the Nature of a Law, (whereof an Act of
Parliament is the highest and of greatest Authority.) A Law has its Name (as I
said before) from its Nature, Lex a Ligando, it binds and compels to Obedience,
and it binds together and cements, it knits and unites a multitude of People,
and makes them all as it were but one body.

Now a Dispensation is of a quite contrary nature, and is destructive of Law:
As the Law does Ligare, a Dispensation does Relaxare. It is defined to be,
Relaxacio Juris: it does unbind and set loose the Obligation of the Law, and by
consequence tends to the dissolving of the Body Politic. Whatsoever is
destructive of the Law cannot it self be Law; for then the Law would be felo de
se, Lex quae Leges evertit ipsa Lex esse non potest, a thing divided against it
self, and therefore will not stand. Ubi non est pudor, nec cura juris,
instabile Regnum est, (says Seneca.)

Law is made by an universal consent and agreement of Prince and People.

I have already shown, how that the Common Law (which is as ancient as the
Nation it self) is that Covenant which was agreed upon by Prince and People at
the first framing and institution of the Government.

The Statute Law has its Force and Authority from the like consent, and
nothing is Law without that consent, as appears by the Preamble of 25 H. 8. c.
21. concerning the very Point of Dispensations; Sir John Fortescue says, Rex
leges sine subditorum assensu mutare non potest; potestas regia lege cohibetur,
in his Book de Laudibus legum, etc.

Now for the Prince alone, without the like consent, to depart from that
Agreement, and at his will and pleasure to break any Article of it, is in
effect to put the sole Power of the Law into the hands of one person, which
received its force and vigor from the consent of all, which is irrational.

Sir Ed. Coke 2 Inst. 27. No Law or Custom of England can be annul'd but by Act
of Parliament.
Bracton, who, as Sir Edward Coke says, in his Preface to the Ninth Report, was
a famous Judge of the Common Pleas, in the time of King Henry the Third, is of
this Judgment, Leges (says he) cum fuerint approbatae consensu utentium and
Sacramento Regum confirmatae, mutari non possunt nec destrui sine Communi
consensu and Concilio eor' quor' concilio, and consensu fuerint promulgatae.

2. The Laws of England (both Common and Statute Law) have (as I have already
shown) a different Original from that of the Power of Selden's Dissertatio ad
Fletam, 539.
Dispensation (as it is exercised now among us) they have not the same Father.
The King, (who is Pater Patriae) with the consent of the People, is the Father
of our Laws, he is Juris Pater: but he that is called the holy Father, and from
thence has his name of Pope, is the Father and first Inventer of
Dispensations: so that there is no kindred nor affinity between the Law and
Dispensation.

3. The Laws amongst us and this faculty of Dispensations, as they have a
different Original, so they have no resemblance one of another: facies non
omnibus una est, they have contrary qualities and dispositions. The Law is
equal and impartial, and has no respect of persons, and (as before I observed
from Aristotle) is a Mind without Affection. Now the nature of a Dispensation
is to favor some, to set some at liberty from the obligation of the Law, and
is a kind of praeterition of others, leaving them still under the tie and
obligation, and obnoxious to the Penalty if they transgress. Whereas, in a well
governed Kingdom there ought to be Unum pondus, and Una Mensura in
distributive, as well as commutative Justice.

It was part of the Oath that was taken by King William the First, (who is
commonly styled the Conqueror) that he would, Aequo jure Anglos and Francos
tractare: Which Oath favors nothing of a Conquest, nor does it run in the
style of a Conqueror.

And it is the Oath of a Judge at this day, That he shall truly serve the King
and his People, etc. That he shall do Right to every Person, notwithstanding
the King's Letters, that is, notwithstanding any (Non Obstante).

It is a Maxim in Law, Quo modo aliquid Ligatur, eo modo dissolvitur.

Now a Law being made by Consent of all, should not be Dissolved again, but by
the like Consent; that is, by Authority of the King and Parliament, who have
the Legislature. Dr. Willet in his Synopsis Papismi, Fol. 775.
makes a Difference between a Toleration, and a Dispensation: That of Moses, in
case of Divorces was a Tolleration. A Dispensation (says he) must be of as high
a Nature as the Institution: None but the Lawmakers, can Dispense with the Law,
not he that has but a share in the Legislature.

And from hence I shall take occasion to assert, and shall endeavor to make
good my Assertion by Law, that the Lawful Power of Dispensing The King and
Parlialiament have the Power of Dispensing.
with an Act of Parliament, that concerns the Public, is only in the hands of
those that have the Legislative Power. I confine my self to such Acts only as
concern the Public (as the present Act we have now to do with, does in a very
high degree). And therefore I hold that none can Dispense with such a Law, but
the King and Parliament, and such as they entrust with it.

I shall begin to prove this by an Act of Parliament, which is the The Statute
of Dispensation.
highest Resolve and Authority in our Law: It is in the Preamble of the Act of
25 Hen. 8. c. 21. (the Statute of Dispensations) and the Preamble of a Statute
is Law, as well as the enacting part, or body of the Law. It is in effect a
Declaration of what was Law before, at least it shows the Opinion and Judgment
of the Lawmakers; which is of high Authority.

It first utterly disowns and renounces the Pope's long usurped Claim and
Pretense of Dispensing with any Person within this Realm, even in The Preamble.
Matters Spiritual, though by him practiced for many Years. I desire to observe
upon this, that long usage by an Usurpation, gives no lawful Right: But I would
further observe too, that where it has been long admitted and used, it is in
such Case reasonable for none but the Supreme Court to undertake it, and
declare against it.

In the next place, this Act of Parliament does affirm, That this Realm of
England is subject to no Laws, but such as have been made and taken by
sufferance of the King and his Progenitors, and the People of this Realm, at
their free Liberty, by their own Consent to be used amongst them, and have
bound themselves by long Use and Custom, to the observance of them, as to the
customed and ancient Laws of this Realm Originally established, as Laws of the
same, by the said Sufferance, Consents, and Customs, And none otherwise. This
shows the Original of our Common Law. This likewise clearly proves, that
whatever is imposed upon the People without their Consent, has not the
Authority of a Law: And it cannot be shown that ever the People did consent to
this Power or Practice of Granting Dispensations. But it plainly appears that
our Acts of Parliament are so far from approving or countenancing of it, that
they have often fenced against it, although in vain hitherto. And though the Usage
have been very Ancient (as I have shown) yet that gives it no lawful Authority;
for this Preamble declares, those only are Laws binding to the People, that
have been Originally established as Laws. The Word (Originally) refers no doubt
to our very Primitive Institution, which is Common Law, or at least to a time
so ancient, as that the Original cannot be traced out, nor shown, and then it
shall be presumed to be the Common Law. Now I have (I hope) clearly evinced
that the very first invention and practice of Dispensations by the Bishop of
Rome, is not time out of mind, No Prescription.
nor can the Usage of it here by imitation of the Pope, reach up to a
Prescription, in the judgment of our Law, nor by the Rules of it: For Sir
Edward Cook in his first Instit. Fol. 115. treating of a Prescription, and the
nature of it, says, That if there be any sufficient proof of Record or Writing
to the contrary, albeit it exceed the Memory of any Man living, yet it is
within the Memory of Man, in a legal sense, it had its Original since the
beginning of the Reign of our King Richard the First, (that is in the time of
King John, and King Henry the Third). The time of Limitation in a Writ of
Right, is limited to the time of R. I.


But that which makes it much the stronger is, that this Declaration of the
King and Parliament against such Dispensations and Laws introduced without the
King and Peoples Consent, does conclude with Negative Words, viz. (and not
otherwise) and is exclusive of all other, that is, that nothing is Law without
their Consent.

And this Statute of Dispensations proceeds further to show, where the true and
lawful Power of Granting Dispensations is vested, in these words, viz.

It stands with natural Equity, and good Reason, that in all Laws humane within
this Realm, the King and both Houses representing the Where the true Power of
Dispensing resides.
whole State of the Realm, have full Power to Dispense, and to Authorize some
Person to Dispense with those, and all other humane Laws of this Realm, and the
same Laws to abrogate, annull, amplify, and diminish as it shall be seen unto
the King, the Nobles, and the Commons of the Realm present in Parliament, meet
and convenient for the Wealth of the Realm, and then it does dispose of the
Power of Dispensation in Matters Ecclesiastical to the Archbishop of
Canterbury; some whereof are to be confirmed by the King, and others that may
be good without the King's confirming.

And although the body or enacting part of this Statute, extend only to Causes
Ecclesiastical, yet the Preamble does reach expressly to all humane Laws.

This Statute of 25th of Henry the Eighth, was made in the time of such a King,
as we all know, by reading our Histories, stood highly upon his Prerogative,
and would never have consented to such a Declaration, concerning the Power of
Dispensing, if it had been a special Prerogative in the Crown; and had there
been such a Power in the Crown, the King would never have suffered himself to
have been deprived of it, and to have it disposed of into other hands, by the
Parliament, and there would have been no need of passing such a Law, the King
himself alone could easily have transacted all this Matter provided for by this
Act of Parliament, had he had the sole Power.

It is true that the Lord Hobart, in his Reports, Fol. 146. mentioning this Act
of Dispensations, and taking Notice that by the express words of the Act, all
Dispensations, etc. shall be granted in Manner and Form as is prescribed by
that Act, and not otherwise; yet he holds that the King is not thereby
restrained, but that his Power remains full and perfect as before, and that he
may still grant Dispensations as King: for (says he) all Acts of Justice and
Grace flow from him.

This and such like Statutes (says the Lord Hobart) were made to put things
into ordinary form, and to ease the King of Labor, not to deprive him of Power.

This Opinion of his is grounded upon a presumption, that the Power of
Dispensing with Laws, was always from the beginning a Prerogative inherent in
the Crown, not examining who was the first Author, and the time when it first
began, and whence we borrowed the use, and how there was a time within evident
proof of credible and authentic Writers, when Dispensations were not in use,
and so they are within the time of Memory in a Legal Construction, and cannot
be by Prescription.

And it is plain every Legal Prerogative must be so by Prescription, that is,
used time out of Memory of Man, and whereof there is no sufficient Writing to
the contrary.

But I may appeal to any unbiased and equal Judgment, upon the reading of this
Act (especially the Preamble of it) whether this Act merely intended to put
things into an ordinary Form, and to case the King of Labor, or whether it was
not to put an absolute stop to the former Practice, and does not directly
declare and determine where the true Power of Dispensing ever was, and therein
uses those exclusive words (and not otherwise) for those words are in the
Preamble, as well as in the Body of the Act.

So that this Construction of the Lord Hobart's, That still the King may
Dispense alone by himself, and that he might have done so by his Prerogative,
before the making of this Statute, and may do so still, notwithstanding this
(...) is directly against the very words of the Statute, that says it shall not
be otherwise then as the Statute directs, and being in the Negative are the
stronger.

And the three Instances, or Cases cited by the Lord Hobart all out of Dyer, do
not come home to the Case of the King's Granting Dispensations in other manner
than the Statute of 25 H. 8. c. 21. has directed, which expressly enacts that
they shall not be granted otherwise.

1. His first Instance is out of Dyer, 211, the Statute of 28 H. 8. c. 15.
Appoints, that the Commissioners for Trial of Piracy, shall be named by the
Lord Chancellor; now it happened there was no Lord Chancellor, but a Lord
Keeper, and it was held that he might name the Commissioners, by the meaning of
this Statute, as well as the Lord Chancellor. This is, under favor, but a weak
proof of the King's Power or Prerogative, of varying from the Directions of an
Act of Parliament, or dispensing with the Rules prescribed by it; for it is a
mere imaginary variation, the Lord Keeper ever having the same Power as the
Lord Chancellor; and it is not merely so enacted, but declared by the Act of 5
Eliz. c. 18. which proves it was Law before. And yet some Judges held the
Commissioners were not well named, but that the Commission was void.

2. The second Instance or Authority that the Lord Hobart uses to prove his
Assertion, that the words (and not otherwise) in the Statute of Dispensations,
do not restrain the King's Power, but that he may do otherwise, is out of
Dyer, 225. That Queen Elizabeth might make Sheriffs without the Judges,
notwithstanding the Stat. of 9 E. 2. this I shall have occasion to examine and
speak to more fully hereafter, and therefore shall reserve it till then, and
doubt not to show, it is a mistake: and it was done by the Queen in a case of
necessity, it being in the time of the Plague, when the great Officers could
not safely meet in the Exchequer, (as the Statutes require for the choosing of
Sheriffs) and the Term was held at Hertford; and the Report says, no Sheriff
was named by the Queen, for the most part, but out of those Names that remained
in the Bill for the former Year. And the Book only says, it was held, the Queen
might do it by her Prerogative.

3. The last Instance that the Lord Hobart gives is out of Dyer, 303. b. that
the King may grant the Aulnagers Office without a Bill sealed by the Treasurer,
though the Statute of 31 H. 6. c. 5. says the Grant of that Office shall be void,
without a Bill sealed by the Treasurer.

The Resolution of that Point is very obscurely reported, but however take it
at the strongest, this is in a matter that concerned the King's Revenue, and
where it may more reasonably be said by the King. May I not do what I will with
my own? And this Statute may easily be understood to be to put the granting of
this Office into an ordinary form, and to ease the King of Labor, and not to
restrain his Power. If that may be said in any Case against the express words
of a Statute, it may be in a Case that concerns merely his Revenue, as this of
the Aulneage was.

In the next place I shall show, that the stream of Dispensations did anciently
run in this channel, till afterward it found out another course, and that
Dispensations with Laws, were only in the same hands as had the Legislature,
that is, in the King and Parliament, in former times, and this answers that
Example that has been used, that Almighty God dispensed with his own Law of
the sixth Commandment, when he commanded Abraham to sacrifice Isaac: God was
the great and only Legislator. Now the King is not the sole Legislator.

I shall present you with a very full Precedent and Proof of the Power of
Dispensing with Acts of Parliament to be no where else but where the very
Legislative Power is. And that the Kings have sometimes accepted it from them
in some particular cases, and for some limited time, and with diverse
restrictions, which is a full acknowment that it belongs only to the
Legislative Power to dispense with Laws.

The Commons, for the great Affiance which they repose in the King, 15 R. 2.
nu. 8.
granted, that he, by advice of his Lords, might make such Toleration touching
the Statute of Provisions, as to him shall seem good, until the next
Parliament, so as the Statute be repealed in no part thereof. So also as the
Commons may disagree thereunto at the next Parliament, with this Protestation
too, that this their Assent being indeed a Novelty, (these are the very words)
be taken for no example. This is granted with abundance of caution and
jealousy, and proves it is not ancient.

The Commons do agree to the Power granted to the King, for the 2 H. 4. nu. 26.
Moderation of the Statutes touching Provisors in the last Parliament,
beseeching the King, that the same may not license any Cardinal or Stranger to
enjoy any Benefice within the Realm.

It was enacted by the Lords and Commons, that Tydeman, late Abbot R. 2. nu. 22
of Beaulew, and Elect of Landaf, by the Pope's provision, should enjoy the
same Bishopric, notwithstanding any Act, so always as this be taken for no
example.

That the sale of Tin may be at Lostwithiel in Cornwall, and shall 17 R. 2. 34.
not continue at Calais. Notwithstanding the Council may grant License to
Merchants, to carry the same Tin to what parts they will, as to them shall seem
good. Here the Power of Dispensing is delegated to the Council.

Upon the request of the Commons, the King promises, that he will not from
thenceforth dispense with the Statute of Provisions to Benefices. 2 H. 4. nu.
63.


This implies, that the King had practiced it, and we know who began the
practice, and who taught it to others, and this Record shows it was without
consent, and was a cause of complaint, and the King promises to reform it for
the future. But what signifies a Promise, where a Law and an Oath is too weak
to secure it? this Promise does not confer a new Right, but is to reform an
unjust Practice.

I shall use one Argument more against this exercise of the Power of Dispensing
with Acts of Parliament, as it has of late been practiced, and that Argument
shall be raised from the great Inconvenience and Mischief that will ensue upon
it to the Kingdom; it may occasion the infrequency of Parliaments, by taking
much of their power out of their hands.

Laws are many times made but probationers and temporary, to the end, that if
upon experience of them they be found to be too severe or strict and to sit
hard upon any persons, that the Parliament at their next meeting may moderate
or relax the severity or inconvenience that may arise by them. But if there be
another way allowed for the doing of this Work, there will be the less need of
a Parliament, and so other Work, that requires also their meeting, may remain
unremedied.

If we consider how frequently the Parliament ought to meet, and and how often
they did anciently meet, we shall easily be convinced, that the relaxing of a
Law, or giving remedy, (where the Law was upon experience found inconvenient)
was a work properly belonging unto them, and there was no need of resorting to
any other help: for who should cure or reform a Law, if any thing were amiss in
it, but the Lawmakers? See the Statute of 6 H. 8. c. 18. the Book of Statutes
at large concerning Bristol.

Our Saxon King Alfred and his Wise Men (that is, the great Council of the
Kingdom) ordained, that a Parliament twice a Year, and oftener in time of Peace,
should meet in London. Thus says that ancient Book, styled, The Mirror of
Justices, c. 1. sect. 3. page 10. by 4 E. 3. c. 14. It is accorded that a
Parliament shall be holden every Year once or more often if need be; this does
not abrogate not alter King Alfred's Law.

By 36 E. 3. c. 10. many Laws had passed in that Parliament of 36 E. 3. which
are there called Articles, (as anciently our Statutes were drawn into certain
Articles, and so passed, as being Articles of Agreement betwixt the King and
his Subjects (as I had occasion to observe in the beginning of my Discourse)
and this Statute of 36 E. 3. provides, that for maintenance of the said
Articles and Statutes and redress of diverse Mischiefs and Grievances, which
daily happen, a Parliament shall be holden every Year, as another time was
ordained by a Statute) referring to the Statute of the Fourth of this King.

The Act of 16 Car. 2. c. 1. for repeal of the Triennial Act made 16 Car. 1. in
the last Paragraph recites, that by the ancient Laws and Statutes of this
Realm, made in the Reign of King Edward the Third, Parliaments are to be held
very often; and this Act of 16 Car. 2. makes a new provision, to the end (as
the words are) there may be a frequent calling, assembling and holding of
Parliaments once in three Years at the least.

Now let us enquire what the proper Work of a Parliament is, which the said
Statute of 36 E. 3. mentions in part, viz. for maintenance of the Articles and
Statutes and redress of Mischiefs and Grievances that daily happen (as that
Statute recites).

Sir Tho. Smith, (who was principal Secretary of State) in his Treatise de
Republica and Administratione Anglorum, L. 2. c. 2. fol. 50, 51. says this of
the Parliament.

In Comitiis Parliamentariis posita est omnis augustae Absolutaeque potestat is
vis veteres leges jubent esse irritas, novas inducunt, praesentibus modum
constituunt. (There is the true dispensing power) Incerti juris controversias
Dirimunt.

Bracton writes of this High Court, Habet Rex Curiam suam in concilio suo in
Parliamentis suis ubi terminatoe sunt dubitationes Judiciorum and novis
injuriis emersis, nova constituuntur remedia.

The Mirror of Justices, c. 1. page 9. says, that Parliaments were instituted
to hear and determine the Complaints of the wrongful Acts of those against whom
the Subject otherwise could not have common Justice, that is, against great and
powerful Delinquents.

Nihil prodest (says Bracton) Jura concedere nisi sit qui Jura tueatur.

So that there is need of a frequent resort to be had to the Law-mamakers, not
only to resolve difficulties of Judgments, but to keep the power of
Interpretation within its due bounds, and the Law has taken care for frequency
of Parliaments.

Sir Francis Bacon, in his Advancement of Learning, gives this excellent Advice
to Lawmakers, and to those to whom it belongs to defend the Laws.

Let not (says he) Praetorian Courts (speaking of Courts of Equity) have power
to decree against express Statutes, under pretense of Equity; for (says he) if
this should be permitted, a Law interpreter (that is a Judge) would become a
Lawmakers, and all Matters should depend upon Arbitrament, (that is) upon an
Arbitrary Power. And Arbitrament would encroach upon, and at last swallow up
Law.

The power of extending or supplying or moderating Laws, little differs (says
he) from the power of making them.

Courts of Equity sometimes, under the pretense of mitigating the Rigor of the
Laws, (and such is the Power of Dispensing) relax the Strength and Sinews of
Laws, by drawing all to Arbitraments: he was well able to judge of this, having
been Lord Chancellor. And it is his 46th Aphorism. That is the best Law which
gives the least liberty to the Judge; he is the best Judge, that takes least
liberty to himself.

Therefore where any new Law sits uneasy and too hard and heavy in some
particular cases, it were much safer to suffer the mischief for a time, (if any
such happen) and let it wait till those that gave the wound come to cure it.
Una eademque manus vulnus opemque feret. The overhasty cure, arising from the
impatience of enduring pain, makes the case the worse: frequency of Parliaments
is a proper cure. Other ways of cure are apt to cause infrequency of
Parliaments.

And in Matters of great difficulty which come before the Judges in the Courts
of Westminster, or if there be no great difficulty, yet if it be of mighty
concernment and not clearly concurring with the Hob. 157. at the lower end. It
is the Office of Judges to advance Laws made for Religion, according to their
end, though the words be short and imperfect.
intent and words of Lawmakers, but the Law in the scope of it, is like to be
frustrated by an hasty determination, it is, under favor, the Duty of the
Judges in such Cases of Sir To. Cott. Abridg. 1 R. 2. nu. 95. 2. Inst. 408.
Dubitaciones Judicior' to rest till the Parliament meet, and then to propose
it to the Parliament for their resolution. Thus it is expressly provided in the
Statute of Treasons, 25 E. 3. to defer doubtful Cases till the Parliament
resolve them, being in a matter of so high concernment as that of Treason.

And in Cases of much lesser consequences, especially upon a new Law, (as that
is that we have before us) in several Cases cited in Blackamore's Case, the
Judges have sought to the Parliament for a Resolution in smaller matters.

8 Rep. 158. In doubts arising before the Judges in their Courts, upon the
Construction of Acts of Parliament, the Judges resorted to the Council, (which
is there said to be meant of the great Council, (the Parliament) that made the
Act in the Case there cited.

The Question 39 E. 3. 21. 40 E. 3. 34.
did arise upon the Statute of 14 E. 3. c. 6. which gives power to Courts to
amend Misprisions of Clerks in Process, in writing a Letter or Syllable too
much or too little: But whether these words in the Act, gave power to amend
where there was a whole Word too much or too little, was the Question, and the
Lords declared, 39 E. 3. 21. that their meaning was, that in such Cases the
Process should be amended: this shows the tenderness of the Judges in those
times, in construction of new Acts of Parliament, and the frequency of
Parliaments and the resort still had to them in case of Doubts. And this was in
the time of E. 3. the most flourishing time of the Law; and a Case that the
then Archbishop said had no great difficulty in it.

But I presume it will be said against me, that this is a clear Case Objection.
in Law which is now before us, and that there was no doubt nor difficulty in
it, but that the King by his Prerogative could dispense with this Act of 25
Car. 2. and that all the twelve Judges (but one or two) was of that opinion,
and that the Point has formerly been resolved in the Case of Continuing a
Sheriff in his Office longer than one Year, notwithstanding the several Acts of
Parliament to the contrary, and that was so resolved by all the Justices in the
Exchequer Chamber, 2 H. 7. and by the opinion of Sir Edward Coke, 12 Rep. 18.
and repeated in Calvin's Case, 7 Rep. 14. which are the only Authorities that
come home to the Case, and none of them ancient.

Before I speak to these Authorities in the Case of Dispensing with a Sheriff
to continue longer than a Year, I shall make it appear, that the Case now in
question, or the Point in Law of this Case, was very much doubted, if not
clearly held on the contrary, that the King could not dispense with this Act of
25 Car. 2. and that by no mean Judgments.

If the King could have dispensed with it by his Prerogative, and it had been
so clear, what need was there of his Majesty's proposing it to the two Houses,
at the opening of a Session, to allow him a Power of Dispensing with this Law?
or that they themselves would dispense with it? why would the two Houses, after
long debate about it, excuse themselves from consenting to that which the King
could do without them? were there no Judges that did scruple the doing of it?

If it were a Prerogative in the King, how came it to be so long before the
King's learned Council could start it? we heard nothing of this till all other
ways were tried.

Let me add to this what was spoken by the late King's own command and
direction in the House of Lords, before the King and both Houses, and all the
Judges present, by a late Lord Chancellor, who as he was an excellent Orator, so
he was a very learned Lawyer, and my honorable Friend.

It was in his Speech made to both Houses the Twenty third of May, 1678. (about
five Years after the making of this Act of 25 Car. 2.) and it was spoken in
reference to this very Act of Parliament.

Has not the late Act (says he) made it impossible, absolutely impossible for
the most concealed Papist that is, to get into any kind of Employment? And did
ever any Law since the Reformation give us so great a security as this?

Hereupon, in the same Speech, that noble Lord does declare it now a stale
Project to undermine the Government, by accusing it of endeavoring to
introduce Popery, that a man would wonder to see it taken up again.

This Law had so abundantly secured us against the Danger of it.

And yet, after all this, do we hear the Judges openly and judicially
declaring, that it appeared to them to be a very plain case, that the King
alone could dispense with this Act of Parliament by his Prerogative: and though
it was acknowledged to be a Case of great consequence, (as the truth is) yet it
was pronounced withal to be of as little difficulty as ever any Case was, that
raised so great an expectation.

These are strong Arguments to prove the Doubtfulness of it: after all these
Refusals or Hesitations, it might very well be accounted a Doubt or Difficulty,
worthy to be referred to the judgment of the Parliament, if the Parliament had
not already in effect given their judgment to the contrary.

As I remember, it was in February 1663. that the two Houses made an Address to
the last King, for revoking a Declaration, whereby his late Majesty had granted
a Toleration and Indulgence to some Protestant Dissenters, as being against
Law, and such a Toleration was declared illegal by the Parliament in 1672.
These are two Resolutions in the point by the Supreme Judicature.

If this Prerogative of Dispensing with Acts of Parliament were in the Crown by
Prescription, (as it ought to be if it were a legal 12 H. 7. 19. Plowden 319,
and 322.
Prerogative) it ought then to be confined and limited to such cases only
wherein it had been anciently and frequently excercised: and there ought to be
no extension of Cases where they are depending upon a Prescription, nor is
there any arguing a Paritate rationis in such Cases and which have their force
merely from ancient and constant Usage.

It is a Rule at Common Law, Ubi eadem est ratio ibi idem Jus: But this Rule
does not hold in Customs and Prescriptions.

In the Case of Bailey and Stevens in Croke, Jac. 1. fol. 198, it was held per
Curiam, that where Lands in Borough English descend to the youngest Son, and he
dies without Issue, that the Land in such Case shall not go to the younger
Brother without a particular Custom; but the elder Brother shall have it, for
the usage had been in the one, but not in the other Case; yet these two Cases
are very near of kin.

Now this Prerogative of dispensing with Acts of Parliament, in the original
use and exercise of it, was but in very few Cases, and those which more
directly concerned the King himself immediately, in his Revenue, or the like,
which were Cases of no great Consequence, and such wherein the Lawmakers, in
making their Laws, might be easily understood not to intend to abridge the King
of his Power, but to ease him rather of Labor, and to put things into an
ordinary course, which yet the King might depart from, if he were so minded,
and if he did accordingly signify his Pleasure, by granting an express (Non
Obstante) the Act of Parliament to the contrary) and making particular mention
of the Act: Unusquisque renunciare potest Juri pro se introducto.

Or in Cases where there is no disability imposed upon a Person by the Act, but
only a pecuniary Penalty given to the King, and forfeited by the Subject,
transgressing the Act, where the King is Creditor poenoe; it seems more
reasonable that the King may dispense with the Penalty that will be due to
himself. And these, and such like, are the only Instances given in that great
Case of 2 H. 7.

But to dispense with an Act of Parliament, made in a Case of the highest Sir
Francis Moor's Reports, 239. Warram's Case: A Prerogative that tends to the
great prejudice of the Subject, is not allowable.
concernment to the Public that can be, wherein Religion, and the Government
are so deeply concerned, and where the King himself, and the Parliament, have
thought fit to disable any Person to do to the contrary, and so pronounced it,
and have put an incapacity upon Persons, and adjudged the thing done to the
contrary void; this has been of latter times, and but of late found out and
practiced, and is not warranted by any Prescription.

I shall cite some Resolutions to this purpose, that the King cannot dispense
with Disabilities and Incapacities imposed upon any Person by Act of Parliament.

The Lord Hobart's Reports, fol. 75. in the Case of the King against the Bishop
of Norwich, Res. That if an Incumbent were guilty of Symony Croke, Jac. 385.
The same Case.
in obtaining a Benefice, he was made incapable of that Benefice for ever, by
the words of the Statute of 31 Eliz. c. 6. Paragr. 5. And the Case of Sir
Arthur Ingram was cited, who bought the Office of Cofferer; he was holden by
Egerton Lord Chancellor, and Coke Chief Justice, incapable of that Office, by
force of the Statute of 5 E. 6. c. 16. though he had a Non Obstante; and the
reason there given is in these words:

For the Person being disabled by the Statute, could not be enabled by the
King: And yet the Office of Cofferer is a special Service about the King's
Person, and his Treasure.

The Lord Chief Justice Vaughan, in his Reports of the Case of Thomas and
Sorrel, fol. 354, 355. gives this for the reason why the King cannot dispense
with a Man to buy an Office contrary to the Statute of E. 6. nor with one
Simoniacally presented, to hold that Living, or to be at any time after
presented to it; nor with any of the House of Commons not to take the Oath of
Allegiance, according to the Statute of 7 Jac. 1. c. 6. Because (says he) the
Persons were made incapable to hold such Office or Living, and a Person
incapable is a dead Person, and no Person at all, to that wherein he is
incapable.

And a Member of the House of Commons is by 7 Jac. Persona inhabilis.

1. Inst. fol. 120. In the Case of the Simonist, Sir E. C. says, The Act so
binds the King, as that he cannot present him that the Law has disabled, for
ever after, to be presented to that Church. The words of the Act be: He shall
be from thenceforth adjudged a disabled Person in Law, to have or enjoy the
same Benefice. And the Party being disabled by the Act (says Sir E. C.) cannot
be dispensed withal by any Grant by a Non Obstante, as it may be where any
thing is prohibited sub modo, as upon a Penalty given to the King.

The Case of Sir John Bennet does not at all contradict these Authorities. It
is Croke, Car. 55. Sir John Bennet by Sentence in the Star Chamber, was made
incapable of any Office of Judicature for Bribery, Res. by all the Judges, and
Barons, that by the King's Pardon, all Inabilities are discharged, because the
Sentence could not take the Office from him being Freehold, over which the
Court had no Power.

So that after so often declaring by several Acts of Parliament, Grants, and
Patents made contrary to their Acts to be void, and all Dispensations, and Non
Obstante's, to the contrary of the Laws made by them, to be void, and
inflicting Penalties upon such as should obtain those Grants, and Non
Obstante's, or make use of them as appears by a multitude of Acts; and all
these too weak, and all in vain by the Judges allowance of these Non
Obstante's, the Parliament had no other sense against these Non Obstante's, but
to fix a disability in the Persons, and to make them incapable of taking the
benefit of such Grants; and this has held good till now, but now they break
through this too.

And as I observed in the Pope's Exercise of his Power of Dispensing, that it
was used with some moderation at first, in Cases that seemed to be of great
necessity only, but at last, by degrees, it grew to be intolerable and
unlimited: So the like may be observed in the use of this Prerogative.

3. Instit. fol. 236, in the Chapter of Pardons, by diverse Acts of Parliament,
the King's Power of Granting Charters of Pardon has been restrained, as by 2
E. 3. c. 2. 10 E. 3. c. 2. 14 E. 3. c. 14. 13 R. 2 Stat. 2. c. 1. these are
ancient Statutes. It has been conceived (says Sir E. C.) which we will not
question (says he) that the King may dispense with these Laws by a Non
Obstante. Yet Sir E. C. there declares, That he found not any such Clauses of
Non O^stante, to dispense with any of these Statutes, but of late times. This
shows that it is a growing mischief and had not been anciently used, as it
ought to have been to make it a good Prescription and Prerogative.

I shall now examine the Authorities and Cases that are cited in defense of
this Prerogative and Power of dispensing with a disability imposed by Act of
Parliament; for I do not purposely dispute it in any other Case, but as they
are coincident with this.

The first that we meet with, is that of 2 H. 7. fol. 6. and it was by all the
Justices in the Exchequer-Chamber. The Case thus:

King Edward the Fourth granted the Office of Sheriff of a County to the Earl
of Northumberland, for the Life of the Earl, and the Justices held the Patent
good, there being a Non Obstante in it to the Statutes.

Let us look into 14 E. 3. c. 7. That by their trusting to tarry in their
Office by procurement they are encouraged to do many Oppressions to the People.
28 E. 3. c. 7. 42 E. 3. c. 9. 1 R. 2. c. 11
the Statutes that forbid a Sheriff to continue in his Office longer then one
Year: There had been several Sir Robert Cotton's Abr. 18 E. 3. nu. 54.
ancient Statutes made to that purpose, but they all proved to be of little
effect, for Patents were still granted to hold the Office of a Sheriff, for a
longer time than one Year.

At length came the Stat. 23. H. 6. c. 8. which recites the former Statutes
forbidding any Persons continuance in the Office of Sheriff, above one Year;
and observing the great Oppressions and Abuses to the People, that did arise
from it, and how that yet they were granted contrary to those Statutes. This
Statute therefore of 23 Hen. 6. ordains that those Statutes shall be duly
observed. And further ordains, That if any occupy that Office contrary to those
Statutes, or to the effect or intent of any of them, he shall forfeit two
hundred Pound yearly, as long as he occupies contrary to any of those
Statutes, and that every Pardon granted of that Forfeiture shall be void, and
that all Patents made of the Office of Sheriff, for Years, or any longer time,
shall be void, any Clause, or word of Non Obstante in any wise put, or to be
put in such Patents notwithstanding; and every such Person is thereby disabled
to bear that Office.

Nothing could be penned stronger than this Statute, and it is a Law made by
the Supreme Legislative Power of the Nation, and it expresses the former
granting of Non Obstante's to be a great abuse, and to be contrary to Law. Yet
contrary to the express words, and clear intent and meaning of this Statute,
did all the Judges resolve in 2 H. 7. That by a Non Obstante, a Patent for a
longer time than a Year should be good, of the Sheriffs Office.

The King, and both Houses were of Opinion, that they could make a Non Obstante
in such Case void. The Judges are of a contrary Opinion, that a Non Obstante
shall make void the Statute. Here is an Inferior Court overruling and
controuling the Judgment of a Superior Court. The Judges who are but Jura
dicere, contradict those who have the Power Jura dare, as well as Jura dicere,
and of Correcting the Errors of the highest Court in Westminster, and
controuling their Judgments.

The Statute was a mere idle nugatory thing, if it were not to restrain the
granting of a Non Obstante: if it did not that, it did nothing. The King
himself alone, (if he had pleased) could without any Act of Parliament, have
reformed the Abuse, by refusing to pass any such Patents for a Sheriffs
continuing in his Office longer than a Year. But the King was sensible of the
Abuses, and therefore willing to be restrained from passing any more such
Patents, and to avoid any importunity that might be used for the obtaining any
such Patents, and therefore consented that a Law should pass to make such
Patents void. And after all, shall the King (if he pleases) still make the like
Grants? Why then the Act was of no manner of use, and operates nothing; and the
Resolve of the Judges has made the Act a mere idle vain thing.

But the twelve Judges in 2 H. 7. have so resolved, and the only use Objection.
they would allow to all these Acts of Parliament is no more than this, that if
the King grant a Patent to one of the Sheriffs Office for more than one Year,
and there be no Non obstante in the Patent, that then, for want of a Non
obstante, the Patent should be void by those Acts of Parliament which otherwise
would have been good, had not those Acts made them void.

But how easy would it be for one that obtains such a Patent, to get Answer.
the Non obstante to be inserted? and who would accept such a Patent without a
Non obstante? and to whom would the Non obstante be denied to whom such a
Patent is granted? the Lord Hobart, in the Case of Needler against the Bishop
of Winchester, fol. 230. says it is denied to none, and that it is in the power
of the Attorney General.

The Reasons given by the Judges in 2 H. 7. for that resolution, are, because
the King had always used such a Prerogative of dispensing with the Acts of
Parliament that required the 1 H. 4. c. 6.
true value of the Lands, and the certainty of the Lands to be mentioned in his
Grants of Lands, and with the Acts concerning the 11 E. 3. c. 1. 13 H. 7. 8. by
Daver 's Letter B.
shipping of Wool, and pardoning of Murder (without express mentioning of the
Murder.)

These Cases are nothing alike, but of a trifling consideration in respect
Answer.
of the Act we have in hand of 25 Car. 2. And in these Cases the Penalty and
See 13 H. 7. 8. by Daver's Letter B.
Forfeitures are given to the King, and they concern the King's profit only to
dispense with them: but in our Case the Safety of the Government, and salus
populi, and the maintaining of the true Religion established by Law, are all
concerned, and so the Case is not alike. And to compare this with those Cases,
is parvis componere magna.

This Opinion and Resolution of the Judges in 2 H. 7. has been the Foundation
of all the like Opinions that have since that time been given of the King's
Power of Dispensing with Disabilities and Incapacities imposed by Acts of
Parliament. Upon what ground the Justices held the Patent of the Sheriff's
Office, good to the Earl of Northumberland for Life, does not appear, whether
because it had formerly been an Office of Inheritance, and so within the
Exception in the Statute of 23 H. 6. or whether by virtue of a Non obstante to
the Statutes, as Ratclif only argues, for the rest say nothing of the Non
obstante. Some Resolutions have been to the contrary of that of 2 H. 7. as in
the Case that I cited of the King against the Bishop of Norwich, in the Lord
Hobart's Reports, and the Case of Sir Arthur Ingram, where it was adjudged,
that the King could not dispense with a Disability.

And the Book of 2 R. 3. fol. 11 and 12. concerning Waterford in Ireland, is of
the King's Power to dispense with an Act of Parliament where the Forfeiture is
given only to the King: so it comes not home to our Case.

This Resolution of the Judges in 2 H. 7. was the Precedent and leading Case to
all the subsequent Opinions, and was the Foundation of them, and they all must
stand and fall by it.

Now it will be very evident, that the King had no such Power or Prerogative of
continuing Sheriffs in their Offices longer than a Year. For, under favor, the
Making of Sheriffs, does not, nor never did, belong to the King, neither at the
Common Law, nor by any Act of Parliament; so that all these Opinions and
Resolutions are built upon a sandy Foundation, and have but debile fundamentum,
and they take that for granted, which is not a truth.

The Election of Sheriffs, at the Common Law, even from the very first
Constitution of the Kingdom, and by the Original Institution Election of
Sheriffs by the County.
of the Government, was in the Freeholders in the several Counties, ever since
there was any such Office as a Sheriff, and ever since the Kingdom has been
divided into Shires, that is, in the time of the Saxons, (from whom we derive
most of our Common Law) and long after their time, in the time of the Normans,
till being neglected by the Freeholders, it came at length, by an Act of
Parliament, made within the legal time of Memory, to be taken from the
Freeholders, and the Power of Naming and Choosing Sheriffs every Year lodged in
the hands of certain great Officers of State, and so it continues to this day;
but neither is, nor never was in the King.

Mr. Lambard, in his Book de Priscis Anglorum Legibus in his Lemma de
Heretochiis, fol. 147. says, that those Heretochii were Ductores exercitus.
(Here, signifying an Army in the Saxon Tongue. The same as in the Dialect of
this present Age may be called Lord-Lieutenants or Deputy Lieutenants. The Law
of King Edward (which I take to be the Confessor) speaks of these Heretochii,
in these words: Isti vero viri Eligebantur per Commune Concilium pro Communi
utilitate regni per provincias and Patrias Universas and per singulos Comitatus
in pleno Folkmote sicut and Vice-Comites Provinciarum and Comitatuum Eligi
debent. This Law mentions this Election, as an Use and Custom.

If the King did not make the Sheriff, he could not continue him Sheriff; if he
could not make him for a Year, he could not grant him the Office for longer
than a Year: the Sheriff had his Authority and Office from the Election, not by
Commission or Patent, and that but for a Year.

Sir Edward Coke, in his Second Institutes, in his Exposition of the Statute of
Westminster 1. Cap. 10. concerning the Election of the Coroners Fol. 174, 175.
by the Freeholders, (which ever was so, and so still continues) says, there is
the same reason for Election of Sheriffs, and so (says he) it anciently was by
Writ directed to the Coroners.

In like manner were the Conservators of the Peace chosen, in whose place the
Justices of the Peace now succeed, and so the Verderors of the Forest are to
this day.

These were great and high Liberties, and did belong to the Freeholders from
all antiquity, and are strong Arguments to confute those late Authors, that
will by no means allow of a limited Government, but leave us under an Absolute
and Arbitrary Power, and who call our Laws and Liberties, but the Concessions
and Condescensions from the Regal and Absolute Power.

Sir Edward Coke discourses largely of these Elections, in his Exposition of
the Statute of Articuli super Chartas, in his Second Institutes, 28 E. 1. c. 8.
and chap. 13. See the Reports of E. 2. int' Memoranda Scac' fo. 28.
or Magna Charta, fol. 558. By this Statute (it is said) the King has granted
to his People, that they have the Election of their Sheriff in every County
where the Sheriff is not of Fee, if they will. Sir Edward Coke says, by this
Act, that ancient Right the People (that is, the Freeholders) had, was restored
to them; and the words (if they will) import, that they formerly had it, but
neglected it.

By a Statute made in the next King's Reign, viz. 9 E. 2. styled, The Statute
of Sheriffs, upon pretense, that insufficient persons were commonly chosen for
Sheriffs: by that Act it is ordained, that from thenceforth the Sheriffs shall
be assigned by the Sir Rob. Cot. Abr. 18 E. 3. nu. 54.
Chancellor, Treasurer, Barons of the Exchequar, and by the Justices.

And by the Statute of 14 E. 3. c. 7. some change is made of the persons that
are to have the Election, and the Day and Place of such Assigning of Sheriffs
is prefixed, viz. yearly in the morrow of All Souls, and in the Exchequer.

By the Statute of 12 R. 2. c. 2. the Assigning of the Sheriff is put into the
hands of more great Officers, who are to be sworn to execute this Trust
faithfully, but it is not vested in the King all this while, nor never was.

It is true, that out of Reverence to the King, these great Officers, who had
the Assigning of Sheriffs, did afterward use to name three persons, out of
which number they left it to the King to choose one for every Shire. But this
was more out of deference to the King, than out of any strict Obligation so to
do, and the Election made by the King, was in Law to be accounted an Assignment
by these great Officers.

Nor could the King choose any other for Sheriff than one of those three so
Assigned by those great Officers, though it is sometimes otherwise practiced. And
this has been a Resolution of all the Judges of England, and is mentioned in
Sir Edward Coke's Second Institutes, fol. 559. it was in the 34th Year of Henry
the Sixth, and it is in these words. viz.

That the King did an Error, when he made another person Sheriff of
Lincolnshire then was chosen and presented to him by those great Officers,
after the effect of the Statute. So that the right of Electing Sheriffs by
those great Officers, we see, continued so lately as the latter end of King
Henry the Sixth, and I know of no Law since, that has altered it: therefore we
may conclude, it is no Prerogative in the King.

And we may further observe, what plain Language all the Judges used in those
days, as to tell the King and the Lords of the Council, that the King had erred
in what he had done. I observe this the rather, that it may be some excuse to
me for the plain Language I am forced to use in the Arguing upon this Subject.
The Lawyers are not always Courtiers, nor will the Subject Matter bear
Complements and Courtship. Ornari res ipsa negat, contenta doceri.

I cannot reconcile this Resolution of the twelve Judges, given in the time of
King Henry ths Sixth, with that Opinion that is delivered in the Lord Dyer's
Reports, fol. 225. b. and it is but an Opinion. 5 and 6 of Queen Elizabeth. In
the time of the Plague, the Sheriffs were named and made without assembling the
Judges ad Crastinum Animarum at the Exchequer, according to the common usage,
but for the most part none was made but one of the two that remained in the
Bill the last Year. Though it was held, (says the Report) that the Queen, by her
Prerogative, might make a Sheriff, without such Election, by a Non Obstante
aliquo Statuto in contrarium, which crosses the Resolution I now mentioned. It
is but an Opinion against a Solemn Resolution of all the twelve Judges.

I find, that some who had transgressed that Act of 23 H. 6. and had continued
above one Year in that Office of Sheriff, soon after the making of that Act,
did not think themselves secure against the Penalty of that Act by any Non
obstante from the King, but procured an Act of Parliament to indempnifie them
for what they had done; for, See the Stat. of 6 H. 8. c. 18. in the Statutes at
large, concerning the Undersheriff of Bristol.
by another Act made the 28th of the same King Henry the Sixth, it is ordained,
that the Sheriffs for the Year then last past, should be quit and discharged
against the King and his People, of the Penalties of the 200 l. which they
incurred by the Statute of 23 H. 6. by Exercising the Office of Sheriff longer
than a Year, from the day next after the day of all All Souls, on which day, by
the Statute, a new Election was to have been made.

I have one great Authority more, and that is of an Act of Parliament too,
which, in my judgment, clearly proves, (against this Resolution of the twelve
Judges in the time of 2 H. 7.) that the King had no such Prerogative to
dispense with the Sheriff's continuing in his Office longer then a Year. But
that the only dispensing Power was in the King and Parliament, as I have
affirmed, and in the King, when any Special Act of Parliament shall for a time
limited enable him so to dispense. And it is an Act in the time of a wise and
powerful King, who would not lose his Prerogative, where he had right to it.

It is the Statute of 9 H. 5. c. 5. in the Statutes at large, this Statute
recites the Statute of 14 E. 3. whereby it was ordained, that no Sheriff 9 H.
5, c. 5.
should continue in his Office above a Year. And it recites further, that
whereas at the making of that Statute, there were diverse valiant and sufficient
persons, (I suppose it is ill translated (valiant) and it should have been (men
of value) in every County of England, to exercise the said Office well, toward
the King and his People: But by reason of diverse Pestilences within the Realm,
and Wars without the Realm, there was not now such sufficiency of such persons.
It is therefore ordained, that the King, by Authority of this Parliament of 9
H. 5. may make the Sheriffs through the Realm, at his will, until the end of
four Years, notwithstanding the said Statute made 14 E. 3. or any other Statute
or Ordinance made to the contrary.

Here the King is entrusted with the Power, and that but for a short time in
the very Case of continuing Sheriffs in their Offices longer than a Year, and
that in a case of great and absolute necessity, and this by a Special Act of
Parliament, which plainly shows, he could not do it by any Prerogative he had
of dispensing, for then he would never have taken it under an Act of Parliament.

What ground therefore the Judges had in the second Year of Henry the Seventh,
to adjudge it to be a Prerogative in that King, I cannot see: and that
Resolution is the leading Case to all the Opinions that have been delivered in
the Point, since that time, and the Opinions still justify themselves by that
one first Resolve, and cite that for their great Authority: That Opinion seems
to be delivered upon a sudden Question, put to the Judges by the King's
Council, not argued nor deliberated on, nor upon any Case that came Judicially
before them, and the Judges there take notice only of two ancient Statutes,
viz. 28 E. 3. c. 7. 42 E. 3. c. 9. both which barely forbid the Sheriffs to
continue longer than a Year in their Office, but no Penalty is imposed; and the
Earl of Northumberland's Case had a Non Obstante in it only to these two
Statutes, as appears by the Abridgement of that Case by Brook, Tit. Patent's
Case, 109. So that they did but, ad pauca respicere and de facili pronunciare.
But they do not take the least notice of the Statute of 23 H. 6. c. 8. which
makes the disability, nor do the Judges in that Case, give that reason for
their Judgment, as Sir E. C. has since found out to justify it, viz. His
Prerogative inseparable, etc.

Something may be observed from the time when that strange Resolution passed:
Judicis Officium est ut res ita tempora rerum querere. It was in 2 Henry the
Seventh, in the beginning of the Reign of that King, who stood high upon his
Title and Power (if we may believe a late Historian.)

(Mr. Buck.) in his History of the Life and Reign of Richard the Third, who in
his Second Book, fol. 54. discourses likewise of King Henry the Seventh, and
his Title to the Crown, says of him, That he seemed to wave all other Titles,
and stuck to that of his Sword and Conquest, and at his Coronation he caused
Proclamation to be made with these Titles, Henricus Rex Anglioe Jure divino,
Jure humano, and June belli, etc. Which yet the Barons could not agree to, though
the King peremptorily avowed he might justly assume it, having as a Conqueror,
entered the Land, fought for the Crown, and won it. The Barons answered (says
the Historian) as peremptorily, That he was beholding to them both for his
Landing and Victory. But the more they opposed it, the more he insisted upon it.

Now that King that made his Title by Conquest, might carve out to himself what
Prerogatives he pleased; And who durst dispute it with him? And this probably
might have some influence upon that Resolution of the Judges, being so early
after his Claim, viz. 2 H. 7.

But I find Sir E Coke, a Chief Justice of great Learning, and of as great
Integrity, taking up the same Opinion: It is in the Reports that go by the Name
of Sir Edward Coke's, 12 Rep. fol. 18. No Act, says he, can bind the King from
any Prerogative which is sole and inseparable to his Person, but that he may
dispense with it by a Non Obstante, as a Sovereign Power to Command any of his
Subjects to serve him for the Publick-weal; and he instances in that of a
Sheriff, and quotes the Resolution of the Judges of 2 H. 7. and urges that of
Judges of Assize, that they may go Judges of Assize in the Counties where they
were born, or did inhabit, if the King dispense with it by a special Non
Obstante.

But he gives another instance, which I presume none in these days will
subscribe to; and if he mistook himself in this instance, he may be supposed to
mistake and err in all the rest: Purveyance (says he) for the King and his
Household is incident solely, and inseparably to the Person of the King: And for
this Cause the Act of Parliament of Henry the Third, de tallagio non
concedendo, which bars the King wholly of Purveyance, is (says he) void. If
this be Law, what a Case are the Subjects in, that have given a Recompense by a
Revenue of Inheritance (in part of the Excise) to the King, in lieu of
Purveyances.

It is sober Advice given by Learned Grotius, in his Book De Jure Belli and
pacis, 82. Let us not (says he) approve of all things, though delivered by
Authors of greatest Name, for they often serve the Times, or their Affections,
and bend the Rules as occasion requires.

This Resolution of all the Judges, in the Second of Henry the Seventh, is
again cited in Calvin's Case, in Sir Edward Coke's Seventh Report, and there a
Reason is given to justify that Resolution, which is not so much as touched
upon in the Report itself, of 2 H. 7. but it has been studied and found out
since that Resolution, viz. That an Act cannot bar the King of such Service of
his Subject, which the Law of Nature did give him.

And this is the main Reason insisted on in the late Judgment given in Sir
Edward Hales's Case (as I am informed); which is the only Case, that I find,
which came to be argued upon the very point, yet it was but lightly spoken to,
for that of 2 H. 7. which is the first of the kind, was not upon a Case that
came Judicially before the Judges, but was upon a Consultation only with the
Judges, and without Argument.

Nor in any other Authorities that I have cited, grounded upon that Resolution
of 2 H. 7. did the Point directly come in question Judicially.

And Calvin's Case is the first that I find, which offers this special Reason,
viz. That no Act of Parliament can restrain the King from commanding the
Service of his Subject, but it is an inseparable Prerogative in the King; and
as Sir E. C. speaks in his 12 Rep. Though an Act makes the King's Patent void,
and though the King be restrained to grant a Non Obstante, by the express words
of the Act, and though the Grantee is disabled by the Act to take the Office, yet
the King (says Sir Edward Coke) may by his Royal Sovereign Power of Commanding,
command a man by his Patent, to serve him and the Weal-Publick, in the Office
of Sheriff for Years, or for Life: And this the King may do for such Causes as
he in his Wisdom shall think meet and profitable for himself, and the
Commonweal, of which he himself is solely Judge, says Sir E. C. So though the
King and Parliament have adjudged and declared by a Law, such a person, or such
a sort of persons to be altogether unfit for such a Service or Office. As for
Example: They have adjudged Papists (who own a Foreign Authority and
Jurisdiction, and who hold Doctrines destructive and contrary to the Religion
Established in this Kingdom) to be very unfit and incapable of being entrusted
with the maintaining of the Government, and the Religion Established by Law, in
this Kingdom. Yet according to late Opinions and Resolutions, though the King
himself, by the Advice of his Great Council, have so adjudged and declared, yet
he may do otherwise, and he may employ a Papist to defend the Protestant
Religion; and he is the sole Judge of the fitness of Persons for his Service.
This is the Discourse, this is the Argument and Reason used.

Will this Reason be allowed of, shall the King be the sole Judge of the
Persons fit to serve him in all Cases, and is it an inseparable Power and
Prerogative in the Person of the King?

I shall put a Case wherein the Judges depart from this Opinion, and appear to
be of another mind.

In the Lord Anderson's Reports, the 2d Part, 118. It is there said, If an
Office in the King's Bench or Common Pleas be void, and the placing of the
Officer belongs to the King, if the King grant it to a person not able to
execute it, the Palmer's Rep. 451.
Grant is void; as it is there held by many of the Justices. And there a Case is
cited out of 5 E. 4. rot. 66. where one Tho. Winter was placed by the King in
the Office of Clerk of the Crown in the King's Bench.

The Judges, before the King himself, did declare him to be Inhabilem ad
Officium illud pro commodo Regis and populi sui Exercendum, and he was laid by,
and one Roger West (at the commendation of the Judges) was put in.

Will any man presume to say the person is unfit, when the King, who is the
sole Judge of the fitness of persons to serve him, has adjudg'd him fit? yes,
the Judges, in a Case that concerns the Courts where they sit, (it seems) will
control the King's own judgment, and judge the person inhabilis, and hold the
Grant void in such case.

To compare our present Case with this: The King and Parliament by a Law have
adjudged the Papists unfit to be entrusted with the Government, and with the
preserving of the Reformed Religion: but (says the Judges) if the King, without
the Parliament, judge otherwise, his judgment shall prevail: why not as well in
the case of an Office in the Courts at Westminster, which does belong to the
King to dispose of, as in an Office that immediately concerns the Safety of the
King and Kingdom and the great concernment of Religion?

So here is one Command of the Kings set up in opposition to another Command of
the King. A Command of the King upon private advice, or (it may be possible)
gained from him by surprise, by an importunity or an undue solicitation,
against a serious solemn deliberate Command of the King, upon advice with his
great Council, and with the Consent of the whole Kingdom: this is the very Case
before us.

This is against all reason, and against the Examples of the greatest, wisest
and most absolute of Kings and Princes, who commanded their Judges to have no
regard to any Commands of theirs, that were contrary to Law.

Vinius the Civilian, in his Commentary on the Imperial Institutes, fol. 16.
gives this Rule, Rescripta Principum contra Jus vel utilitatem publicam,
Elicita a Judicibus improbari etiam ipsorum Imperatorum constitutionibus
jubentur.

Princeps non creditur (says he) aliquid velle contra utilitatem publicam
concedere, 21 H. 8. c. 13. sect. 10, 11, 27. Dispensations for Pluralities,
contrary to Act, are declared to be void, Hob. 82, 149, 146, 155. The King is
never by Law supposed ill affected, but abused and deceived, for Eadem
praesumitur men's Regis quae est Juris.

Grotius de Jure belli and pacis, 112, 113. Amongst the Persians, the King was
Supreme, yet he took an Oath at his entrance, and it was not lawful for him to
change certain Laws made after a particular form.

If the King Establish the Decree, and Sign the Writing, it may not be changed,
according to the Law of the Medes and Persians, which alters not, as we read
in the Book of Daniel, 6 Dan. 8. 12, 15.

By the Act of 2 E. 3. c. 8. it is accorded and established, that it shall not
be commanded by the Great Seal, nor the little Seal, to disturb or delay Common
Right, and though such Commandments do come, the Justices shall not therefore
leave to do right in any point.

Grotius ubi supra, 117. Antiochus the third, sent a Rescript to the
Magistrates, that they should not Obey him, in case he should command any thing
against Law.

And Constantine published the like, That Orphans and Widows be not constrained
to come to Court for Justice, no, not if the Emperor's Rescript be showed.

In the story of Daniel, we read, that King Darius signed the Writing, and the
Decree, which indeed was but a snare laid for Daniel, and Daniel had fallen
into the snare: The King was his friend, but could neither dispense with him,
nor pardon him, though he were sore displeased with himself for signing the
Decree, And the King set his heart on Daniel to deliver him, and he labored
(says the History) an whole day, till the going down of the Sun to deliver him:
he wanted such Judges as Cambyses had, to find out an Evasion; But the King
himself sealed the stone that was laid upon the mouth of the Den with his own
Signet, and with the Signet of the Lords, that the purpose might not be changed
concerning Daniel.

Nihil opus est (says a learned Author, writing of the Government of England)
Licentiam dominandi in Rege Coerceri, quoniam quicquid in administranda rerum
summa vel contra Patriae leges vel minus ex populi commodo gestum fuerit Id
omne Ministris Luendum rejicitur Adeo ut non ab adulatione sed ab aequitate
summa fluxerit Notum Axioma apud Nostrates Rex Nunquam potest Errare aut
cuiquam injuriam facere Quippe in Administros and Conciliarios quorum est
Admonere Principem iniqua volenti, denegare operam, aut officio renunciare,
potiusquam contra Leges quicquam jubenti parere tam culpa omnis quam paena
derivari solet and debet.

And we have seen Examples of such in our times, many that have left good
Places, rather than act against their Judgments.

There is a rare Example of this in the French History.

Lewis the Eleventh, King of France, at the Pope's importunity, had signed a
Concordate for setting aside the Pragmatical Sanction which was made in defense
of the Liberties of the Gallican Church, and the King had undertaken to the
Pope, that his Parliaments should approve of what he had done, and the King
sent a Command to the Parliaments accordingly, and required them to give a
punctual obedience to his Order. The King's Advocate, Johannes Romanus, argued
stoutly against it, Dr. Burnet's Hist. of the Rights of Princes, 239. K. James
in his Promonition to all Christian Monarchs, 298.
and being threatened to be turned out of his Place for his pains, he said,

The King had freely bestowed that Office on him, and he would discharge it
faithfully, as long as the King thought fit to continue him in it, and should
be ready to lay it down, whenever it pleased the King: But he would suffer all
things, rather then do any thing against his Conscience or the King's Honor
and the good of the Kingdom: and out he went.

It will be admitted by those that argue for the Prerogative of Dispensing,
that though the King, without the Parliament, cannot dissolve nor Objection.
repeal, no nor so much as suspend the Law totally, though but for a time, but he
may dispense with it, as to some particular persons, and for some limited time,
and so the Law will still remain in force against all others.

Those that will argue thus, do yet hold, that the King is the sole Answer.
Judge who are to be dispensed with, so that he is not limited to any number,
nor to any time, so that though he may not in the gross dispense with the Law,
yet he does the same thing by retail, which comes all to one, or it is in his
Royal Will and Pleasure to do so: We are nothing beholding to the Judges if the
King uses his Prerogative with moderation.

According to that sort of Argument that is called Inductio: which is a
particularibus ad Universalia progressus. He that can dispense with A, B, C,
and so with the 24 Letters, one by one, does in truth dispense with the whole
Alphabet; but he must not do it Uno Ictu.

And we find it by Experience. What signify those several Acts of Parliament
that forbid a Judge of Assize to Execute that Office in the County where he was
born or dwells, they are easily and daily dispensed with?

How many Acts have been made against pardoning of Murder, and to make void
such Pardons, and what fruit have they had? Let us hear a learned Judge plainly
speaking his experience and his mind in it: Stamford, in his Pleas of the
Crown, fol. 101. says, that though there are words to null and make void these
Charters of Pardon, yet by putting into the Charters of Pardon these words,
viz. Non Obstante aliquo Statuto in contrarium Edito, the force of these
Statutes is taken away, and not only of these, (says he) but also of all
others, in which this Clause of Non obstante is put, and it is put (says he) in
every Letters Patents.

And fol. 102. (he says) that the Statute of 13 R. 2. Stat. 2. c. 1. and the
rest of the Statutes to the same effect, have always been destroyed by that
Clause of Non obstante; and so false Suggestions have continued (says he) to
this day without redress, and abound from one day to another, to the great
detriment of the Public Weal, and do not cease till Princes have more regard
what Charters they pass; and he might have added, till the King's Attorney and
Council at Law shall have more Fidelity and Courage.

I hear, that in justification of such a Dispensation as this, it was said
Objection.
in the Argument of the Case of Sir Edward Hales, in the Court of King's Bench,
That there is no Law whatever, but may be dispensed with by the Supreme
Lawgiver, as the Laws of God may be dispensed with by God himself, as appears
by God's command to Abraham, to sacrifice his Son Isaac.

So likewise may the Laws of Man be dispensed with by the Supreme Legislator.

I fully agree to this, and have already argued upon this ground, That Answer.
the Legislators (and no other) can dispense with their own Laws, and I have
given several Instances and Examples wherein it was so practiced; that is, by
King and Parliament.

But does this justify the present Dispensation now in dispute? I agree the
King has a great and most eminent part in the Legislature, and in the passing
of Laws, it is he that quickens the Embrio, and first gives it Life, but under
favor, and with all due Reverence to the King, I may affirm it, That the King
has not the sole Legislature, such as Almighty God has over his Creatures,
but the whole Kingdom has a share in that Power, as I have fully proved, as
well as the King.

I would cite one Case, not so much to prove what I have said herein, but
rather to illustrate it: It was a Case in Hill. 11 Jac. B. R. Dominus Rex, and
Allen against Tooly, in the Second Part of Bulstrode's Reports, 186, to 191. in
an Information brought upon the Statute of 5 Eliz. for using the Trade of an
Upholsterer, in which he had not served as an Apprentice Seven Years. The
Defendant pleaded, That he was a Freeman of London, and that by the Custom of
London, a Freeman might use any Trade; and he alleged that the Custom was
confirmed per Regem in Parliamento. It was holden first, that there can be no
good Act of Parliament, without the three Consents, viz. Of the King, Lords,
and Commons. 2. That though diverse Acts of Parliament do not specify these Three
Assents, but only mention the King as Dominus 8 R. 20.
Rex Statuit; and as it is in the Prince's Case, Dominus Rex de Communi
Concilio Statuit (and the like): Yet when the Party will Plead, he ought to
Plead it according to Law, and to set forth all the Assents, that is, of the
King, Lords, and Commons: and this was the Opinion of the whole Court. Now
Pleading is an exact setting forth of the Truth. We are not to raise Arguments
from Forms of Speaking, but rather from exact Pleading, and the Resolutions of
Judges: And though Magna Charta in the style, seems to be spoken by K. H. 3. as
by the word (concessimus); yet the Act of 15 E. 3. c. 1. recites that it was
made a Law by the King, Lords, and Commons, and that what is said to be
granted, was but their former Right. Lambert's Archion, 267, etc.

I hear, that in speaking to the Case of Sir Edward Hales, it was observed that
by this Act of 25 Car. 2. there is no incapacity, or disability at the first,
and upon the admission to the Office put upon any Person from taking of an
Office, but that he is well admitted to it, and the Grant is good, and that
time is given to take the Tests, and if by the times given he fail to take
them, then he is to be disabled, and the Grants are to become void, but not
before: Like a Condition subsequent that defeats the Estate, which yet was well
vested; and then before the Grant is defeated, and the Party become disabled,
the King's Dispensation steps in and prevents the Penalty and Disability: And
herein (it was said) it differs from the Case of Symony, and buying of Offices,
where the Interest never vested, but the Person was first disabled.

There is indeed a difference, but none that is material, for it is all one
whether the Party be disabled to take, or whether having well Answer.
taken, and been well admitted, he is afterward disabled to hold, and retain,
by not performing the Condition: For when he is first admitted, it is sub modo,
and under a Condition, that if he fail to perform what the Law requires, his
Office shall be void.

Another Argument (as I hear it reported) was raised from the King's being a
Sovereign Prince, and from thence it was inferred, that he Argument.
might dispense with Laws that are Poenal upon necessity, whereof he is the
sole Judge.

The ground of this Argument, namely, That the King is a Sovereign Answer.
Prince; if it serve for the Point in question, it may also extend a great way
further then to this question we have before us, it is hard to limit the extent
of it, it seems to speak that we must obey without Reserve.

The word (Sovereign) is French, and in Latin is Supremus, id est qui in alios
potestatem habet: The Correlate whereof is, Subditus, or a Subject, and is
attributed frequently to some sorts of Subjects, especially to the Heads or
Superiors of Religious Orders.

But among us, though now frequently used in our humble Addresses to the King, or
in our reverend mention of him, yet we find it very rarely, if ever, used in
our ancient Acts of Parliament, or in our Law Books.

I find no mention of the very word among the many Attributes and Titles
ascribed to Kings and Princes, in Mr. Selden's Titles of Honor: He has that
which is Synonimous, as Supreme Monarch, as it signifies in opposition, or in
distinction to Princes that are subordinate and feudatory, such as Tacitus
speaks of, that the Romans (when their Government Or Tributary.
was Popular) had instrumenta servitutis, Reges.

But properly, he is a King that is a Sovereign, and has no Superior upon
Earth: According to Martial, Rex est qui Regem (Maxim) non habeat.

And such we freely and cheerfully acknowledge the King to be, and the best and
most of his Subjects do swear that he is the only Supreme Governor of this
Realm, and of all other his Dominions, as well in all Spiritual, or
Ecclesiastical, as Temporal Causes, and that no Foreign Prince has any Power
within this Realm. And I wish that all the rest of his Subjects would heartily
take this Oath: but this among others, is that which Sir Edward Hales's
Dispensation extends to.

Yet how from hence it can be argued that the King can dispense with his Laws,
I do not see. I mean Laws of the same nature as that we have now before us.

Therefore those that used this Argument surely meant the word of (Sovereign)
in another sense. viz. Absolute and Solutus a legibus.

It they mean by (Sovereign) a Prince that is absolute, and solutus a legibus
(and they must understand it so, or else I do not see how it is pertinent to
the present Argument) this is of a mighty Consequence, and ought to have been
well considered before it had been used.

I find the word in this sense (as I take it) propounded in an addition or
saving to the Petition of Right, 3 Car. 1. viz. Not to infringe Sovereign
Power: But it was not liked, and upon Reasons given at a Conserence, those that
did propound it, were satisfied to lay it aside. It may be read in the
Memorials of the English Affairs, fol. 10.

If the word (Sovereign) be meant in this sense, it is opposed by all our
ancient Authors, Judges, and others, by plain and express Language, whose very
Writings I have before cited, and I will but only touch upon them again.

Fleta says, Superiorem non habet Rex in Regno nisi Deum and Legem per L. 1. C.
5.
Legem factus est Rex: This fully expounds the word Sovereign.

Both Fleta and Bract. and Sir Gilbert Thornton (who was Chief Justice in Edw.
the First's time) take notice of that: Jus Caesareum, or Lex Regia, as it is
called by the Civilians, Nec obstat quod dicitur quod Principi placet Legis
habet vigorem: For it never was received in England, but in a restrained sense.

And with this agrees the ancient Coronation Oath, That the King shall hold the
Laws and Customs of the Realm, which the People have chosen. But King H. 8.
with his own hand, corrected the old Oath, to the effect following, viz. That
he shall hold the Laws and Customs of the Realm, not prejudicial to his Crown
or Imperial Jurisdiction: The Original of this Correction is in Sir Robert
Cotton's Library K. James 1. in his Speech to both Houses, 1609, in his Works,
fol. 533, says the King with his Parliament, are absolute in making or forming
of any sort of Laws. Sir Walter Rawleigh's Hist. of the World, fol. 245.
See the History of the Reformation: Sir John Fortescu, sometime Chief Justice,
and afterward Lord Chancellor, in his Book De Laudibus Legum Angliae: The
Civil Law (says he) runs thus, Quod Principi placuit legis vigorem habet, sed
long aliter potest, Rex politice imperans quia nec Leges sine subditorum
assensu mutari poterit: Potestas regia Lege Politica cohibetur.

Sir Edward Coke, in his 12 Rep. fol. 63, 64, and 65. (says) It was greatly
marvell'd that the Archbishop Bancroft durst inform K. James Archbishop Laud
too did the like.
that such absolute Power and Authority (as is there mentioned) belonged to the
King, by the Word of God, and there Sir E. C. cites the Sayings of these
ancient Authors in our Law: But he says that the King was greatly offended with
him.

A Learned Civilian gives some restraint even to the Lex Regia in this point:
Vinius in his Comment upon the Instit. fol. 381, Populus Romanus jura
Majestatis omnia abdicative in principem transtulit, hinc Principes Romani
Legibus soluti fuerant. But he utterly opposes that Opinion of the Schoolmen:
Principem Legibus solutum esse quoad vim coactivam sed etiam quoad vim
directivam. Rot. Parl. 11. R. 2. The King and Parliament declare, That the
Realm of England never was, nor was it intended by the King and Lords, that
ever it should be governed by the Civil Law.

In the deciding of the Great and Royal Controversy, in the time of K. E. 1.
concerning Right of Succession in the Crown of Scotland; it was debated by the
Commissioners, according to what Law that Case should be determined; whether by
the Law of England, or of Scotland, by the Civil Law, as being the Jus gentium,
before the King of England, as being the Superior Lord: they all at last
concluded, That the Civil Law by no means should be admitted: Ne inde
Majestatis Anglicanae Juri fieret detrimentum. Seld. dissertatio ad Fletam, 539.

Mr. Seldom, mentioning John of Salisbury, who said, that in his time there
were those that did prefer the Civil Law before all other Laws, especially,
that de absoluta principis potestate quae in lege habetur Regia; he says, it
was meant of none but de assentatoribus illius saeculi exgenere Hieratico, non
de gente Anglicana aut de aliis qui Judiciis tunc praefuere, It would have been
far from any of the English Nation, especially from any of the Judges, to have
maintained any such Opinion.

But let it be understood (sano sensu) and in a proper and literal sense Seld.
Dissert. 539.
too, and it is very true and agreeable to our Law, quod Regi placuit legis
vigorem habet; without the King's Placet, and his Royal Consent, nothing is Law
amongst us. The Laws already in force, have had the Consent of his
Predecessors, and no new Law can pass without the Royal Assent; nay, they are
his Royal Words, Le Roy le veut, that first gives life to any new Law.

And the Judges Oath in the time of H. 3. was, that they should judge Secundum
Legem and consuetudinem regni; which words (as Mr. Seldom there says) seem
designedly to Exclude the Jus Caesareum then lately brought in: whereof, as he
says, some were fond in those times; and he tells us of what Order they were,
but they were not Common Lawyers nor Judges, but the Hierarchy.

But should Judges give countenance to any such Law in the Latitude of it, they
should be put in mind of what was done by King Edward the Confessor, which we
are taught by Sir Roger Twisden, in his Preface to the Laws of William the
First, annexed to Mr. Lambert's Treatise, De priscis Anglor' Legibus, fol. 155.
Omnes (says he) qui Leges iniquas adinvenerant and injusta Judicia judicaverant
multaque concilia contra Anglos dederant, exlegavit: such Enemies to the Laws
of England should be put out of the Protection of the Laws of England. Rode
caper Vitem, etc.

It is said amongst the Laws of King Henry the First, c. 28. (and it is in the
very Body of that Law) Lambert, ibid. 186. Gravius Lacerantur pauperes, a
pravis Judicibus, quam a cruentis hostibus.

The Lords of Parliament, when any attempt is made to introduce the Caesarean
Law, (as once in the time of our K. H. 3. there was an endeavor to bring in
part of the Pontifician Law) and it was by the Bishops, I make no doubt but
they will answer Una voce, as their Ancestors then Seld. Dissertat. ad fletam.
fol. 537.
did Nolumus Leges Angliae mutare quae hucusque usitatae sunt and approbatae.
The Statute of Merton, c. 9. 2 Instit. fol. 96.

The Act of 25 Car. 2. one of the principal Ends and Aims of it is, to keep out
that Foreign Power, that would pretend to a Sovereignty or Supremacy over our
Sovereign, but the Dispensing with this Law (which is maintained to be a Right
incident to the Sovereign Prince) seems to be the likeliest way of setting up
again that Pretense and Claim of a Foreign Bishop, which was so long usurped,
and against which Pretense so many Acts of Parliament have been made, and which
our ancient Kings did of old utterly renounce and disclaim, and we know the
same Foreign Bishop has made another Pretense to England, besides, that
Ecclesiastical Power, by color of a Resignation, made by King John. But King
Hen. 3. Son and next Successor to King John, in the General Council at Lions,
Anno 1245. by his Ambassador and Advocate, made a Special Protestation against
that pretended Resignation made to Pandolphus, the Pope's Legate, (Innocent the
Third) as a mere Nullity, In quod nunquam Pryn's Second Tome, fol. 290, 292,
299. and 301, 302.
consensit Regni Universitas, and afterward upon the Pope's issuing out of
Process against K. E. 3. and the whole Kingdom, for the Homage and the Arrears
of the 1000 Marks Rent due to him.

The Parliament declared, That King John, nor no other, could put himself or
his Realm into such a subjection, without their consent. 46 E. 3. Rot. Parl.
nu. 7. 8.


And that it was against the Oath King John had taken at his Coronation.

This Record expounds the word (Sovereignty) in the true sense of it, namely,
that our Sovereign is no way subject to the Bishop of Rome, or to any Foreign
Power. But it does no way import, that the King can dispose of his People ut
placuit Regi, or alter the Government, without the Peoples consent, nor
dispense with his Coronation Oath, but proves the quite contrary.

A Short Argument UPON THE PLEADINGS Of the aforementioned CASE of Sir EDW.
HALES.
THE first Point argued by the Plaintiff's Council was, That it appears by the
Declaration, and it is now confessed by the Defendant's joining Demurrer, that
the Defendant has been Indicted for this Offense, in exercising the Office of
a Colonel, without having taken the Tests. And upon the Indictment he either
did plead this Dispensation, or might have pleaded it. And he is now Convict,
according to the direction of the Act of 25 Car. 2. so that he now comes too
late to plead it to this Action: for he cannot falsify the Conviction, nor
averr any thing against the Record of it, and bring the Fact to be tried over
again in this Action; but is concluded and estopp'd in Law to say any thing to
the contrary of that Record, by which he is found guilty of the Offense against
this Act of Parliament.

The Defendant either did plead this Dispensation or Pardon to the Indictment,
in discharge of the Indictment, and it has been overruled by the Judges at
the Assizes, (as by Law it ought to be, being no good Plea:)

Or he might have pleaded it, if he had been advised it had been a good Plea.
And not having done it, he has elapsed his time, and now comes too late to
plead it, being Convict of the Crime.

To this it was objected, (as I hear) That the Plaintiff, if he will take the
advantage of an Estoppel, ought to have set it forth by way Object.
of Replication to the Defendants Plea, and to have relied upon Estoppel.
it.

For the Rule is, That he that pleads an Estoppel, must rely upon it as an
Estoppel.

It is true, if a man will plead an Estoppel, he must rely upon it. Answ.


But in this Case the Plaintiff does not plead the Estoppel, but the Estoppel
appears by the Declaration, and the Defendant's own Plea together: so that
there was no need for the Plaintiff to set that forth by way of Replication;
which does sufficiently appear by the Defendant's own Plea, viz. That he did
not take the Tests within the time limited by the Act, and the Conviction is
confessed by his Plea, and joining in Demurrer.

If a man recover a Debt upon a Bond, and before Execution dies, if his
Executor sue a Scire Facias upon that Judgment, the Defendant cannot plead any
Plea that he might have pleaded before, as Non est factum, or by Dures, or the
like: for he is concluded by the Judgment.

In Jason and Ketes Case, in Siderfen's Reports, fol. 43. by Bridgman, Chief
Justice, a man shall never help himself by Audita querela, (though that is an
equitable Suit at Law) for any matter that he might have pleaded before.

There is no Estoppel in this Case: for the Conviction is upon an Indictment,
which is the King's Suit; and this is the Suit of another, viz. the Object. 2.
Here is no Estoppel. Answ.
now Plaintiffs, and so they are two distinct Suits.

The Conviction upon the Indictment, is an Estoppel against the Defendant
himself; of which any man may take the advantage, and he himself shall never be
admitted to averr against it. As in Maynyes Case, in Leonard's first part, fol.
3.

An Attainder for Treason is an Universal Estoppel, of which any Stranger may
take the advantage, not only against the Party attainted, A Stranger may take
the advantage of this Estopp.
but against his Wife too, if she sue for Dower. And it does not run in
Privity. By Manw. Chapter Bar.

Where a man is attainted by his own Confession of a Felony, a Stranger is not
Estopp'd, to say he was not guilty. But if A. commit Felony, and after enfeoff
7 E. 4. 1. Br. Estoppel 163.
I. S. of his Land, and after A. is attaint of this Felony by Verdict, there I.
S. is Estopp'd, and may not averr Knoil and Heymor's third Kebk. 528. by Chief
Justice Hale.
that A. was not guilty, because he claims under him; much less shall A.
himself averr against the Verdict, that he is not guilty. That a Stranger
cannot falsify a Verdict.


If a man be acquitted of Felony, all the World, says Grevil in Kellow. Rep.
81. b. is Estoop'd to say the contrary. Roll. Abr. first part, 362.
So vice versa, if he be convict, by the same reason. Dr. and Stud. 68. a ad
fin. and b.


As to that which is objected, that the Conviction is upon an Indictment
Object. 2.
(which is the King's Suit) but this is another Suit; and therefore the Verdict
shall not conclude the Defendant in this Suit.

This is not another Suit, but in effect an Execution upon the Conviction, and
grounded upon that Record; and therefore not merely a Answ.
new Suit, but a dependant Action; as a Writ of Error, or an Audita quaerela, A
dependant Action.
or a Scire Facias upon a Record, are dependant Suits, or an Action of Debt
upon a Judgment.

The Act of 25 Car. 2. c. 2. has made it Criminal in any person, after his
neglect of taking the two Oaths, or of the Sacrament, by the times limited, to
execute any such Office or Place of Trust: and for such Offense has made him
indictable at the Assizes; and upon a Conviction the Offender incurs (among
other Penalties) the forfeiture of 500 l. and gives it to any one that will sue
for it in an Action of Debt.

So the Statute has directed the method of trying the Offense, and of
convicting the Offender, by Indictment at the Assizes.

And if he that sues for the Forfeiture shall be driven to prove the Offense
over again, then the Conviction at the Assizes serves for nothing, but was all
in vain. And such Construction defeats the intention of the Lawmakers, for they
intended this for the only Trial, and not to have several Trials; for suppose
it should be tried again in this Action, and a Verdict pass for the Defendant,
here shall be Trial against Trial, and Verdict against Verdict. And such
Construction ought to be made of Acts of Parliament, as may not elude, but
agree with the intent of the Lawmakers; and so, as that no Words, Clause, or
Sentence, shall be altogether idle and insignificant.

And this Conviction upon the Indictment, is the very ground of the Action of
Debt brought by the now Plaintiff: for the words of the Act are, And being
thereupon lawfully Convicted upon any Indictment, every such person shall from
thence-forth forfeit 500 l.

So that till there be such a Conviction, there is no Forfeiture incurred of
500 l. nor no Action can be brought for the 500 l. The Offense must be proved
and determined, before any Action can be brought; and therefore the proof of
the Offense whereof the Defendant is convict, must not be made in this Action
over again: if it must, what serves the Conviction for?

Suppose the Plaintiff here had brought his Action, after the neglect of the
Defendant of taking the Oaths, and of receiving the Sacrament, and his acting
in his Office after such neglects, and before any Conviction upon Indictment,
and had only averred, that the Defendant had so neglected, and yet acted; would
this Action have been well brought? Or, suppose there had been a Conviction,
but the Plaintiff had not set it forth in his Declaration, but had only averred
the Offense committed; would this have been a good Declaration? Surely it would
not. This proves, that the Record of the Conviction is the very ground and
foundation of this Action, and the Action would not lie without such
Conviction: so that it is not a mere new Action, but a dependant Action.

And the usual difference is where the Action is a dependant Action, depending
An Action dependant or collateral.
upon a Record, and grounded upon it; and where it is a collateral Suit, not
depending upon that Record.

An Action against the Sheriff for an Escape of one taken in Execution, this is
a dependant Action, and is grounded upon the Record of the Judgment given
against the Party that escaped. The Sheriff cannot aver any thing against that
Record, and examine it over again; nor can he take any advantage of Error or
erroneous proceeding, in obtaining that Judgment. Jaques versus Caesar. And Dr.
Drury's Ca. 8 R. 142. And Mackaelly's Ca. 9 R. 68.
Saunders Rep. 2 part. 101.

So in an Action of Debt, grounded upon a Judgment, or in an Audita quaerela to
be relieved upon a Judgment.

And so in our Case, this Action of Debt for the 500 l. is grounded upon the
Conviction, which must stand for truth, as long as it remains in force not
avoided by Error or Attaint.

A Writ of Error to reverse a Judgment, is a dependant Action: In error, the
Plaintiff may not averr any thing against the Record. Mullens versus Weldy.
Siderfin's 1st part 94. Error was sued in the King's Bench to reverse a Judgment
given in the Palace-Court. And the Plaintiff in Error assigned for Error, that
the Duke of Ormond (who is principal Judge of that Court by Patent) was not
there. It was agreed by the Court, that it might not be assigned for Error, for
it was contrary to the Record.

But per Cur. in an Action of Trespass, or false Imprisonment, which (says that
Report) are collateral Actions, he may falsify and assign that, if he be taken
upon such Judgment.

So if a man be indicted and convict of an Assault and Battery, and afterward
the person so assaulted brings his Action for the Battery, this has no
dependence upon the Indictment or Conviction, for it may be sued, though there
were no Indictment, but is a distinct and collateral Suit. The Indictment and
Verdict is no Estoppel, nor can so much as be given in Evidence, as is held by
the whole Court in the Case of Sampson versus Yardley, and Tothill, 19 Car. 2.
B. R. Kebles's 2 part, 384. The like in an Appeal of Murder. Kebele's 2 part,
223.

Another Penalty upon the Offender against this Statute of 25 Car. 2. is, That
he shall be disabled to sue in any Action. Now suppose a person convict at the
Assizes sues an Action, may not the Defendant in that Action take the advantage
of that Disability. and plead the Conviction? As in Case of an Outlawry pleaded
in Disability, there need not be set forth all the proceedings in that Suit
wherein the Plaintiff was outlawed, but he may plead the Record of the
Outlawry, and rely upon it, and it shall not be examined whether there was any
just cause to sue him to the Outlawry, or not.

The Indictment, the Defendant's Plea to it, and the Verdict upon it, have
determined the matter of Fact, that the Defendant is guilty of the Offense
against this Act of Parliament.

The Act it self has pronounced the Judgment, which consists of many
particulars; one whereof is, That the Defendant shall forfest 500 l. to him
that will sue for it. And the Action of Debt for the 500 l. brought by the
Plaintiff, grounded upon all these, is in the nature of an Execution.

And all these put together, are not several and distinct Suits, but in effect
all but one Suit, and Process, one depending upon the other.

The second Point is, Whether the Dispensation pleaded by the Defendant, be a
good Bar to the Action of Debt? And this is properly called, The Matter in Law,
and the great Point of the Case? for which I refer the Reader to my Argument at
large.

POSTSCRIPT: BEING SOME Animadversions UPON A Book writ by Sir EDW. HERBERT,
Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas,
ENTITLED, A short Account of the Authorities in Law, upon which Judgment was
given in Sir Edward Hales's Case.
SINCE the finishing of my Argument about the Power of Dispensing with Paenal
Statutes, a Book came to my hands touching the same subject, entitled, A short
Account of the Authorities in Law, upon which Judgment was given in Sir Edward
Hales his Case; written by Sir Edward Herbert, Chief Justice of the Common
Pleas, in vindication of himself.

And although I am of opinion, that the substance of all the Arguments
contained in the said Book, are fully answered in my aforesaid Discourse, yet I
hold it necessary to make some Animadversions upon the said Book, and to point
out readily to the Reader the several Pages of my Discourse, wherein the
Arguments of the Chief Justice are more directly and particularly treated of,
and answered.

And there being great Reverence justly due to a Person that bears so high a
Character, as also to a Judgment given in that Superior Court of the King's
Bench, and by advice of all but two of the rest of the Judges, as I now hear,
some short Apology had need be used for that freedom I have taken to animadvert
upon it, being (as I am) but in a private station.

In short therefore, I have not undertaken it out of any vain conceit of my own
Abilities, but out of a sincere desire to inform such as in the approaching
Parliament are like to have this great Case in Judgment before them; and some
may possibly not be at leisure (as I have been) to study the Case, the matter
being of a mighty importance.

Nor have I entered the Lists upon any contentious humor, or taking any
advantage of the late Happy Change of public Affairs. I am (I thank God) more
inclined to commiserate the Distress that may befall any persons by the change
of the times (it having been my own case so lately) although they differ from
me in Judgment or Interest. I am very far from insulting over any, whatever
hard usage I my self have met with. Nemo confidat nimium secundis,
Nemo desperet meliora, lapsus.


My Apology is this: 1. I was engaged in the Argument before the coming forth
of this Book, and it happening into my hands before my publishing of my
Discourse, I could not decline the observing something upon it, without being
suspected to have given up the Cause. 2. The Lord Chief Justice himself has by
his Book given fresh occasion fairly to discuss the point again, by declaring
that he expects (as we all do) that it will receive a disquisition in
Parliament. 3. And as the Chief Justice has endeavored (with as much as can
be said) to give the World satisfaction in the justice and right of the Case to
maintain the Judgment given; so he is well known to be of that ingenuity and
good temper and candor, as willing to receive a satisfaction, if any further
Argument to the contrary may be so happy as to convince him.


The Chief Justice Herbert, page 6. gives us the Definition of a Dispensation
out of Sir Edward Coke's 11th Report, fol. 88. viz. Dispensatio mali prohibiti
est de jure Domino Regi concessa, propter impossibilitatem praevidendi de
omnibus particularibus.

And again, Dispensatio est mali prohibiti provida relaxacio utilitate ceu
necessitate pensata.

Upon the word (Concessa) I would gladly be satisfied when or by whom that
Power was ever granted to the King; where shall we find that Grant?

It is clear, that whoever has the entire Power of making a Law, may justly
dispense with that Law. And therefore Almighty God being the sole and supreme
Lawgiver, might dispense even with the Moral Law; as he did with the sixth
Commandment, when he commanded Abraham to sacrifice his Son Isaac; and with the
eighth Commandment, when he commanded the Israelites to borrow the Jewels of
the Egyptians, and to go away without restoring of them.

But it stands not with reason, that he who has but a share with others in the
making of a Law, (as the King has no more) should have the power by himself
alone to dispense with the Law, unless that power were expressly entrusted with
him by the rest of the Lawmakers (as sometimes has been done.)

Sir Edward Coke in his seventh Report, in the Case of Paenal Statates, fol.
36. toward the lower end, does affirm, that this Dispensing Power is committed
to the King By All his Subjects: So that it is not claimed Jure Divino, but by
Grant from the People. But where to find any such Grant, we know not.

I have (as I conceive) made it appear in my larger Argument, p. 14. that the
first Invention of Dispensations with Laws, began by the Pope, about the time
of Innocent the Third, and by our King Henry the Third, in imitation and by
encouragement from the Pope; so that it was not by the Grant of the People, but
ever exclaimed against by all good men, and generally by all the people, and
ever fenced against by a multitude of Acts of Parliament.

It is true, the Dispensing with Laws has ever since been practiced; and they
began at first here in England to be used only in Cases where the King alone
was concerned, in Statutes made for his own profit, wherein he might have done
what he pleased. But it is but of latter times that they have been stretched to
Cases that concern the whole Realm. See my Argument, fol. 13. Hence it
evidently appears, it cannot be a legal Prerogative in the King; for that must
ever be by Prescription, and restrained to those Cases that have been used time
immemorial, and must not be extended to new Cases.

Now there has been no such usage as will warrant the Dispensing with such an
Act of Parliament as is now before us: that of 25 Car. 2. c. 2.

The Chief Justice Herbert, from the Definition before recited, and those two
Authorities of Sir Edward Coke in his Case of Monopolies, and that other of
Penal Statutes, frames an Argument to prove, that the Dispensation granted to
Sir Edward Hales, was good in Law.

Because a Dispensation is properly and only in case of a Malum Prohibitum, he
thence insers, that the King can dispense in all Cases of Mala Prohibita.

Which is a wrong Inference, and that which Logicians call, Fallacia a dicto
secundum quid ad dictum simpliciter. Because he can dispense with some, that
therefore he can dispense with all, is no good Consequence.

It appears by the late Chief Justice Vaughan's Reports, in the Case of Thomas
and Sorrel, (so often cited by the Chief Justice Herbert) Vaughan's Rep. fol.
333. the fourth Paragraph, that his Opinion is, That the King cannot dispense
with every Malum Prohibitum; and he gives many Instances of such Mala Prohibita
that are not dispensable, fol. 342, and 334. parag. 4.

Therefore the Lord Chief Justice Herbert should (as I conceive) regularly
first have given us the distinction of Mala Prohibita, into such as are
dispensable, and such as are not dispensable; and then have shown, that the
Dispensation granted to Sir Edward Hales, fell under the first part: but that
learned Reporter, (the chief Justice Vaughan) (so often cited by our now Lord
Chief Justice) in the aforesaid Case of Thomas and Sorrel, fol. 332. the last
Paragraph save one, quarrels with the very distinction of Malum Prohibitum, and
Malum in se, and says it is confounding.

From whence I would observe, and from the whole Report in Thomas and and
Sorrell's Case, that the Notion of Dispensation is as yet but crude and
undigested, and not fully shaped and formed by the Judges.

The Pope was the Inventer of it. Our Kings have borrowed it from them. And the
Judges, from time to time, have nursed and dressed it up, and given it
countenance. And it is still upon the growth and encroaching, till it has
almost subverted all Law, and made the Regal Power Absolute, if not Dissolute.

I must agree, that our Books of late have run much upon a Distinction, viz.
Where the breach of a Penal Statute is to the particular damage of any person,
for which such person may have his Action against the Breaker of that Law,
there though it be but Malum Prohibitum, yet the King cannot dispense with that
Penal Law; according to the Rule in Bracton: Rex non potest gratiam facere cum
injuria and damno alterius.


As for instance: There are several Statutes that prohibit. one man from
maintaining another's Suit, though in a just Cause. See Poulton de pace Regis
and Regni, in his Chapt. of Maintenance, fol. 55.

Now it is held, that the King cannot dispense with those Laws, because it
would be to the prejudice and damage of that particular person, against whom
the Suit is so maintained by another: for there can be no maintenance, but it
is to the wrong of a particular person.

So of carrying a Distress out of the Hundred.

But there are many other Penal Laws, where by the transgressing of them, no
Subject can have any particular damage, and therefore no particular Action for
the breach of them.

As upon the Statute that prohibits the Transportation of Wool, under a
Penalty. By the breach of this Law, that is, by the Exportation of Wool, no one
particular man has any damage, more than every other man has; but it is only
against the Public Good.

And the breach of such a Penal Law is punishable only at the King's Suit, by
Indictment or Presentment.

And the like, where such a Penal Statute gives an Action Popular, to him that
will sue for the Penalty, who has no right to it, more than any other, till
his Suit be commenced.

In these Cases (it is commonly held) that the King may dispense with such
Penal Statutes, as to some particular persons, and for some limited time,
(whereof they make the King the sole Judge) because, as the reason is given in
the Chief Justice Vaughan's Reports, fol. 344. parag. 2. Such offense wrongs
none but the King. This is now the common received Opinion and Distinction. And
the breach of such kind of Penal Statutes, are said to be only the King's
damage in his public capacity, as Supreme Governor, and wronging none but
himself. Lord Vaugh. Rep. 342. parag. 3.

But if we will narrowly search into this Distinction, and weigh the Reasons so
given, we shall find it is without any just ground.

The damage done to the particular person in the Cases past, in the first part
of this distinction, are merely his own proper and peculiar damage; and he is
entitled to his particular Action for it, in his own proper personal Right:
and therefore, if he discharge and dispense with them, it is no wrong to any
other man. He may do what he will with his own.

But the Cases in the second part of this Distinction, are where the King has
a right to the Suit, and the offense and damage are said to be to him only.

But are they so (as the former) in his own personal right, as his Lands and
other Revenues are? or are they to him but as a Trustee for the Public, for
which reason he is called Creditor Poenae? and may he therefore upon the like
reason, dispense with them, or dispose of them, as a Subject may do with his
own particular Interests?

Again, Shall a public Damage and Injury to the whole Nation, be more
dispensable by the King, than the loss of one private man? -- fuit haec
sapientia quondam
Publica privatis secernere --


And therefore in my apprehension the King cannot in such Cases of
Dispensations, be truly said to wrong none but himself; and it is not agreeable
to the Definition before given, Utilitate Compensata, for the King wrongs the
whole Realm by it. Where if he grants a Dispensation with a Penal Law of the
first sort of this distinction, he only wrongs some particular persons.

The Cases and Authorities for Dispensations in our Books that were granted in
ancient times, will generally be found to be only where the Penal Statutes were
made for the King's own proper interest and benefit: As his dispensing with the
Statute of Mortmain. For in such Cases it was to the King's own loss only, in
Cases where the King might by Law have given away his Lands or Services. So the
King may in his Patent of Grant of Lands, dispense with the Statutes that
require there shall be mention of the true Values of them. And by a
Non-obstante to those Statutes (which is now generally 1 H. 4. c. 6.
used) the King does in effect declare, that it is his pleasure to grant those
Lands, whatever the Value of them be more or less: and the Statute does by
express words save a liberty to the King in that Case.

The King is not a Trustee for others in such Cases, nor can these
Dispensations be said to be directly to the damage of the Public. And such
Penal Laws as merely concern the King's own Revenue or Profit, may justly be
thought to be intended to be made only to put the King's matters into an
ordinary method and course, and so save the King a labor, as the Lord Hobart
says; and so prevent the King's being surpised or mis-inform'd, when Patents
are gained from him, and not designed to tie the King's hands, or to restrain
his power: as out of all doubt was done and intended by the Lawmakers in our
Act of 25 Car. 2.

But in all the late Cases and Authorities which we meet with in our Books
concerning Non-obstante's, and Dispensations, as in the time of King Henry the
Seventh, and so downward to this day, we shall find them practicing upon such
Penal Statutes as merely concern the Public Good and Benefit, and the Laws of
such a nature, by the breach of which the whole Nation suffers: While some
particular persons, it may be, by giving a large Fine, or a yearly Sum, obtain
the favor to be dispensed with and exempt from a Penal Law, while all others
continue to be bound by it.

As for Example: Where a Statute forbids the Exportation of Wool, or of Cloth
undyed or undressed, under a Penalty; such a Law is greatly for the Public
Good, and it takes care that our own People shall have Employment and
Maintenance. Yet this is such a Law, as according to the received Distinction,
the King may dispense with, there being no particular damage to one man more
than to another, by breach of such a Law, although it be a mighty damage to the
whole Nation: For by such a Dispensation, the person so dispensed with to
Export such White Cloth undyed, will have the sole Trade, which before the
making of that Penal Statute, was equal and common to all. I wish the House of
Commons would enquire what vast Riches have been heretofore gotten by such as
have obtained the Dispensations with this Penal Statute, besides the Sums they
paid to the Crown for them. These are mere Monopolies.

In such a Case it may rightly be applied, That Sin takes occasion by the Law.
It had been better for the Nation, that such Laws were never made, being no
better observed: for here again the Dispensation is neither Utilitate, nor
Necessitate pensata.

Look into the Case of Thomas and Sorrel, and you will find few or no Cases of
Dispensations cited out of our Books, but of the time of King Henry the
Seventh, and much more of very late times: so that the ill practice is still
improving and stretching.

The Lord Chief Justice Herbert, in the next place, page 9. proceeds to mention
the great Case of 2 Hen. 7. a Resolution of all the Judges in the
Exchequer-Chamber, upon the King's dispensing with the Statute of 23 H. 6. cap.
8. That no man should be a Sheriff above one year. This is the great Leading
Case and Authority, upon which the main stress is laid to justify the Judgment
given in Sir Edward Hales his Case.

I would avoid repeating what I have already so largely said to this Authority,
to which I must refer my Reader, by which I hope it is most evidently made out,
that the King neither has, nor never had any just Right or Power to elect
Sheriffs: But the right of Electing was anciently and originally belonging to
the Freeholders of the several Counties; and since it was unjustly taken from
them (as they have ever been on the losing hand) it has been lodged in the
great Officers of the Realm, as the Lord Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, Lord
Privy Seal, and the Judges, etc. as appears by the several Statutes.

And they are to make such Choice every year in the Exchequer, on a day
appointed by the Statute for that purpose. So that the Sheriffs are by those
Statutes to continue in their Offices for one year only. And the King cannot
hinder such Election.

Only by his Patent or Commission to the Sheriff, has he used to signify to
the Sheriff himself that is so chosen, and to publish to all others, who the
person is that is so chosen. This is all the use of the Patent; but it is the
proper Election of those great Officers that truly vests them in their Office.

And it does as clearly appear, that when former Kings have dispensed with a
Sheriffs continuing in his Office for longer than one year, contrary to the
several Statutes so forbidding it, the King has so done it by virtue (not of
his Prerogative) but by a special Act of Parliament enabling him to do it, for
some extraordinary occasions, and for some limited time only. See for this the
Statute of 9 Hen. 5. cap. 5. in the Statutes at large, and my larger Argument,
fol. 34.

The truth is, the Power of Dispensing is originally in the Legislators. He
only can dispense with a Law, that can make a Law. The Power is equal; and the
Legislators can confer the same Power upon the King or any others, for some
convenient time, etc. as appears by the last Instance of the Sheriff, and
diverse other like Cases, mentioned in my foregoing Argument, where I have also
observed many other things upon that Resolution of 2 H. 7. concerning Sheriffs.

The Chief Justice Herbert supposes the Mischiefs recited in the Preamble of
that Statute of 23 Hen. 6. cap. 8. concerning Sheriffs continuing in their
Offices longer than one year, to be equal, if not greater (as he judges) than
the Mischiefs recited in the Statute of 25 Car. 2. by Papists being in Offices.
And from thence, I presume, would infer, that the Case of Sir Edward Hales is
not so fatal in the consequence, as the Case of a Sheriff.

I may appeal to any ordinary Judgment, and to the sad Experience and Trial we
have so lately had, and to the desperate Danger we were so lately in (from
which Almighty God, by no less than a Miracle has in great mercy delivered the
Nation) whether the Mischiefs that could any way possibly arise from the
dispensing with the former, (I mean, the Statute concerning Sheriffs) be
comparable to the infinite Mischiefs arising from putting Papists into Office,
and intrusting them with our Religion, and all our Civil Rights.

The Chief Justice, upon those words of the Statute concerning Sheriffs, viz.
That no Non-obstante shall make them good, infers, that those words do show,
that the Parliament which made that Act concerning Sheriffs, was of opinion,
Page 10.
that had it not been for that Clause, the King could otherwise have dispensed
with that Act by a Non-obstante.

Answ. This to me seems a strained Inference, and that it is very far from
showing any such Opinion in that Parliament. It rather signifies, that had not
the Parliament inserted that Clause into the Act, the King might have done
again as he had frequently practiced before, viz. granted Dispensations upon
that Statute: which ill practice they endeavored to prevent for the future,
not approving the practice, nor owning the power of doing it. Ex malis moribus
bonae oriuntur Leges. A good Law rather condemns a contrary practice before
used.

I heartily desire my Reader (as I have done in my foregoing larger Argument)
carefully to observe and examine of what sort and nature those several Cases
are, which the Resolution of the Case of 2 Hen. 7. urges to warrant that
Resolution. As those Cases concerning the true Value of Lands, which the King
grants; and that concerning the shipping of Wool to a certain Staple, etc. and
let the Reader judge how vast a difference there is between those Statutes in
the nature, and import, and reason of them, and this weighty important Statute
now before us; and how little that Resolution of 2 H. 7. can be warranted by
the Cases there cited, being of so inferior and minute a Consideration, in
comparison of the principal Case.

It is true, Sir Edward Coke (if the twelfth Report, which goes by his name, be
truly his) has since that Resolution given in 2 Hen. 7. found out new and
different Reasons and Arguments, which are not urged, and therefore I presume
never so much as thought on, at that time, by the twelve Judges who gave the
Resolution in that Case of 2 Hen. 7.

Thus says Sir E. Saundys, in his Relation of the Religion used in the West
parts of the World: Those of the Roman Religion made their Greatness, Wealth,
and Honor, to be the very Rule by which to square out the Canons of their
Faith; and then did set Clerks on work to devise Arguments to maintain them.

Sir Edward Coke seems to justify that Resolution concerning Sheriffs, from
this ground, viz. That the King has a Sovereign Power to command any of his
Subjects to serve him for the Public Weal. And this is (says he) solely and
inseparably annexed to his Person, and that this Royal Power cannot be
restrained by any Act of Parliament. 12 Rep. fol. 18.

That it is not solely annexed to the King's person, appears by the several
Acts of Parliament which I have cited to this purpose in my larger Argument,
fol. 34. where the Power of Dispensing with some particular Acts, was given to
the King by the Parliament, and by him accepted for some short time. And the
whole Parliament have in diverse Cases themselves exercised this very Power.

Judge of the weight of the Reasons said to be given there by Sir Edward Coke,
by that one Instance of his in the Case he puts of Purveyance, 12 Rep. fol. 19.
which (he says) cannot be taken from the King, no not by Act of Parliament.

Yet we have lived to see it lately taken away by Act of Parliament; which in
the Judgment of a Parliament (which is of the highest Authority in Law) may
therefore be taken from the King.

And is the King in truth restrained from commanding his Subjects to serve him
for the Public Weal, either by those Statutes that disable Sheriffs to
continue in their Offices longer than one year, or by our Statute of 25 Car. 2.
that disables Popish Recusants to bear public Offices: Because some very
unfit, incapable, and dangerous persons are disabled to bear Offices of Trust
and Power, (and this by the King's own consent to the Act, and by the advice of
the great Council the Parliament) and indeed of the whole Realm?

Does the King by this (which the Judges mis-call a Restraint) want for choice
of fit persons to serve in Offices? Does the Public Weal suffer by this
Restraint? is it not rather preserved by it? Has not the King Protestant
Subjects enough to bear Offices? And are Popish Recusants (who account
Protestants Heretics, and to be rooted out and destroyed, and with whom they
hold no Faith is to be kept, and against whom they have been continually
plotting Mischief) are these the fittest to be entrusted with the Defense of
the Protestant Religion, and with our Lives and Estates, which are all
concerned, more or less, in every Public Office and Trust?

And are those persons (the Papists) that have a dependence upon the Sea of
Rome, and a Foreign Power, fit to be entrusted with the power of the Nation,
with the Militia, and the Seaports?

Is not this to commit the Lamb to the custody of the Wolf?

This Act that disables Papists to bear Offices, cannot be justly said to be a
Restraint upon the King; that expression sounds ill, and takes the matter by
the wrong handle. It rather imports the King's Declaration and Resolution, by
advice of his great Council, to employ none in Offices and Places of Trust, but
such as are most capable and fit, and will most faithfully answer the great
Ends for which they are so entrusted, that is, the preservation of the
Protestant Religion, which is the true English Interest.

And this agrees with the Rules of the Common Law, That if an Office be granted
to one that is Inidoneus, the Grant is void, though granted by the King
himself. Of this I have treated more largely, in my Argument, fol. 37.

The Lord Chief Justice Herbert, page 16. asks the Question, Whether so many
solemn Resolutions of all the Judges of England in the Exchequer-Chamber, are
not to be relied upon for Law? And I answer, That if they were ten times as
many more, yet they are not to be relied on against many express positive Acts
of Parliament directly to the contrary. For what words could the Parliament use
more emphatical and express, and more to the purpose, than by saying, That a
Non-obstante, or a Dispensation, or a Grant of such a thing, (prohibited by
that Law) shall be absolutely void, and ipso facto adjudged void, and the
person made incapable to take? And is not a Judgment in Parliament, and by Act
of Parliament, of the highest Authority?

But (says the Chief Justice, fol. 16.) the constant practice has been to
dispense with the Statute of Sheriffs. I answer, It has also been a very
frequent practice too for the King, to make such persons Sheriffs, as were none
of the number nominated or chosen, as aforesaid, by the Chancellor, Treasurer,
Judges, and other great Officers; and it passes for current that he may so do,
though it be a vulgar Error: For it has been resolved by all the twelve
Judges, to be an Error in the King. See Sir Edward Coke's 2 Instit. or Magna
Charta, fol. 559. and yet it is practiced to this very day.

The Chief Justice, page 18. seems to excuse Popish Recusants, for not
qualifying themselves for Offices, by taking the Oaths and the Test, etc. for
that no man (says he) has it in his power to change his opinion in Religion as
he pleases, and therefore it is not their fault. It is an Error of the mind,
etc.

Answ. Here is no occasion taken to find fault with them for their Opinion; let
them keep their Religion still, if they like it so well, who hinders them? This
Act of 25 Car. 2. imposes no Penalty upon them for their Opinion. But is there
any necessity of their being in Offices? Must they needs be Guardians of the
Protestant Religion? The Penalty upon them by this Act, is not for their
Opinion, but for their presuming to undertake Offices and Trusts, for which
they are by King and Parliament adjudg'd and declared unfit.

Page 20, and 21. The Chief Justice Vaughan is brought in, arguing for the
Kings Power of Dispensing with (Nominal) Nusances, (as he is pleased to call
and distinguish Nusances). The word (Nominal) (as there understood) imports,
that though a Parliament declares any thing to be a Nuisance, (as sometimes they
do in Acts of Parliament, to render them indispensable) which yet in its proper
nature would not otherwise be so conceived to be; that such a Nominal Nuisance
(as he holds) may however be dispensed with by the King, though regularly by
Law the King may not dispense with any Nuisance.

Answ. Shall any single or particular person, though a Chief Justice, presume
to call that a mere Nominal Nuisance, which a Parliament by a solemn Act and Law
have adjudg'd and declared to be a real Nuisance? Are we not all concluded by
what a Law says? This Arrogance is the Mischief now complained of.

The Chief Justice Herbert, page 22. at the lower end, says, That from the
abuse of a thing, an Argument cannot be drawn against the thing it self. I
agree this is regularly true; yet we have an Instance to the contrary in the
Scripture, in that point of the Brazen Serpent. But in our Case the abuse does
arise from the very nature of the thing it self, from the constitution of it.

For the King practices no more in dispensing, than what these Resolutions of
the Judges allow him to do by this pretended Prerogative. The Error is in the
Foundation.

They have made his Power to be unlimitted, either as to number of persons, or
as to the time how long the Dispensation shall continue. Sir Edward Coke says,
and so the other Books, That the King is the sole Judge of these. Nec Metas
Rerum, nec Tempora Ponunt.


The Chief Justice Herbert, fol. 24. cites two clear Concessions (as he is
pleased to call them) of all the Commons of England in Parliament, which he
esteems much greater Authorities than the several Resolutions of all the twelve
Judges.

But how far these are from Concessions, will easily appear to an indifferent
Reader. They are no more than prudent and patient avoiding of Disputes with the
several Kings. And there are multitudes of the like in the old Parliament-Rolls.

It is but an humble clearing of themselves from any purpose in general, to
abridge the King of any of his Prerogatives, (which have always been touchy and
tender things;) but it is no clear nor direct allowance of that dispensing
there mentioned, to be any such Prerogative in him.

However, I am glad to see an House of Commons to be in so great request with
the Judges. It will be so at some times, more than at others.

Yet I do not remember, that in any Argument I have hitherto met with a Vote^
or Order, or Opinion of the House of Commons, has been cited for an Authority
in Law, before now. Will the House of Peers allow of this Authority for Law?

It will be said, That this is but the acknowledgment of Parties concerned in
Interest; which is allowed for a good Testimony and strongest against
themselves.

Answ. I do not like to have the King and his People to have divided Interests.
Prerogative and the Peoples Liberties, should not be looked upon as Opposites.
The Prerogative is given by Law to the King, the better to enable him to
protect and preserve the Subjects Rights. Therefore it truly concerns the
People to maintain Prerogative.

I could cite several Parliament-Records wherein the poor House of Commons have
been forced to submit themselves, and humbly beg pardon of the King, for doing
no more than their Duty, merely to avert his displeasure. See the Case of Sir
Thomas Haxey, whom the King adjudg'd a Traitor, for exhibiting a Bill to the
Commons for the avoiding of the outrageous Expenses of the King's House 20 R.
2. number. 14, 15, 16, 17, and 23. and the Commons were driven to discover his
Name to the King, and the whole House in a mournful manner craving pardon for
their entertaining of that Bill.

No doubt, as good an Authority against the Commons for so sawcily meddling in a
matter so sacred, and so far above them. Yet afterward, 1 Hen. 4. number. 91.
that Judgment against Sir Thomas Haxey was reversed.

As for the distinction, page 30. of a Disability actually incuri'd before the
meddling in an Office, and where the Disability is prevented by the coming of a
Dispensation; I answer, That its being so prevented, is but Peticio Principii,
and a begging of the Question. And to this Distinction I have (I think) fully
spoken in the foregoing Argument, fol. 40.

The late Parliament, in making this Act of 25 Car. 2. had, no doubt, a
prospect that probably the Crown would descend upon a Popish Successor; and
they levelled this Act against the Dangers that might then befall our Religion
and Liberties, and they thought it a good Security: But it is all vanished and
come to nothing, by occasion of this Judgment in the Case of Sir Edward Hales.
And that must be justified by a (Fiat Justitia.)

As to the Objection that the Chief Justice fancies might have been made
against him, or advice given him that he should rather have parted with his
place, than to have given a Judgment so prejudicial to the Religion he
professes, page 33.

This, I say, that for my part I should never have advised him to have parted
with his Place, much less to have given a Judgment against his own Opinion. But
let his Opinion be what it was, yet seeing the clear intention of the Makers of
the Law, contrary to that his Opinion, and knowing the desperate effects and
consequences that would follow upon dispensing with that Act, (for we were upon
the brink of destruction by it) and taking notice (as this Chief Justice and
the rest of the Judges needs must) that the King had first endeavored to have
gained a Dispensing Power in thismatter from both Houses (which was the fair
and legal course) and that yet that very Parliament which out of too great a
compliance with those times, had overlooked so many Grievances, and connived
at the King's taking and collecting of the Customs, (though in truth the
Collectors, and all that had any hand in the receiving of them, incurred a
Praemunire by it) not to mention the ill Artifice used in gaining the Excise,
yet that Parliament of the King's, boggled at the Dispensing with the Act of 25
Car 2. knowing the mighty Importance of it.

And though they could not but take notice that so many Judges at once had been
removed, because they could not swallow this Bitter Pill, and others brought
into their places, as might be justly suspected to serve a Turn, and the King's
Learned Council could not at first find out this Prerogative to do his work
with, till so many ways had been attempted, and all proved ineffectual; sure in
such circumstances it had been Prudence, nay the Duty of the Judges, to have
referred the determination of it to a Parliament; and the rather, because it
was to expound a Law newly made, and the consequences so dreadful, and the
intent of the Lawmakers so evident.

And this has been frequently practiced by Judges, in Cases of far less
difficulty and concernment. This I have also enlarged upon in my Argument, page
26.

Object. But it might have been a long time before any Parliament had been
called.

Answ. We ought to have Parliaments once a year, and oftener if need be; and
eadem praesumitur esse men's Regis, quae Legis; and we then stood in great need
of a Parliament even for the sake of this very Case.

And these hasty Judgments are one ill Cause why Parliaments meet no oftener;
the Work of Parliaments is taking out of their hands, by the Judges. And it is
the Interest of some great Officers, that Parliaments should not be called, or
else be hastily prorogued or adjourned.

As to the point of the feigned Action, which the Lord Chief Justice seems to
justify, I conceive he mistakes the force of the Objection. Feigned Actions
may be useful; but this Action against Sir Edward Hales, is suspected not only
to have been feigned and brought by Covin between him and his Servant and
Friend, but it was feignedly and faintly prosecuted, and not heartily and
stoutly defended.

Like the practice of common Fencers, who play for a Prize, they seem to be in
good earnest, and look very fierce, but agree beforehand not to hurt one
another. Qui cum ita pugnabat tanquam se vincere Nollet
Aegre, est devictus, proditione sua.


This solemn Resolution was given upon a few short Arguments at the Bar, and
without any at the Bench, and upon other Reasons (as I have heard) which were
then made use of, are now given by the Chief Justice; but the Times will not
now bear them.

After all, I intend not by this to do the Office of an Accuser, nor to charge
it as a Crime. But as I think my self bound in Duty, on the behalf of the whole
Nation, of my self, (though a small part and member of it) and of my Friends, I
humbly propose, That the Judgment given in Sir Edward Hales his Case may, after
a due Examination, (if there be found cause) be legally Reversed by the House
of Lords, and that Reversal approved of and confirmed by a special Act of
Parliament.

FINIS.

