THE KINGS Grant of Privilege FOR SOLE PRINTING Common-Lavv-Books, DEFENDED;
AND THE Legality thereof ASSERTED.

LONDON, Printed by John Streater, 1669*

THE KINGS Grant of PRIVILEGE FOR Sole Printing Common-Law-Books, defended,
etc.
THe principal Exception against the Grant of Privilege before mentioned is
the slander of a Monopoly; And the principal Foundation on which it stands
supported and justified is the Kings Prerogative; and therefore those two
matters, A Monopoly and the nature thereof; and the Kings Prerogative and the
Extent thereof are necessarily to be first considered.

I consider a Monopoly as it is (or was) at the Common Law before the Stat. 21
Jac. the matter in question being of a Grant made before that Statute; and the
thing granted Excepted out of that Statute.

It Is true, A Monopoly is (as many other ungrateful terms are) taken primarily
and generally in the worst sense, to signify something unlawful, against the
Freedom of Trade, the Liberty of the Subject, etc. And the word is thereupon
also forced and extended (beyond its literal signification) to comprehend every
sole dealing or exercising of that which others are restrained to use. And to
be termed a Monopoly, is at this day an imputation, as if the unlawfulness
thereof were necessarily to be presumed and employed. Whereas it is most clear,
That All Monopolies are not against Law, some being reasonable, useful and
beneficial to the Public, and some necessary; and this Necessity and Benefit
to the People recompenceth the restraint of their Liberty, and takes away the
unlawfulness thereof. All Patents of Privilege for the sole usage of new
inventions are Monopolies undeniably, yet is it necessary they should be
granted for the encouragement of Industry and Invention; The communicating
whereof to public use, is a public and general benefit, though the making the
Invention should be perpetually appropriated to the Inventor. All or most of
the Ancient Offices were at the first (and are agreed to be) direct and plain
Monopolies in their natures, and are now found so to be in their mischievous
consequence to the generality of the people, whose charges do but enr^ch a
single person sometimes for performing that which is needless; or if needful,
might be performed by the persons concerned themselves without charge.
Nevertheless, such Offices having been created originally upon reason of Use
and Benefit to the Public, for encouragement of Learning, Diligence or
Fidelity, or such like Motives to His Majesty's Royal Predecessors by whom they
were erected, have from Age to Age been approved and continued as they now are,
(and are excepted by name with this Privilege in question out of the aforesaid
Stat. 21 Jac.) as unquestionably lawful.

It has been said, That Ancient Offices are established and made Lawful by
Time and Custom, which is part of the LAW. To which I answer, That a Monopoly
is an Evil of that nature as could not be justified by Custom, or by length
of Time, if it were not ex rationabili causa usitata, a benefit to the People
in recompense of the restraint of their Freedoms: For it is the reasonableness
of Benefit that justifies the thing, and not Time or Custom; In
Consuetudinibus consideranda est soliditas rationis, non diuturnitas temporis.
In like manner a man may by Usage or Reservation claim the Sole Privilege of
keeping a common Mill, a common Bake-house or Brew House within a certain
Precinct; For this may have commenced originally ex rationabili causa, by
bargain or agreement to be made at the Owners charge, and for the Inhabitants
ease and benefit, which is a recompense for the restraint of their liberty of
using the like.

2 E. 3. 7. The Case there is, That the King had granted a Charter of
Privilege to the Lord or Owner of a Haven, that such Ships as Anchored or
entered there for Harbor, should unlade there only. This and the precedent
Cases are plain Monopolies; yet because they stand upon equivalent benefit, and
the Ships had harbor and safety from the Lord of the Haven, 'twas therefore
allowed a lawful Charter.

From which Cases I infer, That before the Statute a Monopoly might be lawfully
erected, because it might be beneficial to the Public, and was permitted in
special Cases. And with this agrees the Learned Grotius in his Book de Jure
Belli and Pacis. Lib. 2. cap. 12. Parag. 16.
Monopolia non omnia cum jure naturae pugnant, nam possunt interdum a summa
potestate permitti justa de causa, etc. And he instances the practice and
permission thereof in the Roman State, (the pattern of Governments) and the
Holy Story of Joseph touching this matter. A Monopoly is then unlawful, when
thereby the People are restrained in their Lawful Trades, or in the exercise
of what they have right to use, without general benefit or recompense for the
same: but the priviledging particular persons to exercise a particular
Employment which others never did use, nor have right to use, and the general
use whereof would be dangerous, and the Restraint of the use safe for the
Public, cannot be unlawful; for the reason of that unlawfulness fails,
cessante ratione Legis cessat Lex.

Now for the Prerogative (which is a copious subject) I shall only mention so
much touching the same, as I conceive most proper to the matter in hand. The
King has Prerogatives of several natures, and grounded upon several Reasons;
Some in respect of his own Royal Estate and Person; Others in respect of His
Office and Magistracy, for the better Government of his People: For the King as
Supreme Magistrate has a general Trust and Care of the Peoples safety, to
prevent, as well as to deliver from public Evils. Reg. 127.
Rex etc. ratione dignitatis Regiae ad providendum salvation^m Regni
circumquaque est astrictus. Now Providentia is (properly) futurorum; whereby
the King is to use all means to foresee and prevent mischiefs within his
Kingdom. For this purpose, and for the enabling him to perform this Office and
Trust, he is by Law endowed with several transcendent Prerogatives, some known,
and some unlimited and unknown which are jura summi Magistratus, as great for
weight, and as infinite for number as the contingencies may be wherewith the
Peoples safety may be affected.

The Extent of the Kings Prerogatives, such as concern their own personal
rights, or the rights of their Estate, are sometimes disputed, and have
sometimes been limited and restrained by their own consents in Parliament. But
those touching the preservation of the public have never been limited, nor
ought to be disputed or lesned; and if so, the intended limitations and
restraints thereof have been adjudged void because these Prerogatives are
inseparable from the Crown.

Hence it is, The King can dispense with Laws, can pardon offenses, can license
matters prohibited, can prohibit matters tolerated, and can privilege,
restrain, or qualify new accidents, as he in Wisdom and Deliberation shall
judge expedient and best for the Public good. F. Paul Servita in his History
of the Inqu. page 104.
Which Judgment and Deliberation is peculiar and proper to the KING, who alone
comprehends the Estate of public things, and it is a duty and consequence of
his Supreme Magistracy. Now Printing in every man's reason and observation is,
and in the Act for Regulating Printing is prefaced to be matter of Public Care
and great Concernment.

These things being premised, I shall only state the Case truly as it is to be
understood touching the Privilege in question, and then the Application will
be obvious.

In the Reign of King Hen. 6. the Art of Printing was first invented. Anno 1466.
And as some Manuscripts relate, This appears by a Manuscript thereof in the
Library at Lambeth.
the same King Hen. 6. purchased the first discovery of the Art, and thereby
became Proprietor thereof at his own charge; Whereby the same came to be taught
and used in England, but for the Printing of such matters only as the King
Licensed and Privileged, and by the sworn Servants of the King only, and in
places appointed by the King, and not elsewhere.

By the later end of the Reign of H. 8. the Invention was come to some
perfection, and several Books were then printed here cum Privilegio, and Others
brought over printed from beyond the Seas; but being few in number, and the
prices thereof excessive, the same was remedied by the Stat. 25 H. 8. cap. 15.

The State at that time taking consideration of the growth of Printing, 7 E. 6.
and the danger and consequences that might ensue to the King and People by
Printing the Laws of the Land, that thereby Errors and Seditions might be
divulged and insinuated, and other mischiefs happen to affect the the people,
thought fit thereupon to commit the Printing of the LAWS to the Care and Trust
of some particular persons whom the KING by Patent privileged to print the
same, with a Clause of Restraint to all others from presuming to meddle therein.

All succeeding Kings and Queens of this Realm have upon like Considerations
mentioned in their Grants, and other Considerations of State, in Wisdom
thought fit to continue the said Privilege in the hands of some persons in whom
they consided, with like Clauses of restraint as before. The dates and
successions of which Grants are as follows.

The King granted a Patent of Sole Privilege to Print Law Books, 7 E. 6.
to Tottell for 7. years, with restraint to others from presuming to print his
Laws.

The Queen renewed Tottells Grant for life. 1 Eliz.


The Queen granted like Patent of privilege to Yersweirt Clerk of her Signet,
20 Eliz.
for 30 years.

The Queen granted a New Patent of like Privilege to Weight and Norton for 30
years. 41 Eliz.


The King granted a New Patent of like Privilege to John Moore Clerk of his
Signet for 40 years; 15 Jac.
Which Patent is still continuing.

These Privileges ad Imprimendum solum, have continually been enjoyed
according to the purport of the said Grants; saving the interruption forced
upon the Press after 1642. in the times of the late Troubles, whereby Sedition
and Treason came to be printed openly, and continued so to be till His
Majesty's Restoration.

This is the first peaceable Age wherein the Kings Prerogative, in this matter
of Printing the LAWS, was ever questioned, or the aforesaid Privileges
charged with the imputation of Monopolies. And whether they be Such Monopolies
as are against Law, is the present question.

For the justifying the lawfulness of this Privilege, I offer the Reasons
ensuing.

1. That the King has as absolute Power to prevent Evils foreseen, as He has
to reform them which happen unforeseen. And I conceive it clear, as He may
forbid the exercise of any Invention, which upon the Permission thereof shall
prove or become a Nuisance, or common mischief, So He may qualify, or wholly
prohibit the first use of it, out of a prospect of the mischief. Watchfulness
and Carefulness are the Duties required of a good Prince; to watch, is, that He
may prevent and obviate Dangers. Now experience has discovered to us the
Dangers and Mischiefs of the Liberty of Printing; And, though the excellency of
the Invention cannot be denied, yet, whoever will consider it, shall find, that
Factions and Errors in matters of Religion, and principles of Treason and
Rebellions in matters of State have been more insinuated and fomented by the
Liberty of the Press, then by any other single means. So it may seem a
question (impartially considered) whether the Use of Printing recompenceth the
mischief by the liberty and abuse thereof. Therefore the F. Paul Servita ubi
supra, Page 106, 107.
Father observes excellently well, The matter of Books seems to be a thing
of small moment, because it treats of words; but through these words, come
Opinions into the World, which cause Partialities, Seditions, and Wars: They
are words, it is true, but such as in consequence, draw after them Hosts of
Armed Men.

Now certainly, had the King at the first discovery of the Invention of
Printing, foreseen the Use thereof a likely means of Disturbance to the peace
of the Church or State (as the liberty and abuse thereof has proved to both).
It had been in the Kings power, for the Peace and Safety of both, to have
prohibited the Use of Printing wholly.

2. As upon the Reason aforesaid, the King might at the first have refused to
have received the Use of Printing at all into His Dominions, so much more
reasonably might He restrain the general Liberty and Use thereof, not to extend
to matters of State or Law, these being peculiarly within His Concerns, and of
more apparent danger to the peace of the State. Some States have not suffered
their Laws at all to be published or known. There might be policy in this,
though it seems unjust; yet on the contrary, for a general Liberty to publish
the Laws is neither honorable nor safe. The mean betwixt these extremes has
been practiced by the Kings of this Realm, not to Restrain the printing of the
Laws wholly (as They might have done) nor yet to give a General Liberty to
every man for the doing thereof (which might prove unsafe) but to Privilege
Select Persons only to do the same, who might be answerable for Misdemeanors
and Defects therein.

3. Though the Art of Printing was discovered sometime before the Reign of E.
6. from whom the first Patent of this Privilege appears Granted, yet were the
presses all then Licenced by the King; And none, or no considerable Book of the
Law was printed before that time, the Art not being come to perfection: So that
the first Patent of this privilege could not be pretended a Monopoly, or
illegal, none then having the Trade, or Right of printing the Laws to be
detrimented thereby.

4. The King having at the first beginning of Printing, by His lawful
Prerogative, and upon just Reason placed this Privilege of printing the Laws
solely in the hands of particular persons, to prevent mischiefs which might
ensue upon a general liberty given to print the Laws; and the said Privilege
being then not unlawful, because no restraint of any thing then practiced or
exercised, or which any one had right to exercise: and having ever since so
continued, and the people generally neither entitled to the Right or Usage of
printing the Laws, remains grantable as at the first by Virtue of the same
Prerogative, and for the same ends, and with the same innocence from injuring
any one.

5. Besides the Reasons before mentioned, (of security to the Kingdom, against
Innovations, or false construction of the Laws, either by the designs of
Authors, or mistake of Printers, which is worthy the Princes Care, and those He
entrusts with the printing of the Laws to prevent) the King has (as I
conceive) a peculiar Right and Property (not only in the Art and Invention of
printing by purchase (as before has been said) for in that I lay no great
weight but) in the Laws themselves, and in the publishing thereof, which cannot
be taken from Him, or assumed by any Subject without His leave. It Is true, the
people have also a Right in the Laws (as they had before Printing was known)
not to print them, but to receive the fruit of them from the Kings Hand. But
the King is the Repository and Proprietor, and is entrusted with the
Promulgation and Execution of the Laws.

There is Lex scripta and non scripta. The written Laws are Records, etc. which
are Recorda and Brevia Domini Regis, and are reckoned inter Thesauraria Regis,
as the chief and principal things wherein he has property. But the unwritten
Laws, which are grounded upon Custom and Reason, etc. are yet more properly the
Kings then the other, for these are in his Breast. The written Law is reposited
but in Arca or Thesauro Regis, but the Laws unwritten are in pectore Regis. In
scrinio pectoris, says Fortescue. From whence I infer, That these Laws and
Records which are so peculiarly the Kings in property and dispensation, ought
not to be published, or numbered, or interpreted but by Authority from Him; and
the printing thereof is of the Kings free pleasure, and not the peoples Right,
and consequently the priviledging some to print the Law is the Kings Grace, and
the restraining others from that Liberty not any wrong.

6. If no material Reason could be offered in this Case, to assert the Kings
Right in Granting this Privilege, yet there want not Authorities to justify
the same.

1. The constant usage and practice, without exception from the first
settlement of Printing, as appears by the succession of Patents before
mentioned.

In the Argument of Darcy and Allens Case, One great Reason against that
Patent, 44 Eliz.
was, That the like had never been granted before. But here the like has ever
been granted, ever since the printing of the Laws, and the like (or any)
Exception thereunto never heard of before.

2. The general Allowance of the Judges in the Argument of Darcy and Allens
Case, Moors Rep. 673.
where this Patent was cited as a president, and holden lawful, and necessary
pur le peace and safety del Realm, Nemine contradicente.

3. The Stat. 21 Jac. cap 3. was passed purposely to suppress the then
present, and to prevent the future granting of Monopolies, and yet expressly
excepts Patents of privilege for sole printing of Books with several branches
of the Militia and Offices, and other like things of the highest concern to the
Crown. And I cannot omit to observe, That this privilege of printing is the
first thing named in the Exception, as if the Parliament then had it first and
principally in their Care; And that this Patent now in question was the same
Patent then in force.

4. The Stat. 21. Jac. before mentioned, and also the Stat. 14* Car. 2.
touching the Regulation of printing, provide for Patents of Privilege for
printing, Granted, or to be granted; which they would not have done, had they
not approved and intended to encourage like Grants to be made. And also the
last mentioned Stat. fol. 433. expressly prohibits under penalties printing or
com-printing of such Books, the which any other has sole privilege to print
by Letters Patents; which implies, the Parliament intended to support and
establish such as lawful; and it cannot be reasonably thought several
Parliaments should so expressly provide for this privilege of sole Printing, if
they had not designed to secure it from the Censure of a Monopoly.

It has been Objected, 1. Object.
That this Patent has the mischiefs of a Monopoly, for thereby the Patentee
may enhaunce the prices of Law Books; May print the Law Books as defectively as
he pleases, and may prise men's Labors at his own Rates, etc.

1. The prices of Books may (if occasion shall be) be regulated by the
Chancellor, Sol.
etc. per Stat. 25* H. 8. cap. 15.

2. Defective printing, or other abuses in or about the printing of the Laws,
is a breach of Trust, and punishable in the Patentee, and a cause of forfeiture
of his Patent, as mis-execution, or defective erecution is a cause of
forfeiture of an Office.

3. If these Objections were true, and could receive no Answer, the mischiefs
pretended are not comparable to the benefits received, or the security which
redounds to the Public, by restraining the general Liberty of printing the
Laws.

The words of the Patent are said to be too large and unreasonable, 2. Object.
to privilege all Books concerning the Common Laws. For herein all manner of
Books whatever are included, forasmuch as every Book more or less compriseth
something of the Common Law.

This is an unreasonable construction of the words; Sol.
for Books principally treating of another Subject, which in the proof, or
proceeding thereunto, only mention some Maxims or principles of the Law, can
only be said to contain in them some Chapter or Page (but cannot be termed
Books) concerning the Law, the Law neither being their subject or design.
Denominatio ^umitur a Principali.

7. If this Patent touching the sole printing of the Laws should in this Age
have the sentence of a Monopoly against Law, in consequence other Patents of
privilege of like nature for sole printing of Books (that is to say) the
Patents to the Kings Printers for printing Proclamations. The Patents for
printing the Bible, Testament, Common Prayer, etc. The Patents of both the
Universities of this Kingdom in reference to Printing. The several Patents to
the Company of Stationers for sole printing the Primer, Psalters, Singing
Psalms, School-Books; and that of Almanacks, the words of which are, All and
all manner of Almanacks, In terminis such as be the words of the Grant in
question, and are all Privileges of the like nature and authority (but of
less reason and use) must have the same fate to be overthrown therewith.

8. The usage of other Neighbor Kingdoms and States, may in this matter
enforce the reasonableness of the like Usage here. In France, Germany, Holland,
etc. sole privileges of this Nature are usually granted, and solemnly
observed. The Forms whereof are to be seen before several Books printed within
those Kingdoms; to this effect, (viz.) Sancta Caesarea Majestas diplomate suo
sanxit, ne quis praeter A. B. C. D. intra sacri Imperii Romani Regnorumque,
etc. Fines, these and those Books in toto vel in part excudat, etc. sub
confiscatione, etc.

In like manner, Ordinum Hollandiae, Westfrisiaeque singulari privilegio cautum
est, ne quis praeter A. B. and C. D. (these and those Books) Imprimat etc. sub
confiscatione, etc.

The Form of the French Kings Privileges, recite his Prerogative, That no Book
can be printed within his Dominions, Sans avoir sur ceo nos Lettres a ce
necessairs, That thereupon he does permit such persons to print such Books in
such manner, etc. Faysans d' offense a touts imprimeurs, etc. d' imprimer, etc:
any of the said Books besides the persons privileged.

Now forasmuch as the Kings of this Realm of England are not Restrained herein
(in case they might so be) by any Statute since the Invention of printing, why
should They be conceived to have less Right and power to Grant like privileges
touching printing, then is practiced by their Neighbor Princes upon the same
Reasons of Law and State, for their Subjects safety. It being almost impossible
for a Prince to rule the spirits and wills of his Subjects (since Printing came
in Use) without restraining the Press, which so evidently influences them to
Evil or Good. I only add, That after the Long Parliament had (Anno 1641.)
opened a Liberty to the Press for their first Service, to insinuate and
propagate Principles of Rebellion, they immediately found it necessary again to
Restrain the same (Anno 1643.) for their own Security.

The sum of all which is,

1. That some Monopolies may be necessary and useful to the Public, and
consequently lawful,

2. That the King has Prerogative to privilege such, and is Judge of the
matter.

3. That the Privilege in question is such, and has been so adjudged by the
Kings Predecessors ever since the Reign of Edw. 6.

4. That there has been a continued succession of Patents of the same
privilege ever since the printing of the Laws.

5. That experience has discovered the Mischief of Liberty in printing the
Laws.

6. That the King upon foresight hereof (much more upon experience) might
Restrain the printing of the Laws wholly.

7. That the King has a Property in the Laws, and it is His Grace, and not the
peoples Right, to have them printed.

8. That like privileges for sole printing of Books, are practiced and used to
be granted by all the Neighbor Princes and States where printing is used.

9. That in Arguments of Law, this Privilege has been cited, and allowed
lawful.

10. That several Statutes have excepted and preserved it as lawful. From all
which it is (with submission) concluded to be so.

FINIS.

