AN ANSWER TO SOME CONSIDERATIONS ON THE Spirit of Martin Luther AND The
Original of the REFORMATION; Lately Printed at OXFORD.

The fierceness of Man shall turn to thy praise, and the fiercness of Them
shall thou refrain. Ps. 76. 10.

OXFORD, Printed at the THEATER. Anno 1687.

Imprimatur.

IO. VENN. Vice-Can. Oxon.
Iulii 29. 1687.
The PREFACE.
WHEN I first happened upon this Pamphlet, and by some peculiar beautys in the
style, easily discovered it is Owner, I was, I must confess, not a little
surpised: I could not have imagined that a Man of so bigg a reputation as the
Author of the Guide in Controversy; One, whose thoughts had for some years
conversed with nothing less then Ecumenical Councels, Popes and Patriarchs,
should quitt all those fine amusements for the humble task of Life-writing, and
drawing of Characters. 'Twas mean prey, I thought, for a Bird of his Pounces:
and the Design he did it with, made it ten times more a Riddle. The Doctrines
of the Reformation have, for near two Centuries, kept the field, against all
Encounterers: and does He think they may be foiled at last by two or three
little Remarks upon the Life and Actions of a single Reformer? But it look's
like a Jest, when the Irregularities committed by Luther in Germany, are turned
upon Us here in England: as if any thing that He said, or did, could affect a
Church established upon it is own bottom, and as independent on any foreign
authorities, as the Crown, Her Defender wears. Luther's Voice is indeed to Us,
what our Page 2. of Consid.
Author term's it, the Voice of the Stranger; and though we are allwaies ready to
wipe off the unjust aspersions cast upon him by his Enemies, yet this is what
we are obliged to, not as Sons, but as Friends. Whenever injured Virtue is set
upon, every Honest man is concerned in the Quarrel. But these last Attacqu's
have been so very feeble, that had we for once trusted the Cause to it is own
strength, 'twould have suffered but little Damage. And I for my part should
have done so, did I not know there were a sort of Men in the World, who have
the vanity to think every thing on their side unanswerable, that does not
receive a set Reply; though at the same time they are pleased to answer nothing
themselves. They fight indeed all of 'em, like Tartars; make a bold and furious
onset, and if that does not do, they retreat in disorder, and you never hear
of 'em afterward. And this, I expect, will be the present case. The Editor of
these Considerations will not much care for replying, I believe; because that must
be de proprio, and cannot be drawn from the old store of provisions laid in by
the Fraternity. But whether the Poisons were of an earlyer mixture, and
designed, like Italian Preparations, to work now at a distance, or whether
later tempered, is a thing we may safely be ignorant of; as long as we are
secure of the Antidote, before they take their effect. And this the
Theatre-Press thinks her self engaged to promise: considering from Whose
Munificence she had her Birth, and especially to Whom she ows her Luster; a
late Prelate, of a remarkable zeal for the established Church; and who, were
Religions to be tried by Lives, would have lived down the Pope, and the whole
Consistory. If the Services she does now are not of the most deserving
Character, it is what the Meanness of the Opposer, and a worn-out Cause will
bear: she has already produced the strongest arguments against Popery, Fathers,
and Bibles. The present Attempt is confined perfectly within the bounds of an
Answer; and pretend's to nothing more then a bare pursuit of the Author step by
step; and the laying open his Blunders, for the Reader's ease, just in the same
order they ly. There was nothing frightful in this Task, but the toil of being
forced to think so long upon so very thoughtless a Writer: in all other
respects 'twas as easy as one would wish. The History-part lay within a little
room; and the Reasonings upon it were so thin, that they needed only setting in
the light, to be looked through. In both, my greatest helps have been drawn from
one single Author, the Considerer himself: who in every Book of his has made it
appear, that he can write Contradictions, as well as believe 'em. This small
performance had seen the light much sooner, but that it waited the Edition of
another Piece which should regularly have prevented it. But the Gentleman
employed on that occasion having not yet had all the leisure he expected, 'twas
thought fit rather to send this abroad, out of it is due place, then stay till
every body had forgotten the Book it answer's: a misfortune, which I fear it
has already in a great measure undergone. In the Defense of Our Reformation, to
come, 'twill be found, that the Considerer is no good Historian; the Replyer,
has proved him no good Catholic; the Animadverter no good Subject; and all
together no good Disputant: so that I have now no new side of him left, to
entertain the Reader with. What he is, after all this, no body know's; it is
much easyer to guess, what, under another Revolution, he will be.

Answer to Considerations etc.
MARTIN Luther's Life was a continual Warfare, he was engaged against the
united forces of the Papal world, and he stood the Shock of 'em bravely, both
with Courage, and Success. After his Death, one would have expected, that
generous Adversaries should have put up their Pens, and quitted at least so
much of the Quarrel as was Personal. But on the contrary, when his Doctrines
grew too strong to be shook by his Enemies, they persecuted his Reputation; and
by the venom of their tongues sufficiently convinced the world, that the
Religion they were of, allowed not only Prayers for the Dead, but even Curses
too. Among the rest, that have engaged in this unmanly design, our Author
appears: not indeed after the blustering rate of some of the party, but with a
more calm and better dissembled malice: He has charged his Instrument of
Revenge with a sort of White Powder, that does the same base action, though with
less noise. It Is cruel thus to interrupt the Peace of the Dead; and Luther's
Spirit has reason to expostulate with this Man, as once the Spirit of Samuel
did Ecclus. 46. 20. 1 Samuel 28. 15.
with Saul -- Why have thou disquieted me to bring me up? He know's the sequel
of the story: the answer that was given was no very pleasing one; it only
afforded the Enquirer an account of his own Discomfiture. Let us see whether
this Disturber of Luther's Ashes will have any better fortune.

The first thing we are presented with, is a double Character of the Good, and
Evil Spirit, set out by those Works or Properties, which are said to attend
each of 'em in Scripture. And by this Test it is that Luther's Consid. p. 2.
Spirit is to be tried. For -- so often as the Teachers of new and strange
Doctrines come into the World, professing opposition to those received by our
present superiors, and to the common Tenants of the Church, Christians are
directed by St. John c. 4. v. 1. to try such Spirits, whether they are of God.
And we are instructed by our Lord Mat. 7. v. 16. that they shall know and
discern them by their Fruits. The inference from hence is, that Luther's
Doctrine should be tried by his Works. Now, though we are very willing to stand
to this Test, yet nothing hitherto said can any ways engage us to it. For here
is a manifest violence offered to two places of Scripture: by leaving out the
preceding verse in one, and the subsequent in the other, he has quite perverted
the meaning of both. St. John says, Beloved believe not 1 John. 4. 1.
every Spirit, but try the Spirits whether they be of God. How shall we try
them? the next verse instructs us. Hereby know ye the Spirit of God; every
Spirit that confesses Ib. v. 2.
that Jesus Christ is come in the Flesh, is of God. Nothing can be plainer then
that the Apostle here would have new Teachers proved, by the conformity their
doctrine bore to that he had delivered. But this was not for our Author's
purpose to observe; and therefore He dropped the latter part of the Quotation,
which would have expounded the former, and slipped over to St. Matthew's -- Ye
shall know them by their Fruits. Whom? Mat. 7. 16. Ibid. v. 17.
Consult the foregoing words. Beware of false Prophets, which come to you in
Sheeps clothing, but inwardly they are ravening Wolves. The caution here given
is against such as come in Sheeps clothing, that is in all outward innocence
and meekness (as our learned Paraphrast expound's it Nor is this merely a
Protestant-Exposition. Luca-Brugensis, upon the place, says Induti speciem
^vium i ^. m^ntientes (...) fraudisque nesciam simplicitatem. And Maldonate,
much to my purpose ^ensus est facilis: Vestimenta vocat quicquid extrinsecus
apparet* (...) and Opera, (...), ^iaque (...) ch^ritatis.
) Ye shall know them by their Fruits: not by their well or ill living sure, for
they are supposed to put on the Vizard of seeming sanctity: but - by the
doctrines, which, as soon as they have got any authority with you, they will
endeavor to infuse into you [id. ibid.] Thus are the two Texts, which should be
the Basis of the whole discourse, proved directly contrary to the design of it,
and naturally leading us to the examination of particular doctrines according
to a received standard, the thing which our Adversaries so studiously avoid.
But Scripture Proof was never the Talent of these men, and it is no wonder they
are foiled, when they fight us at our own weapon. Yet in these places, the
sense offers it self so easily, and that shuffling way in which they are
proposed, looks so like a Trick, that we cannot but question our Author's
sincerity: and shall therefore be the less concerned, when, in the Progress of
these Papers, we find him m^gling and putting a wry ^ense upon our Protest^t
Writers, since it is but what he has done to the inspired Penmen themselves. But
to drive this point further, whether Works ought to be the adequate measure of
Doctrines? I say, not only that he has not proved it by any authorities drawn
from Scripture, but that it is impossible he ever should. For Scripture cannot
be against Scripture: Now we have frequent instances in Holy Writ, where God
Allmighty has made bad men the Instruments and Promoters of a good Doctrine;
such indeed, whose actions were not agreeable to what they taught. So Balaam
was a Diviner, yet the Spirit of the Lord came upon him, and Number. 24* 2.
he prophesied of the coming of Christ. Iehu though otherwise none of the Holiest
men, was yet employed by God in that grand Reformation of his, when the whole
Land of Israel was overrun with Baalism. A Case so parallel to this we are
upon, that one would wonder it should never be taken notice of in the whole
course of the Pamphlet, did we not know some men's Talent lay in dissembling
things, when speaking out will not be for their turn. I ask him again, if the Jews
should have contrasted thus with Hosea; that his message could not come from
God, since his works were not answerable: he Hos. 1. 2.
had taken a Wife of Whoredoms to him, and loved another that was an
Adulteress: or should a Ninevite Hos 3. 1.
have disputed the mission of Jonas, because he was a wicked person, and had
been thrown into the Sea to appease a tempest, would this kind of Plea have
held against the Prophets? If not, why is it urged against Luther? Or why are
Scripture-Maxims put upon us, without taking notice of Scripture-Examples, that
ly cross 'em? He has not offered any thing from the Fathers upon this occasion,
and therefore we may take it for granted, they are Ours. Indeed, to instance in
no more, St. Austin Ne objiciatis haereticis, nisi quia non sunt Catholici: ne
similes iis sitis, qui non habendo quod in causa suae divisionis defendant, non
nisi hominum crimina colligere affectant; and ea ipsa plura falsissime jactant,
ut quia ipsam divinae Scripturae veritatem criminari and obscurare non possunt,
homines p^r quos praedicatur adducant in odium, de quibus and fingere quicquid
in mentem venerit possunt. August. Ep. 137.
is express upon the point. Nay the greatest of their own party even the two
pillars of the Romish faith, Bellarmin Certum est ex ipsorum hominum, qui nos
docent, operibus, non posse cognosci doctrinam, cum opera interna non
videantur, externa autem sint commun^a ^que etc. Bellarm de great. and lib. arb.
L* 5. c. 10.
and Baronius Ignarum Vulgus dum non ex sacris literis, quas ignorant, sed ex
vitae exemplo definire soleat Catholica dogmata. B^ron. Annal. Tom. 7. An* 526.
n. 58.
are in this case as much Protestants as we are. But he himself has given up
the Cause p. 98. He there in broad words confesses, that a teacher of Truth may
bring forth the fruits of a bad life. And if so, I would ask him, why he writ
his Book?

And here the business seems to be at an end. For if no proof has been brought,
why a good Doctrine should always require good outward works to support it:
and yet it be the whole drift of the Pamphlet, to bring Luther's preaching to
such a scrutiny, it is all built on a false foundation, and, when that is
weak'ned, must drop a course. But because we are pretty well assured of
Luther's Moralls too, we'll be so obliging as to give up what has been already
said, and put the Cause upon that Issue: though his Life dos not in the least
concern the Church of England. In order to this let us take the prescribed
method, and put our selves in the same posture Consid. p. 2.
now, as we should have been in, had we lived at the first appearance of
Luther. And since the Properties of the Evil Spirit are reducible to Two. 1.
Fleshly Lusts. 2. Contention and Disobedience, (as One, who^e knowledge in this
case we shall not question, has informed us) let us see, whether after our most
impartial researches, we in those circumstances could have fixed either of
these blots upon him.

1. As to Fleshly Lusts, there is no one action through the whole course of
Luther's life, that can possibly come under that Character, but only his Match
with Bora. Now this happened not till 1525, and in 1517 Luther had begun to
Reform: so that, should I put my self into that posture, the Considerer
desires, yet here would be nothing for my observation to lay hold of for above
eight years together. Fleshly Lusts therefore could have given me no prejudice
against Luther's Doctrine, when it first appeared, since his very Adversaries
do not till long after that time charge 'em upon him. Yes but we page 20.
are told, that he preached against the Vow of Continence long before he
married. Now though it be something improper, to call preaching an Act of Fleshly
Lust, and give me that to try his Doctrine by, which is indeed a piece of the
Doctrine it self; yet neither did Luther let fall a syllable against these Vows
for several years after his first setting out. So that had I lived in the dawn
of the Reformation, and made all those Observations I am desired to do, I can
as yet see no reason, why I should not have been Luther's Proselyte. And thus
much will serve to free Luther from Incontinence, as far as the method proposed
reaches: the Breach of Vow, and Marriage it self shall be more largely
discoursed of in their proper places.

2. The other Head of the Charge is Contention and Disobedience. And here again
I am invited to consider, whether Luther was not in an high manner guilty of
these? and, if so, whether a wise man that had lived in those days, could have
had any reason to follow so unruly a Guide? Now the Question here is not
whether Luther disobeyed? for that is confessed: but when and in what manner he
did it. For if upon enquiry it be found, that for near three years together he
treated his Adversaries with all mildness, and paid a just deference to his
Superiors; if he threw not off their Authority, while there was any hope left
of doing things in a regular way, and mingled no gall in his expressions till
after all the venomous mouths in Europe had been opened upon him, how can he
with any color of reason be termed contentious or disobedient? And that this
was his case any impartial man that reads the joint accounts of Sleidan, Soave,
Melancthon* and Melchior Adamus, must needs acknowledge. It Is a known story that
he first stood up against the gross abuse of pecuniary Pardons: he proposed his
sentiments about it in a mild Scholastic way, and invited all that should think
themselves strong enough to a fair disputation. This Challenge was not thought
fit to be accepted of: but Thecel the ^preader of the Pardons answered him an
easier way, by branding him with Heresy, and denouncing Anathemas against him
from all the Pulpits in Saxony Melch. Ad. Vit. ^uth.
. This did not heat him, he went on calmly, representing the case in a letter
to the Archbishop of Mentz It begins thus. Pardon me Reverend in Christ, if I
the meanest of men have the boldness to approach your highness with a Letter.
etc. Luth. Op. T. 1. p. 92.
, and afterward in two more to the Bishop of Brandenburg, in whose Dioceses
the scene lay: all written with so deep an humility, that one would say, the
impressions he took from his Vow of Obedience were then strong upon him Tom. 1:
Op. p. 9^. Edit. Wittenb* 1582.
. I am well content, (says he) I had rather obey* than even, if I could, to do
miracles Melch. Ad. Vit. ^uth.
. This submissive way of representing things he continued afterward in several
Letters to the Pope, though he knew Leo had formed a design against his Life
Sleid. Com. L. 2. ad An. 1519.
, and taken Friar Hogostrat's advice, to confute his Doctrine by fire and
faggot Soave p. 2. Ed. Land. 1620.
. Upon the Legat's summons, he submitted himself to an Examination, and
appeared before him; and though Cajetan used him very coursly in the Conference
Id. p. 8.
, yet no unbecoming word came from him See the Account of this Conf. in. 1.
Tom. Op.
. At last, when for along time he had employed all the most inoffensive methods;
and instead of the Redress he expected from Rome, found his Books burnt there,
himself condemned without an hearing, and his Adversaries Eckius and Prierias
supported in all the Ribaldry of Language, that their passions could suggest,
he then, and not 'till then, first changed his note, and put on a greater
freedom of Expression. Before this time, he strove with no man, but in the
spirit of meekness, and threw off no Authorities that he had engaged himself to
obey Hear an Enemy consess it. In ipsis hujus Tragaediae initiis visus est
Lutherus etiam plerisque viris grauibus and eruditis non p^ssimo zelo moveri,
plan^que nihil spectare aliud quam Eccle^ Refo^matioonem. Surius Comment. ad
Ann. 1517.
. But the Pope had now declared his judgment by a fresh Bull, and owned the
Cause: so he was forced* to de^line his censure, and appeal to a Council. Thus
are the earliest actions of Luther in no wise chargeable with contumacy; and I
believe that part of the first Volume of his Works, which contains whatever he
wrote in his two leading Years, will, though sifted by an Enemy, hardly afford,
throughout, one single indecency.

I might here again very justly drop this Answer: for since the drift of his
book is already evacuated, what Consid. p. 2.
need I pursue him through all it is particulars? He advised me to put my self in
the same posture I should have been in had I lived at Luther's FIRST
APPEARANCE: I have done so, and find that this first appearance of his has
nothing hideous or frightful in it: the Posture, he put me in, has proved
flatly against his design: for it represent's Luther under the Image of an holy
and humble person, with nothing of Fleshly Lust, or disobedience about him. But
because I find the bulk of his book employed upon the latter passages of
Luther's life, I am tempted to think that by first appearance, he might mean
last appearance; and shall therefore (after I have desired him to consider to
what trouble his odd way of expression has put me) follow him even in that
sense too; confronting his Accusations Paragraph by Paragraph, as they ly in
order. And perhaps, by that time this is done, 'twill appear, that he meant,
neither first, nor last appearance* but just nothing at all.

The thing promised was to set out some of Ls. Works or Fruits, that by them we
might pass sentence upon his Doctrines: let us see how he performs. He
entertains us first with a Preamble about the holiness of Martin Ls. life,
while a Monk; in such obliging terms, that for a page or two, you would think him
on our side: but it is only a piece of his address, a small civility before he
open's his busyness: in return to it therefore I am his humble Servant, and so
(if he pleases) we'll come to the Point.

We find him then. 3. and 6. crying (...): he has discovered the main root of
the Reformation: the first wheel it seems which set all the rest a work; was a
new Doctrine that Martin, while a Monk, embraced, of Justification by Faith
alone. Now 'twill be found I believe, when this is looked into, that he has
discovered just nothing but the depth of his own understanding. For

1st. I would ask him, whether this new Doctrine of Justification be one of
those Works which Ls. Faith is to be tried by? if not, why are we amused with
it here for a dozen pages together? was he serious when he proposed a method,
which he quits now the first step he advances? But admit the pertinence of the
remark, I am sure we have a great deal of reason to question the Truth of it.
For tho we are not at all concerned, where L. first took up this opinion, yet

2dly, How is it proved, that he embraced it while in the Monastery? why, by
express assertions of this Doctrine, in Treatises of his, written ten years
after he came out on it A fine discovery indeed! and every ways befitting a man
of my Author's Sagacity! Now should I turn this way of reasoning upon him, and
prove from what he now writes, he must needs have been a Papist 20. years ago,
he would not, I believe, admit the argument, because there is a scurvy
inference hanging at the tail of it. Nay.

3dly, He is so far from fixing the time when this new Doctrine was first
hatched, that he has not proved the Doctrine it self to be new: tho, he
attempts it. 6. by citing a decision of the Council of Trent's, together with
Bellarmin and Cassander's authorities. But I would have him remember, that the
Epoch of that Doctrine, he calls new, does by his own account run at least 30
years higher then the oldest of these: so that L. is brought in guilty of
Novellism, as Strafford was of Treason, by a Law made after the fact was done.
Now to urge the supposed perpetuity of their Faith for the validity of this
instance, is to urge a thing, which Protestants deny: and therefore any
argument grounded upon that maxim can be nothing but a childish petitio
Principii, a fault which his own Logic whips him for. Should I insist upon
every failure of this nature, I must write Volumes, for there is never a step
made without a stumble. 'Twill be more material to observe, that

4thly, He has not dealt fairly with Ls. Doctrine in vid.. 7.
this point; insinuating all along that it falls in with the Solifidian and
Fiduciary Errors: but he wrongs him infinitely, for an hundred instances might
be brought from his writings, where the necessity of good works in order to
Salvation is displayed. But instead of that, I shall leave him to be confuted
by Bellarmin's confession Lutherus docet aliquo modo necessaria esse bona
opera, cum affirmet veram fidem non esse, quae non parit bona op^* de Justif.
L. 4. C. 1.
, or, if he will not take his word, by his own p. 16. where he allows Ls. faith to
be such, as when true, has allways good works joined with it. L. teaches indeed
that fides sola justificat, but not solitaria; that faith alone justifies, but
not the Faith that is alone: Good Works are inseparable attendants upon this
justifying Faith, but they contribute nothing to the act of Justification: they
make not just, but are allwaies with them that are made so. This is Ls. was the
C. of Rome's Viqe Tho Aqu. Lect. 4. in Gal. 3.
, and is now the C. of England's Doctrine: if he will be pleased to attacque it
as such, it shall not want a Defender. As to his Quotations on this occasion,
they are, (as at other times) very trifling. To pursue every particular of 'em
would be nauseous and unnecessary: one general Remarque, that I shall leave
with the Reader, will lead him into the sense of 'em all. L. wrote against a
sort of men that held good works to be meritorious, and relied on 'em, as of
themselves satisfactory, without a particular application of faith: this was
the Doctrine (or at least the practice) of the cloister; and this L. through
all his Writings encounters: so that where ever he put's a slight upon good
works it is as they stand distinct from Faith, under the notion that
superstitious zeal had then clothed 'em with Thus when he had said Contritio
quae paratur per discussionem, collectionem, and detestationem peccati etc.
facit hypocritam. Assert. Art. 6 he expound's himself afterward by telling you
that the contrition he is talking of is naturalis, impia and extra fidem. When
he tell's you (Assert. Art. 11.) Creed fortiter t^ absolutum, and absolutus
vere eris quicquid sit de c^tritione, what is meant by these last words, is not
whether you are contrite or no, as his sly interpreter has it, but without
respect to your contrition, i. e the contrition you so much rely upon, as the
article it self when propounded entire, and the paraphrase upon it sufficiently
evidence. And so of the rest.
. I will not say that in the prosecution of this he never went awry, he did so
in reviving that doubt, which was sometime in the primitive Church, of St.
James's Epistle being Canonical, because he thought it ran counter to St. Paul:
but he withdrew this plea of his, when better informed; if quoting from it
afterward, as from Scripture, be owning it is Authority. It Is plain his
followers think so: the most rigid of whom, and who in every puncttlio would be
thought like Luther, do yet retain this Epistle in the Canon. Indeed in the
1st. Edition of his German Bible he call's it straminea; not absolutely, but in
comparison with those of St. Paul. But in all the Editions after 1526 it is left
out: and the arida, the Pamphlet talk's of, is in none of 'em at all. The
objection drawn from his calling St. Paul Evangelist in preference to Matthew,
Mark, and Luke, is ridiculous, for he there tells you what he mean's by
Evangelists, viz: such as preach the glad tidings of that comfortable Doctrine
(as our Articles term it)* of Justif^cation by Faith alone: and in this sense
he says - you may more properly say the Gospel of St. Paul then of Matthew
etc. And what is there so heinous in this expression? It Is low ebb sure with
his Accuser, when such Peccadillos as these are put in to swell the Charge. But
the grand Article is to come. L. (he says) was so strangely affected with this
new invention [he mean's justifying Faith] that he made bold much to prefer the
Mohammedan life as to good manners before the Christian. Now had L. spoke up to
this accusation, yet Chrysostom's example would have been his defense. For he
says the very same thing in almost the same terms of the Christians in his time
compared with the Pagans Chrysostom Op Imp. in Matthew. hom. 49.
. But L has indeed said no such thing. In the place cited he compares
Mahometans* and Papists as to the austerities of living: but it is far from his
principles to say all good life and practice consists in these strictnesses
Christiana Religio long aliud est, and sublimius aliquid, quam Ceremoniae
spe^iosae Rasura, Cucullus, Pallor vultus, Jejunia, Horae Canonicae, and
universa ill^ facies Ecclesiae Romanae per orbem* Luth Praef in Tract. de
Turcismo.
. He only urges that if it were so, then the one would lay as fair a claim to
it as the other. For the proof of this he vouches the testimony of a Papist,
one used barbarously by 'em in a slavery of 11 years continuance; and who had
therefore no great reason to favor 'em. The Considerer here gives him the Ly,
and says no such thing is to be found in that Relation. I shall not return the
Complement, but desire the Reader to look at the bottom of the page Chap. the
14th, of the Relation I find these words. In ista specie religionis inveniunt
aliquid tant^ (...), ut impassibiles s^nt, ut nihil exterioris* impressionis,
sentire val^ant: nam in maximis frig^ribus ^udato corpore incedunt, and non
sentiu^. Isti suae probationis rations and veritatem ostendunt in v^riis
stigmatibus c^bustionum, and cicatricibus incisionum etc. A living witness of
good credit has confirmed this account* He says the Turks have their M^ks, and
thoseof different Orders, the D^rvices, the Kadri, the Nimi^ali, the E^i and
twenty more. These live under as great austerities as Cap^s, or C^lites: they
go barefoot, use corporal penn^ce, have frequent* Pilgrimages, and take some of
'em the three Vow^ of (...), Poverty, and Obedience Ryc. pr^st* of the O^. Emp.
p. 138 etc.
, and he will be pretty well satisfied of my Author's modesty. This innocent
reflection gives occasion for one of the wildest inferences that ever was made.
He is condemned immediately as preferring Turcisin to Christianity, the
Alchoran to the Bible, and Mahomet to Christ. With this false scent my Author
runs away at full cry; proves manifestly to you, that the Christian Religion is
the most holy of all Religions; and after he has heated his imagination to an
high pitch of zeal, concludes with a Deus tibi imperet, the Ld. rebuke thee.
His fancy, it seems has made a Giant of a Windmill, and he is now engaging it:
I shall slip away in the mean time, and when he has spent his fury, meet him at
the 10th Paragraph.

For so far we must go before any new matter offers it self. His reflections
between are so very mean, that a bare recital confutes them. Ls. Doctrine (he
says). 7.
is since detested by many judicious Protestants. If you ask him how he knew
it, he will tell you - Hammond and Thorndike wrote against the Solifidians, and
Luther himself (one of those judicious Protestants) confessed, that some
wrested what he taught to their own destruction. it is a Doctrine void of
Consolation - because some men. 8.
think they have this Faith, when they have it not, and so are betrayed into a
fatal security. This is such stuff as no patience can digest. But L. pursued
this notion. 9.
so far, as to hold a parity of honor in all justified. He did so, as to the
act of Justification it self, and so must all do that hold it gratuitous: but
not as to the degrees of Sanctification afterward. The honor of Knighthood is
the same in all upon whom the Prince confer's it: but some Knights may live up
to their characters better than others, and so possess a larger share in the
Princes favor. What little amusements these are for so mighty a man in
Controversy to sport himself withal? He might even as well have employed his
time (as the Author of a Book of Education says some Princes have Educ. p. 13.
done) in the frivolous and low delights of catching Moles, baltering Frogs,
hunting Mice with humble-bees, making Lanterns, Tinderboxes, and such like
Manufacture.

Come we now to the second Branch of Ls. Accusation,. 10.
his vilifying Religious Vows, Penance. etc. Again I must ask him, is this a
work to try the Doctrine by, or rather a part of the Doctrine that is to be
tried? If Works are to decide the goodness or badness of Ls. cause, according
to what was first proposed, why are these speculative points preposterously put
upon us? But if our Author, in spite of his own design, is resolved to give us
a list of his Doctrines, with what color of reason can that about Indulgences
be slipped over? 'Twas the main Article that made the breach, as all their own
writers confess: and does it not deserve a mention? But we deal with a man that
understands very well the ordering of his scenes. This busyness of Indulgences
is too gross to be touched upon, 'twould leave ill impressions upon the
Reader's mind; and therefore he passes it over just as Mezeray and the French
Writers do the battle of Cressy. It cannot be shown so much as in Profile, no
light will make it look lovely. Here is a fair occasion given to supply the
defects of my Author's story, and show to what beastly uses Indulgences were
then put, and upon how brave an occasion it was, that L. first appeared: but
because the whole voice of Germany in the Centum Gravamina Grav. 31.
, and the Trent-Council it self Sess. 25 Decret* de Indulg.
has done it to my hands, 'twill be perhaps a needless trouble. I go on then to
see what L. has said in disparagement of Penance, Vows, etc.

As to the first of these, Penance, and what falls under it in all that heap
of Quotations which he has pil'd up Paragr. the 10th, nothing is aimed at but
the superstitious, and meritorious use of it: and this all Protestants as well
as L. decry. When he is pleased to urge any thing in it is favor, twill be time
to think of our reasons. In the mean while he is resolved, I find, by such dry
tedious accounts, to force his Reader upon the Practice of Penance, where he
is not able to recommend the Doctrine of it. He has a long passage out of the
Colloquia where L. deter's men from solitaryness: from indulging themselves in
a strange affected retirement, he dos not from a sober solitude, that rallies
our scattered strengths, and prepares us against any new encounters from
without: for this he both taught and practiced, He has indeed said nothing
there, which St. Bernard did not say 500 years ago of some who in pursuit of
greater sanctity withdrew themselves into deserts Demon ille meridianus Eremum
petere persuasit; and cognoverunt etc. Rem in Ca^t. Sermon. 33.
such, says he, are tempted by the Devil, and in the end, by sad experience
find the truth of that saying. Woe unto him that is alone! for if he falls, he
has none to help him. But a shorter Answer may be given to this and all other
places taken from the Colloquin mensali^* It Is a book not received yet into the
Canon by the Learned: It depends purely on the credit of one Van-Spar^, that
tell's a blind story of his finding it in the ruins of an old house many years
after L. and Aurifaber the pretended compiler was dead: but should it be
genuine, yet no fair adversary would urge loose table talk against a man in
controversy, and build serious inferences upon what perhaps was spoken but in
jest.

Vow's and Celibacy are the next points he goes upon. The latter of these makes
an entire Treatise of it self, and is the Task of another hand, to which I
refer the Reader, that desires a fuller satisfaction; and shall only make a
reflection or two en passant. L. recommended matrimony,. 11. n. 2.
he did well, I hope, to follow so good a Guide as St. Paul: -- Yes, but in
preference to Celibacy: now this, I say, is a piece of my Author's mendacity:
for in that very place that he has recourse to, for the proof of this
assertion, these words are plainly read. Comm. in 1 Cor. 7. 6.
Sicubi conjugium quis cum caelibatu conferat, praestantius certe donum est
caelibatus. With what tolerable ingenuity could he pass this over unmention'd?
Yet in spite of Ls. declaration in the case, he will it seems prove the Tenet
upon him. He urges that place, where L. says, that -- properly speaking the
state of the Religious Orders is mundane,. 11. n. 6.
and that of Matrimony Spiritual. He dos so, but he says more too; for the very
next words are De istis autem Ordinibus and Religiosis loquor, qui eo nomine
ha^tenus sese and nominari and jactari perpessi sunt. He affirm's not
absolutely that Marriage is the more Spiritual state, but in comparison with
Celibacy as then practiced in the Church of Rome: where it was commonly forced
Juventam passim in caenobia ad coelibatum cogunt. Luth. Exeg* in 1 Cor. 1.
, taken up under a bold vow Continentia donum est non nostri operis, nostrarum
ve virium, proinde nec quisquam id vovere potest. Ibid.
, thought meri^orlous Ex castitate meritum and jactantiam coram Deo and
hominibus saciunt. Ibid.
, and lead in all uncleaness Nullus statuum impudentior est, and ad libidinem
promptior Ecclesiastico and spirituali statu, ut hodiernus dies testatur. Ibid.
. And in this sense it was that he said, Matrimonium velut esse aurum,
spiritualem vero statum ut stercus; for to the objection made immediately upon
this, -- What then must none live unmarried? he answers -- I am now talking not
of Celibacy it self, but of the Spiritual state (as they term it) two as
different things, as can well be imagined. Again when he expound's that Text
urged for virginity, [ It Is good for a man so to be] of convenience in 1 Cor.
7. 26.. 11. ^. 6.
this life, not of Spiritual good; it is in concent to his own Principles, which
allow no merit, no intrinsic worth to accompany one state more then another.
But then he own's this convenience may be employed to a very good use in
respect of another life too Mallet Apostolus cuivis eximium continentiae donum
concessum esse, ut anxiae matrimonii ex^ers curae and miseriae, soli Deo and
verbo ejus libere totis viribus incumberet. Ibid.
, as it afford's us freer seasons of attending upon God and Virtue. The state
it self is not more holy then another, but it gives a larger scope to display
the holiness we already have, and to procure what we have not. He invites all
people in general to matrimony because he thinks the Qui potest capere, capiat
of o^r Savior's, implys Ibid.
, the gift of Continence to belong but to a few. But where he meets these few,
he break's out into Euges, and Acclamations; and expresses himself in terms
that might become the mouth of St. Hierome. Alti and praedivites spiritus sunt
per gratiam Dei infraenati, qui natura corporisque viribus ad rem inidonei non
sunt, and saupte tamen sponte coelibes permanent Sermon. de Mat. item Comm. in
Ps. 128. 3.
Those are high and noble Souls (says he) who by the Grace of God have laid
such a chain upon their passions, as, though supplyd by nature with all bodily d
Respondeo -- De spirituali nunc statu loquor ad matrimonium comparato, non de
Caelibatu. ^aelibatus and vera continentia aliud est ac spiritualis status.
Ibid.
vigor, can yet willingly abstain. Thus after all the little sleights and
cavils of the Considerer, it is plain that Luther's expressions are just, and
his thoughts every way regular upon the point. Though, should he have indulged
himself in a flight or two beyond strict truth, in praise of marriage, it had
been no more then what some Fathers have been guilty of on the other side, as
his very Adversaries confess Espencaeus. L. 3. de Cont. in c. 11. Hieronymus
aequus sane parum esse videtur vel unis nuptiis. Apolog. Tumult. p. 14.
Gregorio viro ut videtur plus satis (...).
. And a great deal must have been allowed to his natural warmth of temper, in
this case, when it is considered what sort of Church he engaged: a Church, where
marriage had by Syricius, and Innocent.
two Popes been styled Innocen Exup. Tolos. Episc. Ep. 3. c. 1. Did. 128.
Proposuisti. Vide Surium Tom. 1. p. 530.
unholy, Syricius Pap. Decr. Tom: 1. Conc. apud Surium p. 495.
carnal, and unpleasing to God; by St. Dunstan and St. Oswald. vide Reg. Eccl.
Wigorn. Bp. Hall Honor of the Married ^lergy. lib. 3.. 10.
two Saints, filthy beastlyness; and by Council. Tolet. 8. c. 5. Quosdam
sacerdotes aut uxorum aut quarumcunque soeminarum immunda societate and
execrabili contagio turpari. Mode^n examples might be alleged in good store.
Even Bellarmin says -- conjugii actus hominem reddit totum carnalem and ineptum
ad divina. L. 1. de cler. c. 18.
a Council it self, unclean abominable contagion. I shall dismiss this point
with a request to the Considerer, that he would do Lr. at least this justice in
citing him, as not to make him speak in congruously: Christus ipse non
consuluit -- says Lr. -- caelibatum, my Author wisely put's in. Now unless he
can prove p. 21.
caelibatum a man or a woman, this Latin will be muchwhat the same with a
solaecism: for nothing but men and women dos consulo ever advise. But a piece
of false Grammar is easily pardoned, where we have so much false reason to deal
with.

The discourse of Vows (blended with that of Celibacy in the Pamphlet) has that
art and address in it as to make Lr. appear a Lampetian. But this is an
unworthy design. For any man conversant in his Works must know, that he was not
utterly against all Vows Bellarmin L. 2. de Mon. c. 15. own's it.
but only for regulating the use of some. Hear him once for all thus speaking,
Ego sane non repugnaverim, siquis privatim arbitrio suo velit vovere, ne vota
penitus contemnam aut damnem Lib. de Vot. Monast.
. The thing he blamed was their being taken up absolutely, without any reserve
of necessity: His maxim was, that absolute Vows can be made only of such things
as are wholly in our power then, when we Vow: and of this kind, he says Nullum
omnino in scripturis Voti Exemplum legimus, nisi in his rebus, quae nobis jam
antea dat sunt, aut subinde dabuntur (ut Numer. 30. constat.) ut de aedibus,
agris, castigatione etc. Exeg in 1 Cor. 7.
all Scripture-Vows were. Now Continence he thinks is a Gift perfectly out of
our reach, and therefore dos not ly within the compass of such a Vow. The
Considerer supposes otherwise, affirming this Gift to be given to all those,
who use a just endeavor for p. 21.
it. But we say, that the wisdom of the Holy Ghost would then never have
prescribed marriage as a remedy for fornication, for what need of a remedy,
where there is no Disease? We appeal to that Text -- All men receive not this
saying, and from thence urge, that a single Life Mat. 9. 11.
is not the Talent of all men: and Maldonate allow's us, that almost all the
Interpreters (amongst whom he reckons three Fathers of the first magnitude) do
so expound it Sic fere omnes exponunt: quam interpretationem adduci non possum
ut sequar. Maldon. in locum.
. Though, with the modesty of a Jesuit, he says afterward, that nevertheless he
is not of their opinion. To his three Fathers ( Origin, Nazianzen, and Ambrose)
we add two more, St. Hierome Si omnes virgins esse possent, nunquam and
Dominus diceret [qui potest capere capiat] and Apostolus in suadendo non
trepidaret. Hier. adv. Jovi^. L. 1. p 412.
, and St. Austine; Nunc rectissime dicitur [qui potest capere, capiat qui autem
se non continet, nubat. Aug. de Adult. Cons. L. 2. c. 2.
and are content to err in the interpretation of a Text, with almost all the
Fathers on our side. But Lr. sometimes presumes upon the Gift of Continency, as
when the Wife is sick etc. 11. n. 4
Right! in such circumstances as took their rise from a lawful and warranted
action de does; and there he thinks the divine veracity engaged to make good
the promise of our being tempted no farther then we are able; not so, when the
necessity that lies upon us, had it is rise from something unlawful, and
unwarranted, such as he accounts Vowed Celibacy to be: which he knew under this
indispensable restraint was never taught nor practiced by Ancient Fathers; and
he knew too the wild effects that had followed upon this restraint in latter
times, when men allowed themselves all Liberties that did not directly infringe
their Vow, and Concubinage, and simple Fornication were almost expunged out of
the list of Sins. Damianus's letter to Nicholas the 2d about the middle of the
11th Century is an Authentic Record of the lewdnesses committed under the reign
of Celibacy: the grossest part of his confession, was (as Baronius owns)
suppressed by the Pope, yet as it now stands, 'twould make a man think Sodom
and Gomorrah were rebuilt again. Clemangis's complaints De statu Eccl. p. 47.
and inde.
near 300 years ago are known things, and Erasmus's confession Quam innumeri
Monachi sint public incesti and impudici etc. Erasm. Annot. in. 1 Timothy 3. p.
533.
is a standing testimony. Who is ignorant of the story of Petrus Aloysius, Paul
the 3d's, Bastard, or of the Archbishop of Benevento's Poetry? These were
crying lewdnesses, yet not resented by the Popes then in the Sea: nay the
latter was thought fit to be honored afterward with the character of Nuntio to
the Venetians. Yet the Pamphlet is very warm with Lr. for impiously accusing
the Religious of uncleanness. And 11. n. 3.. 11. n. 7.
if it were so, how could he know it, that himself lived chaste? The Question is
silly enough to Answer it self. The matter of fact has been already in part
made out, and might yet farther be cleared by a Cloud of Witnesses. The
beastlynesses upon Record committed in our English Monasteries are a sufficient
sample of what was done in the rest. We have the Prior of St. Andrew's
Confession amongst our Rolls: we have an abstract of the Breviarium
Compertorium in Monasteriis Ao. 1538. Which if we do not more largely insist
upon, it is our good manners that will not suffer us to talk of those sins,
which their Religion did not hinder them from Acting. In such a time therefore
as this, when the Celibate was stained with these impurities, 'twas requisite
to preach up the honor of the married state in the highest strains it would
bear. Prudent Zeal could contrive no better an expedient, and I see not how Lr.
Accuser can charge him on this account, as encouraging the liberties of the
Flesh, Vide. 3. 12.
unless he first subscribe the lewd determination of Coster and the Casuists,
that says -- ' It Is less sin for Priests to fornicate then marry Sacerdos si
fornicetur, aut domi Concubinam habeat, tametsi gravi sacrilegio se obstringat,
gravius tamen peccat* si matrimonium contrahat. Coster. Ench. c. 15.
. As for that expression, si Domina nolit, 11. n. 3.
adveniat ancilla, though it be indeed too light upon so serious an occasion, yet
any man who consults the Context will find nothing indecent at the bottom on it.
Lr. is making a decision upon St. Paul's rule of separating only for a time.
Here, says He, if the Wife persists in an obstinate denial of the Bed --
opportunum est ut dicat maritus - si tu nolueris, alia volet; si Uxor nolit,
adveniat Ancilla. That is, she shall be taken into her place not as Woman but
as Wife; after divorce made from the other: for so the next words plainly speak
-- ita tamen ut antea iterum and tertio uxorem admoneat, and coram aliis ejus
etiam pertinaciam detegat, ut public and ante conspectum Ecclesiae duritia
ejus and agnoscatur and Reprehendatur. Si tum renuat, repudia eam -- He must
first admonish her twice or thrice in public, and then -- Repudietur Uxor,
adveniat Ancilla. I was willing to propose this passage entire, to take off the
disguise which it is Quoter has put upon it. He has shuf^led the two ends of the
sentence together, and by taking out the ita tamen etc in the middle, made it
speak just as he would have it. That which gives distaste to the Ear in it is a
German byword: and such kind of things Lr. according to the humor of those
times, pursues with some fondness: take it singly, and it carries an air of
levity, I confess; but, in consort with the rest, you see, has a meaning quite
different from what this Author would insinuate.

Thus far my Author has slipped his first design; not a letter of what has been
yet said promoting any ways the trial of Ls Spirit, by the Fruits of it. He
begins now (after a Parenthesis of 25. Pages) to offer something that looks
that way. Ls Anticelibacy stay's not here, he says, he shook. 12.
off his Vow, and Married a Nun: This we acknowledge to be a Work, and we'll
prove it no bad one. Had he done it with the Pope's License, his Adversaries
must have been silent, for that is a ruled case with the Schoolmen; and the K.
of Aragon's story is too known to be repeated. Yet these same Schoolmen do not
stretch the point so far, as to say the Pope has an absolute unlimited power
over these Vows: no, a solemn Vow (such as Luther's was) is, they say, de jure
positivo ac naturali: and that in this therefore, the Pope cannot make a
nullity, where there is none; but only declare it, where it is Papa non potest
dispensare in Voto solenni: quis enim potest dispensare in jure naturali and
positivo? possunt quidem incidere causae, in quibus Papa non quidem dispenset,
sed per interpretationem aequi and boni declaret eum qui voverat, non teneri
voto. Maldon. Sum. q. 12. art. 7.
. Now if Ls Vow was of it self void, what need of a recourse to the Pope to
have it declared so? 'Twas made immediately to God, without any intervening
obligation to his Holiness; and though the judgment of the Church be desirable
to satisfy a scrupulous Votary that he is released, yet if the Votary be
satisfied without this judgment, and his grounds be rational, he may act
accordingly, without sin. Now Lr. had several reasons to think his Vow not
binding. It was taken up without deliberation, or even consent. Neque enim
libens, and cupiens fiebam Monachus, sed a terrore and agone subitae mortis
vovi coactum ac necessarium votum Praef. ad Lib. de Vot. Monast. This citation
my Author has page* 3. but mangled, he leaves out those first words - neque enim
libens and cupiens fiebam Monachus, sed - and then in the end - coactum ac
necessarium votum. And yet p. 63. when these expressions are for his purpose,
he cites 'em all entire.
: And against the express commands of his Father Te ignorante, and invito id
tentavi. Ib*
: to whom Obedience was he knew enjoined by Scripture, when Continence was not
Continentia non est mandata, Obedientia vero est mandata. Ibid.
. So many flaws had this Vow in it is first conception, And as he had taken it
up through disobedience, so 'twas laid down in compliance to that very authority
it had defied: for so Melchior Adamus relates the story. But what need was
there of doing this in the 42d year of his Age? when (in the homely phrase of
the Pamphlet) the boilings of nature were now well asswag'd? But is the
Considerer so well acquainted with Luther's Crasis, as to be sure of that? Are
fresh lustings a greater wonder after forty, then a new Religion after
threescore? If Lr. did not then burn, how comes this act to be a Fleshly Lust
with my Author? If he did, why is it questioned, when an Apostle has given his
warrant for it? He himself, I own, gives another reason for his Marriage -- the
leaving his own doctrine confirmed by his own example Epist. ad Mich. Shifel*
. But he does not give it as the only one. Tho should he lay the whole stress
of the case upon this principle *twould easily bear it. Men were then strangely
possessed with the aeternal obligation of a Vow: when they grew uneasy under
it, yet they looked on Marriage with horror and detestation, and chose rather
the methods God had forbid* then the remedies he had appointed. To rescue men's
minds from the slavery of these notions was Ls design: He could no ways so
effectually recommend his doctrine, as by being himself the example of it. This
motive therefore was sufficient to authorize what he did: since according to
St. Thomas Qui ^ovet que dammodo sibi statuit legem, obligans se ad aliquid,
quod est secundum se and in pluribus bonum: potest tamen accidere, quod in casu
aliquo sit in utile, vel majoris boni impedimentum, quod est contra rationem
ejus quod sub voto cadit: and ideo necesse est quod in tali casu determinetur*
votum* non esse servandum. Aqu. 2. 2. qu. 88. 10.
and St. Bernard's Non arbitror Deum exigere a nobis quodcunque sibi promissum
bonum, si pro eo aliquid melius fuerit absolurum. Bernard. Ep 57.
rules, it is allowable to exchange a Vow for any greater good that stands in
competition with it. And the picking out Bora to match with, one who had
formerly been a Nun* was but making the President he was going to set, more
conspicuous; and an open declaration that the quarrel between him and Rome was
irreconcilable.

Besides it must be considered, that Lr. did not by any particular
solicitations invite Bora, either to leave her Monastery, or to take up
thoughts of marriage: she had done both of her own accord. Her Veil she had
thrown off above two years before her acquaintance with Lr. and went so far in
these resolutions, as almost to close with a match that was proffered her, but
this breaking off, His offer was accepted. But Adamus says that Lr. himself
afterward. 12.
regretted this action. What is meant here by regretting, I don't understand:
for Adamus says no more, then that he was concerned at the censures of some
people about it: But the Pamphlet in the next words will explain it self, where
we are informed, that Melancthon too by Ls procurement took a Wife, so that
it is plain now that by regretting is meant approving: for certainly, if a man
were disgusted at marriage, he would never recommend it to his friend* This I
take, in the language of the book* to be a sufficient autocatacrisy. If the
English Reader be p. 10.
startled at the Word, he may be pleased to know, that it is Greek for a Blunder.

After these advances, Lr. wholly left off his* Canonleal. 13.
Hours: an heinous accusation! why, he had left off his Monkhood too, and was
no longer obliged to 'em* How could he have the leisure and retiredness of the
Cloister, to perform all those acts of Devotion in, when the Burden of the
Reformation lay upon his Shoulders? No* his active spirit was employed upon
things more acceptable to God almighty, because more useful to mankind. He was
wrestling against Principalities and Powers, against Ephesians. 6. 12, 13. 14, 15.
16, 17. 18, 19.
the Rulers of the darkness of this world, and against spiritual wickedness in
high places. To that end he took unto him the whole armor of God, that he might
be able to withstand in the evil day; and having done all, to stand. He stood
therefore, having his Loins girt about with Truth, and having on the breast
plate of righteousness, and his feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of
Peace: Above all, taking the shield of Faith, wherewith he was able to quench
all the fiery darts of the wicked. And he took the Helmet of Salvation, and the
Sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God: Yet praying always with all
Prayer and Supplication in the Spirit, and watching thereunto with all
perseverance, and supplication for all Saints; And for himself, that utterance
might be given unto him, that he might open his mouth boldly, to make known the
mystery of the Gospel. I could not forbear setting down at full length this
Panoply of St. Paul, wherewith Lr. completely armed himself in his spiritual
warfare: and I do not know whether this description belong's so justly to any
man as him, since the day's of the Apostles. Should he therefore have laid
aside his Canonical Hours, yet the Work he was about, sufficiently atton'd for
the omission. But I had rather his Accuser should vindicate him, then I. You
will find then, that tho Lr. has discharged these duties quite at the entrance
of the Paragraph; yet at the end of it you will be told, that he never totally
cast off this holy Exercise. So obligingly does this author contradict himself,
to spare the Replyer's pains. ^d And this ease I must acknowledge he has more
then once afforded me.

In the following Account of Ls. appearing before. 14.
the Legate in Germany, I must desire him to rectify a mistake or two: for
neither was Lr. condemned by Cajetan there, nor was Cajetan a moderate Prelate.
He descended to bitter reprehensions (says Soave Hist. Counc. Tr. p. 8.) and
base terms, and concluded that Princes have long hands, and so bid him be gone.
Here was no Judicial Process, all ended in a threatening: and this moderate
Prelate behaved himself with such a rude zeal through the whole conference,
that even his own party blamed the furiousness of it. [ Soave ibid.] If Lr.
afterward threw off the Pope's Authority, it was not till he had tried all
softer ways of redress, by Letters, Remonstrances, and the most submiss
applications: it was not till a fresh Bull of Leo's had declared how inflexible
the Court of Rome was in the point of Abuses; and not till Prierias had in
downright terms told him -- Indulgentiae authoritate scripturae non innotuere
nobis, sed authoritate Ecclesiae Romanae, Romanorumque Pontificum, quae major
est. The Pope now was become a party in the cause, and could not be relied upon
for a decision: to a Council therefore he appealed; and, if he afterward
revoked this Plea too* 'twas because he found the expected Council was
dwindling into a Conventicle; a packed Assembly of Italian Bishops, not a free
convention of Fathers from all Quarters of the Christian World. So that to urge
upon this account, that he denied the Authority of the present Church,. 15.
or denied (...) pres^ Church (...) true (...), (...) ^ay. 16.
no worse of it, an (...) (...) f^ b^ ^e present Church here is meant (...)
more then the Court of Rome, and it is dependents. But he is challenged of going
much farther then this, even to (...) of the visibility of the Church for many
ages upon what account? Because he made this the only note of the (...) Church*
that there the Gospel be truly and sincerely (...). As if (...). and with him a
great train of learned (...), did not own, that in all that dark (...) of (...)
were still some gleams of light, some witnesses that arose, to give testimony
to the truth, and protest against innovations* I cannot but take (...) way, of
a little artifice of the Considerer's* (...) he has of disguising a Doctrine,
when it lies a little too open, by putting a new name to it* Is it too bold to
say the Elements must be adored? they shall then only have a certain sort of a
Cul^ paid them* So here the Priest is said, to operate the presence of the body
and blood of Christ: which in plain broad English is neither more nor less then
to make God. But that is too gross to go off, so a term is coined to make the
conveyance easy.

As for the newness of Ls. opinions, and his marching. 16.
alone, against the Doctrine of the primitive ages, it is so beaten a point,
that it deserves no other Answer then that true Jest of Scaliger's* (...)
Novatores, sed Vos estis Veteratores: and the Considerer, if he pleases, may
apply it.

But it is ridiculous to say he denied the validity of. 18.
the former Clergy's ordination: for that necessarily draws along with it, the
invalidity of his too. Yet he proceeded, we see, in the work of his Ministry
without expecting any new Mission, and never thought himself a See Disc about
the Euch.
obliged to a reordination. No, he was so far from this, that in the Articles
of Smalcald he own's Orders conferred by a Popish Bishop even then to be valid
Smalcald. Art. 10.
and in his Letter about the Anabaptists, you will find him in 20 places
owning, that the C. of Rome has the true Faith, Baptism, Sacraments, the Keys,
the Office of Preaching etc. Concessions that run as high, as any the most
charitable Protestants now make. So that that objection of the Devil's in Ls.
book of the Mass, must be counted a flourish only, and not a convincing
argument; for though Lr. gives his assent in general to the reasoning of that
discourse, yet he does not say every particular of it amounted to a
demonstration. As for his book adversus falso-nominatum ordinem Episcoporum,
and some harsh expressions about the Prelates of his time, they must not be so
understood as if he meant to unbishop 'em, but only to set out their corruption
and degeneracy. Athan^sius does not speak more softly of the Arrian Bishops in
Constantius his Court: he says they are (...): and that if any of them has a mind
to be consecrated, he is not told, that a Bishop should be blameless, but only
bid to rage against Christ and never trouble himself about manners (...).
Athan. Ep. ad. Solit. Vit. agentes. p. 812. Edit. Paris. 1^27.
But these words must be allowed a latitude, and are not strictly to be taken,
as if the Father denied the validity of their Consecration.

After the Breach with the Pope, it is owned that Lr. ^. 17.
took the freedom of calling him Antichrist, when ever he came in his way: but
ere this can be made his crime, it must be proved, that St. Paul has not called
him so too; for otherwise we cannot but think that he has taken after a good
pattern. If his spirit must be dubbed evil for an hard* word or two against his
holiness, of what spirit pray was the sacred Council of Brixia, when they
stigmatized Hildebrand? calling him -- Virum procacissimum, sacrilegia and
in^endia praedicantem, Perjuria and Homicidia defendentem, manifestum
Necromanticum- and a deal of that stuff. Now can I see no great difference
between Lr. and the Council in this matter, but that they rayl'd perhaps with
infallibility on their side, when He had only plain certainty on his.

But he rejected the authority of Councils: yes, siquando. 19.
contraria Scripturae statuunt Assert. Art. 29.
, and so do all the Reformed, as well, as He. So that this will not pass for a
fault in him, till it is proved one in us too. But he never refused to be
concluded by the authority of One legally summoned: as is plain from that
Preface of his to the Smalcald Articles, written a little while before he went
out of the world. Indeed the sense he had of the tricks and Artifices used in
convening these Synods for some Centuries together, and the noise of his
Adversaries, who were perpetually crying Councils, Canons etc. when they had
nothing else to say for their cause, might perhaps force out an expression or
two from him, that did not carry all the respect due to those great Names: he
had fire in his temper, and a German bluntness, and, upon these provocations,
might possibly strain a phrase with too great freedom: yet even the diligence
of his accuser has in all his works been able to find out but a few passages of
this nature; and of them the most material perhaps were never found out by any
body else but himself. For those two, which seem the warmest on this occasion,
are quoted, the one from Assertio Art. 36. contra Reg. Angliae; the other from
a Treatise of his about Councils in 1639; two imaginary books that the
considerer dreamt of perhaps, but I am sure L. never wrote In Luther's Works in
High Dutch there is a Book of Councils I confess. But this cannot be that my
Author means, because his Quotations here are in Latin.
. So that till he lay'^ his Indictment in some certain County, we don't think
our selves bound to answer an indefinite charge. As for the rest, we
acknowledge, he called the Council of Constance, Synagogam Satanae; and I
wonder my author should be offended at the expression, when it is considered
what unlucky things they did in the business of the Pope's Supremacy:
especially since their own Annalist has given the same Title to that of
Syrmium: a Council legally summoned by the Emperor Constantius, approved by
Pope Liberius; and which they of the Roman Persuasion have no color to reject,
but upon Protestant grounds, because it made Heretical Decrees. Lr. says --
sive Papa, sive Concilium sic aiunt; abundet quisque in sensu suo, in rebus non
necessariis ad salutem. Assert. Art. 28. Here is He represented by this author
as denying the power of the Church in indifferent things: but this is foul
dealing to conceal the occasion the words were spoken upon, and then fasten a
sense of his own. This Article is aimed against the pretenses of a Pope or
Council to make that a necessary point of faith, by their determination, which
was of it self unnecessary before. For they took upon 'em he knew to enlarge
the Creeds which were already fixed; and had explained a Parable of our
Savior's in a far different sense to what he taught it in: The Faith, which was
but a Mustard Seed in the Primitive ages, was grown by little and little
toward the beginning of the 16th Century into a great Tree. This power of
their's and no other Lr. here disowns: as any one that views the place but
cursorily, must needs see. There is no harm in this I hope: and yet how bigg
the accusation looked, as his sly Enemy had managed it? There is another
sentence taken from Tom. 2. p. 243. But I must desire the Citer henceforward to
inform us of his Editions too: for in the first Wirtenberg one, which I now
have by me, no such thing appears. I would request of him too, to be punctual
in his Titles, that we who are at the drudgery of Reading him, may loose no
more time then is necessary. By the book de gravi doctrina, is meant, I suppose
de quavis doctrina: p. 33.
but it is a trifle he has taken from it, and what he knows every body own's.
Thus has this one Paragraph afforded us more absurdities, then we could
possibly have expected in so narrow a compass; and methinks, tho I don't well
know what the words mean, yet in the phrase of the man, it discover's a strange
plerophory of blindnes^.

Lr. is next arraigned for speaking contemptuously of. 20.
Fathers: but this is a rank calumny: No man has a greater veneration for 'em
then He. Let his latest Writings (which our. Author observes to have been the
most haughty) give us a taste of his thoughts on this point. I say not this, to
lay a blott on the Holy Fathers, whose Labors we ought with veneration to
receive; They were great men, but men still -- and a little afterward* Quoties
videmus patrum opinione^ cum scriptura non conven^re, cum reverentia eos
toleramus, and agnoscimus tanquam major^s (...), sed^ (...) eo^ ^almen non
discedimus ab authoritate scripturae: Ibid.
When ^e find the opinions of Fathers jarring with Scriptures, we must pay a
respect to 'em even in their very Errors, and acknowledge the^ as our Betters:
but we are not nevertheless for their sakes to depart from the authority of
holy Writ. Nothing can be expressed with greater decency; and therefore we may
reasonably suspect false play in the Citations, which would persuade us to the
contrary. To instance in the first -- Non ego quaero quid Ambrosius,
Augustinus* Concilia etc. dicunt. Contra Reg. Angliae. Lr. is there proving
that no sort of Tradition a Non haec dico in contumeliam Santorum Patrum,
quorum labores venerari* decet. fuerunt magni viri, sed viri tamen. Comm. in
Genes. c. 2. p. 72.
can make an Article of faith, of what is not contained in Scripture; and in
this case if a thousand Ambroses, or Councils should vote it such, he would
slight the decision. This is plain from what immediately follows -- Non disputo
quid a quoquam dictum vel non dictum sit, sed an hoc dictum necessarium sit
servatu, an sit articulus fidei, an sit aequale verbo Dei etc. I desire the
Reader to trust his own eyes in consulting this Passage, and then tell me,
whether this Man be not the foullest Trader in Quotations, that ever he dealt
with. Indeed he is a very Procrustes in his way: whatever he meets of other
men's, he unmercifully either stretches, or curtails, till he has made it
exactly of a size with his own notions. The rest of the Testimonies are highly
impertinent: and if they be looked into, 'twill be found they signify no more
then this -- the Fathers have erred and therefore he cannot rely merely upon
their authority: and what is this more then their own) Canus and Cajetan say?
that no man should detest a new sense of Scripture for this, that it differs
from the ancient Doctors, for God has not (say they) tied exposition of
Scripture to their senses Can Loc. Com. L. 7. C. 7. where he quotes Cajetan too.
. We have a surfeit of Quotations here again from the Colloquia: but I have told
him what credit they are like to find with us. That from Captivitas Babylonica,
needs only to be proposed entire. It goes upon a supposition that Lr. had
already showed the plain meaning of Scripture to be against the doctrine of the
Mass. Here says he -- Quid dicimus ad authoritates Patrum? Primum respondeo --
si nihil habetur quod dicatur, satius est omnia negasse, quam Missam
sacrificium esse concedere, ne verbum Christi negemus. Very right! supposing,
as he does, that Christ's words are express in the case: But neither does he
rely on this Plea: for in the very next line he reconciles the Fathers, and
Scripture: and shows there is no clash betwixt 'em. What he wrote in
comm^ndation of Melancthon before his works, cannot be supposed so exact, as to
discover his judgment on the point: but was only a complement strained a little
too high in behalf of a friend.

I must leave the Track of the Discourse here, to fetch in another instance of
Lr. despising Church-Guides, and yet arrogating to himself all the Authority of
them. It Is at. 23. Which because I take to be the compleatest. 23.
piece of false dealing that ever was used (...) paper, I shall set down entire.

Upon the same presumption of his unerring judgment, he by his single Authority
altered the former public Lit^rgy, and reformed the service of the Mass. (apud
Hosp. fol. 20.) -- The place cited in Hospinian has not one word of this, but
it has something directly contrary to it. Luther began not the Reformation of
the service of the Mass, the Austin-Fryars did it, Hosp. fol. 20.
without his knowledge, when he was in his retirement after the Diet of Worms;
and he wrote his book of the Abolition of the Mass afterward, only to confirm
them in what they had done. Carlstat too, Melch. Ad. V. L.
while he was absent, promoted a Reformation of the Mass, and of several other
abuses: but in too tumultuous a manner, so that Lr. upon his return to
Wirtenburg complained of the violence of their proceedings. -- Non quod impie
fecissent, sed quod non ordine: damnare se Missam Papisticam etc, sed damnare
solo verbo, non violenta abrogatione. The Mass then was abrogated, without Ls.
consent; and not either by the single Authority, of him or any one man else;
the whole University of Wirtenburg first gave in their reasons to D. Frederic,
and he himself complied with the alteration. Luther afterward prevailed to
have as much of the service as was innocent restored again; and he was deputed
to throw out all that part of it, that made the Sacrament a Sacrifice. He did
so, but imposed not even this form as obligatory: for thus he speaks in the
preface to it. Nulli praejudicamus, ne aliam amplecti formulam aut sequi
liceat; quin ex animo per Christum obsecramus, ut siquid melius illis revelatum
fuerit, nos priores tacere jubeant, ut communi opera rem communem juvemus.

-- and generally held in matters of Religion no Ecclesiastical [i. e. human]
Laws obliging. (See before. 19.) -- I have proved already, that that Paragraph
says no such thing, and that Lr. never disallowed the power of the Church in
things indifferent.

-- began a new ordination of Bishops and Ministers descending from him, after
having declared their former unction null, and God's Church to be only that
where the Gospel was purely preached; that was his -- I have shown that he is far
from declaring their former Unction null, since in the Smalcald Articles he
allows their Ordinations to be valid. Nor did ^e ever deny that the true Gospel
was preached under the Papacy -- Nos fatemur (they are his words) sub Papata
plurimum esse boni Christiani, imo omne bonum Christianum, imo verum nucleum
Christianitatis Ep. de Anabapt.
.

-- By the same Authority assisted by the Power of the Prince, he made new
Bishops, and put them in the places of the deceased: against the Canonical
Election of another, made his intimate Friend Amsdorf Bishop of Neoburg. (see
Melch. Ad. vit. p. 150.) George Auhaltinus, Bishop of Mersburg. That he made
new Bishops, we admit; not out of choice, but necessity: following, as he
thought, in this case the practice of the Church, mentioned in that well-known
passage of St. Austin's -- in Alexandria and per totam AEgyptum, si desit
Episcopus, consecrat Presbyter. But that he put these Bishops in the places of
the deceased by his (...) Authority, is notoriously false; for the D. of Saxony
always presented: as the following story will evince, when freed from the
disguises he has put upon it, and honestly told. The Canons of Neoburg upon a
vacancy, presented one Psugius to the Bishopric, who was refused unanimously ab
Ecclesia, ab Ordinibus, and Patroni^ Ecclesiae, says Adams Ad. in Vit.
Amsdorfii.
. The D. of Saxony had always the right of Allowance; but in this case 'twas
denied him: so he thrust out the Invader, and collated Amsdorf to the Benefice:
Luther performed the Consecration, and the D. and his Brother Ernest, were
present at the Ceremony Ibid.
*

-- By the same Authority he sentenced the Canon Law consisting of the former
decrees amassed, as well those of Councils, as those of Popes to the fire; and
assembling the University solemnly burnt it at Wirtenberg. The matter of Fact
is true, but it is frivolous to say he assumed to himself any particular
Authority in the doing it. The reasons, he published, declare that 'twas done
by virtue of the Commission, he had as Preacher of God's word; and the Oath he
took, at his going out Dr. of confounding all pernicious Doctrines, as much as
in him lay. So that he own's himself upon the level with all of the same
degree. But he had other motives he tell's you. His books had been solemnly
burnt at Rome as Haeretical: some people, he found, were startled at it; so he
was forced boldly to make reprisalls, and do an action in the same way, to buoy
up their courages: yet he did it not singly, the University concurred. This way
of Burning declares no such Authority as the Considerer talk's of. Neither he,
nor any one else that assisted at the Oxon-Decree, pretended to it: if He
declared his opinion then against Bellarmin the Jesuits etc, 'twas all that was
expected.

-- By the same, he frequently pronounced Anathemas, and Excommunications to
those reformed that dissented from him in opinion -- Is there no difference
between an Authoritative Judicial Anathema, and a Wish of Execration? The Monks
certainly did not pretend to the Anathematizing power; and yet at the entrance
of their MSS. we always find this sentence -- Quicunque hunc librum violaverit
etc sit Anathema Maranatha. It Is the constant style of all their own men that
write warmly: The Papist Repr. and Misrepr. has used it at the tail of his
Pamphlet for some pages together. Thus has not this Paragraph one ingenuous
word throughout. I have dissected it for a sample, to show how a man that had
the patience, and was sure of the days of Job, might handle the rest: for I Will
do my Author this right, to acknowledge, that his Book's all of a piece. But he
is here inconsistent not only with truth but himself. He would make us believe
that Lr. in these actions pretended to a je ne scay quoy Authority, forgetting
what he had sleepily owned in the Paragraph before, that Lr. required not
conformity to his Doctrines, out of any Authority he claimed to impose them,
which Authority ^e renounced -- He think's perhaps, that what is past ought not
to be thought of, but we are not of his opinion.

In this point of Church Authority, and that other of Marriage, I have si^ted
all the little scraps alleged by the Pamphlet, with the greater care, because
here it is, if any where, that the Author seems to be awake, and have some eye
to his design. I don't know whether the Reader will thank me for this
exactness, I hope the Writer will not. But to make amends to 'em both, I promise
in what follows not to be so punctual, but skip over sometimes 4 or 5 pages
together, without saying one word to em. This Weapon formed against us, if it
had any sharpness, yet by this time I Am sure it is quite blunted: a Child may
now be trusted with it, for the Tool has not Edge enough to hurt him. For what
are the mighty Considerations with which we are now to be entertained? The
first is that --

Luther was so bold, as to think and say he was certain. 21. n. 1.
of what he taught: a crime of so high a nature, that the Considerer has taken
pains to prove it by a Passage as 24. n. 1. 2.
long almost as from hence to the beginning of the Reformation. Now he might
have spared his labor, for all wellgrounded Protestants are in this point as
bold as Lr. himself. We have a certainty, whose Evidence we find, and under
whose guidance we think our selves secure, without the pretended boast of
Infallibility: a word, which sound's bigger indeed, and fill's the mouth
better, but is not so satisfactory at the bottom, as a late Author has (though
not infallibly, yet) certainly proved Disc. about Judge in Controv.
. But we'll allow the Considerer to decry this Protestant Certainty, which he
never understood: if he had, our charity tells us, he would never have changed
it for the gawdiest pretenses on the other side.

But Lr. maintained this certainty of his against other. 24. n. 3.. 21. n. 2.
Reformed, which were equally certain; and in contradiction to himself too: for
in the point of Consubstantiation, towered the latter end of his life he changed
his mind, say the papers; and quote for it Melchior Adams, and Hospinian. I
suppose my author is sure of Ls. instability in this point, because he averr's
it so confidently: Now I am as sure, that from the authorities mentioned no
such thing can be inferred, as shall presently be made out. Here is certainty
against certainty, and one of us must be in the wrong. Yet neither of Us is
obliged to think his own sentiments ere the less right, merely because the
other opposes 'em: Why then might not Lr. maintain his certainty against those
of the Reformation that maintained the contrary? The conviction of his
understanding lay within it self, and could not be weakened by another man's not
being convinced. The reason of my certainty in the case is, because I am very
well satisfied that what Adams and Hospinian have here said, does not at all
infer a change in Luther's Opinion. The story they tell is this -- Lr. some
days before his death, owned that he had written a little too warmly in the
Sacramentary-Controversy: upon this Melancthon desires him, [ ut leni edito
scripto se explicaret] that he would explain himself in some milder treatise.
The heat of dispute had forced out from him Expressions, that seemed to make
his doctrine run higher then really it did. 'Twas his friends advice therefore,
that he should in some just discourse, calmly and without reflection state the
point; and (not correct, but) explain his first notions. [ ut leni edito
scripto se explicaret] Now whatever sense explaining may now bear* yet in those
days it did not signify changing: for the Bishop of Condom had not then writ
his Exposition. I am further convinced, that this story relates not to any
change of Ls. opinion, but only to an hot word or two, that ought to have been
softened, from the Preface, with which Hospinian usher's it in. Multi (says He)
verba Lutheri urgent, quae calor disputationis (...) exprimere solet,
dissimulantes aut nescientes illa, quae valedicturus Collegio Philosophico,
dixit: and then comes the Relation* Had his Adversary acted up to this Remark
of Hospinian's, the bulky book we have now before us would have lain within a
very little compass. But to go farther, and yield him what he does not ask --
What if Hospinian should have said in other places that Lr. waver'd in the
point of the Sacrament? does it follow, that he really did so, because one of
differing sentiments, and that would any ways have drawn Lr. over to his
party, has said it? or can we conclude upon Ls. instability (as our Author has
done) because in a single notion, no ways fundamental, an Enemy writes that he
had some doubtings? This is such a way of reasoning as is answered only by
being despised. However it is pretty odd to see instability and fluctuation in
opinion so earnestly charged upon Lr. by such as have lived half their days in
a poyse between two Churches; and write even now, when the Scales are turned,
with so much waryness and reserve, that a body would not think 'em heartily of
any.

But Lr. condemned his Brethren of the Reformation 22. 25. 26.
too; not without their returning the Censure -- There was eagerness I confess
on both sides, but this is far from laying a blot upon Lr. It argues him a very
honest man, who had such a zeal against Error, as not to suffer it in a Friend:
and is an undeniable evidence, that he took not upon him the character of a
Reformer, in opposition to a Party, (as has been falsely suggested) since, where
truth was concerned, he equally oppos*d All. The debate Perhaps between him and
the Sacramentarians (as they are called) was managed with a fierceness not
exactly warrantable: but it must be considered, that the best men of antiquity
have been guilty of such excesses. Have we forgotten the feud of Hierome, and
Ruffinus? of Epiphanius, and Chrysostom? of Victor, and the Greek Bishops,
whom he excommunicated for a trifle? Or to go higher, did not Paul and
Barnabas, when sent out together by the Holy Ghost, dispute with that
vehemence, about a very little point of convenience, that they were forced to
break company? These infirmities are such as Christians of the first rank have
fallen into; and the proving Lr. guilty of 'em, is the proving him a Man, and
no Angel. How far either he; or any other Reformer might go in this quarrel,
out of a Love of victory and the shame of being baffled, it concern's not me to
determine. I am satisfied with what the Apostle has told me, that -- some preach
Christ out of Contention, and strife: yet so they preach, and so we believe.
But what will my Author leave unobjected against Lr. when (p. 67.) he makes it
his crime, that he defied and abused even the Devil? whereas Saints (he says)
are usually more modest and go no farther then a bare imperet tibi Dominus. A
pretty way of calling himself Saint! for it is his own familiar phrase. But upon
the same principle we must deny him to be one, for Saints are usually more
modest then to call themselves so.

We are now to have a taste of the male dicency of Ls. Spirit. 33.
from his book against Henry the 8th: a fault, which I cannot but wonder to
find objected by such men, who every day make bolder with the names of both
him, and his Royal Issue. I shall not wholly defend his carriage here, since he
himself has condemned it. All the Truth in the world on one's side can never
justify an unmannerly expression. But it must be considered, when a King of
such repute for learning entered the Lists against him what a noise this action
made, and how some weaker Protestants must needs be startled by it. Lr.
therefore, that he might fix his followers, thought himself concerned to take
up a brisker air of assurance; and show a particular undauntedness in the cause
of Truth, when it had so mighty an Opposer. But here he overacted his part: his
passions, when once let loose, were too impetuous to be managed; the native
plainness of his Country, and the privacy of his own Education, which had not
been much acquainted with greatness, carried him beyond the respects due to a
Crowned Head; and brought out such blunt Truths from him as neither Friends,
nor Enemies could tell well how to approve. But the party was even with him.
Sr. Tho. More took up the quarrel, a man (as they tell us) much a Christian,
much a Gentleman, and naturally of great mildness and candor: who yet forgot
himself so far in this Answer to Lr. that he has there thrown out the greatest
heap of nasty Language that perhaps ever was put together. The book throughout
is nothing but downright Ribaldry, without a grain of reasoning to support it;
and gave the Author no other reputation, but that of having the best knack of
any man in Europe, at calling bad names in good Latin. Though his passion is
sometimes so strong upon him, that he sacrifices even his beloved purity to it
-- Haec est (he says) Domini Doctoris Posterioristice; qui quum sibi jam prius
fas esse scripserit Coronam Regiam conspergere and conspurcare stercoribus, an
non nobis fas erit posterius hujus posterioristicae, linguam stercoratam
pronuntiare dignissimam, ut vel mejentis mulae posteriora lingat suis prioribus
etc. p. 72. I forbear to instance any farther: if the Reader has a mind to see
railing in it is perfection, let him open any one page of his book, and he will
have a glut of it. But perhaps the bad treatment, which Lr. had before received
from one Sovereign Prince, might urge him to talk the more disrespectfully of
another. The style of Edicts, we know, is generally calm and majestic: yet
Charles the 5th after the Diet of Worms put out such a blustering one againg Lr.
as even modest Papists have condemned. -- Constat (says he) hunc unicum non
hominem, sed daemonem potius figura and specie humana cuculloque Monastico
indutum etc. Ulemberg confesses that this decree was by some thought too
sharply penned: but these were only the ignorant (he says:) for others very
well knew, that Maximilian once saw a Devil sitting upon his Cowl Rayn. ad An.
1521.
. As for the heat, with which he treated his other adversaries, 'twas sometimes
strained a little too far, but in the general was extremely well fitted by the
Providence of God to rowse up a people, the most phlegmatic of any in
Christendom. Europe lay then under a deep Lethargy, and was no otherwise to be
rescued from it, but by One, that would cry mightily, and lift up his voice
with strength. Besides Printing, and Letters had just then peeped abroad in the
world; and the restorers of Learning in Italy, taking the advantage of the
Press, wrote very eagerly against one another, so that Invectives were in those
days the fashionable way of writing. If Lr. therefore mingled a little Gall
with his Ink in his books of Controversy, he followed but the humor of the Age;
and considering the stupidity, the malice, and the obstinacy of his Readers,
cannot but be thought excusable. I have seen at the end of Theodoret's
Ecclesiastical History, a Catalogue of Caesar's, Bishops, Haeretics etc, where
Chrysostom is set down as guilty of too great sharpness, and liberty of speech:
but it is added -- Profecto illorum temporum vitia secari atque uri, non levibus
medelis curari voluere. And this is the Plea, we would make for Luther. In the
mean time it is base in his Adversaries thus to dwell upon the excesses of a
passion, of which they themselves were in a great measure the occasion. When
they could not coolly convince him Tot sunt millia Rabbinorum, tot sunt qui
sibi Pii videntur: nullus exstitit qui Luthero sobrie docteque responderet, si
ve inscitia fuit in causa, sive ignavia, sive metus, quorum nihil competit in
bonos Theologos. Erasm. Epist. ad Godesch. Anno 1520.
, they railed, and called him an Haeretic: thus they wound up his temper to a
pitch, and then treacherously made use of that infirmity. And it is the same
ungenerous method they take in reproaching us with Schisms, when alas! none
know's better then they, how the Panther (for under that name it seems we must
be baited) came by her Spots.

To what purpose then are Erasmus and Calvin's testimonies. 31. n* 2, 3.
urged upon a confessed point? It Is owned Lr. had a vehemence of speech, and if
he offended that way, yet 'twas an useful (not to say a necessary) failure.
There was but this single fault that Erasmus, though an Enemy, could object to
him; the other part of the character speaks as high as we could wish. For his
Life and Manners, thus -- Hominis vita magno omnium consensu probatur* Iam id
non leve praejudicium est, tantam esse morum integritatem, ut nec hosts
reperiant, quod calumnientur Ep. ad Tho. Card. p. 543. Ed. Land. 1642.
. And as to his doctrine, Compertum est a Theologis quibusdam damnari ut
Haeretica in libris Lutheri, quae in Bernardi Augustinique libris, ut
Orthodoxa, imo ut pia leguntur Ep. ad Archiep. Mog p 586.
. So that Erasmus is perversely brought in to blacken Ls. reputation: what he
says of him would not disparage the best of Saints: for it amounts to no more
then this, that he had many great virtues, and amongst them one small
infirmity. So that if the Standard Comines has given us of a good King be
accepted, that he is then to be accounted so, when his Virtues exceed his
Vices, how good a Man must we conclude Lr. to have been? Guicciardine I Am
sure, has taken a much greater latitude for Popes, who, he says Guicc. L. 16.
are now adays to be praised for their goodness, when they exceed not the
wickedness of other men. But further, Schooling Luther,. 31. n. 3.
is an undervaluing term, and would make one think that Erasmus had a mean
opinion of him. Whereas I do not know any one even of the Reformed that speak's
more respectfully of Luther, than he. When Aleander, and Caracciolus were sent
from Rome to Colen in 1520. to tempt Erasmus with a Bishopric, to write against
Luther, hear the return he made 'em. Major est Lutherus, quam ut in illum ego
scribam. Major est Lutherus quam ut a me intelligatur. Plane Lutherus tantus
est, ut plus erudiar and proficiam ex lectione unius pagellae Lutheranae, quam
ex toto Thoma. If this be Schooling, it is well for the Considerer: I Will engage
that no adversary of his shall in this sense ever school him.

There is a little occasional Remark of the Author's, p. 45. which slipped me.
He is there angry with Lr. for saying -- That Peter taught otherwise than he
should by the word of God, and therefore Erred: whereas his Example only, he
says, and not his Doctrine was false. But this is trifling: for are there no
Errors in matter of Practice? and does not He who so err's, if he be in a
conspicuous station, teach as much by his Example, as he could by his doctrine;
since every action is supposed allwaies to be bottomed upon some principle? But
besides it is highly probable that Peter asserted an opinion agreeable to this
practice: for else how could St. Paul withstand him to the face? Withstanding
by words on one side implies an opposition in the same kind on the other. When
Elymas is said to have withstood Paul and Barnabas; and when Paul says of
Alexander, he has greatly withstood our words, do we think the withstanding
there was without speaking?

He steps out of his way (p. 59.) to make a remark upon Calvin: but because the
Scene of our affairs now lies at Wirtenberg, and Geneva is many miles off, he
must pardon me, if I don't step out of my way to confute it.

Hitherto the Considerer has been attacking Lr. in his Doctrines and Positions:
and now and then a Work or two has crept in to keep his first design in
Countenance: he is now making his last efforts upon his reputation by showing us
what Company he kept. He would persuade. 32.
us that Lr. had frequent intercourses and Dialogues with the Devil. He proves
it first by the story Lr. tells of himself in his book de Missa privata etc.
It Is true, he does there say, that waking once at midnight, Satan began this
disputation with him: but how began it? In animo instituit, say the words of
the Relation: by suggesting bad thoughts to him, not by any personal
conference, as the Pamphlet all along would insinuate. To fix this Idea upon
the mind of the Reader there is an account here given of Satan's way in
disputation: Diabolus sua argumenta fortiter figere, and urgere novit: voce
quoque gravi and forti utitur etc, All which is wanting in the first
Wirtenberg-Edition, but was requisite to support the fiction of a real
appearance, which my Author had raised. If Lr. relates these suggestions in the
way of a formal and set Dialogue, it is only a contrivance of his to make the
story more divertive in the telling; and was perfectly the style of the Convent
in those days: I desire therefore the Reader to remember the excuse, Lr. has
made for himself -- Pium Lectoremoro, ut ista legate cum Iudicio, and sciat me
fuisse aliquando Monachum Luth. Pref. in Op.
.

He goes on with 2 or 3 Quotations from Melancthon, and Melchior Adamus, which
in their utmost stretch can signify no more then that Lr. lay under severe
agonies of mind. Oh! but Adams says the Divil appeared to him in p. 52.
his own Garden in the shape of a black Boar. And the Colloquia Mensalia
relate, how when Lr. was at his chamber in the Castle at Wartsburg, the Devel
cracked some nuts, he had in a box upon the Bed-post, tumbled empty barrels
down stairs etc, What pretty stories these are for a man of my Author's
seriousness to sport himself with all! He know's Adams is a Collector, and took
every thing upon trust, without ever being famed for any exactness of judgment:
and as for his Table-talk he would do well to vent it there, where 'twas first
spoken, for we have told him more then once, that it is not like to bear the
force of an argument with us: it may serve to divert a Reader, but is not fit
to convince him. But Lr. himself confesses (Lib. de Vot. Monast.) that the
Devil used all methods to hinder and annoy p. 62.
him. No doubt on it, 'twas his interest, so to stop the progress of the Gospel:
and since Ls. death, the same design has been carrying on by him and his Agents
against his reputation. But this is so far from giving us a prejudice against
Luther, that we think it a very good character of him, that the Devil and he
were at enmity, and no very bad one, that the Considerer is not his Friend. I
have strictly examined particulars here, and letting every tittle, he has
brought, go in his own sense, can discover, after all, none of those frequent
intercourses and negotiations, we were told of. Unless it be proper to say that
Lr. negotiated with a Black-boar, and had an intercourse with the Devil about
Nut-cracking. stories so silly, that they are fit to be the Objects of a
stronger and more resigning Faith, than we Protestants can pretend to.

Pass we on then to the next Paragraphs. And there I found my Author pretty
well disengaged from Quotations. I was in hopes upon this to see a fair naked
piece of reasoning, and was resolved* to give it as fair an Answer. But I
quickly saw there was no need for it; sheer argument is not the talent of the
man, I have to deal with: Little wrested sentences of authors are the Bladders,
which bear him up, and he sinks downright, when he once pretends to swim
without 'em. He discourses us here very largely upon the Craft and Wilyness of
the Devil; and proves how sly and double-fac'd his designs commonly are, for 4
or 5 pages together: all which we in one Line answer, by granting it. But what
inference does he make from these Premises? that a man besett with Temptations
cannot possibly know, with what design the Devil attacq's him? No: that Luther
did not? Nor that neither: but only that 'twas pretty difficult for him to do
it. Perhaps it was, but if fastings, prayers, and a serious application in
order to a discovery of truth will not call in God Allmighty's assistance, what
shall we say of that Text where it is promised, that we shall not be tempted
above what we are able? These means Lr. used, and these we question not but God
accepted of, and led him into Truth. Now for our Author's saying that this
might be a Satanical Illusion, so say I too: but the quaestion is, not what it
might be, but what it really was. And to this there is not a syllable of proof
offered. He has only busily been proving how ready Satan is to get an advantage
over us: it is owned; and he has been formerly told, that we are not ignorant of
his devices.

But the Arrow is now drawn to the head. There seems. 39.
great evidence, he says, that the whole platform of the Reformation proceeded
Originally from the Devil. A gross calumny! which we could not easily pardon,
if he did not kindly wipe it off, by the reasons that follow. His very next
words are -- For many of these very arguments against the former Church, which
the Devil now openly owned and urged to Lr. in this disputation held A. D.
1522. were the very same that had been urged by Lr. some years before. That is,
because Lr. urged these arguments first, and the Devil afterward, therefore
Lr. copied from the Devil. It Is amazing to consider how this inference should
come into the head of any thing that thinks. The truth of the story is this.
Lr. had published several Treatises against the Mass long before this dispute:
one in High Dutch in 1520; and the same year had writ against it in his
Captivitas Babylonica: another in Latin, entitled de abroganda Missa privata
Ao. 1521. and some months before this, in his book against Ambrosius
Catharinus, and his Wormes-Articles. In 1522. the Devil (that is, Luther's
Conscience, by his instigations) turn's these very reasonings upon him; and
taking advantage of 'em as of confessed principles, inferr's, that then Lr. must
have been unpardonably wicked in using Masses for 15 year together. Audisne,
inquit, excellentissime Doctor? number ignoras Te per annos quindecim privatas
Missas quotidie fere celebrasse? etc. How comes the Pamphlet to conclude then
from this account, that whilst Lr. was in the bosom of the Church, the Devil
by his arguments disputed him into a Reformation? Will he pretend that these
reasonings must needs be received from Satan at first by Lr. because used by
him afterward against Luther? This is so precarious a consequence, and yet
establishes so unchristian a reflection, that it deserves only one of his own
Deus tibi imperets for an Answer. Let the case be put home to him, and he must
own the foolishness of it. He has left the Communion of the Church of England
for some time; upon good grounds, I suppose, he will tell us -- and convincing
reasons: should the Devil now employ these very reasons against him, by the
force of them to set out how heinous his sin was in continuing so long in our
Communion, would it follow that the Devil was the Author of his Conversion? Or
rather would he not think us that made this inference, neither good Christians,
nor good Arguers? And yet he, who would pass for both, has not, we see, given
Lr. fairer play. But the Old Serpent, he says, was very silly, if his design
upon Lr. in this conference was as we have represented it: for he might have
considered in the discovery of so much new truth, what might have happened, if
instead of despair he should prove a Reformer. What dos he p. 85.
mean here? Could the Devil fear a discovery of Truths, which (as he himself
own's p. 71.) Lr. had preached up 5 years before? Could he dread a future
Reformation, which had then been a good while afoot? These are such
inadvertencies, that a body would think, even our Author with all his drowsy
reasoning could never have been capable of 'em. No, his design was to stop a
Reformation already begun, by involving in despair one of the chief supports of
it. He gave no new light to Lr. but only accidentally added new strength to his
Faith, inasmuch as the assault was in vain. False therefore is that Assertion
of the Pamphlet's, that Lr. yielded the field to the Devil in this Combat as
Conqueror: All he yielded to in the dispute, was the conviction of those
arguments, which he himself had before reformed upon. The objections the
Tempter raised from hence to discourage his Faith, and shake his constancy,
those he withstood and baffled. What is there then in this Encounter that can
be laid hold of to Ls. disadvantage? Is it, that he conversed with the Devil?
He did not, we see; the dispute was managed in animo atque in cord, by
suggestions within, not without by any personal appearance. But had he really
entered into Dialogue, yet the President, our Savior has given, would have been
his warrant. And would one ransack the Life's of their Popes [ Sylvester the 2d,
Gregory 7, Benedict. 8, Hildebrand etc.] 'twere easy to retaliate, and show how
much greater intimacies have been maintained between Satan and some of them. Is
it, that his Doctrine of the Mass was struck out in this Conflict? or that it
gave him any occasion of Reforming in this point? We have evidently made out
the contrary by an elder date of some works of his, which establish these very
opinions. Yet should it have been so, the actions of their own Saints would
justify Ls. management. For their admired Dominic reformed the Religious of his
Covent upon just such another rancounter with the Devil Vid Antonin Chron. 3.
Part. Tit. 23. Cap. 4. 6.
; and made use of his accusation, though contrary to the intention of the
accuser. Is it that Lr. complied with the Tempter's arguments? no such matter!
The supposition he allowed, because 'twas his own; but denied the Sequel, which
his disputant would have fastened upon him. Yet should what he yielded to, have
been Satan's own proposition, it does not follow that he was therefore in the
wrong: for Lying is not the indelible Character even of the Father of Lies;
sometimes a Truth serves his turn better. He quoted Texts right upon our
Savior, though he expounded em wrong: and surely he told no ly, when he confessed
ChristJesus to be the Son of the living God. Does this story carry such
scandalous impressions along with it, that even Chillingworth himself own's it
as one of his motives for deserting our Communion? But pray take in the other
part of the account too; and consider how he laughed at it when he returned. So
that after a search into particulars, all we find true in this affair is, that
the Devil once made a solemn onset upon Lr. as before he had done on his
Redeemer. A Calumny, which we are so far from disowning, that we are proud
on it! The Devil had great reason to employ all his Engines against a Man, who
had made such ravage in his Kingdom: and he took a good time to make his
attacq's, when Lr. was in his solitudes at the Castle of Wartsburg: for there
it was, I think, that the scene of the Temptation lay. Upon the whole then, our
Author's modesty seems to be unexampled, who upon so slight grounds, nay upon
no grounds at all, could be bold enough to say, that -- the whole Platform of
p. 71.
the Reformation proceeded originally from the Devil. and again that -- the
Devil is the Original Founder and Abetter of the p. 72.
Reformation. These are such saucy expressions upon a Religion established by
Law, as deserve rather to be burnt, then confuted.

The manage and address of my author has been spent to no purpose in tricking
up this story: for after all, we see, it has no hideous appearance. He Is
resolved now (in contradiction still to the method laid down of considering
works only and not disputing) to baffle the arguments the Opponent urges in the
dispute, and show how slight the propositions were, which Lr. let go for good.
So that p. 72.
the Tables are turned, and whereas the Scene before lay betwixt Lr. and Satan,
it is now betwixt the Devil and the Considerer. And for my part, to give every
one his due, I think the Devil has much the best on it. I shall pass by the
little skirmishings on either side, and touch only on what is material. The
Devil argues against private Masses,. 40. n. 3.
from the nature of Christ's institution, when he distributed it about to his
disciples, and said -- Do this etc. From St. Paul's Comment on these words 1
Cor. 11. from the usage of the Primitive Church See Annot. in Conc. Trid. Sess.
22. Cap. 6. Where this usage is confessed.
; and from the term Communion, which she allways expressed it by. Here the
Answerer has nothing to say, but that the Priest in these Masses is ready to
communicate the Sacrament to all that offer themselves. But this is not enough:
for the Devil's quaestion is, whether it be not against the notion of a
Sacrament, that the Consecrater alone should partake of it? He urges farther,
that neither have they any intention of communicating it, because the words of
Consecration are pronounced, according to the Canon of the Mass, with a
Whisper, and so not defign'd for the peoples Ears. And to all this there is not
a word replied. The Devil goes on to object, that as Lr. had withheld all the
Sacrament in private Masses, so neither did he give it entire in public ones.
To. 40. n. 4.
this the answerer returns nothing, but that the practice of the primitive
Church is sufficient warrant, that the words of institution are not so to be
expounded as if both kinds were necessary. But this bold assertion has been so
fully vanquished in a late Reply to the Bishop of Meaux's treatise on this
subject, that I shall not stop here to expose it. The Reader will there find,
that not a single instance of Communion in one kind is to be found in all the
Records of antiquity. At least, if our word will not be taken, that of the
Council's will, which decreed it with a non-obstante to the custom of the
Primitive Church. Satan argues. 40. n. 5.
against their form of ordination, which seems rather to give the power of
offering a Sacrifice, then distributing a Sacrament. For the words, he says, of
the Suffragan, when he deliver's the Chalice into the Priest's hands, are --
Take thou Power of consecrating, and Sacrificing for the Quick and the Dead.
What says the Replyer? Why, that Sacrificare in the Churches sense takes in
the distributing part too. But we know this is not the Church-sense, and referr
our selves to the Trent-Catechism to expound it. There Cap. de Euch.. 75.
the Eucharist is said to be instituted upon a double account: the one that it
might be a Spiritual food for our Souls, the other that it might be a Sacrifice
for our Sins. So that whatever belong's to it as it is the food of our Souls,
belong's to it as a Sacrament: and certainly the ministering of it to the people
belong's to it, as it is the food of our Souls, and therefore as a Sacrament
not a Sacrifice. Besides the notion of Sacrificing has nothing in it of
distribution. It Is offering something slain by the hands of a Priest, to God.
Now this is all done, before it comes to be distributed to the People, as they
who allow private Masses must needs acknowledge. It avails not the Considerer
here to urge another part of the office, where the Priest is said to be
ordained in totum Presbyteratus officium: for if in the most solemn clause of
it, where the power is specified; and conveyed, no mention be made of a power
of imparting the Sacrament, why should not the totum officium be rather reduced
to this, then this to that? Nor does this prejudice. Ls. Orders at all: for
since no set form of words is prescribed by God as essential to Ordination, we
doubt not, but that, where the Church intends to convey this, it is actually
conveyed, tho the form of doing it should be a little defective: which is all
the Devil here pretends to make out; and which yet I don't see how his
Adversary has answered. Satan proceeds to another objection against his using
the Mass as a Sacrifice propitiatory for sins, contrary to Christ's
institution. Our Author says, it is a propitiatory Sacrifice, only as those
under the Law are said to be so, with respect to that on the Cross. But by his
leave, we deny the Parallel: for the quaestion we would put, is not whether the
Sacrament of the Mass be as truly propitiatory, as those under the Law? but
whether it be as truly a Sacrifice? If so, then it is a true proper Sacrifice,
without relation to that of the Cross; (for such the Jewish Sacrifices were)
and is not only commemorative, or representative, as we are told at a push:
Even as the annual offering of the Paschal Lamb was not only commemorative of
that first Paschal Lamb, but also in it self, exclusively to that respect, an
entire proper sacrifice. But if he shall say, it is not of it is self a true
proper sacrifice, 'twill follow, that neither can it be so, with respect to
that on the Cross; for whatever is not in it is own nature a true proper
sacrifice, can never be made so by a relation to some other that is. The
Parallel then is wide. For the immolations under the law, were first in their
own nature Sacrifices, and then propitiatory in virtue of that last offering
upon the Cross: whereas the Sacrament of the Eucharist has not that first
ground of a real Sacrifice; and so nothing to support it is propitiatory virtue
upon. But learned Protestants he says have long* since yielded up*. 45.
this argument, and quotes Mede and Perkins for it. They say indeed that the
Eucharist is a sacrifice in representation, and who ever said otherwise? but
deny expressly that it is really and properly such. Our Author wonders they
should relieve themselves with this distinction, and yet own the Legal
Sacrifices (though representative) to be proper and real. But I hope his wonder
will abate a little, now I have showed him the difference between 'em. St.
Paul's authority brought from 1 Cor. 10. 18. is beside the purpose. The Apostle
is there arguing against the Gnostics, who joined in the Idol-Feasts, and whom
he therefore accuses of participating of the Idol-God: even as those (he says)
who join in the Christian-Feast, participate of Jesus Christ. -- Therefore the
one is as much a Sacrifice as the other! No! But therefore the one is as much
an act of Religious worship as the other, and a confederating with him to whom
the Sacrifice is offered: for upon that the Apostles argument runns. Satan had
therefore reason to say, that Christ instituted not the Sacrament to be either
a Sacrifice, or singly received: for look upon the words of institution -- Do
this -- Do what? no doubt on it, what I did; that is, bless the bread and wine,
and distribute it. So that, where this is not done, there is no Sacrament; and
where it is done, no sacrifice. For nothing is done but what Christ did. Now he
did not offer up himself: for then what need of the oblation of the Cross
afterward? as 'twas well urged by near half the Divines and Fathers of Trent
Counc. of Trent. page 545.
. Who asserted also that neither Scripture, Fathers, Canon of the Mass, or any
Council, ever said that Christ offered up himself in the last supper. But I*am
weary of saying what has been so often said, and shall therefore leave Satan
and my Author to dispute it out, as not being much concerned which way the
victory* goes: for the strength of the cause, I suppose, does not depend upon
either of their talking. Indeed since the main of the argument has proved good,
it is a needless task to vindicate particulars. If what is said in the lump be
supposed of force enough to ground Ls. aversion against the Mass, it is all we
desire. So that had I leisure to pursue the minutes of the discourse, yet the
argument would be but where it was: for one demonstration upon a subject is as
good as a thousand. The disputing part might have been spared here, because
it is foreign to the first design of proposing bare Works, and by them making
an estimate of doctrines. But I must be content to follow my Guide in his own
way. Should I have set aside every thing that was* impertinent, my Answer must
have lain within the room of one of his paragraphs. But this had not been
deference enough to an Author of his bulk; and the dwarf had looked too
despicably little, to encounter the Giant.

He comes now to make his reflections upon this dry 41. 42*
tedious story. He guesses it probable that the Devil intended by this Dialogue
to fix Luther's notions of the Mass more strongly upon him: and I guess
otherwise. His only way to confute me will be, to show, that those notions are
bad: till that is done, we are not to be moved by conjectures.

Here is a digression about Zuinglius. 44. which yet. 44.
contrary to the rule of Episode, has nothing in it surprising. Zuinglius
dreamt it seems, one night of a Text, which upon recollection he found very
pat to his Doctrine of the Eucharist: and what thoughtful man is there, that
has not met with such lucky hints sometime or other, without thinking himself
obliged to the Devil for the discovery?

The next *Paragraph recapitulates, and has been Answered. 45.. 46.
already. He beginn's then to make his Concessions. Luther, he thinks,
discovered not these wiles of Satan; but inferr's, that he was therefore the
more dangerous. 47.
instrument: and so takes occasion to tell us the story of Vaninus, and lay out
bigotry, and false confidence in all it is colors. Some people have died by
suspension at Tyburn, he says, some by fire at Smithfield, with an equal
resolution for two contradictories. This is a darling Point, and he is every
weary where full of it: you will find him at it, in muchwhat the same words.
Church-Gov. part. 5. p. 260. But what does he mean by it? would he argue that
because both thought themselves certainly in the right, therefore he of the two
that was in the right, was not sure of it? Does Truth know her self 'ere the
less to be truth, because Error stand's up, and pretend's boldly to know the
contrary? This strike's at all certainty, as well as Luther's: and my Author
must be a Skeptic, and no Roman-Catholic if he believes it.

He own's there were several specious pretenses for a. 48, 49, 50, 51.
Reformation, and allow's Lr. not to have been destitute of many personal
virtues; but then he says they did not balance his vices: and to prove this,
instances in his sensuality and disobedience; two crimes, which he has dealt
with, as Varillas dos with Charles the 5th; and, to make the more solemn show,
split 'em into twenty. For he accuses him of Pride and Contention, of
Licentiousness, and Rebellion; of Anger, and Impatiency: he accuses him of self
admiration, and contempt of others; of railing, and blasphemiug against the
Catholic Church -- and of a great many other Synonyma's. All which have been
sufficiently confuted in what goes before; and shall receive here no other
Answer, then one of his own, [ -- Words.] I shall give one instance of my
Author's integrity, and so dismiss this point. He cannot but own, that Lr.
dissuaded the Protestants from taking up arms in the Cause of Religion, but
(according to his usual way of guessing at peoples thoughts) imputes it to his
being conscious of their weakness. All that I shall say to this kind censure
is, that the passive obedience of the primitive Christians has been used at the
same rate by a late Author* whose face I have since seen through a pillory.

He gives a finishing stroke to his reasonings now. 52.
toward parting, by a Parallel drawn between Luther and Mahomet. A man is
tempted here to return the kindness, and give him another between some body,
that He knows, and Judas. But we understand with what design this odious
comparison was made, and shall therefore (to mortify him) not be provoked. Only
he will give us leave to revive an old observation, that Mahomet, and Pope
Boniface were cotemporaries. Indeed Boniface got the start of him a little, and
set up his kingdom about 15 years before him: but Mahomet having the advantage
of so good a pattern, though he began something later, has thrived better. There
is an author too of ours that has writ a book, called Turco-Papismus, which I
would desire him to read, before he ventures at capping Characters. These, he
has given us, are very childish, and have no other property of parallels, but
that, draw 'em out o'both sides, as far as you please, they will never meet. I am
too weary now to allow my self any excursion from the main design; else here is
a fair opportunity to show how great a bungler my Author is in hitting
features. And after all, let the likenesses be never so true, yet a Parallel in
a writer of Controversy, is no more then a Simile from a pleader at the Bar: it
may glitter a little, and look prettily, but will never convince the Jury. What
is said upon this occasion then, I shall suppose within a Parenthesis, and so
go on.

He resumes his first method afresh, and after this long. 57.
account, would now at last try his doctrine by his works, according to that
Text -- Ye shall know them by their fruits, which he here repeats again, and
expounds as formerly. But I have showed him from the natural drift of the
words, from the joint authorities of our and their own Expositors, that this
Text must have another meaning. Yet we have complied even with this sense too;
and expected, after we had condescendingly made Ls. works Umpires in the
Controversy, that the gross of his book should have been taken up in setting
them out: but find contrarily that two thirds of it have been employed against
his doctrines. We may hope at least that he will be more pertinent in the
close. Here then after some little flourishes about the. 61.
Connection of Truth and Holiness, Error and Vice (which kindly destroy one
another) he summ's up the Evidence; that is he setts out what bad consequences
Luther's doctrine had; instancing in Variety of Sects, Dissoluteness of Life
etc. which (he says) attended the Reformation. So that by Works, it seems, he
did not mean Ls. Works, as we were foolishly made to believe for above an 100
pages together; (for on this Topic not one word here is said) but the works of
those that followed Luther; and when His faylings are too light to carry any
weight, other men's Vices are thrown into the Scale. What a strange
thoughtlessness is this to write a book, and then baulk the whole design of it,
just when it is to be shutt up? The Deserter, it seems, is resolved to maintain
his character, by running from every thing, and leaving his own very methods in
the lurch. But how does he prove this Dissoluteness of manners upon the
Reformed? why, as he does other things, he says it. Now whether there were at
that time any such bad things, as he talks of, among Protestants, or no; yet we
are sure these fruits could not spring naturally from Ls. doctrine: they might
perhaps arise from it, as Vermin from the power of the Sun, by Equivocal
production; but that they were it is direct genuine issue, is a proposition in
vain asserted, unless it be proved. To show this, would be to his purpose: till
he does, we are left at a gaze; and have nothing (for all his fine promises at
first) to try Ls. doctrines by, but the very doctrines themselves. But men had
reason to suspect 'em (he says) because they came into the world. 58.
neither with miracles, nor (if we consider all said) with the signs of a good
Spirit, nor yet owned or defended (nay also rejected and condemned by the
Church.) For the first of these, Miracles, Luther, we own, came without 'em,
but neither had he any need of 'em. Their use is to establish some new
doctrine, not to restore an old one, which was his case. And* therefore he no
where pretend's to any extraordinary immediate vocation, but only to that
ordinary call of the Presbytery, and the commission then given him to preach
the truth of the Gospel, and confound Error. As to the signs of a good Spirit,
I have considered all said, and cannot find that he had the signs of a bad one.
He had a zeal for God's glory, which hurried him sometimes beyond what was
decent in his expressions: but this imperfection was, we doubt not, easily
pardoned by that God, who in some measure accepted Iehu's zeal, tho stained
with gross hypocrify. In other things I hope I may by this time boldly
pronounce him blameless. As for the Churches rejecting and condemning his
Doctrine, it is the old figure of the Church of Rome for the Catholic Church;
and is too trite a subject to be here insisted on.

But Truth and Holiness, Error and Vice have a necessary Connection:. 59.
What then? Luther we have proved an holy man* and therefore this does not
touch us in the sense he would have it. Yet truth and holiness, Error and* Vice
are not, it seems, so necessarily linked together, but that a Teacher of
something false may bring forth the fruits of a good life; and contrary, the
Teacher of Truth the fruits of a bad: for these are his words in this very
paragraph. So that Necessary and Contingent are the same in this man's Logic.

Again he proves, that where more corrupt Doctrines are. 60.
believed, and taught, there for the general are more corrupt lives. Agreed!
but are Luther's Doctrines of such a stamp? Indeed in his gross way of
delivering 'em, they may have such an appearance. The 4 main heads are, he
says, 1. The. 61.
Nullity and Antichristianism of the former Clergy and the nonobligation of
their Laws. But I have made out from the Smalcald Articles, that Luther held no
nullity in this case: and though in points fundamental he allowed not the
Authority of councils, as depending merely on revelation for them* yet in
things indifferent I have showed that he was as willing to be concluded by
their sanctions as any man. 2. The inutility of works, penance, mortifications
etc. This is all a slander: he decry'd not the use* but the merit of them. 3.
The servitude of Man's will, and inability to do good even in the regenerate.
Ls. Doctrine of free will is, when fairly expounded, the same with the Church
of Englands: as such, we own it, and shall defend it. 4. The sole sufficiency
of Faith in us for our Justification. We have told him that Luther held good
works as necessary to Salvation as any Papist of 'em all, though he did not think
they were the cause of justification. That they followed upon it, as heat
attends the light of the Sun, he owned: but then as heat does not enlighten,
however close joined with that which does, so neither do they justify. If then
' it was out of these three latter points, that a great dissoluteness of Life,
Covetousness, Oppression etc. grew; it is to be hoped the crimes imputed are but
a fiction, and that the Reformed are not so bad as they are represented, since
those three points, when truly stated, have a quite different air, we see, from
what he has bestowed upon 'em. The Parragraph referred to, I Am sure, proves no
such thing: 7.
there are two or three expressions from Erasmus, Calvin, and Musculus, which
represent some of the Reformed as worse then while they were Papists. And will
he take the advantage of this, so far as to say, that the Reformation does of
it self make men worse? If he will, it is plain, he is resolved to make all the
spiteful inferences he can, without troubling himself whether they are just or
no.

He proceeds to reflect on the many Sects that sprung 62.
up after the Reformation. But a late Apologetical Vindicator of the Church of
England has so fully cleared this objection, that the most partial must be
satisfied. I can add nothing to what that worthy Author has done, and shall
therefore spare my self the trouble of transcribing. I shall only take notice
of something the Considerer relates on this occasion. By reason of these Sects,
he says, following the Reformation so close at the heels etc, -- Lr. often
foretold that the true Religion should not long continue after his death. He
bring's not a Letter from Lr. to confirm this report, which is an evident sign
that he cannot: for upon lesser occasions* he does not spare his Latin. Indeed
Luther was so far from any diffidence of this nature, that his Adversaries have
blamed him for a too great presumption on the other side: particularly Bellarmin
in his 12th. Note urges against him a prophecy of his, that in two years the
Papal Kingdom should be destroyed. Though this too be a falsity, and was
broached by Cochleus, a venomous writer; and one so careless of truth or
falsehood, that Sanders himself is not more. But my Author has a great knack at
Remarks: in the end of this Paragraph, he makes another about our refining in
the points of Controversy, and coming nearer and nearer still to the Church of
Rome. Now let any man compare Bellarmin's bold truths, with the softnings of
the Bishop of Condom, and the Representer, and then tell me, on which side this
imputation lies. 'Twill appear, I believe, upon this search, that Old Popery,
and New Popery agree no more, then the two styles.

We are come now to the last stage of the Pamphlet;. 63.
where we may see how much art is requisite to manage circumstances well.
Nothing is less obnoxious to censure then the story of Ls. death, when entirely
told. Yet as passages are here picked out, and wrested it makes no good
appearance. This we have the more reason to take ill of him, because he there
quotes Iustus Jonas his account, the most authentic extant; and yet takes but a
single circumstance from him in the whole relation. The truth is, no other
account bear's any credit with us: This was compiled by Eyewitnesses, Jonas,
Caelius, and Aurifaber: who solemnly invoke God to witness that they have
related all things with exact fidelity; and who indeed durst not have done
otherwise; since Count Mansfeld, and several other persons of Quality were
present also, and could have confuted 'em, had they been faulty in any thing.
Sleidan has contracted the story from them, and in his words I shall give it
you. Vide marg. Prius quam Islebium perveniret, quod erat sub exitum Januarii,
valetudine utebatur tenuiori: sed tamen and causam agebat, propter quam erat
vocatus, and aliquoties in templo docebat, percepta quoque caena Domini. 17.
vero die Februarii coepit aegrotare gravius ex pectore. Erant cum eo filii
tres, Joannes, Martinus, Paulus, and alii quidam familiares; in his etiam
Justus Jonas, Ecclesiae Hallensis Minister* and quanquam erat imbecillus,
prandit tamen cum reliquis atque coenavit: inter coenandum variis de rebus
locutus, hoc etiam inter caetera rogavit - Number in illa sempiterna vita simus
alter alterum recognituri? cumque illi ex ipso averent scire; quid, inquit
accidit Adamo etc. -- A coena quum divertisset precandi causa sicuti consuevit,
coepit augeri dolor pectoris. Ibi monitu quorundam usus est cornu monocerotis,
ex vino; post, in minori lectulo hypocausti per unam and alteram horam suaviter
dormit. Cum evigilasset, in cubiculum ingreditur, and ad quietem iterum se
componit, and salutatis amicis, qui aderant, orate, inquit, Deum, ut Evangelii
doctrinam nobis conservet: Pontifex enim and Concilium Tridentinum dira
moliuntur. Haec ubi dixit, facto silentio, dormit aliquandiu. Sed urgente vi
morbi, post mediam noctem excitatus, queritur de pectoris angustia and
praesentiens instare jam vitae finem, his omnino verbis Deum implorat. Mi pater
coelestis, Deus, and ^ater Domini nostri Jesu Christi. Deus omnis
consolationis, ago tibi gratias, quod filium tuum mihi revelasti, cui credidi,
quem sum professus, quem amavi, quem celebravi, quem Pontifex Romanus, and
reliqua impiorum turba persequitur contumelia: rogo te, mi Domine Jesu Christ,
suscipe animulam meam Mi pater coelestis etiamsi divellor ex hac vita, certo
tamen sclo, me tecum esse permansurum in sempiternum, neque posse me tuis ex
manibus a quoquam avelli. Non multo post hanc precationem, ubi spiritum suum in
manus Domini commendasset semel atque iterum, tanquam dormiturus paulatim e
vita decedit, nullo cum corporis, qui quidem animadverti posset, cruciatu.
Sleid* ad Ann. 1546. This account falls in exactly with Th^anus's (Hist Lib 2.)
a Writer of the other party and even Surius himself has given us (Comm. p. 474)
a Copy of the Prayer.
. Here is first of all no surprise, as the Pamphlet tell's us; Luther had early
warnings given him by a lingering sickness, and was sensible of his death some
time before it is approach. Neither happened it amidst all the Iollity that is
pretended: He had discoursed all that day on divine subjects, had employed his
latter days in preaching, and receiving the Sacrament, and his breath departed
with a prayer. But this prayer had never a miserere mei in it, says the
Objecter. What then? must all good men at their death be tied up to a
particular phrase? yet nevertheless it had something equivalent: Rogo te, mi
Domine, Jesus Christ suscipe animam meam, was no assuming expression, but as
much a request of mercy as the other. He died calmly too, and with all the
easyness of a man falling asleep: not with the tortura oris, and dextrum latus
totum infuscatum, which we are told of out of Cochleus. The Considerer might be
ashamed, after he had professedly disowned that senseless writer through his
whole book, to close it up at last with a little piece of borrowed malice from
him. A thousand such particulars as these might be drawn from Lindanus,
Pontacus, Thyrraeus and the rest of that rank Crew, who have taken care that
neither Luther nor any other Reformer should go down to the Grave with honor.
Luther had the luck to detect one of these shamms whilst living: for even Then
a story was sent abroad of his Death, with all the hideous circumstances
imaginable Vide Lonicer. Theatr. p. 246.
: But he himself confuted it in writing, and showed us in this one report what
credit may be given to the rest. Yet Bellarmin was so taken with these
fooleries, that he has, ridiculously enough, inserted into his Notes of the
true Church, this for one -- The bad ends of it is opposers: and there with a
great deal of formality tells this story of Ls. death, and twenty more not less
extravagant. But let the Considerer p. 104.
rebuke him for it: his words are, that the chief authors of Sects and
Haeresies have, not unfrequently, nothing in their Life or Death exorbitant or
monstrous: which also is a kind hint, that he himself has been committing an
impertinence for above an 100 pages together; For it is an Observable very
easily drawn I think from this Concession, that the Life and Death of a man can
be no standard of his doctrine; which evidently undoes all he has been doing,
and putt's us in mind once again of the humble-bees, and the Tinder-boxes.

I have done with his Paragraphs; and shall now examine a little his design in
writing em. It was, I suppose, to lay a blot upon the Reformation in general,
and particularly that of the Church of England. But first, how comes the Church
of England to be concerned in what Luther said, or did? Whilst he was pulling
down the Papacy in Germany, she was carrying on the same design here at home.
She had struggled and heaved at a Reformation; ever since Wicliffs days, for
abont a 150 years together: her Lollards (as they were called) had all along
spoken, written, and died for it: she could not nevertheless bring it to the
birth 'till about this time, when the Eyes of all Europe began to be opened:
then it was that she pushed it forward, and threw off the Popes Yoke in concert
with other Churches. Her proceedings were regular, and by the joint Authorities
of the state Civil and Ecclesiastical. If irregularities were done elsewhere,
let them Answer for 'em, that did 'em. Whatever Luther's actions at that time
might be, they concern us no more, then the Historian's flourish about Sultan
Selim's Conquests does his History of Haeresys: they were cotemporary indeed,
and that is all; for there is no other dependence between 'em.

But neither is the Reformation in general at all blasted by this method. For
let Luther be as bad as he will, yet the Doctrine of the Apostles, and the
primitive Church is, we hope, never the worse for his preaching it. He pretended
to no new Revelation; had he done so 'twould have been requisite, perhaps, that
he should have lived up to it: he only pointed out some old Truths, that had
layn hid a great while; and detected some Errors, which in the course of time
had, like rust, overspread Christianity. Here have we nothing to do but to put
our selves upon the search, whether these pretenses of his to antiquity be true
or false: for if they be true, it is a confessed point that they must be listened
to, whoever he be that makes 'em. Idolatry is agreed to be a sin on all sides:
should a Jew therefore object it to the Church of Rome, as an hindrance of his
Conversion, she were bound to reform even on this admonition. But where a new
Religion is revealed, the case I confess, is otherwise: there the doctrine it
self is in dispute whether true or false; all aids therefore are to be called
in, that may any ways assist us in the discovery; and the Lives of the
Revealers may be justly enough set over against the Revelation, to find whether
they agree. Thus should that bad man Lr. have been the first discoverer of
Errors in the Church, yet his badness would in no wise have prejudiced his
discovery. But what now if he were one of the latest protesters against Popery?
and even then, but one among many, that set about the same work? The objection
at this rate lessens very much, and comes to no more then this, t^ amongst a
Cloud of Witnesses, there was One of no very good reputation. And that this is
the case, has been proved upon 'em to a demonstration a hundred times over.
Melchior Adams has afforded us the Lives of no less then 22 Divines, who
immediately before, and together with Luther promoted all the same design. The
Errors of the Church of Rome were never possessed quietly: we have told 'em
when they came in, and who they were that rose up against 'em, in every age,
from the 6th Century down to the 16th. If any man requires this Catalogue, he
may find it in White's True way to the Church completely and learnedly set
down p. 387. Edit Land. 1620.
: not to mention Field, Usher, Catalogus Testium Vt ritatis, and twenty more.
Goldastus's three Volumes sufficiently explain the sense of all ages in this
point; and Orthuinus Gratius's Collection of Complaints lets us know what
peoples thoughts were, when Luther appeared. He did not awaken the world with
new surprising notions; for then they would have suspended their judgments a
while: whereas thousands followed his standard, as soon as ever it was
advanced; and Melitz the Apostolic Commissary owned that in 1518 (a year after
Lr. first preached) he found in his journey from Rome to Saxony three on
Luther's side to one that stood for the Pope Vide Sleid. ad Ann.
. Luther then was one of the latest asserters of truth, and even at that time
not single: Oecolampadius, Zuinglius, Carlstad, and many more were even as
early as he: though it is true he signalized himself above the rest by a peculiar
bravery of mind, and an undauntedness in the cause of God, that was little less
then miraculous. He labored more then them all, yet still they were his
Fellow Laborers in the Gospel: and therefore, were the Reformation to be run
down by Life-writing, yet to think this task is performed by considering the
actions of Lr. alone, when there were so many both before and with him that
embarked in the same cause, is the most senseless thing imaginable.

But further, when the Considerer has managed this argument to the best
advantage, he would do well to consider too, how it returns upon him. Luther,
even in the colors he has laid upon him, does not look half so ill as some
Popes of theirs who were his Cotemporaries. Julius was of a cruel restless
temper, and sacrificed the peace of all Italy to his ambition. Leo the 10th. is
deservedly infamous for his base prostitution of Indulgences. Paul the 3d. kept
a Whore openly, and owned it; and advanced a-Bastard of his to the Principality
of Parma and Piacenza. Would we ascend higher to the known names of Hildebrand,
Innocent, Boniface, and the rest of those lewd Popes, whom Bellarmin confesses
to have gone in a long Train to the Devil, we should quickly find how
advantageous Luther's character would appear: and what reason Castilio's
Painter had to reply upon the Cardinal, who blamed him for putting a little too
much color into St. Peter and Paul's faces, that 'twas true indeed, in their
Life time they were pale mortified men, but that since they were grown ruddy,
by blushing at the sins of their Successors. Now let any man tell me, why
manners are not (as much, nay) more requisite to an Infallible Guide, then a
fallible Reformer? since in the one, we accept the Doctrine merely for the
man's sake, in the other the man for his Doctrine's sake: especially since the
first involves always the latter's character; for Infallibility carrys along
with it the perpetual power of reforming Abuses. This holds good then against
such as place the last appeal in the Pope: those who take refuge in a
multitude, have an Arrian Council to Answer for; a Council, where the lives of
the Fathers were as unorthodox as their Principles; and this in a much higher
degree then is pretended upon Luther, if Athanasius's word may be set over
against the Considerer's.

The method then of the Pamphlet is every wa^ (...) sufficient, and let the
Spirit of Martin Luther be as (...) it is supposed to be, yet the proof of this
would not bla^ one single truth of that Religion, he professed. But to ^e off
all seeming objections, and stop the mouths of the most unreasonable
Gainsayers, I have examined even this little pretense too; and find, upon a
faithful enquiry, that Luther's Life was led up to those Doctrines he preached,
and his Death was the death of the Righteous. Were I not confined by the
character of an Answerer merely to wipe off the Aspersions that are brought, I
could swell this book to 'twice the bulk by setting out that best side of Lr.
which our Author in the Picture, he has given us of him, has; contrary to the
method of Painters, thrown into shade, that he might place a supposed deformity
or two the more in view. He was a Man certainly of high endowments of mind, and
great Virtues: he had a vast understanding* which raised him up to a pitch of
learning unknown to the age he lived in: his knowledge in scriptures was
admirable, his Elocution manly, and his way of reasoning with all the subtilty
that those honest plain truths, he delivered, would bear: His thoughts were
bent always on great designs, and he had a resolution fitted to go through with
'em: The assurance of his mind was not to be shook, or surpised; and that
(...) of his (for I know not what else to call it) before the Diet at Worms,
was such as might have become the days of the Apostles. His Life was holy, and,
when he had leisure for retirements, severe: his virtues active chiefly, and
homilitical, not those lazy sullen ones of the Cloister. He had no ambition but
in the service of God: for other things, neither his enjoyment, nor wishes ever
went higher then the bare conveniences of living. He was of a temper
particularly averse to covetousness, or any base sin; and charitable even to a
fault, without respect to his own occasions. If among this Crowd of Virtues a
failing crept in, we must Remember that an Apostle himself (...) not been
irreprovable: If in the Body of his Doctrine (...) Flaw is to be seen; yet the
greatest Lights of the Church, and in the purest times of it, were, we know,
not exact in all their Opinions. Upon the whole, we have certainly great reason
to break out in the phrase of the Prophet, and say -- How beautiful upon the
mountains are the feet of him that brings glad tideings?

FINIS.

