THE LORD CHIEF JUSTICE Herbert's ACCOUNT EXAMINED.

By W. A. Barrister at Law.

Wherein it is shown, That those Authorities in Law, whereby he would excuse
his Judgment in Sir Edward Hales his Case, are very unfairly cited, and as ill
applied.

Vendidit hic auro patriam, Dominumque potentem
Imposuit, leges fixit pretio, atque refixit.
LONDON, Printed for J. Robinson at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard,
and Mat. Wotton at the Three Daggers in Fleetstreet. 1689.

THE Lord Chief Justice HERBERT's ACCOUNT EXAMINED.
WEre it not the Reproach of our Times, to have had Men advanced to Courts of
Judicature, for other Merits, besides Integrity, and Learning in the Laws of
their Country; it might seem a great piece of Vanity in me, to answer a Book
stamped with the Name, and Authority of a Chief Justice.

Yet, perhaps, I might be thought not without cause to take this as my more
immediate Province; having been the first of the Profession, who ventured in
Public Companies to show, how woefully that innocent Book-Case 2 H. 7. in
relation to Sheriffs, has been mistook, or wrested, to serve for Color to that
hasty Judgment in Sir Edward Hales his feigned Case.

Wherefore, how needful soever the Chief Justice may find it, to make
Protestations of his Sincerity; Vid. Account, p. 1.
this may supersede any such from me. Nor would I willingly call his a
Protestation contrary to apparent Fact (especially considering that weakness of
Judgment manifested by this Defense) did he not give too great occasion for it:
1. From the large Steps which he took, to precipitate, and, as I am well
assured, to solicit that Resolution. 2. The manner in which he delivered it,
widely differing from what he now prints. 3. The unfairness of his present
Quotations: And, 4. The unhappiness, not to say worse, of those Instances which
he is pleased to give of his Sincerity.

I shall not dispute, or repeat his Lordships State of the Case: But the
Question upon it being, Whether the King may by his Prerogative dispense with
the Statute 25 Car. 2. c. 2. requiring all Persons in any Office under the King
to take the Test against Popery, I shall enquire,

1. Whether those Books, which he relies on as Authorities for his Judgment,
give any color to it.

2. Whether, admit they did, they would countenance the Resolution as he
delivered it.

3. Whether those Instances which he offers of his Sincerity, may reasonably be
taken for such.

4. Whether he in any measure clears himself from the Imputation of being
highly criminal.

His Lordship, like a Master-Disputant, begins, as he thinks, Account, p. 6.
with a Definition of a Dispensation, which, he says, is given by the Lord
Cook: Cook 11 Rep. f. 88.
Dispensatio mali prohibiti est de jure Domino Regi concessa, propter
impossibilitatem praevidendi de omnibus particularibus; and dispensatio est
mali prohibiti provida relaxatio, utilitate, seu necessitate pensata.

Where, I must say, he very unlearnedly clogs the Definition of a Dispensing
Power, with the Person in whom it is supposed to be lodged; nay, and the Reason
too why it should be so, which neither the Lord Cook, nor Common Sense, gives
him any Warrant to bring into the Definition. However, it seems, according to
this, a Dispensing Power, in some Case or other, is vested in the King; which
yet is far from proving any thing to his purpose; for either the King may in
all Cases dispense as to particular Persons, and then his Distinction of malum
prohibitum, V. p. 7. and 8.
and malum in se, falls to the ground; or else it reaches only to those Cases,
in which the Judgment, or Flattery of Judges have ascribed it to him.

He adds out of the Lord Cook, P. 6. 11 Rep. f. 88.
as an Enlargement upon what he calls the Definition: Inasmuch as an Act of
Parliament, which generally prohibits any thing upon a Penalty that is POPULAR,
OR ONLY GIVEN TO THE KING, may be inconvenient to diverse particular Persons, in
respect of Person, Time, or Place; for this purpose the Law gives a Power to
the King to dispense with particular Persons. Where the Lord Cook manifestly
restrains the Penalty, to such as is given the King as Head of the People, upon
which account only he calls it Popular; nor, indeed, can be thought to take in
what is granted to any Subject that will inform, it being mention^d without
distinction whether before, or after an Information commenced.

7 Rep. f. 36.
And that the Lord Cook's Words here, ought not to be strained farther, is yet
more evident, from the Case of Penal Statutes, on which Sir Edward Herbert's
Misrepresentations will occasion my more particular Remarks.

As Sir Edward, considering what Interest he has served, may be presumed
something conversant with Priests and Jesuits, He might, among others of less
use, have consulted the Learned Suarez, Suarez de Legibus, lib. 6. cap. 10. f.
384.
who after the Definition, which he makes to be Legis humanae relaxatio, in a
distinct Chapter shows, with whom the ordinary Power of Dispensing (which he
distinguishes from that which is delegated) is lodged, where he says, Ib. cap.
14. f. 395.
Certum est eum habere ordinariam potestatem dispensandi, qui legem tulit: And
he gives the Reason, Quia ab ejus voluntate, and potentia pendet. So that none
can have this power, but he, or they who are vested with the Legislative
exclusive of others; or such as have it delegated from thence. V. Jus Angl. ab
Antiquo and Jani Angl. fa. nov.
That the King has not the Legislative exclusive of others, is what I have
formerly proved at large, and it lies on the other side to show that the
Dispencing Power bas been delegated to him. Yet thus much may be said on the
contrary.

1 st. That the King could not in Law be presumed to have exercised such a
Power by himself; for that the ancient Law provided, that he should have a
Counsel chose in Parliament, who (as the Charter affim'd to be declaratory of
the ancient Law, and sworn at the Coronation of Hen. 3. has it) were sworn quod
negotia Domini Regis and Regni fideliter tractabunt, Vid. Mat. Par. de Anno 28.
H. 3. So Rot. Pat. 42, H. 3. m. 4. m. 10. V. Jan. An. fa. Nov. p. 244. Rot.
Par. 4. E. 3.
and sine acceptatione personarum omnibus justitiam exhibebunt: and that it was
accounted the Law long after that, appears by the impeachment of Roger Mortimer
4o. E. 3. part of which was, that Whereas it was ordained in the Parliament
next after the Kings Coronation, that four Bishops, four Earls and four Barons
should stand by the King PUR LUY COUNSEILLER, without whose assent NULL GROS
BUSOIGN NE SE FEUST. Nevertheless Mortimer would undertake to manage all by
himself, accroaching Royal Power, Vid Rot. Par. 5. E. 2. Ryley pl. parl. f. 317.

Rot. Par. 8. E. 2. n. 35. 4. E. 3. n. 16. 17. E. 3. n. 12. Walsingham fol. 243.

Vid. Knighton the 1st. Art. against R. 2. f. 2747.

Vid. etiam 5. H. 4. n. 37. 11. H. 4. n. 15. 1. H. 6. n 16.24.30. 11. H. 6. n.
17. 31. H. 6. n. 38.

V. Roles Ab. 2. part. 179. Mat. Par. ed. Tig. f. 784. V. Math. Paris f. 827.
illepidum.


and it is easily to be shown that such a Counsel was in use, or continually
insisted on, as the right of the Kingdom, from the time of the Charter,
confirm^d 28. Hen. 3. till the end of the Reign of Hen. 6.

2. A Power to grant Non obstantes to Statutes could not have been a right in
the Crown at Common Law; for we have clear Proofs of its odious and condemned
beginning, from the sulpureous Fountain of Rome, as an honest Popish Lawyer
confessed with a deep sigh. 35 Hen. 3. this Non obstante Matthew Paris calls a
detestable addition, against all Reason and Justice; and when the year after
King Henry urged the example of the Pope for Non obstantes: The Prior of
Jerusalem says, God forbid you should use this unpleasant, and absurd word; as
long as you observe Justice you may be King, and as soon as you violate it, you
will cease to be King. Which shows how little Foundation in Law it then was
thought to have; and what the whole Nation thought of the Pope's use of it, may
be seen at large in Matthew Paris, Prin's Animad. f. 129.130.

V. etiam Sir John Davis his Rep. f. 69. b.


and Mr. Prin's Animadversions on the 4 th. Institute.

Farther the Reasons given why the King ought to have this Power, fail here
upon many accounts.

1. In that the Interest of the whole, of which the Legislators are the best
Judges, when they make the Law without Exception, ought to outweigh all private
Inconveniences.

2. The Law has provided a more certain, and equal Remedy; having taken as
sufficient Care for the meeting of Parliaments once a Year at least, and, I may
say, Vid. Mod. ten. Parl. Parliamentum separari non Debet dummodo aliqua
Petitio pendeat indiscussa vel ad Minus ad quam non suit determinatum responsum
and si Rex contrarium permittat perjurius est. As I find it in an ancient MS.
of the Modus. Vid. etiam 4 Inst. f. 11. Vid. 50 E. 3. n. 177, 178. 1 R. 2.95.
This acknowledged for Law in the King's Name, 2 R. 2. n. 4.
sitting too, as it has for the sitting of the Common Courts of Justice; as
appears from the several Statutes in Print, and others in the Rolls, which
avoid the common Cavil upon the words Oftener if need be.

And these were, like the famous Triennial Act, Provisions for the greater
certainty of meeting so often at least; but no Recessions from the old Law,
which, as appears both by the Mirror, and the Life of King Alfred, Vid. Spelm.
Vit. Aelfredi, f. 115.

Mirror, p. 282. Where it is placed among the Abuses of the Law, That
Parliaments are not held twice a year.


was for the Great Council to meet twice a year at London.

3. The great Reason assigned in the Latin Quotation from the Lord Cook,
Propter impossibilitatem praevidendi de omnibus particularibus, which is after
distinguished, as to Person, Time, and Place; can by no means be applied to the
Case in question: For, 1. The Law was made but very few Years before their
Lordships Resolution, and not grown more inconvenient by length of time to any
particular Person, than it was at the making of the Act. 2. The Lawmakers had
in their immediate prospect every particular Person of the Romish Communion,
and the Time when, and Place where, the Danger would happen, if any such were
Commissioned.

Let us now see what help he can have from his second Quotation from the Lord
Cook, which is 7 Rep. f. 73. but he intends, I suppose, f. 37. and would have
it believed, that it was the Opinion of all the Judges of England, 2 Jac. 1.
That the King may dispense with any particular Person, that he shall not incur
the Penalty of the Statute, Account, p. 7.
though it be an Act made pro bono publico, and that this is a Trust and
Confidence inseparably annexed to the Royal Person of the King, in which, 1. He
again overthrows his Distinction of malum in se and prohibitum, making that
Power at large in relation in any Statute pro bono publico. 2. He manifestly
perverts the Lord Cook's sense, whose Words are, 7 Rep. f. 36.
When a Statute is made pro bono publico, and the King as Head of the
Commonwealth, and the Fountain of Justice and Mercy, is by all the Realm
trusted with it; this is a Trust and Confidence inseparably adjoined, and
annexed to his Royal Person, in so high a Point of Sovereignty, that he cannot
transfer it to the disposition or power of any private Person, or to any
private Use; for this was committed to the King by all his Subjects, for the
Public Good, etc. But true it is, that the King can upon any cause moving him,
in respect of Time, Place, or Person, etc. make a Non obstante to dispense with
any particular Person, that he shall not incur the Penalty of the Statute.

Where the sole Question was, of transferring over a Penalty granted to the
King, as entrusted by all the Realm to see the Statute put in execution, by
inflicting the Penalty: This Trust is adjudged inseparable, and not to be
transferred over; but that however, the King may dispense with the Penalty
granted to himself. Upon which I must say our Chief Justice has made a very
foul Stretch; for what is this to the Informer's Part, concerning which the
Question before him was? But surely there is a mighty difference between these
two Propositions. Where the Subjects have entrusted the King with a Statute
made for the Public Good, this Trust is inseparable, and cannot be transferred
to another; but the Statute so entrusted may be dispensed with; which is all
that is to be gathered from the Lord Cook: and this, Though an Act be made for
the Public Good, yet the King may dispense with it, and this is a Trust and
Confidence inseparably annexed to the Royal Person of the King; which is Sir
Edward Herbert's perverse Comment. In short, Lord Cook says, Where the King is
entrusted with the Execution of a Statute made for the Public Good, he may
dispense with that Statute. Sir Edward Herbert says, He may dispense with any
Statute made for the Public Good. Upon which it is to be observed, That the
Question in the Lord Cook was not of Dispensing, but granting over the Penalty;
which Penalty, he says, is not to be transferred over: The other would make it
of Dispensing, and that that Power is inseparable, and not to be transferred;
so apparently changes the State of the Question.

His next Step is to the Year-book of H. 7. f. 11, and 12. in which he leaves
us to seek the Year, which is 11. This he calls the first, and great Case which
he cites, wherein the King's Dispensing Power is described and limited.

Account, p. 7.
There is a diversity, says the Book, between malum prohibitum, and malum in
se; as a Statute forbids any Man to coin Money, and if he does, he shall be
hanged, this is malum prohibitum; for before the Statute, Coining Money was
lawful, but now it is not so, and therefore the King can dispense with it. So
if a Man ship Wool in any place but Calice, it is malum prohibitum, because it
is prohibited by Act of Parliament: But that which is malum in se, the King,
nor no other Person can dispense with; as if the King would give a Man power to
kill another, or license one to make a Nuisance in a Highway, this were void;
and yet the King can pardon these things when they are done. Upon this Case
it is observable, That the Power of Dispensing is here asserted in relation to
Things, and not Persons: Wherefore according to this, taken in Sir Edward
Herbert's Latitude, the King may grant Dispensations to all in general, where
the Matter is only malum prohibitum; whereas he himself owns that the nature of
a Dispensation is particular, and given to particular Persons by name. Page 7.
2. Many things in Magna Charta, nay the most, are but mala prohibita; and so
Magna Charta its self may be dispensed with: when he himself owns, Page 28.
that the King cannot dispense with one Tittle of Magna Charta: And methinks he
could not but observe this Contradiction. Wherefore the Rule there, admit it
were a Judgment in Law, as it was not, being only spoken obiter by one of the
Judges, Chief Justice Fineux, 11 H. 7. f. 12. a.
can be applied only to such Cases as are there cited. The first is that of
Coining Money, which goes upon the ground in Moor's Reports, Moor Rep. f. 714.

Indeed the Book spsaks also of dispensing with Statutes restraining the
Prerogative; but that concerns not the Instances here of things forbid the
Subject for the limitation of that Power. Vid. infra.


where it is said, that such Statutes as give a Prerogative may be dispensed
with: and that of shipping Woolls at Calice, the King's Staple, is of the same
nature; and both sufficiently show the Distinction of malum prohibitum, from
malum in se, to relate barely to such things as become evil by accident, as
they are against an accidental Prerogative. Which no way interferes with the
Rights of the Subjects in general, or particular.

And I much wonder that Sir Edward Herbert should cite my Lord Vaughan in the
Case of Thomas and Sorrel, as confirming what he would infer from the
Year-Book, when Lord Vaughan says, F. 332.
That old Rule has more confounded Men's Judgments on the Subject, F. 333.
than rectified them; and himself denies that the King can dispense with every
malum prohibitum by Statute, though prohibited by Statute only.

Oh, but my Lord Vaughan shows, that a Dispensation does jus dare, and makes
the thing prohibited to all others, lawful to be done by him that has it. Does
he say this of every malum prohibitum? By no means: Wherefore we must apply it
to the Case then in question, which concerned Wine-Licences, about which the
King had a Prerogative by Statute Law: And the dispensing with that, falls
within the Rule in Moor; Sup. f. 714.
agreeing with the Lord Coke in the Case of Penal Statutes. 7 Rep. f. 36. b.
Yet even thus much was a Point gained by the Prerogative, since the first of
H. 7. for it is then made a Doubt before all the Judges of England in the
Exchequer Chamber, and adjourned over for the difficulty, 1 H. 7. f. 2. b. and
3. ^.
Whether the King could license the Shipping Woolls elsewhere than at Calice;
one of the very Instances which Sir Edward Herbert relies on: And Chief Justice
Hussy was positive, that the King could not license it, though indeed the
Chief-Baron and some others held as Fineux did afterward. Wherefore no body of
less assurance than our Chief Justice can say from these Cases results this
plain Syllogism.

Whatever is not prohibited by the Law of God, P. 8, and 9.
but was lawful before any Act of Parliament made to forbid it, the King by his
Dispensation may make lawful again, to that Person who has such Dispensation,
though it continues unlawful to any body else, etc. In which if we grant his
Major, I will own, the Conclusion to bring it to Sir Edward Hales his Case, is
not criminal: Yet the Proposition is so pernicious, striking at the very
Foundations of our Government, that if there were a Resolution, in stead of an
extrajudicial Opinion, giving that Countenance which even that loose Opinion
does not; yet it ought to be rejected: For if all Acts of Parliament contrary
to Magna Charta are void, as some have held, I am sure much more so would such
Resolutions of Judges be; and that such an one would be contrary to that Great
Charter, is evident; for no Man can say, that all things prohibited by Magna
Charta, are prohibited by the Law of God.

Acc. p. 9.
To come to Sir Edward's next Great Case, as he calls it, but indeed the only
one which has colored the Resolution to the World, which is that 2 H. 7. Yet
p. 5. he promises to cite the Books and Pages, and to transcribe the very words
of his Authorities, that every body may be convinced, if he were in a mistake,
it was no wilful mistake.

2 H. 7. f. 6. b. and 7. a.


Notwithstanding his Promise, he has not been so fair to give the Words of that
Case, or so much of them as is material, lest every body might judge of how
little use it would be to him; nay, lest Men should be for satifying their own
Eyes, he has not directed to the Folio.

The English of the material part is thus.

In the Exchequer Chamber all the Justices were shown for the King, how King
Edward the Fourth by his Letters Patents had constituted the Earl of N --
Sheriff of the same County, and had granted the said Earl the Office of Sheriff
of the said County for the Term of his Life, with all the other Offices thereto
belonging, rendering to the King at his Exchequer annually 100 l. without any
Account, or any other thing to be given for it, etc.

Now, 1. Whether this Patent was good? And also, 2. How this Patent shall be
intended? were the Points in question. And as to the first Point, the Justices
held the Patent good; for it is a thing which may well be granted for Term of
Life or Inheritance, as diverse Counties have a Sheriff by Inheritance, and this
commenced by a Grant of the King. Then was shown a Resumption, and then was
shown a Proviso for H. Earl of N. so that the Patent remains in its force.

Radcliff shows the Statute of 28 E. 3. c. 7. and 24 E. 3. c. 5. That no
Sheriff shall be more than one Year, etc. although he had a Non obstante. And
notwithstanding this, that the King shall always have his Prerogative, as of
the Value and the Certainty of the Land, and other things granted by the King,
and of Woolls shipped, and of Charters of Murder, and many other Cases, where
the Statutes are, That Patents that want these things shall be void; yet the
Patenrs are good with a Non obstante: But without a Non obstante the Patents
are void, by reason of the Statutes, so here the Patent, with a Non obstante,
etc.

This is all that is said in the Book upon the first Point, upon which it is
observable,

1. By the Book it would seem that this Radcliff was but a Sergeant at Law; for
at the end of the Case Brian Justice demands of Brian Radcliff, F. 7.
etc. Yet indeed I find upon search, that he was a Baron of the Exchequer.

2. What Radcliff says is after the Resolution of the Judges over, and no way
influenced that.

3. Whereas Sir Edward Herbert says, the Resolution was upon 23 H. 6. c. 1.
Radcliff, who should better know the Subject of Debate, discourses only
concerning the Statutes 28 E. 3. c. 7. and 12 E. 3. c. 5. which are barely
prohibitory, It should be c. 9.
without any mention of Non obstantes, or any voiding or disabling Clause.
Indeed Radcliff, it being upon a sudden Discourse, as the Book shows, F. 7. a.
Brook Patents, n. 45.
mistakes the Statutes, as if they had such Clauses; and Brook, who cites part
of the Patent, which it seems he had seen, says, there was in it a Non obstante
to the Statutes 28 E. 3. c. 7. and 12 E. 3. c. 9.

Fitz. Ab. tit. Grant, n. 22.
Fitzherbert indeed says, R. objected the 23 H. 6. but for that sit liber judex.

Account, p. 11.
4. But above all, though our Chief Justice calls them the Judges Enemies, who
say, the Point of Non obstante is not resolved in this Case, which he calls
Confidence, and that they may as well deny one of the ten Commandments; it is
manifest beyond contradiction, that the Resolution ended at issint que le
Patent demurr en sa force; after which comes Radcliff's Discourse; and the
Resolution went upon two Gtounds.

1. That this was a thing grantable for Inheritance, or for Life; which if it
were, First Ground.
it could not be presumed to be touched by the Prohibitory Statutes: And
besides, if the Question had been upon the other, the Case had been an
Exception out of the Statute; 23 H. 6. c. 8.
for the Statute excepts such Counties in which diverse of the King's Liege
People be inheritable to the Office of Sheriff at the making of the Statute,
and also such Persons which have Estate of Freehold in the Office of Sheriff,
at the making of the Letters Patents made to to them of the Office of the
Sheriff, etc. Now whether this were really a County so inheritable, or of an
Estate of Freehold, at the time, or no, is not so very material, being at least
it was so looked upon by the Judges, nay and by the Parliament too, as will
appear by their second Ground.

But that this County was such an one, I take to be also true in fact: Vid.
Cambd. Brit. f. 115. Vid Dugdale's Baron. f. 2. Bromton, a. f. 779 ad 798. De
Regno Northumb.
For it is to be considered, that this was the County of Northumberland, which
was a Palatinate, upon which Reason this, with other Counties under it, was
left out of the Survey in Doomsday Book, as being pensitationibus liberi: This
Palatinate comprised Cumberland and Westmorland, among other Counties, in the
last of which the Sheriffwick is at this day enjoyed in Fee. Indeed
Northumberland came soon into the Crown, as early as the time of William the
Second, upon the Rebellion of Mowbray, constituted Earl thereof in the time of
William the First: But the Authority in Law is much clearer, that this
Sheriffwick, if ever held in Fee, would remain in the Crown as an Inheritance
in gross, and was not merg'd, than any Sir Edward Herbert has produced on his
side; for which we may observe the Rule taken in the Case of the Abbot of
Strata Mercella, which is this: 9 Rep. f. 25 b.
When a Liberty, Franchise, or Jurisdiction was at the beginning erected and
created by the King, and there was no such Flower in the Crown before, there by
the Accession of them again to the Crown, they are not extinct.

Where Instances are given of the Cases of Markets, Hundreds, and Earldoms; nor
can any one say, that Sheriffwicks are ancient Flowers of the Crown: ir Rob.
Atkins v. Rob. Holford in Scaccario Hill. 22 and 23 Car. 2. Vid. Rep penes
doctissimum Dominum Ward.
But more directly to our Case is that between Sir Robert Atkins, and Robert
Holford, which, though not in our Books, is well known. The Case was of the Grant
of the Seven Hundreds of Cirencester, with the Returns of Writs to the Abbot
and Covent of Cirencester: This came to the Crown by the Dissolution of
Monasteries, 31 H. 8. but yet that it was not merg'd thereby, but remained as
an Inheritance in gross, without the help of any Statute, was the Opinion of
the Great Hales then Chief Baron, and of two other Barons, Windham, and Turner.
Part of Hales his Words, as I find them excellently well reported, and full to
this Point, are:

Such Hundreds as were anciently severed from the Counties, and come again to
the Crown by Escheat or Forfeiture, were sometimes, but rarely committed to the
Sheriff, and rejoined to the County, but for the most part kept a distinct:
Ret. Brevium, and the Hundred to which it was annexed, without an actual and
special Reannexion to the County, remains in the King in gross; for the Ret.
Brevium is a thing created de novo. Suppose it were a Court or Jurisdiction
merely created by the King, and the Hundred it self, tho ancient, yet by return
to the Crown it is not merg'd or annexed; this I know in the Case of the Courts
belonging to the Honors of Gloucester, and Hereford, that came to H. 5. by
Marriage of a Coheir, it is still in esse.

This were enough to show, that the Judges Resolution 2 H. 7. had a better
Legal Foundation than what Sir Edward Herbert would suggest.

The second Ground.
2. But then besides that, there was another Ground mentioned in the Book, which
was, That a Resumption was shown before the Judges; and then was shown a
Proviso for H. Earl of N. and so says the Book, the Patent remains in its
force. This Resumption was an Act of Resumption 1 H. 7. and if this Act
provided for that Earl's Grant, as the Judges it seems thought it did, who can
doubt but the Grant was good? The Act of Resumption is to be seen upon Record;
Rot. Parl. 1 H. 7. par. 2.
it is a Resumption of Grants made by Edward the Fourth, and among others, of
the Yefts, that is, Gifts of Offices: The Proviso runs thus.

Provided always, That this Act of Resumption, or any other Act made or to be
made in this present Parliament, be not in any wise prejudicial or hurtful to
the several Grants, and Letters Patents made to Henry Earl of Northumberland,
etc. Which indeed does not make good any void Grant, but supposes all the
Grants to him to be good in Law; nor would the Judges dispute their Supposal.

Account, p. 12.
I admit with him, that Fitzherbert says, and that truly, That the Patent was
adjudged good; but the Reason he gives agrees with what I have shown; his words
are, for such a thing may be grantable for Inheritance, or for Life; and then I
am sure that the Statute does not say expressly, the Patent shall be void, Vid.
Account, f. 12.
though Sir Edward affirms that it does.

Obj. It may be objected, that the Exception in the Statute relates to Estates
in the Subject; but if this were an Interest in gross in the King, that it
could not be taken from him without express words, cannot be denied me.

What he cites from Plowden, Account, p. 12.
can be of no more service; for he only says, there it is held, and I agree it
is held by Radcliff, Accoont, p. 13.
with a mistake of the Statute, That the King can grant a Sheriffwick for more
than a Year: Yet whereas he magnifies this as cited by Plowden, who, as he
supposes, well understood the sense of the Year-Book;

1. It does not appear that it was Plowden, Grenden v. Levesque de Lincoln.
but one who was of Counsel in the Case for the Defendant, who mentions this.

2. He mentions it only as a Case in Fitzherbert, without referring to the Book
2 H. 7. Plowden, f. 502.


But the second Point raised before the Judges, Second Point 2 H. 7.
which occasioned the main Debate in that Case, as appears by the Book, shows,
That the Resolution could not be upon the Point of Prerogative; for they
questioned whether the King could dispense with his own Profit; and all the
Judges except Brian, and Catesby, held, that the Patentee shall account for the
Green Wax, and other things, notwithstanding the Clause of absque reddendo
computum: But the Debate concerning other things arising upon that second
Point, was adjourned; the first resolved upon the Grounds above.

Tho hitherto there is no proof, that any one of Authority in the Law has taken
the Book 2 H. 7. in Sir Edward Herbert's sense, which yet would be of no moment
if they were express, being the Book is to be seen, and clearly otherwise; yet
he thinks my Lord Coke will bear him out, and to this purpose he cites two
Places; one, where he supposes that the Lord Coke not only authorizes this
sense of the Case, but asserts the Prerogative in much higher Terms than they
would presume to do; Account, p. 13.
and by the second he would have it believed, that if the Lord Coke be a
faithful Reporter, all the Judges of England took that Case in the same sense.

The first is the Case of Customs, 24 Eliz. which is pregnant with many
Objections against its being of any force in this Case.

12 Rep. f. 17.
1. The Book is of suspected Authority, being printed in the late Times, and
what the Lord Coke never owned, or thought fit to print in his Lifetime.

2. This comes foisted in among Cases in the time of King James, without any
parallel Case which might occasion the placing of it there.

3. It was when the Lord Coke was but a young Reporter, Was made Solicitor 16
June, 34 Eliz. Dugd. Cron. Series, f. 99.
it being ten Years before he was King's Solicitor.

4. It is not only no Point in question relating to the Case where it is cited,
and so extrajudicial, but wholly foreign to it: For the Question was, Whether
Goods sold before they were landed, were to pay Custom within the Statute 1
Eliz. c. 11. Wherefore being barely a Memorandum of a young Reporter, no way
occasioned by what went before, it cannot possibly have any weight.

5. The fancied Reason there given why the King may dispense with the Statute
of Sheriffs, is none at all; for whereas it says, 12 Rep. f. 18.
that the King has a Sovereign Power to command any af his Subjects to serve
him for the Public Weal, and this solely and inseparably annexed to his
Person; and this Royal Power cannot be restrained by any Act of Parliament;
there is no Authority cited for this, but the Case 2 H. 7. which, as appears to
any body that reads it, neither has that Reason mentioned so much as by any one
Judge, nor in the least goes upon the Point of the Prerogative. Besides, if the
King can command any Subject to serve him for the Public Weal, either he is to
be Judge, or the Laws. If the latter, then no Person not qualified by Law is
obliged to act; nor though qualified, to do any thing forbid by the Laws. If the
former, as the Words imply, then the King's Commands may be pleaded to justify
any ill Minister who has rendered himself obnoxious to the Laws. But that this
cannot be, is sufficiently evinced by necessary Examples in all Ages. And this,
by the way, may show how false, as well as pernicious, that Doctrine is, which
tells us, Dr. Sherlock's Case of Resist. p. 113.
That (...) in the New Testament always signifies the Authority of a Person,
not of a Law: Or, as another has it to the same purpose, Dr. Scot's Sermon. upon
Romans 13, 1.
By Higher Powers, it is evident, we are to understand the Persons of Sovereign
Princes, or Governors, not the Laws and Constitutions, as our Republican
Doctors pretend.

Of the same Batch is another memorable Position, Dr. Sherlock's Case of
Non-resistance, p. 199.
That the King's most illegal Acts, though they have not the Authority of the
Law, (for indeed, to say they have, would be a Blunder with a witness) yet they
have the Authority of Sovereign Power. Some will say, that this is qualified by
what follows, Which is irresistible and unaccountable; as if the King had this
Power only so far as it is irresistible and unaccountable: Whereas it is
evident, the Proposition is entire before, being the Medium whereby he would
prove, that the King's illegal Acts are not inauthoritative; in proof of which
Medium, he afterward affirms, Page 199, 200.
That the Sovereign Power which made the Laws, and can repeal and dispense with
them, is inseparable from the Person of the Prince.

Reduced to a Syllogism, it runs thus:

The Authority of Sovereign Power is irresistible, and unaccountable: But the
King's most illegal Acts have the Authority of Sovereign Power. This is an
entire Proposition, upon which he concludes, Ergo, The King's most illegal Acts
are irresistible, and unaccountable. This Assumption he goes to prove from the
Supposition, that such a Sovereign Power as he describes, is inseparable from
the Person of the Prince; upon which, or the like Doctrine, another raises this
comfortable Use. Jovian, p. 242. How falsely, vid. the Letter to Jovian.
In all Sovereign Governments (and such he at large endeavors to show England
to be) Subjects must be Slaves as to this Particular, they must trust their
Lives and Liberties with their Sovereign.

But for the Honor of our Gown, this may be said, That such Heretics never
appeared among Lawyers, Vid. Jovian, p- 236.
till Divines began thus to wrest the Laws, and Scriptures to their own
damnation. But as the former Quotation out of the Lord Coke can do Sir Edward
Herbert no service, upon the Reasons above shown, much less can the other,
which is one of Sir Edward's usual Perversions: Account, p. 13.
He tells us, That it is resolved by all the Judges, if my Lord Coke be a
faithful Reporter, that it is agreed 2 H. 7. That the King may, against the
express Provision of the Act 23 H. 6. dispense with that Act; for that the Act
could not bar the King of the Service of his Subjects, which the Law of Nature
did give unto him. He adds, This is reported (unless my Lord Coke had a mind to
deceive the succeeding Judges, and draw them in to give pernicious Opinions) as
the Sense of all the Judges of England, in King James 's Time, in the
Exchequer-Chamber. Whereas the Lord Coke, on purpose to prevent such an abuse
of his Words, says in the beginning of the Case,

7 Rep. f 4.
I shall give no just offense to any, if I challenge that which of right is due
to every Reporter, that is, to reduce the Sum and Effect of all to such a
Method, as upon consideration had of all the Arguments, he himself thinks to
be fittest and clearest, for the right understanding of the true Reasons and
Causes of the Judgment, and Resolution of the Case in question. Upon which it
is evident, that if any one of the Judges mentioned this, the Lord Coke is a
faithful Reporter; but had he been silent as to this matter, no man could
suppose, that such a tedious Argument as that in Calvin's Case, was the
Resolution in which the Judges concurred in every Expression.

But Sir Edward Herbert's own Eyes might, and ought to have satisfied him, that
the Judges 2 H. 7. gave no Determination upon the 23 H. 6. nor does the Book
say, that so much as any one Person spoke to that Statute, or mentioned the
Reason devised in Calvin's Case; for that the Act could not bar the King of the
Service of his Subject, which the Law of Nature did give unto him. Nor could
Sir Edward choose but know the absurdity of that Ground; for according to that,
all ought to be left in the State of Nature, as it was before any Law made; so
that not only any Person might act, tho prohibited by subsequent Laws, but he
might act any thing forbid by any positive Law; Vid. Archb. Abbot's Exceptions
to Sibthorp's Sermon. Rushw part 1. f. 439. and 442,
which would make a mad World: And this would come of a Natural Allegiance due
to the Person of a King, without respect to the Laws of his Government. And the
Resolution of the Judges in Calvin's Case, is quite contrary to this Supposal;
for it is there resolved, That they who were born under King James his
Allegiance, 7 Rep. f. 27. Vid. Vaugh. f. 286.
before he had the Crown of England, were Aliens here, notwithstanding that
Accession.

But my Lord Coke is so far from giving any real Countenance to such a
Resolution, as that in Sir Edward Hales his Case, that he, in concurrence with
all the Judges of Edgland, is express to the contrary; for in relation to the
Court of Admiralty, he and the rest of the Judges declare, 4 Inst. f. 135.
That the Statutes of 13 R. 2. c. 3. 15 R. 2. c. 5. and 2 H. 4. c. 11. being
Statutes declaring the Jurisdiction of the Court of the Admiral, and wherein
all the Subjects of the Realm have Interest, cannot be dispensed with by any
Non obstante. Nay, he gives another Resolution of Judges, though not so solemn as
the former, yet what he says is warranted in the Books, and the Resolution
comes up to our Case in terminis: 3 Inst. f. 154.
His Words are; When an Act of Parliament is made that disableth any Person, or
makes any thing void, or tortious, for the good of the Church or Commonwealth,
in that Law all the King's Subjects have an Interest, and therefore the King
cannot dispense therewith, no more than with the Common Law.

All the Chimerical Foundation of Solemn Resolutions being thus destroyed, I
need not concern my self with the vain aerie Superstructure, which must vanish
in fumo; and in stead of the Appeal, Account, p. 16.
What may be relied upon, if such Resolutions may not? I appeal to all Mankind,
Whether our Senses are not sufficient Judges against these Accidents,
subsisting without any Subject, mere Transubstantiation Nonsense! Such are
Reasons devised for a Resolution which never was to be seen.

But we are told, Account p. 16.
That besides the Authority of the Case, we have constant Practice that this
Statute has been dispensed with ever since; and if it were not so, the
Consequences would be dreadful, illegal Convictions, etc. But to this I say,

1. A facto ad jus non valet argumentum, till there be legal Determinations on
the side of the Fact.

2. The Fact cannot be shown, for any Sheriff to have enjoyed the Office for
more than one Year by the same Patent.

3. However the Consequences would not necessarily follow; for we know, Vid.
Consid. touching the Grand Quest. a. p. 210. to 214.

1 Inst. f. 58 b.


even Laws made by Kings de facto have always been looked on as binding, and so
have the Admittances to Copyhold Estates, made by Disseisors, and others
without Title. And, though I love not to lay any great stress upon Presidents of
our own time, yet it may serve to Sir Edward; and we well know, that
notwithstanding the late illegal Choice of Sheriffs in the City of London, yet
no Challenges were allowed, because they were Sheriffs de facto.

That I may not be here unnecessarily detained, with what he says to real or
fancied Objections, I shall hasten to his other pretended Authorities, and
shall begin with his last, as having the most immediate reference to the Cases
above cited, and which he seems to be most proud of, and that is Sergeant
Glanvil's Argument, delivered at a Conference between the Lords and Commons;
wherein he owns, that in such things as are only mala quia prohibita, Account,
p. 26.
under certain Forfeitures and Penalties to the King, and the Informer, there
the King may dispense. This indeed is more than appears from any Case that Sir
Edward Herbert has cited, as I have shown above; yet is no more than what the
Lord Coke says elsewhere, immediately after he has denied that Power in things
made void or tortious, Vid. supra, 3 Inst. f. 154.
for the Good of the Church or Commonwealth; in which, he says, all the King's
Subjects have an Interest, and therefore the King cannot dispense therewith, no
more than with the Common Law.

All that is more in Sergeant Glanvil, relates only to the Nature of those
Laws which were then insisted upon; if he went further, it could no more be an
Evidence of the Opinion of the House of Commons in that Point, not being the
Point put to the question, than his Quotation out of Calvin's Case, is of the
Opinion of all the Judges. But the first part of his Speech cannot be stretched
farther than mala prohibita had formerly been taken, that is, in relation to
new Prerogatives, Vid sup p. 12, 28, 30.
or at least Things wherein the Subjects in general have no Interest vested in
them; and he expressly restrains it to such Cases, Account, p. 26.
wherein his Majesty, by conferring Grace and Favor upon some, does not do
wrong to others; as it is in my Lord Coke above, and in Moor, where it is held,
Moor, sup. f. 714.
That Statutes which give a Prerogative, or restrain the Prerogative, may be
dispensed with; but not such as give, or dispose of Interests: And as to what
restrains the Prerogative, not coming within the mala prohibita, though it falls
not under consideration here, yet we may observe the difference taken in Lord
Hobart, Hobart, f. 146. Vid. Vaughan, f. 57. speaking of Lord Hobart's
Judgment, which is always accurate for the Reason of the Law.
where a Statute is made to ease the Sovereign of Labor, not to deprive him of
Power. In the first Case the King may dispense, not in the other.

And I think no man can doubt but the Statute 25 Car. 2. c. 2. which not only
requires Officers to take the Oaths, and Test, to distinguish them from
Papists, but disables them that do not take them within three Months, vests an
Interest, not only in several particular Persons, who may be Reversioners, but
in all the Subjects in general; and is of the nature of those Statutes insisted
on in the Petition of Right, and pressed for by Sergeant Glanvil, Not Laws
inflicting Penalties in malis prohibitis; Account, p. 27.
but Laws declarative, or positive, conferring, or confirming ipso facto an
Inherent Right, and Interest of Liberty, and Freedom in the Subjects of this
Realm, as their Birthright, and Inheritances descendable to their Heirs and
Posterity. A Freedom, I may add, from Popish Slavery and Tyranny, Statutes
incorporate into the Body of the Common Law, over which, with reverence be it
spoken, there is no Trust in the King's Sovereign Power, or Prerogative Royal,
to enable him to dispense with them, or take from his Subjects that Birthright,
or Inheritance which they have in their Liberties, by virtue of the Common Law,
and of these Statutes: I may say, this Statute.

And such a Statute it is, that no man that wishes well to the Protestant
Interest, not only here, but through Christendom, would consent to the
abrogating or impairing the Force of it; without obtaining such Laws for
restoring the ancient Constitution, both for the Choice of Sheriffs, and
Counselors, among other things, as might more effectually keep out the Booted
Apostles, than any other Means, next to the glorious Expedition of his Highness
the Prince of Orange: whose miraculous Successes, are not only the Subject of
present Admiration, but have been plainly foretold in past Ages, Vid. Grebner,
cited in the Northern Star. Vid. Nostredamus, Cent.
1.33.35.2.68.87.3.16.4.75.89.5.24.26.34.87.6.7.13.28.8.58.9.38.64.10.7.26.56.12.80. 5th. Stanza, at the end.
and will be celebrated in all future.

But to return from this short Digression: It Is manifest that Sergeant Glanvil
speaks as well of such Laws as are positive, as those that are declarative;
such as confer an inherent Right, as that confirm; and of Statute, as well as
Common Law, not to be dispensed with; so that he is manifestly on our side, and
seems not in the least to have exceeded the Lord Coke, where he makes so
express an Exception of our Case, from that Dispensing Power which he allows.
By inherent the Sergeant can mean no more, considering the import of confer,
than actually vested, and inherent, and inseparable by any less Power than that
from which it was derived. Thus in relation to those Prerogatives that have
been counted inherent, and inseparable in relation to Penalties, and the like,
Vid. Lord Cook's c. of Penal Statutes, 7 Rep. f. 36.
the true meaning can be only that while they continue, they are not to be
separated, and transferred over to another: Yet no thinking Man will doubt the
Power of a Parliament, in relation even to them; and if they cannot be receded
from in particular, at least they may in gross; when a King does cedere
imperio, or abdicare Regnum, which most Prerogative-Casuists own may be, Vid.
Grot. de Jure Belli and Pacis.

Vid. Falkner's Christian Loyalty, p. 544, 545. speaking of the Parisian
Massacre, etc. But if ever any such strange Case as is proposed, should really
happen in the World, I confess it would have its great Difficulties. Grotius
thinks that in this utmost Extremity, the use of such Defense, as a last
Refuge, ultimo necessitatis praesidio, is not to be condemned, provided the
Care of the Common Good be preserved. And if this be true, it must be upon this
ground, that such Attempts of Ruining do ipso facto include a disclaiming the
Governing those persons as Subjects, and consequently of being their Prince or
King. V. Bishop Bilson, of Christian Subjection, Ed. 1586. p. 280. I never
denied, that the People might preserve the Foundation, Freedom, and Form of
their Commonwealth, which they forepriz'd when they first consented to have a
King.


not only by actual cession from the Government, but by Acts amounting to an
Abdication, and showing a fixed Intention no longer to treat his People as
Subjects. Nor perhaps could there be greater Evidence of such Intention, than
the dispensing at a lump, not barely by retail to particular Persons, with
those Laws which were made by the united Wisdom of the Nation, to secure it, as
much as they thought Humane Means could, or, at least, the Court would yield
to, against those real Dangers, which were in their immediate prospect: Nor in
all probability had this Enclosure been laid waste, if the Dispensing Judges
had not made the first Gap.

Account, p. 24.
As to Sir Edward's supposed clear Concessions of this Power from all the
Commons of England, 1 H. 5. they are quite otherwise than he represents them,
nor would be conclusive to his Point however.

In the first, says Sir Edward, The Commons pray, that the Statutes for voiding
of Aliens out of the Kingdom, may be kept and executed; to which the King
agrees, saving his Prerogative, that he may dispense with whom he pleases; and
upon this the Commons answered, That their Intent was no other.

But the Record says, Sauvant a luy sa Prerogative, "Saving to him his
Prerogative. Whatever that was, they declare, they never intended to injure it.
Then it goes on with the Copulative and, which adds new Matter, and is
dishonestly left out by Sir Edward, Et qil purra dispenser ovesque cex queux
luy plerra, AND that he may dispense with whom he pleases: Which is an
additional Grant, or License to that King; but that this Saving is but a
general Saving of the Prerogative, appears by the very next Record, which he
cites of the same Parliament.

Sir Edward's Words are, In the same Parliament, when the Commons pray, That
the Statutes of Provisors, Statutes of the same nature with this in our Case,
(for they were made against the Court of Rome's encroaching Jurisdiction in
England) I say, when they make the like Prayer, That these may be put in
execution; being admonished by the King's Answer in the former Case, they
themselves insert in their very Prayer, a Saving for this Prerogative of the
King's, and then the King agrees to it. Where he would insinuate, that this
Prerogative of dispensing with particular Persons, is there saved; when the
Record is express to the contrary: The Words in English are,

Rot. Parl. 1 H. 5. n. 22.
Also the Commons pray, for the Good and Profit of the Realm, That all the
Statutes made against Provisors, in the Times of the most Noble Kings E. 3. R.
2. H. 4. your Father, Qe Dieu assoille.
whom God be merciful to, may stand in their force, and may be held, and
executed in all Points, A aucuny fait un affair a contre.
and that no Protection, nor other Grant, to any Person, by our Lord the King,
working to the contrary, in forbearance of the Execution of the said Statutes,
be allowable or available to any Person whatsoever in this Matter. A nully.
And if any thing be done to the contrary, Pur null.
let it be held for null, or void: Saving all times the Prerogative of the
King.

The King answers, Let the Statutes thereof made be held and kept. Which is
plainly meant according to their Prayer, without the King's impeding the
Execution of them by any Protection, or other Grant to any Person whatsoever;
and if such Grant be, that it shall be void. Vid. Account, p. 10.
Is not this as much as to say, That no Non obstante shall make any such Grant
good? Oh but Sir Edward will tell us, That this shows that the Parliament
thought the King could otherwise have dispensed with those Acts. By no means;
it only argues an Abuse crept in (which Matthew Paris shows to have been as
early as the time of H. 3.) and likely to be allowed of by the Judges; but the
Parliament would prevent even that; and surely they would never provide, that a
Non obstante, or Grant to a particular Person, shall be void, if they thought
the King had a Prerogative to defeat this when he pleased: much less, when they
expressly pray against such an Abuse, can they be thought to contradict
themselves, and in the same Breath that they desire that no Person whatever may
be dispensed with, yet leave the King a Prerogative to dispense with whom he
pleases: The absurdity of which Reasoning he might have seen in that excellent
Speech of Sergeant Glanvil, Vid. Sergeant Glanvil's Speech.

Rushworth's Coll. part 1. f. 573. and 575. Account, p. 25.


which he himself receives as the Sense of the Commons of England assembled in
Parliament.

Wherefore the Savings in both the Records can be but general Savings, of such
Prerogative as the Kings had, whatever it were: Which the Kings, as they began
to encroach upon the People, or to be Jealous of their Encroachments, would
have inserted out of abundant Caution, before they would yield to several Acts.
And these being Acts of Parliament, which could pass but as the King consented,
the People were forced often to gild the Pills with such Savings; but 'twas
otherwise of Judgments in Parliament, to which no Consent of the King was
requisite.

Farther yet, Admit the King had a Prerogative of dispensing with particular
Persons, both as to Aliens, and Provisions; yet there could no general Rule be
taken from thence, because it would only argue, that the fondness for Aliens,
and fear of displeasing the Court of Rome, had at first occasioned the
reserving the Power of easing some particular Persons, without which the Kings
would pass no Act against them. However it was, the frequent Complaints of the
Commons, Vid. Dr. Stillingst. against Cressy, from p. 426. to p. 461.
and Acts made against both the one and the other, show, that those Laws were
little regarded or executed, and yet that the King had not a Prerogative
allowed him, any more for particular Persons, than for all in general.

Sir Edward has five other trivial Instances of the Dispensing Power, which
however I shall not omit. One is the Dispensing with the Statute 8 R. 2. c. 2.
which requires, Account, p. 19.
that no Man should go Judge of Assize into his own Country: But for this there
is only Practice, which has passed sub silentio, and so could be of no
Authority in Law: Besides, the Statute is barely Prohibitory, and does not
render the Patents void if otherwise; yet I cannot say but an Information would
lie, though there were a Non obstante in the Case.

The second is of dispensing with the Statute 10 E. 3. c. 3. which provides,
Account, p. 19.
That whoever has a Pardon of Felony, shall find Sureties of the Good
Behavior: Of which he says, as of the other, That it has been constantly
dispensed with ever since it was made. But if the Practice had been so, which
he does not prove, it would not avail, unless it had come in question
judicially, Whether the Pardon would be valid to one who had not given, or at
least tendered Sureties. Indeed there is a Case in our Books, where the Court
did not require Sureties, because of a particular Clause in the Pardon
dispensing with it: Sir Matthew Mints Case, Crook, Car. f. 597.
but this was no earlier than 16 Car. 1. the Judges of which time paid
sufficient deference to Prerogative; but that Case seems to be not only primae
impressionis, and without any Reason given, but in effect condemned by the
Reporter, as he shows that the Court abused their Discretion, if they had any
in the Matter: It Was the Case of Sir Matthew Mints, who appeared to be guilty of
several Misdemeanors, for which he deserved to be bound to the Good Behavior,
committed after the time to which he was pardoned.

The third and fourth Instances, Account, p. 31.
scattered from the rest, are of dispensing with Pluralities, and Bastards
entering into Priests Orders; which, p. 32.
if possible, will be less serviceable to him: For,

Vid Vaughan's Rep. f. 20. Edes v. Evesque d' Oxford.
1. Such Dispensations are never granted by the King, but by the Archbishop; and
the King only licenses, or confirms, the Archbishop's Dispensation in unusual
Cases.

2. That the King's License or Confirmation in Cases unwont, as the Statute has
it, is of any force, is owing to the Statute 25 H. 8. c. 21.

3. Even in usual Cases, where the Archbishop might dispense, though the King's
Confirmation be added, yet unless it come in due time, it will not prevent a
Lapse incurred upon the Statute 21 H. 8. c. 13. against Pluralities; as was
adjudg'd in Digby's Case, 4 Rep. f. 78. b.
though the Dispensation came before Induction. And this comes up fully to one of
the Points in Sir Edward Hales his Case, which our Chief Justice has not been
so fair as in the least to mention to be a Point in the Case: nay, quite
contrary, he supposes it to be a Case where a Disability is annexed as a
Penalty, Account, p. 38.
and that Penalty is not to be incurred before Legal Conviction, and where the
King's Dispensation makes the thing dispensed with lawful, and consequently
prevents any Conviction or Penalty at all; forgetting, that in the very State
of the Case, page 5.
he owns there was a Conviction before the Dispensation came; so that here was
a Disability actually incurred, and that upon Record, as appears in the
Pleadings; and while that Record remains, there is no falsifying of it, Vid.
Rolls Abr. Brook. Fitzh. tit. Estoppel, particularly Statham. Si home soit
oblige de garder le Peace and puis Scire facias issist verse luy de ceo qil bat.
uneqe viet and est trove coup. and puis cet port. brief de trans. verse luy de
mesm le batie and il pled de rien coup. il luy estoppera per matter trove al
suit le Roy, etc. So Brook. n. 59.
though in fact the Conviction were before the three Months given in the Statute
to prevent a Disability; and he had no other Means, than either to plead no
such Record, or to bring his Writ of Error. Wherefore this Dispensation comes
clearly within Digby's Case, as being too late, supposing otherwise it were
valid.

As Sir Edward shows that he has read Thomas and Sorrel^s Case, he might have
known another Reason given of these two Cases, viz. Vaughan, f. 358.
That the King may dispense with a Bastard to take Holy Orders, or with a Clerk
to have two Benefices with Cure; which were mala prohibita by the Canon Law,
and by the Council of Lateran, not by Act of Parliament; which is most true:
For these are mention^d in the Book of H. 7. before any Act made against
Pluralities.

There is another Instance in that wild Annotation, upon the Case of Customs in
the 12 Rep. where it is said, Account, p. 14.
See 4 H. 4. c. 31. in which it is ordained, That no Welshman be Justice, etc.
in any part of Wales, notwithstanding any Patent to the contrary, with Clause
of Non obstante licet sit Wallicus: And yet without question the King may grant
with a Non obstante.

Nor do I question it neither, even before 21 Jac. c. 1.38. when that Statute
was repealed, provided the Welshman use not Welsh Speech; and this by 27 H. 8.
c. 26.

But as to these three last Instances, it might be said further, That if they
were stronger than they prove, yet they might fall under the Difference
received by him from Lord Vaughan, where he says, The King may dispense with
Laws made pro bono populi complicati, but not with such as are made pro bono
singulorum populi; in which the Lord Vaughan is not so absurd, as to mean, that
though the King cannot dispense with a Law in which any Man in particular is so
far interested, as to be entitled to an Action for himself alone, yet he may
with those in which all the Subjects are interested: But his Meaning, to make
him consistent with himself, must be restrained to Lord Coke's Sense upon the
Penal Statutes, which makes this Power to be only where the King, Vid. 7 Rep.
p. 36.
as Head of the Commonwealth, is trusted by all the Realm; in which sense, he
alone is to look after the Interest of the populus complicatus under him, as
Head. Thus Lord Vaughan, 1. expressly qualifies it, Account, p. 21.
when he says, They are pro bono populi complicati, as the King in his
Discretion shall think fit to order them for the good of the whole. 2. He
illustrates it by the Example of a Pater-familias, whose Estate, Vaugh. p. 342.
he tells us, may be said to be pro bono communi of his Family, which yet is
but at his Discretion, and Management of it, and they have no Interest in it,
but have Benefit by it. 3. Both he, and Sir Edward Herbert allow Instances,
where every particular Man is not entitled to his Action, and yet the Statutes
are owned to be pro bono singulorum populi, and not to be dispensed with; and
such are Magna Charta, Account, p. 27, 28.
and those other Laws mentioned by Sergeant Glanvil, and Sir Edward. Account,
p. 11.
And if some difference can be found between the Interest singulorum populi in
all those Statutes, and in ours, to use his words, I wish any man would show me
any such difference; or else we must say, That not only the former
Resolutions, but Lord Vaughan here, as well as where I before observed, is full
against him; Supr. p. 12.
nay, even he is against himself: which I would be loath to think that Lord
Vaughan is, who owns, Thomas v. Sorrel, f. 350.
That the King cannot dispense in any Case but with his own Right, and not with
the Right of any other; which he confines not to individual Persons, considered
singly; for he says expressly, Ib. f. 347.
If the Wisdom of the Parliament has made an Act to restrain, pro bono
publico, the Importation of Foreign Manufactures, that the Subjects of the
Realm may apply themselves to the making of the said Manufactures for their
Support, and livelihood, to grant to one or more the Importation of such
Manufacture, without any Limitation, non obstante the said Act, is a Monopoly,
and void. For this I am sure, particular Persons are not entitled to Actions
upon their own accounts. Indeed he supposes the King may license, limiting the
Quantity, Vaugh. f. 346.
and that for private uses, not by way of Merchandise, as not being against the
End of the Act. Wherefore in our Case all the Subjects being interested as
Protestants, their Support and Encouragement being provided for by the Act, and
the letting Papists into the Government against the End of it, who can doubt
but Lord Vaughan would have pronounced Sir Edward Hales's Dispensation void?

Account, p 31.
And whereas our Judge pleads in his excuse, That though this Law was made for the
Interest of Religion, the Offense is not directly against Religion, but against
a Politic Constitution, though made for the Interest of Religion, he might not
only have learnt from Lord Cook above, Supr. p. 30.
That the Subjects have such an Interest as the King cannot dispense with, in
what is made void or tortious, that is, unlawful, for the good of the Church;
but Lord Vaughan shows, Vid. Lord Vaughan, f. 339, 340.
That there are mala politica, not to be dispensed with, and instances in some
things, which are Nusances in specie.

Now besides what already has been shown, to disable these three last Instances
urged by Sir Edward; That they are not pro bono singulorum populi, as that Rule
is vindicated from Misapplications, may appear, in that neither of them affect
all the People in general: As to the Clergymen, they can only do injury in
their respective Parishes where they are Beneficed, and the Welshman in that
part of Wales where he is an Officer; nor besides, can the Clergymen be
supposed much to prejudice the Interest of Religion, being the Plurallist
cannot supply his Cure but by one qualified, and the Bastard might be a good
Man, and good Preacher. L. Vaughan, f. 344, 345, 346, 347.
And yet even these would fall within Lord Vaughan's acceptance of his own
Rule; for he shows, That Laws made for the benefit of but part of the Kingdom,
Artificers, and Husbandmen, cannot be dispensed with to any one Person, to
frustrate the Ends of the Statutes.

This leads to another Flourish which he makes with the Lord Vaughan's
Authority, in answer to the Objection, That the Law was made pro bono publico,
Account, p. 22.
and was highly necessary for the Public. Indeed Lord Vaughan will have it,
that the sole Reason why a Statute cannot be dispensed with, is not, that the
Law was made pro bono publico, because all Laws were made for Public good; and
yet Dispensations had been allowed in some, nor was the Degree of Public good
that which altered the Case; yet he shows, that the Extent of it does: and
seems still to keep to Lord Cook's Rule, Where the People had entrusted the
King with the Law, as Head of the complicated Body, there the Trust was
entirely in him; but when the Law extended in Interest not only to individual
Persons, but to a considerable part of the Nation, much more when to all, in
either of which Cases the Statute is pro bono singulorum populi, in neither of
these can the King dispense. And that the Statute in question is of the largest
extent, appears, as the Nation is a Protestant Nation, this the Religion
established by Law, and these Provisions necessary Means to preserve it; and
therefore though the Papists have no benefit by it, they are not in Law, in this
respect, any part of the People; for People always is taken for them that have
Legal Interests. Thus when the Statute provides, 2 Inst. f. 559.
That the People of Counties shall choose their Sheriffs, it relates not to all
the People in general, but only to Freeholders.

2dly.
Having thus shown, That those Grounds which our Judge pretends to have gone
upon, afford no Countenance even to his Palliation of the Judgment, they will
appear much less to countenance it as it was delivered; which to evince, I
shall here set it down ipsissimis verbis, from that faithful Reporter Mr.
Blaney.

It was on that memorable Day when, as another mark of his Sincerity, he
directed the willing Jury, and concurred in the infamous Sentence against that
excellent Author Mr. Johnson; when the Jury was gone out, the Chief Justice
took occasion to inveigh against spreading of Scandalous Reports about Cases
depending in the Court; and to prevent any thing of that Nature in the Case of
Sir Edward Hales, he thought fit to deliver the Opinion of the Judges in this
manner.

C. J. In the Case of Godwin and Hales, wherein the Defendant pleads a
Dispensation from the King, it is doubted, whether or no the King had such a
Prerogative? Truly, upon the Argument before us, it appeared as clear a Case as
ever came before this Court: But because Men fancy I know not what difficulty,
when really there is none, we were willing to give so much Countenance to the
Question in the Case, as to take the Advice of all the Judges of England: They
were all assembled at Serjeants-Inn, and this Case was put them, and the Great
Case of the Sheriffs was put, whether the Dispensation in that Case were Legal,
because upon that depended the Execution of all the Law of the Nation? And, I
must tell you, that there were then Ten upon the place, that clearly delivered
their Opinions, That the Case of the Sheriffs was good Law, and that all the
Attainders grounded upon Indictments found by Juries returned by such Sheriffs,
were good, and not erroneous; and consequently, that Men need not have any
Fears or Scruples about that Matter. And, in the next place, they did clearly
declare, That there was no imaginable difference between that Case, and this,
unless it were, that this were the much clearer Case of the two, and liable to
the fewer Exceptions. My Brother Powel said, he was inclined to be of the same
Opinion, but he would rather have some more time to consider of it; but he has
since sent by my Brother Holloway, to let us know, that he does concur with us.
To these Eleven Judges, there is One Dissenter, Brother Street, who yet
continues his Opinion, That the King cannot dispense in this Case: But that is
the Opinion of One single Judge, against the Opinion of Eleven: We were
satisfied in our own Judgments before, and having the Concurrence of Eleven out
of Twelve, we think we may very well declare the Opinion of the Court to be,
That the King may dispense in this Case; and the Judges go upon these Grounds.

1. That the Kings of England are Sovereign Princes.

2. That the Laws of England are the King's Laws. So Sibthorp, Rushworth vol.
1. p. 422.


3. That therefore, it is an Incident inseparable Prerogative in the Kings of
England, to dispense with Penal Laws in particular Cases, and upon particular
necessary Reasons.

4. That of those Reasons, and those Necessities, the King himself is sole
Judge: And then, which is consequent, upon all,

5. That this is not a Trust invested in, or granted to the King by the People;
but the ancient Remains of the Sovereign Power, and Prerogative of the Kings of
England, which never yet was taken from them, nor can be. And therefore such a
Dispensation being pleaded by the Defendant in this Case, and such a
Dispensation appearing upon Record to come time enough, to save him from the
Forfeiture, Judgment ought to be given for the Defendant, quod querens nil
capiat per billam.

It Is evident, that these Propositions are very wide from any thing he has, or
could have urged from the Books, unless where a Brand of Infamy has been set
upon the Judges. The Examples of which, made in several Ages, one would have
thought, might have given sufficient Caution; yet, indeed, he might have had
enough of this kind from those of the other Gown, who, I think, are now pretty
well ashamed of these Notions. Whatever Power of Dispensing the King has, the
Books suppose it to be entrusted by the People; but according to this
Resolution, it came down from Heaven the Lord knows how: And as he goes upon
the Supposition of an Absolute Sovereignty in the King, V. Case of Resistance,
p. 200. See there such a Sovereignty as makes laws, can repeal, and dispense
with them.

Fortescue, p. 32. Ad tutelam namque legis subditorum, ac eorum corporum and
bonorum rex huj^smodi erectus est, and ad hanc potestatem a populo effluxam
ipse habet quo ei non licet potestate alia suo populo dominari.

See this condemned 13 and 14 Car. 2. c. 29. V. Bushw. part 2. f. 608.


inseparable from his Person, as such will have it, unless that be granted, all
that he builds upon it are but Castles in the Air: For this we are to have
recourse to our Constitution, to see what that Power in the Prince is; which,
the great Fortescue says, is, a populo effluxa, derived from the People. But
for that we have no occasion, from any so much as pretended Proof of his
Assertions; nor can any be offered but from the Resolution of the infamous
Ship-money-Judges, which seems to run parallel to this, but is indeed far short
of it: For though they made the King the sole Judge of the Kingdom's Necessity,
yet they supposed it to be at a time when there was a real Danger to be
prevented by the exercise of this Judgment; whereas here it is abused to the
bringing in what the Parliament labored to prevent.

But I must observe, Vid. Account, p. 37.
1. That whereas Sir Edward Herbert owns the Dispensing Power to be of dark
Learning, and that it is very fit it should receive some Light from a
Determination in Parliament, that Judges may judge by more certain Rules, which
Acts of Parliament the King may, and which he may not dispense with. Grant his
Premises, and there can be no Darkness in it; for the Power will extend to all
Cases, as far as the Legislative does; and that he has determined positively in
this Point, Account, p. 8.
when he makes all things not forbid by God's Law, to be dispensible by the
King; nay, if he might dispense with every malum prohibitum, that is not malum
in se, without such Qualification as I have shown ought to be, it would go
farther, even as far as God's Power, Vid. Grot. de Jure Belli and Pacis, l. 1.
c. 1. Sicut ut bis duo non sint quatuor ne a Deo quidem effici potest; ita ne
hoc quidem ut quod intrinseca ratione malum est malum non sit.
who never dispenses with more than his own Positive Laws, not such as are
founded upon Eternal Reasons: And thus the Positive Laws of God and Man would
be subject to the Pleasure of the Prince. 2. He has taken it out of the Power
of the Parliament, to settle the Bounds of this extravagant Power: For, what he
ascribes, he says, never was taken from the Crown, nor can be; because,
forsooth, it is the ancient Remains of the Sovereign Power, and Prerogative of
the Kings of England. Wherein, by the way, there is an Implication contrary to
what he would infer; for this implies, that it is but the Remains of a Power
diminished and impaired. 3. His printed and parol Resolutions are not only
very different, as is obvious by the Comparison, but very contrary: Account, p.
37.
One says, It Is a dark Learning; the other, The Case is as clear as ever came
before the Court.

3dly.
Though his Insincerity is sufficiently evident from every part of his Defense,
yet it may not be unprofitable for the Public, that he should be followed to
those Instances in which he glories; for which, it is not enough for him to show
some one Act wherein he is singular, if he follows the multitude to sin in
others, even of the same kind; which if he does, he can no more acquit himself
of Perjury and breach of Trust, Account, p. 1.
than the rest of the tainted Herd.

Account, p. 28.
In Matters of Blood, he affects the Reputation of great Tenderness, and thinks
he has been scrupulous even to a Fault: For, says he, in some Cases upon
Statutes, that had been adjudg'd Felony by wiser and better Judges than my
self, and it was highly for the King's Service that it should be so, yet I
would never give Judgment of Death, because I could not satisfy my Conscience,
that those Statutes were now in force. It is a Fault, it seems, not to give
Judgment against his Conscience, when the narrow Interest of the Court exacts
it, and other Judges, influenced from thence, would countenance it: But we may
observe, that those Statutes concerning Soldiers, The Case Crook Car. 51. and
Hutton 134. is of one pressed to serve beyond Sea.
of which he is to be understood, not only give no Warrant for such Judgment,
as is obvious to the meanest Capacity; but if they could admit of any Question,
the unbiased Judgment of the then Recorder of London, Sir John Holt, ought to
outweigh the whole Bench.

But I wish our Chief Justice could as well acquit himself in the Case of the
Lord Brandon. The Fathers Heroic Merits of the Crown, too great to be
rewarded, and the Son's Hereditary Valor, dangerous to those who had reason to
fear brave Spirits, occasioned the rigorous Prosecution of both. The Father was
obliged to change his Soil, till it might become more equal, not unmindful of
our Savior's Advice, or rather Precept, when persecuted in one country, to
flee into another, that though he contemned Death, he might not provoke it.
Witness the great endeavors to make him confess a Plot, while he lay under
Sentence of death.
The Son falling into their Hands, both his Life, and Honor, which the
severest Trials approved to be most valued by him, were designed for a
Sacrifice. In subserviency to which, our Chief Justice directed the willing
Jury to find him guilty of High Treason, chiefly upon a supposed Conspiracy, to
seize the Castle of Chester; which, if true, were but Felony by a Statute, Vid.
14 Eliz. c. 1. Rastal f. 411.
as to that part, yet in force, and so could be no Evidence of Treason: Nor
would he suffer the Fact to be found specially, tho he pretended not to answer
the Cases and Records which were cited to show, that the Matter alleged could
not be Treason; nor did the then Solicitor undertake the Task, notwithstanding
that show of Reasoning, with which he labored to set aside the Authority of
Lord Cook L. Russel's Trial, f. 57. Sol. To conspire to levy War, is an Overt
Act to testify the Design of the Death of the King; and the Error of my Lord
Cook has possibly misled my Lord. This he goes to refute by the Cases of Story
and Lord Cobham, which were not of levying War within the Kingdom, and besides
were expressed by the Overt Act of Writing. Vid. 3 Inst. f. 14. Hales his Pleas
of the Crown, p. 13. Dyer, f. 298. b. Sanderson's Hist of K. James, f. 283.
, pleading expressly and unanswerably for that injured Hero, of whom the Age was
not worthy, the Lord Russel.

Nor was the Proof in Lord Brandon's Case, less defective than the Matter; for
besides the scandalous Sexton, who swore to Designs against another King, there
was but one Witness in the Eye of the Law; he indeed so far Legal, as that he
might be heard, being an Approver Lib. Assiz. 27. pl. 29. Of an Approver
Shared, says, Il ne duist, passer sans estre duement purge car tout sont en
male.
; but no way credible, considering how far he had been drawn with his Fetters
about his Heels, even to At Lord Russel 's Trial, I am not certain whether I
did hear something about a Declaration, etc. Trial, f. 39. At Mr Cornish 's, e
contra.
contradict himself. The other by no means Legal, being under an Outlawry for
High Treason, unrevers'd: For though the Execution of that Judgment, for so in
Law it is, was pardoned by the King, yet the Crime was by no means purged, to
set him right to Fame: Which though the Counsel offered to make good, they were
not suffered to speak to it; and yet the Point is very That such are not probi
and legales, for Witnesses or Juries, vid. 2 Bulst f. 144. alias 154.1.
Brownlow p. 34. part 2.47. Rolls. Ab. tit. Chal. 657. Brook tit. Tesmoins,
penult. Fitzher. tit. Process, 208. Dyer f. 34. a. Owen f. 22. Castle. main's
Trial f. 38.11 H. 4. 41. b. Godbolt 288. Fortescue p. 60. b. Fleta lib. 4. c.
8. Bracton de Corona, cap. 3. p. 118. b. Rolls Ahr. tit. Prer. f. 222. Vid. de
eodem Baluzium, Tom. 1. f. 887.2.362.
clear by ancient Authorities, and confirmed by later, without any thing really
to the contrary. Nay, farther, though besides all these things, another Matter
was urged in Arrest of Judgment, upon which Judgment had Arundel's Case, 6 Rep.
f. 14.
formerly been arrested; yet, without enquiring whether the Fact were true, or
the Book Law, that, with the rest, was overruled, to come at the Life of a
Person obnoxious to the Government, as some called themselves. Such was Sir
Edward's great scrupulousness, and tenderness, where the Life of Man was
concerned.

He adds a Scruple, in a Case before himself, and the other Usurpers of the
High Commission Court; but his singularity therein can be no Excuse for his
acting at all upon a Commission apparently against the Statute, which took away
not only the Power of Fining and Imprisoning, which that Court illegally
pretended to, but the Spiritual Authority which it really had; 26 H. 8. c. 1.
repealed 1 and 2 P.M.
and such a Commission it was, as never received countenance till the Act, long
since repealed, which not only made H. 8. Head of the Church, but gave him
Power, which he afterward delegated to Lord Cromwell, V. 31 H. 8. c. 10.
to redress all Errors, Heresies, and Abuses, by Spiritual Authority.

4thly.
I suppose it is by this time pretty evident, that Sir Edward's Crime will admit
of no Extenuation; but the Aggravations are many, it appearing,

Account, p. 37.
1. That he and his Brethren were the Inventers of this Dispensing Power, in
such extent as he contends for in the Print; but much more in his real
Resolution.

Vid. ib.
2. That the Error was not an Error in that single Case, but of large and
mischievous Consequences; and if the King could dispense with that Statute,
upon the Reasons given, and Circumstances appearing in Sir Edward Hales his
Case, others may well conclude from thence, That therefore he has a Power to
dispense with all other Statutes, even such as confer or vest in any of the
Subjects any manner of Interest whatsoever, in their Lives, Liberties, and
Estates; Account, p. 37.

Vid. supr. p. 40, 41.


and there being a Conviction, and consequently a Disability actually incurred
before the Dispensation; therefore, by reason of this Case, the King may
dispense with such Statutes where a precedent Disability is actually laid upon
a Man, as there is upon the Members of both Houses, till they have taken the
Oaths and Tests prescribed. These are not Consequences which may flow from the
heated Imaginations of angry Men, but such as have Warrant and Foundation from
their Judgment.

3. His so far undervaluing the Wisdom of the Nation, as to make the benefit of
a Law against the undue continuance of Sheriffs, equal, nay, go beyond what
they could devise for the security of their Religion; or rather, so to
undervalue the Holy Religion, which I think he yet professes, when however it
would not come up to the Point, according to the Differences which himself
receives. Account, p. 9.
Speaking of the Statute 23 H. 6. c. 1. he says, The Recital in the Preamble,
and the whole Purview, if compared with our Statute of 25 Car. 2. c. 2. equals
it in every Particular, and in some goes beyond it: For the Mischiefs recited
in this latter Statute, are only in these Words, For preventing Dangers which
may happen from Popish Recusants, and quietting the Minds of his Majesty's Good
Subjects: The other, page 10.
for preventing the importable Damage of the King, and his People, by Perjury,
Manslaughter, and great Oppression. Then he goes to the Purview, express
against Non obstante's, and creating a Disability; but, according to his usual
haste, he stays not here to make the Comparison, but hastens to his
Sham-Resolution, as has been sufficiently evinced already. The Questions here
will be, 1. Whether the Mischiefs intended to be prevented, are equal in both?
2. Admit they were equal in Degree, whether they are in Extent; which if they
are not, still the Resolution, if real, will fail him, according to the
Difference which he himself receives, Vid. sup. p. 43.
of pro bono populi complicati, and singulorum populi.

1. For the first, I suppose he thinks the Epethite importable gives the odds,
as if Popery wanted an Epethite to represent it to Protestants, for what they
ought to do their utmost to prevent; as if it did not carry in the Belly of it
Perjuries, Manslaughters, and great Oppressions, by wholesale; or that
Mischefs more remote, and accidental, as the Continuance of Sheriffs, may
habituate to Corruption, and that occasion the other fatal Train; could equal
the more immediate and certain Consequences, unless by good Laws prevented, of
French Conversions, proceeding from fixed Principles. But then to give Judgment
to frustrate this necessary Law at a time when the Papists had a King of their
own Superstition to head them, is to make the King as much above the Law,
Bracton l. 2. c. 16. Rex habet Superiorem, Deum S. item legem per quam factus
est Rex, item Curiam suam, viz. Comites, Barcnes, quia Comites dicuntur quali
socii, etc. Fleta l. 1. c. 17. p. 17.2. has Superiores. Which avoids the Cavil
in the Royal Apol. ed. Anno 1684. p. 36. supposed to be Dr. Ashtons.
as our ancient Lawyers tell us, the Law and his Court by way of Eminence, that
is, the Great Council, or Parliament are above him.

2. As this proves the Interest of the Subject, in the Law about Sheriffs, to
be neither equal, nor so immediate, as in our Statute, there needs not many
words to show the difference of the extent: the Peace only of particular
Counties, and tha^ by small insensible degrees, is there concerned, nay, admit
the King had this Power, and should so violate that Trust which Sir Edward will
have to be reposed in him, V. Account. p. 23.
as to extend it to all Counties where he puts in the Sheriffs; yet this could
not affect all the People, because there might be a Retreat to London,
Middlesex, and Westmorland, in neither of which has it been pretended, that the
King had such a Power, till the late Violence of some, and Treachery of others,
gave that unhappy Inlet of Perjury, Manslaughter, I may say, Murder and
Oppression; before which, London was a perfect Goshen in an Egyptian Kingdom.

4. But what can excuse our Chief Justice's so apparent falsifying both Records
and Law Books, or if not, at least, his shameful Negligence in not going to the
Fountain-heads, but setting up the Recitals of Cases against the Cases
themselves; and the extrajudicial Opinions or Arguments of Judges, nay, the
very Annotations of Reporters, foreign to any matter in question, against
solemn Resolutions; which either wilful Falsifications, or criminal Negligence,
has occasioned the answering Objections with a Case which never had a
Resolution, but what he and his Brethren, gave when it was brought in by Head
and Shoulders, only to be a leading Case to this.

5. He could not but know, that the Case was faintly argued against Sir Edward
Hales, either he, or the late Empson and Dudley, having given the Fees on both
sides; wherefore 'twas comical for the Chief Justice to say, That the Case
appeared clear upon the Argument; I am sure he is inexcusable, that when Causes
of less Consequence, and of less dark Learning, used to be argued twice at
least, this was but once; and the learned Mr. Wallop, who could have set it in
the truest light, was refused to be heard to it, though he required it.

V. Sup. p. 6.
6. Our Chief Justice might easily have found, that the beginning of Non
obstante's was within time of Memory, which would not be enough to entitle the
King to a Prerogative: Plowden of Mines, f. 322.10.
For as it is in Plowden, every Prerogative contains a Prescription, for it
rests in usage; that is, such as are not derived from known Grants of the
People. And he might have learnt from that Great Man, whom he would fain draw
to his side, Vaugham, f. 419.

Nota, this was in a Case of less consequence the sending Process into Wales.


That Presidents are useful to decide Questions, but in such Cases as these
which depend upon fundamental Principles, from which Demonstrations may be
drawn millions of Presidents are to no purpose.

Time of legal Memory is well known to extend to the Reign of R. 1. and though
Non Obstante's, as I observed above, Brook Prescrip. n. 6. Stat. West. 1.3. E.
1. c. 39. Stat. de quo Warranto, 18 E. 1.

Prin's Animad. f. 133.


are complained of within that time, as early as 35 H. 3. yet that diligent and
faithful Searcher into Antiquity Mr. Prin, shows, That they were then made use
of, only to revoke some indiscreet Grants or Privileges, but not to elude,
subvert, or dispense with any Penal Laws, or Acts of Parliament, till they were
introduced by religious Persons, after the Statute of Mortmain, 7 E. 1. to
elude and frustrate the Act. And if this be true, I am sure thus far there is
no Color for the late Resolution; for they might have seen in Lord Vaughan,
That the King in that Case dispenses only with his own Right, Vaughan f. 356.
and concludes not the mean Lords.

Vid. e cont. Dr. Brady's complete Hist. dedicated to K. James 2. Pref. All the
Liberties and Privileges the People can pretend to, were the Grants and
Concessions of the Kings of this Nation, and were derived from the Crown.
Founded upon his supposed proofs that W. 1. obtained this Land by conquest, and
governed it accordingly. V. Brady's first Book p. 23. in Marg. refuted in Jus
Anglorum. Account p. 8.
Though successive Resolutions of Judges are but Evidences of the Law, and such as
are to be examined and rectified by the Constitution, and fundamental Maxims of
the Inherent Rights, and Liberties of a freeborn People: Yet if Sir Edward had
had the diligence to read what might have occurred on this Subject, or the
Honesty to hear it from others, he might have known, that it is far from being
a settled Point, That the King might dispense with particular Persons as to
whatever is not prohibited by the Law of God; and that his Dispensation makes
the thing prohibited lawful to be done by him that has it. The farther we look
back since this Power has come in question, the less does it seem allowed.

V. Sup. p. 5. V. Rolls ab. tit. Prer. f. 180. 34 E. 3. c. 21.
Edward 3. with the Assent of that Council, which, as I observed before, was
chose in Parliament, had granted to Merchants Denizens, for a time, the same
Liberty about Staple Commodities which Merchants Aliens had; though this was not
by the King alone, and for the Benefit of Natives, yet the Merchants fearing
that they might be impeached in time to come for their Merchandise which they
had so passed by virtue of such Grants; for as much as they were made out of
Parliament, for their Surety, obtained a Ratification and Confirmation in
Parliament.

But the vexata question was about licensing the shipping of Wool elsewhere
than at Calais; Nota, This is one of the Cases mentioned by Fineux, Sup. p. 12.
that the King might do this, the Pretense was specious. Calais was no part of
the ancient Demeasn of the Crown, but a new Acquisition, whose Interests the
King seemed to have more absolutely at his Disposal, Anno 1667.
according to the Resolution of our Judges before the House of Lords, V. 3 Jac.
c. 6. forbidding Trade to the Dominions of Spain.
who declared, That though the Canaries were the Dominion of the King of Spain,
they were no part of the Dominion of Spain. And if Sir Edward had taken notice
of Lord Cook where he is against, as well as where he seems to favor him, he
ought to have observed, That one Lions a Merchant, 3. Inst. f. 186.
and Lord Latimer were sentenced in Parliament for procuring of Licenses and
Dispensations for transporting of Wool: And this they laid to the Destruction
of the Staple, Rot. Parl. 50. E 3. n. 17, 24, 28.
and of the Money of Calais, to the great Damage of the King and Realm: Indeed
the year after, the Lord Latimer's Sentence is remitted at the Request of the
Commons, alleging that the Charge against him was not true, not for defect of
matter. 51. E. 3. n. 75.
So that here is a Judgment of the House of Lords in Point, against one of
those very Cases; upon which Court, Judges have since founded their Distinction
of malum prohibitum, and malum in se: V. Account p. 8.
And it is an easy thing to know which ought to turn the Scale.

37 H. 6. f. 4.
After this, it came to be a Question before all the Judges in the
Exchequer-Chamber, Whether this Offense being pardoned (which that the King
might do after it was committed, has not been disputed) the Pardon before an
Information brought, would defeat the Informer of his share. There the Court
held, That if the Suit were the Parties, the Pardon should not bar him; but the
sole Question was, Whether the Party was entitled to any Suit, being the
Advantage was given to the Discoverer, This notrightly abridg'd by Brook tit.
Charter de Pardon, n. 24.37 H. 6. f. 5. a. adjornatur.
which he might have by a Suggestion in the Exchequer, but the Statute gives no
Action; however this received no Determination at that time.

But if the Question had then been of a Dispensation, and whether that would
bar the Informer's Action given by Statute, can any man doubt but that they
would have adjudg'd it could not? When notwithstanding a Pardon, and that in a
Case where an Action was not expressly given; yet it was so doubtful, that they
would not determine against the Informer; but that the Dispensation would not
have availed with them, or at least, they would not have looked upon it to
authorize what was prohibited by any Statute, appears from other Passages
there; as where it is said, 37 H. 6. 46. V. 5 E 4 f. 34. a. Where a Statute
concerns only the King himself, which the King may choose to use at his Will,
etc.
That in a Recognizance of the Peace (which is not confined to one entered into
at the request of a Subject) the King cannot pardon, or release, till the Peace
is broken: And where a man ought to repair a Bridge, the King can pardon only
for the Fine due to himself; but however, the Party shall be obliged to repair
the Bridge, because this is to the Damage of all the People. And to the same
purpose is that 3 H. 7. that though the King may pardon, 3 H. 7. f 15. b. Chief
Justice Hussy citing Fortescue.
or free from a pecuniary Mulct before the occasion happen, yet he cannot
pardon, or discharge the Trespass it self; and instance is given in voluntary
Escapes: So far were they from believing, that the King in remitting the
pecuniary Mulct, could make the thing lawful; nor could this in the least be
inferred from the other, because however an Act may be made void or tortious.
Indeed in the Reign of R. 3. whose Character blemishes the Judgments of his
time, 2 R. 3. f. 12.
it was held by all the Judges in the Exchequer-Chamber, that the King might
license the shipping of Wool elsewhere than at the Staple; yet even they were
not of Opinion that the License made the thing lawful, for then the Discoverer
could not have had his share, which they agreed that he ought to have; and so
the License was only as far as it concerned the King. They also settled the
other Point, If any one doubt this upon the words of the Book, it appears
beyond contradiction from its being brought about again by the Merchants whose
Goods were seized. 1 H. 7. f. 2. b. and 3. a. V. Sup. p. 13.
which before was a Doubt, That a Pardon before an Information brought, would
defeat the Informer. But then the Authority of the first Point is suspended, by
a Doubt remaining before all the Judges afterward assembled upon a rehearing
of this Cause in a more settled time. Indeed they agreed the other of an
Information after a Pardon, but hitherto there is no manner of Proof of any
Case, wherein the King by his Dispensation could discharge the Penalty given
not only to himself, but also to an Informer, who has his Action given by
Statute: But for this we must take a Leap downwards as far as 13 Jac. 1. which
we may balance with the 7th. of his Reign, 3 Inst. 154.
when it is held by Lord Cook, That where a Statute concerns the Benefit of the
King alone, he may dispense with it by a Non obstante: And BY THE COURT, that
where it concerns the Benefit of the Subject, the King cannot dispense. Rolls
Ab. tit. Prcr. f. 179.


7. Whereas our Chief Justice thinks that a Statute's providing against Non
obstante's, shows that the King could otherwise have dispensed with the Act by
a Non obstante; Account p. 10.
it is not only unconcluding, because it might be no more than an Argument of
an Abuse of the Law; but turns very strong against him: V. Sup. p. 36.
For, admit the Resolution of the Judges, 2 H. 7. were as he contends, yet he,
who makes so much of a Concession of the Commons of England assembled in
Parliament, when he thinks it of his Side, Account, p. 25.
ought surely to yield that the Judgment of King, Lords, and Commons, is of
uncontrollable Authority. Wherefore when not only one, but several Parliaments
provide, that all Non obstantes shall be void, is it not plain, that their
Judgment was, that such Non obstantes could not be set up by any Resolution of
Judges? And for this we have the Judgment of King, Lords, and Commons, and that
of but late days, That even where a Grant is made to the King, where 'twill be
said he is solely entrusted for the Public Good, yet it may be out of his
power to defeat it by a Non obstante. According to Kieble, c. 7. but not
printed there.
This appears by the Statute 19 Car. 2. c. 8. which provides, That no Letters
Patents granted to any Person, of Exemptions from Subsidies, etc. shall free
them from the Charges of any Sum granted by that Act; and all Non obstantes in
Letters Patents made, or to be made in bar of any Act or Acts of Parliament,
for the Supply or Assistance of his Majesty, are thereby declared to be void
and of none effect.

And even where Statutes have not expressly provided against Non obstante's,
though the Statutes were such as restrain what many take to be the King's
Prerogative, yet if we receive the Sense of Lords and Commons, the King has no
Prerogative warranting Non obstante's to them; as appears by the Articles
against King Richard the Second, Vid. the Stat. barely prohibitory.

28 E. 3. c. 7. and 12 E. 3. c. 9. supr. p. 16. V. Knighton.


one of which is, For that the King, contrary to the Laws, and Wills of the
Justices, suffered Sheriffs to continue longer than one Year, etc.

This were enough to set aside all Pretenses taken from Calvin's Case, though, as
Sir Edward Herbert pleasantly suggests, Account, p. 18.
it were resolved there, That that was resolved 2 H. 7. which was never
mentioned till after the Resolution. Here is the Authority of Lords and
Commons, in competition with that of Mercenary Judges: And if the Concessions
of the Commons alone assembled in Parliament, Account, p. 25.
are of weight with him, I know not why their Denials ought not as well to be
urged against him; which if we may do, not only the Fictions and loose
Reasonings in Calvin's Case, See them censured in Vaughan, f. 227, 285, 401.
but the main Resolution there, may be justly called mere Court-Law. Such I am
sure it is, Moor a. f. 790, to 805.
that the honest House of Commons, 4 Jac. 1. would not bear it; and any one
that reads the Arguments of those Learned Men who managed the Conference with
the Lords, upon the Question of the Union of the two Kingdoms, may easily see
how inexcusable the Judges of that time were, to proceed to the Judgment in
Calvin's Case, after they had been so enlightened. Nor could they but know, that
the then Parliament was broke up, because they were not so complying, as the
Judges showed themselves both then and afterward: But they secured their
Cushions by it, while Sir John Bennet, Vid. his Censure. 4 Inst. f. 336.
Father of the present Lord Oswalston, lost his in the Prerogative-Court, and
had a swinging Fine imposed upon him into the Bargain, several Years after,
upon pretense of Extortion; but, as I am well informed, the real ground was,
his disrellishing Speech in Parliament upon this Subject. It Is well known, some
Princes used to have good Memories that way. Manet alta mente repostum, etc.

8. Non obstante's having no other Foundation than in the Encroachments of
Princes, and Servility of Judges, especially if we except Cases concerning the
King alone, they ought not to be strained to any new Case: The Advice of
Bracton will rise up in Judgment against such Men, who tells them, 2 Inst. f.
408. Bracton, l. 1. c. 2. Si autem talia nunquam prius evenerint, and obscurum
and difficile sit, eorum judicium tunc ponantur judicia in respectum usque ad
Magnam Curiam. Vid. 1 E. 3. 7. b 33 H. 6. 18. a, Cest un Act de Parliament and
nos voilomus estre bien avis devant que nous adnullamus ascun act fait en le
Parliament and peradventure le matter doit attender jusque al prochein Parliament.
If such things never happened before, and the Judgment is without Light from
former Cases, and difficult, let it be adjourned to the Great Court. According
to which, Adjournments to ensuing Parliaments have been frequent in former
days, when there were more Learned Judges, and that as often for the
weightiness of the Matter, as intricacy of the Points.

Account, p. 34.
9. But for the closing Aggravation; Whereas our Chief Justice denies all
indirect means for procuring Opinions, and stands upon his Innocence,
challenging the World to lay any thing of that kind to his charge; I think, by
this time, few will the less suspect him, because of his Assurance: if either
Threats or Solicitations can be proved upon him, the World will judge either
of them indirect Means; and I am much misinformed, if both cannot be justly
charged.

If after all, he can excuse himself with renouncing Infallibility, Account, p.
35. page 36.
and making Asseverations of keeping to the clear Dictates of his Conscience, I
must say, Judges in former Ages have had hard luck, and been made Examples to
little purpose. V. Mirror, a. p. 296. to 300.
King Alfred would lose the Reputation of his Justice, in hanging above thirty
Judges; and Parliaments have been very barbarous to proceed against others as
Traitors, who yet either were so ingenuous to confess their Faults, or, at
least, not so provoking as to justify them.

Tresylian, Bealknappe, c.
It is well known in Story, that six Judges, and two of the King's Council at
Law, suffered for Treason, upon a Parliamentary Prosecution, 11 R. 2. for
delivering their Opinions, That they were to be punished as Traitors, Knighton,
f. 2726, 2727. ib. f. 2695. Regaliam. Ib. f. 2694.
who hindered the King from exercising his Sovereignty and Prerogative over a
Statute, and an Ordinance, and Commission made in the foregoing Parliament: The
substance of their Crime lay in ascribing to the King a Power to defeat the
Provisions of the Parliament for the safety of the Nation, and is a direct
President, at which our Judges ought to tremble. Nor can it avail them, that
the express words of the Statute 25 E. 3. c. 2. do not condemn them, since that
Act transmits Common Law Treasons to the Judgment of Parliament, and the
Statute 1 Mar. c. 1. leaves that power untouched; and who can doubt but such a
Resolution, and that justified in Print, and published to the World, is an
overt Act of Treason, as it tends to the subverting the Fundamental Rights of
Parliaments: Nor can they have any color for asking, with the Lord Strafford,
Where is the Buoy? when they see so many Shipracks to admonish them.

Nor ought Sir Edward to wonder at a Treason against the Government, though not
directly against the Person of the King, his Relatives, Officers, or his Coin;
nor yet an actual levying of War within his Kingdom, V. Glanvil. p. 1. Crimen
laesae Majestatis, ut de nece vel seditione personae Domini Regis vel Regni.
Exact. Collect ed. Anno 1643. p. 35. V. Dugdale's cron. Ser.
or adhering to his Enemies; for he may find among the Articles against the
Lord Kimbolton, and others, exhibited Anno 1641. by his Father then
Attorney General.

That they have traitorously endeavored to subvert the very Rights and Beings
of Parliaments.

Account, n. 33, and 39.
But since Sir Edward pleads Conscience for what he did, and might have urged
the Authority of Spiritual Guides, who would make the Scripture notion of
higher Powers a sufficient Warrant for such a Judgment. I shall conclude with
the good Queen Elizabeth Doctrine of the famous Bilson, afterward Bishop of
Winchester.

Bilson of Christian Subjection, p. 280.
By Superior Powers ordained of God, we understand not only Princes, but all
politic States and Regiments, some where the People some where the Nobles have
the same Interest to the Sword that Princes have in their Kingdoms: And in
Kingdoms where Princes bear rule by the Sword, Glanvil. Prol. Bracton, v. l. 3.
c. 9. Fleta lib. 1. c. 17. Fortescue, c. 9. Mirror, p. 9.
we do not mean the Prince's private Will against his Laws, but his Precept
derived from his Laws, and agreeing with his Laws.

FINIS.
Published by this Author.
A Poetical Essay toward an Epitome of the Gospel. Ed. Anno 1678.

Jani Anglorum facies nova. Anno 1680.

Jus Anglorum ab Antiquo. Anno 1681.

King Edward the Sixth against the Pope's Supremacy, with Remarks on his Life.
Anno 1682.

Lord Hollis his Remains. Dr. Twisden's Considerations touching the Grand
Question: With Reflections upon Antidotum Britannicum, and Mr. Hunt's Book and
Postscript. Anno 1682.

Anonymus his Letters to Dr. Sherlock, concerning Church Communion: With a
Reply to his Answer. Anno 1683.

A Letter of Remarks on Jovian. Anno 1683.

A true Account of the Unreasonableness of Mr. Fitton's Pretenses against the
Earl of Macclesfield.

Grotius his Arguments for the Truth of the Christian Religion, in Verse: With
an Appendix concerning Prophecies. Anno 1686.

The Idea of Christian Love, and Paraphrase on Mr. Waller's Poem of Divine
Love. Anno 1688.

Ready for the Press,

A Supplement to Dr. Brady's Introduction, and Complete History.


