Advertisement.
THere are lately Printed for Timothy Goodwin, at the Maidenhead against St.
Dunstan's Church in Fleet Street, these Three Books following.

I. An Enquiry into the Power of Dispensing with Penal Statutes. Together with
some Animadversions upon a Book writ by Sir Edward Herbert, Lord Chief Justice
of the Court of Common Pleas, Entitled, A short Account of the Authorities in
Law, upon which Judgment was given in Sir Edward Hales's Case.

II. The Power, Jurisdiction, and Privilege of Parliament; And the Antiquity
of the House of Commons Asserted: Occasioned by an Information in the
King's Bench, by the Attorney General, against the Speaker of the House of
Commons.

As also a Discourse concerning the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in the Realm of
England; occasioned by the late Commission in Ecclesiastical Causes.

III. A Defense of the Late Lord RVSSEL' s Innocence, By way of Answer or
Confutation of a Libellous Pamphlet, Entitled, An Antidote against Poison;
With Two Letters of the Author of this Book, upon the Subject of his Lordship's
Trial.

Together with an Argument in the Great Case concerning Elections of Members to
Parliament, between Sir Samuel Barnardiston Plaintiff, and Sir William Soames
Sheriff of Suffolk, Defendant, In the Court of King's Bench, in an Action upon
the Case, and afterward by Error sued in the Exchequer-Chamber.

All Three Writ by Sir Robert Atkyns, Knight of the Honorable Order of the
Bath, and late one of the Judges of the Court of Common Pleas.

THE Lord Russel's INNOCENCE Further DEFENDED; By way of REPLY TO AN ANSWER,
ENTITLED, The Magistracy and Government of ENGLAND Vindicated.

By Sir ROBERT ATKYNS, Knight of the Honorable Order of the Bath, And late one
of the Judges of the Court of Common Pleas.

LICENSED,

April. 9. 1689. James Fraser.



LONDON: Printed for Timothy Goodwin, at the Maidenhead against St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleet Street. 1689.

THE Lord Russel's INNOCENCE Further DEFENDED, etc.
THere is a Pamphlet very lately published, which styles it self, The
Magistracy and Government of England Vindicated.

It appears by the following part of the Title, to be no less than A
Justification of the Proceedings against Criminals; impudently declaring in
plain and express words, as also by all his subsequent Discourse, That by the
Criminal he means the late Lord Russel. Page 2. Column 2. in the middle of it.

And the Author does professedly own, that the Book is written by way of Answer
to a small Discourse or Argument lately printed, which bears the Title of A
Defense of the late Lord Russel' s Innocence.

It argues a transcendent boldness in this Answerer, to call this Noble Lord a
Criminal, and to justify those Proceedings against him, which all honest men
ever accounted no less than Murder, under a pretense and color of a legal
Proceeding, and to presume to publish such a Discourse as this, after the King
and the two Houses of Parliament have, by the most solemn Judgment that can be
given, pronounced that Noble Lord to have been Innocent; and thereby have done
so great Right to his Memory, and that with so high a Zeal, and so mighty a
Concernment for him, as the like cannot be shown in former Precedents.

It is most evident, that the Author was composing this Scandalous Libel even
when he very well knew the Bill was brought down from the Lords to the Commons,
for reversing this Noble Lord's Attainder; and the Author could not but observe
with what Zeal and Affection the Bill was entertained at its first entrance
into that House.

The Author, by endeavoring to conceal himself, is from thence, as he plainly
professes, encouraged to take the more liberty to lay about him in the dark (as
he fancies) and thinks to escape ^nseen; and not only strikes at the Author of
the Lord Russel's Defense, but as far as in him lies, wounds that Noble Lord in
his Honor, whose Justification and Defense was so undertaken, and labors to
overthrow that Right and Justice that has been done by the Supreme Authority
of the Nation.

This is no way agreeable to a noble and generous soul, to come behind a man
and strike him; it rather follows the Example of that devilish Powder Plot, to
destroy and blow up the King and both Houses, and to do it in such a close and
clandestine way, as it should not be known who hurt them: for he was too much a
Coward to set his Name to it.

But it is very easy to tell you what are the first Letters of this Author's
Name, without casting of a Figure. His Argument in Law plainly speaks his
Profession, and what Robe he wears: and his style and phrase of speaking,
having appeared in so many noted Trials, as do in so many visible and legible
Characters disclose the Author, Sir R. S. does under his hand readily and
utterly disclaim it; and is heartily believed in what he says.

This slanderous Author acknowledges, that upon the Lord Russel's Trial some
blamed the Jury, most censured the Witnesses, but very few arraigned the
Council or Court. Here it evidently appears how our Author is concerned: first
for the Council, and then the Court, and Self has the preferrence, though it
be here with a breach of good manners to name the Council before the Court.

Page the first, he takes it heinously that any Gentlemen of the Long Robe
should appear in Print to Riducle their own Profession, this grossly speaks our
Author one that was of Council in the Trial. Et tu Brute?

If it had been an open Enemy, a Doctor of the Commons excersing his Wit and
Raillery on the Common Law Proceedings, then (as he expresses himself) this
Author could have born it; but he did not imagine that Satyrs and Invectives
upon past Proceedings should be writ by Lawyers.

In reply to which it may be justly said, That when Lawyers will make use of
their Wit and Rhetoric, as this Answerer has done, to boulster up an unjust
and revengeful Proceeding, and out of ambitious Designs, to get or continue in
Favor, and to gain greater Preferment, or show their Parts, will engage in
Causes of Blood, and help to destroy the Innocent, and be instrumental in
subverting the Laws and Government, it is every Lawyers Duty as far as in him
lies, to vindicate the Profession, by utterly disclaiming and abhorring all
such Practices: And the Defender can appeal to all that have known his
Conversation for above this forty years and under, whether ever he used any
such pitiful mean and ungenerous Arts and Methods, better becoming the Stage
than a Court of Justice; and whether he did not, when it was in his power,
constantly restrain and condemn that scandalous and disgraceful way of
Practice. And he can as freely appeal to all that will be at the pains to Read
his Printed Argument (which this concealed Author so unjustly Censures) whether
any such bitter Reviling, and revengeful Humor, appear in any part of what he
so published, or the least reflecting upon any particular person, but only in
the general, and no further than the mere Justice of the Cause did extort from
him; so far was he from this Author's scurrilous and rude course of reflecting
upon any Persons private Conversation; but some men's faculties lie this way,
and they are very well known, though after such manifest and gross provocations
that have been given by this Author, and such public and scandalous Actings of
his in the eye of the World, it might justly be said with the Poet: Difficile
est Satyr^s non Scribere.

The Author of this Answer, in his first Paragraph, would have the World
believe that he writes upon no other design than to support Magistracy, and the
Government; a Noble Th^m^ (as he terms it). Every Man knows what sort of
Government he labored to support, but the other day, and how far he was
instrumental in it; but the other day, and how far he was instrumental in it;
but it is rather thought fit to leave him to a General Act of Indemnity and
Oblivion, then take any Revenge upon him.

He seems to allow the Lord Russel's Defender, in his Fourth Paragraph, to be
an Author of Age, Experience, Figure, and Learning, (but he will not say
Candor or Honesty). Thus he writes.

The Lord Russel's Defender is very glad he has so little of this Adversary's
Commendation, for it would gain but small esteem amongst Men of true worth, to
be commended by him. It might be said to him with the Philosopher upon the like
occasion, being commended by an infamous person, What Ill have I done, that
thou should thus Commend me? Yet that Candor and Honesty, which he covertly
refuses to allow, is that which the Lord Russel's Defender prefers before all
this Answerer's mercenary Wit and Rhetoric.

In his fifth Paragraph he judges the Lord Russel very unfortunate to fall
under the Accusation of Treason, and says that Noble Lord was most pitied, of
any under those Circumstances.

That Noble Lord's misfortune (among other things) was his falling under the
lash of so bitter and sharp a Tongue as yours, Reply.
who however you seem now to mention that Lord with pity, had then no pity for
him, but used him with severity, as may appear by your own Printed Narrative of
that Trial, and your Rhetorical Flourishes in a Case of innocent Blood, which
contributed in an high degree to enveagle the Jury, and bring that Noble Lord
to the Scaffold.

He confidently says in the same Paragraph, that in truth the fairness and
indifferency of that Trial was such, that his own Relations were pleased.

How untrue this is, Reply.
in both the parts of it, that the Trial was very far from being Fair and
Indifferent, and that his nearest Relations were highly exasperated and
offended, shall appear before we part.

In the Sixth Paragraph of his sheet, he complains that the memory of that
Unfortunate Gentleman, was revived by the Publication of the Defense of his
Innocence.

Why what hurt in the reviving of his Memory? his Memory is precious, he dyed a
Martyr for his Religion, and for the Rights and Liberties of his Country, and
fell a Sacrifice under cruel and merciless hands.

It is indeed this Answerers Conscience that flies in his face, the reviving of
this Noble Lords Memory speaks Terror and Amazement to the Answerer. Thus did
bloody Herod when he heard of the Fame of Jesus, he presently cries out, This
is John whom I Beheaded.

He does prepare himself to make use of indecent or disrespectful Language, (as
himself expresses it) and comforts himself with the thought, that his Name
shall not be known. A pitiful and unmanly dealing, not becoming a person
pretending to Ingenuity. The Lord Russel's Defender dealt otherwise, and owns
his Name, and will let the world know what this Answerer is.

In the four next ensuing Paragraphs, he is much to seek for what end and
purpose the Lord Russel's Defense was Printed in that Pamphlet (as his wonted
Rhetoric thinks fit to call it.)

It could not be (as he most contemptuously says) for Consumption of Paper.

Nor for the Bookseller's Profit, for a Reason to be guessed at.

Forbear, for shame, to use these sly and silly Intimations, they are fitter
for Schoolboys, or the Mountebank's Stage, or for Billings-gate, than for a
Man of your Figure, one may be ashamed to have any Dispute with such an
Emperick, or rather a jesting and jeering Merry-Andrew. Pray keep this Sport
for the next Bartholomew-Fair, and learn more Gravity and Civility.

It could not be (as he further proceeds upon the same Enquiry) for the sake of
the Lord Russel's Memory, or any of his surviving Relations; for what was
written in the Lord Russel's Defense, is (says he) but a painting to the Life,
the too deep Concern of that Noble Lord, in a weak as well as criminal
Enterprise.

This is wonderful boldness and daring in this Answerer, still to pronounce him
a Criminal (that Noble Lord) whom the Supreme Power of the Nation, and the
highest Judicature and Authority have adjudged Innocent. And yet he has the
Impudence to entitle his undutiful Pamphlet, The Magistracy and Government of
England Vindicated: And to Publish this, after he, as well as any Man knew that
the Act of Parliament had passed, asserting the Innocence of that Noble Lord,
and the Barbarity and Injustice of the Proceedings against him. Wherein this
Answerer had so great an Hand, and so bitter and sharp a Tongue.

One would think that an ordinary Wit might have served to put him in mind,
that as yet there is no Act of General Pardon and Indemnity passed, And who
knows upon whom the great Exception may light?

But he gives a very just occasion to the Lord Russel's Defender, to let the
World know for what end and purpose he long since writ, and so lately Printed
so despised a Pamphlet; by which, even his Adversary may be convinced, it was
not merely for Consumption of Paper, or for the Bookseller's Profit, but truly
for the sake of that Lord's Memory, in asserting his Innocence, and at the
desire, and for the sake of his surviving Relations. And for the truth of what
is thus affirmed, he does appeal to those Noble Relations of his, who are yet
alive.

While that Noble Lord was upon his Trial, or very soon after, there came a
Letter to his Defender's hand, who was then in the Country; near Eighty Miles
from London, and this from a person of great Honor, and one of the nearest
Relation to that Noble Lord, requesting the Author of his Defense to afford the
best Advice he could; and accordingly he heartily and freely gave it: Much of
which does appear by what is Printed by him.

This was not the only Letter he received from that Lord's great Relations,
upon that sad occasion: But after that bloody stroke had been given, a Paper
was Published as the Speech intended by that Dying Lord.

In Answer to which, the now Answerer and Adversary (as is too evident) did
publish his first Pamphlet, Entitled, An Antidote against Poison, composed (to
use its own words) of some Remarks upon the Paper printed by the direction of
the Lady Russel, and mentioned to have been delivered by the Lord Russel to the
Sheriffs at the place of Execution. Thus far of the Title of that pretended
Antidote.

In the latter end of his second Page, that which is mentioned in the Discourse
out of his Pamphlet called the Antidote, and which is barely repeated in order
to be answered and confuted, he grossly mistakes in this latter Pamphlet, and
falsely affirms, it is admitted to be true; and from thence endeavors to have
the Lord Russel's Defender understood as arguing against the Lord Russel, and
acknowledging his guilt: Which is a very unworthy way of dealing by this
pretended Answerer, but easily discerned by any wary and intelligent Reader.
Nay, this Answerer himself immediately after, before he is aware, clears the
Lord Russel's Defender again from the Imputation, by taking notice that the
Defender of the Lord Russel endeavors to invalidate the Credibility of the
Evidence given against the Lord Russel.

This Reply declines the taking notice of many of this Answerer's Paragraphs,
that are spent merely in vilifying the Lord Russel's Defender, it being obvious
that they were intended only to render mean and contemptible the person he
undertakes to answer; it being beneath this Reply to repeat them, and to follow
the Answerer in his rude and scurrilous way of writing.

It was indeed no Secret to the Learned, that a Variance between the Indictment
and the Evidence, might be alleged on the General Issue; nor that Treason and
the Misprision of it are different Crimes; nor that proofs of Treason must not
be by Hearsay nor Argument only; nor that less than two Witnesses are not to be
allowed for proof of that Crime; nor that the Witnesses ought to be credible:
But these are not so generally known to such as are not professed Lawyers; and
may be usefully remembered to such as are brought upon their Trials for their
Lives, and are denied the help of Council when they most need it, and are apt
to be more under a consternation, when they are beset with such sad
apprehensions of their danger, and baited at by a multitude of crafty Wits, and
such as abuse their Parts and Eloquence, to destroy the Innocent, and the Court
(it may be) not always so indifferent as they should be. And these useful and
well-intended Assistances, as ordinary and useless as the pretended Answerer
would represent them, were very thankfully entertained, and made use of by
several persons of great Abilities, and of the best Quality, who afterward
fell under the like cruel and malicious Prosecution: but they were no professed
Lawyers. And most of these are still living, and will and do testify the truth
hereof.

The Answerer in his fourth Page falls to argue the points in Law upon the
great Head and Title of Treason.

This Reply forbears to repeat what the Answerer says upon this subject, or to
repeat what this Repliant has formerly printed, but therein refers himself to
what is so printed.

Only finds it necessary to state the point in question in as few and plain
words as he can, and leave it to any impartial Reader to judge of it.

The great Statute of Treason, viz. that of the 25th of Edw. 3. was the only
Statute upon which the Lord Russel was indicted, and this is acknowledged and
professed by the Attorney General, as appears by the printed Narrative of the
Trial, and he could best know his own meaning.

They could not proceed against the Lord Russel upon the late Statute of
Treasons, made in 13 Car. 2. for that Statute limits the Prosecution to a
certain time, after the Treason committed; which was elapsed in the Lord
Russel's Case.

Now the Statute of 25 Edw. 3. does specify and enumerate the several and
particular Heads, and Sorts, or Species of Treason, that might be proceeded
upon, or tried and adjudged in the ordinary Courts, viz. in the King's Bench, or
Judges of Oyer and Terminer, or Jail-deliver. Such as that of Newgate, or the
Sessions for Jail-deliver at the Old Bailey, where the Noble Lord Russel was
brought to his Trial.

The scope and drift of that Statute of 25 Edw. 3. (as appears by the Preamble)
was to confine those ordinary Courts and the ordinary Judges to plain manifest
Rules, what they should adjudge Treason, and what not, it being of so great
Concernment to the lives of Men; and not to allow the Judges or Lawyers a
latitude or liberty to make what they thought fit to be Treason, or to exercise
the Tongues and unruly Noises of Lawyers in a matter of that moment. And that
Statute of 25 Edw. 3. being in its nature a confining, restraining, and
explanatory Law, ought therefore not to be largely extended or improved and
stretched beyond the plain words and apparent sense of them.

Now among other several Species, or Heads, or sorts of Treason, particularly
enumerated by that Statute, there are these two, pertinent to our Case, viz. 1.
Compassing or Imagining the Death of the King. 2. Levying War against the King.


Whereupon the common Reader (for whose satisfaction this is written) may
easily observe this distinction, That the first of these is Treason (in the
very imagining or conspiring) though the King's Death do not ensue.

But the latter is not Treason in the conspiring and imagining, but the Treason
must be in the actual levying of War.

So that barely to consult, conspire, or imagine to levy War, though there be
never so plain nor so open or overt an act of such consulting or conspiring or
imagining of it, will not amount to this Species or sort of Treason, upon this
Statute of 25 Edw. 3. which is the only Statute upon which the Lord Russel was
concerned.

For that Statute of 25 Edw. 3. did not intend to make it Treason, to consult
or conspire to levy War, without the actual levying of War.

This will not be denied nor disputed by the Lord Russel's Adversaries, nor by
this Answerer.

But perfectly to evade this Statute, and the manifest intent and meaning of
it, they insist,

That though conspiring to levy War, be not Treason within the Statute of 25
Edw. 3. yet to conspire, consult, agree, or conclude to stir up, or raise, or
move Insurrection and Rebellion against the King, and to consult or conspire to
seize the King's Guards, (which signify one and the same thing with consulting
or conspiring to levy War) these (say they) may be an open or overt Act, to
prove a consulting or conspiring to kill the King.

What is this but to confound the several and distinct sorts and Species of
Treasons, which the Statute of 25 E. 3. does so carefully and industriously
labor to distinguish?

And what is this, but to make a bare conspiring and consulting to levy War,
without any actual levying of it, to be Treason within this Statute of 25 Edw.
3. which plainly this Statute would not have to be so taken? and so the good
design and scope of the Statute, the security of men's lives is wholly
overthrown by this Artifice; and what shall be taken to be Treason, and what
not, will be still as uncertain as it was before the making of that Act of 25
Edw. 3.

And it was then a needless idle thing in those that made the Statute of 13
Car. 2. and so of former Statutes, to make the conspiring to levy War to be
Treason: for by this practice and construction it is already made so to their
hands, by 25 Edw. 3.

Now the Lord Russel was Indicted for Conspiring to kill King Charles the
Second, and the overt or open Act alleged to show and signify it, is nothing
but his consulting and conspiring to raise and stir up Insurrection and
Rebellion, and consulting to seize the King's Guards, (though they were not
actually done) which are just the same thing with conspiring to levy War; which
plainly is no Treason within the Statute of 25 Edw. 3. and therefore most
clearly the Lord Russel was not guilty within that Statute, upon that
Indictment and Evidence.

Since the Lord Russel's Defender has composed this short State of his Case
upon this great point, there has come to his hands, a printed half sheet,
which has excellently well done the same work, which had been but a few hours
sooner, it had saved the labor of this part of the present Discourse and
Argument: This half sheet is justly entitled, A Justification of the late Act
of Parliament, for the Reversing the Judgment against the Lord Russel.

There is but one Point more to speak to, and then the Lord Russel's Defender
will bid his Answerer and Reader Adieu: And it is that Point which the
Answerer's (...) Print, viz. his Antidote against Poison, did not mention, and
so no occasion was given then to consider of it; but it is largely debated by
Court and Council, at the Lord Russel's Trial; yet being then but suddenly
started, tho it were well argued by the Lord Russel's Council assigned, no
Authorities however were then cited (tho called for by the Court) to justify
and make good the Arguments and Reasons urged by the Councel^* and it is a
point in Law which the Act for Reversing the Judgment against the Lord Russel
is principally, and in the first place grounded upon, viz. That there had been
an undone and illegal Return of of Jurors to Try that Noble Lord (too often
practiced of late) and that the Noble Lord was refused his Lawful Challenge to
them for want of Freehold. The truth of this as to matter of Fact, does
evidently appear by the large Narrative of the Trial, Printed by that Lord's
Adversaries; and this is not in the least touched upon by the printed half
sheet, styled, A that of the Act for Reversal of the Judgment against that Lord.

That Point in Law now only remains to be (...) to, viz. That in all Cases of
the Trial of a Man especially in a Trial for his Life, the Jurors ought to be
Freeholders even at the Common Law, and before the Statifie of (...) 5. Cap. 3.
and that not only in Trials within the City of London (as the Lord Russel's
was) as in all other Cases (...) Towns Corporate, where there was a
Jurisdiction of Trying for Life in Cases criminal.

It was not material (...) the Go^^^^n Law or of what yearly Va^^ie that
Freehold was, or is to be, but some Freehold (tho never so small) the Jurors
ought to have, or else it was a just cause of Challenge.

It was indeed the Statute of 2 H. 5. C. 3. that first ^ate the yearly value of
the Freehold, and required it should be of 40 s. per Annum, which 40 s. per
Annum was then in that King's Reign, being so long since, equivalent to a much
higher Value now.

And therefore the Books and Authorities that speak of Freehold of a less Value
then 40 s. per Annum, must of necessity be understood not to speak of Cases
within that Statute, but of Cases at the Common Law.

3 H. 4. fol. 4. b. Rolls Abridgement, Title-tryal* fol. 648. It is there
held, that Freehold of any value was sufficient for a Juror. This proves that
Freehold is requisite, and that it was so before the Statute of 2 H. 5. it
being in the Reign of K. Henry the Fifth's Father; and with this agrees
Kelloway, fol. 46. toward the end.

Some other Cases after the time of King Henry the Fifth, proves the same, as
16 E. 4. fol. 8. half an Acre of Land, so it be within the Hundred, says that
Book, is sufficient, and it is well known, that as to this qualification of
having Freehold, the same Rule governs in the rest of the Jurors, as in those
of the Hundred, 10 H. 6. Brooks Abridgement, Challenge 192. Hales's Pleas of
the Crown, 260.

Nor do these Authorities distinguish at all between Cases criminal and civil,
nor in Cases criminal between that of Treason and in Cases less criminal.

This being so at the Common Law, and the Statute of 2 H. 5. c. 3. only adding
the yearly value, viz. 40 s. per Annum Freehold, which before at the Common
Law, might be of any lower value. Now tho that Statute of 2 H. 5. be Repealed,
as to Trials in Treason, as in truth it is by the latter Statute of 2 and 3 of
Phillip and Mary, cap. 10. which Enacts that all Trials in Treason, shall be
according to the course of the Common Law, the result is, that still there must
be Freeholders to Try, tho they may be Freeholders as at the Common Law, of any
yearly value whatsoever.

That the Statute of 2 H. 5. (while it was in force) did extend to Cases of
Treason (tho Treason was not expressly mentioned in it, and the Statute speaks
very ambiguously and obscurely) appears by the Authorities following, viz.
Stamford's Pleas of the Crown, 161; and P^^lton de Pace Regis, and Regni, 187;
and by the Statute of 33 H. 8. c. 23. in the Proviso, that reserves to the
Party the Challenge, for want of 40 s. Freehold, even in case of Treason,
though it make the Treason triable in any County.

See Sir Christopher Blunt's Case, Justice Croke, 37 Eliz. fol. 413. In an
Information of Intrusion, by the Queen: a Juror was challenged for want of
Freehold, and upon Examination of the Juror, it appeared he had Freehold of 15
s. per Annum value, and that was adjudg'd sufficient; which admits it had been
a good cause of Challenge, had there been no Freehold at all; and it
necessarily implies that it was required by the Common Law, for no Statute
interposed, as to any lower value than 40 s. per Annum. Nor does this Case
distinguish between the Case of Intrusion upon the Queen, and any other Case.

But it may reasonably be argued, if Freehold be necessary in a Juror, who is
to try a Case of Intrusion only, a Fortiori, is it requisite in a Case of
High Treason, but in that Case of Sir Christopher Blunt, another Juror was
challenged that had no Freehold, and he was therefore set aside.

Now that the Challenge for want of Freehold extends to the City of London, and
other Cities and Buroughs, as well as to the Counties, is abundantly proved by
the Statutes of 11 H. 6. c. 1. 7. H. 7. c. 5. and 23 H. 8. c. 13. to which the
Reader for brevity-sake is referred.

It is no where maintained that an agreement to Poison or Stab, etc. is no
Treason, if the very Act do not ensue, as the Answerer very falsely alleges in
the Second Column of his 6th Page, toward the lower end; for those have a
manifest tendency toward killing, nor are they any distinct species or sorts,
or kinds of Treason from the killing of the King, as that of Levying of War,
and seizing the King's Guards (especially not showing what Guards) are a
distinct species from that of killing the King, and need not necessarily be
understood to terminate and conclude in a killing the King, taking the King
Prisoner, or seizing his Person, may more reasonably be thought to aim at a
killing of the King, or have a tendency toward it.

And the Indictment ought surely to have declared and expressed clearly and
plainly what Guards were meant, there being variety of Guards; for every
Indictment ought to contain certainty.

Herein the very Indictment was faulty.

The bold Answerer hopes the King will always preserve those Guards, tho the
Parliament have declared their sense to the contrary, when the present
extraordinary occasion shall be over.

This daring presumptuous Answerer in defiance of the Act for Reversal of the
Lord Russel's Attainder, the Trial having been partial, unjust, and illegal, as
the Act affirms it, yet dares to averr in his last Page that there was Evidence
enough to justify all concerned in the Prosecution and Trial.

The Answerer, toward his close, takes great care, and is much concerned to
justify the King's Solicitor that then was.

And this would incline one to think that the then King's Solicitor was not
the Author of that Antidote against Poison; nor of this last Print, entitled,
The Magistracy and Government Vindicated; which are so much alike in their
style and strain. And in truth that late King's Solicitor does utterly deny
that he had any hand in either of them. And Sir George Jeffries, the last Lord
Chancellor, could not compose this last. This being so, it may easily be judged
where it must fix: for this, look into the printed Trial.

I now refer the Answerer to justify himself at Law, if he happen to be in
danger of an Exception out of an Act of General Pardon and Indemnity, where he
may have a fairer opportunity to defend himself in his own more immediate
Concern for endeavoring to subvert the Law, which ever proves too hard for all
its Opposers. And I will so far follow his Humor and Vein, as to conclude with
Verses too.

Rode Caper Vitem tamen hic cum stabis ad Aras
In tua quod fundi cornua, possit, erit.
Which I thus English: Go, spightful Satyr, bruise that Sacred Vine
(The LAW) but know there shall not want for Wine
To pour into thy Head, which may suffice,
To render thee a perfect Sacrifice.


FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
POlitica Sacra and Civilis: or, a Model of Civil and Ecclesiastical
Government. Wherein, besides the positive Doctrine concerning STATE and CHVRCH
in general, are debated the principal Controversies of the Times concerning the
Constitution of the State and Church of England, tending to Righteousness,
Truth, and Peace. By George Lawson, Rector of More in the Country of Salop. The
Second Edition.

This Book (first printed 1660.) being so well approved of, that it soon became
very scarce, and was sold at great Rates, is now reprinted for I. S. and are to
be Sold by T. Goodwin, at the Maidenhead over against St. Dunstan's Church in
Fleet Street. 1689.


