THE RIGHTS AND AUTHORITY OF THE COMMONS OF THE City of LONDON, In their
COMMON HALL assembled, Particularly in the Choice and Discharge OF THEIR
SHERIFFS, Asserted and Cleared. In Answer to the Vindication of the Lord Mayor,
Court of Aldermen, and Common Council.

LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCXCV.

The Rights and Authority of the Commons of the City of London in their Common
Hall assembled, Particularly in the Choice and Discharge of their Sheriffs,
asserted and cleared.
In Answer to the Vindication of the Lord Mayor, Court of Aldermen, and
Common Council.
IF the present Controversy in the City of London be unhappy, and ill-timed;
the blame of continuing, if not of raising it, must fall upon that Side, which
shall appear to have been in the wrong.

But since such a Contest is begun, in some Respects the present Time may be
thought propitious, for bringing it to a fair Decision. For,

1. There is the less Danger in it, because it happens chiefly among Men united
in the same Cause and Common Interest; who have always stood up for the Rights
of the City, and are likely to manage the Question, who are principally
entrusted with the Care of its Rights, without Animosities; and quietly to
submit to Authority, or Conviction.

2. The Learning and Integrity of the present Judges, and the Independency of
their Places, assure the right Side of Justice.

3. If it could be imagined, that they would be influenced by the Court: It is
an happiness that there is no color to suspect, that our present Ministry
should interpose to the Prejudice of either's Right.

And as no Prince, who is not truly popular himself, can be pleased to have
Power lodged in any great Body of his People; the Common Hall could not, in any
Reign but this, since Queen Elizabeth's, have expected to bring on their Cause
without great Disadvantage.

And certain it is, there never was so great a Body of Men, of more steady
Loyalty to their Prince, than this Common Hall is to his present Majesty King
William.

Yet I cannot but hope, that this Controversy may be ended, without recourse to
Westminster Hall, or the last resort to Parliament.

For to me it seems, there wants nothing to the quieting the Controversy, but
the setting it in a true Light: Which I shall endeavor to do with that
faithfulness and impartiality, which becomes a constant Servant to Truth, and
the Old English Liberties.

But I must premise, that tho the Author of the pretended modest Essay, runs
the Dispute as high as if the Common Council and Common Hall, were like Rome
and Carthage; The sole Point now in Question is,

Whether the Lord Mayor, and Court of Aldermen, by themselves, The Question,
or in conjunction with the Common Council, as now composed or acting, have
rightful Power to discharge any Person, whom the Citizens assembled in
Common Hall have chosen Sheriff; and to exempt him, or others, from the
Service, for a Year, or Years to come?

Bating what relates to the higher Controversy, he uses but three Topics to
justify the defeating, or vacating the Election of the Common Hall.

I. The Resolution of the Judges, 40 and 41 Eliz. II. Bylaws. III. Custom.
Every one of which I shall show to be fully against him: and that both such
Bylaws and Custom, unless of another Nature than is or can be pretended, would
be absolutely void.

I. The Resolution of the Judges is no more in Substance than this; Of the
Resolution of the Judges, 40 and 41 Eliz.
That tho the Choice of Officers in Cities and Towns incorporated by Charters,
be granted to Mayor and Commonalty, or the like; yet ancient and usual
Elections, by a certain select Number, are warrantable, by reason of Bylaws,
made to avoid popular Confusions; by virtue of a Power of making Bylaws given
by the Charters. And that tho such Bylaws cannot be found, they shall be
presumed: and that this was by common Assent, because of such especial manner
of ancient and continual Election. And according to this Resolution, the
Elections are said to have been in the City of London.

But since the Common Council do not pretend to choose the Sheriffs, otherwise
than as part of the Common Hall, which has long been in possession of this
Right; it is evident, that the Resolution of the Judges is so far from proving
the pretended Authority of the Common Council, to set aside Elections made by
the greater Body of the City; that it manifests the illegality of the Attempt:
since, according to this Resolution, the Common Hall is, to this Purpose at
least, not only the fullest, but the truest Representative or the Body of
Citizens; Vid. (...). de jure belli and pacis.
who, according to Grotius his Distinction, are the Common Subject of this
Power, while their Representatives assembled in Common Hall, are the Proper
Subject by which it is exercised.

And if it were admitted, that an Authority to make this Power useless, or to
weary them out of it, were by some By-Law given to the Common Council as now
composed; or that the Custom has so long been on their Side, that such a By-Law
is now to be presumed; yet it is very evident, that there is nothing to warrant
it in that Resolution. For besides, that, as I have observed already, it only
concerned Elections:

1. The Case is only of such Provisions as have been made, or are presumable to
have been made, to avoid popular Confusions: which the Common Council may, if
they please, urge, for the setting aside the Usage for Elections in
Common Hall: But then they must consider, that an Arbitrary Court would be sure
to fight them with their own Weapon, and, with parity of Reason, to set them
aside. And I submit it to their calm Consideration, whether the
indefeazibleness of Elections, without the Consent of those who made them; or
the defeating them at the Pleasure of others, and from time to time requiring a
new Choice, be the most likely to occasion popular Confusions?

2. The Case put is only of Corporations by Charter, and deriving their Power
of making Bylaws from such Charters; in most, if not all of which, that Power
is by the Charters lodged in a select ^umber there appointed. When, as I shall
show, the Citizens of London were a Body Politic, with Power of making Laws
for the Welfare of the City; and had the ^hoice of their Portreve, since called
Mayor, and of the Sheriff of their ^ity, by Prescription, before they had any
Charter: Which if they had, tho the Sheriffwick of Middlesex were annexed to
London by Charter; that would fall under the same Government, and be subject to
an Authority independent on any Charter; especially if such Annexation has been
before time of memory, and confirmed by Acts of Parliament.

And further yet, if it will appear, that no Charter to the City of London
about making Bylaws, appoints any select Number for the exercice of this
Power; it will if possible be more evident, that the Resolution of the Judges
has nothing to support the Authority claimed by the present Common Council.

However it must be remembered, that the Resolution says, Such especial manner
of ancient and continual Election, could not begin without common Assent.

Since therefore common Assent has placed the Election of Sheriffs in the
Common Hall; it will lie upon the other Side to show at least the Presumption
of common Assent, to place the Discharge in the Common Council. And they must
not for this urge any Act of Common Council as Authoritative in it self.

Of Bylaws, particularly that 7 C. 1.
2. I do not find that the Vindicator pretends, that the Custom for the Mayor
and Aldermen by themselves, or in conjunction with the Common Council, to
discharge a Person chosen Sheriff by the Common Hall, is so ancient, that a
By-Law to warrant it, made by the Common Council as now acting, Vid. Vindic.
much less by the Common Hall, is to be presumed. But he insists upon Positive
Bylaws made in the Common Council, for their excusing any Persons duly chosen,
by admitting them to Fine for one Year. This he supposes to have been
established by several Acts of Common Council, one of which he pretends to have
transcribed.

But certainly no Act ever began with [and] as his Transcript does: And it is
visible, that what he gives as the whole Act, 7 C. 1. is very lame and
imperfect. Had he published the beginning of it, the pretense of more Acts of
Common Council than that one, unless they be of very late and suspected Date,
must have vanished. For tho, as may appear by comparing it with former Acts, it
makes in great measure the same Provisions, and uses almost the same words with
some of them, only altering the Penalties, and Values of Estates required for a
Qualification, with some other necessary Circumstances; yet it in express Terms
repeals all former Acts made upon that Subject.

The Substance of what he is pleased to communicate, is this; If any Freeman of
the City, being duly chosen Sheriff, shall not personally appear before the
Mayor and Aldermen, at their next Court, unless he have such reasonable Excuce
as the Mayor and greater part of the Aldermen then present shall allow; and
there enter into Bond to take the Office upon him in Common Hall, on
Michaelmass Eve; or shall openly refuse; he shall forfeit as is there provided;
Unless he shall be duly discharged for want or defect of Ability in Wealth; and
shall nevertheless remain eligible yearly afterward, as if he had never been
chosen.

Upon thus much of the Order it is observable;

1. That the Excuce to be allowed by the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, is not for
not taking the Office upon him; but for not attending at the next Court-Day;
and not entering into Bond beforehand, to oblige himself to take the Office
upon him in Common Hall.

Now it is probable, that Men may have been out of Town, or detained by
Sickness, or necessary Affairs, which hindered them from engaging at the next
Court-Day to take the Office; and yet they might appear in Common Hall time
enough to enter upon it. And therefore the Court of Aldermen might be Judges of
the Reasonableness of the Excuce, for not engaging beforehand; or at least not
so soon as the Order in strictness requires: and yet there would be no
Consequence from thence, That it is in their Power totally to excuse from
holding.

Further yet it will appear, That this of entering into Bond, was an additional
Provision made 34 Eliz. and repeated 7 Car. 1. beyond what was in any former
Order; Nor was there any Custom in the City for entering into such Bond. This
therefore being a Creature of Common Council, might be left to the Discretions
of the Mayor and Aldermen, without the least Prejudice to the Right of the
Common Hall.

2. The Excuce of which the Mayor and Aldermen are made Judges, is only such as
is reasonable; so that their Discretion is a legal Discretion: And if the
Excuce be for not holding the Office, it is evident that no Excuce for that is
to be allowed, unless it be want of sufficient Estate; in which Case, only, the
Party is dischargable by the Words of that Order.

3. Paying a Penalty is not properly any Excuce.

4. He is to be discharged duly; the Order does not mention by whom: But this,
as it will appear, ought to be by the Common Hall; either in express Terms, or
by implication, in their proceeding to a new Choice.

But for what Time the Discharge shall be, will, notwithstanding that Order, be
absolutely at the Discretion of the Common Hall. Some would infer from the
Words, [ be shall be yearly eligible] that the Person who is excused by the
Mayor and Aldermen on paying his Fine, shall not be eligible till another Year.
Whereas,

1. It must be remembered, that the Excuce of which they are made the Judges, is
not from holding; but tho he should hold, he is subject to the Penalty, if he
does not in due time oblige himself to hold.

2. The [ yearly Eligible] may be in every Year after that Order, when the
Penalty should happen to be incurred. Accordingly, the Order speaks only of the
Discharge of Persons to be chosen; and without such an Interpretation as this
of [yearly], could not be taken to extend to Persons actually chosen.

Or else it may be for every Year following his Default: according to the usual
Entries, that such a Man was chosen Sheriff for the Year ensuing.

Besides, by the express Words, the Party is Eligible, as if he had never been
chosen: And therefore he must remain Eligible, as if he had never paid his
Fine; which follows the Choice.

This will be yet more evident, if we compare this with the Act of
Common Council, Vid. inf.
19 H. 8. repeated in Substance by that 34 Eliz. with only necessary
Alterations; and by this 7 Car. 1. For it will appear to have been the
Intention of this, as well as of former Orders, as indeed it is of most Laws,
to oblige Men to their Duty by exacting the Penalty: not to take the Penalty to
excuse from their Duty; much less thereby to exempt from Penalties, when the
Offense shall be repeated.

And it is observable, that the Order, 19 H. 8. has not the word [Yearly], Vid.
inf.
which gives color to a Dispute; it declaring, That such Person shall be
Eligible, notwithstanding his paying the Penalty.

3. If there had been any intention of exempting the Offender for a Year, upon
suffering the Penalty; it would certainly have been in the Negative, that he
should not be eligible till the next Year. Which, indeed, would have been no
very wise Provision; and, as will appear, directly contrary to the Preamble,
and declared Intention of that very Order.

But for certain, whatever Power may have been entrusted with the
Common Council; they cannot, according to the known Rule of Law, set aside the
City's common Law-Right of choosing any Person capacitated for the Service,
without a Clause in the Negative; that is to say, that they shall not choose a
Person, discharged by the Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council, upon paying his
Fine, till another Year.

Tho, as it will appear, it signifies nothing to the Merits of the Cause, Of
Bylaws before 7 C. 1.
what the Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council have done, for drawing to
themselves Jurisdiction or Authority from a greater and higher Court in being,
and full exercice of Authority, and of which they make but a small part; yet
what is called Argumentum ad Hominem, is never to be neglected. For to prove,
that those very Arguments in which Men place their Strength, make directly
against them, is to disarm, if not convince them.

To this end it may be of Service to show, what Provisions had formerly been
made in this Matter: and what has been omitted by the Vindicator, out of the
Order 7 C. 1. agreeing with those former Provisions.

In Archiv. Civ. Lib. Dunthorr. f. 416. B. and Lib. O. f. 10. a. The Act of
Common Hall, 24 E. 3.
In the 24 th of E. 3. a public Act or Ordinance had been made, which taking
notice, That many sufficient Persons used to absent themselves out of the City
to avoid the Office of Sheriff; by means whereof Persons less sufficient were
chosen through their Default; to the great Mischief of them, and to the Desolation
of the City; and so following to the great Jeopardy of the Franchises of the
same: Disfranchises such Absenters, and allows of no Excuce, unless they swear
with six Vouchers, that they did not absent themselves for that Purpose.

This was manifestly made in Common Hall: For one Evidence of which it is to be
observ^d, that it was on the Feast of St. Matthew, which had been the usual Day
for such Elections, till the Day was altered 19 H. 8.

And it is observable, that tho the Common Council 19 H. 8. as some would
think, to color their Authority to alter the Day and Penalty; say it was
ordained and established by the Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons, in their
Common Council, 24 E. 3. yet it is plain it was the Common Council of all those
who assembled at that Day for the Election.

In Arch. Civ. Lib. O. f. 10. 18 H. 8.
And the Common Council, 18 H. 8. voting that ancient Act to be put in execution
in the Case of one Hynde, and of all other such Offenders; calls it, according
to the Style it had at the making, An Ordinance made by Walter Turk Mayor,
Simon Franceys, and others, [ with the Assent of the whole City].

It will further appear, that whatever Councils may, before the time of that
old Act, have been summoned to particular Purposes; no Common Council separate
from them that used to assemble in the Common Hall, was ever settled as a
standing Council, of any considerable Authority, before that time.

This public Act of the whole City, having therefore absolutely required all
sufficient Persons chosen Sheriffs to serve, upon pain of Disfranchisement; and
allowing of no Excuce but Insufficiency in Estate; all Acts of Common Council
allowing any less or other Court, to discharge sufficient Persons chosen, or to
exempt 'em from being chosen, must be void in themselves: And, according to
what the City has declared in its fullest Authority, is the assuming a Power,
not only to injure those Persons, who through the Default of others, serve before
their turn: Which is a stretch beyond the Exercice of a Dispensing Power by the
most Arbitrary of our Kings: But as it tends to the Desolation of the City, and
hazards the loss of its Franchises; is beyond, and contrary to, any Power that
they can pretend to for the making Bylaws: which can be only for the Benefit
of the City. But, in truth it will appear, that Common-Councils after this
solemn Declaration of the Sense of the City, only took care to enforce the
Substance of what was then enacted; expressing what shall be adjudged
Sufficiency; and making other Penalties more likely to be effectual, than the
Bugbear of Disfranchisement, can be with a wealthy Citizen, who is above his
Trade, or any need of the Privileges of the City.

In Arch. Civ. Lib. O. f. 53. Of the Act of Common-Counc. 19 H. 8.
Wherefore the Common Council, 19 H. 8. having altered the Day of Election to a
more convenient Day than the Feast of St. Matthew; which was too near the Day
on which Sheriffs were to be presented at the Exchequer, making almost the same
recital with the Act 24 E. 3. provides, That if the Person chosen shall make
Default, he shall pay 200 l. to the Use of the Commonalty of the City; 100 l.
of which shall be given to him who next serves through his Default.

But expressly declares, That every Person so making Default, at all times be
eligible unto the said Room and Office of Sheriffwick; the said former Act, or
any thing therein contained to the contrary, [ or the payment of the said 200
l. for such Default, notwithstanding].

In Arch. Civ. Lon. 13 Eliz. The Act of Common Council, 13 Eliz.
Thus the Bylaws in this Matter stood, till 13 Eliz. when an Order of
Common Council was made, expressly affirming, or confirming, all former Acts of
Common Council, and Decrees of Court, herein.

Where Decrees of Court may well be taken to include the Decrees of the
Common Hall pronounced on the Hustings; and consequently that 24 E. 3. as to
the requiring Persons chosen to hold, without any Excuce but Insufficiency,
stands affirmed 13 Eliz.

That of the 13 th of Eliz. continued the same Penalty as 19 H. 8. but made
nothing under 2000 l. to be a sufficient Qualification: Yet that, as well as
the Order 19 H. 8. stood in need of some amendment.

Wherefore 34 Eliz. it was prudently provided, Of the Act of Common-Counc. 34
Eliz.


1. That the Day of Election being within too few Days of the Time for
presenting the Sheriffs at the Exchequer, should be put back to the 24 th of
June.

2. There being no sufficient Means of securing the City beforehand, that they
might depend on a Person's standing; a Bond was required for that purpose.

3. The Penalty proving over-mild, it was raised from 200 l. to 400 Marks; and
if the Person chosen were an Alderman, to 600 Marks.

4. It was not expressed, 19 H. 8. what Estate should qualify a Person for the
Service; and the Qualification required 13 Eliz. became insufficient; wherefore
the Order, 34 Eliz. required 5000 l.

Upon these Accounts it repealed all former Orders about this Matter; that a
more effectual one might take place. But then it must be agreed, that till the
34 th of Eliz. there was no manner of color to imagine, that paying a Fine
could discharge any Man without Consent of the Common Hall.

And as it has appeared already, that 7 Car. 1. made no Alteration herein, or
placed any Power of discharging or exempting, where it had not been before:
Neither did that 37 Eliz. which that 7 C. 1. transcribes as to this Matter.

But notwithstanding the requisite Alterations made 34 Eliz. the Expensiveness
of Shrievalties, and Men's backwardness to hold, occasioned the Provision, 7
Car. 1. which has given Ground, tho no true Color, for the present Dispute.

That Act repeals all former Acts of Common Council: Com, Council, 7 C 1. Deucy
Mayor.

This Part omitted by the Vindicator.


but does not pretend to repeal any Act of Common Hall. So that all the
Obligation which lay upon Citizens to be concluded by their own Consent,
publicly, and solemnly declared, 24 E. 3. still remains unshaken.

Nor does the Act, 7 C. 1. repeal former Acts of Common Council, as too
severely keeping Men to their Duty: but, [for that the same have not taken so
good Effect as might be wished; by reason that the Penalties and Forfeitures
therein contained, have been over-mil'd: and thereby his Majesty's Services
have been in danger of Prejudice; and the good Citizens of this City, by reason
of the often refusals of the said Office of Shrievalty, have been much troubled
and disquieted.

The better to secure good Sheriffs, it appoints the Day of Election to be the
24 th of June. And that no Freeman of the said City, so to be chosen or elected
as aforesaid, shall be exempted from the execution of the said Office of
Shrievalty, by supposition, or excuce of defect or insufficiency of Wealth;
[except] he will voluntarily take his Corporal Oath, before the Mayor, and
greater part of the Aldermen, in open Court of Lord Mayor, and Aldermen for the
Time being; that he then is not of the Value of Ten thousand Pounds, etc.

Now considering how the former Provisions were, this is as much as if it said,

Whereas according to former Bylaws, no sufficient Person is to be discharged
or exempted from holding Sheriff; and what was Sufficiency then, is not so now;
but the Penalties upon sufficient Persons were over-mil'd: therefore every
sufficient Person chosen shall serve, upoin pain of forfeiting the sum of 600
Marks, if an Alderman, and 400 l. if a Commoner: unless he can swear, as is
hereby required.

Wherefore, according to the plain scope and meaning of this Order, and which,
indeed, is expressed in that very Part which the Vindicator uses, no Man is to
be discharged, or exempted, but for insufficiency in Estate.

But however that Order were; it is evident, that the Act of Common Hall, 24 E.
3. is far from being antiquated or repealed: and is of force as to the
Obligation, which the Body of the City laid upon every individual Person of the
City, and upon all Inferior Courts or Councils: and if the Penalty be duly
taken away, that will not weaken the Sanction of such a declaratory Law.

And surely no Man can say, that because of this Alteration, the exempting or
discharging a sufficient Person from being Sheriff, will not be to the
Prejudice of less sufficient Persons, who shall be obliged to serve before
their turn: or that it will not tend to the Desolation of the City, and to the
Hazard of its Franchises.

As I take it, all the Citizens are precluded by this Act from saying
otherwise, than themselves did so long since by their Predecessors; and yet
speak in this their standing Law.

III. I come now to consider how the Custom has been: which, Of the Custom.
by what has already appeared, could not signify much, if it were contrary to
these Bylaws; and yet, as I shall show, that is quite otherwise than the
Vindicator would seem to believe.

In the In Arch. Civ. Land. lib. D. f. 76. b.

Causton 's Case.


18 th Edw. II. one John Causton had been chosen Sheriff at the usual time, he
not appearing Solemniter vocatus.
whether upon personal Notice by Order of the Common Hall, or upon a
Proclamation, is uncertain; the Aldermen and Commons were summoned to be at
Guildhall the Michaelmas Day next following: On which Day Causton was Depositus
fuit a liberate and de Aldermannia.
disfranchised, and put out of his Aldermanship.

And one Alan Gill was chosen Sheriff, and sworn: Afterward, at the Hustings
holden on Monday next after the Feast of Simon and Jude, Causton came and put
Posuit se in gratia Maj. Ald. and Communitatis.
himself upon the Mercy of the Mayor, Aldermen [and Commonalty] and begged to
be restored to his former Estate, proffering to take the Shrievalty upon him.

The Maj. Aldris. and coitat. super hoc eodem die consultis.

Habitoque respectu ad impotentiam, etc.


Mayor, Aldermen [and Commons] having the same Day consulted together; and
Respect being had to the Impotency or Insufficiency of Gill; Causton was
admitted to his former State, and sworn Sheriff: after which he was accepted,
and sworn at Westminster. Observe,

1. Here was a Disfranchisement by Common Hall, before any Act of other Common
Council was made in the Matter: and indeed, as it will appear, before there was
any other Common Council; or any Authority to make Bylaws given or confirmed
to the City by any Charter.

2. The Common Hall restores a Man who had been disfranchised.

3. It discharges a Man who had been actually sworn Sheriff.

In Arch. Civ. I. Lib. O. f. 10. A. 18. H. 8.

Of several Elections, and two Discharges by the Common Hall in one Day.


To come to Times after the supposed Settlement of the present Common Council,
and of the Livery Common Hall. In the 18 th Hen. 8. one Thomas Hind was chosen
Sheriff by the Common Hall: He not appearing, his Default was recorded; and the
Mayor directed the Persons that were of the Common Council of the City, to
resort up to their Place accustomed, there to hold a Common Council; and that
all others should abide within the Hall.

In that Common Council the Ordinance abovementioned 24 Edw. 3. was read, and
agreed to be put in execution. Hynde not yet appearing; it was shown to the
Commons by the Common Clerk, in the Recorder's Absence, that inasmuch as the
City was destitute of a Sheriff; and also in consideration, that the Day of
presenting the Sheriff at the Exchequer drew near, they should immediately
proceed to a new Election.

2d Choice.
Then the Commons chose Simon Rice on a Saturday. The Day for presenting the
Sheriffs being the next Monday, the Commons were appointed to meet on the
Sunday. But Rice not being to be found, such Persons as were of the
Common Council were again ordered to resort up to their Place accustomed to
Council; where it was ordered, that every Citizen who had dep^^^ed out of the
City since the Friday before, should forfeit 20 l.

3d Choice.
Thereupon the Commons being ordered to proceed to another Election, chose
William Robins: who appearing before the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons,
swore, [before them all] that he was not worth 1000 Marks; upon which Oath he
was immediately clearly dismissed.

The Commons being again commanded by the Mayor to proceed to a new Election;
the Mayor and Aldermen returned to the great Chamber; in whose Absence the
Commons chose Mr. William Lok: 4th Choice.
who making humble Supplication to the Mayor, Aldermen [and Commons] showed
them, that considering his Youth and great Charges, he was nothing apt nor
liable to take the Office upon him: which Mayor, Aldermen [and Commons] having
Pity and Compassion of the said Mr. William Lok, upon his said Declaration,
clearly discharged him for that time, without making of any Oath.

5th Choice.
The Commons being commanded to proceed to a new Election, the Mayor and
Aldermen withdrew as before, and the Commons chose Mr. Nicholas Lamberd, who
was sworn Sheriff.

At this time it is evident, beyond Contradiction, that though the Lord Mayor
gave the Rule, as Chief in the Common Hall; and he, with the Common Council in
the Council Chamger, set the Penalty upon Absenters; the Discharge of the
Persons chosen was in the Common Hall, and the Act of the Common Hall.

In Arch. Civ. Journal Seym. 1.163. A. 21 H. 8. Ralph Rowlet 's Case.
Within three Years after this the Authority of the Common Hall in this Matter,
exclusive of all other Powers, is asserted in a very remarkable Instance.

They having chosen Sheriff one Mr. Ralph Rowlet, an Officer in the Royal Mint;
the King wrote to the Mayor and Citizens, showing that Mr. Rowlet was occupied
in the Charge of the Mint; and therefore willed them, having Knowledge of his
Privilege, no farther to inquiet him, but to proceed to a new Choice. Whereupon
it was ordered, decreed and determined, by the Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons,
that the Persons there named should repair to the King in the Name of the
Mayor, Aldermen, and Citizens, in their most humble manner to beseech him, that
the Liberties, Customs and Franchises of the City, by his most noble
Progenitors granted to the same, and by his Highness ratified and confirmed,
may stand, and be in their Strength and Virtue, concerning the said Ralph
Rowlet; that he may take upon him the said room of Sheriffwick, according to
the Effect of the same.

The Persons so deputed having attended the King, returned with a second
Letter; directed, to our trusty and right well beloved the Mayor of our City of
London; and our trusty and well beloved the Aldermen, Citizens, and Commons of
the same.

Wherein, as he says, Tendering the entire Conservation, and Maintenance, of
the Liberties and Privileges of the City; and seeing that his learned Council
were absent; for which Cause he was in suspense and doubt, whether his Letters
Patent to Rowlet were of such Force, that by Virtue of the same he ought to be
discharged; he desires them to proceed to the Election of some other Person, [
so to discharge] the said Ralph Rowlet: Not in Contemplation of the said
Letters Patent, but of those Presents, being only of request.

Whereupon it was agreed, by the said Mayor, and Aldermen, that a
Common Council should be warned against the Vigil of St. Michael the
Archangel, concerning the same: And [to their Advyses] in the Premises. The
Common Council meeting, it was then and there agreed, according to the Tenor,
and Effect, of the said Letter.

It must be owned, That in the Entries of the Common Council there are these
words; It is agreed, Fol. 165.
That the said Ralph Rowlet shall be discharged of the said Office for this
time only: And that thereupon the Commons proceed to a new Election.

Where they do not pretend actually to discharge him, but agree that he shall
be discharged: Which shows, that the Discharge was to be in the Place where
another was to be chosen: And they only advised this, or recommended it, to the
Common Hall. That this was only by way of Advice appears farther; not only by
the declared End for which they were summoned; but by what follows the former
part of the Journal; which, after mentioning what was done in Common Council,
has these words; And then immediately, the said Letter was openly read in the
Guild Hall aforesaid, [to all the Commons in their Liveries, then and there
assembled.] And in like manner were agreed, in manner and form as the said
Common Council had agreed and granted. And thereupon, the said Mayor, Aldermen,
and Commons, by one Assent, and Consent, proceeded to the Election of a new
Sheriff, in the stead and place of the said Mr. Rowlet. Here it is observable,

1. That it was held and declared, whether by the Common Hall, or ordinary
Common Council, it matters not; That the King's Prerogative to require the
Service of his Subjects, could not defeat the Right of the City, to employ its
Citizens: Though the King had exercised his Prerogative, before the City had
applied that Right to the particular Person.

2. That the King did not think it in the Power of the Mayor, and Aldermen, or
any other Body of Men, without the Commons, to discharge the Person chosen.

3. That he supposed the Choice of another Person, to amount to the Discharge
of the first.

4. That though the Common Council among themselves agree, that the Person shall
be discharged; they did not insist upon this Order or Vote, as conclusive to
the Common Hall. But caused the King's Letter to be read in Common Hall. Where
all agreed in manner and form as the Common Council had done before: That is,
they agreed to discharge the Party. So that the Agreement of the Common Council
was but matter of Advice, or a probationary Order; which wanted the Placet, or
Fiat, of the Commons.

The next Case which I find to this Point, is that of Richmond, 33 H. VIII. In
Arch. Civ. li^ Q. f. 35. a. 33 ^ VIII. Richmond 's Case.
In which, as I am informed, the Asserters of the Authority of the
Common Council much triumph: And yet it will prove to have been the Effect of a
strong Prepossession; or of not attending to those governing Passages and
Expressions, which will fully explain what may seem doubtful in this, or other
Entries of the like kind.

Richmond having been chosen by the Common Hall, and his Election certified to
the Mayor, and Aldermen, in the utter Chamber of Guild Hall; the Mayor, and
Aldermen, are there said lovingly to have confirmed and allowed the same.

After this, the Lord Mayor, and his Brethren the Aldermen, returning [into the
Hall] Richmond came up unto the Lord Mayor, and his Brethren the Aldermen,
Note, This was upon the Hustings in Guild Hall.
and [then] and [there] made right humble and hearty Suit, Petition, and
Request, both [unto them] and [ unto the whole Commons there present] That,
forasmuch as he had not sufficient Estate, It might please [them all] to be so
good Lord and Masters unto him, and to discharge him thereof again.

Notwithstanding his Allegations and Reasons for his Excuse and Discharge,
because it seemed [unto them] that he was a Man very meet and hable for the
same, his said Petition and Request would not, nor was not granted unto him.

He proffered his Oath, that he was not worth 1000 Marks: But the Mayor,
Aldermen, and Council of the City answered, That such Oath was not sufficient
without Six Vouchers, according to the late Act of Common Council.

However, he swore to his Insufficiency, before the Mayor, Aldermen, and [
Commons;] Whereupon, forasmuch as his own Oath did not discharge him, according
to the Laws and Usages of the said City, of and from the said Office; but that
he stood still, and remained chargeable to the same, and expressly refused, and
denied there openly to take it upon him, and to meddle withal; he was sent to
Ward for his Disobedience, and Obstinacy, by the whole Court [and Consent of
the Commons] there assembled.

After this, he was several times brought in Custody before the Mayor, and
Aldermen, and as often remanded; till at last he agreed to pay 200 l. to the
use of the City, for his Discharge; and gave Bond for the Money.

Thereupon he was discharged from his Imprisonment.

Then the Mayor, Aldermen, Common Council, and [other the Commoners assembled
at Guild Hall, for the Discharging of the said Richmond] of and from the said
Office, and for the Election of another.

Whereupon, great part of the Premises, and the Circumstances of the same, by
Mr. Recorder, first to the Common Council, and afterward [to the Commons
aforesaid] [then] and [there] being substantially, discreetly, and prudently,
published and declared [at length] the same Mr. Richmond was [then] and [there]
by the said Mayor, Aldermen, and [ Common-Counsail there holden] clearly
discharged for that time only, of and from the said Office, for his said Fine.

Here they will take no notice of what was transacted in the first Common Hall;
where Richmond petitioned [the whole Commons] as well as the Mayor, and
Aldermen, for a Discharge, which he could not then obtain; and further, the
Commons agreed, That he should be committed to Prison: Wherein they, with the
Mayor and Aldermen, acted as a Court of Justice, and Common Council.

If the Council of the City, which urged an Act of Common Council, were the
Common Council it self; then it is evident, that they acted there but as of
Counsel or Advice to the Common Hall; in which that Entry places the Authority
of Discharging.

If they were the Cities Counsel at Law who mentioned this; then the
Common Council had no share in any part of that Transaction, otherwise than as
part of the Common Council in Common Hall assembled, who consented to the
committing Richmond.

Still some will hang upon that part of the Entry concerning the Second
Common Hall, where Richmond is said to be discharged by the said
Common-Counsail there holden.

When it manifestly was the very same Body of Men, to whom he petitioned for a
Discharge, which he could not then obtain; and by whose Consent he was
committed to Prison for his Disobedience and Obstinacy.

To give color to their Sense, they must have it, that though Richmond sued to
the Mayor, Aldermen, Common Council, and Common; who would not then discharge
him; and though, after he had fined all met to discharge him, and choose another;
yet the Commons met only to choose another; and the Mayor, Aldermen, and
Common Council, to discharge him.

And though the Discharge is plainly shown to have been in Common Hall, where the
Common Council cannot pretend to act as a Council, with Authority; and that [at
length] after the Commons, as well as the Common Council, had been applied to
by the Recorder; yet they must fancy, that the Common Council withdrew out of
the Common Hall, and went up to the Council Chamger, to make a particular Order
for his Discharge. Of which there is not the least mention or intimation, in
relation to that Second Common Hall.

But, as this is mere Imagination, not only without ground, but directly
contrary to the careful and solemn entry of the Proceedings, from the beginning
to the end; it is evident, That the Common Council was but part of the
Common-Counsail, there holden, consisting of Mayor, Aldermen, Common Council,
and other Commoners.

Vid. Infra.
Farther yet, if it should appear by other Evidences, as I make no doubt but it
will, That the Commons of the City, with their Officers, and Council, assembled
in their Common Hall, or other Folk-mote, in their own Persons, or by
Representation; have, from long before the reputed Conquest to this Day, been
and continued the Common Council of the City; and that the Common Hall, wherein
Richmond was discharged from serving Sheriff, was a true Representative of all
the Commons; it will be certain that all together were properly called a
Common-Counsail.

And if the Common Hall, as now composed, be the same with that which
discharged Richmond; it will also follow, That the Right of Discharging belongs
to this Common Hall: And that it is the true Common-Counsail, or rather
Council, of the City.

Take all the Precedents together, as they strengthen and give Light to one
another; and, I think, there can be no question, but they will so explain and
govern following Orders of Common Council, that not one of them shall be taken
as a Precedent to the Contrary: Unless it can be shown, that the Person
discharged by the Common Council, has been looked upon in Law as duly
discharged; before the Commons have allowed of the Discharge, by proceeding to
a new Choice; and even though they absolutely refused to choose again.

However, lest it should be thought, Of a Discharge in the Common Hall, 1 Eliz.
that all the Entries since the Reign of H. VIII. to 7 Car. I. (when the Order
was made on which the Vindicator lays his chief stress) are on the Side of the
Common Council; I shall give the Words of the Journal of the Common Hall, 1
Eliz. which may govern all the Entries to 7 Car. I.

Common Hall.
In Congregatione Majoris, Aldror' and Communitatis, Civitatis Lond' apud
Cuihalde, xxi Die Sept' Anno Reg' dnae Eliz. Dei Grat' Ang' Franciae and
Hiberniae Reg' Fidei Defensor' etc. primo.
Forasmuch, as Mr. Walter Jobson, Citizen and Cloth-worker of the said City of
London, who was lawfully elect and chosen the 11th Day of August last past, by
the Commons of this City, one of the Sheriffs of the same City, and of the
County of Middlesex, for the Year next ensuing after the Feast of St. Michael
the Archangel now next ensuing; has since that time signified and given
sufficient knowledge unto my said Lord Mayor, and Aldermen; that he, by reason
of Sickness and debility of Body, wherewith he a long time has been and yet is
fore vexed, detained, and troubled; as he says, is not in any wise able, to
take upon him the exercice and execution of the same Office accordingly.

In consideration whereof [the said Commons] have this Day eftsoons assembled
for the Election of one other able and sufficient Person, to bear and exercise
the said Room and Office of Shrievalty for the said time, in the stead and
place of the said Mr. Jobson; did this Day elect and choose Mr. Roger Martin,
Alderman, one of the Sheriffs of the said City and County of Middlesex, to
have, occupy and exercise the said Office of Shrievalty, from the Feast of St.
Michael the Archangel now next coming, unto the Feast of St. Michael the
Archangel then next ensuing, acc^rding to the ancient custom of this City in
that behalf.

Here observe;

1. That in the First of Eliz. the Common Hall was a Court which kept the
Journals of its Proceedings.

2. That the Matter of which the Mayor and Aldermen had taken Cognizance, was
not within any By-Law: So that they could not pretend to any Authority to
discharge. Nor is it said that the Party was discharged, though they were
satisfied that he was not able to hold. Wherefore this Matter represented to
the Common Hall, could be no more than as the Opinion, and Advice, of the Mayor
and Aldermen.

3. Accordingly, the Common Hall takes the Matter into consideration: For they,
being assembled for the Election of another, did elect, in consideration of the
Matter represented to them in Common Hall.

4. To put this Matter beyond Controversy, it is observable, That no
Common Council was held upon this Occasion; and there is no color of
Authority, or ancient Usage pretended, for the Mayor and Aldermen to discharge
without the Consent of the Common Council. Therefore Mr. Jobson must have been
discharged by the Common Hall, or otherwise he continued Sheriff; which, it is
certain he did not.

5. No other discharge of the Party is mentioned, or implied, than the
Common-Hall's proceeding to a new Choice.

And if in any following Instances they have proceeded to new Elections, upon
such Inducements as they had at the respective times, whether upon taking
Fines, or otherwise, the Entries of Clerks can be no Prejudice to their Right
so manifest upon many Entries in the Common Hall Journals.

According to what is said in Slade's 4. Rep. f. 93.
Case, The Returns of Sheriffs, or Entries of Clerks, without challenge of the
Party, or consideration of the Court, being contrary to common Law, and Reason,
are not allowable.

And therefore, whatever may have been entered in the Books of the
Common Council, it shall not be supposed that the Common Hall ever admitted any
Man to have been discharged, till they had actually consented to it; or did it
virtually, in choosing another in his stead.

And the same may be applied to Exemptions, of which I will admit there are
some Instances to be found in the Books of the Common Council.

That if the Bylaws and Custom were on the Side of the Lord Mayor, Aldermen,
and Common Council: Such Bylaws and Custom would be void in Law.
4 th. That no Man was ever duly discharged or exempted, till there was the
Consent of the Common Hall, may sufficiently appear by what I have shown of the
Bylaws and Custom in this Matter.

And yet if both favored the Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council, I shall make
it evident, that they would be void in Law.

To which purpose I shall show,

1. That the exempting a Person from being chosen Sheriff within the City of
London, and the discharging or amoving one chosen, is contrary to the
Common Law Right of the Electors.

2. That it is contrary to their Charters, confirmed by Parliaments.

3. That Magna Charta, and other Acts of Parliament, declaratory of the
Common Law, have so vested the exemption and discharge in the Electors; that if
their free Consent out of Parliament might divest them of it; for certain
nothing less can.

4. That they have never parted with, or quitted it: Yet if they had, are
restored to their Right by his present Majesty's gracious Act of Restitution.

Lib. K. f. 120. temp. H. 6. That for any to amove or discharge Sheriffs, but
the Electors, is contrary to their Common Law-Right.
A Canon of Waltham having, in the Reign of H. 6. been arrested by a Sergeant of
the City, in the Close of St. Martin le Grand; the Legality of it coming in
question, because of the pretended Privilege of that Place, granted by W. 1.
there called Conqueror.

The Mayor, and Citizens justify, and say, All the Close is and ought to be,
and of all time beyond memory of Man was, of and in the Liberty and
Jurisdiction of the said City: For the verifying which they say and show,
diverse Reasons and Evidences. First, they say, That the said City is, and
beyond memory of Man was, the Capital City of the whole Kingdom of England,
before the rest of the Cities and Towns of the same, adorned as well with
Honors, as Liberties; and very many free Customs of diverse Kinds: For it was
founded of Old by the famous Progenitors of our Lord the King that now is,
after the likeness, and manner, and in memory of Ancient Troy the Great: and
from hence was long called Trinovant. Which City, in the time of St. Edward,
King and Confessor, and [of all time before] was of it self, and in it self
[one sole and entire County], and one sole and entire Jurisdiction and Liberty,
[ held at Farm by the said Citizens and their Predecessors] of the said King
and his Predecessors. And the same Citizens then, and from all the time
aforesaid, by reason of their said Jurisdiction and Liberty, have among other,
such Liberties and free Customs: to wit, to choose and make of themselves, every
Year, certain principal Officers in the said ^^^y, who may faithfully answer
the King of the said Farm, and immediately under him, the People of the said
City, and others resorting to the same, in Peace and Justice according to its
ancient Laws and Customs, to rule. And also they could, ought, and for all the
times aforesaid, used to make other Ministers under them, in aid of the
sustaining and (...) ^^ising the Premises: So that all the said time, no
Summons, Attachment, Distress, or Execution, ought, or used to be made, in the
Place where the said Close now is, nor elsewhere in any Part of the City;
unless by the Officers and Ministers aforesaid, except on their failure.

And they say, That the said Lord William the Conqueror, before the Foundation
of the Church aforesaid, and the making the said Charter, of which before was
mention, by the Authority of his Parliament; and by two Charters which the said
Mayor and City here proffer: to wit, by one of them demised to the Citizens of
London, the whole said City and County, with all its Appendences, Things, and
Customs, to them in any manner appertaining.

And by the other he granted, and by the Authority aforesaid confirmed, to the
same Citizens, and their Successors, that they should have the said, and all
other their Liberties and Free Customs unhurt, which they had in the time of
the said holy King Edward his Progenitor: and that they should peaceably use
and enjoy them, etc.

And, speaking of other Kings, his Successors,

Which Kings severally, some by their Charters, and some by their Charters and
the Authority of diverse their Parliaments, granted and confirmed, to the said
Citizens and their Successors, all the said City and County, with all the
Rights, Jurisdictions, Liberties, and Free Customs beforementioned, with their
Appurtenances whatsoever [ in Fee Farm].

Indeed, I find no Judgment upon this, but it seems the Plea quieted the
Dispute. That the Plea was rightly founded, may appear from two considerable
Authorities, not to name more.

1. The Lambert 's Archaionomia, f. 148. Fundata enim erat ad instar and ad
modum and in memoriam maguae Trojae and usque in hodiernum diem, etc.
Confessor's Law (received and sworn to by Will. 1. more than once) out of which
the Passage concerning the Antiquity of the City, and its being founded in
Imitation and in Memory of Old Troy, is transcribed: That Law derives the
City's Laws, Rights, Liberties, and Royal Customs, from its first Foundation;
and says it has preserved them with an entire Inviolability; and consequently
affirms those Laws, Rights, Liberties, and Royal Customs, to have been at
Common Law before any Charter.

A Vid. Rot. Cart. 1 E. 3. m. 45. n. 76. By I nspex. 1 R. 2. m. 31. n. 22. and
2 E. 4. pars 5. m. 23.
Charter passed in Parliament 1 E. 3. and at the Request of the City, expressed
by the Recorder, Placita coram Rege apud Ebor. 1 E. 3.
enrolled in the King's Bench soon after.

This Charter, mentioning the great Charter's Confirmation of all the City's
ancient Liberties and Customs, adds, that at the making of that Charter, and in
the times of Edward King and Confessor, and of William the Conqueror, and other
E. 3 d's Progenitors, the said Citizens had diverse Liberties and Customs, as
well by Charters of Kings, as without, of ancient Custom: Where the Custom is
laid from before the reputed Conquest. And thus their Plea above, which I find
likewise pleaded or prepared, Journal Seym. f. 385. h. 25 H. 8.
25 H. 8. is in effect warranted by Act of Parliament.

It appears that the Charter to St. Martins, which occasioned this Plea, was
granted 2 Will. 1. and that in Parliament, for it was at the Queen^s
Coronation, which, as appears Vid. Bir. Cor. sub effi^ie Claudil A. 3.
Coronatio Regis Athelredi An. 989. and H 1. An. 11 co.
by the old Rituals and Histories, could not then be without the Consent of the
States: Though in the Charter to be seen in the Tower by inspeximus, there are
Words exempting the Place from all secular Jurisdiction; yet the whole County
of London being the City's Farm, Jurisdiction in every part of it was such an
Incident as could not be taken away by general Words in an Act of Parliament:
According to a Case, Lib. E. f. 174. a 2 E. 3 coram Rege.
2 E. 3. wherein it was adjudged, that though the Stat. of Westminster gave an
Attaint against a Jury for a false Verdict; an Attaint would not lie upon a
Verdict in the City of London, because of the Credit the Oaths of a City-Jury
had by Prescription before the Statute.

Since therefore the County of London is the City's Farm, and of such a Nature,
Vid. Mitton's c. 4. rep. Tho. the King even before he makes a Sheriff grant
away the Office of County Clerk, the King's Grant is void, because it is an
Incident to the Sheriff's Office,
that what belongs to the Farm is not separable by the general Words of an Act
of Parliament; neither will the discharging the Sheriffs otherwise than at the
Pleasure of the Electors, that is, of the City duly represented, at least for
that Purpose, be to be taken from the Electors by a less Authority than a
Parliament: And if a Parliament cannot do it by general or doubtful Words, much
less can any others.

But to evince that the discharging or amoving is incident to the Right of the
Election, I must observe, that in other Counties, which are not of Fee, though
the Choice of Sheriffs was at common Law in the Freeholders of the Counties,
yet the Sheriffs had their Commissions and Authority from the King. And as they
have their several Bailywicks under them, they were and are the King's Bailiffs
of the whole County; which in many Records is styled their Vid. Selden's Tit.
of Honor, f. 587. 15 Johannis omnes milites Ballivae tuae qui sum moniti
fuerunt ad nos, etc. Rot. Claus. 38. H. 3. m. 7. n. 12. d. Omnes de Balliva tua
qui tenent 20 horat. terrae, etc.
Balliva or Bailywick.

And though ordinarily the King constitutes them his Bailiffs for a Year, they
at Common Law were amoveable at his Pleasure. But as the County of London is
the City's Farm, it is the Sheriff's Bailywick under the City, whose Election
and Confirmation constitutes him Sheriff, without any Commission from the King.

And because the City is answerable to the King, if the Sheriff be not able,
(though not for his Crimes, which several Charters provide against) the
Sheriffs used anciently to find Lib. C. f. 111. n. 32. E. 1.
Sureties to indempnify the City.

The Sheriffs therefore being but Bailiffs to the Electors, in the Nature of
the thing, are amoveable or dischargeable by them; and consequently by them
only: unless we suppose two supreme Powers within the City; which, according to
Vid. Grot. de veritate Religionis Christianae.
Grotius's Argument against the Plurality of Gods, are absolutely inconsistent.

2. If there were any Question, whether the discharging Sheriffs at Common Law
belongs to the Electors; Charters confirmed by Parliament put it beyond Dispute.

In a Charter Vid. this in the printed Charters, p. 13. and in several
Inspeximus's.
1 John after the Confirmation of the Sherifwick of London and Middlesex, with
all the Customs and Things to the Sherifwick belonging, at the Rent of 300 l.
per annum, with a special saving to the Citizens of London of all their
Liberties and free Customs; it adds, Moreover, we have granted to the Citizens
of London, that they from among themselves may make Sheriffs whom they will,
and amove them when they will.

This is not only confirmed in general by that King's Great Charter at A (...)
place for Great Councils in the open Air. Hence called Pratum Concilii.

Vid. Rot. Cart. 7 R. 2. m. 8. n. 11. A Charter of Cnute's, with the Advice of
his Redgynen wisemen.


Runny-mead, or Redden-mead, and by H. Third's Great Charter, under the Cities
Liberties, and free Customs; but by the express words of a Charter, 11 H. III.
and by two Acts of Parliament at the least; one 1, the other 7 of R. II. In the
first of which this is preserved, Rot. Cart. 1 R. 2. m. 31. n. 37. 7 R. ^. n.
37.
among other Rights, though not used: And in the later, though not used, or abused.

And all of them are repeated and confirmed Rot. Cart. 2 E. 4. pars 5. m. 23.
, 2 E. IV. And that of 7 R. II. is exemplified under the Broad-Seal Vid. Lib.
Q. Arch. Civ. L.
, 8 J. I.

It is observable, That the managing Part of the City took Care to leave the
Parliamentary Confirmations of this, and other Clauses; which, possibly, they
thought too much to favor the Commonalty, out of the Confirmation of their
Charter, 16 C. II. However, the Acts of Parliament stood in no need of
Confirmation; and the late Exemplification, of the most considerable of them,
confirming the rest, removes the Pretense of their being antiquated, or lost,
by any supposed disuse.

And, besides what I have mentioned, according to the Cities Plea to the Quo
Warranto in Michaelmas-Term, 1681. The entire Benefit of these Charters, in
this Point, was confirmed, 5 H. VIII. 2 E. VI. 1 Mar. 4 Eliz. 6. J. I. 14 C. I.

To which, not to mention others, I may add the Statute, 7 H. 4. c. 1.
7 H. IV. which, after providing that Holy Church, the Lords-Spiritual, and
Temporal, and all the Cities and Burghs, have, and enjoy, all their Liberties
and Franchises before that time granted; adds, And that the Great Charter, and
the Charter of the Forest, and all the Ordinances and Statutes made in the time
of our Sovereign Lord the King, and in the time of his Progenitors, [not
repealed] be firmly holden and kept, and duly executed, in all Points.

It may be material here, to show how the Law, as to the Cities Liberty and
Franchise, for the choosing and amoving Sheriffs, was taken in the next Reign
after the making that Statute.

Lib. Dunthorn, f. 442. a. 6. H. 5.
In the 6th of H V. a Sheriff dying in his Shrievalty, the Mayor, Aldermen, and
the more sufficient of the Commons, that is, as will afterward appear, the
Livery-men, were summoned Mora questione inter Dominos de Consilio Regis
mittebatur, etc.
before the King in Council, to show their Right to choose, upon the death of a
Sheriff. They appearing, answer by the Recorder, That, Quod inter ceteras
libertates Civibus L. concessus ac in diversis Parl. Ratificat. etc.
among other, the Libertus granted to the Citizens of London, and ratified in
diverse Parliaments, it is con^^i^ed, That the Citizens of London may make
Sheriffs of themselves, as often as they will, and amove them when they will.
By reason of which Liberty they say That often hitherto, after they have chosen
Sheriffs from among themselves, who have behaved themselves ill, or died, as it
now happened, they have chosen others in their stead.

This Plea was then allowed by the Counsel, or before the King in Council,
where such Matters used to be determined. And it was said to the Mayor and
Commons, That they should use as they had done hitherto.

Where the Chusers and Amovers are agreed to be the same: And that these were
the Mayor and Aldermen, with the more sufficient of the Commons.

Vid. Infra.
And, if it will appear, that these were the Livery-men; here is a Judgment of
that time, That, according to the Charters confirmed by Acts of Parliament, the
choosing, and amoving, or discharging of Sheriffs, belongs to the Livery-men,
and, consequently, to none besides.

If the abovementioned Charters and Acts of Parliament, in affirmance, as I
have shown, of the Common Law, are not enough to preserve the Cities Right of
amoving, or discharging Sheriffs, as well as choosing them; and if they may not
choose Persons exempted by Order of a Common Council, as well as others; it is
in vain to talk of such a thing as Legal Rights: For none can be more firmly
and plainly established.

If it be said, That the City has this, but not the Citizens which meet in
Common Hall: It may as well be said, That they are not the Electors in any
Case; for whoever are, by Law, the Electors, have Right to disallow Exemptions
by others, even by the King himself, as in Rowlet's Case; and to amove, or
discharge, in as full a manner as they have the choosing.

Farther yet, Whatever is inconsistent with an undoubted Right, is absolutely
void; but for the Common Council to discharge a Person whom the Common Hall and
they themselves as Part did choose by an undoubted Right, is inconsistent, as it
makes the Right useless; and therefore such a Discharge must be void. And the
same will hold against Exemptions; and indeed, if others may exempt, they
cannot choose whom they will. In either Case they are defeated of what the
Common Law and Charters, confirmed in Parliament, vested in 'em.

3. Since therefore, they remain the Electors, it will be a great Question, A
Question, whether the Common Hall could bar themselves of this Right.
whether they could bar themselves, or succeeding Common-Halls, from a Right
so incident, and annexed to the Election, as the amoving, or discharging, a
Person chosen Sheriff; or exempting Persons being chosen; according to the
Notion of Sir Robert Filmer, and others, of Supreme Power (in which they
mistake only for want of observing how the Power, which is in its Nature
indivisible, is seated, and enjoyed.)

To this Matter I may well apply what that great Man, the late Earl of
Clarendon, says of the Supposition, That our Ancestors had absolutely submitted
to the Will of a Conqueror.

If it Survey of Hobbs 's Leviathan.
can be supposed, That any Nation can concur in such a Designation, and
devesting themselves of all their Right, and Liberty; it could only be, in
reason, Obligatory to the present Contractors: Nor does it appear to us, That
their Posterity must be bound by so unthrifty a Concession of their Parents.

To which I may add that of Grot. de Jure Belli and pacis, lib. 4. c. 12.
Grotius; No Man can oblige himself by way of Law, that is as a Superior: And
hence it is, that the Authors of Laws have Right to change their Laws; yet any
Body may be obliged by his own Law; not directly, but by consequence, (that is
to say) as he is a Part of the Community; according to natural Equity, which
requires that Parts should be composed with respect to the Whole.

But here the Electors stand in the Place of the whole Body of Citizens, and
therefore might at any time reassume the Right which belongs to them as
Electors.

However, that they shall not be thought to have parted with it by Implication,
Not parted with by Implication from a supposed Custom.
in suffering a Common Council to act as if the sole Authority in this Matter
rested in them; though for a longer time than can be pretended here, may, besides
the reason of the thing, appear:

1. From observing some parallel Cases.

2. From the Resolution of Judges, directly in this Point.

First, I may observe some Cases, of many, wherein a greater length of time
than is supposed here, can take away no Right.

1. Discontinuance of part of the Services, belonging to Tenure, when the Lord
of a Manor has been possessed of other Part, or at least of the Principal; as
in Bevil's Case. 4. Rep.


According to which, possession of the Right of Choosing carries with it the
incidental Right, of Exempting and Amoving, or, Discharging.

2. Where a Custom which has long obtained, is contrary to the Common Law
Right, confirmed by Magna Charta, of a considerable Body of Men.

Thus from the Precedent in the Case of the Earl of Warwick, 14 or 15 H. VII. a
Custom and supposed Prerogative had obtained, for the King to name a select
Number of Peers to try any one of them for his Life. And this is supported not
only by the Opinion of the Lord Coke, but by the Year-Book, 1 H. IV. f. 1.
1 H. IV. where there is a formal Account of the Trial of an Earl of H. in such
manner, at that time.

When it appears by the Summons to Parliaments at that time, that there was no
other Earl of H. besides the Earl of Huntington: And the Record Rot. Parl. 2 H.
IV. n. 30.
of 2 H. IV. shows, that he being taken in open Rebellion, was executed by the
People without any Legal Process.

This, and other Evidences of the Right of the Lords to fair Trials, Vid.
Journals of the House of Lords, Jan. 1689.
having been communicated to several of them, occasioned their Resolution, Jan.
14. 1689.

That it is the ancient Right of the Peers of England to be tried only in full
Parliament, for Capital Offenses. Which they explained three Days after,
excepting Appeals for Murder, or other Felony. Jan. 14. 1689.
Which Resolution was 189 Years since the Precedent to the contrary, which had
been followed ever since to that Day.

3. It is to be considered, That the Right here in question, Of Rights of
Boroughs, not loss'd by discontinuance.
is a Right belonging to the Citizens of London by Prescription, confirmed by
Charters and Acts of Parliament: And a Right, which, as has appeared above, the
present Representatives of the Citizens, for the election of Sheriffs, were
possessed of in the Reign of H. VIII. if not as late as 1 Eliz. But if the
Custom ever since, or for a much longer time, had placed the Exemption and
Discharge in others; such a Custom could not destroy the Cities prescriptional
Right: For though Interruption may destroy the prescriptional Rights of
particular Persons, Vid. The Resolutions sup.
it shall not such Rights of Cities and Boroughs, as may be regularly exercised
without confusion.

Accordingly, though some Vid. Pryn 's 4 th Register of Writs, p. 1176.
Boroughs never sent Burgesses to Parliament above once, twice, or thrice, in
one or two, and some not in three hundred Years, they, in pursuance of several
Votes of the House of Commons, from the 18th of J. I. downwards, have been
restored and remitted to their Ancient Right: As Pr^n 's 4 th Reg. p. 900. 28
E. 1. 1 E. 2. 2 E. 2. none since till late days.
Agmondesham, St. Albans, Alverton, alias Allerton, Andover, lb. p ^05. 26 E.
1. not before or since, tell ut s^pra.
Asperton, Beverley, Botolph, Dunster, Fawy, Gatton, Herewich, Honyton,
Lancaster, Leychesfeld, Lee, lb p. 1^5^. 26 E. 1 (...).
Malton, Marlaw Magna, Okhampton, Oreford, P. 1180. 26 E. 1. not before or
since, till. 8 J. 1.
Pontefract, Preston, Richmond, Seaford, Web^eley, Wendover, Wych.

I shall take leave to observe what is cited upon this Occasion, in one of the
Reports of the ^ommittee of Privileges, An. 1628. from Hankford, 11 H. 4. The
long discontinuance might come from Poverty, or the nescience or neglect of the
Sheriff. Tho for certain, in so long a Succession of Parliaments, these
Buroughs had sufficient Opportunities of freeing themselves from any Prejudice
which might arise from such ^^science, or Neglect; and by so long a Sufferance,
seem to have given up their Right: Yet it appears to be a Right of such a
Nature, as is assumable whenever they are in a condition to exercise it.

For evidence of which, I take leave to add a farther Instance, that no
discontinuance, tho for several hundreds of Years, shall destroy such a Right.

Which is the Case of St. Edmond's Bury in Suffolk.

This by King Vid. Inspex. Rot. Cart. 7. R. 2. m. 8. n. 11.
Cnute's Charter, confirmed by Cart. Antiq. in Tur. Land. Litera P. n. ^.
Edward the Confessor, and afterward by W. 1. and (whatever some talk of the
publishing his Laws in French) according to the Usage of his and former Times
Cart. Orig. Bib. Cotton.
published or proclaimed m^re than once, in the Sax^n Tongue; appears to have
been a Borough, from the Time of K. Edmond, who died about 800 Years since,
and yet but one Precept can be found for this Borough to send Members to
Parliament till within late Days: and that single Precept was as early as 30
Edw. 1. nor was there any Return upon it. But this appearing to have been an
Ancient Borough; the right of being represented in Parliament was such an
Incident, as no discontinuance could sever.

4. Nothing appears to the contrary, but that from the Time that this
Common Council received its Settlement, Of the Choice of Common Council Men.
whenever that was, they have been chosen by the Inhabitants in the several
Wards, free and unfree: tho directly contrary to the Charters, which place the
Rights of the ^ity in the Freemen. And thus it continued, till the Mayoralty of
that prudent Magistrate, Sir Thomas Stamp: When it was declared, That it is,
and anciently has been, the Right and Privilege of the Freemen of the said
City only, Vid. Act of Com. Council, Anno 1692. f. 2.
being Householders, paying Scot and bearing Lot, and or none other whatsoe^er,
in their several and respective Wards, from time to time, as often as there was
or should be occasion* to nominate Aldermen, and elect Common-Council-men, for
the same respective Wards.

There is not in that Act the least intimation, that there ever was a Custom
for the Freemen to choose, exclusive of all others: And yet the Sense of the
Common Council was, that such Right remained, notwithstanding the long Disuse,
and the usurpation of Foreigners, with the Permission of the Freemen.

2. Among Resolutions of Judges, directly to the present Point, I may very well
use that which is cited on the other Side, Of Resolutions of Ju^^es to this
Point.
40 and 41 Eliz.

According to which, it is to be presumed, that Common Assent has placed the
Elections of Sheriffs in the Livery-men: but the Claim or Exercice of Authority
to discharge or exempt a Person chosen, can have no Foundation in Law, unless
transferred from the Electors to others, by the express Common Assent of the
Electors, or at least such as is presumable to have been very long since given:
for which Presumption, I challenge any Man to show the least Ground.

But there is another Resolution of Judges of yet greater Authority; that 40
and 41 Eliz. being extrajudicial upon a Case put at Serjeants-Inn. Whereas I
shall show a formal Judgment, that Common Assent, to be of any Force in such
Case, ought to be express, and not by Implication. The Judgment follows in
these words:

3 d. It was agreed by Coke, Chief Justice, and the whole Court, in this Case
of Colchester, Bulstrod, f. 71. Corp. of Colchester.
concerning their Corporation, that if there be a popular Election of the
Mayor, and Aldermen, in Corporate Towns, and this happens to breed Confusion
amongst 'em, this may be altered by their Agreement, and by the common Assent
of all, to have their Elections by a fewer Number; but not otherwise. But if by
their Charter they are to be elected by them all: then this is not to be
altered, but by and with the general Assent of the whole Town, and so by this
means to take away Confusion.

This is so plain, that it needs no Comment, only that it must not be objected,
that this speaks only of Elections, not the discharging of Persons chosen, or
any other Incident.

For if even in the Case of Elections, where there is a Necessity to restrain
the Numbers of Electors, to avoid Confusion; this Restraint will not bind
without a general Assent; much less can it be pretended, that where Elections
can be, and are, duly made, it shall be in the Power of others to defeat or
vacate the Election; and put the Electors in danger of wanting sufficient Men
to serve, or of Confusion by Elections often repeated: when the Power of doing
this was never parted with in express Terms, or so much as by Implication.

4. But that the Common Hall have never parted with this; or if they had, are
restored to it, may very easily appear, if we consider,

1. That the Right of choosing what qualified Persons they please, or amoving or
discharging 'em at pleasure, is not only vested in 'em by common Law, confirmed
by Charters, and Acts of Parliament; but has been exercised by the Common Hall,
not only before the supposed Settlement of the present Common Council, and the
Livery Common Hall, but after; and that in Instances very remarkable, and fully
expressive of their Authority.

And if there had been any Discontinuance, their adhering to their Choice of
Sir Christopher Lethieulier, and Sir John Houblon, and obliging them to hold,
after they had fined; according to a known Term in Law, would work a Remitter,
by which they would be restored to their best Right, which is so favored in
Law, Vid. 1 st Inst. f. 347. Lit. Sect. 695.
that if one who has been disseis'd of Land, enter under a Lease from the
Disseisor; he shall be adjudg'd to be in Possession upon his former Right.

2. That whereas the Vindicator will have a supposed Custom for the Mayor,
Aldermen, and Common Council, to discharge, or exempt, to have been confirmed
by the late Act, restoring the City Charter; it restores to the Mayor,
Commonalty, Stat. 2. W. and M. Sess. 1. C. 8.
and Citizens, all their Rights, [which they lawfully had] at the recording or
giving the Judgment: But surely a Custom of so late Days as this is, take it
with the greatest color of Pretension, (especially when the Custom is of such
a Nature, that whatever Entries may have been in the Books of the
Common Council, the Common-Hall's unanimous Choice of any other Person, may be
well taken to have been the only legal Discharge; as it plainly was so late as
1 Eliz.) cannot come within the meaning of those words; and that to the
Prejudice of a Right which Magna Charta, and so many other Charters and
Statutes; and some of them not very Ancient, have vested in the Electors.

Wherefore the lawful Custom in this Matter, used by the Common Hall, from the
beginning, till within the Time of Queen Elizabeth, and of which they were
possessed at the making the Statute, 2 W. and M. is indisputably restored and
confirmed by that Statute.

And if all this cannot fix a Right in the Common Hall, I must needs think the
Rights of Englishmen very precarious.

Which leads me to the higher Controversy; where the Vindicator supposes, The
higher Controversy raised by the Vindicator. P. 1, 2, 3.
that if there has been no former By-Law or Practice, directly in this Point;
yet the Common Council may exercise such a Power, by a Right inherent in them,
as the City's Legislators, who were not only prior in time to the Livery
Common Hall, but gave being to 'em in the Time of E. 4. and can control their
Acts.

Not here to insist upon the plain Consequence of these Assertions, that if
what the Vindicator holds be true, the Common Council may not only place
Elections of Sheriffs in themselves, but of all other Officers, and even of
Members of Parliament, and Common Council Men; and make themselves a Body of
perpetual Continuance, supplying Vacancies by the Choice of the Survivers; and
so by one single Act of a Common Council overthrow all the Rights of the City;
to leave this Reflection to be improved by others.

I shall prove, that the present Common Hall is by Law chiefly entrusted with
executing the Powers given by Common Law, Of the Authority of the Common Hall.
and Charters confirmed by diverse Parliaments, to the Body of Freemen: Where I
shall show,

1. That the Rights and Liberties of the City rested in the whole Body of the
Freemen: and the whole Body of them have regularly voted in making Laws, for
the Benefit and Government of the City, before they had any Charters, and since.

2. That whoever are legally possessed of the public Common Hall, are
entitled to all the Authority which the whole Body ever had: especially in
those Matters wherein the present Possessors exercise Authority: and that the
Livery-men have this Right.

3. That a Representation of the Commons, by the Mysteries, was settled in the
Council Chamger, with Authority to make Bylaws, before any Common Council of
the present Form had such Authority. And, however, that the Authority of that
Council was soon taken away by Act of Common Hall; and lodged for some time in
the Representation by the Mysteries.

4. That whoever are entitled to the Council Chamger; that Council is a mere
Creature and Committee of the Common Hall, by it entrusted with the dispatch of
some things; and for preparing others for its ease. And whatever Power they
have about Circumstances, cannot by their Act deprive the Common Hall of any
Right.

5. That there is no color to believe, that the Common Hall, as now composed,
received its Being or Authority from such Common Council as now acts: or from
any thing but the general Consent of the Freemen, expressed in some Act of
Common Hall, before the Time of E. 4. or implied in the long submission of the
rest of the Freemen, before that Time, or since.

Of the Rights and Liberties belonging to the Body of Freemen.
(1.)As I before observed, the Confessor's Law derives the City's Laws, Rights,
Dignities, and Royal Customs, from its first Foundation.

I may add, that it says, in every County there ought to be a Lambert 's
Archionomia, f. 148.
Folkmote on the first of the Kalends of October, there to provide who shall be
Sheriff, and who shall be their That is their Earl, or other chief Commander.
Heretochs: and there to hear their just Precepts, by the Counsel and Assent of
the Peers, and [ Judgment of the Folkmote].

That London had such a Folkmote, and the Judgment of that Folkmote extended to
the making Bylaws, before the Time of the Confessor, appears by the following
Instance.

In the Time of King His Reign began, Ann. 924. ended 940.
Athelstan, above 120 Years before the reputed Conquest, Laws had been made at
Gratelie, Exeter, and Winresfeld; or rather the Laws made at Gratelie, were
ratified at the two other Places; all the wise Men not being able to meet at
the first.

These Laws are not only received by the Earls, or rather Companions, and
Townsmen, or Citizens of London; but they make considerable Additions to them
for the Good of the City.

Vid. Corpus Legum in Bibliotheca Cottoniana sub E^fi^. Claudii D. f. 14. c.
Their Act or Judgment is called the Constitution, Hoc est constitutum quod
Episcopi, and Prepositi qui Londinensi Curiae pertinent, e^ixerunt and jure
jurando confirmaverunt, in suo Fridegildo. Comites and villani in adjectione
judiciorum quae apud Grate leiam, etc.
which the Bishops, and Head-boroughs, who belong to the Court of London, have
made or published: and which the Earls, or rather Companions, or Companies, and
Townsmen, have confirmed by Oath in their Free-Gild.

There, among other things, they provide, that no Thief above 12 Years old,
found guilty by Inquisition, or upon Trial, shall be spared. And that
Excipiatur imprimis captale repetentis, and dividatur postea superplus, etc.
he who was robbed, having received his Capital or Principal, the King should
have half; the Society should share the rest with the Lord, of whom he held
Book-Land, or Bishops-Land.

It provides Diximus ut unusquisque nostrum ponat unum denarium ad nostrum
commodum, etc.
for a Common Stock for the Good of all: and that all in common shall inquire
into the disposal of it.

It settles Et habeamus nobis omnes eam inquisitionem.
Decennaries, or Tythings: and that there shall be one over 'em, who shall
summon them for their common Profit; and take an Account what they send,
Fraternities by Tens.
when they are to contribute, or be taxed; and what, Quando ipli gildare
debebunt.
when they receive Money, by Order of all the Citizens, upon their treating
together.

With other Particulars, which I need not mention; this being enough to show
their Authority at Common Law, before the reputed Conquest. Et quid recipiant,
si nobis Pecunia surgat, a nostro communi locutione.


Then, which was above 750 Years since, they had their Guildhall; and, as the
Vid. Leges Sancti Edw. Declaring they shall be held weekly every Monday, and so
in Charters after tha^ time.
Confessor's Law shows, their Court of the Hustings; which in that Law is
spoken of as an ancient Court: and all things of Moment seem to have been
transacted there; till the Numbers of Freemen so increased, that they could not
all meet in the Hall, but were forced to keep their Folkmotes in the open Air
at St. Paul's Cross; where was a very wide Field before there were Buildings to
the Waterside.

I shall not detain the Reader with the many Presidents of their Assemblies
there upon all emergent Occasions; but must observe, that as late as Mic. 19 E.
2. coram Rege Rot. 22.
19 E. 2. they prescribed to a Right of holding Assemblies there.

I shall give but one Instance, how early the Aldermen, with those who called
themselves the more discreet of the City, would have usurped upon the Rights of
the Commons in their Guildhall, or Folkmote in the open Air. At the end of H. 3
's Reign, the Citizens, Lib. de antiquis Legibus in Archiv. Civ. f. 132. a. A.
1272
according to Custom, had met in Guildhall for the Election of a Mayor: the
Aldermen and more discreet of the City would have chosen Philip the Tailor; the
Commonalty contradicted it with great Noise, and chose one Hervey, and placed
him in the Chair. Upon this the Aldermen and their Party complain to the King,
that they were overrun by the Commonalty. The People followed them with great
Noise, to the Disturbance of the King, who lay upon his Deathbed; and cried,
that they were the Commons, and to them belonged the Election of a Mayor.

The others said, they were the Head, and the People but the Members: the
King's Council put them off till next Day, and bid Hervey not to come to Court
with more than ten in his Company: However he summoned all the Citizens, except
those who adhered to the Aldermen: And next Day a vast Number of Horse and Foot
came to Westminster. The King's Council finding they could not agree, threatened
to amove Hervey, and put a Custos over them. To avoid which they agreed, that
five should be chosen of each side to settle who should be Mayor.

However, this being in Diminution of the Right of the Commons, took no effect.

H. 3. dying, the Archbishop, the Earl of Gloucester, and others of the
Nobility, came into the City, where they caused E. 1. to be proclaimed King;
and then went into Guildhall, where a Common Hall was then assembled; and
enquiring about the Business of the Mayor, the Aldermen told them, the Matter
was left to Arbitration.

The Earl of Gloucester not valuing this, bids them hold a Folkmote the next Day
at St. Paul's Cross; and he should be the Mayor to whose Election the major
Part of the City should assent.

The great Men going into the Church with the Aldermen, persuaded them to
yield: upon which Hervey was declared Mayor before all the People. And thus
were they in full Possession of their Right, 1 E. 1.

That this People who had the Right to carry Elections and other Matters in
Guildhall, or their Folkmote in the open Air, were the Freemen, appears by the
Words of some of their Charters declaratory of their ancient Right. Many of
which are granted to the Citizens, which the Charter passed in Parliament 1 E.
3. explains, of Freemen of the City; where it provides, that they shall not be
impleaded or troubled at the Exchequer, or elsewhere, by Bill, except it be by
those things which touch the King and his Heirs. And how careful the City has
been to keep Foreigners from partaking in the Privileges of Freemen, appears
from the Act of Common Hall, returned under the Common Seal into Parliament,
Rot. Par. 12 E. 2. m. 2. par. 2.
12 E. 2. and there confirmed; whereby it is provided, that if Foreigners be of
any Mystery, they shall not be admitted into the Liberty of the City without
Sureties of six honest Men of the Mystery, for their indempnifying the City:
and if Et si non sint de certo mysterio, tune in libertatem non admittantur
sine assensu communitatis civit. illius.
they be of no Mystery, they shall not be admitted without the Assent of the
Commonalty of the City.

That the Freemen of the Mysteries had their several Gilds or Halls, where the
Society or Fraternity met, not to mention more Authorities, appears by a
Charter of Rot. cart. 1 E. 3. m. 33. n. 68.
E. 3. reciting one of E. 1. which recites H. 2 d's granting to the Weavers of
London their Gild, to hold in London, with all Liberties and Customs which they
had in the time of Henry his Grandfather, which was H. 1. Ib. Et quod nullus
nisi petillos incromittat infra civir. de cor. ministerio; nisi fit in eor.
gilda.
and that no Man, unless by them, should within the City meddle with their
Ministry, unless he be in their Gild.

As therefore the Gild was that Company, or the Hall where the Men of that
Mystery met; the Common Guildhall was where all the Mysteries or Companies met.

(2.) That whosoever are legally entitled to the Common Hall are entitled to
all the Authority which the whole Body ever had, especially in those things
wherein the present Possessors exercise any Authority; though they are not the
whole Body of Men who used to assemble, as long as they are a large Part of
that Body, may appear.

1. In that the Folkmote in the open Air, and that in Guildhall, were anciently
taken to be of the same Nature. Accordingly, I find In Arch. Civ. lib. de
antiq. leg. de A. 1270. 54 H. 3. in Hustingo vestro vel ad crucem, etc.
a Writ to the Mayor, Sheriffs, and whole Commonalty of the City, requiring
them to swear Allegiance in their Hustings, or at Paul's Cross.

2. Guildhall has, time out of mind, been the Rot. de 18 E. 1. A Grant of a
Message prope communem aulam in civitate Land.
Common Hall of the Citizens; and the Assemblies there have of all times,
before In Arch. civ. Lib. Dunthorn, f. 416. The Ordinance 20 E. 3. De assensu
totius communitatis in Gihalda
the first supposed Settlement of the Livery Common Hall, and since Lib. X. f.
73. 13 Eliz. congregatio Majoris, Ald. and totius civitatis in Gihalda.
, been accounted the Assembly of all the Commonalty, as some Entries have it;
of all the City, as others.

And if the whole City can regularly act together, it is absurd to imagine,
that its Acts can be controled by a small part of the Great Body.

3. The chief Power of making Bylaws for the Benefit of a City, or Borough,
is an Incident to the having a Gild, or Common Hall.

Accordingly in the Cartae antiq. in Tur. Land: R. n. 18.
Reign of H. 2. the Archbishop of York, by the Counsel of his Barons, granted
to the Men of Beverlay in Yorkshire Suam Hansiam, etc.
their Hanse; that there they may treat of their Statutes for the Honor of God
and St. John, and the Canons, and for the bettering the whole Town; with the
same kind of Liberty as they of York have in their Hanse.

H. 2. Ibid.
confirming this, grants to the Men of Beverlay free Burgage, according to the
free Laws and Customs of the Burgesses of York, and their Gild of Merchants.

So that Gild is the same with Hanse; and Hanse, as Bertius Bertius de Urbibus
Germaniae, p. 25. ^oedus and concilium prisca Germanorum voce Hansan dicunt.
tells us, in the old German Tongue signifies a League or Council. According to
this, in a Case which I shall have another Occasion to mention, the turning out
of the Council of the Citizens was the turning out of the Gild, and that was
plainly a Disfranchisement.

4 Such of the Commons as have from time to time assembled in the Common Hall,
have, with others, been a true Common Council of the City, and acted as such
since their Numbers have been restrained, as well as before.

It must be observed, that the City had, or made, a Common Council before any
such Restraint; which is plainly intimated in Magna Charta, An. 1215. 17 J.
17 of K. John: which mentioning a Common Council of the Kingdom (whether only
for Aids belonging to Tenure of the Crown, or such a Common Council as the
Cities, Boroughs and Villages were at in Person or by Representation, which D.
Vid. Dr. B's Appendix to his complete History.
Brady at last yields, need not here be determined) adds, In like manner let it
be concerning the City of London, that is, that the Cities Aids shall be taxed
in its Common Council. Rot. Claus. 11 H. 3.
Sutably to this, 11 H. 3. a Tallage was assessed in the City, by the Will of
all the Barons or Citizens. And thus the Commonalty of London, in the time of
Lib. Dunthorn in Arch. Civ. f. 89. temp. E. 1.
Edw. 1. plead that the Citizens, and their Heirs and Successors may, for the
Necessity or Profit of the City, among themselves, by their common Assent,
assess and raise Tallages without troubling the King.

So Rot. cart. 4 Joh. p. 2. m. 28. n. 188. Gipsewich Burgus, Quod iidem
Burgenses nostri per commune concilium villarae suae eligant, etc. Lib. D. f.
46. 25 H. 3.
Ipswich, not to name other Buroughs, had its Common Council of the Town, etc.

And 25 H. 3. I find the Choice of Sheriffs in London by the Common Counsel and
Assent of the honest Men of the City.

The Hustings I find to be the Court of these honest Men; there they joined
with the Mayor and Aldermen in the Grants of City-Land; were Judges at Trials,
and Parties in the making Bylaws. Prosecutions for Offenses against the Rights
of the City were in their Name: And Quo Warranto's upon supposed Abuses of
their Liberties were brought against them: And therefore they not being
represented by the Common Council, now using that Name; those two great
Ornaments of their Profession, the late and present Chief Justices of the
Common Pleas, maintained, with the Strength inseparable from their Arguments;
that no Act of the present Common Council could be a Forfeiture of the
City-Charter.

Indeed as the Clerks generally favored the Prerogative, often exercised by
the Chair, with the Advice of private Cabals; I find a Mayor, 47 H. 3. blamed
for making the Aldermen and great Men useless, while he did nothing without the
Assent of the Commonalty.

That they acted as a Council, and exercised a judicial Power at the Hustings,
after that time, I might show by numerous Instances, but shall here content my
self with one, 3 E. 1. In Arch. Civ. Lib. de antiquis legibus 3 E. 1.
which was in the Judgment against Hervey abovementioned; who, though he was
the Darling of the People when he was chosen Chief Magistrate, was soon
overcome with the Infection of the Chair.

Some time after his Mayoralty, the Mayor and Venientibus Maj. and Civibus ad
Gildhalliam ad coia placita placitanda
Citizens having met in Guildhall for trying Common Pleas; a Dispute arose
before all the People between Hervey and the then Mayor, and it seems Hervey's
Party there was then the strongest; for the Mayor found himself obliged to
withdraw, and make Complaint to the King.

The Pervenientibus Majore and Civibus in Gildhalliam ad placita quae incoata
fuerunt, etc.
next Day the Mayor and Citizens returning to Guildhall, to finish the Pleas
depending before them; a Roll was shown, and read before all the People,
containing several notorious Articles of Hervey's Presumptions; one of which
was, that in the time of Tempore Majoratus sui tenetur conservare and observari
facere omnes assisas factas per Aldermannos and discretiores viros civitatis,
etc.
his Mayoralty he acted contrary to the Ordinances made by the Aldermen and
discreet Men of the City. Another was, that he used the Common Seal, which was
in his Custody, without the Assent of the Aldermen [and others:] which others,
as I could show, were to be particularly chosen by the Common Hall, for that
purpose. For these Offenses, among others, Contra totam communitatem civitatis,
etc.
against the whole Commonalty of the City, and contrary to his Oath, he was
judicially degraded from his Aldermanship, and Et a consilio civium in
perpetuu^ privatus
for ever incapacitated to be of the Council of the Citizens: which was plainly
a depriving him of his former Right of voting in Gildhall; and indeed a
Disfranchisement, as it turned him out of the Gild. And thus I Rot. Cart. 2 John m. 16. n. 44.
find Privileges in Canterbury granted to all the Burgesses of the Gild of
Merchants.

5. The present Possession of the Common Hall is or must be agreed to be a
legal Possession: and therefore in all things which they have not parted with,
the Possessors are the legal Successors to them who exercised Power in greater
Numbers.

6. Even when those Numbers could regularly meet, they were concluded by such a
Number as came upon general Notice, though the Number which met were very
small; according to the Resolution, 33 Eliz. Lane 's Rep. f. 21.
in the Case of the Vestry of St. Savior's in Southwark.

7. Vid. communia de term. St. Hill. 19 E. 2. Rot. penes rememb. in secio where
Thomas de Furnival pleads, That he was no Baron, nor held his Land by Barony,
or part of a Barony; yet Father and Son had been specially summoned to a great
many Parliaments from the 3d of E. 1. downwards. Vid. Rot. Claus. 23 E. 1. m.
9. dorso 24 E. 1. m. 7. dorso, etc.
Though it may be proved that the great Barons in Parliament were anciently
only those who held by Baronies, or were created in Parliament; yet those who
have been made Peers by Patent or Writ, succeed to the same Jurisdiction; as
they are possessed of the same House which the Lords formerly had.

8. A Corporation by one Name is entitled to the prescriptional Rights which
that City or Town had by another Name.

And thus it was held, that though the Carter 's Reports, f. 122.
Town of Colchester was incorporated by the Name of Bailiffs and Commonalty;
the Mayor and Commonalty might prescribe to the ancient Customs of that Town.

That the Livery-men have such a Right to the Common Hall, appears by their
long Possession; for which, according to the Resolutions of Judges
beforementioned, we are to presume, that there had been the express Assent of
the Body of Freemen, or of such of them as met upon a general Summons.

If I show an Act of Common Hall, as ancient as the Time of E. 3. for the
Mysteries to choose such as should represent the Commons, which I shall have
Occasion to show under the next Head; if we find that they had been represented
in Common Hall, by the Mysteries, before that Time, and downwards to this Day;
and no Act of Common Council, or Common Hall, will appear to have first settled
the Right of Elections in the Livery-men of the Mysteries; then it will be
evident, that tho Originally the Mysteries might have been represented by such
as they should choose, from time to time; It is to be presumed, that they agreed
to be represented by the Livery-men, as a standing Representative.

8 E. 2. above 30 Years before the Pretense to any Act of Common Council, or
Common Hall, which may be thought to restrain the Freemen from the exercice of
the Power originally vested in them; Rot. Claus. 8 E. 2. m. 3. Temporibus
retroactis.
I find a Writ to prohibit the Multitude from meeting to choose a Mayor, and
Sheriffs, alleging, that such Elections for Times past, used to be made by the
more discreet Men of the City, especially summoned: But then, lest this special
Summons should seem at the Discretion of the Mayor, and Aldermen, it forbids
all to meet, unless specially summoned, or [ at the Time bound to come].

And a Proclamation which was published in the City, in pursuance of that Writ,
In Arch. Lib. Dunthorn. f. 313. a. 414. b. Etautres bones gentz de la dite
City que per ministrez de mesine la City illoques avenir especialment sont
somons, etc.
says, That no Man, upon pain of Imprisonment, shall come to any Election, but
Mayor, Sheriff, Alderman, and other good People of the chief of the City, who
by the Mysteries, are especially summoned to come thither; or to whom it
belongs to be there.

These Representatives of the Mysteries, according to what I have before
observed of the legal Possession of the Common Hall, are to be supposed to have
been the Livery-men, and none others: but because the Partiality of the Masters
and Wardens might occasion the not summoning some of the Livery-men; therefore
there is Liberty left for them who had Right, to come, though not summoned.

That they and none others had this Right, will further appear when I come to
prove, that no Act can be found, from whence their Right, exclusive of others,
is or could be derived, or so much as occasioned.

3. That a Representation of the Commons by the Mysteries was settled in the
Council Chamger, with Authority to make Bylaws, A Representation by Mysteries
first settled in the Council Chamger with Authority to make Bylaws.
before any Common Council of the present Form had any such Authority; And
however, that the very Being of a Council of the present Form was soon taken
away by Act of Common Hall; and a Representation by the Mysteries settled in
their Places with greater Authority, will appear very evidently.

I must agree, that 20 E. 3. it was ordered by the Common Hall, Vid. A Paper
entitled, The Right of the Citizens to elect Sheriffs, etc. citing the Books
in Gildhall, 20 E. 3.
That every Alderman, at the holding of his Wardmote yearly, should cause 8, 6
or 4 of the ablest and wisest of his Ward to be chosen, to treat of the Affairs
concerning the Commonalty of the City.

But upon this it is observable.

1. That though according to the Lord Coke the Wardmote is of the Nature of an
Hundred Court; that is, in relation to the Districts or Divisions of the City,
and chiefly as to the Returns of Juries; but in Relation to the present Debate,
This, according to the Reference which I have to that time, is Lib. Dunthorn,
f. 416. b. 417. a.
it is more fully of the Nature of a Court Leet, where all Resiants are obliged
to attend, and upon the Account of Resiancy are to bear Offices; and contribute
in several things together with the Citizens, who in this Respect are as the
Barons or Free-Tenents of a Manor.

Wherefore this Order does not restrain Foreigners from being Electors, or
elected.

2. This is not said to be appointed for the Common Council of the City; but in
truth the Common Hall, as they were before, then continued the only
Common Council.

Nor, taking the Original Entry of that Order to import more than [Affairs],
does the treating of [the Affairs] concerning the Commonalty, in this Place
imply more than such Affairs as concern them, according to their Divisions by
Wards, in the Choice of Constables, or the like; or the assessing of Aids and
Tallages: for which Purpose I find certain Numbers in every Ward, appointed
very anciently, before there is the least Pretense of the Settlement of any
other Common Council besides the Common Hall.

But it is far from appearing, that the Men of the Wards appointed to treat of
Affairs, 20 E. 3. were to treat of such as concerned the Commonalty, as divided
or acting by Mysteries: Or, however, if the treating of Affairs extends to all
the Affairs of the City; it can here imply no more than treating of them by way
of Advice, to that supreme Power in the City which made them what they were,
and divested it self of no Authority: nor indeed could any form of Words have
passed away the Authority of that, much less of succeeding Common-Halls.

And it is certain, that anciently whatever Power the Common Hall placed
elsewhere, they never thought it abridg'd their own Power: of which I shall
give a considerable Instance.

In Arch. civ. lib. C. f. 6. a. 21 E. 1.
21 E. 1. The Commonalty of the City in their several Wards chose their Aldermen
freely and with full Consent; and presented them to the Custos then over them,
in this form.

That all and singular the Things which the said Aldermen of their Counsel and
Discretion, with the Custos, and Superior for the time being, should make and
ordain to be firmly observed; for the Government of the City, and for keeping
the King's Peace; and for [other Provisions touching the Commonalty of the
City,] they will hold ratified and firm, without Challenge or Reclaim for the
future to be made. And also every Ward chose its Alderman, for whom as to his
Deeds touching the City and Commonalty, and State of the same, they will
answer.

Notwithstanding the Power so amply conferred upon those Aldermen, they did not
pretend to use the common Seal without the express Consent of those who set
them up, and could then pull them down at pleasure, at least at the Year's end.
That very day after the Commons had presented their Aldermen in Common Hall, a
Grant of City-Land passed with the common Assent, Ibid.
and Consent of all then present.

And that the Common Hall thought themselves in full Possession of their Power,
notwithstanding the Ordinance they had made 20 E. 3. for some to Treat about
their Affairs; appears in that they being found useless, or too assuming; the
Mayor, Aldermen and Commons, who seem to have turned them off 43 or 44 E. 2.
before; within 23 or 24 Years after they had received them into their Service,
and 28 or 29 Years after the City's Power of making Bylaws was first expressly
affirmed by Charter; referring In Arch. civ. Land. lib. Legum, a 15. E. 3.
to that Grant, by common Assent, agree upon a method for putting it in
Execution: but till then seem never to have exercised that Power otherwise than
in Common Hall: Then the Mayor and Aldermen [by the Assent of all the Commons]
Ordain, and firmly establish for ever, as the most convenient manner they could
find, to debate of the Mischiefs which had at that time been complained of; and
to eschew all Suspicions, and outrageous Tumults, which often happened to great
Assemblies; that every Year against the day that the new Mayor shall be sworn,
the Surveyors of every sufficient Mystery of the City shall assemble the
Mysteries each by it self, where they shall please; and Et islirent, certain
Persons en qui eux ils se tendront content. etc.
they shall choose certain Persons in whom the Mysteries shall hold themselves
content, with whatever shall by the Mayor, the Aldermen, and these chosen, be
assented and ordained in the Guild Hall; and that these chosen and none others,
be summoned to the Election of Mayor, and Sheriffs; and also at all times that
any matter shall be touched at Guild Hall, for which they ought to assemble and
take Counsel of the Commons.

Hence it appears;

1. That this Provision agrees with what was 8 E. 2. affirmed to have been the
Custom then: so that this was but in Affirmance of the Custom.

2. That the Commons in Person, or by Representation, made a Council; or
Counsel was to be taken of them; which comes to the same thing.

3. That whatever Representation may have been at some times, by certain
Numbers out of the Wards, or any other way; the settled Representation was by
the Mysteries or Companies: and this amounted to a Repeal of all former Acts
which might have placed this in others.

4. That they who were entitled to the Common Hall for Elections, were to the
Council Chamger for making Bylaws.

In Arch. civ. L. lib. H. f. 45. 50 E. 3. Ward Mayor.
Thus it continued 50 E. 3. when the Commons having by their Common Sergeant
complained, that the Mayors used to call together such mean People as depended
upon them, and to pretend that what was done at such Meetings was with the
Assent of the Commons: the Mayor, by Advice of several principal Citizens,
summoned the Mysteries, according to the Order of 43 or 44 E. 3. They meeting
in great Numbers, the like Order as the former, and with the like Recital, was
made by the Mayor and Aldermen, with the Assent of all the Commonalty.

Indeed, they particularly provide, that at their Assemblies to treat and
consult of the common Business of the City, no Action shall be tried before
them, if it does not touch at least an entire Ward, or a whole Mystery.

And they restrain the Mysteries to a certain number of Representatives,
providing that the greater Mysteries shall not send more than six, the less
than four, and the least but two: But this was looked upon as too great a
Restraint of Common-Right; and therefore was never followed.

A In Arch. civ L. lib. H. f. 198. b.
Council being holden in the City 9 R. 2. about the Case of one John of
Northampton, there met 13 of the Ward of Cordwayner-street.

And I find it upon Rot. in ^ur. Land. 8 R. 2.
Record, to have been one of the Articles in an Appeal brought against him,
that against the meeting of every Common Council in his Mayoralty, he caused a
Man or two that for that Year was chosen to be in the Common Council of the
Crafts which held with him, to meet at a Tavern to prepare Matters for their
carrying his Designs with one Voice at the Common Council. And that in an
Assembly at Goldsmiths Hall he caused Persons of diverse Crafts more than were
entered for the Common Council, to be Cleped.
called at the day of Election into the Common Council, to help his Election.
Which not only shows that the Common Council at that time was, as it is
elsewhere called in those Articles, the Common Council of Crafts; but that they
who made the Elections in Common Hall made Ordinances in the Council Chamger
(tho as it will appear they were to be ratified in Common Hall, or else had no
force:) And that they were not confined to a certain number according to the
Ordinance 50 E 3. or that 7 R. 2. which I shall soon consider. And argues
strongly that those who were then brought upon the Livery, tho not before
returned, were held to have Right to be at the Elections, and Common-Councils.

And it appears by most Entries concerning Elections from those times downwards
to the present time; that tho Orders have been made to keep some Elections
within the Council Chamger; those Orders have been looked on as absolutely
void, and the Elections have been made by great multitudes, or the immense
Community, as often styled* nor has the Common Council assembled in the
Council Chamger kept within the number appointed by former Ordinances.

But it is observable, Journ. Foster. f. 1^6. a. 210, b. 218. b, 32, and 33 H.
6.
that in H. 6 th's time the Common Council is called Commune Concilium
Ministratorum, that is, of those who exercised the Ministeries or Mysteries, as
a Trade is called in H. 2 d's Charter to the Weavers Company.

And it will appear by the Bylaws 7 and 15 E. 4. that the Common Council then
consisted of the Mysteries; that is, as the Ordinance 15 E. 4. explains it, ^id
Inf.
the Livery-Men of the Mysteries. Lib. L. f (...) 6 H. (...) May A. (...) mu^^.
(...) Gard^^ (...) and al. (...) ru^n (...) omnium ^^^steria^um.


And 6 H. 7. I find the Common Council called the Common Council of the
Wardens, and other honest Men of all the Mysteries.

According to which Instances it seems the Council appointed 7 R. 2. was very
short-lived: and the present Common Council must date it self from after the 6
th H. 7.

4. But whosoever are entitled to the Council Chamger; that the Council there
is a mere Creature of the Common Hall, and in the nature of a Committee
entrusted with the dispatch of some things, and the preparing others in Ease of
the Common Hall; The Common Council a Creature of the Common Hall.
and that they cannot deprive the Common Hall of any Right; may appear beyond
Contradiction, if we consider,

1. The only Foundation upon which the present Common Council now stands.

2. The nature of the Power of making Bylaws; and some particular Evidences
that that Power is subject to the Control of the Common Hall.

(1.) Some have supposed the present Common Council to have had its
Establishment and Settlement 20 E. 3. the contrary of which has appeared. The
Foundation of the present Common Council.
But the true Foundation of such a sort of Establishment as it has, was the Act
of Common Hall, 7 R. 2. in the infamous Mayoralty of Brember, when John of
Northampton before mentioned was ruined, for standing up for the Rights of the
City; in which he was In Arch civ. lib H. f. 262. b. 15 R. 2.
afterward justified by Act of Parliament. Whereupon all the Ordinances made
against him in the City were repealed by Ib. f. 300. a. 18 R. 2.

In Arch. civ. lib. H. f. 173, and 197.


the then Common Council.

The Act which gives some sort of Settlement to this Common Council is as
follows.

On Friday next before the Feast of the Purification of the blessed Virgin
Mary, in the 7 th Year of the Reign of King Richard II. in the Presence of the
Mayor, Aldermen, and the immense Community Immensae Communitatis, proborum, etc.
of the honest and discreet Men of the said City, in Guildhall, for diverse
Affairs touching the said City assembled; the underwritten ^ot. Petitions.
Petitions by the honest Men of the City before, by the Mayor, Aldermen, and
Commonalty, chosen and assigned This seems not very good sense: but the
Original is Ad ordinandum cum matura deliberatione quomodo judicia tempore
praeterito in Communi Concilio reddita and facta, etc. fiebant.
to ordain with mature Deliberation, how Judgments in times past in the
Common Council of the said City given and made were made by Noise more than by
Reason, and sometimes by Men less sufficient deputed to the said
Common Council: for the taking which away, the said honest Men, in the said
Assembly, with full Deliberation ordained the said underwritten Ordinances, and
caused them to be read in form following,

Par causeque, etc.
For as much as by Complaint of many honest Men of the Town, made to the Mayor
that now is, how diverse times in the Counseils used within the Hall and
Chambers of the Guyhalde, great Rumor and Peril had been perceived, as well by
great Assemblies, as often by insufficient Persons deputed to the said
Counseils; seeing that oftentimes the Judgments of the said Counseils were more
by Clamor than by Reason, to the great Disturbance of the Peace, and Quiet
between the People for times passed, and more likely to be in time to come, if
Remedy be not provided.

Whereupon, the Mayor, with the Aldermen, and the good Commons, chose certain
Persons thereupon by Deliberation to advise them, Note, They chosen only to
advise the Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons.
how such Rumor and Peril might be eschewed and remedied: Which Persons being
diverse days assembled upon the Matter aforesaid, have [by their Advice]
ordained, for remedying such Perils, the Articles after-written. If this please
the Mayor, and the other good Men of the Town, to try for a time, to such
intent, that if Good and Peace be found in such Counsels by the Ordinances
after-written, Note, A probationary Order.
in the Name of God let them be confirmed; and if the contrary, as God forbid,
that this may in time be amended, for the common Good of all the Town. For the
continuing a Common Council of the Town by sufficient Persons, as well of
Substance as Sense, Note, The Aldermen used to be chosen annually.
let it be Ordained; "That every Year on the Day of St. Gregory, when the
Aldermen are established for the Year ensuing, let them be firmly charged 15
Days after the said Day, to go to assemble their Wards; and by good
Deliberation, charge them to choose Four of the most sufficient Persons that are
in their Ward, without regard to the State which they bore before, to be of the
Common Council the Year ensuing: Vid. The rest in the Right of the Common Hall,
etc.
And the Names of the said Four to present to the Mayor for the time being;
which Persons shall be accepted by the Mayor, and commanded to take their Oath
as is comprised in Writing heretofore made. Provided always, that the Mayor for
the time being shall not receive throughout the Town, of any Mystery, for the
Common Council more than Eight Persons of a Mystery: Although it happen that more
than Eight of one Mystery be presented and chosen, etc.

Which Ordinance was approved, and confirmed to endure for ever.

Here it is observable,

1. That at the time of this Common Hall, there was no standing Common Council
other than the Common Hall, all others being discontinued; and that before that
time, the Common Council filled both the Hall and Chambers belonging to it: And
Matters were carried as the noise was communicated, from one place to the other.

2. That the Persons who are said to have made the Ordinance were only a
Committee, appointed and chosen by the Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons, for that
single Purpose, and for that Time only.

3. They supposed Themselves, and all Common-Councils for the future, according
to the Provision then made, to have no farther Power, than to prepare Matters
for the Common Hall, and propound them for their Fiat.

4. They do not propound the Constitution of that Common Council as an absolute
Form; but that it may continue as long as it proves convenient, and that it may
be tried for a time.

5. Therefore the Establishment, according to the very Words, as well as the
Nature of the thing, is of no farther force than as a probationary Order; to be
observed only till the Common Hall should think fit to set it aside.

6. As they who propound this Ordinance, in relation to that Body of which they
were part, were Inferiors, and therefore Petitioners, to the Body assembled in
Common Hall; they set a good Example to all future Common-Councils.

But that the Common Hall has not thought it self bound always since that Act
of Common Hall, which ratified the Ordinance above, to keep to that Form of
Common Council there appointed, we may gather from the Entries, which argue
Representations at Councils after that, by the Mysteries. It Is certain, the
Number of Common-Council-men appointed 7 R. 2. was never kept to; Rot. Pat. 21
H. 6 p. 1. M. 25. To several Parishioners there.
no not the very next Year: For then, as has before appeared in the Case of
John of Northampton, the Representation was by the Mysteries, and sent from the
several Halls. And in the Year after that, there were in the Council Chamger,
13 of Cordwayner-Street; that is, as I should think, Cordwayner's Mystery. And
it is certain, Companies used anciently to keep together within the same
Streets, or Districts. And some Wards to this very day retain the Names of the
Companies, or Guilds, which lived there; as the last abovenamed,
Candlewick-Ward and the Vintry. And Cornhil-Ward, as I take it, was from the
Gild settled there. Nor can I omit the Observation, that in some Vid. Rot. Pat.
12 E. 2. m. 5. n. 4. pro mercatoribus de societate Gardarum de Florentia.
Records I find Ward and Gild, or Company, synonymous.

Of the Nature of Bylaws, and the Common-Council's Pretense to make 'em.
2. Having traced this Common Council to its weak and infant State, we may
consider it as possessed of a Power of making Bylaws: But then we must
observe, that this will bear no Comparison to the Possession which the
Livery-men have of the Common Hall, which has been exclusive of all others.
Whereas all the Possession which the present Common Council have had of the
Common-Chamber, has been only as a Committee entrusted by a greater Court,
having Continuance, and acting with Supreme Authority.

Besides, it has been resolved by the Judges, That a By-Law to make a Monopoly,
Moor 's Rep. f. 576, and 591.
and a Prescription of such a Nature, to induce a sole Trade or Traffic to a
Company or Person, and to exclude all others, is against Law.

Which is easily applicable to the Common-Council's engrossing the Power of the
Common Hall.

It would be endless to heap Authorities which might be brought to evince, that
the Common Council has no color of Pretense to make Bylaws, of such a Nature
as they now insist upon.

But I cannot pass by the Resolution in the Case of the Chamberlain of London,
5 Rep. f. 63.
in an Action brought by him for a Penalty raised by a By-Law.

All such Ordinances, Constitutions, or Bylaws, are allowed by the Law, as are
made for the true and due Execution of the Laws or Statutes of the Realm; or
for the good Government and Order of the Body-corporate: And all others which
are contrary, or repugnant to the Laws or Statutes of the Realm, are void and
of no effect.

To apply this to the Case in Question; for the Common Council to vacate an
Election made in Common Hall, or to exempt any Person from being chosen, is not
for the good Government and Order of the Body-corporate; and besides, is
directly contrary or repugnant to the Laws and Statutes of the Realm, which
have fixed the Election of any sufficient Citizen in the Livery Common Hall;
and have provided it with Authority to oblige them to hold: And therefore any
By-Law made in the Common Council contrary to this Right, is void.

Nay, and thus they themselves have judged but lately in the like Case.

In the Mayoralty or Sir John Fleet, he acquainted the Common Council, Anno
1693.
that 40 or 50 foreign Merchants would pay 400 l. a-piece to the use of the
Orphans, if they might be admitted to the Freedom of the City, and have an Act
of Common Council to exempt 'em from bearing chargeable Offices.

After several long Debates, this Project, though of apparent Advantage to the
City, was laid aside; the Common Council declaring it was not in their Power,
to restrain the Right of the Common Hall to choose any sufficient Citizen.

The Opinion of the Learned Judge Bracton, is very applicable to this Matter;
where speaking of the English Laws, he says;

Which since they were approved by the Consent of those who use them, Bracton,
lib. 1. c. 2. Temp. H. 3.
and confirmed by the Oaths of Kings, cannot be changed or destroyed, without
the common Consent, and Counsel, of those by whose Counsel, and Consent, they
were promulged. But they may be changed for the better; because that is not
destroyed which is made better.

With such a Limitation we may allow the Common Council to act for the Ease of
the Common Hall, in relation to Times, Places, and other Circumstances; for the
better Execution of the Laws and Customs of the City.

But that the Power of making Bylaws, exercised by the Common Council, is
controlable by the Common Hall, will, besides what I have already observed,
Vid. By Inspect. Rot. Cart. R. 2. M. 31. n. 22.
appear by the Charter 15 E. 3. which is the only Charter expressly affirming
the City's Power of making By Laws.

Moreover, we have granted, that if any Customs in the City of London, [newly
arising] where a Remedy was not before ordained [ want Amendment] the said
Mayor and Aldermen, and their Heirs and Successors [ with the Assent of the
Commonalty of the same City] remedy convenient, consonant to good Faith and
Manners, for the common Vtility of the Citizens of the said City, and other our
Liege People flocking to the same, may apply and ordain, as often, and when it
shall seem expedient to 'em. Provided nevertheless, That such kind of Ordinance
be of Utility to us, and our People, and consonant to good Faith, and Reason as
abovesaid.

According to this Charter,

1. The Power of making Bylaws relates to Amendments for the common Utility of
the Citizens.

2. Those Amendments cannot sap, or weaken any ancient Constitution or Custom.

3. They are to be made with the Assent of the Commonalty of the City.

Neither of which can be pretended in the Matter in question: And since, 5 Rep.
sup.
as is said in the Chamberlain's Case, Corporations cannot make Ordinances or
Constitutions without Custom or the King's Charter, unless for things which
concern the Public Good, as Reparations of Churches, or Highways, and the
like; but the Power now claimed, is neither of that Kind, nor is there Legal
Custom or Consent or Charter for it: I need raise no Consequence upon it.

To conclude this Point; if this Common Hall legally succeeds the Common Hall
which appointed this Committee; and the Committee may be set aside at the
Pleasure of the Common Hall; if since the raising this Committee, and that of
late days, the Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council, have acted together as one
Court: If farther, as in the Case of Rowlet, beforementioned; they have acted
with a Superior Authority in those very things, wherein the Mayor, Aldermen,
and Common Council, have exercised Authority by themselves; if most of these
Premises hold, especially if all do; there can be no Question but Bylaws, and
other Acts of the Common Council, are controlable by the Common Hall: and then
it would be very strange to imagine that it should be in the Power of the
Common Council to take away, or abridg, any Right of its Superior, from whence
it came, and in which it is contained.

I shall not so much question the Judgment or Memory of my Readers, as to
repeat the Proofs of every one of these Premises.

But I would desire 'em to remember the Instances of Disfranchisements by
Common Hall, before any standing Rule for 'em. This Power, I must confess, the
Common Council have pretended to; and as if they not only had it, but had it
without delegation, have fansied they could delegate it to others.

Journal Cotes, f. 103. 36 H. 8.
Accordingly I find an Act of Common Council, impow'ring the Mayor and Aldermen
to Disfranchise, upon competent Proof by Oath, before them, of any Citizen's
Trespass, Act, Disobedience, or Offense, against the City, and the Liberties,
Franchises, and free Customs and Privileges of the same.

Which would be a very dangerous Weapon in the Hands of Aldermen, who by Act of
Parliament obtained by Surprise, and contrary to the Sense of the City,
declared more than once, and ratified by former Parliaments, have their
Stations, in effect, for their Lives.

Bagg 's Case, 11. Rep. f. 99.
But as it appears by the Resolution in Baggs's Case, the abovementioned Act of
Common Council is void in Law; no such Power having been derived to them by the
express words of any Charter, or Prescription.

Yet this Power the Common Hall undoubtedly has, and, I may say,
incommunicably, till that part of their Court, or the Committee from them,
which sits in the Council Chamger, shall have legally possessed themselves of
the Hall.

I shall add but one Precedent, of many, where the Mayor, Aldermen,
Common Council, and Commons, acted together as one Court, and true
Common Council of the City; and that since the time that the present
Common Council, and Livery Common Hall, are supposed to have been settled.

A Mayor In Arch. Civ. Journal Haddon, f. 34. a. and b. Aylmer Mayor, 23 H. 7.
dying in his Mayoralty, the Locum tenens, or Senior Alderman, with the rest of
the Aldermen, appoint a Day for the choice of a new Mayor; and order the
Servants of the Chamber to summon the immense Community of the City.

There met the Commune consilium ac immensa multitudo communario um in
penultima liberatura. Note, This is not according to the Ordinance, 15 E. 4.
Common Council, and the immense Multitude of Commoners, in their last Livery
but one.

Aylmer was there chosen Mayor, and sworn before the Aldermen, and Commons.

In that Common Hall they, after the Election was over, acted together as a
Council: For whereas the Mayor should, as it seems, according to the usual
course in such Cases, have been sworn to the King the next Day; The Aldermen,
and Commons, for certain Reasons moving them thereto, appointed a farther Day.

That the Commons who did this were the Livery-men, appears by what immediately
follows in the same Entry: Where it is said, That the Aldermen conducted the
new Mayor to the taking his Oath, in their Violet-colour'd Gowns, and the
Common in their last Livery.

Communiarii in ultima liberatura.

That the present Common Hall did not receive its Being, or Authority, from
such a Common Council as now acts, etc.


5. That there is no color to believe, That the Common Hall, as now composed,
received its Being, or Authority, from such a Common Council as now acts, or
from any thing but the general Consent of the Freemen, expressed in some Act
of Common Hall before the time of E. IV. or implied in the long submission of
the rest of the Freemen, before that time, may sufficiently appear by what has
been proved under former Heads: And yet if any Act or Acts of Common Council,
in the Reign of E. IV. were the occasion of Elections having been restrained to
the Livery-men, it may appear by what has been formerly shown, That the
submission of the Freemen, implied in the Custom ever since that time, gave
the only force to that Restriction; that of it self carrying no manner of
Authority to diminish the Right of the Common Hall.

But any one, who remembers the Evidence that the Mysteries had Representatives
of their own, before the time of E. IV. and the Legal Presumption, that those
Representatives were the Livery-men, will be more fully satisfied, that they
were so before the time of E. IV. when he observes the words of those Orders,
which are pretended to have given Being to the Livery Common Hall.

The first Order is thus:

Vindic. p. 2. Li. l. Young Mayor.
At a Common Council holden on Wednesday, in the 7th Year of the Reign of King
Edward the Fourth, it was agreed by John Young Mayor, John Norman, etc.
Aldermen, and the Commonalty of the City of London, (inter alia) That the
Election of the Mayor and Sheriffs, shall hereafter be made [only by the
Common Council:] The Master and Wardens of every Mystery of the said City
coming in their Liveries; and by other honest Men for that purpose specially
summoned.

1. It must be remembered, That the Common Council in Hen. the Sixth's time,
was the Council of the Mysteries; and consequently, unless an alteration can be
shown, must be thought to have continued so at the time of that Order, 7 E. IV.

2. This Representation of the Commons being so large as has appeared above,
their Act is called, The Act of the Commonalty of the City: And this we must
suppose to have been made in Common Hall.

3. None besides the Masters and Wardens are by this Act obliged to come in
Liveries.

4. Here is no restriction of Elections to the Liveries; but to the
Common Council: That is, as is there explained, the Masters, and Wardens, and
other honest Men of the Mysteries, specially summoned.

To which special Summons, as has been shown before, the Livery-men, and no
others, were entitled.

Wherefore, this was no more than a repeating, or affirming, former Orders,
often occasioned upon the breaking in of other Freemen, to the disturbance of
Elections, before placed in the more discreet, which the Custom has interpreted
to be the Livery-men: Who, according to this Ordinance with which the present
Common Council triumph, were the only Common Council at that time.

And thus, as appears by the Entry before-cited, 6 Hen. VII. they continued
after this Ordinance, and after the next, 15 E. IV. which has these words.

Then in the same Common Council it is agreed, That the Master and Wardens of
the Mysteries of the City, in their Halls, or other Places of the City, Vindic.
p. 3. Lib. L. f. 113.
fit and convenient; associating to them the honest Men of their Mysteries,
being clothed in their last Livery, shall go together to the Guild Hall of
their City, for the Election of Mayor, etc. And in their last Livery but one,
to the Election of the Sheriffs of the City, etc. And that no others, besides
the honest Men of the Common Council of the City, shall be present at the said
Elections.

All that this adds to the former Provision, 7 E. IV. is only the requiring all
the Livery-men, for distinction's sake, to go in their Liveries, to prevent the
interposition of others. Which was no restraint upon Persons; but a requiring
the Persons who came according to their former Right, to wear their proper
Habit, to distinguish 'em from others. Some may suppose, that this speaks of
honest Men of the Common Council, besides the honest Men of the Mysteries:
Whereas the Common Council is plainly here mentioned as exegetical, or
explanatory, of the honest Men of the Mysteries: That is to say, such honest
Men of the Mysteries as are of the Common Council, and no others, shall be
present at the Elections: Which, as has appeared, were, long before that
Ordinance, the Livery-men only. If this and the other be not taken in this
Sense, then they neither confine the Election to Livery-men; nor suppose the
Livery-men only, to have right to come; but allow any Commoner, who is chosen
to the Common Council, to Vote at the Elections, though no Livery-man: Whereas
they who would derive the Authority of the Common Hall from these Ordinances,
suppose, that they restrain Elections to the Livery-men only.

But, could it be imagined, that those Ordinances, or either of them is, or are
conceived in terms importing a restriction of Elections to the Livery-men; and
that the Ordinances were made by a Common Council chosen by the Wards, it
appears by the Ordinance which laid the moveable Foundation, upon which
following Common-Councils of the Wards have built up themselves; besides, other
Evidences of the Superior Authority continuing in the Common Hall, (the true
Common Council of the Mysteries or Crafts, as it is called 8 R. II.) That the
force of such restraint could not proceed from the Authority of the
Common Council; but that subsequent Common-Halls not having thought fit to
alter this; and the generality of the Freemen having rested contented with
their Livery-men; Such Sufferance and Consent has made that become a legal
Settlement, which at first could be no more than Matter of Advice.

And, according to this, I find Writs from the Crown, and Acts of
Common Council, place the legality of such Restrictions in the Custom of the
City. But I must submit to Consideration, whether there is not better ground to
believe, That the Livery-men were the standing Representatives of the rest of
the Freemen, before ever such a Council as now acts had any settled Being; or,
at least, before the time of E. IV. than there is to think, that the Words of
either of the Ordinances of his time, so much as recommend any other
designation of Electors, than what Custom, and consequently the Consent of the
Freemen, had settled before.

In short, it has appeared, That the Resolution of the Judges, cited on the
other side, and more particularly, mother upon the like Occasion used by me,
are strong for the Common Hall.

That according to that very Act of Common Council, 7 Car. I. on which the
Vindicator relies, no Man chosen Sheriff is dischargeable, unless for want of
sufficiency in Estate: Nor is there any ground for other Exemption: And
whatever Discharge or Exemption may have been given by any besides the Common
Hall; the Party is nevertheless elegible, as if he had never been discharged,
or exempted.

This is made yet more evident, by comparing the Act of Common Council, 7 Car.
I. with former Acts: But chiefly, with the Act of Common Hall, 24 E. III. which
was reinforced, 18 Hen. VIII. and to this very Day stands in full Virtue,
declaring the Sense of the Body of Freemen, That for the Common Council to
vacate or defeat their Elections, is to the Prejudice of particular Persons,
who are obliged to serve, through Default of others; and of the whole City in
general, who may want sufficient Persons to serve: Or, at least, cannot find
Men of the like Qualifications in every respect, with those whom they first
chose.

If we look into the Custom, it is manifest, That the Authority of the
Common Hall, and of none besides, to Discharge, or Exempt, has been fully
exerted; and owned, not only by Common-Councils, but by the Crown; and that in
Times neither too long since past, nor such wherein Precedents on the side of
the Commons could have obtained, if their Right had not been undoubted.

And, as this Authority has been exercised by the Common Hall, before ever any
Common Council of the present Form or Nature, had a settled Being; so it has
been after; and since the Time that the Vindicator supposes the Livery Common
Hall to have been instituted.

And the seeming Practice of later Days to the contrary, has been of such kind,
as has been far from proving any Authority to go along with Acts of
Common Council, for the discharging or exempting any one Person. The Discharge
arising from the Common-Hall's proceeding to a new Choice.

Farther yet, if either Bylaws or Custom, or both, have crept in to the
seeming Diminution of the Right of the Electors; as has appeared; they would
have been void in Law, being contrary to their Common Law Right declared by
Charters, and confirmed by Acts of Parliament. And whatever Force, Custom and
Bylaws, supposing them clear, might have had against Rights so established,
the Act of Restitution, 2 W and M. being made while the Commons were in
Possession of their Power, to oblige the Person whom they had chosen to hold,
notwithstanding any pretended Discharge; certainly wrought a Remitter to their
ancient Right. And this was remitted and restored to the Livery-men.

I may add, that by the express Words of that Statute it is enacted, that the
several Companies, that is, the Mysteries (so often named in the City-Journals)
shall have all their lawful Liberties; and particularly every Person admitted
into the Freedoms or Liberties of the Companies, shall enjoy the Rights and
Privileges of a Freeman, and Livery-man.

Which confirms the Livery-men in the Possession of the Common Hall, with all
the Rights and Incidents belonging to that Possession.

And whereas the Vindicator supposes that the Common Council can set aside the
Rights and Privileges of the Livery-men, as they of the Common Council are the
City's Legislators.

If they were such, the Restrution, 2 W. and M. settles the Livery men beyond
being shaken by any Authority within the City, for the making Bylaws. And in
truth the Authority of making Bylaws, both at Common Law, and by Charter,
originally rested with the whole Body of Freemen; and has formerly been
regularly exercised by the whole Body, in their Assemblies in Guildhall, or
other Folkmote.

The Exer^ice of this has by Custom been confined to Guildhall; and is now
become impracticable elsewhere.

Of this Common Hall, and the Authority of this Court, the Livery-men, with the
Mayor and Aldermen, were in full legal possession, before such a Common Council
as now acts had any settled Being: nor has any Act of Common Council so much as
occasioned the Privileges of the Livery-men, much less has it created them.

But, according to the Presumption of Law, they have had an uninterrupted
Possession from before 8 E. 2. nor does it appear that any Man can gave any
Vote among them, otherwise than as a Livery-man,; the Right of Suffrages in the
Common Hall being settled in the Livery-men; who have been, and yet are the
true Common Council of the ^ity

On the other side, that which now obtains the Name of the Common Council, has
been from its several Institutions, and yet is, a mere Creature of the
Common Hall, and dependent upon its Pleasure: at the most is but of the Nature
of a Committee, and has no greater or higher Relation than of a Part to the
whole: and whether it acts by it self, or in Conjunction with the greater Body;
must be concluded by the Majority.

To close this Argument, which may seem tedious to many; and, yet possibly, is
no more labored than the strength of Prepossession requires; I may well say,
with the Vindicator, Vindic. p. 8.
While some strive to make Breaches, my business shall be to promote Peace.

But it must be considered, That Men have very different Notions of Peace.

When our Governors, in Church and State, valued themselves upon the
Peacefulness of former Reigns; many, who now would have the Commons of the City
of London to sacrifice their Right, to the quieting this Controversy, were
thought properly to have applied that old Sarcasm; " They make Solitude, and
call it Peace.

For my part, I always thought the asserting and adhering to the Fundamental
Constitution of the Great Community in the first place; and next of the City of
London, which, Caput legum and Regni.
according to the Confessor's Law, is the Head of the Great Body, to be the
best means to secure such a Peace, as English Men may rejoice to transmit to
Posterity. And I cannot but hope, That both Sides may receive this my sincere
Endeavor, as a seasonable Peace Offering.

FINIS.
Sold by Richard Baldwin near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane. Price 6 d.


