AN ATTESTATION TO THE Testimony of our reverend Brethren of the Province of
LONDON To the Truth of JESUS CHRIST, and to our SOLEMN LEAGUE and COVENANT: AS
ALSO, Against the Errors, Heresies, and Blasphemies of these Times, and the
Toleration of them. Resolved on by the Ministers of Cheshire, at their meeting
May 2. and subscribed at their next Meeting, June 6. 1648.

Now I beseech you Brethren, by the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all
speak the same things; and that there be no divisions among you, but that ye be
perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same judgment,

1 Cor. 1.10. Sunt qui quod sentiant etiamsi optimum sit, tamenn invidiae metu
non audent dicere,

Cicer. de Offic. l. 1. p. 362. edit. Lutet. 1554. Patiemurne igitur extingui
aut opprimi veritatem ego vero libentius, vel sub hoc onere defecerim,

Lact. de Opificio Dei, c. 21. p. 808. edit. Lugdun. 1594. London, Printed by
R. Cotes for Christopher Meredith, at the Crane in Pauls-church-yard, 1648.

AN ATTESTATION Of the MINISTERS of CHESHIRE, To the TESTIMONY of the Reverend
Brethren of the Province of London, TO THE Truth of JESUS CHRIST, And to our
Solemn League and Covenant. As also, Against ERROVRS, etc.
SECT. I.
Reverend and Well-beloved Brethren,
WE cannot but apprehend it as an especial providence of God, that so many
godly and faithful Ministers of Christ in the Country, (partly drawn together
by authority of Parliament, to make up the Assembly of Divines at Westminster;
and partly driven to London, as to a City of refuge, for safety and succor
from the violence and outrage of the adverse party) have been lawfully allowed,
and have frequently enjoyed, many opportunities for communication of counsels,
and contribution of endeavors, to carry on the Covenanted Reformation toward
an happy conclution, which are like to be frustrate of much of the fruit and
good effect desired by them unless there be a conscientious concurrence of
your other brethren, who upon the same principles and interests stand deeply
engaged with you earnestly to contend for the faith which was once delivered to
the Saints, as just occasion is offered to show themselves not only resolute
Protestants for it, but religious Detestants against all errors, heresies, and
blasphemies which are contrary to it.

Wherein though you have precedence before us, and advantage above us (both for
intelligence and accommedation of convening, and consequently for consultation,
consent and publication of what you resolve on) we meant (at least some of us,
from the first view of your printed Testimony to the Truth of Jesus Christ) you
should not therein be singular without us. And now all of us whose names are
subscribed, do freely and publicly profess, both how far, and upon what
grounds and reasons, we give our Attestation to the contents of your book
forementioned: and first how far we do it, and for that,

errors, heresies, and blasphemies, and for that in the particular Titles all
along your book, you use the word error only, and add not the other words,
heresy, and blasphemy, though many of the positions recited by you, be
materially both heretical and blasphemous: wherein we conceive you have been
discreetly cautelous to prevent exception, for there is great doubt, much
dispute and difficulty, to determine what heresy is, and what opinion is
heretical. Thence it is that Epiph. An. 370.
Ephanius, and Phil. An. 380.
Philastrius (who both of them wrote of heresies before Aug. An. 420.
Augustine) agree not in their Catalogue, for the one accounts those tenants to
be heresies which the other does not. And that Bellarm. de Christo, lib. 2. c.
19. Tom. 1. p. 132, 133.
Bellarmine does acquit Calvin from the heresy charged upon him by Genebrard,
for teaching that Christ is (...). But though it may be questioned of many
opinions, whether they be heresies or no, it may be manifest enough that they
be errors.

in abstract^, as Epiphanius, Philastrius, Augustine, and Alphonsus a Castro,
not upon Heretics in Concret^, as Adversus hujus temporis haereticos, Bell. in
title page of his disputations.
Bellarmine does, who entitles his disputations not against the Heresies but
the Heretics of these times. For that is far more difficult to determine
then the other. What makes an Heretic cannot as I conceive at all, or very
hardly be comprehended in a regular definition, said Quid facit haereticum
regulari quadam definitione comprehendi (sicut ego existimo) aut omnino non
potest, aut difficillime p^test. Aug. de Haeres. ad quod vult Deum, Tom. 6. p.
11.
Augustine many a hundred years ago. The modern Arminians say as much or more,
viz. Sciri hodie non posse quis sit haereticus -- So the Arminians, Apud Nicol.
Vedel. part. 4. defens. Arcani Armin. lib. 1. cap. 2. p. 3.
that it cannot be known in these times who is an Heretic: but they are the
less to be believed because of more light in latter times, for the discovery
of truth and error, then in the ages more remote. Yet is there great
difficulty, and (by reason thereof) there may be much deceit and error, in
an inconsiderate application of the word, Heretic, though to a man of
erroneous opinion, yea though grossly erroneous.

This difficulty was the cause that some of the Ancients, who wrote against
Heretics were numbered with Heretics themselves, as Bellarmine in effect calls
Tertullian heretic, when he says Tertullianum inter Catholicos non numeramus.
Bellarm. de poenit. l. 1. c. 1. Tom. 3. p. 377. col. 1.
Tertullian, Epiphan. Haeres. 64. and in a Synod of Alexandria. an. 399 vide
Fran. Long. sum. council. p. 324. and 325.
and Origin; and that some of those who wrote of heresies since them have
Bernard Lutzenburg misere errasse qui Catalogum Haereticorum describens aliquos
recenset qui nunquam in fide catholica fuerunt. Alphon. a castro Adversus
haeres lib. 1. c. 9. f. 23. p. 6.
(as Alphonsus a Castro writes of Bernard Lutzenburg) bren miserably mistaken
in taking those for heretics who were not, and so came Epiphan. haeres. 75.
Aerius to be listed in the black-bill of heretics for denying the
distinction betwixt a Bishop and a Presbyter. And for the same opinion (in
kind, though differing in degree) was Marc. Anton. De Dom. Spalat. de repub.
Eccles. l. 2. c. 3. p. 240.
Hierom taken for an Aerian Heretic by Michael Medina, but foolishly and
ignorantly says the Deseruimus in hac part Hieronym: Sed non propterea stulte
and imperite (quod facit Michael Medina) illum Hereticum facimus Aerianum. M.
Anton. de Dom. Arch. Spalat. ubi supra.
Archbishop of Spalat. And for Aerius himself (though he denied not only the
Divine: right of Episcopal prelation, which Hierom did) but all right of
preeminence of Bishops over Presbyters in the Church, (which Hierom did not) he
is cleared also from that contumelious title by the learned author of the book
called Altar. Damasc. p. 276. 277, 279
Altar Damascenum.

Westminster, concerning a confession of faith, whereof we conceive it
needless, to say any more, or otherwise then you have done.

Congregationall, Classical, and Provincial Presbyterie's) prevails so
little in most places; which we must impute partly to the misrepresentations of
it, to those that should submit unto it; (for to some it is rendered formidable)
as if it were more oppressive then ever the Prelacie was; to others despicable,
for want of a competent power to proceed to effectual reformation of
offenders; and to most (whatsoever it be in it self) it is the more unwelcome,
because they have bin so long wonted to live without rule, that now as sons of
Belial a (...) Beli, id est non, and nomine (...) ^^ol, id est jugum, ut
significetur impatien tia jugi, id est disciplinae. Mr. Leigh crit. Sacr. in N.
T. p. 43. Margin.
Belial) having shaken off the yoke of subjection, they take it for an injury
if any restraint be offered to their licentious humors, Which some by a
partial Charientismus mis-call by the name of Liberty of Conscience, whither
(as Mr. Buroughs well observes) the Devil sometimes flies ( as Joab did) to
the horns of the Altar, or seems to do so, when if he be well sought for, you
shall find him in some other room of the soul (as in the will) but he
pretends to conscience; hoping to escape there better then any where else. And
as the Civil and Ecclesiastical Government, when they are reciprocally
authorized, are both a support and reputation to each other; Mr. Buroughs his
Iren. p. 29, 30.
so we cannot but sadly forecast how much the Civil power will be cast down,
at least enfeebled and contemned, if some Ecclesiastical awe be not put upon
the Spirits of the people, as well by order of Discipline as rule of Doctrine.

taking of it with instructions, exhortations and satisfactions of such
scruples as might arise about it, and that it should thus be published in all
the Churches of England, and Dominion of Wales; with the most solemn
subscribing of it, by the Members of the Honorable House of Commons, and the
Assembly of Divines, after a divine Declaration of it, and preparation for it
in the Pulpit. That this so Solemn League and Covenant should be by so many
without any sense of Religion both taken and broken, as if it were but as a
King at Chesse set upon the board for a game, and to be shut up in the bag,
(when the game is done) this is that which may make us to hang down our heads,
with heavy hearts, and with Ezra each of us to say, O my God I am ashamed and
blush to lift up my face to thee my God, for our sins are increased over our
heads, and our trespass is grown up unto heaven, Ezra 9.6.

(the Confession of Faith, Government of the Church, and Solemn League and
Covenant) will necessarily follow our hearty and serious detestation of Errors,
Heresies, and Blasphemies and the Toleration of them; which are destructive to
all three; and though as Errors etc. they be all one in the malignant and
mischievous end, they aim: yet in their way to that end, they are capable of
distinct and different consideration, both for the Errors, Heresies and
Blasphemies themselves, and for the toleration of them.

First, then, for the Errors, etc. as you have sorted them under several
Titles, so have you fitted your titles with answerable instances and pregnant
proofs, besides and without such particulars as are capable of some
problematicall debate, and by their conformity to some obscure Scripture
phrase, may (at last) by distinction and limitation be like to take sanctuary
in a Scripture sense, though there be no reason, why men who are subject unto
error, and many times do err, should have their ambiguous expressions
entertained with so fair and favorable a construction, as the Word of God,
which cannot err, and which if it be obscure in one place, gives light for its
own clearing and interpretation in another.

Besides, of this we are bound to take notice, because we are bidden to
search the Scriptures, Ioh. 5.39. all the Scriptures, for all Scripture is of
Divine inspiration, and profitable, etc. 2 Timothy 3.16. But for humane writings
we are not obliged to be so well acquainted with them, nor to have so much
respect unto them. Luther. Tom. 2. in Genesis p. 144. operum lenae excus.
Luther was once so far carried with a pleonasm of zealous emulation of the
honor and utility of the Word of God (above the writings of men) that he wished
his own Books were burned, for fear they should be an hinderance to men's more
profitable employment in reading the holy Scriptures; though otherwise he was
wise enough to know how serviceable handmaids to Divinity they may be, if
descreetly used; and for his own works Ad eruditionem spiritualem, and
sapientiam illam Ecclesiae peculiarem, and mundo ignotam, de gratia Dei and
justitia fidei intelligend. plus conducit unicus Lutherus in Ep. ad Galat. quam
omnia Hieronymi, Basi lii, Cyrilli, Origenis, Naz Epiph. Hilarii and pleraque
patrum opera in unum collecta. David. Chytraeus de stud Theol. fol. 12.
whereof some (for spiritual proficiency) are preferred before many Volumes of
the Fathers, he showed himself so addicted to them, that when by the Popes
decree his books were burnt, Sleid. Com. l. 2. page 39. V. Nihilo plus
sanctitatis inesse Scripturis, quam caudae caninae aut felinae. See Mr. Vicars
his Book called Coleman-street conclave visited, the report and proof of it.
page 33.
he in revenge thereof solemnly burnt the Popes Laws and that papal decree,
upon which so severe a sentence, and execution passed upon them.

From his high estimation of these sacred Oracles how low are they fallen in
this wretched generation of our's, when some have not been ashamed nor afraid,
(which in the uttering, and hearing, we think worthy to be entertained with
the trembling of the belly and quivering of the lips of the Prophet Hab. 3.16.)
blasphemously to compare them in point of holiness to the most contemptible
part of the meanest creature.

We could (under other titles) make remarkable additions to your Catalogue of
errors, of our own times, (as your selves we doubt not might easily have
done) but that bundle of weeds is sufficient for the present (having occasion
under another title to bring in many others) to show how negligently the garden
of the Lord has been kept, and how subtly and successefully Satan has
proceeded in his seducements of simple and sinful people. And therefore as we
profess we are deeply affected with fear and sorrow, for the prevailings of
Satan so far a mong us: so in the next place we cannot but zealously avow our
dislike of Toleration of them.

SECT. II.
BUt here we crave leave clearly to deliver what in judgment and conscience we
conceive and do desire for this particular.

First, We think it meet that a due distinction be made betwixt error and
error, because Humanum est errare, and wish that (since all men never were nor
will be of one and the same opinion, no more then of the same feature and
complextion) it were diligently debated, and judiciously resolved what is the
latitude of allowable differences by the Word of God, and how far the strong
ought to bear with the infirmities of the weak, Romans 15.1. Gal. 6.1.

Secondly, That the lives of erroneous Dogmatists (though civil or religious)
should not gain so much credit or countenance to any dangerous or damnable
tenet, as to procure it favor, or protection, for their sakes. For a very
erroneous Religion may have some that profess it such as may be commendable
for their moral conversation. And though Sunt quidem in Ecclesia Catholica
plurimi mali, sed ex haereticis nullus est bonus. Bellarm. de not. Eccles. l.
4. cap. 13. Tom. p. p. 83.
Bellarmine out of hatred to those he calls Heretics (and he thinks most of
Protestants when he uses that name) say that among Catholics (that is,
Papists, in his dialect) there be many bad, but of heretics there be none
good, we doubt not to aver the contrary with Multi qui a perte foris sunt and
haeretici appellantur, multis and bonis Catholicis meliores sunt. Aug. de
baptism. contra Donat. lib. 4. Tom. 7. part. 1. page 503.
Aug. who says, many of those who are without and called heretics, are better
then those who with us are held good Catholics: and we may say the like of
Papists, Turks, yea of heathens, and particularly of (that Sect which is most
licentious) the Epicures Epicurus bonus vir fuit and multi Epicurei fuerunt and
hodie sunt in amicitia fideles and in omni vita constantes and graves. Ita
vivunt quidam ut little vita probetur, refellitur oration. At utque caeteri
existimantur melius dicere quam facere, sic hi mihi videntur facere melius quam
dicere. Cicer. de finib. bonorum and malorum lib. 2. p. 65.
Cicero says that Epicurus the author of it was a good man, and many
Epicureans were and to this day are faithful in friendship, in the whole
course of their lives constant, grave; Some of them so live that their life is
approved, while their spcech is worthy to be refuted: and as others are
observed to say better then they do, so these do seem to do better then
they say. If then the life's of seducing Teachers, be alleged to get
approbation of their doctrine; we must say as was said unto Torquatus, Non
quaeritur quid naturae tuae consentanewn, sed quid disciplinae, Cicer. ibid.
the matter in question is not what is agreeable to thy disposition, but what
to the discipline or instruction of others, not how good the Doctor is, but how
sound the doctrine he divulgeth, and if the one be good, the other bad, in such
a case, the saying of Diligite homines, interficite err^res, Aug. contra lit.
Pet Donat. l. 1. prope fin. p. 104. Tam. 7. part. 1.
Augustine is seasonable and suitable to both, deal in all mildness with the
men, but show no mercy to their error.

Thirdly, For the errors of men if they be such as be not only contrary to the
Scripture, but inconsistent with salvation, both Ministers and Magistrates (we
rank them thus, not in order of dignity but of duty) may and ought according
to their callings and places to oppose them; so that they may suppress them:
1. Ministers by discovering of them, preaching, writing, and disputing against
them, as the quality of the error shall require: for some doctrines of
Religion are such sundamentall Principles, as ought to be privileged from
dispute, which Rem, measententia minime dubiam, argumentando dubiam facias,
Cicer. de not. Deorum. l. 3. page 243.
though they be most certain may be made doubtful by sophistical wranglings,
and some error (as that of Anaxagoras dixit nivem esse nigram. Cicer. Acad.
qu. lin. 2. page 17.
Anaxagoras who held snow was black, and that of Inter optime valere and
graviss^me aegrotare Aristo and Pyrrho dixerunt nihil interesse. Cicero de fin.
Bon. and Mal. lin. 2. page 58.
Aristo and Pyrrho, whose opinion was that there was no difference between very
good health and grievous sickness, and that of Aliud Iudicium Protagerae, est
qui putet id cuique verum esse quod cuique videatur. Cicer. Acad. qu. lin. 2.
p. 30.
Protagoras who thought that that is true to every one, which appears or
seems to be true) are so absurd, that they are more worthy to be exploded
then debated by any argument of reason, and against such (says the Cicer. de
finib. ubi supra lit. d.
Orator,) men have long since left off to dispute; and such surely are many of
the fanaticall fancies of our present time.

But such Tenants as may deserve dispute, and may safely be admitted to debate
and discussion, (though occasionally both Ministers and other Christians may
fall to argument and contestation about them) we conceive (and thereupon have
unanimously resolved for our selves,) that no set conference or dispute
concerning them be undertaken by any Minister or other private Christian,
without the common consent of the Ministers, and their advice how to order or
manage it in the most convenient manner. And secondly, for Magistrates, we hold
it to be their duty, (and they are to be put in mind of it by the Ministers if
need require) to prohibit the publishing or spreading of false and dangerous
opinions, and if they be published in Books and Pamphlets, that they ought to
pursue them, with zeal as hot as fire, that they may be burned as the Books
of Abderites Protagoras cum in principi^ libri sui sic posuisset de Diis neque
ut sint, neque ut non sint, habeo dicere. -- libri ejus in concione combusti
sunt Cicer. de Not. Deo. l. 1. p. 206.
Abderites Protagoras were at Athens for his speaking doubtfully of Religion in
the beginning of them, and the books of curious arts at Ephesus, Acts 19.19.
and the Books of the heretics, as of Nicep. Calist. l. 8. Eccl. Hist. c. 18.
col. 384.
Arius and others, and that the persons of such as are forward to poison souls
with pernicious errors, if when they be forbidden they will not forbear,
ought either to be confined, or exiled, a^ Athen^ensium jussu urbe atque agro
exterminatus est librique ejus ut supra ad lirt. g.
Abderites Protagoras was by the Civil authority, and no more to be allowed
liberty to seduce the souls of men to the belief of damnable doctrines, then
those who have the Plague sore running upon them to come into all companies, or
for furious mad men to be permitted to walk at large with Swords in their
hands to wound and kill whom they meet, if they have a mind unto it.

And we take it to be the true Bloody Tenent, (which might give denomination
to the Book of that title, (though the Author meant no such matter) Bloody
Tenent, p. 2.
That it is the will of God that since the coming of his Son Christ Jesus, a
permission of the most Pagan, Jewish, Turkish, and Antichristian consciences
and worships be granted to all men, in all Nations and Countries, and that they
are only to be fought against, (with that which only in soul matters is
able to conquer) to wit, the sword of Gods Spirit, the Word of God. And Ibid.
c. 3. p. 19.
that to molest any person, Jew or Gentile, for either professing doctrine or
practicing Worship merely Religious or Spiritual, is to persecute him, and
such a person what ever his Doctrine or practice be, true or false, suffers
the persecution for conscience. Which are such maxims of soule-murther as if
when he wrote them, Satan (who most thirsts for the blood of souls) did not
only stand at his right hand, as Psalm. 119.6. but did guide his pen while he
wrote such paradoxes of perdition, against which it were an easy task, (if it
were any part of our present undertaking) to make good the contrary tenent of
Mea primitus Sententia erat neminem ad veritatem Christi esse cogendum. Sed
haec opinio mea -- non contradicentium verbis sed demonstrantium superabatur
exemplis. Aug. Ep. 48. Vincentio p. 195.
Augustine; Where he corrected his former remissness and lenity toward the
erroneous by resolving upon better consideration, that men may be compelled to
their own good, and overruled when they are in an evil mind, which is the
summary contents of his Epistle to Donatus the Donatist, when cited to the
council he offered to make away himself by the way.

Fourthly, In opposition to the prodigious indulgence forenoted and to the
evil effects it may produce (if not opposed by the Magistrates as well as by
the Ministers.) We conceive it was necessary for the High Court of Parliament
to set forth an Ordinance for the punishing of Blasphemies, The same day the
Ministers of Cheshire met at Northwich, and resolved of an Attestation to the
Testimony to the truth of Jesus Christ. etc.
as they did the second of May, 1648. Whereof the summary Contents which we
think meet to mention in this place are, that all such persons as shall from
and after the date of this present Ordinance willingly by preaching, teaching,
printing or writing, maintain and publish that there is no God, or that God is
not present in all places, does not know and foreknow all things, or that he
is not Almighty, that he is not perfectly Holy, or that he is not Eternal, or
that the Father is not God, the Son is not God or that the Holy Ghost is not
God: or that shall in like manner maintain and publish, that Christ is not God
equal with the Father, or shall deny the manhood of Christor that the Godhead
and Manhood of Christ are several natures, or that the humanity of Christ is
pure and unspotted from all sin, or that shall maintain or publish as
aforesaid, that Christ did not dye, nor rise from the dead, nor is ascended
into heaven bodily, or that deny his death is meritorious in the behalf of
Believers: or that shall maintain and publish as aforesaid, that the holy
Scriptures of the Old Testament from the first of Genesis to Malachi, and of
the New Testament from Matthew to the Revelation is not the Word of God; or
that the bodies of men shall not rise again, or that there is no day of
Judgment after death: All such maintaining and publishing of such error or
errors is made felony, and the party accused thereof by the oath of two
witnesses before any two of the next Justices, (who in such a case are
authorized by the Ordinance, to minister an Oath) or by confession of the party
shall by them be committed to prison without bail or mainprize until the
next Gaole-delivery at which he shall be indicted for felonious publishing
and maintaining such error. And in case the Indictment be found, and the
party upon his trial shall not abjure his said error and defense, and
maintenance of the same, he shall suffer the pains of death, as in case of
felony without benefit of Clergy, and in case he shall renounce and abjure
his etc. He shall nevertheless remain in prison until he shall find two
sureties (being subsidy men) that he shall not thenceforth publish, etc. And
if after abjuration he relapse and it be proved as aforesaid, he shall
suffer death as in case of Felony without benefit of Clergy. And it is further
Ordained by authority aforesaid, that every person that shall publish or
maintain as aforesaid, that all men shall be faved; or that man by nature has
free will to turn to God; or that God may be worshipped in or by pictures or
Images; or that the soul of any man after death goes neither to heaven or
hell, but to Purgatory; or that the soul of man dies or sleeps when the
body is dead; or that Revelations or the workings of the Spirit are a rule of
faith or Christian life though diverse from or contrary to the written word of
God; or that man is bound to believe no more then by his reason he can
comprehend; or that the Moral law of God contained in the ten Commandments is
no rule of Christian life; or that a believer need not repent or pray for
pardon of sins; or that the two Sacraments of Baptism and the Lord's Supper
are not Ordinances commanded by the word of God; or that the baptizing of
Infants is unlawful, or such baptism is void, and that such persons ought to
be baptized again, and inpursuance thereof, shall baptize any person formerly
baptized; or that the observation of the Lords day, as it is enjoined by the
Ordinances and Laws of this Realm, is not according, or is contrary to the
word of God; or that it is not lawful to join in public prayer, or family
prayer, or to teach children to pray; or that the Churches of England are not
true Churches, nor their Ministers and Ordinances true Ministers and
Ordinances; or that the Church Government by Presbytery is Antichristian or
unlawful; or that the Magistracy, or power of the civil Magistrate by law
established in England, is unlawful; or that all use of Arms, though for the
public defense, (and be the cause never so just) is unlawful; and in case the
party accused of such publishing and maintaining of any such errors shall be
convicted as aforesaid, he shall be ordered by the said Justices to renounce
his said errors in the public congregation of the same parish from whence the
complaint does come; and in case he refuses so to do, then he shall be
committed to prison by the said Justices, until he find two sufficient
suretyes, that he shall not publish or maintain the said error or errors any
more. With this Proviso, that no attainder by virtue hereof, spall extend
either to the forfeiture of the estate real or personal, or the corruption of
blood of any such person.

Fifthly, Though we acknowledge diverse of our brethren of the Independent way,
to be learned, godly, charitable and kind even to their Presbyterian brethren,
(and Mr. Buroughs in his Iren. cap. 6. p 30, 32, 34, 35 36, 37.
some of them to be adverse in a great measure to such a Toleration as Test. to
the truth, etc. p. 29.
you might truly term intolerable and abuminable, which that Catholic
Advocate and Patron In his book called the Bloody Tenet.
of all irreligious Religions proposes) yet as we take the tenet of
Independency to be an error in it self, so do we find it by sound reason and
sad experience to be, if not the natural mother, yet such a tender Nurse and
Patroness to heretical opinions of all kinds, that to it we may (for a great
part) ascribe the luxuriant growth and spreading of errors, heresies, etc. so
far over this Kingdom: as on the contrary the freedom of the Kingdom of
Scotland from the like evils Eccles. Scotican. privilegium rarum in quo ejus
nomen apud exteros fuit celebre, quod circiter annos, plus minus 54. (ante an.
1602.) sine schisina^e nedum haer^si u^^^itatem cum puritate doctrinae
retinuerit, in prin Syntag. C^nsess. p. 6. edit. Genesis 1612. in 4.
(which is recorded as their happiness and to their honor) to the firm
establishment of a subordinate Presbyteriall Government among them.

Sixthly, Notwithstanding we are far from the rigorous resolution of Haeretices
incorrigibiles and posse and de^ere temporalibus paenis, a^que ^psa ^tiam mor^e
muliart. Bell. de Laicis, l. 3. c. 2.
B^llarmine, who is peremptory for the punishment of heretics with death
(without any such distinction or difference as is made in the Ordinance of
Parliament) Haere^icis obstinatis beneficium est quod de hac vita tollantur,
nam quod diutius vivunt, eo plures errores excogitant, plures pervertunt, and
majorem sibi damnationem acquirunt. ibid. p. 225. col. 2.
affirming also it is a kindness to them, to cut them off; because the longer
they live, the more errors they will invent, the more persons they will
pervert, and so to procure themselves the deeper damnation.

Which conclusion of his we account the more cruel, because of the large extent
of the title Heretic, in his sense comprehending all Christians who profess
not subjection to his Antichristian Caiphas the Pope. But we conceive the
Spirit of Christ breaths into his, more meekness and moderation toward such
as are contrary minded, though their simplicity have sometime been so far
wrought upon by the subtilty of others as M^dicamenta nesciunt and insani sunt
adversus Antidotum quo sani esse potuissent. Aug. Confess. l. 9. c. 4. p. 262.
263.
to become mad against the medicine that should cure them of their madness. At
whom when we are moved to be angry, we must turn anger into pity as Quam
vehemen^i and aeri dolor indignabar Manichaeis and miserabar e^^^ Aug. ibid.
Augustine did toward the Manchichees, and when we oppose them, we must as he
Sine superbia de veri^ate praesumi^e: sine saevitia pro veri^ue certa^e. Aug.
contra lit. Petil. Donatistae lib. 1. Tom. 7. par. 1. p. 104.
advises without pride presume of the truth, and without cruelty contend for
the truth, not abridging them of any liberty either of opinion or of practice,
which may be proved by the word of God to be a part of their Christian right.
Which we profess without all prejudice to such necessary and salutary
severity, as by just and lawful authority is already or hereafter shall be
thought meet to be exercised upon those, who by their sedulity in soliciting
to perilous opinions, as by their obstinate persisting in them may deserve
that.

SECT. III.
THus far for the first point, how far you have our consent. We are next to
show our reasons why we thus join with you, both in our judgments and in our
public profession thereof to the world. For though we think with Ambrose,
Plurimum prodest unicuique bono jungi. Ambr. de Offic. l. 2. cap. 20. princ.
that it is matter of advantage to sort and associate our selves to every good
man, much more to so many and so worthy Divines as are united in your
subscription to the Testimony to the Trtuth, etc. Yet we conceive it will be
rather a support to the cause, then a prejudice to you, or in us, to any other
(who have appeared in this compliance before us (and who might be so much
shorter, as they were quicker in their Attestation) if we put off the reproof
of Sapientiam sibi adimunt qui fine ullo judicio inven^a majorum probant and ab
aliis pecudum more ducuntur. Lactant. Inst. l. 2. c. 8. p. 139.
Lactantius, by subjoyning to our former Assent such confiderable reasons
thereof as these that follow.

The first we take from the just zeal we ought to bear to the glory of God,
which is much opposed by error, herefies, and blasphemies, and the Toleration
of them. For albeit Socr. c. hol. l. 4. c. 27. p. 336.
Themistius told the Emperor Valens, that variety of Sects tended to the glory
of God, though they amounted to more then 300, as did the opinions of the
Philosophers; God is jealous of honor, and as he is but one, so he allows
but of one Lord, one faith, and one baptism, Ephesians. 4.5. and being most true
and holy, he cannot but be vehemently incensed against errors, heresies, and
blasphemies, especially when they are presented under the name and notion of
Religion, for then he is twice dishonored. First, in contradicting his truth
by falsehood, his glory by reproach; and then in ascribing erroneous and
heretical opinions unto him as to the author of them, whereas indeed they are
the dictates of the Devil. For as Videns Diabolus templa de^rum deseri, and in
nomen Liberatoris, eurrere genus humanum; haereticos movit, qui sub vocabulo
Christiano Doctrinae resisterent Christianae. Aug. de Civit. Dei. l. 8, c. 51.
par. 2. p. 459.
Augustine well observes, the Devil seeing his Temples forsaken, and that
mankind began to run after the name of a Redeemer, or delivering Mediator,
he stirred up heretics under the name of Christians, to undermine and oppose
the Doctrine of Christ. For Mar. 5.17. Luke 10.26. and c. 18.21.18, 19, 20.
Mar. 10.19.
Christ in the Gospel confirmed the Law, and the heretics, as the Marcionites
and Manichees (besides others) opposed it. Whereupon they are posed with this
question by Athanasius (...); Athan. disput. prema contra Arian. Tom. 1. p. 113.
: What has Marcion or Manichaeus to do with the Gospel when they abrogate the
Law? And (...). Clemens. Alenandr. (...). p. 189.
a sort of heretics called Antitactae so far contemned and affronted it, that
because the law said, Thou shall not commit adultery, they professed they would
commit adultery. And this impure purpose and practice of theirs, they grounded
upon an impious principle of their own, holding two Gods, a first and a second:
the second (they said) sowed tares, corrupted mankind, and gave the Law, in
breaking whereof, they make account they have revenged the wrong of the first
and better God, upon the second and worse.

The same Devil which suggested such wild and wicked conceits to them, has
taught some of our times Testim. to the truth, etc. p. 6.7.
to make the Chapel of Rome the Church of Christ, the brand set in the
forehead of the great whore, because it is in the Frontispice of all the
Catholic Confessions, as you have noted in your Catalogue. And the Devils
Amanuensis doubtless he was, who not many years since wrote the book of Man's
Mortality, which presents to the world a gallipot of poison, for an
Alablaster-box of Spikenard, Mar. 14.3. in which pestilent Pamphlet, are such
blasphemous and absurd assertions, as Religion may abhor, and reason deride;
and that such poysonful pills may be swallowed with the less suspicion of
danger; they are sugared over with prefatory praises; and the doctrine of the
immortality of the soul, that it may be distasted and detested, blasphemously
reproached, as if it had been rather raised up out of hell, then sent down
from heaven.

And can we take notice of such notorious and horrid contempts of the truth
and honor of our God, and not be so far moved with them, as to testify our
consent with our godly brethren against them? God forbid, yea we hold it our
duties in true zeal to his glory, rather to become emulous of the melting
spirit of David, when he said, rivers of water run down mine eyes because men
keep not thy law, Psalm. 119.136. how much more, when they do not only not
keep the law, but teach men to break and to contemn the law, and as much as
in them lies, to disanull and destroy the law; not only the law of Faith, Romans
3.27. as this impious miscreant forementioned would do, but the law of works
also (the rule of life, which is another law of the same Apostle in the same
place) as the Antinomians go about to do; both contradicting and blaspheming
them, as the Jews did Paul's preaching, Acts 13.45. and the Anti-Scripturist^,
who do the like against them both, Law and Gospel, as you have showed in your
Testim. to the truth, etc. p. 5. 15, 16.
Testimony; It is time for thee O Lord to work, for they have made void thy
Law, Psalm. 119.126. and for the Lords servants to work with him, and for him,
and to contend for the Emphaticall conclusion of the Apostle, Do we make void
the Law through faith? God forbid, yea we establish the Law, Romans 3.31. And
while many are so lewdly lawless, as our late erroneous and heretical
Rabshakeh's have showed themselves to be; We cannot but call to mind the deep
sense that King Hez^kiah had upon the blasphemous reproaches of the Assyrian
General, when at the hearing of them he rent his clothes, covered himself
with sackcloth, went into the house of the Lord, and made other patheticall
expressions, which showed how much he was perplexed for the dishonor of his
God thereby, Isa. 37.1-4. Nor can we but desire and endeavor to be affected
(as he was) with due proportion to the impieties and provocations of our
present times, and to give such demonstration thereof as the cause requires,
and the opportunity affords.

And though Ministers be inferior to Kings in honor, yet in zeal to the glory
of God they should not be second to any, how great soever, but Fore-men rather
as the Levites were, who (when God was dishonored by that stupid Idolatry, in
making and worshipping the golden calfe, and Moses demanded who is on the Lords
side, Exodus 32.26.) came with their swords by their sides and did present
execution upon the principal transgressors; and albeit we be no such swordmen
as they were, nor have any thing to do with bloody sacrifices as they had, yet
we are not without our weapons (which may be of use for conviction, though not
as those in their hands, for execution of such as are injurious and blasphemous
against the glory of God, as that Idolatry was, and our modern heresies are)
with our tongues and pens we may plead for the propriety and purity of Gods
honor, against all who any way seek to oppose or eclipse it. And remembering
how great the zeal of Moses was to the glory of God, when rather then the
Heathen should have any occasion reproachfully to misreport his judicial
proceedings with his people in the wilderness, Exodus 32.12. he wishes that
his name might be blotted out of Gods book, ver. 32. We take it to be but a
slender testimony of our zeal to the glory of our Maker and Redeemer to
subscribe a printed Testimony to the truth of Christ Jesus. Nor should we
think it too much (if there were cause to require such a service at our hands)
to set forth a Betwixt the penning and printing of this Attestation, there came
forth a brief yet sound confutation of errors, W. in the name of the Ministers
of Devon. Printed by William Dugard for Ralph. Smith.
just volume for vindication of his glory, against the heretical traducement
of this wicked and wretched age wherein we live.

SECT. II.
As we are called Divines and under that Title and in relation to our great and
gracious Lord (whose Ambassadors we are, 2 Cor. 5.20.) we stand obliged to be
affectionately sensible of every thing wherein his honor is concerned; So in
our relation from him to the people as watchmen over their souls, Heb. 13.17.
we may take a second reason from the tender care we ought to have of their
eternal welfare, which must needs be deeply endangered by such erroneous,
heretical and blasphemous opinions as have been too boldly divulged, and but
too tamely tolerated in our days.

The Apostle and Disciple whom our Savior especially loved, professed in his
epistle to Gaius, that he had no greater joy then to hear that his children
walk in truth, 3. Epist. of John v. 4. It must needs then be one of his
greatest griefs to hear that they wandered and went aside out of truths
highway, to bypath of errors and heresies. For the word of heretical
seducers fretteth or eats into the soul as a canker, or (as the original
has has it) a Gangrene, 2 Timothy 2.17. does the body. Which Nominant Gangranas
eas, quae ex magnitudi ne inflammationis fiunt mortificationes, quae nondum
integrae factae sunt: nam cum omnino membrum affectum est emortuum, ut punctum
vel sectum vel adustum non sentiat quae patitur; statim recidere opor tet quae
sanam partem vicinam attingunt. Gal. de art. Curat. Tom. 6. operum. col. 403.
Galen treats of as two distinct evils. And of the Gangrene he says, it
kills where it infects, making the flesh dead that is infected by it, so that
whether pricked or cut or burned, it is unsensible of any pain. Yet proceeding
with so much peril from one part to another, that unless the part corrupted
be cut off, it will go on to bring the whole into the like desperate and
deadly condition. Depravant quae sunt Dei and adulterant verbum Dei, lacte
gypsum male miscetur. Iteneus. adv. haeres. l. 3. c. 19. p. 281.
Irenaeus compares the doctrine of heretics to milk mingled with lime or
plaster, and that such a potion is poison Exemplum illustre C. Proculeium -- in
maximo stomachi dolor gypso conscivisse sibi mortem. Plin. Not. Hist. l. 36.
c. 24. p. 512.
Pliny shows by experience upon C. Proculeius a familiar friend of Augustus
Cesars, who making trial of it upon him, got his death by it. In respect of
both these bad effects, the one without, the other within, both of them deadly
and destructive to the souls of men; the accusation of Vir Sanguinum omnis
haereticus, qui quotidie animarum sanguinem fundit. Hieron. in Psalm. 5. Tom. 8.
p. 4. col. 2.
Hierom may be justified against an heretic; which is, that he is a man of
blood, who daily is guilty of the blood of souls; and so should we be, if we
should be silent when we have a strict charge to watch over them, to forewarne
them of their danger, that they may take heed of it; and we conceive this way
of warning may be very useful, as a common shout of the Shepherds together,
against the Wolf in Sheeps clothing, though a Lion fear it not, Isay 31.4.

Thirdly, A third reason which engages us to a public attestation of those
truths whereunto you have given testimony, and the disclaiming of errors as
you have done, is the respect which of duty we ought to bear to the public
welfare of the Kingdom; both in point of safety and of honor. First, for
safety, and that from a double danger, the one of corruption of faith,
society, and civil justice; Haud scio an pietate adversus deos sublata, fides
etiam and societas humani generis, and una excellentissima justitia virtus
tollatur. Cicer. Tusc. quaest. lib. 1. p. 197.
for if piety toward God be takere away, (and with toleration of all opinions
in Religion, it cannot consist) as the Roman Orator infers, faith and that
excellent virtue Justice which upholds humane society, will fail, for the
administration whereof, the decision of differences, and the stinting of strife
is resolved in the Testimony of an oath; as the Apostle shows, Heb. 6.16. And
what assurance of an oath, if it be not rooted in Religion, and how unstable
will that root be with many, when they are subject to be shaken with
multiplicity of winds of erroneous doctrine? Ephesians. 4.14. The other danger is of
the ruin of the weal public, which is hastened and sometimes suddenly
brought on (to the destruction of Cities) by evil studies, and evil
doctrines; Vetus Graecia long providens quam sensim pernicies illapsa civium
animos malis studiis, malisque doctrinis, repenie totas civitates everterit.
Cicer l. 2. de legibus p. 330. med.
Heathen yet very prudent Moralists have observed, although perhaps they were
not so wise as to know the radical or original cause thereof, which is the
just judgment of God, for the wickedness of men in particular, for their
licentiousness in fond and false opinions, and impious practices. And for the
honor of our Church and State, how much is it impeached both at home and
abroad, by the infamy of so many errors, heresies, and Sects as have been, and
yet are, too much tolerated among us? What a shame and reproach is it to our
nation at this day to see it in print from beyond sea, and that not by a
Papist, but Anglia his 4. annis facta est colluvies and Lerna omnium errorum
and sectarum: nulla a condito orb, Provincia tam pa^vo spatio tot monstrosas
haereses protulit. Atque haec Honorus Reggus Commentar. de statie Eccles. in
Anglia p. 1. praefat.
a Protestant Divine, That England within this four years is become the sink
and lake of Hydra for all errors and sects, no Province from the beginning of
the world, in so short a space, has brought forth so many, so monstrous
heresies, as England has done. Against these two great evils both of danger
and disgrace, the best remedy and apology we can hope for is this, that
public persons do openly profess against errors and heresies. The Parliament
has done it thrice in most public manner, once in their first Declaration,
where they say (and a worthy Mr. Leigh Ep. ded. before his treatise of Divin:
p. 6.
Member of the Honorable House of Commons remembers them of it, in an epistle
dedicatory to them,) It is far from our purpose to desire to let loose the
golden reins of discipline and government in the Church, to leave private
persons, or particular congregations, to take up what form of Divine service
they please; for we hold it requisite, that there should he throughout the
whole Realm a conformity to that Order, which the laws enjoyne, according to
the word of God. Secondly, in their Ordinance of the 4. of February, 1646. for
a day of humiliation of the whole Kingdom in regard of the growth of those
wicked winds of error, etc. Which being worthy of perpetual remembrance,
that it may not be lost in a loose sheet, (for the glory of God, and honor of
the Parliament) we conceive it convenient wholly to insert in this place.

Die Iovis 4. Feb. 1646. An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons Assembled in
Parliament, concerning the growth and spreading of Errors, Heresies, and
Blasphemies; setting apart a day of public humiliation to seek Gods
assistance, for the suppressing and preventing the same.
WE the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament of England, having entered
into a Solemn League and Covenant, to endeavor sincerely, really, and
constantly, the Reformation of Religion, in Doctrine, Discipline and Worship:
and the extirpation of Popery, Superstition, Heresy, Schism, Profaneness,
and whatsoever shall be found contrary to sound Doctrine, and the power of
godliness; and having found the presence of God wonderfully assisting us in
this cause, especially since our said engagement in pursuance of the said
Covenant: Have thought fit (lest we partake in other men's sins, and thereby
be in danger to receive of their plagues) to set forth this our deep sense of
the great dishonor of God, and perilous condition that this Kingdom is in,
through the abominable blasphemies, and damnable heresies vented and spread
abroad therein, tending to the subversion of the faith, contempt of the
Ministry, and Ordinance of Jesus Christ: And as we are resolved to employ and
improve the utmost of our power, that nothing be said or done against the
truth, but for the truth, so we desire that both our selves and the whole
Kingdom may be deeply humbled before the Lord for that great reproach and
contempt, which has been cast upon his name and saving truths, and for that
swift destruction, which we may justly fear will fall upon the immortal
souls of such who are or may be drawn away, by giving heed to seducing
spirits. In the hearty and tender compassion whereof we the said Lords and
Commons Order and Ordain, that Wednesday being the 10. day of March next, be
set apart for a day of public Humiliation, for the growth and spreading of
erros, heresies and blasphemies, to be observed in all places within the
Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick, and to seek God
for his direction and assistance, for the suppressing and preventing of the
same; and all Ministers are hereby enjoined to publish this present Ordinance
upon the Lords Day, preceding the said tenth day of March. Ordered to be
printed, and copies to be sent abroad by the Members that serve for the
respective Counties, Cities, and Buroughs.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.



Thirdly, by their Ordinance of the 2. of May, forementioned for the punishing
of Blasphemies and heresies, which we presume had been sooner set forth, if
the distempers of the times had not defrauded them of fit opportunities for
such a publication, and the Ministers doing their parts to the same purpose to
cry down errors, etc. by preaching and writing against them, there is the
less cause to fear a public guilt and peril of the Kingdom, and a fairer
defense against the imputation of reproach, though they be not so far
suppressed as they should be.

Fourthly, A fourth reason why we thus publicly profess against errors etc.
with you is, because of the subtilty, sedulity and pride of heretics; 1. For
their subtilty, they are as Paul said of Elymas, full of all subtilty (though
but the children of the devil) as he calls him Act. 13.10. for the Host is
noster cui mill nocendi arts. Epist. Paulim and Therasiae August in. Aug. 31.
p. 133.
Devil their father, who has a thousand deceiptfull arts or devices to do
hurt, instructs them in pernicious fallacies, and teaches them to make
choice of such persons to work upon as are most easily deceived, and such
ways to work by, as may be most probable for prevailing: Upon this ground
does Gregory Nazianzen pose an Impostor in his time (...), etc. Gr. Naz. orat.
33. Tom. 1. p. 535.
, Why says he do thou gather together as the filth of a sink into one
gulf every vain and light witted man, not worthy indeed of the name of men,
and by subtilty of speech, having made them more and more effeminate, have set
up a new shop of impiety, and by abusing their madness, have craftily
contrived an harvest of advantage to thy self? 2. For sedulity, as the Devil
is a perpetual Peripatetick continually going to and fro in the earth, and
walking up and down in it, Job 1.7, 1 Pet. 5.8. So his agents and emissaries
heretical teachers (as our Savior said of the Scribes and Pharisees) compass
Sea and land, to make a proselyte, Matthew. 23.15. Thus do the Jesuits at this
day, Philip. Alegambe Bibliotheca, Scriptor. Societ. Jesus. passim.
as one of their own Order shows by manifold examples: and both they and
other seducers came of late from forain parts to sow their tares of errors in
our fields. 3. For pride, they are many of them of the high mind of Eunomius
the heretic, whom it would not suffice, (as the same ancient Orthodox (...).
Greg. Naz. orat. 46. p. 721.
Doctor observes of him) to be of some account, and to have a number of
Disciples, but he took it for a detriment to himself, unless he might draw
all to destruction, after him. The consideration hereof may give us just cause
to cast about Hostis noster tam variis expugnandus est telis quam oppugnat
insidiis. Ep. Paulini and Theras. Augustino. Aug. Ep. 31. p. 133.
to overcome them as many ways, as they come to assault or oppose the truth:
and we conceive this way of unanimous discovery and detestation of errors,
etc. to be of great moment, to that purpose.

SECT. III.
FIthly, A fifth reason, why we think it requisite thus to express our
selves opponents to errors, etc. is, because of the common people, who by their
levity and inclination toward vagrant speculations, as Tanta pleresque titillat
vagtrum speculationum cupido; tantaque levitas circumagit, ut facile sit
impostoribus, quemvis nec ingenio nec, etc. Calvin expl. perfldiae Valinten.
Gentil opusc. p. 672.
Calvin calls them, are apt to be deceived by such imposters as without fear,
or wit, or learning, or dexterity draw such disciples after them; and as they
are willing to be deceived, soar they wilful when they are deceived.

For the first, the observation of Nihil tam facile est, quam vilem plebeculam
linguae volubilitate decipere, quae quicquid non intelligit, plus miratur.
Hieron. ad Nepotianum de vita Clericorum. Tom. 1. p. 70.
Hierom has been verified in diverse ages (ours for one,) that nothing is so
easy as to deceive the vile vulgar sort, with a voluble tongue, who admire
every thing so much the more as they less understand it; and it may be their
Teachers do not understand themselves, for Pr^^s imperitorum Magistri quam
doctorum discipuli. Hieron. ad Demitr. Tom p. 14.
some of them, as he says, are Masters of the ignorant, before they have
been scholars of the Learned. And they are not more ignorant then confident,
and obstinate too, as the Ad quamvis disciplinam quasi tempestate delati ad eam
tanquam ad Saxum adhaerescunt. Cicer. Acad. qu. lib. 2. p 4. fin.
Orator observes, to what discipline soever they are carried as with a
tempest, to that as to a rock they stick, and they Vestra solum legitis, vestra
amatis, caeteros causa incognita condemnatis, Cicir. de not. Deor. l. 2. p. 226.
read only what is written on their own side, not vouchsafing a view of any
thing against it, and so condemning the innocent without taking cognizance of
their cause. That Is the manner of many seduced Disciples amongst us, who are
well acquainted with short seducing Pamphlets, but will neither be at cost nor
pains to read full and solid discourses made in confutation of them, and many
times they are, or pretend themselves ignorant, that any such are extant, as if
they had Errare malo cum Platone quam cum istis vera sentire. Cicer. Tusc.
quaest. l. 1. p. 122.
resolved rather to err with some, then to think right with others. Of this
pertinacious persisting in error, Augustine rendereth a double reason, or cause
rather, (for reason it has none) every one is a shamed Erulescit quisque
pravam mutare sententiam, ne aut inconstans putetur, aut diu errasse se ipso
judice teneaur. Aug. ad Deogratias Epist. 48. p. 214.
(says he) to part with an evil opinion, lest he should be thought
unconstant, or be made, by his amendment, a condemning Judge against himself
for having continued so long in his precedent error: though of some we may
say, that they are very fickle as well as very false in their opinions,
affecting as Affectant per singulos dies, novum aliquod adinvenire, and
fructificare quod nunquam quisquam excogitavit. Irenaeus adv. Haeres. p. 1.
cap. 18. p. 111.
Irenaeus notes, to find out some new thing every day, to bring forth somewhat
that has not been thought of by any one before them; in regard hereof, though
some may be so far gone, in erroneous and irreligious folly and frenzy; that
as Vniversae terrae Elleborum non sufficit ad expurgandum, ut evomant tantam
stultitiam. Iren. ibid. cap. 53. p. 210.
Irenaeus says, all the ellebore in the earth ( a Elleborum medetur vertigini,
melancholicis, insanientibus, lymphaticis, Plin. Not. Hist. l. 25. ca. 5.367.
sovereign antidote against brainsicke distempers) will not recover them to
their right minds. Yet since (as Primus sapientiae gradus est falsa
intelligere. Lact. Just. l. 1. cap. 22. p. 104.
Lactantius notes) the first d^gree of wisdom is to know what is false, those
that are not at all, or not deeply tainted with any of them, may become wiser
by your Catalogue of errors, etc. And by the common consent of Ministers
contesting against them, may be more confirmed in the Orthodox Faith.

Sixthly, We take the zeal of the ancient Fathers for a reasonable
inducement, for us thus to appear in opposition to errors, etc. as of the
Bin. Tom. 1. Conc p. 322.
318. Fathers assembled, Anno 325. in the first council of Nice, especially
for the suppression of the Arian heresy, where Epiph. Haere. 69. Aug. Haeres.
49.
Arius was condemned by a common Vote, and so were other heretics in other
councels. But we consider not only their number, and consent as a motive unto
us, for what we now present to your view, but take it, for an incentive for
more servour in our Detestation of heresies, that some of them have opened
their mouths in severe censures, and vehement reprehensions of them, as
Polycarpus (who lived in the time of Ignatius the Disciple of John the Evang^^
list) and outlived him, though he dyed a Martyr. Polycarpus Marcioni aliquando
occurrenti and sibi dicenti, Cognosce nos, respondit, Cognosco te esse
primogeniuim Satanae. Irenae. 9. l. 3. adv. haeres. cap. 3. p. 233.

Simile etiam de Polycarpo referiur ad Florinum ex Eusebio l. 5. c 19. addit.
oper. Irena. p. 510.


When Marcion the heretic would have him take knowledge of him, I know thee
(said ^^e) to be the first berne of Satan. Quibus. (i.e. sanctis patribus) si
aliquis annunciavetit ea quae ab haeratiois ad inventa sunt -- statim
concludentes aures. long longius fugerent, ne audire sustinentes blasphem.
colloqu. Irenae. adv. Haeres. l. 3. cap. 4. p. 242.
Some of them have stopped their ears at the rehearsal of heretical
inventions. Claudite aures qui audituri estis, ne impietatis vocibus
polluamini. Hieron. advers. Lucifer. Tom. 2. p. 143.
Hierom being to repeat a heretical baptism, bade his auditory stop their
ears, lest by hearing it, they should be polluted with impiety. By which
Preface he prepared their hearts to an hatred of it, and then though they
heard it, they were the less in danger to be corrupted by it. And for this
Author he was so sarre both from partial and timorous silence toward any whom
he held for an heretic, that when he was moved to moderation to such kind of
men, his answer was this, Vno tibi consentire non possum, ut parcam haereticis
me catholicum non probent; si ista causa discordiae, mori possum, tacere non
possum; Hieron. Apol. adv. Ruff. Tom. 2. p. 244.
In one thing I cannot consent unto thee, that by sparing of heretics I
should not show my self to be a Catholic, if that be a cause of discord, dye
I can, but hold my peace against such persons I cannot. And if he were
sometimes too rough and ruffled too much against such as were opposite to him
in opinion (though on this side heresy) as indeed he did against Vigilantius
(for which he is justly taken up by In hunc, id est, Vigilantium ita
debacchatur Hieronymus ut plusculum in eo modestiae cogar desiderare. utinam
argumentis duntaxd tegisset, and a convitiis temperasset. Erasm. Argument. in
Hiero. Ep. adv. Vigil. Tom. 2. p. 12.
Erasmus:) yet both he and the most of the ancient Fathers of best account, as
Irenaeus, Cyprian, Epiphanius, Athanasius, and Augustine, were such zealots
against errors, especially heretical and blasphemous opinions, that having so
great a cause and so fair an occasion to declare our dislike of them (as you
have done.) we might be judged degenerated sons of such Reverend Fathers,
if we should not join with our venerable, Brethren as now we do, in a
Protestation against them.

Seventhly, We took into our thoughts the Synod at Dort, against the
Arminians, and the Attestations of other As of Peter Du. Moulin and others, who
gave their assent in writing to the Synod, though they were not at it.
Divines thereto, (who were not called to it, or not permitted to be present at
it,) as an imitable example for consentient testimony of Ministers against
errors, etc. It will not, we hope, seem an impertinency, in this place (since
the cause is the same, though the persons be of a far higher rank) to
rehearse the Declaration of King James in his prosecution of a complaint to the
States of Holland, against Conradus Vorstius a wretched heretic, or rather
Atheist, (as he calls him) whom he would not endure to be harbored in a
neighbor Country, much less in any of his own Dominions. For thus may such an
instance reasonably induce us to a public profession against errors, etc.
and the toleration of them: if a King were so zealous against the Toleration of
one particular man infected with unsound principles, and at such a distance
from danger to his own people (though he might be the more zealous as he
was entitled, Defender of the Faith), Henry the 8. had that sent him by the
Pope for writing for Popery against Mr. Luther Fox. Mart. vol. 2. p. 74. c. 2
nu 20. Speeds Chron. in H. 8. l. 9. cap. 2.1. par. 38, 39. p. 1007.
a contrary faith to that which in that style was first intended; Should not
Gods Ministers be awakened and quickened zealously to contest against Domestic
Seducers, by whom their flocks may be in danger to be destroyed?

Eighthly, If we should not be very apprehensive of the prejudice and reproach
of Divine truths, and Doctrines of Piety by the multiplicity of erroneous
opinions, heresies, blasphemies, and perjuries in the breach of Covenant, and
the toleration of them; We will not say (as some have hyperbolically spoken of
the supply of their own silence, Mr. John Goodwin, Sion College visited, page
26.
That the stones of the streets and tiles of the houses would cry, should they
hold their peace, but we conceive that heathens might rise up in judgment
against us and condemn us, for if we should be mute (while heresy is so
loud) they would be found more faithful to a false Religion then we to a
true. What the moral sort of such men have both said and done for their
Religion (as for the Greeks, Plato and Plutarch, for the Latins, Cicero and
Seneca,) would make up a copious accusation of our Laodicean Neutrall or mere
nominall Christians of this age; We may have enough to our purpose out of one
of them, even Cicero, whom because he was both a prudent Moralist and an
eloquent Orator, and well read in the best Authors of both Languges, we may
present as Speaker for the rest; and of him we may learn to take heed how we
make light of any piece or particle of Religion, where Aut undiquaque
Religionem toll, aut usquequaque conserva. C^cer. Phil. 2. fol. 239. h. 1.
he says, that Religion is no better then altogether abandoned, if it be not
every way and entirely maintained: and for making conscience of an oath or
Covenant, we may observe much of his well meaning this way by his definition
of an Oath, and the obligation upon it, Ius jurandum est affirmatio Religi sa
Deo testie. Cicer. de offic p. 404.
an Oath (says he) is a religious affirmation, and of what a man so affirms
God is witness, and with God his own mind, (that is, his conscience,) Cum
jurato dicenda sen^entia meminer it se adhibere testent mentein suam, qua nibil
hom^ni dedit ipse deus divinius. Cicer. de offic. l. 3. p 395.
then which God has given nothing unto man more Divine, and Quod affirmate Deo
test promiseris tenendum. ibid. p. 404.
what is so witnessed, affirmed, or promised, must be kept, though to a man's
loss, yea though to the loss of a man's life, and he commends the
courageous and conscientious resolution of Regulus, who taken Captive in the
first Punick War was sent to Rome, for an exchange of prisoners, which if he
did not effect, he was upon oath by his return to render himself into the
hands of his enemies, and Captivos reddendes in senatu non censuit; deinde cum
retineretur ab amicis, ad supplicium redire maluit quam fidem hosti datam
fallere. Ibi. lib. 1. p. 356.
when he had given his opinion, that it was not expedient for his Country men
to give back their captives, for his oaths sake, and against the disswasion of
his friends he came back to suffer punishment by his enemies rather then he
would salsifie the faith he had given to them. Cum vigilando necabatur, erat in
meliore causa, quam si domi senex captivus perjurus and consularis remansisset.
ibid. l. 3 p. 404.
And though he were killed he was in a better condition (says Cicero) then if
he had stayed an old perjured, and consular Captive in his own count ey. And
that we may know that heathen Romans are more to be trusted (as more true of
their words) then Popish Romanists at this day, he condemns their tenet who
hold that faith with an infidel (or as they say, with an heretic) is not to
be kept; and he bids them that are of that opinion take heed Si sibi sumunt
nullam esse fidem quae infideli data sit, videant ne quaeratur latebra
perjurio. Cicer. de offic. l. 3. p 404.
that they make it not a lurking place for perjury, whereof a man should not
be guilty though it were to advance the welfare of the Common weal: for he
holds there be degrees of the duty of man, the first to God, the second to his
Country, and the third to his parents, and then to others according to their
ranks, so that Religion must have the first place, and by Religion,
(especially by religious taking and keeping of oaths and Covenants) humane
societies are secured and preserved. Quam multa firmantur jurejurando? quantae
salutis sunt faedera Religionis? quam multos Divini supplicii meius a scelere
revocavit? quainque Sancta societas civium inter ipsos, diis immortalibus
interpositis tum Judicibus tum testibus? Cicer. de legib. l. 2. p. 326.
How many things (says he) are confirmed by an Oath? of how great safety are
confederacies of Religion? how many has the fear of Divine vengeance withheld
from Villainy? how holy is the society of Citizens among themselves, God being
interposed both as a Judge and as a witness betwixt them? Upon this ground,
minding to gain extraordinary credit and confidence, to an Epistle which he
wrote to Licinius Has literas velim existimes faederis habituras esse vim non
Epistolae, meque ea quae tibi. promitio ac recipio sanctissime esse
observaturum. Cicer. Ep, ad Licin. l. 5. p. 50.
he desired him to believe there was the force of a Covenant in it, not of an
Epistle, wherein what he promised, he meant most holily to perform. And
touching Toleration of impious opinions, we may know what his mind was, by that
he reports and approves of Protagoras Books being burned, and himself
(for speaking doubtfully of the Deity) banished, Cicer. de not. deor. l. 1. p.
206
and this by the sentence of the Judges of Athens, so that we may see the zeal
of the most eminent, both Greeks and Romans in this example, who though they
were Barbarians to one another (especially the Romans to the Greeks, Romans
14.15.) we that are Christians should be more unworthy and much worse then
either (our greater light adding much to the aggravation of our guilt) if we
should not deeply take to heart the dishonor of God by errors, etc. and the
toleration of them, and willingly put to our hands with our Reverend and godly
Brethren, in a Testimony to the truth of Jesus Christ, and to our Solemn League
and Covenant made against them.

SECT. IV.
Ninethly, We conceive it the more requisite thus to appear in profession of
the same truths and opposition of the same errors, etc. with you, lest we
should incur a double danger, the one of sin, the other of punishment; the
sin, we would be loath should be charged upon us, is a treacherous or
timorous silence, (like that condemned by the Prophet Jeremy in his time, chap.
9. verse 3.) when there is just occasion or rather urgent necessity to declare
our minds in the cause of our Savior Christ, as you have done. The punishment
we have cause to fear (if we should be afraid thus to discover the dictates
of our consciences) is twofold, the one spiritual, the other temporal, the
former no less then the great curse of Anathems Maranatha for lack of love to
our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 16.22. for what love bear we to him, if we
forbear to witness a good confession for him or his truth, when so many false
witnesses are risen up against them both? and for temporal punishments, we
may according to the observation of Plerunque ab ali is docendis aliquando
etiam objurgandis male dissimulatur, quia peccatis eorundem damnablibus
parcunt, jure cum iis, temporaliter flagellantur, quamvis in aeternum minime
puniuntur. Aug. de Civ. Dei l. c. 9. p. 28.
Augustine, justly expect a share in them, with those whose great provocations
of Gods wrath, do most procure them by a silent consent or connivence toward
the wickedness of the times wherein we live, Vel cum laboris piget, vel os
eorum verecundamur offendere, vel cum eorum inimicitias devitemus, ne impediant
and noceant. Ibid.
whether it proceed of negligence, or bashfulnesse, or fear lest their enmity
(whom by discharge of our duty we may offend) should either hinder our good or
do us hurt.

There may be another cause of a worse kind then any of these, viz. a
Politic neutrality, when men suspend all appearance of engagement on either
side in any public breach or division, and resolve to be mere spectators of
a quarrel until they see which way the success is like to be swayed, that
they may make advantageous conditions for themselves, with the prevailing
party. Which the wise Solon. apud. Plutarch. in vita Solonis, p. 91. 92.
Governor and Lawmakers of the Greeks (though having no more in him then
heathen morality) so far detested, that he branded them with a note of
infamy, who in civil discord and sedition sat still, and did not join with
those, that took the justest cause, and hazard themselves with such, rather
then looking on, (without putting themselves in danger) to see which of the
contenders should have the Victory; Which whether cowardly or cunning
refervation and suspense, we take to be deeply condemned in our Solemn
League and Covenant, under the terms of Detestable indifferency or
neutrality: and should we be guilty of the breach of it, by keeping silence
when just occasion and convenient feason invites us to an open profession of
the truth of Jesus Christ against errors, etc. the sin of Tyrus would make
us liable to the Judgment of Tyrus, for not remembering, or not regarding the
brotherly Covenant, Amos 1.9.

Tenthly, and lastly, as we conceive it very reasonable in respect of what we
have already pleaded for publication of this our profession of the same mind
and meaning with you concerning errors, etc. So we hope it is very seasonable
at this time to do it since we perceive by the Published Apr. 28. 1648. But
it came not to our hands, until the latter end of May.
humble reprefentation of the Commissioners of the General Assembly, to the
honorable Estates of the Parliament of Scotland, that they make our taking of
the Covenant and giving Testimony against the errors, etc. a weighty argument
against the waging of a new War betwixt their Kingdom and ours, their words
are these,

We are not convinced of any just ground for a new War against that Kingdom
in that which has been instanced by your Lordships, Ibid. p. 78.
especially for that the Covenant was taken by the representatives, and other
chief Corporations in England, whereupon the General Assembly and Parliament
of this Kingdom have frequently mentioned in their Acts, Letters, and
Declarations, the Union and Conjunction of both Kingdoms, by Solemn League
and Covenant, neither are we without hopes (if things be carried on in a
fair and right way) that the Kingdom of England may be brought to a further
length in the performance of this duty. Whereof we are the more confident,
because of the famous and frequent Testimonies given to the Covenant, and
against errors, etc. by the Ministry in diverse Provinces in England.

Which witnesses their wonted prudence and piety by some of us observed in
their Honorable and Reverend Commissioners sent unto this Kingdom, for the
preventing of a breach among Covenanted Brethren.

And as our Brethren of Scotland are not convinced of any just ground for a new
War by their Arguments who would raise it in their Kingdom against ours, so
we for the same reasons (with some additionalls of moment advancing to an
higher degree of evidence and assurance, For it bate date the 28. of April,
and the penal Ordin. against Here Is. passed the 2. of May.
since their humble Representation was printed) are convinced, that there is no
just warrant for such a War as the enemies of our peace and safety would
enkindle among us, under the oppofite Titles of Presbyterians and Independents.

For, for the most and weightiest differences betwixt them, we conceive a
Parliament of Legislative Senators and an Assembly of Divines are fitter to
decide them then two opposite Armies: for the rest we had rather be resolved
then determined by the Long Robe then by the Buffe Coat, by the Judges of the
Law, in a diliberate way of inquiry and trial, then by Inter arma silent leges.
lawless swordmen in a way of ha^^ie hostility and violence, which will allow
of no leisure for distinction of causes and persons, nor for conviction of
errors or offenses before execution.

SECT. V.
ANd though the breach of Covenant be pretended as a just provocation for
unsheathing the Sword in a second war (and God we confess may as he
threatens, Levit. 26.25. send a Sword to avenge the quarrel of his Covenant)
yet (as the forementioned Commissioners well observed) the Covenant is rather
ratified and confirmed then violated by the Representatives and Ministers of
the Counties, or Provinces (as they speak) whose owning and avowing of it, is
more considerable for keeping of peace betwixt the two Kingdoms then the
neglect or contempt of it by others, for breaking out into a new War.

And we are assured that such a War as some would stir up and carry on
under pretense of asserting the Covenant against Independent Sectaries and
Heretics, would make the breaches of the Covenant wider both in the Doctrinall
and Practical part thereof.

For, first, for the Doctrinall part, though many errors were brewed in the
Bishops times (by occasion of their tyranizing rule over the consciences of
Christians which made them sneake into corners, where ordinarily the truth
dwells not) yet those and many others have been more boldly broached and
more generally propagated by the progress of War, and under the protection
of the Sword they who hold and publish them, make account they may be more
secure from censure and restraint, then in times of peace they can expect to
be.

And for the practical part (which is too much slighted by most, while the
other is in a manner only infisted on) as that it is our true and unfaigned
purpose, desire and endeavor for our selves and all others under our power,
both in public and private in all duty we ow to God and man, to mend our
lives, and to go before one another in the example of a real Reformation,
that the Lord may turn away his wrath and heavy indignation, and establish
these Kingdoms in truth and peace. Can this be expected by the War now
projected? can we hope for any help toward the restraint of profaneness,
and promotion of the power of godliness, by such an art as consists, (as
Praeclara ars incendere domos, diripere Templa, violare virgins, spoliare
miseros, occidere innoxios. Erasm. Colloque Milit. confess. p. 34.
Erasmus notes) in burning of houses, battering down of Churches, violation
of Virgins, spoiling even of those that are in misery, killing of the innocent,
etc. May we not rather fear, that a Civil War of the second Edition, will be
set forth like a Mass Book in red and black letters of cruelty and
uncleanness much corrupted and augmented, and that if the Matt. 12.45.
evil Spirit cast out return upon us, he will bring with him seven other
Spirits more wicked then himself, and so should they prevail, (which God
forbid) our last state would be worse then the first, Matthew. 12.45. Can we look
for any better of such as are impetuously spurred on, (as the same Ego nihil
aliud conjectare possum quam illos agi malis furiis, seseque totos malo daemoni
and miseriaedevovisse. Ibid. p. 32.
Author says of them) by wicked furies, as if they had devoted themselves to
devilish malignity and misery? and if such a destructive hostility should be
prosecuted, as some purpose it, what ever become of the sectaries and heretics
(most spoken of) the grand heretics of the Popish faction would be much
encouraged and advanced by it: for if the most zealous Antipapists should
assault and slay each other, they needed but to be lookers on until both
sides being mutually weakened, they might have hope to have both for a prey, and
would take it, as if God had set us together by the ears to make some
sportfull spectacle for them to behold, so much Genebrard meant, when he said,
Deus haerericis haereticos committit ut Catholicis tacentibus se mutuo
conficiant. Genebr. Chronogr. l. 4. p. 766. inter an. 1572-74.
God sets heretics against heretics, that the Catholics might be silent
spectators of their mutual massacres. Whereby they may expect so far to
prevail as to compass their most destructive designs upon the Protestant
party.

That moved Calvin with passionate admiration, to say upon the contentions of
Evangelicall professors, in his time, Deus bone! quantos and quam jucundos
lusus praebemus, quasi illis locaverimus operam nostram. Calv. Ep. Melanthon.
p. 55.
Good God! what delight and sport do we make to Papists? we could not
gratify them more then we do, by our differences, if they had hired us to
do them some acceptable service. For they make account that our conflicts will
hasten their conquests, and they would be sure the more to glory in our sins
and sufferings, because they make Septima nota est, unio membrorum inter se and
cum capite. Bellarm. de notis. Ecles. l. 4. c. 10. Tom. 2. p. 78. col. 2.
unity their own unity, a note of the true Church, and At haeretici dissentiuni
and unus habet alium pro haereitco. Bell. ibid. p. 80. col. 2.
dissension, our dissension, which they observe, and aggravate beyond all
measure, a mark of heresy. Besides, there is a prelaticall and otherwise
Malignant party among us, to whom such as are in debt, distress, and
discontent, will be ready to sort themselves, as they did in David's time, 1 Samuel 22.2. who would make as ill an use of our discord, (especially if they
could heighten it to a warlike hostility of the religious of both Nations,) as
the Papists would do, whereof our The humble Representation of the
Commissioners of the General Assembly forecited. p. 14.
Brethren of Scotland have a jealous apprehension, and so have we; and
therefore what Heu mihi! qui vos simul invenire non possum, ut moveor, ut
doleo! prociderem ad pedes vestros, flerem quantum vale rem, rogarem quantum
amarem, nunc utrunque pro seipso, etc. Aug. Hieron. inter opera Hieron. Tom. 2.
p. 355.
Augustine would have done to reconcile Hierome and Ruffinus, though but
particular Antagonists, to take off the disgrace of their contentions; that and
much more, according to the proportion both of scandal and of danger would we
do, rather then that any pretended difference betwixt Presbyterians and
Independents, or any conscientious Non-Covenanters should be so far exasperated
as to be put to the blind and barbarous decision of the sword, wherein they
would have most to do, who have least reason and Religion, and the most of
such wild and wicked distempers as are most repugnant to them both.

And for the better part of our dissenting Brethren at home, we hope they would
hold it a matter of duty and of safety, (as well as we do) to be at peace
with us, and that they will bear with our faithful dealing in the cause of
Christ; and if in our zeal thereto we have not showed our selves partial to
any extravagancies of opinion or practice, we wish them to consider the saying
of Augustine, Non omnis qui parcit esse amicus, nec omnis qui verberat, ini^
micus, Aug. Vin. Ep. 48. p. 188.
every one is not a friend who forbeareth to rebuke, nor every one an enemy who
rather strikes then stroaketh; and fince the most of them are for a Toleration
of different opinions, Worships and writings, we cannot but expect their
patience toward us, though thus far we have professed against them, for
even upon their own grounds they must allow us the same liberty to think, and
speak, and write, and act, according to our principles and consciences, which
they assume to themselves and permit unto others; and the rather, because a
confiderable sort and number of them do not so much dissent from us, in
matters of the greatest moment, as they do from many of those who under the
titles of Independents, (howsoever otherwise divided) are united together
against the Presbyteriall Government, and with reference to such we further
say, that (though we approve of the Presbyteriall Government, as most consonant
to Scripture, and most convenient and commodious, (as a wall of Discipline
about the Vineyard of Doctrine) for the defense of the soundness of faith, and
holiness of life, and therefore could wish it were generally received, through
the three Kingdoms of the Covenant.) Yet do we not desire the establishment
of it in that extent, to be purchased by the price of blood, and therefore we
disavow the dispute of the sword, to determine any differences betwixt us. And
we hope the godly, both Presbyterians and Independents, will be so wise, as to
beware of such a breach as may encourage and confirm their enemies, whether
Popish, Prelaticall, or profane, against them both; whom as Tu mecum
Nestorium, me tecum execratur. Nestor. Arn. and Serap. confl. addit. operibus
Iren. p. 547.
Arnobius says to Serapion, they both alike condemn, and by whom they are both
alike abominated, though for divisive and destructive ends, they may court the
one party, and calumniate the other; and vice versa, as Dr. Abbot in his Answer
to Dr. Hills third reason. p. 103.
Cardinal Allen gives instructions to the Seminary of Priests in his time, to
make the division of Protestants and Puritanes (as they call them) more
advantageous to the service of Popish designs.

If you have to deal with a Puritan (says the Cardinal) you must say, truly
Brother for you there is more hope then for these that be Protestants; because
they for fear of the Prince, and the Law are ready to say and believe any
thing, and therefore me thinks they be Atheists, but for you there is more
hope, being either hot or cold. If you deal with a Protestant, tell him there
is more hope of him then of the rash brained Puritanes, because they with
Religion have put off all humanity and civility with all other good manners.

And though some particular litigants in contestation for their cause and
party, have been carried by precipitation of passion to the expression of much
personal spite and reproach both in speech and in print; yet the greatness
of the hazard to which both the one and the other will be exposed, if their
difference should be driven on to a Military march, should make them lay down
their displeasure, and take up the resolution of the Roman Non me impediant
privatae offensiones quo minus pro Reip. salute etiam cum inimieissimo
consentiam. Ci. cer. Epist. ad Plancum, Ep. Tom. l. 10 p. 113.
Orator, No private offenses or fallings out shall binder me, or make me
(says he) less ready to join with my greatest enemy for the safety of the
public.

The third part of the Attestation, Containing an Apology for publication of
these Errors, and for the Reformation in hand against the scandal of them, and
of other impious and absurd aberrations from Religion and reason charged upon
it.
SECT. I.
TO this our confession with you, we think fit by way of Apology for you and
for our selves to add a caution against misconceipt, which many perhaps take up
upon the great noise and outcry we make against errors, etc. which Mr. I.
Goodw. Sion College Visited. p. 7.
some think should rather have been suppressed with filence, then blazed ahroad
to public view, without an antidote against them, or refutation of them. And
it is as probable, yea it is certain to some of us who have heard it spoken,
that all the reproaches of these impious opinions, are cast upon the
Reformation in hand. To take off such imputations we think it fit to say,

First, Though problematicall errors which are presented with some appearance
of truth and reason, should not be published without disproofe, because by such
men may more easily be deceived; Yet such gross and as well absurd as impious
paradoxes, as most of the errors, etc. in your Catalogue may be mentioned
without particular confutation of them, as is the herefie of the Sadduees, who
say, there is no resurrection neither Angel nor spirit, Acts 23.8. and the
herefie of Hymeneus and Philetus saying, in the Apostles time, the
Resurrection, is past already, 2 Timothy 2.17. and the blasphemy of Rabshekeh,
Isa. 36. from ver. 12. to the 20. which was heard at first without speaking of
a word against it, and that by an express command from King Hazekiah ver. 21.
and afterward thrice written without a refutation, 2 King. 18. from v. 27. to
v. 35. 2 Chr. 32.17, 18, 19. Isa. 36. forecired, neither are such irreligious
and irrational conceits or sayings worthy of a refutation, nor they who hold
or vent them capable of a religious and rational conviction.

Secondly, Though in respect of others that may be required and performed, yet
it is not requifite that every time they are reported they should be refuted,
because that has either been done before, or may be done after in time
convenient; Plenisslmam habebis a nobis adversus omnes haereses
contradictionem. Epiphan. praefat. in l. c. adv. haeres. p. 228.
Epiphanius did not only rebearse a large Catalogue of 80. heresies, but (as he
says himself) made a copious contradiction or confutation against them all.
But Aug. princ. Tom. 6. operum.
Augustine writing a Catalogue of heresies after him did there only repeat and
not refute them, though elsewhere he spent a great deal of profitable pains
in confutation of many particular heresies and heretics, as of the Manichees
in general, and many of them in particular, in his first Tome, and (in his
sixth Tome) of the Manichees in general, and in particular of Priscillianists,
Origenists, and Arians, and in the seventh Tome of the Donatists, both in
general and particular. So that what is not done in your Catalogue, may if it
be needful be performed at another time; if not performed already by some
other.

And thirdly, Though those who are not versed in antiquities, think the
errors which are now broached, especially the absurdest of them, to be new
horn brats of the present age, yet, as in Philosophy some are mistaken (who
take Copernicus for the first author of that giddy fancy, of the earths turning
round, and the heavens standing still Abrah. Bucolzerus Jud. Chronologicus. p.
424.
for be was not borne till the year 1473. after Christ; and long before Christ
it was ascribed to Nicetas Nicetas Syracusius, (ut ait Theophrastus,) coelum,
solemn, lunam, stellas, supra denique omnia stare censet, neque praezer terram,
remullam in mundo moveri. Cicer. Acad. ^u. lib. 2. p. 26. fine.
Syracusius,) so in Divinity, those heresies which seem the newest, and of the
latest hatch, have been both taught and contradicted, many hundred years ago,
as that in the late most heretical and most impious Pamphlet of the Mortality
of the soul, of the body of Christ ascending no higher then the globe of the
Sun, and there arrested until the general resurrection; though many take it
to be a new fiction of the Writer in his book of Man's Mortality, both soul
and body. p. 33. printed 1643.
Writer thereof, never heard of before his time; yet the same was the tenet of
the ancient Christum cum in ^^lum ascenderit, corpus suum reliquisse in globo
solis, hinc Manichaeos esse persuastos ut solemn adorarent. Sixth. Senens.
Biblieth. Sanct. l. 5. amot. 140. p. 381. col. 1.
Manichees, and therefore they worshipped the sun, because they conceived the
body of Christ was lodged in the globe thereof; and being ancient errors, they
have met with their confutation heretofore many of them by Tertul. Iren.
Epiphan. Aug. of old, and of later times, by Alphons. a Castre, who wrote 14.
books in rehearsal and refutation of them, which Feuardentius published since
his death, with the addition of forty heresies more, either pretermitted by
Alphonsus, or borne since his death, (as he professes) though both of them
miscall those heresies which are not.

Fourthly, It may fall out that the Reformation may be carried on by some men
with too vehement an antipathy, Impugnant adversus invicem, sua propria
indicantes. Iren. advers. kaeres. lib. 2. c. 18. p^ p. 164.
uttering each of them his own opinion, in a way of contradiction to others,
whereby while they shun one error, they run into another, sometimes most
contrary to it, so Feuardent. in annot. in ista verba. Iren. advers. haeres. l.
2. c. 18. p. 170. col. 2.
Arius took up his herefie out of an hatred of the quite contrary tenet, held
by Sabellius; and Eutiches, his herefie out of too passionate an oppofition to
that of Nestorius: and in like sort out of an extreme detestation of the
Domination of Prelacie, have many among us fallen to Independency, conceiving
they could not be secure enough from Ecclesiastical tyranny, over their
consciencies, if there were any coercive power in one, as in the Episcopal, or
in many, as in Presbyteriall government.

Fifthly, That the many errors, heresies, and blasphemies, which have rushed
in upon us, in a kind of interregnum betwixt the pulling down of the
Prelaticall, and setting up the Presbyteriall discipline, may not prejudice the
present Reformation by the scandal which comes from them, and the contumely
which deservedly belongs to them; we are to be remembered that it is no new
thing, for the devil to bestirre himself as of late he has done, to trouble,
retard, and reproach the true Religion, by putting forth many false ones, which
may puzzle the people, so that they know not which to betake themselves to, but
then especially when any great change is to be made for the better. Which we
may observe in four most remarkable times and states of Religion.

SECT. II.
THe first was when Christianity was to be set up, and Judaisme and Paganism
to be preached down, then did the Devil displeased that his temples were
deserted, and Christ sought after, as under another title has been noted, out
of Aug de civ. l. 8. c. 51. part. 2. p. 459.
Aug. de civitate dei) raise up very many as impious, absurd, and ridiculous
opinions as any are taught in our times; as to begin with that wherein the
Apostles lived, there was Simon Magus a believer for a time, and one that was
baptized by Philip, Acts 8.13. who pretended Epiph. Tom. 2. l. 1. haeres. 21.
that his Concubine Helena was the same Helen of Greece, whom Homer wrote of,
that she made the Angels, and that the Angels made the world; that the Old
Testament was not of God, and that it was a mortal sin to believe it. He held
another opinion Semen virorum per desluxum, and sanguinem faeminarum per
consuetos menser collectum esse mysteria vis tae, cognitionisque perfectissime.
ibid.
as impure as these were impious, which we conceive fitter to be set down in
the margin in Lat. then in this text in the English tongue. And we read of the
Sect of the Nicolaitans, Rev. 2.6.15. descended from Nicolas a Proselyte of
Antioch, one of the seven Deacons chosen and appointed by the Apostle, Acts
6.6, 7. whose doctrine and practice had a rank savor of carnal sinfulness.
And though for Nicolas himself, it be somewhat uncertain what to resolve of
him, for modesty or immodesty either in his dictates or doings, because while
some as Nicol unus de 7. diaconis cum intemperantiae dominari non possit, ut
haberet quo petulantes affectus defenderet, docuit nisi quis singulis diebus
uxorem exerceret, non posse participem fieri vitae aeternae. Epiph. ibid.
haeres. 25.
Epiphanius and Nicolaus Antiochenus omnlum mundiciarum repertor, choros duxit
faeminarum Hieron. Tom. 2. p. 256.
Hierom have accused him of very unclean opinions and practices; others as
Clemens Alexand. Stromat. l. 3. p. 187.
Clemens Alexandrinus, and Eusebius. Ecclesiast. hist. l. 3. c. 26.
Eusebius have pleaded for him, that being charged with jealousy, having a
beautiful wife, he brought her forth, and permitted him that listed to marry
her; and Monuerat Nicolaus Diaconus (...) abuti carne: quo breviter dicto
votupratem cupidinum, maxim verd veneris, reprimendam^ir sanctus voluit. Mr.
Seldom de^ve (...) and Gent. l. 1. c. 1 p. 9. the words in greek are in clem.
Alexan. (...). p. 187. par. med.
a late learned author, commending him, for that he taught the flesh was to be
abused, by which he meant that concupiscence of pleasures, especially
venercous, was to be restrained: Yet is it not denied by any of the Authors who
speak so favorably of him, but that some of the same age, or not long after,
took up licentious and lascivious opinions in his name, and made their
practice as loose as their opinions So Clemens Alexand. Eusebius. and Mr. Seldom.
and so they sinned without shame in filthy fornication; (...). Clemens
Alexand. loco citat. lit. o.
yea as Clemens Alexandrinus says, they pronounced public Venery to be a
mystical communion.

After them came up a most horrid and filthy Sect of the Gnostics, whose
impieties and impurities cannot be mentioned without horror, and we therefore
set them in the margin, and Vxores habuerunt Communes, impudica feminarum and
virorum contrectatio, nota fuit ejusdem professionis in Religione, Synaxim
ipsam turpitudine multiplicis coitus polluerunt comedentes humanas carnes, vir
concedens alteriuxorem, Surge dixit, fac dilectionem cum fratre. Turpissimam
commixtionem secuta est blasphemia, nam muliercula, itemq, vir fluxum a masculo
in proprias manus suscipientes, coelum intuentes, dixerunt; Tibi pater hoc
donum corpus Christi offerimus, and sic ipsum ederunt, assumentes semen suum,
dixeruntque hoc est corpus Christi, hoc est pascha. Epiph. Tom. 2. l. 1.
haeros. 26. Voluptatis gratia tantum, non generationis liberorum coierunt; hinc
si quae praegnans facta suerit mulier, faetum in Mortario pistillo contuderunt,
and admixto melle and pipere participes facti sunt, manibus turpitudinis suae
defluxu imbutis, nudi toto corpore precati sunt. Haec Epiph de Gnosticis. ibid.
in Latin, for they are too gross to be put down in plain English; though
those who are wise, of such a deadly poison, may make an wholesome medicine to
themselves, inferring from such premises, that doubtless there is a devil,
for none but a spiritual impostor of great art and subtilty, as he is Acts
13.10. and of great power, as 2 Thessalonians. 2.9. could persuade men to any such
prodigious impieties, so repugnant not only to the law of Scripture, but to the
light of nature; and thence must necessarily follow that there is a good God
much greater and mightier then he, otherwise the whole world would run mad with
such Diabolical delusions. The Carpocratian heretics were brethren to the
Gnostickes according to the flesh, whose impure impieties Christi animam, and
quamlibet aliam, quae per omnes actiones turpes progressa est, posse in mundi
factores and angelos transire, unde multi seipsos ipso Jesu praestantiores
professi sunt, exercuerunt magiam, incantationes and alia Satanica opera.
Epiph. ibid. haeres 27.
we will lap up in the same language; yet as Christianos senominarunt in
Ecclesiae Christi opprobrium, and gentium scandalum. ibid.
Epiph. says, they called themselves Christians, to the great scandal both of
Christ and of the Heathens.

The Adamites had some affinity with the former sects, but they were more
foolish then filthy, at least in their filthiness not so shameless, for as
Epiph. ibid. haeres. 52.
Epiphanius writes of them; they were like unto Mouldwarpes, who seldom
appeared in the sight of men, they held their males to be as Adam, and their
females as Eve, in the state of innocence, and therefore they excercised their
Religion (such as it was) in stoves and hot-houses, naked, leaving their cloths
in an outward room; if any man had any blemish, they cast him out of their
congregation calling him Adam, who had eaten the forbidden fruit. Epiph. ibid.
haeres. 37.
There was another sort of heretics called (...) Ophis a Serpent.
Ophites from Ophis a serpent, for they worshipped the Serpent that deceived
Adam and Eve, as a most wise creature endowed with all kind of knowledge.
Epiph. ibid. haeres. 38.
And some thought as well of Cain, whom they accounted their father, holding he
was a man of more vigorous virtue then Abell, because he was able to kill him;
to him they sorted Epiph. ibid.
Esau, Core, the Sod^mites and Judas, and in them they gloried as in their
kinsmen, and aseribed to them perfect and supernall knowledge; and for Judas
they praised him for betraying of Christ, Ibid.
some of them rendering for a reason that Christ was about to dissolve things
well established, and others, that by betraying him to death, he did a good
work conducible to humane safety. Besides these tenets peculiar to their sect,
they taught with the Corpocratians Epiph. ibid.
that none could be saved, unless he committed every filthy act, calling upon
a particular Angel, to whom they attribute the instinct of every particular
sin on earth.

We will conclude the heresies raised by Satan against the first Reformation of
Religion, from Judaisme and Paganism, with the heresy of the Pepusians
(omiting diverse others, either less odious, or less ridiculous) Epiph. ibid.
haeres. 49.
who fondly conceived upon a pretended revelation to Quintillus and Priscilla,
that their City Pepuza in Phrygia, was the celestial Jerusalem, forespoken by
the Prophets; they likewise commended Eve for tasting the forbidden fruit, as a
prudent act, and as the cause of our salvation; with them the word Saeerdos was
practically as well as grammatically of both genders, for women were admitted to
all Ecclesiastical offices, and they alleged for their promiscuous practice,
(especially for to make Ministers of the Word and Sacraments) Miriam the sister
of Moses, Exodus 15.20. and the four daughters Prophetesses of Philip the
Evangelist, Acts 21.8, 9. and that of Paul to the Galatians, there is neither
Jew nor Greek, there is neither bondnor free, there is neither Male nor
Female, for ye are all one in Christ Jesus. Gal. 3.28.

SECT. III.
THe second most inconsiderable time or state of Religion was at the
reformation and change of it from Popery to Protestancy (by the Ministry of
Luther, Calvin, Bucer, Beza and others) then did the Devil to disgrace it, set
up sundry graceless heretics, as John Islebius the father of the late
Antinomians, who denied the use of the Law in the time of the Gospel, and
Statuunt quaecunque tandem sit hominis vita, quantumvis impura, justificari
tamen eum si promissionibus evangalii credar. Sletdan. Comment. l. 12. p. 248.
held that how impure soever a man's life be, yet be is justified if he believe
the promises of Christ; and Bell. Chronol. part. altera. p. 567.
Michael Servetus a Spaniard, who being but 25. years of age, bragged that he
was the chief Prophet of the world; when as the Servetus non simplicem, sed ex
multis impietatibus conflatam haereticorum larvam profitetur, puta, Arii,
Marcionis, etc. Pastores Ecclesiae Basileens. Epist. Syndicis and Senatui inter
Calvin. Epi stol. p. 127.
pasters of the Church of Basil, show he professed not the errors of any
simple or singular heretic, but a compound of the heresies of Arius, Marcion,
Sabellius, Photinus, Manichaeus, and Pelagius; and diverse of the Church of
Resuscitat nobis Priscillianos, Anthropomorphitas, Apollinaristas,
Valentinianos. Ministr. Eecles. Bern. Syndic. and Senatui Genev. ibid. p. 118.
Berne charge him with reviving other heresies. And the Divines of Tigure
objected to him Trinitatem aternam Deitriceps Monstrum and Cerberum quendam
tripartitum; denique imaginarios Deos illusiones ac tres Spiritus daemoniorum
appellitat. Ministr. Tigur. Eccles. Syndie. and Senatui Genev. ibid. p. 120.
most execrable blaspbemies against the sacred Trinity, a^^^^ which he wrote
Bellar. Chronol. par. altera. p. 567.
seven b^^^phemous books.

About the same time in Holland the Devil stirred up one Bell. ibid. p. 569.
David George, who took upon him to be a great Prophet, and the elder brother
of Christ, and promised that three years after his death he would rise again,
and restore the Kingdom unto Israel. There was also one Bellarm. ibid.
Casper Swbenckeseldius a Silesian, who held, that upon the ascension of Christ
into heaven the humane nature was turned into the Divine; Litera mortua, egenum
eleme^tum, sic Hosius, de expressoverbe Dei, paulo ante med. non disting.
capit. Sect. nec figure.
and that the Scripture was but a dead letter, a beggarly element. There was
also one Muneo who (as Calvin says of him) set forth an haeresie drawn out of
the dotages of the Manichees concerning the nature and person of Christ. Liquet
te aggressum esse and conatum spargere haereticam doctrinam, blasphemiis
plenam, contra sacrum Mysterium Trinitatis. Calv. o. pusc. p. 671.
And another named Valentinus Gentilis a blasphemous heretic against the
sacred Trinity, against whom the Syndicks of Geneva proceeded to a judicial
Sentence for a Solemn and submissive recantation of his tenets. But there were
two sorts of heretics which most defamed the Reformation of Religion in those
days, the Sleid. Com. l. 6. p. 116.
Anabaptists and Libertines: the Anabaptist denied the baptism of infants to
be lawful; and taught that if they were baptized, such baptism was a
nullity; they held a Community of goods, bragged of Revelations by visions and
dreams; whereupon at Sangall in Helvetia one Ibid.
cut off his brothers head in the presence of his parents, to which he was
persuaded (as he said) that he was commanded by God himself. Of this Sect the
head as a King and a Prophet was Sleid. ib. l. 10. p. 200.
John Leyden, who taught that a man was not bound by marriage to one woman, but
might be allowed as many wives as he pleased and for this (when some Doctors
opposed his opinion) he threw down his cloak, and the New Testament on the
ground, and swore by them both, that the Doctrine he delivered was revealed to
him from heaven.

With him prophesied Knipperdoling, a blasphemous brainsicke Heretic, who said
he had received it from heaven, Sleid. ibid. p. 199.
that all Temples should be destroyed, and presently the besotted people fell
to work, as he gave out the word, Ibid. p. 201.
and when a great crowd of people stood below him, standing upon an ascent
above their head, he went upon their heads with his hands and his knees,
breathing upon them, and saying, the Father has sanctified thee, receive the
Holy Ghost; and to deceive the people yet further with more apparent danger, up
start a new prophet a Goldsmiths by his calling, (his name is not noted) but a
Blacksmith or Iron-smith rather by his speech, and he boldly denounced as a
dictate of the heavenly Father Sleid. ibid. p. 200.
that John Leiden must be Emperor of the whole world, and that being assisted
with strong forces he should without difference or exception, kill all Kings
and Princes, and should spare only the multitude, to wit, those that love
justice, and so he should possess the seat of his father David, until his
father require it again.

The other notorious and dangerous Sect, prejudicial to the honor and
progress of the Reformation begun, was the Sect of the Libertines, of whom
Bellarmine having made a very short and insufficient ^eport intitles it to
Calvin, and to express his extreme contempt of him, he Quorum non alium
authorem habeo nisi Johannem Calvin. haeresiarcham. Bellarm. Chron. par. ult.
p. 371.
excuses himself that be has no other author of the Libertine tenants, then
John Calvin the heretiark in his book against the Libertines: but though to
him the name of Calvine be ignominious, and to other Papists, whom malice has
made mad against him, (as Saul against the Saints before he was converted Acts
26.11. so despicable as to Alii suis canibus Calvini nomen imponunt. Melch.
Adam. pastor. decad. vitar. Theolog. p. 82.
put the name of Calvin upon their Dogs; to us and to all sound and orthodox
Protestants, it is (as Solomon says of a good name) better then precious
ointment, Eccles. 7.1. and his discovery of the opinions and manners of the
Libertines, the more authenticke, and the more punctually to be related,
because he is the exactest writer of their story, speaks of his own
knowledge of them, having had personal notice of, and contestation with the
ringleaders of that sinful sect Calvin. Instr. advers. Libert. c. 4. opusc. p.
436.
Quintine and Poiquius; there was also one Coppine, whom the devil set up
before the former of these two, to begin the sowing of the Libertine tares, but
his fame was soon obscured by Quintine, and his memory in a manner buried by
his proceeding and prevailing.

His discourse of them is somewhatlarge, taking up about 17. leaves in folio,
but we will contract what is pertinent to our present purpose into a narrower
compass: In the general Advers. fanaticam and furiosam Sectam Libertinor. qui
se spirituales vocant. So in the title of his Instr. p. 433. col. 1.
he calls them a furious and fanaticke Sect, who call themselves spiritual,
and yet Vt scelerata Secta, ita long aliis magis prodigiosa and belluina est,
adeo ut nemo sana mente praeditus sine horrore de ea cogitare possit. ibid. c.
1. p. 434. col. 1.
are prodigiously wicked, and brutish, so that no man that is well in his wits,
can think of what they hold without horror, and so foul and filthy Eorum
Secta cloaca est aut sentina quaedam in quam omnes sordes confluunt. ib. c. 21.
p. 456. c. 1.
that it is as the common receptacle of all uncleanness. In particular they
blasphemously confounded God and man in their operations and actions, Cum
aliquando Quintinus in locwn venisset ubi quidam interfectus jacebat, atque
illic adesset aliquis vir pius, qui prae horrore diceret, hei mihi quis
hocscelus admisit? putidus ille inquis. Ita res haber, tu ipse admisisti, ego
admisi, Deus admisit, quod enim ego and tu sacimus, Deus efficit, quod etiam
Deus facit ipsi facimus, nam in nebis est. Ibid. c. 13. p. 445. col. 1.
saying, that what God did, they did, what they did, God did, whatsoever it
was, though a murder or any such crime because God was in them: Hoc concesse
imputandunesset Deo peccatum, aut concludendum nullum in mundo peccatum fieri
-- unde sequetur nobis non licere aliquid ut malum vituperare. ibid.
this granted, all sin must be imputed unto God, or it must be concluded
that there is no sin in all the world, because there is nothing which God
does not; and thence also it follows, that nothing is to be blamed as evil,
and that a man following his own inclination Concupivit uxorem vicini sui
quispiam, ea potiatur si potest, certo enim scit, se nibil a voluntate Dei
alienum facere, ib p. 445. c. 2.
(suppose it be to lie with another man's wise) may do it. And therein be does
nothing contrary to the will of God Fiert omnia ex voluntate Dei, nibil ipsi
displicere. ibid. c. 15. p. 448. col. 1.
who is displeased with nothing that man does. As for the devil and sin,
Diabolum and peccatum accipiunt pre imaginatione, quae nibil est. ibid. p. 444.
col. 1.
they take them for a mere imagination, which is nothing. For Christ they set
up an Proplastice Christum fingunt qui non tantum idolum sit adversus filium
Dei, sed veluti sordium omnium saccus, aut cloaca in quam faeces omnetre
cipiantut. ib. p. 450. c. 1.
Idol Figment of their own, and make him the sack or sink of all impure
dregs. And indeed they put Ipsi Christo probrum inurant quo Diabolo deterior
censeri possit. ib. c. 4 p. 437. col. 1.
so much repreach upon him, as may make him worse then the Devil himself. For
the sacred Aperte ridere soliti sunt, si quis scripturas allegaret: nec
diffimulare quin eas pro fabulis haberent. Calv. Instruct. adv. Libert. c. 9.
p. 441. col. 1.2.
Scriptures if any cited them against their heretical and profane opinions,
they derided them, accounting no better of them then of fables; and to show
themselves lawless Libertines, they will have it; Totam legem abolere volunt,
inquientes ^^llam amplius ejus habendam esse rationem, propterea quod in
libertatem asserti simus. ibid. c. 19. p. 453. col. 1.
that the whole Law is abolished, so as now it is no more to be regarded,
because (as they argue) we are put into a state of perfect liberty. And how
little respect they had of the Gospel, is manifest by their contemptuous
speeches of the Apostles, Apud eos Paulus vas confractum erat, Petrus abnegator
Dei, Johannes adolescens stolidus, Matthaeus faenerator. ibid. c. 3. p. 435.
col. 2.
calling Paul a broken vessel, Peter a Runnegado from God, John a foolish
young man, Matthew an Usurer. And rejecting the bonds of the Law, and guidance
of the Gospel, they let loose the reins to their lewdest lusts, according to
their pernicious principle, which is Quod omnis hominum inclinatio sive a
natura, sive a masa consue tudine proficiscatur, vooatio Dei est. ibid. c. 20.
p. 455. col. 1.
that every inclination of man, whether it be of nature, or of custom, is the
calling of God; and therefore if Simulatque adulter scortatoris sui taedium
caeperit, eum subinde commutare potesi si quis alius magis grat^s sese offerat.
Similiter scortator. etc. ibid. c. 20. p. 455. col. 2.
an adulteress be weary of, or not well pleased with her fleshly bedfellow,
she may change for another, who may be more acceptable to her; and an
Adulterer or Fornicator has the like liberty for female variation; and Leno,
inquiunt, fungatur munere suo, fur audacter furetur, est enim consentanenm
rationi, ut unusquisque vocationem suam sequatur. ibid. c. 20. p. 454. col. 2.
if any have been employed as a Pander, or a Baude, or a thief, they may hold
on their course, because it is their calling. The In bona confusionem inducunt,
communione^ Sanctorum esse dicentes, si nemo quicquam possideat tanquam suum,
se dunusquisque undecunque nancisci poterit ad se rapiat. ibid. c. 21. p. 455.
col. 2.
confusion of goods, they called the communion of Saints, and permitted every
man to get what he could by what way soever unto himself. And so they allowed
themselves and all their sort a Hocu^um est ex praecipuis capitibus Theologiae
ipsorum, artem simulandi and sese transformundi nosse oportere, quo facilius
hominibus imponant -- qua sibi permittunt omnem speciem induere quo placeant
hominibus. ibid. c. 8. p. 440. col. 1.
liberty to dissemble any thing with any man, in any matter, whereby they might
deceitfully insinuate themselves into their good opinion, and so they made no
scruple Nulla est ipsis religio, coram Idolis se prosternere, ita se omnibns
superstitionibus papistarum adhaerere se simulant. ibid.
to adore Idols, nor to adhere to all the superstitions of the Papists, no nor
blasphemously to fiatter them in the abominable idolatry of the Mass: for
Quintine himself being once present where Cum aliquando Quintinus solenni
cujusdam Cardinalis Missae adesset dicebat se gloriam Dei videre. ibid. c. 20.
p. 454. col. 2.
a Cardinal said Mass, professed that at that time be saw the glory of God.
And though for such partly Diabolical, and partly brutish deceipts and
dealings they were such as Calvin well says were worthy that Omnes ad pueros
usque ipsos conspuere infaciem pratereuntium deberent, ut hoc execrationis
signo pudore afficerent cos. ibid. c. ^. p. 437. col. 1.
all even to children should spit at them, in token of execration as they
passed by, that they might make them asbamed; thousands Multis animarum
millibus exitii causa fuerunt. ibid.
of souls were seduced by them to their destruction, the particular account
they reckoned to is above 4 Ganeones aut tres saltem video qui plus quam 4
millia hominum in exitium duxerunt. ibid. c. 4. p. 436. col. 2.
four thousand, an argument of the singular subtilty of Satan, and of the
great simplicity, or rather gross stupidity of the people; and withal an
evidence of Divine indignation, as Certrssimum illud est exundantis in mu^dum
furoris Dei flagellum, cum cousque Satanae habenas laxetut tam detestanda quae,
lli^ Christianis persuadeant, quae prophanis ipsis horrorem incutiant. Calv.
Epist. Ep. N. N. p. 222.
Calvin elsewhere says, in letting out the chain of Satan so many linkes, as
that he should be able to persuade Christians to believe and receive such
dictates as would strike a horror in the hearts of profane men when they hear
them.

SECT. IV.
THe third considerable time and state of Religion was then, when diverse godly
Divines and other well-affected Christians desired and endeavored a further
conformity with other reformed Churches in discipline, and ceremonies in the
reign of Queen Elizabeth.

Of this Camd. Hist. Q. Eliz. l. 1. p. 90.
says Camden, in the 11th of her reign Colman, Button, Hattingham, Benson, and
others who with burning zeal professing a more sincere Religion, allowed of
nothing but what was drawn from the fountains of the holy scriptures -- they
openly called in question the received discipline of the Church of England, the
Liturgy and the vocation of Bishops, yea they condemned them as savouring too
much of the Romish Religion, (with which to have any communion they cried out
was impious) using all the means they could that all things in the Church of
England might he reformed according to the rule of the Church of Geneva; of
these men he further adds, that though the Queen commanded they should be
committed to prison, yet incredible it is, how much the followers of this Sect
increased every where, through a certain obstinate wilfulness in them,
indiscretion of the Bishops, and the secret favor of some noble men, which
gaped ofter the wealth of the Church, which sort began presently to be known
by the invious name of Puritanes; so far he, too far for a true Historian,
who (if he would needs give reasons of their acceptance with the people) should
and might have given others of a far better relish to religious palates. And
for the name Puritan which he familiarly misapplyeth, it belongs rather unto
those who would have the Church to be thought so pure, that it was not needful
to reform it, then to those who discovered the defects and faults of it, and
desired it might be a graduate to proceed to a further degree of goodness,
then the first assayes of Reformation could reach unto.

It was afterward prosecuted further by the penners of the admonition to the
Parliament, An. 1573. and by Mr. Cartwrights defense of it against Dr.
Whitgift, as by their Polemicall writings is evident, set forth by the Dr. in
the year 1574. and Mr. Car^wrights reply unto him in two parts; the first, An.
1575. the 2d. An. 1577.

But to hinder it (as Mr Josias Nio^ls who was a mover for it, a man of good
learning, godly life, and of a gracious and meek spirit, observes) Mr. Iostas
Nicolls plea of the innocent. So in the contents of the 2. chapter nu. 2.
Martine Marprelate, the Brownists, and Hacket were stirred up by Satan. More
particularly he Ib. c. 2. p. 32.
says the first was a foolish jester, who termed himself Martin Marprelate
and his sons, who under counterfeit and apish scoffing did play the Sycophant,
and slanderously abused many persons of reverent place and note, and such was
the wisdom of the time, that many filthy and lewd Pamphlets came forth
against him, casting forth much stinking dung and beastly filth into the faces
of honest men, Ibid. p. 33.
so that it plainly apeared to the wiser and discreeter sort, that the devil
was the author of this disgrace. Ibid.
Secondly, for the Brownists they took offense at both sides, and made a
temerarious and wicked separation; they had their original and name says
Cambd. Hist. of Q Eliz. l. 3. p. 257.
Camden from Robert Brown a Cambridge man a young student in Divinity, who
condemning the Church of England as no Church entangled many in the snares of
their new schism. Thirdly, of Hacket and his party, Mr. Ios. Nic. loco citat.
Mr. Nic. says, two or three men bewitched with some honor, by a certain man
of a frantic spirit, lifted up themselves with high words of blasphemy, whose
working this was all men know, that know the wiles of Satan. But that both may
be better known, (for more assurance of this truth, and better caution against
the slander of Religion) it will be requifite to make a more clear and full
report of the Diabolical blasphemy and fury of that impious Impostor Hacket,
which we will make up out of the several relations of Camden and Seravia.
Camd. Hist. of Q. Eliz. l. 4. p. 400.
This Hacket was a man of vulgar sort, borne at Oundle in the Counly of
Northampton, unlearned, insolent, fierce, and so eager upon revenge, that he
bit off his honest Schoolmasters nose (as be embraced him, under color of
renewing their love) and like a dog (as they say) eat it down before the poor
deformed man's face, while he prayed him to restore it to him, that it might be
sewed to whilst the wound was green. And so averse was he from all piety that
the heavenly doctrine which he had learn^d in Sermons, he repeated among his
drinking companions at their cups to be derided. Afterward when he had wasted
his estate which be had with a widow, be suddenly took upon him the person of
one of admirable sanctity, spent all his time in hearing Sermons, learning
scriptures, and as the devil puts on an holy day habit, transforming him into
an angel of light, 2 Cor. 11.14. so did he present himself in the appearance
of an inspired Saint, p^wring forth his prayers with an admirable and strange
kind of servour; falling upon his face as wrapped in an ecstasy, and
expostulating as it were with God. But whereas all men are wont in calling upon
God to implore his presence, he only was accustomed to pray that God would
absent and withdraw himself from the congregation of those that were praying.
Ibid. p. 401.
He counterseited revelations made to him from heaven, by which he dignified
himself with the title of Ibid.
King of Europe ordained by God. And his deluded disciples Copinger and
Arthrington added that he was the highest and supreme Monarch, and Ibid. p.
402.
that all the Kings of Europe did hold their Kingdoms of him, as his vassalls,
that be alone therefore was to be obeyed, and the Queen deposed. Besides this
temporal, he assumed a spiritual preeminence of a very high degree, for he
Ecoelo ab ipso Spiritu sancto unctus fun, Dr. Hadr. Saravi^ de grad. Ministr.
c. 2 p. 49.
said he was anointed from beaven by the holy Ghost; commanded his two
Prophets, the one of mercy, the other of judgment, Coppinger and Arthrington,
to Ite, inquit, and civibus Land. ^^unciate Christum Dominum ^coelis
descendisse cum ventilabro in manu sua, ut judiceto^bem. ibid.
proclaim in the City of London, that Christ the Lord (meaning himself) was
come from heaven with his san in his hand to judge the world; which he averred
with so much confidence Quod si quis vos roget ubi sit, dicite cum esse in
aedibus Walkeri in fr^cto Angiportu; si credere nolunt, veniant huc, and me si
possint occidant. ibid.
that he had them tell where he lodged, challenging them that would not
believe him, to come thither and kill him if they could. And when for his
blasphemous arrogance against God and his son Christ Jesus, and many
seditious and disloyal expressions of his spite and contempt of the Queen, he
was brought to condign and capital punishment; while he was under the hands
of the Executioner Blasphemo ore Deo minitans nis^ praesens au^llium ei
mitteres ibid. p. 50.
he was not afraid to threaten God himself, if he did not send present help
for his deliverance. Caind Hist. of Q Eliz. p. 403.
Being condemned, he was laid upon an hurdle and drawn to the chief street
of the City, incessantly rearing out with a dreadful sound, Iehova Messiah,
behold the heaven, the heaven open, behold the Son of the most High
descending down to deliver me. At the Gallows being admonished to acknowledge
his sin against God, and the Queen, the execrable wretch inveighing most
contumeliously against the Queen, cried out with a Stentors voice, O heavenly
God Almighty, Jehovah, Alpha and Omega, Lord of Lords, King of Kings, God
everlasting, thou know that I am the true Jehovah whom thou have sent, show
some miracle out of the cloud, to convert these insidells, and take me from
mine enemies. But if not (I tremble to speak it) Says the forecited author
who reports it.
I will set the heavens on fire, and with these hands pluck thee out of thy
throne: and other speeches he used more unspeakable. Turning him to the
Hangman as he was putting the rope to him, Thou Bastard said he will thou hang
Hacket thy King? having the rope about his neck, he lift up his eyes, and
grinning said, Do thou repay me this for a Kingdom? I come to revenge it.

Besides these homebred perturbers of the progress of Religion, in the way
toward a more perfect reformation, there came some forainers from Holland a
Country ( as Camd. censures it) fruitful Ibid p. 218.
of heretics, who under a show of singular integrity and sanctity, insinuated
themselves into the ignorant vulgar people, and then distilled into their
minds damnable heresies, mnifestly repugnant to the Christian faith, by a
portentous and strange kind of speaking, most contrary to the Christian
profession, which men might rather admire then understand. These named
themselves the family of Love, or house of Charity. They persuaded their
followers that those only were elected and to be saved which were admitted
into that family, and all the rest reprobates and to be damned, and that it was
lawful for them to deny upon their oath before a Magistrate whatsoever they
list, or before any other which was not of their family: of this fanaticall
vanity they dispersed books among their followers, translated out of the Dutch
tongue into English, which they entitled, the Gospel of the Kingdom,
Documentall sentences, the prophecies of the spirit of Love, the publishing of
peace upon earth. The Author H. N. whose name at length they cold by no means
be persuaded to reveal, yet it was found afterward to be Henry Nicolai of
Leiden. Who with blasphemous mouth gave out, that he did partake of God, and
God of his humanity.

SECT. V.
THe fourth State or time of Reformation, is that which at present is pestered
with so many errors, heresies, and blasphemies: concerning which your Catalogue
of them will save us the labor of the like account, which concerning others
we have brought in.

From such unsound Divinity, such brain-ficke blasphemy, such a fruitful
harvest of the Tares of heresy, as have most abounded in these times (wherein
Reformation was to be set up, and former swarvings from Religion and reason to
be silenced and suppressed) will fairly follow that which may confirm our
faith in the word of God, and may conform our affections to a better liking of
Religion, in that edition of it corrected and amended, which now is offered to
the acceptance of all well-minded people. As

First, That herein we see by experience the proof of the Apostles prediction,
that there m^^t be heresies that those which are approved may be manifest, 1
Cor. 11.19. And that they also may be discovered, who are tossed to and fro,
and carried about with every wind of doctrine, Ephesians. 4.14. And in respect of
some who ^et themselves against the truth, and settle their resolutions to
oppose it, that of the same Apostle may verified, God shall send them strong
de^^^ions, that they should believe a lie, that all might be damned which (...)
not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness, 2 These. 2.12.

Secondly, That these heresies are as the Apostle calls them the Doctrines of
Devils, 1 Timothy 4.1.

First, Because many of them are so absurdly impious, as to be clearly
contradictorie to the light, not only of holy Scriptures, but of humane nature.

Secondly, Because though many of them were ancient, yet heretics of later
times have revived them, not only by reading (for the leaders of many among
them, were altogether i^^iterate) but by the instinct of Satan, as See Cal^.
his 3. Chapter of his instr. adv. lib. p. 434, 435.
Calvin well observes, in his instruction against the Libertines of his time,
who though they agreed with many of the ancient heretics Cerd^, Marcion, the
Gnostics, and Manichees; yet Hi quidem homines indocti sunt ac idiotae, qui
non usque adeo evolvendis chartis funt exercitati ut ex it is deliria sua
addiscere po^uerint nec very simile est ipsos scire ullam unquam de his
mentione^ babitam fuisse -- sed idem magister qui veteres illos haereticos olim
suscitara^, ^adem d^ctrina istos imbuere p^test qua^ illos instr^ce^at. ibid.
c. 1. p. 434. col. 1.
being unlearned idiots, as he calls them, and not acquainted with books or
writings, they did not draw their dotages from them, nor is it like they had
any mention of them, but that the same master the devil who stirred up the
heretics of old, did instill the like doctrine into these new disciples.

Thirdly, Because he knows better then any Matchiovillian Politician how to
make use of division among men, especially Christians, to serve to his greatest
advantage, and his advantage is to make some of a wrong Religion, some to stand
at a gaze as an ignorant travailer where many ways meet, and to make choice of
no Religion; and some who have mischosen the worst, to reproach the best; not
only by their express contumelies, but by their pernicious ways, (their
gross errors, and loofe manners) by reason whereof, as Peter prophesied, the
way of truth i^ ^vill spoken of, 2 Pet. 2.2. And from differences in opinion
he well knows how to breed disike in affection, which if he can, he will
raise to the height of most hateful hostility, as he did by the spirit of the
Arians, D^natists, An^baptists, and other heretics both of the ancient and
more recent times.

Fourthly, Since all sound Christians resolved for the first Reformation, that
Christianity was the right Religion, and Judaisme and Paganism the wrong,
(notwithstanding the many and monstrous errors, etc. in the primitive times)
and that for the second, the Protestant Religion is the right, and Popery the
wrong Religion, though as impious errors brokeforth as before; so we may
resolve of the other two Reformations from Prelaecie to Presbyteri^, from a
cold and corrupt Liturgy, to a more cordial and sincere service of God, from
the burden of superstitious ceremonies, to a true freedom of conscience, and
Christian liberty, (in the third desired, and by the fourth in a good part
performed) that they have the better cause who stood for them, and endeavored
to carry it on to perfect accomplishment, not they that oppose it, albeit the
Devil (as before time) has let out some smoke of errors, etc. from the
bottomless pit, Rev. 9.2. to darken the light thereof, that it might not shine
forth in so clear a conviction, and so effectual a conversion as otherwise it
might do; yet even this working of Satan (with all who are truly instructed in
the principles and progress of Religion, and are not ignorant of his devises,
2 Cor. 2.11. is an argument that the reformation is of God, because the devil
uses such subtilty and diligence, to defame and disgrace it, and if he could
to suppress it.

Fifthly, If that be true which out of H^norus Reggus a foreign writer we
have noted, that this last Reformation has been invested with more and more
prodigious errors, etc. then any other, this also makes nothing to the
prejudice of those truths of doctrine, discipline, and worship, which now are
presented to the world, but rather much for them, since of the later times, it
is especially prophesied, that men should depart from the says, and give heed
to spirits of error, and doctrines of devils; 1 Timothy 4.1. which imports an
increase of heresies both in kind and degree of proficiency from bad to worse
in late succeeding more then in ancient foregoing ages. Mr. Perkins in his
treanse how to live, and that well. vol. 1. P. 479. col. 1.
Mr. Perkins observing somewhat to this purpose, where he says, that heresies
abound in this last age of the world, gives for a reason of it, the devils
reviving of the heresies of former ages, besides the invention of some new
ones; to which we may add, that he is the more busy at this time, in
prosecution of his design for spreading of errors, etc. (as more outrageous in
his wrath) because his time is but short, Rev. 12.12.

If it be objected as by some it is, Object.
in favor of Prelacie, and for Prelation of it before Presbytery out of the
forementioned author, that whereas in four years space lost past (wherein the
Bishops were opposed and deposed) there have been such multiplicity of
monstro^^ Sects in England, as in so short a time was never known in any
Province; and that there were in Eipiscoporum tempora intra 60. annos non nisi
4. Secta^ protulerunt, Puritanos, Brownistas, Familistas, and Anabaptistas.
Hon. Reg. de stat. Eccles. in Angl. p. 1.
60. years of the Bishops but four Sects, Puritans, Brownists, Familists, and
Anabaptists, nay but three, for he says those that were called Puritani erant
viri pii and orthodo^i qui ab episcopis quod ad gubernationem, caeremonias and
superstitiones quasdam dissentieban^, ib.
Puritans, were godly and orthodox men, who in Church Government, ceremonies,
and some superstitions dissented from the Bishops.

Sol. To this we answer, first, that the reporter being a stranger to our
State, though conversant in many of our controversiall writings might be
mistaken in the number of Sects among us, and doubtless he was so, for beside
those he names, there were Papists, Arminians, Socinians, Grindletonians,
Hothoringtonians, Traskits.

Secondly, If there were fewer Sects in that longer, then in this lesser time,
it might be there was the more peace, less division, because the strong man
armed kept the palace, Luke 11.21. For the Bishops held their palaces armed
with great power and authority, and they were diverse of them as willing as
able, to do the devil better service then petty Sects could do, for their
potency at Court, in the Star Chamber, high Commission, their cross keys of
order and jurisdiction, personal, and consistoriall, enabled them to suspend
and silence the most conscientious and powerful Preachers, to put down
Lectures and afternoon Sermons on the Sabbath, and to set up carnal sports
and recreations on that day, to uphold non-residences, pluralities,
profaneness and superstitious ceremonies; and to carry on such a compliance
with the grand heresy of Popery, as might put Papists in great hope, that if
they were too stout to come to us, we would be so humble as to come to them.

Thence it was that they bragged (when they saw the Communion table set up, and
railed in as an Altar, and the places of public worship popishly painted) that
our Church See Chillingworths pref. in answ. to a Popish book called Charity
mistaken.
began to look with a new face, and their walls to speak a new lauguage, by the
new face they mean a new draught, and by the new language, a new dialect of
Popish conformity; and ibid.
that our 39. Articles are patient, yea ambitious in some sense to seem
Catholic; that is (in their sense) Popish. So that it may with good
probability be collected, that the devil spitteth at Presbytery, by so many
late spread, though not late hatched heresies, with the more spite and rage,
out of the revenge of the quarrel of Prelacie, the putting down whereof, in
respect of their forementioned evil dealings, he cannot but take for a great
prejudice and impediment to the advancement of his Kingdom; by which return
of the objection, we desire not to put any reproach upon such as were not
partakers with the evil deeds of their pragmaticall brethren, for to them we
reserve place for an apologeticall plea, so far as their learning, piety,
pains-taking, moderation and humility (wherein some of them are eminent) may be
capable thereof.

And now (dear Brethren) we have thus joined with you in public profession,
and our engagement to the Covenant and Government of the Church, and our
resolution according to our calling and places, to stand for defense and
promotion of both, and in opposition to all error, etc. contrary to them. We
doubt not but you will join with us in uncessant solicitations at the throne
of grace, that God will be pleased to make way for fincere and affectionate
entertainment of both in the hearts of the people to whom they are tendered,
and that by his blessing thereupon they may attain those happy end^ (for which
they were proposed) and have been approved by the two Honorable Houses of
Parliament, the venerable Assembly of Divines at West^^inster, the reverend
Commissioners of Scotland, and many faithful and worthy Ministers, and
conscientious Christians, both in City and Country. And we wish we could say
so much, and of so many in both the Universities of this Kingdom.

And for the Apologeticall supplement we have made against the reproach of our
present Reformation, we hope you and others of our godly and learned brethren,
will accept of as an assay, to do the truth and them, as well as our selves,
both a necessary and acceptable service. To which we will make no further
addition, then the subscription of our names.

John Ley, for the present Pre^cher at As^bi^ry Thomas Langley, Minister a^
Middle which Henry Masy, Pastor of Ofwald's in Chester John Glendole, Pastor of
Peter's in Chester Thomas Upton, Pastor of Trinity in Chester William Pearetree,
Pastor of Mary's in Chester Benjamin Ball, Pastor of John's in Chester Hugh
Buroughs, Pastor of Christleton John Marigold, Pastor of Waverton Josias
Clark, Pastor of Tattenhall Kichard Chapman, Pastor of Thornton in the Moors
George Cottingham, Pastor of Plemstall James Hutchinson Pastor of Dodlestone
Randall Guest, Pastor of Poulford William Anderton, Pastor de Coppenball Josua
Golborne, Pastor of Eccleston Randall Adams, Minister of Wallesey William
Glegge, Minister of Haswall Bryan Lascells, Minister of Thurstaston Ralph
Poole, Minister of Berington Samuel Marsden, Minister of Neston Rob. Frecleron,
Minister of Backford Richard Hopwood, Minister of Burton William Hewetson,
Minister of Sho^wick Henry Hatton, Minister of Overchurch John Murcot, Minister
of Westkirby Daniel Sunderland, Pastor of Bunbury Nathaniel Lancaster, Pastor
of Tarperly Sabbath Clarke, Pastor of Tarvin John Boyer Pastor of Barrow Samuel
Bowden, Pastor of Frodesham George Mainwaring, Pastor of Malpas William
Holland, Pastor of Malpas John Ford, Pastor of Over John Roberts, Pastor of
Aldford William Bridges, Pastor de Farndon Samuel Catherall, Pastor of Hanley
James Marbarry, Pastor of Davenham Richard Fowler, Pastor of Bartomliy Edward
Burghall, Pastor of Acton John Pemberton, Pastor of Congleton Joseph Cope,
Pastor of Sambach Randall Silletoe, Pastor of Lowton Tho. Jemson, Pastor of
Presbury James Watmough, Pastor of Bowden Ralph Hall, Pastor of Knotsford
Ephraim Elcock, Pastor of Runckorne John Hulme, Minister at Great Budworth
Robert Stringer, Minister at Macclesfield Nicolas Stevenson, Minister at
Alderlcy Nehemia Northington, Minister at Chelford Nehemia Pot, Minister of
Wincle Richard Jackson, Minister at Namptwich Da. Ker, Minister at Audsin
Humphry Whittingham, Pastor at Wistaston Thomas Swan, Pastor of Baddiley Henry
Griffith, Minister at Wrenbury Edward Mercer, Minister at Burldam-chappell
Henry Newcome, Minister at Goosetree.


The Contents of the Attestation aforesaid.
I. The first Part, showing how far the Ministers of CHESHIRE consent with
their Brethren of the Province of LONDON; divided into 2. Sections.
SECT. I. I. CAutions concerning the charge of heresy, and use of the word
Heretic; the difficulty of defining the one, and of discovery of the other.
Page. 2, 3. II. The concurrence of the Ministers of Cheshire with their
Brethren of the Province of London, and of other Counties, in the confession of
Faith, exhibited by way of humble advice to the High Court of Parliament, by
the Assembly of Divines at Westminster. p. 4. III. And in the Presbyteriall
Government, misrepresented to the people, and the evil effects of that
misrepresentation, with the benefit of that Government, and blessing by it,
where it is set up and established in a graduall subordination of
Congregationall, Classical, and Provincial Assemblies. ibid. IV. And in the
Solemn Leagn and Covenant, and sad considerations upon sleighting the Covenant,
without all regard of conscionable, either taking or keeping thereof. p. 5. V.
And against the Toleration of errors, heresies, and blasphemies, and the evil
thereof, yet not all alike intolerable. ibid. VI. Some erros more disputable,
and more probable then others, as appearing in a Scripture expression; yet not
to be entertained with such favorable construction, as the doubtful passage
of Scripture should be, and the reasons why so. ibid. VII. Why Luther wished
his own books burnt, yet when they were so, he burnt the Popes Law, and that
Decree, by which they were sentenced to the fire. ibid. VIII. The high praise
of his Commentary upon the Galatians, and prelation of it before many works of
the Fathers. p. 6. IX. A blasphemous comparison of the Scripture. ibid.

SECT. II. I. DIstinction and difference to be made betwixt error, and error,
both in judgment, and in practice. p. 7. II. The moral or pious conversation
of men, should be no protection to their erroneous opinions. The lives of
Heretics, Turks, and of some Epidures (in opinion) commendable. ibid. III.
Errors inconfestent with Salvation, not to be tolerated. p. 8. IV. How they are
to be opposed by Ministers, and how far by Magistrates. Some errors poo absurd
to be dealt withal by Argument. ibid. V. The Zeal of the Heathen, against such
as publish impious opinions, and of Christians against the like. p. 9. VI. The
book called the Bloody Tenet, a bloody book, dictated by Satan, with a thirst
after the blood of the souls of men. p. 9. VII. August. retracted his opinion
touching the Toleration of heretics. p. 10. VIII. The Ordinance of Parliament,
May 2. 1648. for punishment of blasphemies. p. 10, 11, and 12. IX. Diverse of
the Independent way, learned, The Author of the Bloody Tenet, printed 1644.
See p. 9. of this Attesta
godly and charitable to their godly Brethren, though Presbyterians. Yet
Independency an error, and as some enlarge the Tenet, the Nurse, if not the
Mother of many dangerous deviations, both from truth and piety. p. 13. X. The
Tyranny of Papists over the consciences and lives of men to be abhorred. With
what moderation erring Christians are to be dealt with, yet without prejudice
to needful severity, in cases of importance, p. 13.

II. Part, containing the reasons why the Ministers of Cheshire, thus join with
their Brethren in the Province of London, in judgment, and in the public
Profession thereof. Divided into 5 Sections.
SECT. I. I. AN advantage to be in society with good men, yet that Society must
be grounded upon reason. p. 14. II. The first reason of this Attestation, taken
from the just zeal, Christians, especially Ministers, ought to bear to the
glory of God. p. 14. III. The error of Themistius holding and informing the
Emperor Valens, That variety of Religions tended to the glory of God. 300.
Differences of opinions, among Philosophers. ibid. IV. The Devil upon
deferting of Idol Temples, and erecting of the Christian-Religion, raised up
heretics among the Christians to undermine Christianity. p. 15. V. The
Marcionites and Manichees, going against the Law lose all interest in the
Gospel, the witless and wilful opposition of the Law, by the heretics called
Antitactae; the impiety of the book of Man's Mortality. ibid. VI. The zeal of
Nehemiah, Hezekiah, Moses, and David, worthy imitationin. p. 16, 17.

SECT. II. THe second reason of this Attestation, taken from the Duty of the
Minister in 1. Relation to their charge of Souls, endangered by heresy, as by
a Cancer, and Gangrene; the difference betwixt them, according to Galen. p. 17,
and 18. 2. Heresy deadly, as lime mingled with milk: an heretic a man of
blood. p. 18. 3. The third reason taken from the consideration of the safety
and honor of the Kingdom; which are much opposed and impeached by errors,
heresies. p. 18, and 19. 4. The safety of civil societies endangered by want
of justice, and by pernicious doctrins. 5. The dishonor of England, by
abundance of Sects, aggravated by comparison of our present time, and state;
with the precedent of England, with other Kingdoms. p. 19. 6. The best Remedy
and Apology in respect of both, is publicly to profess against them; the
Parliament has done it thrice. 1. By their first Declaration. 2. By the
Ordinance for a public fast for the spreading of heresy, March the 10. And 3.
by their Ordinance, May 2. for punishing blasphemy's, heresies, etc. p. 19. and
20.

SECT. III. A Fourth reason for public profession against heresies, is taken
from 1. The sedulity, subtilty, and pride of heretics, as of Eunomius. p. 22.
2. Taken from the levity, and inclination of the common people to vagrant
speculations, who are willing to be deceived, wilful when they are deceived.
p. 23. 3. The cause of men's pertinacy in evil opinions: heresy and spiritual
frenzy, hardly cured. p. 23. and 24. 4. A sixth reason, taken from the Zeal of
the ancient Fathers, against heresies; as of the Council of Nice, Polycarpe,
Hierom, and others; though Hierom were sometimes too sharp against some, for
their opinions on this side heresy. p. 25. 5. A seventh reason, from the like
Zealous opposition of heresy by the reformed Churches; as by the Synod at
Dort, and other godly Divines, consenting with it against the Arminians. p. 25.
6. The Zeal of King James against Conrad Vostius: The style of the Kings of
England, DEFENDER OF THE FAITH, when first given them, by whom, and for what.
p. 26. 7. The Eighth reason taken from the care the Heathens had of their own
erroneous Religions, and from their Religious observation of an oath. p. 26. 8.
Regulus an heroicke Roman, willingly dyed, that he might not be wilfully
forsworn. p. 27. 9. How much confidence moral heathens have reposed in an
oath, and what benefit they both expected and enjoyed, by conscionable keeping
of an oath. p. 27.

SECT. IV. 1. THe Ninth reason from the danger both of sin and punishment, by
connivence and silence at the wickedness of others. p. 28. 2. For that
Christians have been passive partakers in the punishment of heathens. p. 29. 3.
Politic neutrality detested by ingenuous moralists. ib. 4. The 10. reason
taken from the good acceptance of the testimony to the Truth, against errors
etc. showed by our reverend and godly Brethren of Scotland; who plead it to the
estates of their Parliament, for preservation of Peace, and prevention of War
betwixt the Kingdoms. p. 29, 30. 5. Differences betwixt Presbytenian, and
Independent, not to be decided by a War. p. 30.

SECT. V. I. THe breach of Covenant politickly pretended for the raising of a
new War, destructive to the Covenant, both in the doctrinall and practical
parts of it. p. 31, 32. II. We shall gratify our greatest enemies, and act
their most dangerous designs against our selves, if we take up a War betwixt
Presbyterian and Independent. p. 33. III. Herein there is great reason the
Independents should be of the same mind with their Presbyterian Brethren, and
should be as willing as they, to maintain mutual peace, notwithstanding
difference of opinions betwixt them. ibid. IV. The Papists subtilty in setting
dissentions among the Protestant party. The instructions given to Seminary
Priests to that purpose, by Cardinal Allen. p. 34. V. No private dissentions
should withhold us from holding together for the defense of the public. ibid.

A III. Part of the Attestation, containing an Apology for Publication of these
Errors, and for the Reformation in hand against the scandal of them; and of
other impious and absurd aberrations from Religion and reason charged upon it.
SECT. I. I. THe difference of errors such, that though some of them need the
addition of an Antidote when they are published, others do not. p. 35, 36. II.
Some errors both in Philosophy and Divinity, thought new, which have been
devised and divulged of old. p. 36. III. Reformation carried on too violently
from one extreme to another. p. 37. IV. Errors and heresies have abounded the
more, by a kind of interregnum betwixt pulling down the Prelaticall, and
setting up the Presbyteriall Government. ibid. V. The Devil most bestirreth
himself in broaching and spreading Errors and Heresies, when any great work of
Reformation is set on foot. ibid. VI. Four remarkable tines observable for
evidence thereof. ibid.

SECT. II. I. THe first when Christianity was to be set up, and Judaism, and
Paganism to be preached down. p. 37. II. Many impious impure and absurd
Heresies set up, and set out by Satan, to reproach the first Reformation. p.
38. III. As that of Simon Magus, Nicolas the Deacon of Antioch, though of him
there be opposite opinions of learned men, some accusing him of fleshly
wantonness, some excusing him, and charging all the crime upon his followers,
called Nicolaitans. ibid. IV. The abominable impiety, and impurity of the
Gnostics. p. 39. A medicine how made of their poison. ibid. V. The Adamites
ridiculous Religion. ibid. VI. Some worshipped the Serpent, that deceived Eve,
and highly approved of Cain, Core, the Sodomites and Judas. p. 40. VII. The
sinful absurdity of the Carpocratian heresy. ibid. VIII. The Pepusians who
admitted women to all ecclesiastical Ministeries. ibid.

SECT. III. I. THe second remarkable Reformation from Popery to Protestancy
invested with many gross, and wicked errors. p. 41. II. What they were. p. 40,
41. III. The wicked opinions and practices of the Anabaptists and Libertines in
Germany. p. 42, 43. IV. The witless, and graceless Heresies of the
Libertines. p. 44, 45. V. Among which some are such, as our late News-mongers
report to the reproach of the present Reformation.

SECT. IV. I. THe third considerable time of Reformation, was in Q. Eliz.
Reign, when godly Divines endeavored a further conformity with other reformed
churches in Discipline and ceremony, more different from the manner of the
Church of Rome. p. 46. 2. Then did Martine Marprelate, the Brownists, and
Hacket, occasion many reproaches against the Reformation. p. 47. III.
Especially Hacket, whose wild, wicked and blasphemous conceits and sayings,
are reported out of Dr. Saravia, and Cambden. p. 47, 48. IV. Besides these
domestical disturbers and disgracers of the desired Reformation, there were
strange and wicked Tenets brought out of Holland, the author whereof was Henry
Nicolai of Leyden, the father of the family of Love; Of their books and tenets,
what they were. p. 49, 50.

SECT. V. I. THe fourth state or time of Reformation is that of the present
Parliament, which is opposed, and reproached with variety of errors, heresies,
etc. as the former were. II. Which yet should not be pleaded, to prejudice the
Reformation in hand; since there be many and weighty reasons to acquit it from
just cause of scandal. p. 50, 51, 52. III. The comparison of the paucity of
Sects (in the Bishops time) and multiplicity of them (since their deposition)
observed by Hon. Reggus. p. 19. Answered. p. 52, 53.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page I: after the words Errors, etc. l: 12: add these words in a new line: I
part showing how far the ministers of Cheshire consent with their Brethren of
the Province of London divided into 2 Sections: p: 2: l: 34: dele, the: p: l:
7: for eminentr: imminent: p: 8: l: 3: for life's r: lives: ib: l: 28: for is:
r: to be. ibid: l: 45: after but, add for: p: 10: l: 25: after places, add or:
p: 13: in marg. add, lit: 5: l: 2: for quod r: quo: p: 14: for that, r: it, and
then add these words in a new line, 2. Part, containing the reasons why the
Ministers of Ch^shire, thus join with their Brethren of the Province of London,
in their judgment, and the public profession thereof: divided in 5 Sections:
p: 15: l: 27: for, to make, r: that the doctrine of the 3. coequall persons is:
ibid: l: 28, after Rome add for. p. 16. l. 18, dele, them. p. 17. l: 16. for
wishes, r: wished: p. 18. in marg: ad lit. g. l. 5: for vi r: ut, p. 18, l.
20, after him, add self, ibid. l. 33. dele thirdly. p. 20, l. 3, for winds r.
weeds, p. 22. l, 5. dele fourthly, p. 23. l. 1. dele fifthly. p, 26, l. 1, in
marg. after that, add title. p, 30. l. 26, for then, r. and, p. 34, in marg. l.
2, after Nesterium r. damnas, p 37, l. 8, after fourthly add though, ibid l.
21, for fifthly r. yet, p. 40, l. 32, after make, add women, p. 41, l. 18. after
diverse, add ministers, ibid. l. 34. for mun^^, r. Men, p. 42, l. 13. after
persuaded, add and, and dele that he was, ibid. l. 25, after him, add he, ibid.
l. 26, after heads, dele he, p. 43. l. 10, after Acts 26.11. add and, ibid. l.
16, after story, add and, P. 51, l. 4, dele only, p. 5^, l. 18. for invested,
r. infested, p. 53, l. 30, for Church, r. Churches.


