AN APOLOGY, Or, Defense of the Divine Art of Natural Astrology.

Being an answer to a Sermon preached in Cambridge, July 25, 1652.

Wherein all the chief Objections against Astrology are fully answered, and the
validity of the Art (in its purity) held forth and maintained, against Picus,
Chambers, Geere, Vicars, Gattaker, Holmes, and others.

Written by the Learned and Ingenious Mathematician, Mr. GEORGE ATWEL, late
Professor of the Ma^hematicks in the University of Cambridg; and now published
by a Friend, for the public benefit of his native Countrymen of England.
Whose Preface is hereunto annexed.

Card. Seg. 1. Aph. 24. ^ulti negligunt and contemnunt Astrologiam, qui
contradicit, ambitiosus est, qui maledicit, fatuus.

London, Printed for Samuel Speed, at the sign of the Printing-press in Paul's
Churchyard. Anno 1660.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
I Here present thee with a modest and learned Defense of Astrology, written by
Mr. George Atwel late Professor of the Mathematics in the University of
Cambridge^ which being communicated unto me by the Noble Author, and left at
my dispose, I thought meet (upon serious consideration) to make thee partaker
thereof; considering also with my self, that at this time, the noble Science of
Astrology has many Adversaries, the most whereof (I dare maintein) are
altogether ignorant in the Art, and in the very principles thereof, who never
observed, or took any notice of the Heavenly Influences, and whether these men
be competent Judges to determine matters of such great weight and importance
(wherein they have as little judgment as honesty) let all indifferent men judge;
but I do not much admire hereat, when I see it apparent in all other Arts and
Professions. Scientia non habet inimicum nisi ignorantem. How rashly do the
ignorant and common sort tax us for maintaining the truth and verity of the
Copernican Systeme of the World: Nay! how do the generality of men unjustly
asperse and revile us for that rare discovery of the truth now so clearly
proved by undeniable Demonstrations Geometrical. In like manner I could
instance in the tenet of Antipodes, and show how Lactantius, St. Austin, and
others, were of the contrary opinion, but I need not trouble my self, or the
Reader to muster us Examples of men's ^^lly in this kind, for it is clear enough,
that as there is no Art, or Invention whatsoever, (though never so commodious
in a Commonwealth) but may have its Adversaries and opponents; even so it is
with Astrology, (which some of the Learned style Theologia naturalis) she
cannot go shot-free, or escape the malevolent rays of the malecontented, and
yet is she not the Mistress of Arts? yea, the handmaid to Divinity? Universa
enim vita nostra abunde testatur, Astrologiam sum utitem esse, quippe ad
praecavendum quae obfutura, assequendum quae profutura sunt, maximam vim
ob^ine^, ut quae doceat praecognoscere mutationes, quae in his inferioribus
eventurae sunt, item quae in corporibus nostris secundum sanitatem,
aegritudinem, ac mores eveniunt: ac tandem in its contingunt, quibus ut
alimentis ad vitam tuendam, and medicamentis ad sanitatem procurandam, utimur.
Add^ quod Astrologia in piis orationem and pietatis studium excitet:
quandoquidem mala, quae ab astris significantur, (...) edicta praetoria, sed
Vitari and (...) precatione and studio possunt. Orig. 399. de effectibus. I
well know some there are that deny that the Stars have any influential
operation on these elementary and sublunary things, but these are a sort of men
(though perhaps otherwise learned enough) that we may justly think are solely
biased to their own perverse and wilful opinions, who doubtless, deserve
reproof, for does not the Word of God teach us the contrary? and are not the
Stars there in many places called the signs of Heaven. Genesis 1. 14. Sunto
luminaria in firmamento Coeli, etc. And God said, Let there be lights in the
Firmament of Heaven, to divide the Day from the Night: and let them be for
Signs, and for seasons, for days and years. Upon which words, Luther says.
Simpliciter Lunam cum Sole and Stellis in firmamento Coeli, Moses dicit
positas, ut ^ssent signa futurorum eventuum, sicut experientia de eclipsibus,
magnis conjunctionibus, and aliis quibusdam meteoris, docet. That is, Moses
plainly says, that the Moon with the Sun and Stars, were placed in the
firmament of Heaven, that they (...) be for signs of future events, as
experience teaches us in Eclipses, great Conjunctions, Meteors, and the like.
Again, in Deuteronomy. 33. 14. you shall find that the influence of the Heavens upon
all vegetables is attributed to the Sun and Moon, where the Prohet blesses the
Lord for the precious hings of Heaven, for the dew, and ver. 14. or the
precious things put forth by the un, and for the precious things put forth y
the Moon. E coelis pugnarunt, sydera ipsa suis agerribus pugnaverunt contra
Siseram. ^udg. 5. 20. They fought from heaven, the ^tars in their courses
fought against Sisera. And the Prophet Jeremy adds further, that we should not
be dismayed at the signs of heaven Upon which words the divine Melancthon in his
praeface to Job. Schonerus, speaks thus. Non ^it Jeremias, nihil esse signa
coeli, imo cum nominat signa portendi aliquid affirmat. Jeremy says, not that
the signs of heaven are nothing, but when he calls them signs, he affirms
something to be portended. So likewise the holy man, Job 38. 31, 32, 33. Can
thou bind the sweet influence of Ple^^^es? Or loose the bands of Orion? Can
thou bring forth Mazzareth in his season? Or can thou guide Arcturus with his
sons? Know thou the ordinances of Heaven, or the Dominions thereof on the
Earth? Who is it now that dare deny the powerful operation and influence of
the Stars when God by his messenger, avers it, and call them the host, and
ordinance of Heaven, and tells us of their dominion in the earth. And although
many other place^ of holy writ might be quoted in defense o^ this noble
Science, yet for brevity fake these may suffice, as being plain and evident
demonstrations of the great power and influence of the Celestial bodies. And
to these we may add the testimonies of many learned Divines and Scholars, but
the day would fail me to enumerate them all. Corpor^ coelestia agunt in haec
inferior a tribus m^dis, videl^ l^mine, influentia and motu; agunt no^ (...),
sed (...): ^o^ (...), sed (...). It is well worthy of our notice, and not to be
doubted by any, but that the celestial bodies are (under God) the universal
causes of all Mundane alterations* having their singular influences upon the
E^^ments* Meteors, Metels, Stones, Vegitables, and Animals. But what need I
spend time to ^indicate the truth of this noble Science? For does not all
creatures participate of the heavenly influences? Quis e^im non videt ^olem and
Lunam ^^terare fruges and fruct us* Quis nescit vicissitudines temporu^ ^b
^^tri^ ^endere? And the learned Alstedius the 17 Book 1 cap. 5 Reg. observes,
that, Nihi^ ^agni in hoc mund^ evenit, quod non ha^e^^ ^estimonium in coelo.
Est enim coelum velut ^uidam liber manu D^i scriptus, in quo tan^uam liter as
legibiles stellas coeliposuit. Cer^ainly were it an art either Diabolical, or
of ^o certainty, it would never have gai^'d the favor and approbation of the
learned in all ages, but we find that even of late times many learned men of
singular skill in Astronomy and the Mathematics, have traveled very far
therein, and given exceeding commendation thereof as is manifest by the learned
Epistles of Melanct hon to Schoner and Grynaeus, by the testimony of Magin^^,
Stof^er, Leovitius, Junctine the Divine, Argol, Virdungus, Origan, Madronus,
Alstede, Eichstadius our Countryman Dr. Dee, and others.

But let our Adversaries both speak and write what they please against the Art,
and the Professors thereof, for my own part, I never knew any Astrologer that
maintained any fatality in the stars, that this, or tha^ thing must come to
pass, as they unjustly charge against us. Astra inclinant v^luntatem, in n^llo
tamen necessitant. Accidit tame^ frequenter Astrolog^s vera prognosticare d^
m^ribus hominum, propter pronitatem ^or^^ ad sequendum appetitum sensitivam.
The stars incline the will (says Scotus) yet in n^ wise necessitate it,
notwithstanding it often happens that Astrologers fore-tel truth^ concerning
the manners of men, by reason of their proneness to follow their sensitiv^
appetite. And though some pretending t^ the Art have abused it, only to please
thos^ that have employed them, upon hopes to have the more liberal reward, yet
what is that to us, or against pure Astrology? T^ metsi ^^te^ tantus hujus
doctrinae sit abusus, n^^ tamen ideo rejiciendus est usus, sed potius a^ illo
pessimo abusu distinguendus. Although the abuse of this doctrine is so great,
yet the use thereof is not to be rejected, but rather to be separated from that
foul abuse* Let us hear what that famous Mathemetician and Astrologer Mr. D.
Origanus says* against some in his time. Merit^ reprehen^en^i sunt illi
deceptores* juventutis, qui A^ologica turpis lucr^ caussa, and ut ipsi saltem
^cepta eo commodius repetant, and sibi fami^ria, faciant, in trivio p^eris vel
adolescen^us prop^nunt, quibus adminicula desunt, ^ dum judicium ullum est, a^
rim^ndas and ^udican^as caussas and rations variarum in ^tura action^m; quod
Simiae caput funda^nta ipsa ^equaquam intelligens p^rum at^ndit.

But the honest, sober and learned Astro^ger (that makes reason his guide, and
^oks only upon the natural and influen^al operation of the Planets and Stars)
^orns and utterly abominates these actions, ^e it is that diligently weighs and
considers ^he natural operation and secret influence ^f the Stars and Planets,
whose dispositions and virtue depend upon the heavenly mo^ions, and their
various configurations at ^he earth. We see (indeed) that some Astro^ogers have
a greater in sight and profounder knowledge therein then others, and some ^here
are that seldom fail in their praedictions, and these are men that are well
ex^erienced, and not rash and over*hasty i^ giving judgment, whilst others
again^ ^oo apt upon every occasion (when t^ is no remarkable position of
heaven) venture their credit and repute to the sc^dal and discredit of the Art
they prof^ In Astrologo requiritur naturatis, inclin^ ad divinandum, says
Or^gan, fol. 400. A really (as my noble friend Mr. John G^bury observes) it is
not for every man hope to be an Astrologer, for heav^ clubs to the act of his
Creation in an espcial manner! an Artist (as a Poet) is bo^ and not made.

As touching the first inventions of t^ art, I will not here take upon me to
d^pute, though I verily believe 'twas inve^ted and practiced long before the
Flood, ^ the old World, but however there may b^ brought authorities of two or
three thousand years antiquity of most learned a^ godly men, who have by their
knowledge in this Art, performed many excelle^ achievements, and contrariwise
that ha^ eschewed many eminent dangers.

Julius Caesar (who was a learned Astronomer, and spent many hours in the
company of Sosigenes, to correct the motion of (...) Sun and Solar-year) was
fore-warned ^he day of his death, and there upon was ^ised by Spurina, that he
should (in an ^cial manner beware of the Ides of ^rch, but when the day came
(seeing Spu^ as he was going to the Senat-house) said unto him; Spurina! the
Ides are ^ come, who answered, They are come, (...) not past, but immediately
he was there ^^in, according to his prediction.

Aechilus the Phisosopher knowing by (...) Nativity that he should perish with
a ^den stroke, and the time of his predi^on approaching, he went abroad, and
sub ^ extra Civitatem degebat, the better to ^ape the danger, but as he was
walking (...) the field, an Eagle suddenly let fall a ^ortoise, or Shel-crab,
upon his naked ^d, whereby he suddenly perished.

Vitellius deriding the Astrologers of his ^e for their predicting he should be
Em^our (thinking with himself that he ^uld never obtein such honor) but ^en he
had obtein'd it, as they foretold, (...) notwithstanding banished all the
Astrologers out of Rome, and that by a ^ day they should depart Italy,
whereupon they foreseeing (by the Figure of his N^tivity) his end approaching,
foretold the time thereof addiem, as it exactly come ^ pass.

Sulla, a Mathematician foretold the death of Caligula, as it punctually
hap^ned.

Picus Mirandulanus, when he was for^ told by Bellantius; of his death that
shou^ happen in the 33 year of his age, was ^ moved with wrath, that he wrote a
Boo^ against Astrologers, but notwithstandin^ he co^ld not evade the immutable
decr^ of the heavenly Book, for he died the sam^ year.

Petrus Leonius the Physician, when ^ Astrologer foretold him of the time ^
should perish by water, he wholly avoid^ to come near the Sea, and other Rive^
nevertheless (about the time predicted) ^ was found drowned in a Well not ^
from Florence, in a Village, called Caregio.

Paulus Tertius, or Paul the Third, a skilful Astrologer (cui Pontificatus
fuerat prae* dictus a Paride Ceresari^ Mantuano) wrote to Peter Aloysius his
son, that in the year 1547 he should beware of the 7 day of September (the
Father could foresee the danger, but his son could not avoid it) for under
pretense of discourse, Landus, Angos^iola, and Scotus, slew him the same day in
his own Castle.

Zonarus reports that an Artist hearing that Julian was engaged with his army
to fight his enemy, spoke these words. Hodie Julius in Persia occiditur. To day
is Julian slain in Persia: and this doubtless he foresaw by the Figure of his
Nativity.

I could here heap up infinite Examples of this kind, but I have neither time
no^ room to insert them: besides our learned Author having taken the pains,
to write the whole subsequent discourse pu^posely, posely, in vindication of
the ART, to satisfy the ingenious, and to un-deceiv^ all such as doubt any way
of the unlawfulness thereof, I shall therefore not detein you any longer, but
commend the Book it self to your serious consideration.

Vale. North-Luffenham in Rutland July 18, 1659. VINCENT WING.

QUESTIONS Concerning ASTROLOGY, Wheter lawful or un-lawful.
IF Astrology be unlawful, whether is it in erecting the figure, or in
judgment? If in erecting the figure, what is there in it, but plain Astronomy?
and what is it but a map of the heavens at some particular time? for though
Cities* Towns, nor Houses on earth change their places, yet the Stars do, at
least in respect of us. And is not our Anography as lawful as Geography. *For
if there be nothing in it more then Astronomy, why is it not as lawful as any
other of the seven liberal Arts.

II. If judgment be unlawful, I ask whether if upon mine own, and many others
observations, we finding for the most part, we have hot weather in the
Dog-dayes, is it not lawful for me to judge, it will be so this or the next
year, though God can alter it as he please? And so if I see the Moon full
South, may I not judge it full Sea at such a place, because God can alter it? We
tie not God, but always Deo volente is understood, neither in humane actions
do we tie the will of man: yet we say the Stars do so strongly incline that
they guide the will very often.

Now then if both parts, that is all the parts, both erecting and judgment are
lawful, then the whole Astrology is lawful, neither may the whole be condemned
for a part of a part, if any such be found unlawful, we must not blame Moses
for having skill in Astrology, because the Chaldeans and Egyptians joined
enchantments with it, for which they are blamed in diverse places of the
Prophets, which indeed is the ignorance, not the learning, of the Egyptians,
and which Moses withstood, Exodus 2. 11. Nor yet if Horary questions should
prove unlawful, blame neither Ptolomy nor Sir Christopher Heyden, who, though
they never used them, yet wrote not against them, and mutato nomine Chambers,
Sir Christopher take you to task, and then de te fabula narratur, rumpuntur
ilia Codro. But I would fain see his Book answered.

See more in the end of the Book.
But for further confirmation, let us examine the lawfulness of judgment, of
such things wherein we have a set time, by these Questions following, and
afterward the Horary.

1 Whether the Stars are not made for signs, Genesis 1. 14. Jer. 10. 2. Mat. 24.
V. 39. 2 If for signs, and so all men call them must they not foretell
something, otherwise it is contrary to their names, their nature, and Gods
Master Gaul, of great Staugton in Huntingtonshire.
purpose in making them, neither are they for signs of seasons, as some would
have, but for signs and seasons. If they do not foretell something, what need
men be afraid of them, or be forewarned from fear of them, Jer. 10. 2. But I
suppose this bidding them not to be afraid both there and in Psalm. 91. and
Matthew. 24. and sundry other places, is not to tell them such events shall not
come, but rather that they shall come, as in Math. 24. 2. and therefore to
forewarn them against these times to make their peace with God, and to shroud
themselves under the covert of his wings, Psalm. 91. 1. And then though ^ plague
shall come* it shall not as he says, come near their dwelling. Not but that a
Godly man's house may be infected with the plague, and a daughter of Abraham
possessed with a Devil as well as a wicked person; But that their shall no
affliction come to them, but such as shall work together for the best to them,
Romans 8. For in common calamities the godly must share with the wicked: Jeremy
must go unto captivity with others, and to tell them such plagues shall not
come, is but to sow pillows under their armholes.

3 If they do foretell, is it not a mere accusing of God of idleness, if he
does not withal both allow land give to some knowledge and skill to understand
their significations, otherwise the trumpet will give but an uncertain sound,
and who will prepare himself to the battle?

4 Is there any other way to understand their meaning besides Astrology.

5 If God made the Stars, all but the Sun only for lights for the night, why
might not the Moon have served for all, as well as the Sun for the day, by
placing it in a continual course opposite to the Sun, for so it would have been
full Moon, and then all the fixed Stars, and five lesser Planets, might well
have been spared. Ye, is there any other use of them? I think it no less then
blasphemy, to accuse God of making them in vain.

6 What is the influence of the Pleiades, and of Orion, Job 18.

7 And what is that Lunacy, Math. 17. 14.

8 And does not the Prophet Esa. 3. V. 2. threaten it as a plague, that the
Astrologer shall be taken away. Our English has it, the Prudent; but the
Hebrew, the Astrologer.

9 What was that learning of the Egyptians that Moses was so well skilled in?
Acts 7. not their enchantments, for them he withstood, Exe. 2. 11.

10 What was that cup wherein Joseph divined and prophesied?

11 Whether is it lawful in it self to erect a figure?

12 Whether experience does not show many things in Astrology, even to ignorant
people: As every Physicia and each Midwife can tell us, that the Child born in
the new or full moon is either short lived, or never healthful: and is this
unlawful to think it, or judge it to be so? and are the dumb creatures the Bees
able to foretell the weather, and the Mouse when an house will fall, and must
man that studies for it tell nothing, the Swan celebrates her own funerals, and
me thinks it should be possible for a man that studies for it, in time to
atteine as much wit as a Goose?

Suppose Bishop Usher in his Macedonian year, tells us that the 24th. of his
first Month Dius, which is about our 17th. of October, there will be magna
aeris turbatio, great trouble of the air, because then the Hyades rose at
Sunsetting, and though no reason can be given for them more then others, yet
it seems Adam knew their qualities well enough, he would never else have called
them the rainers of "(...) to rain, and is this unlawful, either in Adam or in
Bishop Usher. So also for the Winds, the 21 of his 6th. month Zanticus, which
is about our 14 of March, he fore-tels the Oetrithiae begin to blow, when the
crown rises in the evening, and hold till the Aequinoctial, a strange thing to
tell, for they were Aetesae. And I think they that know the reasons of other
things in Astrology, will as little find fault with them as with these.

13 What is the reason that a child born at 7, 9, 10 or 11 months from the
Conception ordinarily lives, but a child at the eighth dies, lives not long,
or is always sickly?

14 If there be not something at least exceeding probable in Astrology, how is
it possible that knowing what accidents have befalne you, and at what age,
together with the year and day of your birth, or perhaps in an ordinary birth
by the Christning day, if it be not above a fortnight after, to know the true
hour and minute, and again, by knowing the true time of the birth, can it be
either impossible by reduction to find out either the same accidents, or others
that have befalne you, and at what time, and is it not the self-same labor, to
find what is to come as what is past, and which of these three is unlawful?

15 How came the Magi to know that the Star signified that?

16 Were the Magi any other then plain Astrologers?

17 How came they above all others to be so much respected, that God should
make a new Star on purposed to send so far for them?

18 If there be not something in Astrology, how came so many to know the times
of their deaths before hand, Julius Caesar, Vitellius, Caligula, Domitian,
Picus Mirandula, Galeatius Duke of Millaine, Peter Leonicis, Peter Aloisius,
Archbishop Pisan, Philip king of Macedon, Machabeus king of Scots, Cambisis,
Epamonandas, Amilcar, Daphadus the Sophister, Sigthimus king of Swesia,
Frederick the II, Ezelinus the Roman tyrant, cum multis aliis.

19 Does not that answer of our Savior, John 11. 19. seem to defend elections
of time? are there not 12 hours in a day, as if he should say, in one hour he
might walk safe among them, in another nor.

20 Quorsum haec

Os homini sublime dedit coelumque videre,
Jussit, and ex^ctos ad sydera tollere vultus.
A face upright God gave to man, the Stars that he might know,
All other creatures to the earth look only to below.
21 Would you have all these Phaenomena's, all these new Stars, Comets,
Eclipses, and Parhelii, that have been within these 80 years last past to
signify nothing? never were the like in so short a time since the creation,
Annus 1572, 77, 80, 85, 90, 93, 96. 1600, 602, 604, 607, 618. in every of these
years were either new Stars or Comets, as Doctor Boreman in his Nuntius
Propheticus, has reckoned them up: Besides the Parhelii or three Suns, that
were seen in Lancashire, Febr. 28, 1648. being the birth day of Charles the
first, though not in the same year. As also the Eclipse of the Sun, the birth
of Charles the second, besides the Stars then appearing in the day time, and
seen of diverse, his birth was May 29 Saturday 1630, and on Sunday following
king Charles went to Paul's to give thanks, and in the afternoon was a great
Eclipse of the Sun, which according to Maginus Ephemerides for the longitude of
Venice, he reckoned 10 digits, 35 m. but he says, England and Scotland should
find a total Eclipse, upon which one wrote these verses:

Rex dum Paulinas acc^ssit gratus ad Aras,
Immicuit medio lucida Stella polo:
Dic arcana mihi tractans Aenigmata coeli,
Haec oriens nobis quid sibi Stella velit,
Magnus in occiduo Princeps modo nascitur Orb
Crasque sub eclipsi regna orientis orunt.
Thus much in English.

When as king Charles to Paul's did go, to bless God for his Son:
The Stars appeared in firmament, and in the afternoon.
Toward six a clock, of that same day, the Sun eclipsed was*
I pray thee, tell me what it means, and what will come to pass:
Their Kingdom shall Eclipsed be, these Stars do speak it plain,
If I have any skill to judge, these signs are not in vain.
Now which of these will you find fault with? either you must deny there were
such apparitions, but you may as well deny there is any Sun at all, or will you
accuse God for making them, then I confess you silence me indeed. Or will you
deny they signify no such thing that the event showed. Or will you deny the
iugdment lawful? then either show some other way whereby Gods meaning may be
known, or else for shame never open your mouth more against Astrology, but
rather confess your fault, and give glory to God with Acham, for you have
robbed him of his chief end in creating them, in denying them to be signs, or
that no man knows their meaning. I could name a hundred more the like events
if time would permit.

22 And who shall tell us the signification of all these but the Astrologer?
let the Minister interpret the word of God, but the Astrologer his works,
especially of the Stars, no question but God would have both interpreted, and
ne suitor, etc. These Phaenomena's are Gods Ambassadors to a land, and that land
is in an ill case that has never a one that knows their language: No marvel
then, though Esaias count it as a plague to have the Astrologer taken away. And I
fear if such Ministers as speak against Astrology should change places with
Astrologers, they would prove more unable to interpret these, then the
Astrologers the word.

23 Is it likely that God, that was so careful in time of the Prophets to
forewarn his people and to comfort them always in their miseries, to send them
still one Prophet, or other, to tell them of their freedom, and has he left
us now no means in the time of the Gospel? has he no care of his Church now,
has he forgot to be gracious? God forbid.

Now if this or any other of these be granted, then Astrology in general cannot
be condemned, but rather be commended, and is it not an heinous sin in any,
especially in Ministers that will uphold Gods truth with a lie, and so call
evil good, and good evil.

But you will object some go too far in it, I answer, prove who they are, and
blame them that do it, and not the Art it self. Blame not Moses, because the
Egyptians joined enchantments with it. But you will object that Horary
Questions are unlawful, because you say, there can be no reason given that the
propounding a question at such or such a time, should produce a true answer. I
answer, though no reason could be given, yet finding by continual experience
that they do produce true answers, we cannot condemn them. And you may as well
condemn laying Iron over Beer to keep it from sowring as this: for no reason
can be given either why thunder should sour it, or the Iron preserve it.

But besides experience, we can give you reason sufficient, if you are able to
understand reason. You know that though the will of man be free to propound his
question when he will, yet as I said before, Deo volente, God first willing, is
always understood. And you know also* that not a hair can fall from his head,
nor yet a word from his mouth, without his providence, both for quid and
quando* what, and when. And therefore as the Stars are his servants to effect
his pleasure, they do so incline the will and other concurrences withal,
whereof there be many, neither does the quaerent stand upon such precise
election of time, but only when he can conveniently meet with the Astrologers,
they so incline him to propound the question at such a time as that the Heavens
shall be in such a position as to give a true answer to the question demanded.
And this is strongly backed by that which Astrologers observe daily, but none
other can, that a man by reason of that inclination can, or at least scarce
ever does move a question at any time with earnest desire of satisfaction, but
the Ascendent thereof will be either the same sign or at least one of the same
Triplicity with the sign of the Ascendant of the Radix of his nativity. If
tendanda gratta* then it falls between two signs or very near. See this
thoroughly proved in Geo. Trapezuntius his Comment. on Ptolomies second
Aphorism.

Besides all this, I think our game is as fair as such Divines as speak
against it, or as they can produce against it; we can produce as learned,
judicious, painful, holy men for it, as they can against it, to the full. Mr.
Gregory, Mr. Spark, Melancthon, Dr. Gell* Dr. Dee, Dr. Preston, Dr. Fulke,
Bishop Laud, Bishop Usher, cum multis aliis, and Garsaeus page 396.

Certain verses made upon another former king of this land, one of the Edwards
or Richards, I have forgotten which, for it is 60 years ago since I read them.

Principio Regis oritur transgressio legis
Quo fortuna cadit and humus retrograda vadit,
Tum been surrexit populus que^^ non been rexi^
Tempus adbuc plangit super hoc quod chronica tangit,
Stultorum vile cepit consilium invenile
Et sectam senium decrevit esse rejecta^,
Vnde Catallorum gazas spoliavit ^or^m.
Englished thus,

When first this King began to take the Scepter in his hand
The laws he breaks, an earthquake great befell within his Land,
Great wars did then this land oppress and people did rebel,
The time does yet bewail the w^es as Chronicles do tell.
The grave advice of aged wise he did reject and leave,
And unto dolts, and giddy colts great audience he* give
Their goods and lands into his hands he takes for his own,
But they would not abide that lot, as time did make it known.
Quis cordatas dicat Stellas and Come^ Annis 1572, 77, 80, 85, 90, 93, 9^ 1600,
602, 604, 607, 618. nihil signif^ care? quis dicat Deum frustra aliqu^ facere.
H. Alsted.

Bapt. Laurus Pp. Urban. 8. a cubicu^ Edist. 6.

Coelum tot facibus, quasi linguis ^ pertius numquam antia proloquitur.

Will they say God made these for ornament? every Eclipse is defect us they may
as well say an earthquak^ that turns mountains upon Cities ^ an ornament to the
earth, such as tha^ was which fell the same year 161^ wherein the last blasing
Star was whereof I my self know one Mr. Robert Hatley of Maulden in
Bedfordshire then an eye witness, and whereof Calvisius says thus:

In montana Grisonum regione terrae motus factus est, and mons summae magnitu^
dinis Aug. 15. subcrepusculum vespe^ ^ number commotus tantam subito ruina^ fecit
sub Pluravicus (my friend calls i^ Plowers) cum edificiis Templis Pala^ ^isque
egregiis exornatus dicto citius cu^ ^ominibus 1500. ab ortus fuerit, and ne
^vestigium ullum conspiciendam amplius ^eliquerit.

Or was that Star of fiery Football what to call it I know not, that came July
the 25, 1628 to Shithington in Bedfordshire, the young men having appointed a
Match at Football with Luton, and to meet in the midway to get together, they
go to ring, in the midst of their zeal comes this Star, first up a narrow
lane to the Churchyard, where it overthrew a little Maid named Hester, but did
her no harm: it comes unto the Churchporch where it overthrows on Mr. Malineux,
and took the ring off his finger, it goes into the Church where Mr. Parrat the
Minister was praying at the corner of the Mid-alley, it past him and did him no
harm, it goes into the Belfree, lays dead every one of the Ringers, it strikes
against the wall and breaks to pieces, whereon fell such thunder, rain, and
lightning as I never heard before: the first that came to live again, was one
Kitchiner a Shoemaker and kindsman of mine, all recovered save one Dear that
made the Football, who never revived, was this Star an ornament either to
heaven or earth. I think all the paper in the town will no t hold what I can
say for it, if time an d means would serve. Now I am in I cannot get out, but
I will not write one word more of this, and yet I cannot leave off, but I must
needs have a question or two more: and answer an objection or two of Dr.
Wendilius, who is Picus his head Scholar, and thereon quotes him in diverse
places* but withal betrays both himself and his Master, to have small skill
in Astrology, and therefore I may well say, Scienti^ nullum habe^ inimicum
prae^er ignorantem. He writes in page 625, that if be 26 of and in the 6 of
then platick they are in an though 20 degrees. distant from a partile, whereas the
largest orbs that are given by any are but 10 degrees. to and 12 to, and some give
but 9 to either, as himself for Example page ^22 line 44. Now in a dexter
Aspect they must be within half the raie^ of both added, viz. within 11, but in
a sinister within the degrees of the applier which is but 6 at the most, so
that where he gives 20 degrees. it is more by 2 then the whole Orbs of both joined,
so that this is as far as York from London of being any aspect at ^ll. And in
another example, if be in, and in 15, that is a pla^icke sextile, whereas
indeed it is ^ust as near a semis^xtile as a sextile, ^s near 30 d. as 0, and
if we com^are these examples with his rule, ^e can do no less then conclude
that ^e puts no difference between a pla^ick, and a partil: nay between a
platick, and a partil: the one (...) aspect of perfect amity, the other ^f
perfect enmity; for if there be no ^ounds to aspects; as neither his rule
which is this, page 625, Platicum ap^llarant, appelo he should have said, ^r
else, appellamus, his Mr. Pacus and ^imselfe, cum a stella adsttellam, plu^s
vel pau^iores, parts quam aspectus, ^antit as numerantur. Now if there ^ay be
two more then the sum of both or 11 as in the dexter, and 14 as in the
sinister, then both by his rule and examples there are no bounds, and so no
distinction of aspects. Alas, good Wendiline thou mu^^ to thy cross row again
for Astrology, and get thee a better Master the^ Picus, least the blind lead
the blind^ I dare undertake neither of you bot^ know what this character of a
semisextile means, if you had yo^ would never have called that a no marvel
the^ that though you trie^ you did toto coelo errare, and could never find
truth in it, and that mak^ you think there is no truth in the Art, because
there is no truth in you^ work.

24 Why may you not better den^ that herbs were ever created for Physic,
rather then the Stars f^ signs? since in their very ordinatio^ Genesis 1. 14. the
stars are expressly sai^ to be both for lights and for signe^ not for seasons,
as Picus, Wendilin^ and Gauh would have them, helpi^ God with a lie, and making
a no^ of wax of his word, but for signs a^ for seasons, but as for herbs in
the same chapter v. 29. there such herbs as have seed in themselves, are
appointed to man for meat, and in Verse the 30, every green herb for food for
cattle. Now if that be a good reason that because the Stars are made for lights
and for signs of seasons, therefore not for signs and seasons,
notwithstanding the word is express for signs and seasons. I may more safely
reason thus, God creates the herbs for food, and will you turn them to
Physic? where is your warrant? you know what is said of the holy writings Exo.
30. 33. whosoever uses it to any other purpose then that which it was made for
must be cut off. Yet you will use herbs for Physic that were made for food,
and will not use the Sars for signs which were made for signs. Also if it be
unlawful to use the Stars for signs, (I mean Astrology) because the Chaldeans
and Egyptians used enchantments with it: Ergo, it is unlawful for them to use
herbs for Physic, because Witches and Conjurers use enchantments with them:
yea even in the very gathering of them, this is just like many that cry out
against English construing books for children, yet they themselves will use
them for Greek, Hebrew, French, Spanish, and Italian. Besides that, where can
you produce any one place of Canonical Scripture where ever they were commanded
to be used in Physic. And therefore no marvel, though there was a time when
Physic was as much cried down as Astrology is now. Besides that it is as
likely that Physicians in curing any disease, make a secret compact with the
Devils and more then Astrologers, for it is certain that together with a green
ointment which cures all diseases new and old, hot and cold, they have their
charms for Tooth-ake, for biting with a mad Dog, for the falling sickness,
convulsion fit, etc. Again it experience will do nothing in Astrology, what
reason besides experience can be given that such an herb should cure sucha
disease. If any could be given, Phisicians might quickly learn to cure all
diseases. Or if that be so as they say, that if an Astrologer does not know,
both all the Stars and the nature of them, he cannot give a right judgment.
Where is that Physician, that B^tomist, that Chiru^geon, that knows all herbs,
plants, trees, minerals, and drugs, together with their natures useful in
Physic, who can give the reason why an Ivy lease should stay the bleeding of a
wound though never so fast, that it should stay it at the first touch? Surely
you will say, if an Astrologer lays it on, that he did it by secret compact
with the Devil, as some great Professors told me long before I knew what
Astrology meant, that because in Surveying I could tell distances before I
measured them, that I could do it by no good means, and that I scandalized the
Gospel by it wishing me either to give it over, or my profession. And how know
you that such an herb is in such a degree of heat, or of cold? Physicians
differ as much about them as Astrologers about Astrology. Besides Physicians
may use Astrology, but no other, Hypoc^ates and Galen may do without
controlment: or any other Physician in his critical days, a Physician has as
much privilege in this as a Priest to keep a Concubine. And the truth is, a
Physician without it, is scarce half a Physician, for I dare boldly say, that a
Physician working Mathematically will three to one tell both the state of the
disease, the place afflicted, and the danger of death, or hope of recovery,
without failing* one, to the Urine thrice, witness Dr. Napier, ^lias Sands,
brother to the famous Lord Napier, of Scotland, first inventer of Logarithms,
who was Minister of Linford in Buckinghamshire and withal practicing Physic,
and with whom I have often been for Physic, who continually used both the
Urine and erected a figure also* not for the time of decumbiture for in
Chronical diseases few know that: but as a Horary Question* who being demanded
by Mr. Bowls of Sutton, and Mr. Wilson of Hawnes, successor to the famous
Brightman, both for place and virtues, what truth he found in his figure (for
of the lawfulness they doubted not) his answer was, that where his figure
deceived him once, the Urine did it ten times, and that sometime they would
speak quite contrary things: but he always found in his figure most truth. And
for that the Urine would not show many things that the figure would, as about
women with child. And this Mr. Wilson told me* of whom I was an often hearer,
and that time did scruple Astrology very much, and this answer he told me,
satisfied both Mr. Bowls and him. And I fully believe, the Urine will not tell
whether a woman be with child or no, upon this ground. My wife practicing
Midwifery, and going into Kent, to lay a Daughter of hers, one Mr. Sparks wife,
Minister of Cooling, whiles she was there* another Gentlewoman not far of, who
had been in labor a week together, who having three Midwives with her, two
gave her over, the third hearing of my wife, comes to her, acquaints her with
the business, and craved her assistance, to whom she consented, together they
went, and finding the Gentlewoman disconsolate without hope of life, yet
committed her self to my wife, who finding no such danger as the other feared,
bids her be of good comfort for she doubted not but all would be well quickly,
the word was no sooner spoken, but in comes a messenger whom they had sent to
Dr. Caesar of Rochester, forbidding the women to use any more ado, for she was
not in labor* (No? quoth my wife, I see then the Doctor has no skill) and I
doubt not but by Gods goodness it shall appear within this quarter of this
hour, and accordingly it fell out presently, God gave a save deliverance both
of woman and child, and the woman mended quickly after. If an Astrologer should
commit such an error, it would be recorded against him to all posterity.

And whereas Wendeline objects that an Astrologer can not give a right judgment
because he knows ^ot the true number and nature of all the Stars. I confess
indeed sometimes the most skilful of all miss, both of Astrologers and
Physicians. But what shall Wendeline do then, that knows not what an aspect
is or his master Picus? But though men do not know all the Stars and ^earbs
now, yet Adam knew all, but ^n him we lost it, we have still the ^parks we know
now but in part, so that God made them not in vain in respect of their
significations.

Therefore I end this argument with this, that like as in Phy^ick Art ^ut of
the knowledge of causes, signs and effects arises the art both of ^udging and
foretelling many changes and alterations of men's bodies, ^ea even of death it
self: yet this is ^onfest to be free from superstition, because it is the
meditation of the divine works: so in this divining art ^udging by the position
and nature of ^he Stars of the causes, signs, and effects, what other is the
consideration ^ereof then the beholding the divine works of God? and therefore
as worthy the name of an art free from all superstition as Physic without
Astrology is, and far more, for Physic cannot well exist without Astrology,
but Astrology can without Physic. Besides, I wonder they should approve it in
Hypocrates, and condemn it in all others.

And whereas W^ndoline thinks he has won Bullen, or rather defended it
against two or three of our breaches with his one bulwark, this one distinction
that the causes of all things either came by necessity, or by contingency,
thinking thereby that because he knows we maintain as little necessity in them
as himself, therefore he would fain deny all influence and inclination of the
Stars at all, for my part I hold that the principal cause of all is God himself
who sometimes indeed works alone by himself, by stirring up principal motions
in the minds of men's wherein the inclinations of the Stars have no place, but
proceed immediately from God such as in David, who immediately was endued with
singular courage and stirred up by Gods spirit to fight with Goliath.

A second cause is man's free will, which either follows or resists the
temperament of the body. This free will of man should govern the Stars which
both can and ought both by meditation, invocation, the fear of God, and daily
exercise, bridle, correct and take away invading evils, and engendered vices,
least that common song prove true, Natura sequitur semina quisque suae.


So that we maintain no necessity that Nero, Caligula, or Anthony, were
compelled to commit their wicked acts, but this we hold, Fata mover^ Deus
tollere fata potest, and that the will especially being helped from above, yea
even its own power may avoid many such inclinations of the Stars, though it be
seldom done.

A third cause is the Devil himself, who does often involve the wretched minds
of men in this so great infirmity in horid wickedness. And thus Nero's fury
rises not only out (...) his temperament, but he also earnstl^ affecting it,
and being in love wit^ pleasures and covetousness is more and more instigated
of the Devil* and he himself forcing it forward^ is become much worse then his
ow^ nature though otherwise bad enough of it self gave him to be. And (...) an
innumerable company of men* who together with the help of the Stars are of
very good natures mos^ horribly rush into such wickedness* whole facts and
events are not to b^ referred to celestial causes and the will of man.

25 Whether is it possible or whether is it lawful for one to tell of one that
died this very hour 100 miles off. This is not a foretelling, but an^
aftertelling, but such a one as exceeds the common apprehension of man. If you
say it is impossible, I prove it thus, I teaching a School at Hitchi^ in
Hartfordshere, about anno 16^4* where amongst others, I teaching three of one
Mr. Christopher Butler^ children of Stapleford near Hartford, who inviting me
to keep my Christmas with them, I being there discour^ing with his wife, a
godly Gentlewoman, she told me she was the famous Doctor Foxes grandchild,
that wrote the Book of Martyrs, and withal told me this story of him, that he
being beyond Sea at the time of the death of Queen Mary as he was preaching,
about the midst of his Sermon he stood still a pretty while and paused,
in^omuch that the people marveiled, by and by he stands up, and utters these
words: My Brethren, I can do no less then impart unto you what the Spirit of
God has now revealed to me, that this very hour Queen Mary is dead in England,
and so it proved. And further she told me of an old man (then alive that heard
him,) which thing I being there at Whit-suntide following meeting there with
him he did constantly affirm. And I fully believe Sr. Ken^elme Digby her near
kinsman can say more in it then I have done. And thus much and a great deal
more is recorded of him of the like kind, in a Book entitled the lives of holy
men of these latter times. Now if you say that he did this by revelation, our
Church will condemn you for an Heritick. If you say they are all deceived, I
ask why may not a few of you more easily be mistaken in point of Astrology then
all of them in point of revelation. Again, if you say he did it by Astrology,
then you not only confess that you denied all this while that an Astrologer
can not tell true. Wendol^ne page 646, but it is either by some compact with
the Devil or by his secret instinct whereon he quotes Aug. lib. 5. cap. 7 De
civitat. De^. I say, as much credit is to be given to Doctor Fox as to
Augustine. Dare you or Augustine either, if he were living, say Doctor Fox did
it either by compact of the Devil* surely if you say that he casts out Devils
through Beelzebub we lesser punies must not take it a mis, however you rail of
us.

26 What I pray you is becomge of Mercury, when saw you him, sure he is but an
ill servant to you that will scarce be feen three times in a twelve month, he
always hides himself that seldom or never he will hold the Caldle unto you,
yet I believe that is all the work you have to set him on, other service he
does you little. They count him a great Astronomer, but I doubt he will scarce
tell when begins Spring, Summer, Autumn, or Winter, nor when Sunday comes, nor
yet whether Easter Day will fall on the Sunday this year or no, me thinks such
a servant should be small ornament to your house, and my thinks such idle
Fellows as will no ways do you good. If you love to keep such, God send you
enough of them. When he was my servant, you see he is pictured with wings. If I
sent him presently he would fly to heaven. If I were casting a Nativity, he
would straight bring me word whether the Child would be a good Mathematician,
and whether he would prove ingenious or not, and of this he never failed me, if
he had, I would never have owned him but have blotted him out of the number of
my servants for ever.

27 Lastly, is it not the constant tene^ of all Divines that that doctrine
which makes most for the glory of God, that is the truest doctrine, that this
is such appears thus: what was the reason the Chaldeans and Egyptians
worshipped the whole host of Heaven, but this that generally they were
Astrologians, and that by their skill they found out their wonderful effects
and operations, and withal not knowing the Maker of them went as far as their
knowledge led them to worship the creature in stead of the Creator. And what
can more move a Christian Astrologer to admire the wisdom, the glory, the
bounty and goodness of God, that knows there is a God that made them, then
this it will enforce him with David to say, Lord, When I consider the Sun,
Moon, and Stars the works of thy hands, especially in their uses, what is man
the^ that thou should once remember him to make him little inferior to the
angels? to crown him with glory in making so many glorious lights not only to
give him ^ight both day and night and to distinguish ^easons; but infinitely
more when he considers Gods mercy and goodness, in sending such Heralds and
Embas^adours to tell wife men of a plague a far of that they may hide
themselves. But as for the Christian Astrologer to whom God reveals this
Magnalia Dei, and makes him in stead of a Prophet amongst the people, I know
not what to make of him if he should not cry out, and say, I thank thee O
Father* Lord of Heaven and Earth, that thou have hid these things from the
wise, and prudent, and have revealed them to me a Babe and a Suckling, and, me
thinks, I can but wonder that such a one shall not at one time or other in the
consideration and meditation thereof be as it were ravished in spirit, and in
some measure to think himself with Paul taken up into the third Heaven, and to
feel such joy as Solomon says a stranger shall not meddle withal.

But this is the reason that the Divines are so mistaken, your taking things
upon trust one of another without examination. I remember that this was the
reason that M. Wilson beforenamed, gave to one Ms. Hatley, who desiring of him
the reason why that doctrine of the return of the Jews to Jerusalem should lie
hid and altogether unknown till Mr. Brightman found it out: gave her (as I say)
this the only cause thereof, never was there that Divine known to this day,
that can be prooved to have had any good knowledge in Astrology, that ever
wrote against it, and therefore I conclude with that in Judges, first consider,
then consult, and last of all give sentence.

All that I have yet spoken with finding no use for diverse Stars, here
especially Mercury are driven to this that there may be use for them in the
world of the moon, let us therefore essay to take that away also and to leave
them no color for it. Si^ probo. Where Christ never redeemed any, God never
created any. But Christ never redeemed any in the moon. Ergo the Major* thus
God never Romans 11. 5, 22* 32. Rom 3. v. 23, 24.
created any reasonable creature, viz. angels or men, but he in his secret
election created, or at least permitted some to prove Vessels or Instruments
to glorify his mercies, others to glorify his Justice, but such God created
not in the moon. Ergo, where Christ redeemed no elect, God created n^ne elect,
but Christ redeemed none there. Ergo.

The Minor thus. Christ redeemed none but the seed of Adam, and such as were
lost in his fall. 1 Cor. 15. v. 21. 32. Or thus, Christ redeemed none but in
that world in which he was both born, lived, and did miracles, and suffered,
but none of these he did in the moon, for as it had been injustice in God to
have cast off Adam for the fall of the angels in another world so neither shall
the fall of angels nor of Adam be imputed to them to there condemnation, nor yet
any actions of Christ here to their salvation.

^ ^b. 16, 17.
As man sinned, so Christ must be made man, as man sinned in this world, so
Christ must become a man and suffer for man in this world not in heaven, much
less in the moon for us, nor here for those in the moon.

Romans 6. 9, 10.
Neither did Christ die anywhere else but here, for he died but once, Heb. 9.
28. and where is now the man in the moon?

But grant it, yet Mercury is as seldom in the moon as here, by reason of his
proximity to the Sun.

But they say each star is a several world, neither does Mendeline content
himself with 1022, but says they are infinitely more, now if Christ must
suffer once for each Star, how many times must he suffer in all. He had better
content himself with the redemption of one, then be troubed with so many.
Suppose there be but 1022 of them, and that each of them cost him but 33 years
time in redeeming, it will take him up 33726 years, which in the judgment of
most, if he ^ad begun as soon as Adam had fell ^ould have took him up as much
^ime as the lasting of five worlds one after another, Heb. 1. 11.

Look where the same reason o ^overnment holds, there the sams ^dministration.
But the same reasone ^olds with them as with us. Ergo.

If each world should have a seve^al government and there can be but ^ne best,
then God did not order all ^y the best. But God did order all ^y the best,
Ergo; Sun, Moon, Stars and Earth, are ordered all by the ^ame government. But
there is but ^ne faith, one Christ, one Baptism, and thus Christ died but
once, and in he earth, and for the seed of Adam only, Ergo.

THere is one Rowland who has lately wrote against Astrology, but all that he
has of his own is not worth the naming, only to make up his Book, he comes at
last to quote some arguments of Mr. Perkins against it, where two especially
are Mr. Perkins own, the rest are common with others, and answered before. The
first is, that men have more trust to it then to Gods word, and thereupon if
the Astrologer tell them by a figure that Corn will be dear such a year, they
will hard it up till it rot: I answer, that though I ingenuosly confess Mr.
Perkins to have been a worthy Divine of his time, and one whom I ever
reverenced, and further to be, as I verily think, the best skild in Astrology
of all that ever wrote against it, yet he is but a man and subject to error as
well as others, and one that diverse good Divines will beg leave to dessent from
in some of his tenants As first the unlawfulness of Cock-fightings, and
Dog-fightings. Secondly, that it is unlawful to buy an Almanac, because if
that says grain will ^e dear, it makes men trust in it and ^listruft God, I
can not deny, but if any shall do so as to put any abso^ute confidence in an
Almanac or ^igure they greatly sin, because there ^s in them a possibility of
error, for ^everal occasions before alleged: so ^s there not in Gods word;
yet there may be a kind of trust (I doubt not) ^n some measure, or persuasion
at ^east of the truth of the Almanac or Figure by how much the more experience
I have had of the truth of the ^ike or the same man's making before. For suppose
I owe 20 l. to be paid upon bond the first day of April, to such a one as I am
sure will ^tand upon the forefeiter, but I have ^ trusty Tenant that never
fails me, ^ut pays me 40 l. Rent the 25 or 26 of March, at furthest, will not
any one rather trust to such a Tenant, though there be a possibility of fail^ng
as by thieves, fire, etc) rather then ^o borrow it elsewhere, or sell
commodities to less? Neither can I think but according to Joseph's example, it
is lawful in a plentiful time with the one to lay up against a time of scarcity.

The other of Mr. Perkins quoted by the said Rowland, is concerning a rule used
by some Astrologers concerning the time when the effects of an Eclipse begins,
which is this: Observe at the middle of the Eclipse how far the Luminary
eclipsed, is distant from its rising, and how long it continues above the
Horizon, then reduce them into minutes, and say by the golden Rule: If the
whole continuance of the Luminarie eclipsed give 365 days, what shall its time
from the rising give? The time hereby found, say some, is the time of the
beginning of the effects. But Mr. Perkins there reckons many several Eclipses
whose effects, (of his own knowledge) began presently after the Eclipses. Where
note, that we need no stronger witness to prove that Eclipses have their
effects* and that these effects are found by Astrology, deny it they that can,
and for my part, I am of his mind, for the time of the beginning of the
effects, and so is Origanus and so is Mr. Wings Ephemeris.

Yet let me answer one objection more, which is this. Though in erecting of
Figures you do not work by the Devil, yet they that come to you do believe
you do. I ask, must I give over my calling of a Surveyor or Inginee^ because
some great Professors thinking (because I could tell distances without
measuring them) that I wrought by the Devil? and thereon moved me to either
leave it or my profession of the Gospel, for I was a scandal to it. Or must our
Savior Christ give over casting out Devils, because some thought he wrought by
Beelzebub, yet I would have none so bold to tell the effects of Eclipses or
great conjunctions before they fall, least they miss of the time when they
will fall, as Lilly did, for as K^pler says, it is hard ^o hit.

Near the beginning of this letter I spoke a word or two in commendation of Sr.
Christopher Heydens Book, and that I would fain see that answered. It has been
mine hap very lately to see a Book coming under the name of one Vicars B. D. as
if he were a Bachelor of Divinity. But if that can be called an answer,
certainly it is so strange an answer, that it gives me as little satisfaction
as Rowland^ book, that promised in the beginning of it to answer Sr.
Christopher in the end of it: but he would first answer an other: which by that
time he had done answering him, Mr. Finis called him away, that he could never
attend to answer him since. Just so deale^ Mr. Vicars, he promises in his
Title Page great matters: but truly so far as I read (which was more then ^
quartern) I may well say: Parturiunt m^rtes nas^^tur ridiculu^ inus.
Much is promised, but nothing performed. I read till I was weary, stil^
expecting some arguments tha^ should either disproove the lawfulness of
Astrology in general: or a^ ^east something that Sir Christopher ^ad defended.
But I found my expe^tation failed me: for all that time ^o far was spent
against Conjurers, Witches* Charmers, Inchanters, and ^uch as observe the
flying of birds are ^uch as look into the River, as if Sir Chr^s^opher had
maintained these things. I^ you did it not to make the world believe so, truly
you have taken a great deal of pains, but nihil ^d thumbum, you may as well
tax M^^es as Sir Christopher for these things.

Again, you say, you have known ^ome were such dunses in the Univer^ities that
being fit for no learning, hey then set upon Astrology, that hey may have the
Devils help in it, though you speak never so mystically ^et I have a sound
witness, even your ^wn conscience, that you would make ^en believe Sr.
Christopher to be such ^ one. I^ he be not such a one, why do ^ou speak it? if
he be such a one speak ^lain English, a man may more easily ^e^end himself from
a masty dog that flies at his face, then from a little Whirpet that bites one
by the heels* Truly, Sir, this is but backbiting at the best, far unbeseeming
the profession of a Divine, neither, is it the breach of the least Commandment
though it were, yet if you teach men so, you are unfit for the kingdom o^ God.
Besides this, whether he be more in wealth, or poor in gifts, the Wise man tells
you, he that despiset^ the poor, reprocheth him that made him. He could have
made him wise and you foolish. But what is this to the matter? this is only
against the man. Besides this. How common a thing is it throughout your Book,
to call him, My Gentleman, My Gentleman. Has king James m^de him a Knight, and
will you degrade him and make him but a Gentleman? Sir I am sure if I should
call you so Would you not take it as ir^nically spoken, and is this to fulfill
the Royal Law of Liberty to do as you would be done to. Quod tibi fier^ non
vis ^lteri ne feceris. But whether this will bear an action in the Court of
Honor, I leave to others to judge.

Non nostram inter vos tant^s componere lates.
am sure it will bear an action in he high Court of Heaven. But sure (...) his
shows that learned king, king James, that great enemy to Astrolo^ie, whom you
so boast of, saw more ^ him then Astrology, though you ^ee it not: otherwise he
would never have made him a Knight, for that he was so great an enemy, to
pretenders ^e did it after he had wrote his Book against Mr. Chambers, for the
books ^ake, as I believe, rather that it was so, for that I have seen king
James ^uoted in defense of Astrology, whatsoever you say. But here is nothing
yet against the matter. Oney it argues a wrangling spirit, and you know what
the Apostle says: If any man lust to be contentious we have no such custom
neither have the Churches of Christ, for the wrath of man does not accomplish
the righteousness of God. But a meek Spirit is a thing before God much set by.

Again, that that has any seeming show to be against the matter, you
altogether desire to draw from a confession of approving that which neither he
nor M^ses, nor any honest Astrologer will approve of* As concerning his
Definition of Astrology, he sets it down as he mainteins it: you as the
Chaldeans used it, so that because you can pick no hole in his coat for his
Astrology, therefore you quarrel against the Chaldeans Astrology. Go tell the
Chaldeans of it, what is that to Sr Christopher, it argues a wrangling Spirit?

Again, how often boiles that Crambe of yours, concerning the prediction of the
death of Henry II. king of France, upon a certain day, by a wound in his head,
by a Conjurer: if a Conjurer, what is that to Astrology?

But I pray how did Doctor Fox tell that Queen Mary died that very hour in
England he being in Germany? Or Mr. Brightman, the downfall of the Bishops? do
you think they did it by help of the Devil? I confess, I have found it the
rash judgment of some, that if they see any excellency in any thing that their
shallow reach cannot aprehend. Because mount Taurus shadows the Bull of Lemnos,
though 20 miles off, they would have it removed if they could.

But, Sir, still you charge Sir Christopher with other men's tenants. I do not
think that you can prove, that ever he predicted the very day of any man's
death: if he did, you might have done well to have quoted the Page, and not put
us to read all his Book, and yet miss of it when we have done, and you to mock
us for our labor? Yet we see Physicians do ^t sometimes, though perhaps more
^y help of Astrology then any phy^ical notions. If Hip^crates, or Gallen, ^ell
you of such a thing you will not ^ay they work by the Devil, but Sci^^tia
nu^lum habet inimicum pr^ter ign^^ant^m, yet this I will say, it is posi^le out
of a man's Nativity to give a ^hrewd conjecture of such a thing, ^erhaps within
a month or a week, perhaps within a day, and why not ^ same day. Yea, and
whether he shall^ a violent death or no* I pray, Sir, h^^ you any skill in
Astrology or not? you have not, then I say you kno^ as little what you say as
they did the condemn me for working by (...) Devil, for telling distances
before had measured them: yet they (...) honest men too. But if you have sk^
you either got it by help of the Devi^ as you say, others do, or else by
reading the Rules and Aphoris^^es of ^ as we do. Which if that be wor^ing by
the Devil in us; it is so in yo^ also. But if it be lawful to read (...) Rules
(or else how shall you be ab^ to confute them) Sir, if you wi^ vouchsafe to
take a little mo^ pains, I doubt not but yo^ your se^ shall easily be able to
give a ver^ near conjecture of almost as great thing. Then if you find the
reason in the one you may do it in the other. And having done, I pray the^
tell me where lies the error, let the Question be how king Charles com^ to be
beheaded, and that time, (...) January 30, 1648/1649. He was born in Scotland
Anno 1600 Nov. 19 hora 10 4 p. m. latitudo loci 57 medium coeli. is 37 the R.
Asc. 17 13 oculus and the of being both in 4 if you direct M. C. to them being
both together and both signifying preferment especially oculus, as you may see
in the rules of directions the R. Asc. of oculus being 61 41. If thence you
take the R. A. of M. C. 37. 13 the art of directions is 25. 28 which gives in
time 25 years and somewhat more. Likewise in 4. 29 of makes her dexter in 4* 29
of, the R. As. thereof is 62. 30, whence take 37. 13 rests 25. 17; which is a
little less then ocu., but both are 25 years, which added to 1600 the year of
his birth, being come to his kingdom Mar. 27, 1625.

And if you have skill as you pretend to have, does not the direction of M. C
to the of tell you nothing of the difference between him and the Parliament,
Anno 1641.

And can you gather nothing out of M. C. to the Sesquiquadrant of concerning
the many battles fought in Anno 1643. And(...)


