JANI ANGLORUM FACIES NOVA: OR, Several Monuments of Antiquity touching the
Great Councils of the Kingdom, and the Court of the Kings immediate Tenants and
Officers, from the first of William the First, to the forty ninth of Henry the
Third, Revived and and Cleared. Wherein, The sense of the Common Council of the
Kingdom mentioned in King John's Charter; and of the Laws Ecclesiastical, or
Civil, concerning Clergy-men's Voting in Capital Cases is submitted to the
judgment of the Learned.

Decipimur specie recti --

Hor. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Basset at the George near St. Dunstan's Church
in Fleet Street. 1680.

Jani Anglorum Facies Nova.
THat King John's Charter exhibits the full form of our English Great and most
General Councils in those days; if I may fay so, is the Vulgar Error of our
Learned Men; and it is that which has given the only prejudice to the pains of
the Judicious Mr. Petyt, who, I must fay, has laid the Foundation, and sure
Rule of understanding the Ancient Records and Histories, which mention the
Great or General Councils, in his distinctions between the Curia Regis, Petyt
's Appendix, p. 131.
and Commune, or Generale Concilium Regni, Barons Regis, and Barons Regni,
and the Servitia which were paid, or performed by reason of Tenure: And those
Common Prestations, Bracton. lib. 2. cap. 16. p. 37.
which Bracton mentions, Sunt etiam quaedam Communes praestationes quae
Servitia non dicuntur, nec de consuetudine veniunt, nisi cum necessitas
intervenerit, vel cum Rex venerit, sicut sunt hidagia, corragia, carvagia, and
alia plura de necessitate and consensu Communi totius Regni Introducta: Which
are not called Services, nor come from Custom, but are only in case of
necessity, Charges upon the Land according to the value or number of Acres.
or when the King meets his People; As Hidage, Corrage, and Carvage, and many
other things brought in by necessity, and by the Common Consent of the whole
Kingdom.

This I must observe upon the differences here taken, that it is not necessary
to the maintaining a real difference, to insist upon it, that none of these
words were ever used to signify what is the natural signification of the
other: for Example, Barons and Milites, are sufficiently distinct in their
sense; and yet when but one of the words is used, either of them may, and often
does take in the other: But when Barons, Milites, etc. are set together, the
Barons are a Rank of men superior to the ordinary Milites; it is enough to
prove that the differences above mentioned are rightly taken, if according to
the subject matter, and circumstances, we can clearly divide the one from the
other.

Now let us see the words of the Charter, Charta Johannis 17. Regni, Anno 1215.
and observe whether they are meant of all General or Common Councils for
making of Laws, and Voluntary Gifts to the Crown, or only of such as concerned
the King's Immediate Tenants.

Nullum Scutagium vel Auxilium Ponam in Regno nostro, nisi per Commune
Consilium Regni nostri, nisi ad corpus nostrum redimendum, and ad primogenitum
filium nostrum militem faciendum, and ad primogenitam filiam nostram semel
Maritandam, and ad hoc non fiet nisi rationabile auxilium. Simili modo fiat de
Civitate Londinensi. Et Civitas Londinensis habeat omnes antiquas Libertates,
and Liberas consuetudines suas, tam per terras, quam per aquas: praeterea,
volumus and concedimus quod omnes aliae Civitates, and Burgi, and Villae, and
Barons de quinque portubus, and omnes portus, habeant omnes Libertates, and
Liberas consuetudiues suas, and ad habendum Commune Consilium Regni, aliter
quam in tribus casibus praedictis Here the London Edition of Matthew Paris,
Tiguri, fol. 247.
and that at Tours make a period distinct from what follows, and then the Sense
is, that except in those three Cases, wherein the King might take Aid or
Escuage at the Common Law, without the Consent of a Common Council, for all
other Aids, or Escuage, a Common Council should be held; and the City of
London, all Cities, Buroughs, Parishes, or Townships; that is, the Villani
their Inhabitants, the Barons, or Freemen of the Five Ports, and all Ports
should amongst other Free Customs, enjoy their right of being of, or
constituting the Common Council of the Kingdom. But so much is certain, that if
these, or any besides the Tenants in Capite came before this Charter, and were
at the making of it, their Right is preserved to them by it, and is confirmed
by the Charter of Hen. 3. cap. 9.

Civitas Land. Magna Carta, cap. 9.
habeat omnes Libertates Antiquas, 2 Just. fol. 20.
and consuetudines suas: preterea volumus and concedimus, quod omnes aliae
Civitates, Burgi, Villae, and Barons de quinque portibus, and emnes alii
portus habeant omnes Libertates, and Liberas consuetudines suas.

And for an evidence of what was their Custom and Right, as to the Great
Council of the Kingdom: both these Charters were made to, and in the presence
of all the Clergy, Counts, Barons, and Freemen of the Kingdom. King John's (as
Mr. Seldom tells us he conceives) was made by the King, and his Barons and
liberos homines totius Regni, Titles of Honor, f. 586, and 587.
as other particulars were of the same time.

But the Record which he cites in the Margent puts it out of all doubt, that
the Charter was made by them all.

Haec est conventio inter Dominum Johannem, Rot. Claus. 17 Johannis Dorso m 21.
Regem Angliae ex una part, and Robertum Filium Walteri Marescallum Dei and
Sanctae Ecclesiae Angliae, Rot Pat. 17 Johannis pars unica m. 13. n. 3. Ib. m.
^3. dorso.
and Ric. Com. de Clare, etc. and alios Comites, and Barons and liberos
homines totius Regni ex altera part.

And in another Record it is said to be, Inter nos and Barons and liberos
homines Dominii nostri: So that the liberi homines of the Kingdom were present;
and who were at the making of the Great Charter of Hen. 3. which has been so
many times confirmed, it acquaints us at the end.

Pro hac autem donatione and concessione libertatum, Magna Charta cap. 38.
and aliarum libertatum in carta de libertatibus forestae, Arch. Ep. Ab. Pr.
Comites, Barons, Milites, libere tenentes and omnes de Regno nostro dederunt
nobis quinto-decimam partem omnium mobilum suorum.

The Charter here mentioned of the Forest had been granted in the Second of
Hen. 3. as was the Great Charter; Confirmatio magna Chartae facta 2. H 3. in
consimili forma cum magna Charta 9. Hen. 3. (testibus and data exceptis)
exemplificata and confirmata 25. Edw. 1. prout Charta de Foresta. Ex MS
contemporanea statutor. penes Sam. Balduin Equitem auratum and servient. ad
legem.
the parties to the grant of a Subsidy are the very same: Archiepiscopi,
Episcopi, Abbates, Priores, Comites, Barons, Milites and libere tenentes, and
omnes de Regno.

Not to produce here the proof of such General Assemblies from the Conquest
downwards to the 49 H. 3. I may say upon what I have already shown, that this
interpretation of King John's Charter, Et de Scutagiis assidendis faciemas
summoneri, etc.
whereby the Tenants in Capite are divided from the rest, and made a Common
Council for Escuage only, agrees better with the Records and Histories, than
the notion, that they alone composed the whole Council of the Kingdom, which
can never be proved.

But I will take the words together, even as they who are fond of the
conjecture of their being the full Representative Body of the Nation would have
it. Et ad habendum Commune Consilium Regni de auxiliis assidendis, aliter quam
in Tribus casibus praedictis, and de Scutagiis assidendis submoneri faciemus
Arch. Ep. Ab. and Majores Barons Regni singillatim per literas nostras. That
is such of the Majores as held intra (...).
Et praeterea faciemus submoneri in generali per Vicecomites and Ballivos
nostros omnes alios qui in capite tenent de nobis ad certum diem, scilicet ad
terminum Quadragint. dierum ad minus, and ad certum locum in omnibus litteris
submonitionis causam submonitionis illius exponemus, and sic facta submonitione
negotium procedat ad diem assignatum, secundum consilium eorum qui praesentes
fuerint, quamvis non omnes submoniti venerint.

Here was I grant the form of a Common Council of the Kingdom, to the purposes
here named, which are for Aid and Escuage: Aid upon Tenants in Common Socage.
The Aid I say, and shall show, was from those Tenants which held of the King
in Common Socage, such as held Geldable, or talliable Lands, the Escuage
concerned the Tenants by Knights Service, Escuage upon Tenants by Knights
Service.
but both concerned only the King's Tenants in chief, which appears in the very
confining the Summons to the Majores Barons Regni, and others which held of
the King in Capite.

Whereas (1) there were Majores Barons, who held not by any Feudal Tenure,
that were not obliged to attend at the Kings ordinary Courts, and they, with
them that were under their Jurisdictions, had their Common Councils apart,
though all might meet at General Councils: So that what was a Common Council of
the Kingdom to this purpose, was not so indefinitely to all.

2. There were others who were obliged, or had right to be of the Common
Council of the Kingdom, though not upon the accounts mentioned in this Charter.

1. The Norman Prince, to the encouragement of those great men that adventured
for his glory, made some of them as little Kings, and gave them the Regal
Government of several Counties, in which they with the great men thereof, and
the libere Tenentes Freeholders, made Laws for the benefit of their
Inheritances, and the maintaining the peace; Chester.
and that of Chester in particular was given to Hugh Lupus Tenendum sibi and
Haered. ita vere ad gladium, Tit. Honor. 1 Edit. p. 247.
sicut ipse Rex tenebat Angliam ad coronam: So that he wanted nothing but a
Crown to make him King. In a Charter of Count Hugh's, See Leicester's Survey of
Cheshire.
of the Foundation of the Monastery of St. Werburg, he says: Ego Comes Hugo,
and mei Barons confirmavimus. And one of his Successors grants to his Barons,
Quod unusquisque eorum Curiam suam habeat liberam de omnibus placitis ad
gladium meum pertinentibus.

And at the Coronation of H. 3. 20. H. 3. M. Paris fol. 563. Ed. Land.
which was after this Charter, Earl John, another of William's Successors,
carried St. Edward's Sword before the King, as Matthew Paris tells us, for a
Sign, that he had of right a very extraordinary power: Comite Cestriae gladium
Sancti Edwardi qui Curtein dicitur ante Regem bajulante, in signum quod Comes
est Palatinus, and Regem si oberret habeat de jure potestatem cohibendi, etc.

Though this was the chief Count Palatine, yet others had their separate
Councils, where they made Laws.

William Fitz-Osborn was made Earl of Hereford under William the First, of whom
William of Malmsbury says; Manet in hunc diem in Comitatu ejus apud Herefordum
legunm quas statuit inconcussa firmitas, Tit. Honor 1 Ed. p. 233.
ut null^s Miles pro qualicunque commisso plus septem solidis, cum in aliis
Provinciis ob parvam occasi inculam in transgressione praecepti herilis,
Viginti vel Viginti Quinque pendantur.

Of the same nature are Examples in the Constitutions of the old Earls of
Cornwall, Seldom, ib.
and the like.

To return to the County Palatine of Chester, Domesday in Cheshire says, Comes
tenet Comitatum de Rege. See Leicester 's survey of Cheshire.
its Count was not Tent. in Capite with the restrictions above taken, viz.
Subject to the Feudal Law, and obliged to attend once at the Courts as other
Tenants, and yet at the general Councils he was present. Therefore this Council
mentioned in King John's Charter, where none but Tenants in Capite (obliged to
the ordinary Incidents of such Tenure) were, was no general Council of the
whole Kingdom, as our Modern Authors would have, though it were for the matters
of ordinary Tenure, all that were concerned being at it. Mat. P. fo. 497. Ed.
Land. Anno 1232. 17o. H. 3. M. P.


In the Year 1232. King Hen. 3. held his Curia or Court at Winchester, at
Christmas, which was one of the Court days, or rather times of meeting; for it
often held several days; An. 1205. 7o. Johannis.
and therefore when that at Tewksbury, in King John's reign, held but a day, it
is specially taken notice of. Mat. Pared. Tig. f. 359.


Soon after King Henry's Christmas Court, Nequi magnates viz. Comes, Baro,
Miles seualiqua alia notabilis persona Rot. Claus. 3 E. 2. m. 16. dor.
he Summons all the Magnates of England ad Colloquium; when they meet, because
he was greatly in debt by reason of his Wars; he demands, Auxilium ab omnibus
generaliter.

Quo audito Comes Cestriae Ranulphus pro Magnatibus Regni loquens respondit, M.
P. f. 359. An. 1232. 17o. Rs. H. 3.
quod Comites Barons ac Milites qui de eo tenebant in Capite cum ipso erant
corporaliter praesentes, Nota, This shows that the Tenants in Capite were not
all the Council, because they in particular are taken notice of amongst them
which came to that Council.
and pecuniam suam ita inaniter effuderunt, quod inde pauperes omnes
recesserunt, unde Regi de jure auxilium non debebant, et sic petita licentia
omnes recesserunt.

Here was the Earl of Chester, this being a Summons to a General Assembly; but
when the King asked money for his expenses in the Wars, he tells him in the
Name of all the Laity, that those which held of him in Capite (which is as much
as to say he was none of them) served him in their Persons, and at their own
charge; therefore they begged leave to be gone, The Earl of Chester was not to
attend the King in his Wars, nor to pay escuage in lieu of military service,
because all his Tenure was to keep to the defense of the Marches.
if the King had no other business with them, for no aid was due: So that it
seems they looked upon Auxilium to be something in lieu of the service which
the Kings Tenant was to perform. That this concerned the Kings Tenants in
Capite by Kts. service, and no others (except the inferior talliable Tenants;)
and they that were then assembled, being the Great Council of the Kingdom, took
upon them to Umpire between the King and his Tenants, and to tell him that he
had no pretense for aid from them, for they had performed their services due.
If only Tenants in Chief, by Knights service, are here intended by Tenants in
Capite, they only most commonly attending the King in Person, though sometimes
all Tenants whatever, were required to attend; and so in King John's Charter,
the Summons be taken, to be only of such Tenants in Chief, then the aid there
is meant only of such as comes from them; but that takes not in all that are
within the meaning of King John's Charter, it adding simili modo fiat de Civit.
Land. which paid a Socage Aid as I shall show: But for Chester, even at those
times when aids were granted by more than the King's Tenants, the Earls,
Barons, and Freeholders of Chester gave by themselves. Prince Edward, afterward
King Edward the First, was in the 44th of H. 3. Count Palate. of Chester, and he
had his Common Council there, wherein he consulted for the good of his
Palatinate apart, from the great Council of the Nation: Rot. Pat. 44 H. 3. M.
1. dor.
Barons and Milites Cestrenses and quamplures alii ad sum. Domini Edw. coram
ipso Domino Edw. apud Shorswick, super statum terr. illius Domini Edw. Consul.
and propon. quae hab. proponenda. Nay so careful were they that the Kings
Feudal Jurisdiction should not interfere with the Earls or other Lords there,
that they insisted upon it as their Prerogative, so say many Records, that if
one held by Knights service of the King, and of any Lord within the Palatinate
also, the Heir should be in Ward to the Lord there, not to the King; and so by
consequence of the other Incidents and attendance at the Kings Courts; so that
those of the County of Chester, could be no part of this Common Council, which
therefore was not general.

In an Inquisition taken 22 Edw. 1. Dicunt quod a tempore quo non extat
memoria, 22o. Ed. 1. n. 45. sub Custod. Camerar in Scaccario.
tam temporibus Comitum Cestr. quam temporibus Regis Hen. Patris Domini Regis
qui nunc est, ac tempore ipsius Domini Edw. Regis nunc secundum consuetudinem
per quandam praerogativam hactenus in Com. Cestr. optentam and ufitatam Domini
feodorum in Com. praedict. post mortem tenentium suorum custodiam terrarum and
tenement. quae de eis tenentur per servitium militare usque ad legit. aetat,
haered. hususm. ten. licet iidem tenentes alias terr. and ten. in Com. praed.
vel alibi de Domino Rege tenuerunt in Capite semper huc usque habuerunt, and
habere consueverunt, etc.

King Edward the First, Rot. Pat. 2. Ed. 1. M. 6.
sends Arch. Ep. Ab. Pri. Com. Bar Mil. and omnibus aliis fidelibus suis de
Com. Cestriae, and desires them that since the Prelati, Comites, Barons and
alii de Regno, which one would think took in the whole Kingdom, had given him
the fifteenth part of their movables, they would do the like, and we find a
Record of their giving a part from the rest of the Kingdom.

Cum probi homines and Communitas Comitatus Cestriae sicut caeteri de Regno
nostro 15 m. Rot Pat 20. Ed. 1. M. 6.
omnium bonorum suorum nobis concesserunt gratiose.

So that these were then no part of the commune concilium Regni within this
Charter, and no man can show that they were divided since the time of William
the First.

2. There were others who were obliged, or had right to be of the
Common Council of the Kingdom, though not upon the accounts mentioned in this
Charter; which if it appear, then this was not the only Common Council of the
Kingdom, or the full form of it, because there were Common Councils wherein
were other things treated of, and other Persons present. For this it is very
observable, there is nothing but Aid and Escuage mentioned, nothing of Advice
or Authority given in the making of Laws, which were ever enacted with great
solemnity, and all the Proprietors even of Palatinate Counties were present in
Person or Legal Representation, when ever a general or universal Law was made
that bound the Kingdom. But to wave this at present, I shall give one instance
from Records, that others were to come or had right, besides they that came
upon the account of Tenure as here mentioned.

The Pope writes to King Hen. 3. Bundella literar. in Turre London. An. 8. H 3.
in behalf of some of his great men, who had complained to the Pope that he had
excluded them from his Councils. The King answers that they had withdrawn
themselves, Ne qui Magnates viz. Comes, Baro, Miles seu aliqua alia notabilis
persona, etc. Rot. Claus. 3 E. 2. m. 16. dor.
and that Falcatius de Brent the chief of them, was by the advice of the
Magnates totius Regni, all the great men of the Kingdom, called and admonished
to receive the Judgment of the King's Court, according to the Law of the Land.
Cum alias teneatur ratione possessionum magnarum, and officii maximi quod
habuit in Curia nostra, ad nos in consiliis nostris venire non vocatus.

Although besides the obligation to obey the King's Summons, he was bound by
reason of great Possessions, and a very considerable Place at Court to come to
the King's Councils, though not called; that is, when ever it was known that a
Council was to meet, which might have been done by an Indiction of an Assembly
without sending to any body.

This shows very plainly that there were others to come to the Great Councils,
besides those that were to come to those Common Councils, and other occasions
for meeting; for confine it to the persons and causes here specified they were
to have Summons, the Majores Special, the Minores General by the Sheriffs, and
40 days notice; whereas the King said, and could not be ignorant of King John's
Charter, which was but 10 years before, that Falcatius was to come without
Summons.

But there is a further irrefragable Argument in the Negative, viz. that this
Commune Consilium Regni, was not the Great Council of the Nation: And that is
the Judgment of a whole Parliament in the Fortieth of Edw. Rot. Parl. 40 Ed. 3.
n. 7, 8.
the Third, above three hundred years ago, when it is probable that they had as
clear a knowledge of the Laws, Customs, and Public Acts in King John's time,
as we have of what past in the Reign of Henry the Eighth. It appears by the
History that King John had resigned his Crown in such a Council as this here,
Matt. Par. p. 236.
it was Communi Consilio Baronum nostrorum and yet the Prelates, Dukes, Counts,
Barons and Commons, upon full deliberation in Parliament, resolve that the
resignation was void, being contrary to the King's Oath, in that 'twas Sanz
Leurassent, without their Assent: And the King could not bring the Realm in
Subjection, Sanz assent de eux.

If it had been in the Great Council of the Kingdom, though it was not possible
for the parties then at Council to have been assenting personally to King
John's Resignation; yet they had assented by a Natural as well as Legal
Representative, as has been long since shown by the Judicious Mr. Hooker.

To be commanded we do consent, Hooker Eccles. lib. fol. 29.
when the Society whereof we are part, has at any time before consented
without revoking the same afterward by the like universal Agreement: Wherefore
as any man's Deed past is good as long as himself continues; So the Act of a
public Society of men done five hundred years past sithence stands as
theirs, who presently are of the same Societies, because Corporations are
immortal. That King John resigned his Crown, without a Parliamentary Consent,
is to be taken for granted after this solemn determination; the only question
is, whether 'twas with the consent of his Curia, Matt. Paris Ann. 1212. 14
Johannis.
or such a Commune Consilium Regni, as his Charter sets forth.

The King had summoned his Military Council to Dover, in the 14 of his Reign,
as in the third he had to Portsmouth; they which were summoned to the last are
specified under the Denominations of Comites, Barons and Omnes qui Militare
Servitium ei debebant, this was to have them pass the Seas with him, and they
that stayed at home, gave him Escuage. Veniente autem die statuto, multi
impetrata licentia dant Regi de quolibet Scuto duas Marcas Argenti. Here was a
Military Council, and a Military Aid given; they that were with him at Dover
are not particularly described by Matthew Paris, but he tells us, Convenerunt
Rex Anglorum, and Pandulphus cum proceribus Regni apud domum Militum, Templi
juxta Doveram 15. die Maii, Matt. Par.
ubi idem Rex juxta quod Romae fierat sententiatum, resignavit coronam suam cum
Regnis Angliae, etc.

This was Communi Consilio Baronum nostrorum, Matt. Par. Knyghton.
as Matt. Paris and Knyghton render the Charter.

As Matt. Westminster ad optimum consilium Baronum nostrorum, Matt. West. fol.
271.
the last gives us the form of the Summons which shows who were the Commune
Consilium Regni here, the Proceres Regni mentioned in Matt. Paris. Omnes suae
ditionis Homines, Matt. West. fol. 271.
viz. Duces, Comites and Barons, Milites and Servientes cum equis and armis:
So that here was a Military Summons to them that ought to come, because of
Services, which is explained by the Summons to Dover, which was to Omnes qui
militare servitium ei debebant, if he thought all were bound to that Service,
and summoned all, still the Parliaments Judgment satisfies us, either that the
rest were not obliged, and therefore came not, or if they came as they often
did in Hen. 3. time, upon the like summons, as appears by many Records of that
Age, that the King's Tenants only assented to the Resignation.

Either way it resolves into this, that a Council of the King's Tenants, was
not a Council that could lay any Obligation upon, or pretend to a
Representation of the whole Kingdom.

Indeed I meet with a MS. wrote I suppose in the time of Hen. 6. above two
hundred years past, the Author of which (being induced by all the Records, or
Histories, which had then appeared to him, to believe that nothing could be of
Universal Obligation, even in King John's time, but what was assented to as
universally as Laws were when he wrote) gives us King John's Charter of
Resignation in a very full and complete form, as if it had been --

Per consilium and assensum nostrorum Procerum Arch. Ep. Ab. Prior. Comitat.
MS. Cod. ex Bib. Dom. Wild nuper defunct.
Baronum, Militum, Liberorum hominum, and omnium fidelium nostrorum: Whereby if
his Authority could stand in competition with the Great Councils, he would
remove the Objection that had been long before made, which was, that this
Resignation made in the ordinary Curia, was not in a Legal Representative of
the Kingdom.

It seems that both the Parliament and this Author were then satisfied that the
King's Feudal Peers or Tenants in Chief could not make a Commune Consilium
Regni, as a full Parliament in King John's time.

Besides it is worthy of consideration, that if none but Tenants in Capite were
of the Common Council of the Kingdom at this time, then all the Abbots, Priors,
and other Dignified Clergy, who held not of the King in Chief, and yet were
very numerous, together with the whole body of the inferior Clergy, were
entirely excluded from, and never admitted to this Common Council any more than
the rest of the Layty, from the time of William the First, to the forty ninth
of Henry the Third.

This I conceive is enough in the Negative, that the King's Tenants could not
within the meaning of this Charter make the Common or General Council of the
Nation: If it be said that they made the Common or ordinary Council for matters
of Tenure or ordinary Justice, I shall not oppose it, in which sense they might
be said to be a Commune Consilium Regni, but that sense cannot be here
intended, because the words are Commune Consilium de auxiliis assidendis aliter
quam, etc. and de scutagiis, etc. So that it is manifestly no more than a Common
Council for the assessing of Aids and Escuage; and if I show that the Aids and
Escuage concerned the King's Tenants only, then the Common Council of the
Kingdom dwindles into a Common Council of the King's Tenants for matters
concerning their Tenure.

If no instance can be shown from Record or History of Auxilia or Aids raised
by the Kings of England without more general consent, except such as were
raised of his immediate Tenants; and those cases wherein the King here reserved
to himself a power of charging with Aid or Escuage without consent of a Common
Council concerned his Tenants only, and more than those Tenants were parties or
privies to this Charter, it must needs be that the other cases wherein the
consent of a Common Council was requisite, concerned Tenants only, since only
their consent is required, and they only stood in need of this clause of the
Charter.

That two of the three above mentioned ( viz.) Aid to make the Eldest Son a
Knight, and to marry the Eldest Daughter were incident to Tenure, appears by
the Stat. West. 1. Cap. 36. which ascertains the Aid which before as that
declares was not reasonable, and shows upon whom it lay ( viz.) Tenants by
Knights Service and Socage Tenants, and there is no doubt, but if the King
might by Law have required Aid, in those two cases he might have done it, in
the third for the redemption of his own body, which was a service a King of
England, especially after the loss of Normandy, which often occasioned the
exposing their Sacred Persons, Note, a Common Lord had Aid in the like case by
King John's Charter.
so little stood in need of and was likely so rarely to happen, that there was
no need to redress, by the Statute of West. any grievance arising from thence.

Though the Statute here spoken of be only in the affirmative, what Tenants by
these Services shall pay: Yet this has been taken to be pregnant with a
Negative as to all others not mentioned. So 11 Hen. 4. fol. 32. Null grand
sergeanty ne null auter tenure mes seulement ceux queux teigne, in Chevalry and
en Socage ne paieront Aid a file marrier pour ceo Stat. de West. 1. cap. 36.
voet que ceux deux tenures serroint charges and ne parle de auters tenures;
that is, none but Tenants by Knights Service and Socage are liable to these
Auxilia. But over and above these incidents, whether with consent of Tenants,
or advice of other Council, or merely of their arbitrary motion Kings used to
raise money upon their Tenants, and these were called Auxilia, which is the
word used in this Charter of King John, the leavy upon Tenants by Knights
Service was called Escuage, because of their Servitium Scuti, Service of the
Shield, that upon Tenants of their Demesns in Common Socage, Tallage, which is
a word that might be of a large extent, as it signifies a cutting off from the
Estate, but being it was never used as an imposition with pretense of Duty but
upon his Tenants, and that which was raised upon Tenants by Knights Service had
its proper name, therefore this has generally been applied to the payments of
Socage Tenants, either as ordinary Services, that is, upon the ordinary
occasions wherein 'twas of course raised by the King, or upon extraordinary
occasions and necessities, which required advice.

Yet as an exaction or unjust payment it has been taken in the largest sense to
reach to all Tenants and others; as in William the First his Emendations or
Charter of Liberties, William 1.
the 1. Magna Charta.

Volumus etiam ac firmiter praecipimus and concedimus, Seldeni ad Fadmer. and
notae and specilegium fol. 190.
ut omnes liberi homines totius Monarchiae Regni nostri praedicti, habeant and
teneant terras suas and possessiones suas been and in pace liberas ab omni
exactione injusta and ab omni Tallagio, ita quod nihil ab eis exigatur vel
capiatur nisi servitium suum liberum quod de jure nobis facere tenentur, and
prout statutum est eis and illis a nobis concessum jure haereditario in
perpetuum, per Commune Concilium totius Regni nostri praedicti.

In a General Council of the whole Kingdom it had been settled what the King
should have of his Tenants by reason of Tenure, and what Free Services he
should have even of those Freemen which were not his Tenants.

Thus by the Oath of Fealty or Allegiance and by the Law of Association, Ib.
cap. 52, 59.
or the revival of the Frank Pledges, every Freeman was tied to Service for the
Defense of the Peace and Dignity of the Crown and Kingdom, Et ad judicium
rectum and sustitiam constanter omnibus modis pro posse suo sine dolo and sine
dilatione faciend. ib.
and by the Association more particularly to maintain Right and Justice; for
all which they were to be conjurati fratres sworn Brethren.

And besides this there were Services belonging to the Crown, which lay upon
the Lands of Freemen; To instance in Treasure, Trove and Royal Mines, Knyghton,
fol. 2358.
Thesauri de terris Regis sunt nisi in Ecclesia vel Coemeterio inveniantur.
Leges Will. 1.


Aurum Regis est and medietas argenti and medietas ubi inventum fuerit,
quodcumque ipsa Ecclesia fuerit dives vel pauper.

And this was as properly a Service as the Roman servitus praediorum,
Servitutes rusticorum praediorum sunt haec, iter, actus, via, aquaeductus.
Digest. lib. 8. tit. 3. Servitutum non ea natura est ut aliquid faciat, sed ut
aliquid patiatur, vel non faciat, ib. fol. 215.
which consisted in something to be suffered upon Lands or Houses.

But he would not exact or take from them by force any kind of Tallage.

Therefore the Historian tells us, Sim Dunelm. fol. 212. 1084. 14 Will. 1.
that in the year 1084. De unaquaque hida per Angliam VI. solidos accepit, he
accepted as a voluntary gift 6 s. of every hide of Land throughout the
Kingdom, if 'twas without consent, 'twas against his own Charter, and so
illegal.

But to proceed to show the nature of the Auxilia, which came from Tenants in
the Reign of some of his Successors, either ordinary as common incidents or
extraordinary.

By the Common Law, 2. Inst. f^l. 232.
as the Lord Cook observes upon the Statute of West. 1. cap. 36. to every
Tenure by Knights Service and Socage, there were three Aids of money called in
Law Auxilia, incident and implied without special reservation or mention (that
is to say) relief when the Heir was of full Age, Aid pur fair fitx Chevalier,
and Aid pur file marrier.

When the Lord Cook tells us that these Services were incident to Socage
Tenures, as well as Knights Service it must be intended, when it is spoke of
the Services of the Tenants of the King's Ancient Demeasn only, for they that
held of the King by certain Rent, which was Socage Tenure, were not subject to
the payment of the Tallage, except their Land were of the Ancient Demeasn of
the Crown.

And therefore Robert de Vere Earl of Oxford, who held a Manor of the Crown by
a certain Rent, which to be sure was not Knights Service, Inter brevia directa
Baron. de term. Mich. 32 Ed. 1. M. 4. dorso penos Rem. Regis in Scaccario.
pleads that he held the Manor with the Appurtenances, per Servitium December
librarum Regi, ad Scaccarium annuatim reddendum pro omni Servitio, and
Regidedit intelligi quod idem Manner non antiquo dominico Coronae Regis Angliae
nec est de aliquibus temporibus retroactis in Tallag. The same Plea for the
Earl of Glocest. and Herts. allowed, ib. M. 5.
per Progenitor. Regis Angliae in dominicis suis assessis consuevit talliari.

Upon search made he and his Tenants are freed from Tallage.

So the King declares that he will not have Aid, Inter brevia directa Baron. de
Term. Hill. 33 Ed. 1. penes Rem. Domini These. in Scaccario.
that is Tallage for marrying his Eldest Daughter of any Clergymen that hold
in Frank-Almaign or Socage, which must be taken in the same sense with the
former.

And before this Walterus de Esseleg held a Manor, Inter Communia de term
Mich. 31 Hen. 3. penes Rem. Domini Regis in Scaccario.
ad foedi firmam, that is at a certain Rent of the gift of Hen. 2. and was
never afterward talliated, quum Praedecessores nostris Reges Angliae and nos
talliari fecimus Dominica nostra (it seems though the Land had been of Ancient
Demeasn, yet it was severed by the Purchase.)

This Tallage was called Auxilium in the Record. Rot. Claus. 11 Hen. 3. M. 19.
De consilio nostro provisum est quod auxilium efficax assideri faciamus in
omnibus burgis and dominicis nostris.

Yet the City of London being charged with a Tallage, the Common Council
dispute whether it were Tallagium or Auxilium which is there meant of a
voluntary Aid, De term. Hill. 39 H. 3. penes Rem. Regis in Scaccario.
not due upon the account of any of their houses being of the Kings demeasne,
though indeed it is then shown that they had several times before been talliated.

This explains that part of the Charter, simili modo fiat de Civitate
Londinensi, that is, as in all cases besides those excepted, Escuage or Tallage
should not be raised but by a Common Council of the Kingdom, that is, of all
the persons concerned to pay: So for the City of London, unless the Aid were
ordered in a Common Council, wherein they and all other Tenants in Chief were
assembled, none should be laid upon any Citizens, but by the consent of their
own Common Council; and if the Ordinance were only in general terms, that all
the Kings Demeasns should be talliated, the proportions payable there should be
agreed by the Common Council of the City, according to that Record, 11 Hen. 3.
Assedimus auxilium efficax in Civitati nostra London. Ita quod singulos tam
Majores quam Minores de voluntate Omnium Baronum nostrorum Civitatis ejusdem
per se talliavimus. Nota.
Et ideo providimus simile auxilium per omnes Civitates nostras, Burgos and
dominica nostra assidere.

This per se talliavimus was a talliating per Capita, for when the Common
Council refused to give such a sum in gross, as the King demanded, then the
King was put to have it collected of every Head, Supra inter Communia de Term.
Mich. penes Rem. Regis.
and is, according to the faculty of every Socage Tenant of his Demeasn, as
appears by the Record of 39 Hen. 3.

Whereas by this Charter the King might take Escuage or Tallage in three cases
without the consent of the Tenants, but confined to reasonable, that is,
secundum facultates, or salvo contenemento, and in those cases wherein their
consent was required, things were carried by the Majority of voices amongst
them that were present upon his Summons, which sometimes were very few; as when
he held his Court at Westminster in the fifteenth of his Reign on Christmas
the chief time, M. P. fol. 224. Ed. Tig.
'twas cum pauco admodum Militum Comitatu, there arose a very great
inconvenience, and a few Tenants called together at a time, when the rest could
not attend, as in Harvest, or the like, might ruin the rest; therefore this
separate Court of Tenants is wholly taken away in the Reign of Edward the
First, and he promises that no Tallage or Aid (without any reservation) should
be leavied for the future, without the consent of a full settled Parliament,
not that it was incumbent upon all that came to Parliament to pay either
Tallage or Escuage; but as they were the Great Council of the Nation they
should advise him, when, or in what proportion to talliate his Demeasns, or lay
Escuage upon his Tenants by Knights Service: And when the King's Tenants paid
Escuage by Authority of Parliament, the Tenants by Knights Service of inferior
Lords, were obliged to pay to their Lords, 34 Ed. 1. cap. 1. Coke 2. Inst. 532.
Lit. Sect. 100. the Statute is thus, Nullum tallagium vel auxilium per nos vel
haeredes nostros in Regno nostro ponatur seu levetur sine voluntate and assensu
Arch. Ep. Comitum, Baronum, Militum, Burgensium and aliorum liberoum hominum de
Regno nostro.

Pursuant to this the very same year is a Record of a Summons for a Parliament
to consider of an Aid to make his Eldest Son Knight, for which before he need
not have consulted his Parliament, nor the Council of the Tenants; de jure
Coronae nostrae in hujusmodi casu auxilium fieri nobis debet, Rot. Claus. 34
Ed. 1. M. 16. dorso.
says the Record, and yet he had tied up his hands from raising it without
consent of Parliament.

However King John had in some measure redressed their grievance, giving them
assurance that there should always be the general consent of Tenants for what
was not payable of right and custom, without any consent of theirs, 25 Ed. 1.
cap. 6. In this part declarative of the Law, as by King John's Charter.
and for the assessing those sums to which consent was made necessary, there
should be a convenient notice that none might complain of the injustice of the
charge.

But all these things so manifestly relate to Tenure, both the cases excepted
and the cases provided for, that no other sense can be tolerable, for where the
King reserves three incidents to Tenure, and the particulars within the
provision are appendant to Tenure, and none but Tenants are mentioned, shall we
believe that something Foreign is intended by the very same words? though we
may well believe that all Aids whatever were intended by the Statute of Edw. 1.
because the consent of all People; Tenants, and others is required.

Thus far I think I am warranted by very good Authorities; I take leave to
observe farther, that it should seem that before this Charter the King might
have charged his geldable or talliable Lands, that is, those Lands which were
held of his Demeasn in Socage at his own discretion, but could not charge them
that held by Knights Service without their consent, and so this part take it,
barely to the consenting is for the advantage and relief of the Socage Tenants
only. The Charter of Henry the First, which exempts the King's Tenants by
Knights Service, ab omnibus geldis, that is, tribute or forced payments beyond
ordinary Services, leaves the King a Power of charging his other Tenants by
meaner Services, though not those which held by Serjeanty, pro omni servitio.

Militibus qui per loricas terras suas deserviunt terras dominicarum carucarum
suarum quietas ab omnibus geldis and ab omni opere proprio dono meo concedo,
Carta, Hen. 1.
ut sicut tam magno gravamine alleviati sunt, ita equis and armis se been
instruant, ut apti sint and parati ad servitium suum and ad defensionem Regni.
But then as the consent is qualified upon such notice and summons to a certain
place* herein the Tenants by Knights Service are eased in relation to part of
their Service.

They were obliged to attend the King's Court, either in his Wars, his
administration of Justice, or for the assessing of Escuage upon those that made
default in their Personal Services; for the first there could not be any time
of summons or place of attendance ascertained, because occasion and necessity
was to determine that; for the second, they could not claim it as a privilege,
the administration of Justice being within the King's Ordinary Power, and his
Ministers and Justices were sufficient assistants. But in the last there was a
grievance in which 'twas proper for the King's extraordinary Justice to relieve
them. Et ad habendum Commune Consilium Regni de scutagiis assidendis, for the
assessing of Escuage, which was part of the work of the Curia, they should be
summoned, as is thereby provided.

Even before the Normans coming the Kings used to celebrate Feast-days with
great solemnity, and at those days they chose habere colloquium, Anno 948. vita
Aelfredi, fol. 124.
to consult with their People: So King Eldred summoned all the Magnates of the
Kingdom to meet him at London on our Lady Day. Ne qui Magnates viz. Comes,
Baro, Miles seu aliquae alia notabilis persona, etc. Rot. Claus. 3. E. 2. M.
16. d. Carta Edgari Regis ex Registro de Ramsey in Scaccario penes Rem. Regis,
fol. 336.
In festo Nativitatis B. Mariae universi Magnates Regni per Regium Edictum
summoniti, etc. Londoniis convenerunt ad tractandum de negotiis publicis totius
Regni; so King Edgar had a Great Assembly, and called it Curiam suam at
Christmas.

Cum in natali Dominico omnes Majores totius Regni mei tam Ecclesiasticae
Personae quam seculares ad Curiam meam celebrandae mecum festivitatis gratia
convenissent coram tota Curia mea corroboravi.

That the Curia Regis then consisted not of the King's Tenants only: I could
show more particularly by a discourse of the Feudal Law, and of what prevalence
it was here before the Normans time: But I think there is enough to this
purpose here from one Piece of Antiquity, which shows what in Ancient time made
a Churl or Pesant become a Theyn or Noble, and that so Anciently, that in a
Saxon MS. supposed to be wrote in the Saxon time, it is spoke of as antiquated.

That was five hides of his own Land, a Church and a Kitchen, a Bell-house and
a Burrough-gate, with a Seat and any distinct Office in the Kings Court. This
Churl is in an Ancient MS. cited by Mr. Seldom called Villanus; so that if a
man were not Freeborn if he could make such an acquisition he became ipso
facto, a Thane, a Freeman, Thani autem appellatione, viri interdum nobiles
interdum liberae conditionis homines, in terdum Magistratus, atque saepenumero
ministri notantur, Glos. ad finem Lamb. Archaionomia.
as they were often used the one for the other, which I think is easily to be
collected from several places in Doomsday Book, and as at that time such
circumstances with a place in the King's Court made a Thane or Freeman, so a
Thane or Freeman had a place in the Great Court, as we see Edgar's Curia had
all the Majores totius Regni, without any qualification from Tenure. But this
is to be observed that this being spoke of as antiquated, and that the People
and Laws were in reputation when this was the usage, there is a strong
presumption from hence, that since that time a less matter than five hides of
Land, Vide Hackwel 's Ancient Customs of England, p. 97,
a Church, etc. gave a place in the King's Court when Nobilty was cheaper, and
so the People, the Nobles of less reputation. The Normans followed not only the
Lane but the decent Customs and Ceremonies of the former Government, though not
directly yet by way of resemblance.

And whereas the Saxon Kings celebrated their Courts often on great Feast days
before all their People upon public notice, King William erects Tenures,
whereby all that he had obliged by his gifts, except such as out of special
favor were to do some small thing, pro omni servitio, should make a little
Court or Council by themselves either Military (if occasion were) or Judicial
in matters belonging to their feud.

And by Henry the Third's time, if not Henry the Second's, it took in all, or
most matters of ordinary Justice; whereas before, its business was confined to
the Controversies arising between the King's immediate Tenants, other Suits,
especially about Lands, were settled in the Counties or Hundreds, or in
particular Lords Courts, as appears by the Charter of Henry the First, de
Comitatu and Hundredis tenendis.

Henricus Rex Anglorum Sampsoni Episcopo and Ursoni de Abecot and omnibus
Baronibus Francis and Anglicis de Wircestrescira, Spelm. Glossar. de Hundred^.
salutem: sciatis quod concedo and praecipio ut a modo Comitatus mei and
Hundreda in illis locis and eisdem terminis sedeant sicut sederunt in tempore
Regis Edw. and non aliter. (...) enim quando voluero faciam ea satis summoneri
propter mea dominica necessaria ad voluntatem meam.

I cannot here omit the plain observation that dominica necessaria, cannot be
meant otherwise than of the King's own business; for his necessary Demeasns
were nonsense, therefore the sense is, that as often as he had occasion, he
would give them, that is, all the Counties and Hundreds, sufficient notice for
attending him; so that here is a clear description of the nature of his Great
Councils, nay, and of St. Edward's too, in that when he says, they shall sit no
otherwise than they had done in St. Edward's time, he adds; For when I have a
mind to it, I will cause them to be sufficiently summoned to meet upon my
necessary occasions, of which, I will be Judge, that is, so it was in King
Edward's time, and indeed so it appears in the Body of his Laws recited in the
Fourth of William the First, Vide Lambart. de Priscis Legibus.
where it is enacted that Tithes shall be paid of Bees, we are there told with
what solemnity the Law passed, Concessa sunt a Rege, Baronibus, and Populo; So
whereas King Ethelwolf Father to the Illustrious King Alfred had in the year
855 or 854 granted to the Church the Tithe of his own Demeasns. In vita
Aelfredi, fol.
Rex Decimas Ecclesia concessit ex omnibus suis terris sive Villis Regiis,
about ten years afterward the Tithes were settled all over the Kingdom by a
general consent, tota regione cum consensu Nobilium and totias populi.

By the Populus is not to be intended all People whatsoever, for they who were
not Freeholders were not People of the Land, were no Cives, and were not
properly a part of any Hundred or Country, for they were made up of the Free
Pledges, the Freeholders, Masters of the several Families, answering for one
another by Tens, Ten Tens, or Tythings at first making an Hundred Court, and
more or fewer Hundreds (according to the first division or increase) a Country,
and for the clear understanding the general Words, as Principes, Thaini,
Barons, Proceres, Baronagium, Barnagium Regni, or the like, relating to the
Great Councils of the Kingdom before and since the Norman acquisition, we find
by this Charter of Henry the First, that the Counties and Hundreds, that is,
the men which composed those Courts were upon sufficient notice to attend upon
the King's business, Sym. Dunelm. fol. 243. Anno 1121.
that is, constitute the Councils, and therefore Simeon of Durham very properly
says of the Great Council, So. Mat. West. f. 352. of the 37 Hen. 3.
Concilio totius Angliae adunato, the same with what Eadmerus says of the
Council of Pinnedene in the First William's time, Adunato magno Parliamento
edicto Regio.
adunatis primoribus and probis viris non solum de Comitatu Cantiae sed and de
aliis Comitatibus Angliae, Ead. l. 1. fol. 9.
here were the probi homines the Freeholders of the Counties, they that made
the County Court or Turn, either of which in St. Edward's Laws is called the
Folkmote, and is there described vocatio and congregatio populorum omnium, and
we find by Statutes made before this time, that the populus omnis, or the
primores and probi homines, according to Eadmerus are called Peers or Nobles,
Nobiles, Minores sunt Equites sive Milites, Armigeri and qui vulgo Generosi and
Gentlemen dicuntur, Camb. Brit. fol. 123.
for that the Country-Court, or Turn at least, was Celeberrimus ex omni
satrapia conventus. Thus in King Edgar's Laws, Centuriae Comitiis quisque ut
antea praescribitur interesto oppidana ter quotannis habentur Comitia.
Celeberrimus autem ex omni satrapia bis quotannis conventus agitor, cui quidem
illius Diocesis Episcopus and Senator intersunto, etc. Lambert de Priscis
Legibus.
This some great men have taken for a General Council or Parliament, but the
contrary is manifest in that only the Bishop of the Diocese, The County was
Satrapia, as they that composed it were Satrapae, so in a MS. cited by Mr.
Seldom, a trial is had at London before the Principes, Duces, Lawyers and
Satrapae, and the same renewed at Northampton, is said to be Congregata ibi
tota provincia sive Vicecomitatu coram cunctis. Titles of Honor, fol. 524, and
525. Bromton, fol. 872.
and one Senator either the Count or the Sheriff are to sit there in Chief and
this very Law being taken notice of by Bromton, it is there called Scyremotus;
so in Canutus his Laws, where this is repeated, Bromton. fol. 924. Canuti Leges.
and where Canutus his Laws give an Appeal from the Hundred to the County Court
or Turn; this of the County is called Conventus totius Comitatus quod Anglice
dicitur Scyremote.

But to proceed with the Charter of Henry the First, concerning the County and
Hundred Court.

Et si amodo exurgat placitum de divisione terrarum si interest Barons meos
dominicos tractetur placitum in Curia mea: Et si inter vavasores duorum
Dominorum tractetur in Com. etc. Though according to this the Titles to Land
between all but immediate Tenants, or such Lords as had none over them but the
King, were determinable in the County, yet sometime before the Great Charter of
Henry the Third, Common Pleas in General, which takes in the Titles of Land
followed the King's Court, where ever he held it, and by that Charter were
brought to a certain place. Communia placita non sequantur Curiam nostram sed
teneantur aliquo loco certo. The King's Bench is coram Rege, and used to follow
the King's Court, and was removeable at the King's pleasure. Here Common Pleas
as well as matters of the Crown were heard, and at this doubtless all the
King's Tenants by Knights Service used to be present, Bracton, lib. 3. p. 105,
of this Bracton says, Illarum Curiarum habet unam propriam sicut aulam regiam
and Justiciarios Capitales qui proprias causas Regis terminant and aliorum
omnium per querelam vel per privileginm sive libertatem; But as the Curia Regis
was held sometimes of the Tenants and Officers only sometimes of the whole
Kingdom, when matters having no relation to Tenure or ordinary Judicature were
in question, hence has arose the mistake of some Learned Authors in taking the
Curia Regis to be nothing but the Court of the King's Tenants, of others that
'twas meant only of the Great Council of the Nation.

Whereas we may trace their frequent distinctions from the Conquest downwards
very apparently, and very often their union.

It is agreed on all hands that the ordinary Curia was held thrice a year, In
praecipuis festis profuse convivabat natale Domini apud Gloverniam, Pascha apud
Wintoniam, Pentecoste apud Westminster.
at Christmas, Easter, and Whitsontide, and in the time of William the First,
the places were as certain on Christmas at Gloucester, on Easter at Winchester,
on Whitsontide at Westminster, while they were held at the accustomed places,
there was no need of any Summons, they that were to come ratione Tenurae might
well come de More; quando in Anglia foret tenere consuevit Knyghton, fol. 2354.
afterward, they removed from place to place, the King made the Court where
ever he was pleased to hold it, and indeed when ever; but then it could not be
the Curia de more: if it were at a different time or place, then there was need
of Summons, if there were summoned at any time more than the Ordinary Members
of the Curia; if this was on the day of the Curia there was an Union of the
Great Council and the Curia, if on a different day there was a Great Council by
its self, yet the Members of the Curia were a part thereof.

Not to anticipate what will appear from the Presidents which I shall produce
to make good this my Assertion; I shall make my Observations upon them in order.

About the first year of the Reign of William the First, William 1. An. 1067.
as Mr. Seldom supposes, Titles of Honor, p. 581.
was held the Council at Pinnedene, to determine the difference between Odo
Bishop of Baieux, Earl of Kent, and Archbishop Lanfranc; if this were a Curia
de More, then it is evident that more than Tenants in Chief; nay, all
Proprietors of Lands assembled then of course even at the Curia, for the probi
homines of several Counties were there, but it appears that it was upon the
King's Summons to all the Freeholders of Kent, and of some adjacent Counties.

Praecepit Rex quatenus adunatis primoribus and probis viris non solum de
comitatu Cantiae, Eadmeri Hist. nov. ^. 1. fol. 9.
sed and de aliis comitatibus Angliae querelae Lanfranci in medium ducerentur,
examinarentur, determinarentur.

Disposito itaque apud Pinnedene Principum conventu Godfridus Episcopus
Constantiensis vir ea tempestate praedives in Anglia vice Regis Lanfranco
justitiam de suis querelis strenuissime facere jussus fecit.

Here all the probi homines are by variation of the phrase conventus Principum,
a Bishop was President and pronounced the Judgment; but it was, as it is said
afterward, Ex communi omnium astipulatione and judicio, this Judgment was
afterward revoked in another Council, which to be sure must have been as large
as the other, else the Lawyers who were there, could never have made any color
of an Argument for the revocation.

Item alio tempore idem Odo permittente Rege placitum instituit contra saepe
fatam Ecclesiam and Tutorem ejus patrem Lanfranc and illius omnes quos
peritiores legum and usuum Anglici Regni noverat gnarus adduxit. Cum igitur ad
ventilationem causarum ventum esset omnes qui tuendis Ecclesiae causis quaque
convenerunt in primo congressu ita convicti sunt ut in quo eas tuerentur simul
amitterent. It Is observable that there was a legal trial, and the cause went on
that side, where the Law seemed to be; but indeed afterward Lanfranc coming
possibly upon producing some Evidences not appearing before the first Judgment
was affirmed.

Here matter of ordinary Justice was determined before more than the ordinary
Curia.

This looks very like a General Council of the whole Nation, to be sure 'twas
more than a Curia of the King's Tenants and Officers, and is more than a County
Court.

Yet in the nature of a County Court, it being several Counties united, and so
was adunatio conciliorum, though not of the Council of the whole Nation.

An Ancient MS. Cod. Roff. MS. Seldeni notae in Eadmer. fol. 197.
makes this Chiefly a Court of the County of Kent.

Praecepit Rex Comitatum totum absque mora considere, and homines Comitatus
omnes francigenas and praecipue Angl. in antiquis legibus and consuetudinibus
peritos in unum convenire.

But then it adds, and alii aliorum Comitatum homines, and so confirms what
Eadmerus says.

The nature of these Courts is easily to be explained by Writs, which we find
from William the First for such Trials as this at Pinnedene. MS. Historia de
terris Aedel Woldi scriptus est hic liber temporibus Hen. 1. jussu Herveri
Episc. Eleensis primi.


Willelmus Anglorum Rex omnibus fidelibus suis and Vicecomitibus in quorum
Vicecomitatibus abbatia de Heli terras habet, salutem: Praecipio Abbatia de
Heli habeat omnes consuetudines suas, etc. has inquam habeat sicut habuit die
qua Rex Edwardus fuit vivus and mortuus, So the Record
and sicut mea jussione dirationatae sunt apud Keneteford per plures scyras
ante meos Barons, Inter com. de Term. Pasc. 18. R. E. fib. R. E.
viz.

Gaulfridum Constansiensem Episcopum, and Balwinum Abbatem, and Petrum de
Valonnus, and Picotum Vicecomitem, and Tehehen de Heliom, and Hugonem de
Hosden, and Gocelinum de Norwicum, and plures alios Test Rogero Bigot.

Willielmus Rex Anglorum Lanfranco Archiep. Breve aliud p. 107. a.
and Rogero Comiti Moritonio and Gauffrido Constantiensi Episcopo, salutem.
Mando vobis and praecipio ut iterum faciatis congregari omnes scyras quae
interfuerunt placito habito de terris Ecclesiae de Hely antequam mea conjux in
Normaniam novissime veniret.

Cum quibus etiam sint de Baronibus meis qui competenter adesse poterunt, and
praedicto placito interfuerunt et qui terras ejusdem Ecclesiae tenent. A Jury.
Quibus in unum congregatis eligantur plures de illis Anglis qui sciunt quomodo
terrae jacebant praefatae Ecclesiae die qua Rex Edwardus obiit, et quod inde
dixerint ibidem jurando testentur. Quo facto restituantur Ecclesiae terrae quae
in dominico suo erant die obitus Edwardi, exceptis his quas homines clamabunt
me sibi dedisse; Illas vero literis signate quae sint et qui eas tenent. Under
Tenants.
Qui autem tenent Theinlandes quae proculdubio debent teneri de Ecclesia,
faciant concordiam cum Abb. quam meliorem poterint et si noluerint terrae
remaneant ad Ecclesiam. Lords of Manors.
Hoc quoque de tenentibus socam et sacam fiat. Denique praecipio ut illi
homines faciant pontem de Heli qui meo praecepto et dispositione hucusque illum
soliti sunt facere.

Willielmus Rex Anglorum Goffrido Episcopo et Rodberto et Comiti Moritonio,
Aliud.
salutem. Facite simul venire omnes illos qui terras tenent de dominico victu
Ecclesiae de Heli, et volo ut Ecclesia eas habeat sicut habuit die qua Edwardus
Rex fuit vivus et mortuus, et si aliquis dixerit quod inde de meo dono aliquid
habeat Mandate in magnitudinem terrae et quomodo eam reclamat, et ego secundum
quod audiero aut ei inde escambitionem reddam aut aliud faciam; facite etiam ut
Abbas Symeon habeat omnes confuetudines quae ad Abbatiam de Heli pertinent,
sicut eas habebat Antecessor ejus tempore Regis Edwardi, Preterea facite ut
Abbas seisitus sit de illis Theinlandis quae ad Abbatiam pertinebant die quo
Rex Edwardus fuit mortuus, These had Lands which belonged to the Abbey, as
appears in the Inquisition.
si illi qui eas habent secum concordare noluerint, et ad istud placitum
summonete Willielmum de Guaregnna, et Richardum filium Gisleberti, et Hugonem
de Monteforti, et Goffridum de Manna Villa, et Radulfum de Belfo, et Herveum
Bituricensem, et Hardewinum, de Escalers et alios quos Abbas vobis nominabit.

Upon these Writs many useful things might be observed, but I will confine my
self as nigh as I can to my purpose.

From them as interpreted by equal authority of History it appears, that Will.
the first used to commissionate several of his Barons. I will not oppose their
being his great Tenants in Chief, these were to preside in the Trials of
matters within ordinary Justice, which were to be tried in the several Counties
where the question arose, sometimes in one County, sometimes in several
together as the men of the several Counties, that is, the several Counties were
united.

Sometimes these great Men, sometimes the Sheriffs were to Summon the Parties,
and to take care that an Inquest of the County or Counties concerned be
impannell'd, in the Counties, that is, by the choice of the Freeholders.

The Kings Commissioners were to pronounce the Judgment in the Kings Name or
stead: So the Bishop of Constance did right to Lanfranc, Eadmerus Codex Roff.
Seldens spic. ad Edm. fo. 200.
'twas Judicio Baronum Regis qui placitum tenuerunt, and yet ex communi omnium
astipulatione and judicio, The Inquest upon their Oaths found the matter of
Fact, the Judges stated it to the people, and delivered their Judgment; to
which the Primores and probi homines assented, for 'twas ex communi omnium
astipulatione; Bracton fo. 1.
this agrees with what Bracton says of the Laws passed in the Great Council of
the Nation. De Concilio and Consensu Magnatum and Reipublicae communi sponsione.

But it may be objected that the Kings Writ is to the Great Men to do Justice,
to which the Books give an answer that the Kings Writ does not change the
Nature or Jurisdiction of a Court, and therefore though a Writ of Right or a
Justities be directed to the Sheriff, Cook. 6. Rep. fo. 11. a. and b.
yet the Suitors in the County Court are Judges.

And what their Jurisdiction was in the time of Will. the first, Gentleman's case.
is to be gathered from what continued to the Freeholders or Suitors of the
County Court of Chester even till the time of Edward the First. Pl. Dom. R.
apud Berwick super Tweedam de Octab. sanctae Tr. An. R. Ed. fill. R. H. 2o Coram
Gilberto de Thornton Reog. Brabazon. and Rob. Malet. Just. ad pl, ejusdem Dom.
R. tenend. assignat.


Upon a Writ of Error to remove a Judgment out of the County Palatine of
Chester into the King's Bench in a Plea of Land; The Chief Justice of Chester
certifies that the Judicatores et Sectatores the Suitors at the County Court,
clamant habere talem libertatem quod in tali casu debent omnes Barons and
eorum Seneschal. ac Judicatores ejusdem Comitatus summoniri audituri hujusmodi
processum and Recordum and illa antiquam sigilla sua apponant; si fuerit infra
tertium Comitatum per seipsos emendare. Et hujusmodi libertates a tempore quo
non exstat memoria usi sunt et gavisi.

And the Chief Justice farther certifies, quod fecit summoniri omnes Barons et
Judicatores, accordingly.

The Parties Assembled at the Council of Pinnedene, were the Primores et probi
viri of the Counties concerned, which answer to the Proceres et fideles Regni,
in the union of all the Counties in Parliament, as in the 42 of Henry 3. which
in another Record of the same Parliament are branched out into hanz hommes e
prodes hommes, Rot. Pat. 42. H. 3. m. 10. and m. 4.
there are the Primores et probi viri, e du commun de nostre Realm: that is,
as the Statute of the Staple has it, the Prelates, Dukes, Earls, Barons, the
Great Men of the Counties, Grands des County's as the French, Stat. staple 27
Ed. 3. An. 1353.
and the Commons of the Cities and Borroughs.

The Testimony of Eadmerus concerning the Parties to the Judgment at Pinnedene
confirms me in my opinion, that the Summons to a Great Council as I take it in
this Kings Reign, mentioned by Simon of Durham and Florentius Wygorniensis,
Sym: Dunelm. f. 213. El. Wygorn. f. 641.
which was to all the Bishops, Abbots, Earls, Barons, Sheriffs, with their
Knights, was not to them and those only who held of them by Knights Service,
Nec multo post (viz.) post Curiam mandavit ut Arch. Ep. Com. Bar. Vicecom. cum
suis mi lit. sibi occurrerent, Saresberiae quo cum venissent milites illorum
sibi fidel. contra omnes homines jurare coegit.
for more than such were Judges even for matters of ordinary Justice within the
Counties, but that it was to them and the Sheriffs, Knights, the Freeholders of
the Countys who were by St. Edwards Laws obliged to find Arms, and became
Knights Milites as soon as by public Authority they took Arms; the ancient
form of Manumission proves this sufficiently.

Siquis velit servum suum liberum facere tradet eum Vicecomiti per manum
dextram in pleno Comitatu, et quietum illum clamare debet a jugo servitutis
suae per manumissionem, et ostendat ei liberas portas et vivias et tradat illi
libera Arma, Cowslli Ins. juris, Ang. de Libertinis Tit. 50. p. 11.
viz. Lanceam et Gladium et deinde liber homo efficitur.

Thus he becomes a freeman and the Sheriffs Knights at the same time.

That all Freeholders had the appellation of Milites, Inter Leges Will. 1. Cap.
65.
is evident by many Records, and even a Statute, Seldeni ad Ead. notae and
spicel.
that for the choice of Coroners which was but declaratory of the common Law,
as appears by several Records, Stat. West. 1.
before that time; I will instance in one.

Because one that had been chosen Coroner, was neither a Knight or Freeman, as
that interprets it self, nor yet discreet, therefore a new choice is directed,
Rot. Claus. 38. Hen. 3.
Miles non est, et in servitio alieno, et juvenis et insufficiens et minus
discretus.

Here in Servitio alieno, a servant, is put in contradistinction to Miles, that
is, to a Freeholder, or Liber tenens. Et here, has the like import with Sed,
unless a man might have been a Knight, and yet no Freeman.

The Freeholders of the County of Cornwall Fine to the King for leave to choose
their Sheriff, Rot. Claus. H. 3. p. 1. m. 18. It appears by another Record that
this Shrivalty was of fee in the Count according to the exception in the
statute, which gives each County leave to choose.
it is said in the Record.

Milites de Com. Cornubiae finem fecerunt Rot. fin. 5o H. 3. pars 1 a. M, 9.

And these which are here called by the general denomination of Knights, are in
another Record of the same specified under these names.

Episcopus, Comites, Bar. Milites libere tenentes, et omnes alii de Com. so
that all the people of the County, that is, they which were part of the County
Court were comprehended under the word Milites.

In another Record, the Milites et probi homines, Rot. claus. An. 11. H. 3.
that is, honest Freeholders are used as the same.

In pleno Com. tuo dicas Militibus probis hominibus Ballivae tuae. etc. Vide
leges Edw. renov 4. Will. 1. Isti vero viri viz. Heretochii eligebantur Per
Commune Concilium, pro communi utilitate regni p^ Provincias and Patrias
universas and per singulos comitatus in pleno folemo^^ sicut and Vicecomites
Provinciarum and Comitat. elegi debent. Lambert A^chaio nomia Ed Cant. fo. 147.


The Milites or probi homines were under the Sheriff, an Officer of their own
choice, as was the Law and Custom of this King's time to be sure and long
after: the Office of the Heretochius, who had been the Ductor Militiae, had
been discontinued no body knows how long, and it is spoke of only as an Office
that had been.

But the Sheriff, being of the Freeholders choice, not the Kings, having no
certain Salary, 2. Just. f. 74.
nor Fee upon any account taken notice of in the eye of the Law; but depending
upon what the King should give out of the two thirds of the Profits of the
County, (the tertium denarium, the third part, the Earl o^ Count had) who will
imagine that the Sheriffs as Sheriffs, had any feud raised upon them by the
King, that is, were to attend at his Courts or in his Wars, with their Feudall
Knights the posse Commitatus which was assisting to them, being of quite
another nature?

Indeed I find one Fulcherus, (...)
homo Vicecomitis, that is, Tenant by Knights Service, to which homage was
incident, and in that sense Miles Vicecomitis; in another part, Tenet Rogerus
de Picoto Vicecomite de foedo Regis hanc terram tenuit Gold. sub Abbate Eli
potuit dare absque ejus licentia sine saca.

This had been freehold within the Abbots Precinct, alienable without license,
subject to no suit of Court, and was granted to Picot then Sheriff of the
County to hold of the Kings feud, that is, by Knights service.

Yet he did not hold this as Vicecomes, but as Baro, so 'twas if any man had
the County in fee: But the King Summoned the Barons, and Vicecomites, that is,
the Vicecomites without consideration of their capacity as Barons, and their
Knights; 'twas long after this, that the word Vicecomes was any thing more than
tbe name of the Office here spoken of; Neither had we any of dignity although
the Office in some places has been hereditary from ancient time. until Hen. 6.
Tit. of Hon. 1. Ed. p. 255. and 256.
an honorary Viscount was not then known, such indeed might at their creation
have had feuds raised upon the Lands granted along with their Honors.

There is this farther proof, that this was more than a Council of the Kings
Tenants and Officers or ordinary Court; in that the Summons was immediately
after the Curia, and that to a place sufficiently capacious, Salisbury Plain.

Et in hebdomada Pentecostes suum filium Henricum apud West. ubi Curiam suam
tenuit armis militaribus honoravit; here was the proper work of the Curia, Sym.
Dunelm. fo. 213.
the King gave Arms in his Court to the Great Men, and immediate Tenants, the
common Freeholders received them in the County Court, either at coming to Age,
or upon becoming free by Manumission; which it is not probable that a man would
desire, unless he had a freehold to live upon, or that thereby those Lands
which were held in Villenage became free.

But though one were born free, yet I take it he was to recieve a formal
military Honor, have Arms delivered to him when he came to Age, and in the
time of Hen. 1. Tit. of Hon. 1 Ed. p. 373.
it is used as a sign that one was not of age when he sealed a Deed, and
consequently 'twas not effectual because Militari baltheo nondum cinctus erat.
Assisa de armis 27. Hen. 2.


We find that when a freeman died, his Heir under Age; some body was to have
the custody of the Arms.

Siquis Arma haec habens obierit remaneat haeredi suo, et si haeres de tali
statu non sit quod Armis uti possit, si opus fuerit ille qui eum habuerit in
custodia habeat similiter custodiam Armorum, etc.

And when he came of Age, tunc ea habeat, this was in Hen. 2. time, and then
the public delivery of Arms to all Freemen might have been disused, Tit. Hon.
1 Ed. p. 306.
but anciently as Mr. Seldom observes, the taking Arms by young men from
public Authority was a kind of Knighthood.

But soon after Will. the first had at his Court Knighted his Son Henry, he
called this great Assembly of Barons, and Vicecomites cum suis Militibus, S.
Dunelm.
his Curia was held at Whitsontide; Nec multo post mandavit ut Arch. Ep Abb.
Com. Bar. Vicecomites cum suis Militibus die Kal. Aug. sibi occurrerent
Saresberiae, quocum venissent Milites illorum sibi fidelitatem contra omnes
homines jur are coegit.

Here I take it Milites illorum refers to the Knights of the Sheriffs, Lamb.
Archaionom. Leges Ed. f. 146.
that is, the Freeholders, this was adunatio conciliorum, a joining together of
the several Councils of the Counties, Omnes proceres and milites and liberi
homines universitotius regni Britanniae facere debent in pleno folemote
fidelitatem Dom. Regi coram Episcopis regni.
where the swearing allegiance to the King was one of their Principal Works;
the Kings Tenants had done it of course in the Curia, but methinks it is a
strange thing that it should be used for an Argument, that this was not a great
Council of the Kingdom, because they were evocati^ ad fidei vinculum. For
satisfaction I will offer a Record of the same work done in Parliament in the
time of Henry 3. This seems to be meant of a Court of all the Counties and then
confirms my sense. in express terms.


Celebrato nuper Concilio apud Bristol ubi convenerunt universi Ang. Praelati
tam Ep. Ab. quam Primores et multi tam Comites quam Barons qui etiam
univerfaliten fidelitatem nobis public facientes, concessis eis libertatibus
and liberis consuetudinibus ab eis prius postulatis and ipsis approbatis.
Claus. 1 H. 3. m 14. dorso.
etc. Here the King yields them those Liberties and Free-customs, which they
desired, and they swear Allegiance to him, here was the fidei vinculum.

But perhaps they will say that this of W. the first was no Common Council or
Parliament, because it appears not that any Laws passed or that they were
summoned to that end.

For the first I think no man will say that the Assembly is less parliamentary
because nothing is agreed upon in it. Indeed we find that where a Parliament
was dissolved without any Act passed, Rolls. Rep.
it is said by Judge Cook not to be a Parliament, but the Inception of a
Parliament, that is, no Session: but whoever will consult the Summons to
Parliament in the time of Ed. 1. and 2. may satisfy himself that there were
many Parliaments called, Rot. Claus. 33. E. 1. m. 15. dor.
at which there were no Laws passed, Rot. Claus. 5. E. 2. m. 21. dor.
but merely Advice given, and yet at the end thereof, the Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses had their Writs of Expenses, wherein the Kings declared that they had
been called to Parliament, nobiscum de diversis negotiis nos and populum Regni
specialiter tangentibus tractatur.

For the last, it is no matter whether the cause of Summons were expressed, it is
enough if it were de quibusdam arduis, or however else was the use of that
time. Besides it is certain many Laws have passed in public Councils anciently
of which we have no intimation from those Historians which mention such
Councils.

Wherever I find any public Act of recognizing a Kings Title of justice, or of
Elections of Persons to any Office, I shall not scruple to call such an
Assembly a Council, and if it it be General, a Great or Common Council of the
Kingdom.

And Lanfranc I conceive was in this Kings Reign chose to be Metropolitan of
all England in such a Council; 'twas indeed in Curia Regis as Gervacius, and
the Author of Antiquitates Britannicae show, but not the Ordinary Curia, for
'twas on our Lady Day, Actus Pontif. Cant.
which was not the time of such Curia, Autore Gervatio Dor. f. 1653. Antiq.
and the Clerus and Populus Angliae more than the Kings Tenants and Officers
there confirmed the choice of the Seniores ejusdem Ecclesiae, Brit. f. 110.
Relat. Will. primi ad finem tractat. de Gavelkind a syla Tay. Ed. p. 194.
that is, of Canterbury.

In the fourth of this King the controversy between the Archbishop of York,
and the Bishop of Worcester, was determined at Petreda before the King,
Archbishop Lanfranc, the Bishops, Abbots, Earls, et Primatibus totius Angliae,
this Mr. Seldom rightly calls a Parliament, R. Hoveden fo. 453.
which is easily to be gathered from the large and comprehensive Signification
of Primates.

That General Summons the same year to have an account of the Laws, Fecit
summoniri, etc. nobiles sapientes. etc. Electi igitur de sing. totius Patriae
Commit. viri duodecim, etc. Lamberts Archionom. fo. 138.
looks as if it were to a Parliament, to which a representation of twelve for
every Country was agreed on, but appears not to have been specially directed:
be that as it will, there was no need of a full representative, or meeting in
an entire Body, because it was not to lay any new obligation upon them, but was
an Enquest of the several Counties to present their old Laws. Seld. spicil. f.
171.
But when he seemed inclined to make the Customs of some few Counties the Rule
to all the rest, Ad preces communitatis Anglorum, he left to every County its
old Customs.

In the Seventeenth of this King, An. 1083. 17 Will. 1.
Convocavit Rex multitudinem Nobilium Angliae, Gerv. Dorob. Actus Pontif. f.
1653.
the multitude of the Nobles of England, says Gervace of Dover, Tota Angliae
Nobititas in unum collecta, quasi sub numero non cadebat, Matt. Paris p. 255.
this was about Ecclesiastical Affairs, Concerning the bringing regular Monks
into Monasteries, and an old Monk tells of the Charter or Law then agreed on.
Haec charta confirmata est apud Westminster. in concilio meo, Anno Regni mei XVIII.
praesentibus omnibus Episcopis et Baronibus meis, Monachus Anongm.
where Barons mei must either be meant with relation to the whole Nobility of
England, Ord. St. Bened. p 44.
which were all the King's men, though not his Feudal, especially immediate
Tenants, before whom the Test of Charters used to be, as in Henry the Third's
time, the Earls only subscribed at the request of the rest, or it might be only
his Tenants in Chief, subscribing as was usual.

In the Eighteenth the King impeaches his Brother Odo for his extortion, An.
1084. 18 Will. 1.
this was at the Isle of Wight; (i. e.) Curia Regis, Ord^ricus Vitalis fol. 647.
In Insula Vecta ei obviavit, Ibi in mirum congregatis in aula Regali
Primoribus Regni: this was matter of ordinary Justice, and though Primores
Regni are named; yet it might have been only such of them as attended on his
Wars, or in his Court; and it is not probable that being abroad, all the
Primores Angliae were summoned to this.

In the Nineteenth of his Reign, An. 1085. 19 Will. 1.
I take it that he held barely his Curia at Gloucester, for 'twas a Military
Council, except that his Judges, Great Officers, and constant Attendants were
part of it.

Partem exercitus sui remisit, S. Dunelm. fol. 213.
partem secum per totam hyemem retinuit et in nativitate Domini Glavorniae
Curiam sua^ tenuit, and at this Court I find only some Ecclesiastical
Preferments disposed of to three of his Chaplains, which required no solemn
Consult; but his Laws passed per Commune Concilium totius Regni, Spelm. Glos.
2* part. fol. 451. tit. Parl.
semel atque iterum ait se concessisse, etc. per Commune Concilium totius
Regni, and his Leges Episcopales, Ecclesiastical Laws were established, Seldeni
aut and spic. ad Eadmerum, fol. 168.
De Communi Consilio Arch. Episc. Abb. et omnium Procerum Regni sui.

For William the Second, whereas a great Antiquary will not say whether there
were any solemn convention of the Nature of a Common or General Council in his
time, it is manifest there was and we may find the Marks of distinction between
his ordinary Curia and Great Council or Parliament. An. 1087. Bromton, fol. 983.
He was crowned convocatis terrae magnatibus, says Bromton, volentibus animis
Provincialium Malms. that is, Malmesb. fol. 120.
the whole Kingdom agreeing or the Major part; indeed it seems the Normans were
for Duke Robert, but the English were not so wasted, as some imagine, S. Dunelm
fol* 215.
but that they carried it, Angli tamen fideliter ei juvabant, as Simeon of
Durham shows, Rog. Hoveden, fol. 461.
and Hoveden out of him.

In the Second year of his Reign he held a Curia on Christmas at London, An.
1088.
but 'twas more than a Curia de more, for there were Justiciarii ac Principes
totius Angliae. Bromton, fol. 983.


In the Third, An. 1089. 3 Will. 2.
Turmas optimatum accivit and Guentoniae congregavit, he called together the
Troops or Army of Nobles, Barons aloquitur, inveighs against his Brother
Robert, and persuades them to a War, Order. Vital. fol. 680.
and ut consilium inirent quid sit agendum jussit, bids them consider or advise
what was to be done. His dictis omnes assenssum dederunt, An. 1093. 7. Will. 2.
all consented to a War.

The King being very ill, omnes totius Regni Principes coeunt, Eadmerus, fol.
16.
Episcopi, Abbates, and quique Nobiles, promittuntur omni populo bonae and
sanctae leges; here the Princes and Nobles reach to omnis populus. Here Anselm
is named Archbishop by the King, and concordi voce sequitur acclamatio omnium,
the noyce and public acclamation witnesses the peoples consent, Gondulfus
Roff. Ep. Monac. Bec. inter Anselm. Epist. lib. 3.
and this is said to be secundum totius Regni electionem, or as another Author.

Rex Anglorum consilio and rogatu Principum suorum, Cleri quoque and populi
petition^ et electione.

The King being upon leaving England, An. 1094. 8. Will. 2.
to settle his Affairs in Normandy, Ex praecepto Regis omnes fere Episc. una
cum principibus Angl. ad Hastings convenerunt. Here Anselm pressed that there
might be Generale Concilium Episcoporum, Eadmerus, fol. 24, and 25.
but went from the Curia, the Great Council, dissatisfied.

Anselm had propounded a question to be discussed in Council.

Utrum salva reverentia et obedientia sedis Apostolicae possit fidem terreno
Regi servare annon? Eadmerus, fol. 26.


Ex Regia sanctione ferme totius Regni Nobilitas quinto Id. An. 1095. 9. Will.
2.
Martii pro ventilatione istius causae in unum apud Rochingham coit.

Fit itaque conventus omnium, Fol. 27.
This is called Curia, but could not be the Court of Tenants and Officers only.

Anselm harangues the Assembly in medio Procerum et conglobatae multitudinis
sedens. Fol. 28.
The other Bishops are the Mouth of the Assembly, and the Bishop of Durham the
Prolocutor; they tell him they will have him obey his Prince, upon this he
appeals to Rome, Fol. 29.
Miles Unus, a good honest Freeholder steps out of the throng, de multitudine
prodiens, and with great devotion sets before his Holy Father the Example of
Job's patience, upon this the Prelate hugged himself in the opinion that the
populus, the Populacy were for him, though the Princes, the heads of the
Assembly were against him.

This Controversy is adjourned to the Curia, Fol. 31.
on Whitsontide, which still was no ordinary one: Anselm was celebrating a
Curia by himself, when he should have attended at the King's, according to the
adjournment, but it seems he expected special Summons, which he has accordingly
by word of mouth, no formal Writ, but Messenger. The King tenuit Curiam suam in
ipsa festivitate apud Windlesoram, and there were Proceres, Fol. 34.
et coadunata multitudo, a very Solemn Convention.

The Authority cited by Sir Hen. Spelman says, that the Clergy was not at the
Council at Roch. Spelman council. vol. 2. fol. 16.
in quo ferme totius regni nobilitas praeter Episcopos and Clerum convenitur;
Jewelli Apcontra Hard. fol. 455.
so that it would seem a President for that Parliament, in the time of Edward
the First, taken notice of by Bishop Jewel, of which he says our public
Monuments, that is, Records have it.

Ha^ito Rex cum suis Baronibus Parliamento et Clero (id est) Arch. et Ep.
excluso statutum est. There it seems the Lords and Commons, who undoubtedly
came at that time, without relation to Tenure, are Barons sui: But whether the
Council at Roch. had the Clergy present or no, the Bishops and Barons tell
Anselm at another Great Council, how much soever he thought the Assembly on his
side, Eadmerus, fol. 39.
that placitum habitum est contra se, his pretenses were over ruled, totius
regni adunatione.

Yet notwithstanding their sense then delivered, they gave a farther day till
Whitsontide; so that in effect 'twas Judgment nisi, then indeed Anselm with a
side Wind got an Advantage of the King, he cunningly waves the question,
whether he might swear Obedience to the King, and puts it only whether the Pall
were to be received from the Pope, or the King, and carried that Point, that it
belonged to the singular Authority of Saint Peter. Eadmerus, fol. 34.


This was a General Council on the Feast day, Adquievit Multitudo Omnis, unde
cum omnes silentio pressi conticuissent, Statutum est. It seems till the
Multitude rested satisfied, the Law could not pass.

But two years after on Whitsontide was held no more than the Ordinary Curia --
An 1097. 10. Will. 2.


Cum igitur in Pentecoste festivitatis gratia Regiae Curiae se presentasset:
peractis igitur festivioribus diebus diversorum negotiorum causae in medium
duci ex more coeperunt --

That 'twas usual when the height of the feasting was over, to go to the Trials
of Causes, or Matters of Ordinary Judicature. In August following is held a
Great Council, the King being, de Statu Regni acturus.

Then he sends out a General Summons.

In sequenti autem mense Augusto cum de Statu Regni acturus Rex, Eadmerus, fol.
38.
Episcopos, Abbates and quosque Regni Proceres in unum praecepti sui sanctione
egisset, and dispositis his quae adunationis illius causae fuerant; etc. Anselm
asks leave to go to Rome, but is denied it. In October following there was a
General Council at Winchester.

Wintoniae ad Regem ex condicto venimus, Eadmerus was there himself.

The first day the Tumult from the vast multitude was so great, that they could
do nothing, and therefore broke up the Court, and adjourned to the next day.

Orta est igitur ex his quaedam magna tempestas diversis diversae parti
acclamantibus; Eadmerus, fol. 38.
the sense of the Assembly was, that Anselm should observe the King's Laws;
upon which he departs the Realm in a pett.

'Twas pity Eadmerus went with him, so that we loose the account of what passed
in his absence. I think however we have enough to prove that there were then no
less, nay greater Assemblies, than what now compose our Parliaments, nay the
very word Parliament was not unknown in that time. Parliamentum dixere
Croylandenses Caenobitae sub Tempore Willielmi Secundi. Spelman Glos. 2. part.
tit. Par.


For farther proof it is observable, that this King stood upon it, that Malcolm
King of Scots, Sim. Dunelm. fol. 218.
Secundum Judicium tantum Baronum suorum in Curia sua Rectitudinem ei faceret.
An. 1093.


That is was to do him right, or answer his demands, according to the Judgment
of his Curia, or Ordinary Court of Justice; Malcolm pleads that 'twas to be in
the confines of both Kingdoms.

Secundum Judicium Primorum utriusque Regni, that is, according to the Judgment
of a Great or General Council of both Kingdoms united, and who were the
Primores that constituted the Great Council of Scotland, even till the 23. of
James the First, is evident by his Act of Alteration, or recommendation of a
Change, Titles of Honor.
which has it, that the small Barrons, and Fee-Tenants (or Freeholders) need
not to come to Parliaments, 1. Ed. P. 287.
nor General Councils, without Election, which shows that till then they did:
And how they came here in this King's time, I leave any body to think as they
please, sure I am here were more than Tenants in Chief.

There was one Council in his Reign, which had no Addition to it, Rad. de
Diceto. fol. 492.
the Author says only Celebravit Concilium, and this, I take it, Christmas
Court.
was no more than an Ordinary Curia, especially it being Octabis Epiphaniae;
And there was a Legal Trial by Duel, and by Judgment of the Court, the Party
conquered had his eyes pulled out, and his stones cut off. That besides the
Great Council, this King above mentioned, held the Ordinary Curia, Sive de
more, we have clear Authority. Huntington fol. 578.
Cum gloriose and patrio honor Curiam tenuisset ad Natale apud Gloucester, ad
Pascha apud Winchester, ad Pentecosten apud Londoniam.

By the foregoing Instances, we may see, notwithstanding Polydore Virgil's
suppressing, Note, he lived but in the time of Henry the Eighth.
as much as in him lay, the MSs. which might take from the Authority of his
History, how many rise up in Judgment against his Assertion in the time of King
H. 1.

Illud opposite habeo dicere, Reges ante haec tempora non consuevisse populi
conventum consultandi causa, nisi perraro facere, adeo ut ab Henrico id
institutum Jure Manasse dici possit --

And it seems the great Mr. Lambert (who possibly was the first that after the
Ages, in which the word Baronagium was used and known to express the full Great
Council or Parliament received its true Notion, Lambert's Archaion, page 26^,
263.
viz. that both the Nobility and Commonalty of the Realm were meant under these
words, the Barons of the Realm) this Great Man it seems, had not met with those
MSs. which since have offered their Light to the World; otherwise he would not
have subscribed to the foregoing opinion of Polydore Virgil, Page 237.
however Polydore himself, as far as his Authority goes, gives us to believe
the frequency of such Solemn Councils, from this King's time downwards. This
Prince was so pleased with his People, and they so much at ease under his
gentle Reign, there was that mutual confidence in each other, that it is a
question whether he ever held a Solitary Curia of Tenants and Officers, only we
find, Eadmerus, fol. 49.
Tota Nobilitas cum populi numerositate, cuncti Majores adunati, fol. 94. and
105.
and Regnum Angliae. All at several times at the Curia de More.

At other times we have Commune Concilium Gentis Anglorum, Matt. Paris, Ed.
Tig. fol. 54.
Clerus and populus congregatus, the same called Commune Concilium Baronum
Regni Angliae. Mat. Par. f. 52, and 53.


Regni Nobilitas sua Sanctione adunata, Florentius Wigorn. An. 1129.

Concilium Magnum --
Magnum placitum apud Northamtune congregatis, An. 1131.
Omnibus Principibus Angliae, 32 Hen. 1.
that is, Huntington fol. 384.
Baronibus, that is, Clero and Populo --

Though 'twere a pleasure to dwell upon this King's Reign, yet it is needless
to insist upon further proof, that his Councils consisted of more than Tenants
in Capite and great Officers. 1 Stephani An. 1135.
King Stephen was elected King, Rich. Hagustal. p. 312.
a Primoribus regni cum favore Cleri and Populi, Joh. Hagust. f. 258.
Clericorum and Laicorum universitate, ab omnibus. viz. tam Presul. quam Com.
and Baron. Mat. Par. f. 71.


Stephanus his et aliis modis in Regno Angliae confirmatus, Rich. Hagust. f.
314.
Episcopos et Proceres sui regni regali edicto in unum convenire praecipit, cum
quibus hoc Generale Conciliam celebravit.

This to be sure was more than the Ordinary Curia: The eighth of July two years
after a Council was held at Oxford, An. 1138. 3. Step.
which broke not up till September following, this was Conventus Magnatum, was
not on the ordinary Court day, Malmsbury f. 181, and 183.
yet perhaps was not a Great General Council: It was only for matter of
ordinary Justice; some of the Laity had complained of two Potent Bishops that
fortified their Castles, as if they intended to rule over them by the Temporal,
as well as spiritual Sword, and had made a Catholic Interpretation of St.
Peter's, ecce Duo Gladii.

It seems the Bishops Plea was, that this was no Ecclesiastical Synod, that is,
in the true sense, not Assembled for Ecclesiastical, but for Civil Matters; but
in their sense, that they would be tried by the Canons, and Canonical Persons;
the Debate is put off to be determined, in a General Council appointed to be at
Winchester.

Here the Clergy set up for themselves, and having the Popes Legate, thought
themselves a body sufficiently entire, without that other part of the Clerus,
Gods Inheritance, which used to make up eventhese Assemblies; with much ado,
they first let in the Nobility Proprietors of Land, Malmsbury hist. Nov. 2. p.
188. 189.
Omnes Barons in eorum communionem jamdudum recepti.

They had not sat four days but the Londoners-Citizens demanded to be admitted
amongst them as Citizens or Traders, they were no part of the Nobility, 'twas a
disparagement for the Son of a Noble Man a Freeholder to be married to a
Trader. Stat. of Merton. cap. 6. 1 Inst. f. 80.
And this our constitution agreed with that of Poland, where Mercator and
Nobilis were always contradistinct, and there is a remarkable Clause in one of
their Statutes. Statuta Regni Polonici.
Nobiles appellandos censemus, qui licet matre Populari, patre tamen Nobili
sunt procreati, quorum tamen parents and ipsimet vivant and vixerint ad instar
aliorum Nobilium in regno ut supra; and non exercuerint vel exerceant eas arts
and actiones quas communiter cives and qui in civitatibus morantur exercere
solent; per contrarium enim usum nobilitas ipsa in popularem, and plebeiam
conditionem transire solet, and with them the Inhabitants of Cities which were
sicut Proceres sent Deputies, whereas the Possessionati the Nobles came to the
Great Councils in person.

There came to the Council abovenamed a Representative in the name of the
whole City of London. Feria quarta venerunt Londinenses, and in Concilium
introducti causam suam eatenus egerunt, ut dicerent missos se a communione quam
vocant Londiniarum, but the Clergy carried it with an high hand, and told them,
that it became not them who were principal men in the Kingdom and sicut
Proceres, as it were Nobles, to favor them who forsook their Lord, which I
think was meant of the Pope, and his Clergy: to be sure they excommunicated the
King, and those that held with him, for meddling in their matters: but they had
much ado to quiet the City of London for the haughty Answer they gave them.

They that were at this Assembly came not as the King's Tenants, or because of
any Office in his Court. Notwithstanding all the Canonical Thunder, at a great
Council possibly of Laymen only, Habito post modum Concilio coram Primoribus
Angliae, statutum est ut omnia per Angliam, Oppida, Castella, Munitiones
quaequae, Continua. ad Floren. Wig. f. 671.
in quibus secularia solent exerceri negotia Regis and Baronum suorum juri
cedant.

Whereby all the strong holds which Clergymen had were subjected to the
Dominion of the Laity, whether only the King's Barons, Barons Curiae suae were
to be Judges in the disposal is needless to determine.

But Statutum est coram Primoribus Angliae, This was made a Law by all the
Baronage of England.

We have several other Councils in this King's Reign.

In the seventh of his Reign, there is an Act of Recognizing Matilda the
Empress her Title to the Crown by all but the men of Kent, An. 1141. 7 Step.
and it is not improbable that they looking upon themselves as a freer People
than the rest, thought it was not fit for them to own any Title but mere
Election.

Maltida Imperatrix ab omni gente Anglorum suscipitur in Dom. exceptis
Kentensibus. H. Hunt f. 392.
An. 1143.
Neubergensis p. 37.


In the ninth the Proceres are Summoned per Edictum Regium to St. Albans.
Radulphi Polycron.


The same year is a great Council at Northampton called Parliamentum. 1152. 17.
Stephani Ger. Dorober. f. 1379.


In the seventeenth, Generale Concilium convocavit at London, to which were
called the Bishops and all the Proceres. An. 1154.


In the ninteenth and last of his Reign, H. Hunt f. 398. 19. Step.
all the Principes met at Oxford ad octavis Epiphaniae, and soon after the
Colloquium at Oxford they met at Dunstaple. Neu^ergensis lib. 1. c. 32.


And he held another great Council the same year at London on Michaelmas tam
pro negotio Regni quam provisione Eccles. Ebor. Brompton f. 1040.


Cum Episcopis and Optimatibus terrae, this was both for Ecclesiastical and
Civil Matters.

The Council of Clarendon with that part of its Constitutions which has been
much controverted of late, Henr. 2.
will detain me and the Reader too long to examine the several Instances of
great Councils or of ordinary Courts in this King's Reign.

By the examination of this possibly I may give some additional light to what I
have already represented.

The end of this Convention was, 11 Hen. 2.
to vindicate the Crown and Kingdom of England from the usurpations of the
Clergy, An. 1164.
who insisted upon Exemptions, Vid Still. answer to Cressy 's Apol. a p. 377.
usque ad finem.
and an uncontrollable license to do ill upon pretense of the sacredness of
their persons. Whereas the King would allow them no other privileges, or
exemptions, than what his laws had given them.

This Council was composed of more than tenants in chief, Titles of Honor,
fol. 582. M. P. fol. 96.
it is called a Great, and full Parliament; Generale concilium; the parties
present are under diverse denominations, Ma. West. fol. 248.
all coming to the same: Rex, Arch. Ep. Ab. Pr. Com. Bar. and Proceres Regni,
Gervasius Dor. fol. 1385.
as M. Paris, Rex and Magnates regni, Mat. West. Anglicani regni praesules and
Proceres, Imag. Hist. fo. 536.
Gervasius; Antiq. Brit. in vita Tho. Becket fo. 133.
Episcopi, and proceres, Radulphus de Diceto.

Praelati, proceres and Populus regni, as another, Hoveden fo. 493.
Clerus and populus regni, Hoveden.

The whole Kingdom as Dr. Stillingfleet shows us out of the Quadripartite
History. Answer to Cressy's Apol. p. 392.


The body of the Realm as Sr. Roger Twisden terms it; 11 Article Conc. Clar.
Yet I conceive that the clause so much tossed to and fro, without any right
settlement, referrs to the ordinary Curia Regis, to which the Kings Tenants
were bound by their tenure to come; and where ordinary justice or jurisdiction
in all, or most causes was exercised, and this gives some account why the
Bishops who have been from the Normans acquisition downwards tenants in chief,
because of their temporalties, Grand quest. p. 152.
and during vacancies the Guardians of those temporalties, upon that very
account have been particularly summoned, why I say they should be allowed to
vote in a legislative capacity which they have as Proprietors, though no
tenants of the King, when they proceed by way of bill of attainder, and yet
tenure only qualifying them for Judges in Parliament (as before in the Kings
ordinary Curia, interesse judiciis Curiae, or at least they succeeding to the
jurisdiction of the Tenants in the Curia) according to the constitution of
Clarend. that jurisdiction which they have as tenants, or as succedaneous to
such, extends not to matters of blood. It will not be proved, that the coming
to the Great Council, where the extraordinary power, justice, or legislature
was exercised, was merely because of tenure, and that no body had right to be
of the great Council but they that held in capite, or were members of the
ordinary Curia; indeed when that was taken away, or disused, they that before
were to do suit and service at the Curia, were to perform it at the Great
Court, the Parliament; for there was no other Court where they could, 8 Ed. 2.
and therefore in the 8th of Ed. 2. the Inhabitants of St. Albans plead that
they held in Capite.

And as other Buroughs were to come to Parliament pro omni servitio.

But that the coming to the Judgments of the ordinary Curia was merely because
of tenure appears from the words of the constitution:

Arch. Ep. etc. and universi personae regni qui de Rege tenent in capite, Qui
habent personatum.
habent possessiones suas de Domino Rege sicut Baroniam, etc. and sicut Barons
caeteri debent interesse judiciis Curiae Regis cum Baronibus, Ger. Dorob. fo.
1387.
etc.

That is, except as is there excepted, these ecclesiastical tenants or Barons
were to be present, Cum Baronibus suis, Seldens Jan. Angl. facies altera, p. 9^
or interested in the Judgments together with the Kings Justices and Officers,
as the other Barons, that is Lay-tenants in Capite. It seems both
Ecclesiastics and Lay-tenants in Capite held per Baroniam, yet I think caeteri
Barons ought to be confined to them that held of the King in Chief by Knights
service, for many held in feodo firma by the payment of a certain rent, or
petty Serjeanty, the payment of a gilt spur or the like, pro omni servitio, of
which the Records are full, who were not ordinarily to give their attendance at
the Curia. But tenure per Baroniam, was I take it in those times no more than
tenure by Knights Service in Capite. This perhaps I could prove by many
records. I shall instance in one to the honor of a Noble Peer of this Realm,
now Earl late Baron of Berkley, as his Ancestors have been ever since the time
of Hen. 2.

One of his Ancestors had the grant of the Manor of Berkley Harness from Hen.
2. Com. de Term.
Tenendum in feodo and haereditate sibi and haeredibus suis per servitium
Quinque Militum. Pasch. 4 Ed. 3. penes Rem. Dom. These. in scac.
An office is found in Edw. the third's time upon the death of Maurice Berkley,
and there it is that he held per Baroniam faciendo inde servitium Trium Militum
pro omni servitio. Two Knights fees having been alien'd; inde, upon the account
of the Barony, or rather the land, was the Knights Service, and the Knights
service made the Barony, as appears, there being no particular words creating
any honorable tenure, but what resulted from serving the King with men upon
his own charges: the number I take it made nothing toward the nature of the
tenure. These tenants by Knights service, the Kings Barons, were obliged to be
at the Kings Courts de more; if at the Great Court when he should call them,
the chief ground was upon their ordinary attendance amongst the rest of the
tenants.

That what relates to the Curia Regis within the Constable. of Clarendon was meant
of the ordinary justice of the Kings Court, and consequently the ordinary
Court, Jani Anglorum facies altera, p. 100.
old (...) of Gloucester is express. Yuf a man of holi-Church has ein lay fee,
Parson, otherwhat he be, he shall do therevore King's Service, that there
valth, that is right ne be vorlore. In plaiding, and in Assize be; and in
judgment also. But this farther appears by the summons to, and proceedings at
Northampton the very next year.

This Hoveden calls Curia Regis, Hoveden, fo. 494.
and Mr. Seldom informs us out of an ancient Author, that the summons thither
was only to the members of the ordinary Curia, Tit. of Honor, fo. 583.
Omnes qui de Rege tenebant in Capite, mandari fecit: upon the Bishops
withdrawing from the judging of Becket, (the ground of which I shall soon
examine.)

Quidam Vicecomites and Barons secundae dignitatis were added, Evocantur
quidam Vicecomites and secundae dignitatis Barons, antiqui dierum, ut addantur
it is and assint judicio, Stephan. MS.
'twas quidam Vicecomites some Sheriffs, it could not be all because several
were Majores Barons, having the countys in fee, but this restraint seems not
to reach to the Barons secundae dignitatis; suppose that it does, and so comes
only to the uppermost of them, the Vavasores perhaps, that is inferior or Mesne
Lords holding Manors of others, not the King; still here were more than
tenants in Chief, and to be sure, these being said to be added, were more than
the members of the ordinary Curia, and this Court to which they were added was
only the ordinary Court of Justice. If we can show when this ordinary Court of
Justice determined, and who succeeded into the places of the ordinary members
of it, we may go farther to clear the matter in question than perhaps has yet
been done. If the Lords the great men, succeeded the Court of Tenants, and were
let into that jurisdiction which they exercised, and there is no color of
proof that Clergymen in the Curia Regis ever voted in Capital causes, but if on
the other side, (the prohibitions running against judicia sanguinis, and the
constitution of Clarendon referring to the Curia Regis, where the ordinary
judicia sanguinis were agitated and pronounced) justly, they took themselves to
be excluded the Curia, quando de illis materiis agitur; It will I think be
evident that the Bishops, as a part of the house of Lords, answering to the
Court of the Kings tenants, never had any right to vote in Capital cases.

But it lies upon me here to show when and how the Curia Regis went off.

I have before observed that the duty of Tenants was either to attend the King
in his Wars, in his administration of ordinary justice, or as a Council to give
him aid in lieu of, or by way of advance upon their personal services in the
Wars.

As they attended in the Wars they could not be a Court or Council, and so no
Curia Regis.

As a Court of justice, their attendance was superseded by Magna Charta, 2, or
9 of Hen. 3.

Communia placita non sequantur Curiam nostram sed teneantur in aliquo loco
certo. Magna Charta, cap. 11.


Hereby the administration of justice was taken from the ordinary Curia, This
explained by Articuli super chart.
and fixed at the Courts in Westminster Hall.

Yet after this they continued a Court, or Council for aids till the 34th of
Edw. the first, Stat. 34 Ed. 1. De tallagio non concedendo.
and by that they were wholly gone as a separate Court, or Council; being from
that time no tax nor aid could be raised without full consent of the great
Council, or Parliament.

When this Court was gone, as before I observed, we find Tenants in chief
pleading that their coming to the Great Court or Parliament was pro omni
servitio, which shows manifestly, that the Great Court not only took in the
less, as it did in the nature of the thing, being that and more; but that it
preserved the Image of it; and indeed what was a duty in them that came to, or
were members of the ordinary Curia, turned to a privilege or right in them who
succeeded to the dignity, though not the services of Tenants.

As the Tenants were obliged by their Tenure interesse judiciis Curiae Regis,
they that succeeded to their dignity had right to be Judges in Parliament. And
whereas the Curia Regis, as a Court of Justice was taken away or defeated in
the time of Hen. 3. we find by Britton, supposed to have wrote in the fifth of
his immediate successor, that the Barons were Judges in Parliament, as the
Tenants and Officers had been in the Curia Regis.

Et en case ou nous somes party volons que nostre Court soit judge sicome
Counts and Barons en temps de Parliament. Britton p. 41. The King's Bench.


Now let us return to the constitution of Clarendon.

The tenants whose duty it exacts (the Lay Tenants disputed not) were Tenants
by Barony; Debent interesse Judic. Curiae Regis, etc. usque perveniatur in
judicio.
that is, by Knights Service of the person, or Crown of the King, and except as
there is excepted, were of duty to be present at all Trials or Judgments, or
to exercise Jurisdiction in all causes: Gerv. Dorob. and vat. cop. quousque
perveniatur ad diminutionem membrorum vel ad mortem.
but judicium vitae vel membrorum they were not to meddle with; when they came
in judicio, in jurisdiction, or the trial of causes, ad judicium vitae vel
membrorum, that is to such a cause, or the exercise of such a jurisdiction, Ma.
Par. and others.
or such a trial, they were to withdraw; and this is the plain sense of
judicium vitae vel membrorum, This the Author of the Grand Question follows as
most authentic.
given us by that Great Judge learned both in the Common and Civil Laws,
Bracton, who wrote in the Reign of Hen. 3. Grandson to this King, who enforced
the leges avitas, in this particular, and others contained in the Constitution
of Clarendon.

This Great Lawyer, Bracton lib. 2. cap. 24. p. 56.
having enumerated several privileges, or jurisdictions, granted from Kings of
England to their subjects, amongst other things has these words.

Item si cui concedatur talis libertas quod habeat soke, and sake, toll, and
them, Infangthef; and utfangthef, Judicium vitae and membrorum, and furcas, and
alia quae pertinent ad executionem judicii, etc.

Here this Judicium vitae and membrorum must be meant of the whole trial, or
jurisdiction, otherwise it is supposed, that he tells us, the King granted
those men Liberty to pronounce, or depute those that should pronounce, the
final Judgment, who yet neither by themselves, nor Deputies, had any thing to
do with the praeliminaries, the questions arising between, and leading to the
Justice of the Judgment, which is an absurd supposal.

The having Judicium, or power in judicio, does not, as I conceive, any way
suppose a trial already begun, Grand Question, p. 34.
and the Bishops present so far in it; but when it comes to the point of
mutilation or death, then they have leave to withdraw; that is, they are a
Court, or of the Court, for such a cause, and yet they are not a Court for such
a cause; for the cognizance of causes takes in the Judicium, the trial, in the
agitation, Agitare judicium, and in the final or solemn pronouncing of the
Judgment. It is indeed possible, though not rational, that the law should give
the Jurisdiction over part of a Cause, and not the whole, yet it is not to be
imagined that such was the meaning of the Lawmakers, especially, when we find
the words of the law, according to the sense put upon those words, by the most
learned, in the age nighest to them that transmit the law to us, are not to be
brought to such a dividing sense without a great deal of force: And to this the
several other copies of this constitution give weight. Grand quest. p. 34.
But we are told that the sense is best understood by the practice of that age.
If the sense be plain, a contrary practice is not to determine the sense
another way, as, as great an Author, the learned Doctor Stillingfleet, proves
at large in his answer to Mr. Cressy's Epistle Apologetical, Still. answer to
Cressy, a p. 339. ad p. 447. p. 449.
where he shows the number of Statutes made against Provisors, in express
terms: And yet when the King of England comes to settle the points in
difference, between him and Pope Martin the 5. there is no manner of regard had
to the Statutes of Provisors, although so often repeated; nor did common
practice agree with the positive and plain law.

But the testimony of Petrus Blesensis brought to prove the practice in the
time of Hen. 2. I could set aside with better color, than the Author of the
Grand question does the true sense of judicium and in judicio.

For Petrus Blesensis joins together the Principes Sacerdotum and Seniores
Populi, the last of which, in common acceptance, relates to the Laity; and for
their withdrawing just at the final judgment, surely there could be no
pretense from the practice of that age. But let us take his authority, Grand
quest. p. 34.
and make the best of it. Principes Sacerdotum and seniores populi licet non
dictent judicia sanguinis, eadem tamen tractant disputando and disceptando de
illis: ideo seque immunes a culpa reputant, quod mortis aut truncationis
membrorum judicium decernentes, a pronunciatione duntaxat, and executione
poenalis sententiaese absentent.

Here he expressly confirms the sense, which I shall enforce, and makes the
votings in the preliminaries, mortis aut truncationis membrorum judicium
decernere.

Some Clergymen it seems did thus decernere judicium sanguinis, and he blames
them for it, but can their practice of any thing against law be an Argument
that there was no law against such practice? And besides this being brought to
show the meaning of the constitution of Clarendon, which speaks only of the
Curia Regis; this has no color of a proof, because they might have handled
such matters in their own Courts, where the King gave them judicium vitae and
membrorum, as Bracton has shown us; but that they did not in the Curia Regis,
we are to believe, till express authority be brought to show that they did.

One of the Editions of Blesensis has but quidam, some of them only could
dispense with the obligation; of what nature the obligation was, I shall soon
show, and will usher it in with the judgment of Mr. Seldom, who was best
acquainted with the several copies of this constitution, and with those laws
which were the ground of it, perhaps of any man since the making the
constitution. Titles of Honor, fo. 582.
The meaning of it is, says he, that all Bishops, Abbots, Priors, and the like,
that held in Chief of the King had their possessions as Baronies, and were
accordingly to do all services, and to sit in judgment with the rest of the
Barons in all cases, saving cases of blood.

The exceptions of cases of blood proceeded from the Canon Laws which
prohibited Clergymen to assent to such judgments. So of Glocest. Bote war man
shall be belemed other to death ido. Jani Anglorum facies altera, p. 100.


But we are told, that Hen. 2. in the Parliament at Northampton declared, that
Bishops were bound by virtue of the Constitution of Clarendon to be present,
and to give their Votes in cases of Treason.

That this was only a Curia Regis, Grand quest. p. 40.
no Parliament, I have shown.

That it should be affirmed that the King then pressed the Bishops to give
their Votes in a Capital case, (as the Author supposes every crimen laesae
Majestatis then to have been) I wonder, because it is apparent from the
circumstances that the King pressed for a final judgment, and therefore could
not urge that as the duty of their tenure, when even according to this learned
man, the Canons prohibited their pronouncing final sentence, P. 28.
and the King at Clarendon, out of regard and reverence to the Canons of the
Church, required only that they should act in such causes, till the cause was
ripe for sentence, not that they should stay at the Sentence: that point he was
content to yield them; and he himself shows us out of Fitz-Stephen, that the
Bishops looked not on the matter as Capital, for they did not urge the Canons
in the case; but they excused themselves upon the account of the Archbishops
prohibition. Grand quest. p. 40.


And the King replied, that (viz. that Prohibition) had no force against the
Constitution of Clarendon, Ejus simplex Prohibitio. Steph. MS.
which was in effect to say, you have no manner of pretense, no Canon
forbidding you to pass judgment upon Becket, and therefore according to the
Constitution of Clarendon, you ought interesse judiciis Curiae Regis at this
time.

Notwithstanding the plain sense of all this, we find a very artificial
management of Fitz-Stephens, and other authorities.

1. As if Becket were accused of a Capital matter, it being called Crimen
laesae Majestatis.

2. As if the crime he was accused of was appealing to Rome, Grand quest. p. 40.
and that such appeal was treason by the ancient Common law before any Statutes
made.

1. I will readily grant that in the language of that age Becket was accused or
impeached of Crimen laesae Majestatis, but that all Crimina laesae Majestatis
were then capital, Glanvile, who was Chief Justice in that Kings reign,
Glanvile de legibus lib. 1. c. 2.
denies. Crimen quod in legibus dicitur Crimen laesae Majestatis, ut de nece,
vel seditione Personae Domini Regis vel regni vel exercitus, occultatio inventi
thesauri fraudulosa, placita de pace Domini Regis infracta, etc. Hereby every
breach of the Kings Peace, was Crimen laesae Majestatis; every breach of the
laws by Acts of injustice is a breach of his peace, contra pacem and Coronam;
therefore Becket having denied justice to John the Marshal, and refusing to
answer the King who charged him in account, especially standing in contempt of
the Kings Court, was guilty of this crime. Indeed Glanvile when he has named
Homicide, malicious firings, and other crimes, adds Et siquae sunt similia;
quae scilicet crimina ultimo puniuntur supplicio, aut membrorum truncatione. As
if no crimes were within this name, but those which drew after them capital
punishment, but that is certainly to be meant of such as are not there
specified: that is, all such like crimes, provided they are capital in the
punishment annexed by law, are Crimina laesae Majestatis, though neither
homicide, nor firing, etc. nor any direct and open breach of the peace.

It Is evident that he confines not placita de pace infracta to homicide and
those that follow; Glanv. p. 2.
for he takes in assaults and batteries de verberibus, de plagis etiam. Which
he says are tryable by the Sheriff in default of Mesn Lords, unless the
Indictment be in the Kings name.

Nisi accusator adjiciat, de pace Domini Regis infracta.

But it appears from Fitz-Stephen, that Becket was not impeached for appealing
to Rome, Stephanides. So Gerv. Dorob. f. 1389.
even upon his second Impeachment, but pro ratiocinio Cancellariae reddendo; to
which he pleads, that the King remitted him when he was made Archbishop, that
he then was quietus and solutus ab omni Regis querela.

But further, that he was called only to answer in the cause of John the
Marshal, in which he complained that he had had hard measure, but for the last
neque in causa sum ratiocinii; neque aliquam habui ad eam citationem: still the
King urges the Proceres to proceed to judgment against him, he finding them
ready to comply with the King, appeals to Rome, and strictly enjoins all his
suffragan Bishops and others not to meddle in the matter.

Upon this, redeunt ad Regem Episcopi and in pace a judicando Archiepiscopo
excusati a Baronibus seorsim sedent, nec minus a Comitibus and Baronibus suum
exigit Rex judicium: evocantur quidam Vicecomites and Barons secundae
dignitatis, etc.

What is here like the pretense of his being accused in a capital matter, and
the Kings urging the Bishops to judge him notwithstanding a capital accusation?
Nay further, admit that he had been impeached of appealing to Rome (which it is
evident both from Fitz-Stephen and Gervase that he was not) I question whether
it had been capital then, or whether the Lord Cook says that such an owning of
the Popes Power was Treason, Grand Question, p. 40.
by the ancient Common Law, before any Statutes were made; which I conceive he
does not: The most which I find in him toward this point, Cook de Jure Regis
Ecclesiastico. 5. Rep.
is of a Judgment in the 30th of Edw. the First, where it is resolved that a
subjects bringing in a Bull of excommunication against another subject, and
publishing it to the Lord Treasurer of England, was by the ancient Common Law
of England Treason. Now this publishing a Bull of excommunication, and thereby
assuming the exercise of justice without the Kings authority, is certainly a
much greater offense against the Kings Crown and dignity, than barely the
appeal: however either might have been Crimina laesae Majestatis, against the
Crown and Royal dignity, and yet not capital, as Glanvile shows.

But this is further observable that the King himself appealed to the Pope in
this very controversy between him and Becket.

Hac igitur celebri celebrata and accelerata appellatione misit Rex, Gervasius
Dorob. f. 1400.
misit and Archiepiscopus nuntios ad Dominum Papam. Ex communi consilio, nos
inquiunt, eum appellabimus coram Papa, de facili convincetus, sine remedio
deponetur, quae cum plurimum placerent Regi, exierunt omnes Ep. Gerv. Dor. f.
1392.
And according to Grev. the Bishops appealed to the Pope against Becket, with
the great approbation of the King.

Wherefore the Article in the Constitution of Clarendon touching appeals, the
first declaration that I find of the law in this point, comes not up to Beckets
appeal.

De appellationibus si emerserint ab Archidiacono, debent procedere ad
Episcopum, ab Episcopo ad Archiepiscopum, Et si Archiepiscopus defuerit in
justitia exhibenda, Gerv. Dor. f. 1387.
ad Dominum Regem est perveniendum postremo, ut praecepto ipsius in Curia
Archiepiscopi controversia terminetur; ita quod non debet ulterius procedere
absque assensu Domini Regis.

This is of causes begun in ecclesiastical Courts, these were not to go further
than the Archbishops Court, that is, not to the Pope without the Kings license;
now admit an appeal had been before the Pope with the Kings license, yet it
might have been Crimen laesae Majestatis, to put the Popes sentence in
execution without new license had: but where a matter lay not in these
inferior Courts, as Becket's did not, whether the appealing in such a case had
been against the Law then, I make a doubt, I am sure it is not proved at least,
that 'twas capital. I know not of any greater penalty than a Praemunire ever
annexed to it, till the Reformation. But if it were capital from the beginning,
'twould not be any thing to the purpose here, because Becket was not impeacht
for appealing.

I cannot but charge this Author with a great deal of artifice in this place,
and of much labor to reconcile things, as I should think, very disagreeing: he
tells us that according to Fitz-Stephen, p. 35.
Becket was accused of Treason, and the Bishops sat together with other
Barons, and because it did not come to a Sentence of death, after a great
debate between the other Lords and Bishops about pronouncing the sentence, the
Bishop of Winchester did it: here he jumbles together, what in another place he
rightly divides, he takes it right that there were Two causes, the one that of
John the Marshal, the other that which he would make capital; in the first, the
Bishops did certainly sit in judgment, there the Bishop of Winch. pronounced
the sentence; as Mr. Seldom (who this Author confesses has printed the
proceedings of this judgment very exactly) shows out of Stephanides: Grand
Question, p. 38.
for this our Author does not pretend that Becket was accused of Treason, and
yet he says that the Bishop of Winch. gave sentence, where he was accused of
Treason; nay, though his own Author Stephanides is express, that upon the
second charge, which contained the supposed capital matter, the Bishops
withdrew, and quidam Vicecomites and Barons secundae dignitatis were taken
into the Court.

Thus I think I have shown that the King did not declare at Northampton, that
the Bishops were bound by virtue of the Constitution of Clarendon to be present
and to give their votes in cases of Treason, (as such were capital) but rather
it not being a Capital case upon which the King demanded judgment, that
therefore the Bishops were by that Constitution obliged to be there.

Admitting that this constitution is no law prohibiting Clergymen to Vote in
Capitals, only obliging them to the duty of their tenure; and leaving them to
act in matters of blood, according as they thought themselves bound by the
Canons: Yet I think herein it appears that those Canons were received by the
temporalty, and so became laws.

But not to insist upon this, the question here is,

1. First, What the Canon law prohibited.

2. What force that prohibition has at this day.

1. The Author of the Grand Question has I conceive misrepresented the sense of
Lanfranc's Canon concerning this matter, which he has rendered thus:

That no Bishop or Clergyman should condemn a man to death, Grand Question, p.
27.
or give vote in the sentence of condemnation. Here he confines the prohibition
to the final judgment only; and yet says, Lanfranc had brought the Canon of
the Eleventh Council of Toledo into England: So that Lanfranc's and that of
Toledo he yields must speak the same thing; That of Toledo, is this:

His a quibus Domini Sacramenta tractanda sunt, Council. Toletan. 11. cap. 6.
Edit. Madr. f. 553.
judicium sanguinis agitare non licet; and ideo magnopere talium excessibus
prohibendum est, nequi praesumptionis motibus agitati aut quod morte plectandum
est sententia propria judicari praesumant, aut truncationes quaslibet membrorum
quibuslibet personis aut per se inferant aut inferendas praecipiant.

His a quibus Domini sacramenta tractanda sunt, undeniably reaches to Bishops,
as well as inferior Clergy, and so removes the cavil which many make upon some
Canons, or Laws, mentioning Clerk, or Clerus only.

Here it is laid down for a principle, non debent agitare judicia, they must not
to debate upon such judgments, or try such causes, that is as Petrus Blesensis
expresses it, (...)
eadem tractare disputando and disceptando de (...).

Now can we think the wise Council of Toledo understood sense so little to
declare, that Clergymen ought not to debate about, or try such causes, and
therefore should prohibit only the final judgment? nay it is very clear that
they, agreeably to the maxim they receive, forbid them quod morte plectendumest
sententia propria judicare, to judge of, or try the matter, or cause in their
own persons; not but that where the King gave them judicium vitae and
membrorum, as we find in Linwood, they might delegate authority to others to
judge, without breach at least of after Canons. But this of Toledo I conceive
wholly shuts them out from the cause, or trial of it. And according to this
very Author, this Canon of Toledo is to be taken as explanatory of Lanfranc's,
which is much shorter, and less express; yet comes to the same, in the
signification of the words, as well as in the intention of the Council, Grand
Question, p. 27.
which received the above cited Canon of Toledo.

Lanfranc's we have in these words,

Iterum ut nullus Episcopus vel Abbas, Spelman 's Council. 2 vol. f. 11.
seu quilibet ex Clero hominem occidendum, vel membris truncandis judicet, vel
judicantibus suae autoritatis favorem accommodet.

This speaks of the man guilty of a crime worthy of death, or loss of member,
the other of the cause, or matter; which are tantamount: but by this they were
not to judge themselves; nor sit by, while others judge, or any way contribute
to the Judgment. But of this the great Council at Westminster in the year
1175. is the best Interpreter. An. 1175.
And if the Clergymen neither before the constitution of Clarendon, 22 Hen. 2.
nor by it, were excluded from meddling in these causes; they are by the last in
full Parliament, the testimony of which is transmitted by us by no less an
Author than Gervase of Dover, who lived in the very time, and whose credit this
learned Person supports by following him rather than Matthew Paris. Pa. 30.


In hoc concilio, Ann. 1175.
he tells us, 22 H. 2.
ad emendationem Anglicanae Ecclesiae assensu Domini Regis and primorum omnium
Regni haec subscripta promulgata sunt Capitula: Gerv. Dor. f. 1429.
amongst which the third is this,

Hiis qui in sacris ordinibus constituti sunt, Judicium Sanguinis agitare non
licet, unde prohibemus ne aut per se membrorum truncationes faciant aut
inferendas judicent, etc. this is almost the same in words with that of Toledo,
and by the concession of the Learned Author of the Gr. Question that of Toledo
was then produced by Richard Archbishop of Canterbury: Grand Question, p. 42.
the same we find in Hoveden, Hoveden, f. 543.
said in the Margent to be ex concilio Toletano. Judicium sanguinis agitare non
licet, surely comes up to the preliminaries, and I cannot understand the
coherence of saying to this effect.

It is a received Maxim that Clergymen ought not so much as to vote in
preliminarys, relating to capital cases; and therefore to give the final
Judgment is only unlawful by the Canon, which declares that to vote, even in
preliminarys, is unlawful.

In Richard the second's time, the Bishops understood not this nice reasoning,
and therefore they enter their formal Protestation on Record.

Agitur de nonnullis Materiis, that is Capital causes, in Grand Quest. p. 46.
quibus non licet nobis aut alicui eorum juxta Sacrorum canonum Instituta
quomodolibet personaliter interesse.

'Twas not so much because 'twas in Parliament, as because matter of Blood was
in question. And indeed the Canons mentioning Judicia Sanguinis, that is
Ordinary Judgments, such as were agitated in the Kings Ordinary Court of
Justice, and the constitution of Clarendon referring only to that Court, it
appears that these Constitutions were received in Parliament in the Reign of
Edw. the first.

When the King tied up his hands from giving Clergymen Power, even so much as
by his special Commissions, to sit upon the trials of such causes. 28 Ed. 1.
cap. 3.
We for the Utility of our Realm and for the more assured conservation of our
peace have provided and ordained that Justices assigned to take Assizes in
every County, where they do take as they be appointed Assizes, incontinent
after the Assizes taken in the Shires, shall remain both together if they be
Lay. And if one of them be a Clerk, then one of the most discreet Knights of
the Shire being Associate to him that is a Layman, by our Writ shall deliver
the Gaoles of the Shires.

Hereby it appears that if one of the Judges were a Clergyman, he was not so
much as to sit with the other upon the delivery of the Gaol; that is the trial
of capital Causes; but another Layman should be commissioned for that purpose.
And agreeable to this we find in the Records of the Tower, that when two have
been Commissioned as Judges for the same Circuit, whereof one has been a
Clergyman the other Lay, the Clergyman has had only Common Pleas in his
Commission, the other both Common Pleas and Pleas of the Crown: nor is it
material that some Rolls may be found out purporting as if Pleas had been held
before two whereof one happened to be a Clerk; for it is to be taken reddendo
singula singulis.

(2.) This were enough to settle the 2d point, viz. of what force such
prohibition, as I have shown, is at this day; but I take leave to offer
farther, what as I conceive may give yet clearer satisfaction; which is, that
the difference of an Ecclesiastical Synod from a Temporal Great Council, was
not taken from the persons present in either, but the matters of which they
treated, and the parties which managed there according to the different
matters; if Ecclesiastical Affairs, 'twas a Synod, if temporal, it had some
other name, as Commune Concilium Regni Angliae, or the like to distinguish it
by.

The great Jewel has long since given Authority to this Assertion about
Ecclesiastical Synods, Jewel contra Ward, p. 518.
which he calls concilia Episcopalia: Ab Episcopis nomen concilia invenisse
fateor, eoque dicta fuisse Episcopalia: quod Episcoporum judicio and prudentia
omnia constituerentur. Sed tune idcirco concilia haec nihil ad principem
attinuisse colliges.

As the Ecclesiastical Laws were supposed to lay a more immediate Obligation
upon the conscience, and were for the most part enforced by Ecclesiastical
censures, they were called Canons or Rules, not having that outward coertion
and penalties annexed which others had, but yet they were no less Laws.

The Statute of Henry the 8th. which provides That no Canons, 25 Hen. 8. cap 19.
Constitutions or Ordinance shall be made or put in Execution within this
Realm, by Authority of the Convocation of the Clergy, does not in the least
Abrogate, or Condemn those which were made by the Authority of the King, the
Clergy, and the Laity: As I will not say all Ecclesiastical constitutions were,
from the time of William 1. to the abovementioned Synod at Westminster, it is
enough if that alone were so.

And then if that be not repugnant to some Law since made, I conceive it is
still in force, having had full Legal sanction.

For the clearing this 'twill be necessary to show something of the nature of
the Ecclesiastical Councils according to the Modus established anciently in
Engl. I must confess that several Historians, when they mention concilium
totius Angliae, speaking of an Ecclesiastical Council, add frequently,
Episcoporum, viz. and Abbatum, nec non and multarum religiosi ordinis
personarum, Ex Cod. MS. in Bib. Cot. sub Effigy Domitiani, A. 5. n. 2.
or to that effect. But Bishop Jewel has well Interpreted such Expressions, and
therefore we need not wonder, when we find another say, Spelm.
Lanfrancus Cant. Arch. and totius Angliae Primas diversa in diversis locis
Angliae celebravit concilia. Conc. v. 2. f. 3.


Though to be sure the King were sometimes jubens and praesens, as at the
Council at Winchester. But it appears even by their own modus tenendi synodos
in Anglia primaevis temporibus, which I take it was the same that was agreed on
in Lanfranc's time, of whom Malmsbury says, Malmesburiensis, f. 118.
quaesivit a senioribus Episcopis qui esset ordo sedendi in concilio Antiquo
more statutus, etc.

By their ancient Modus, I say, it appears that the Laity were to be present in
their Ecclesiastical Councils; for when it mentions the Clergy in order it adds,

Exinde introducantur Laici bonae conversationis, that is probi homines, vel
qui electione conjugali interesse meruerint, every Layman of good conversation,
Spelm.
probus homo, Conc. vol. 2. f. 1.
or freeholder in his own Person, or ex electione conjugali by Joint-Election
of the Clergy and Laity. Ex pervetusto MS. Cod. in bibl. Cot. sub effigy
Cleopatrae. c. 8. f. 35.


It would be superfluous to produce the many Authorities, which show that the
Laity used to be of Council in Ecclesiastical affairs, as well as the Clergy in
Temporal, and to give their Assent in making Canons or Laws.

I will instance in some very remarkable ones out of many;

One Eadmerus recommends with a solemn protestation, Eadmer.
En ordinem gestae rei test conscientiae meae veritate, Hist. Nov. f. 58.
sicut eam praesens audivi and vidi, in nullam partem declinando descripsi.

Matilda Daughter of Malcolm King of Scots married to Henry the first, being
reputed a Nun, offers her self to be tried by the Ecclesiastical Law, Eadmer.
f. 57.
Offert se Judicio totius Anglorum ecclesiae probaturam.

In another place,

Obtulit se vel sacramento vel alia quam magis eligerint ecclesiastica Lege
probaturam, f. 58.
etc. At the day appointed there Assembled Episcopi, Abbates, Nobiles quique ac
Religiosi ordinis viri: the case appeared to be that she had taken upon her a
Nuns habit, but had never been professed; whereupon Anselm having stated her case
to the tota Regni nobilitas populusque minor, the Nobility and Commonalty, and
in the name of God required them, Quatenus siquis aliter de negotio illo
sentiret ac sententia tulerat (unde scilicet ipsam copulam secundum Legem
Christianam fieri non debere posset ostendi) nihil haesitans salva pace omnium
coram proferret.

Here any man there had free leave to offer wherein he thought that marriage
void by the Christian Law, or Law of Holy Church: but cunctis una clamantibus
rem just definitam, legitime conjuncti sunt. Had not this been to vindicate
Anselme, who it seems lay under the imputation of marrying the King contrary to
the Laws of Holy Church, possibly Eadmerus had never given us so full an
account; but he shows very particularly how those great Councils Acted, that
'twas in an entire Body; the Assent was, cunctis una clamantibus. If any thing
was offered, or pronounced in a Definitive Way, which was generally dislik't,
fremitu aspernabatur, as we are elsewhere told of such Assemblies. If the
Council was divided, diversis diversae parti acclamantibus, they were forced to
Adjourn or break up. Thus, as 'twas amongst the Lacedaemonians, what was
propounded was determined, clamore non calculis. We have the like Account of an
Ecclesiastical Synod in the 28th of the same King.

Gulielmus Dorobernensis congregavit generale Concilium omnium Ep. and Abb. and
quarumcunque religiosarum personarum, Contin. ad Flor. Wigor. An. 1127. 28 H. 1.
cui praesedit ipse. This we see was an Episcopal Council, and the Bishop was
President, but then Confluxerant quoque illuc magnae multitudines Clericorum
laicorum tam divitum quam mediocrium, and factus est conventus grandis and
inaestimabilis, here was a confluence of the inferior Clergy, and the
Lay-Lords and Commons, and the number was beyond Account.

Acta sunt ibi de Negotiis Saecularibus nonnulla; being all met together,
though upon Ecclesiastical affairs chiefly, yet they had colloquium about
Secular too; and coming all in their own persons, (not by way of
representation, when they that were chose to come instead of the rest, might
receive certain Instructions according to the matter propounded for treaty,
beyond which they had no power,) it was not needful that they should know
beforehand what they were to treat of, but might fall upon any thing pro re
nata.

Quaedam quidem determinata, quaedam dilata, quaedam vero propter nimium
aestuantis turbae tumultum ab audientia judicantium, profligata.

It seems they had appointed some Judges of the Pole, or rather of the noise,
and the Crowd was so Vast, the noise so Confused, that of many things they
could not make any certain Judgment; some things were determined by a General
Acclamation, and others were Prorogued to a further day.

Quae autem communi Episcoporum consensu in ipso concilio decreta sunt and
Statuta, sicut illic public recitata sunt and suscepta, in hoc opere placuit
annotare, etc.

Here Ecclesiastical Matters were first debated, and settled amongst the
Bishops, then they were publicly rehearsed, and either rejected, or suscepta
received by the whole Assembly of Clergy and laity; but this was not enough to
give them the force of a Law, they must have the stamp of Royal Authority to be
Current.

Rex igitur cum inter haec Londoniae moraretur, auditis concilii gestis
consensum praebuit and confirmavit statuta Concilii a Guilielm. Contin. ad
Flor. f. 663.
Cant. Arch. and Romans Eccles. Legati apud Westminster. Celebrati. At this time it
seems the King was not in the Council, but the Canons, though drawn up by the
Bishops, promulgated before and assented to by the Body of the Realm, yet had
no force till Authenticated by the head of the Church and State.

Gervase of Dover is little less particular in the Account of the
Ecclesiastical Synod in his time, wherein the Canons or Constitution declaring
it unlawful for Clergymen, Agitare Judicia Sanguinis, was embodyed into the
Laws of the Land.

Ricardus vero Cant. Arch. totius Angliae Primas and Apostolicae Sedis Legatus
convocato clero Angliae celebravit concilium in ecclesia Beati Petri ad Westminster.
15. Kal. Chronica Ger. Dorob. f. 1429.
Junii Dominica ante Ascensionem Dom. afficerunt in hoc concilio omnes
suffraganei Cantuar. Eccles. praeter Vigorniens. qui diem clauserat extremum.

In hoc concilio ad emendationem Anglicanae Ecclesiae assensu Domini Regis and
primorum omnium Regni haec subscripta promulgata sunt Capitula. Ad Dextram
Primatis sedit Episcopus Londinensis quia inter Episcopos Cantuar. Ecclesiae
Sussraganeos decanatus praeminet dignitate; ad Sinistram sedit Episcopus
Winton. quia Cantoris officio praecellit: caeteri tam Episcopi quam Abbates
secundum primogenit. (...) sup.
consecrationis suae consederunt.

Ipse vero Archiepiscop. N. this was according to the Modus tenendi Synodos,
Secundum ordinationis suae tempus resideant, only that the Modus more
particularly referred to the inferior Clergy in that.
Primas, and Legatus residens in sublimi post sermonem quem tam facunde quam
diserte fecit in communi de Scripto legi fecit Statuta concilii sui sub hac
forma, etc.

Here it appears that their Councils were held by the Archbishops of Cant.
that the Statutes or Canons were drawn up in some private Consults of Bishops,
but they took their force from the Assents of the King and all the Primores
Regni, the Clergy and Laity of the Land; and that the third Canon by me cited,
was a Statute. This to be sure and the other Ecclesiastical Councils
abovementioned, were more than the Curia de more.

I cannot, as the Author of the Grand Question does, sum up the Arguments on
both sides; for I know not one that has yet been offered, against what I have
gone upon, which may be thus represented in short,

1. That the Canons prohibit the judging in Capital Causes, and all Preliminary
Votes too.

2. That these Canons were received by the great Council of the Nation, and so
became incorporated into, and part of the Laws of England.

3. And that they, running in the terms of Judicia agitare, which in the common
intendment is of Ordinary Justice, and the Constitution of Clarendon
particularly referring to the Ordinary Court of Justice, except it can be shown
that Clergymen Voted in the Ordinary Curia; the Court of Tenants and Officers
whilst that Court continued, there is not one President against this sense of
the Law. If it be said they have Voted in Bills of Attainders which in effect
are Judicia Sanguinis: Still these are not within the ordinary Justice; however
if they are Judicia Sanguinis, in a strict sense, let them who are concerned,
answer the evading the sense of the Law.

I shall give one plain instance of a great Council, Hen. 2. Anno 1176.
and another of an Ordinary Court in this Kings Reign, 23 Hen. 2. Bendictus
Abbas sub effigy Julii Ad. f. 72. Int. Bib. Cott.
and hasten to the next.

Circa festum Sancti Pauli venit Dominus Rex usque Northampton and magnum ibi
celebravit concilium de statutis Regni sui coram Episcopis, Comitibus and
Baronibus terrae, and coram eis per concilium Comitum and Baronum, Militum and
hominum suorum hanc subscriptam Assisam fecit, etc. This was more than an
Ordinary Curia, and there being the Barons terrae; the Milites and homines sui
are not to be taken for his feudal Tenants, but his Liege People.

For his Ordinary Curia we find a clear President in the Glossary of that great
Antiquary Sir Henry Spelman, who if he had lived to finish the second part
would certainly have given a complete Body of Antiquity. We find in him the
form of a fine levied in the Ordinary Curia.

Haec est finalis conventio facta in curia Domini Regis apud Clarendum anno 33.
33 Hen. 2. Glos. Tit. Finis.
Regni Regis Henrici Secundi coram Domino Rege and Joh. filio ejus, etc. and
aliis Baronibus and fidelibus qui tunc ibi praesentes erant, etc.

Richard the first was spirited to Jerusalem, and therefore we must not expect
many instances from him of the one sort or the other, 1 Rich. 1.
but I am sure the Ecclesiastical Council at Pipewell in Northamptonshire, Anno
1189.
could not be the Curia de more. Bromton. fol. 1161.
Sir Hen. Spelman calls it Concilium Pambritanicum, and Bromton tells us in
general who were at it, Spelm. Con. 2 vol. f. 119.
amongst others there were all the Abbots and Priors of the Kingdom, but it is
very manifest that they were not all Tenants in chief, many holding in pura and
perpetua eleemosyna, and others of temporal Lords, Poltons Stat. f. 95. Stat.
Asporta is Religiosorum.
as appears by the Statute of Carlisle, 34 Ed. 1. and therefore this was not a
Court of the Kings Tenants and Officers only.

But then in November following he assembled a full Parliament at London.

Rex congregatis Episcopis, Bromton. f. 1166.
Comitibus, and Baronibus Regni sui Parliamentum habuit and tractatum. This was
manifestly more than the Curia Regis.

A great Court was held the next year at Bury in Normandy, Anno 1189. Bromton.
f. 1170.
Ricardus Rex Angliae Festum nativitatis Domini quod secunda feria illo anno
evenit in Normannia apud Burium cum primatibus terrae illius celebravit. This
seems to have been a Great Council on the Court day.
It seems he had held another Court in England, for this was the second Court,
but the great Council at London was not of either of the Feast days. K. John
But let us see whether this distinction is observable in the reign of that
Prince upon whose Charter our dispute is.

He was crowned in the presence of a larger representative than the
Interpreters of his Charter have put upon us, Anno 1199. 1 Jo.
A populo terrae susceptus est. Knyghton. f. 2414.


King John in one of his Charters says, Carta moderationis feodi magni sigilli
an. 1. Joh. Ex Vet. Registr. in Archivis Cant. Arch. Ma. Par. fol. 189.
he came to the Crown jure hereditario and mediante tam Cleri quam populi
unanimi consensu and favore.

Congregatis Arch. Ep. Comitibus and Baronibus atque aliis omnibus.

This explains who are meant by the Magnates Regni, Anno 1200. 2 John
which assembled at London in the second of his reign, which, the Historian not
having mentioned any feast day, or saying barely that the King held his Court,
is to be taken for the Great Council: But the Records give further light, Rot.
Cant. 5 Jo. m. 5. n. 33. and Rot. cart. 17 Jo. p. 2, 2. m. 3. n. 2 5.
they show us that there the Queen was Crowned de communi assensu and concordi
Voluntate Arch. Episcoporum, Comitum, Baronum, Cleri and populi totius regni:
nor is it a wonder that the Queen being a Foreigner had such a formal consent
of the people to confirm her Queen, for there had been at least the pretense of
a law against any King of England's marrying a foreigner without the consent of
the people, and therefore Harold pleaded against William the First, when he
urged his oath for placing the Crown upon William's head, and marrying
William's daughter, that he could not do either Inconsultis Principibus, or
absque generali Senatus and populi conventu and edicto: Eadmerus. fo. 56.
as another Author explains the Council, Malmesbury. fo. 59.
the consent of which Harold pleaded to be necessary.

From London King John issues out his summons to William King of Scots to
attend him at Lincoln, which summons he was obliged to obey as one of his
Tenants in Chief, but thither came more than Tenants in Chief, nor was it the
place or time for the Curia de more, and therefore the Curia and General
Council was united, the King of Scots coming as attendant upon the Curia,
Convenerunt interea ad colloquium apud Lincolniam, Mat. Par. 196.
Rex Anglorum Johannes and Rex Scotorum Willielmus cum universa nobilitate tam
Cleri quam populi utriusque regni Vndecimo Kalendas Decembris. As under the
Nobility, the Senators of Scotland, were comprehended all the Freeholders at
that time beyond dispute, it is probable at least that our Nobility was of the
same extent. And for the probability of the assembling of so great a body as
the proprietors of both Kingdoms must have made even then, it is observable that
the meeting was without the walls, for the City was not able to hold them. The
King of Scots did homage upon a mountain in conspectu omnis populi, before all
the people, the united body of Freeholders of both Kingdoms.

In the third of his reign this King held his Curia on Christmas at Guildford,
3 Jo. 1201.
and this was no more than his Military Council. Mat. Par. fo. 198.
Multa militibus suis festiva distribuit indumenta, (that is,) in festival
bounty he gave many Coats to his Soldiers.

And that this was no more, is very evident in that the Archbishop of
Canterbury to show himself a Prince in the Ecclesiastical Empire set up the
like Court of his Tenants and Dependants.

Hubertus vero Cantuariensis Arch. M. Par. (...)
quasi cum Rege a pari contendens eodem modo fecit apud Cantuariam.

At Easter the King held his Court at Canterbury, where the Archbishop by
sumptuous entertainment of the King hoped to atone for his former Vainglory.

On Ascension-day the King issues out his summons from Theokesbery, for the
holding his ordinary Court at Whitsontide following at Portsmouth, Generale
proposuit edictum ut Comites and Barons and omnes qui militare servitium ei
debebant, Celebrata igitur apud Portesmue Solemnitate Pentec. ib.
parati essent ad Portesmue cum equis and armis ad transfretandum cum eo ad
parts transmarinas in die Pentecostes iam instante.

Those that would not pass the Seas with him consented to the payment of
escuage Two marks of Silver upon every Knights Fee, dantes Regi de quolibet
scuto duas marcas Argenti.

The next year he held his Curia on Christmas in Normandy. 4 Joh.


And the year following this, Anno 1202. M. P. f. 199.
he held his Christmas Court in Normandy likewise. 5 Joh.


In the year 1204. his Curia was held on Christmas at Canterbury, 6. Ma. Par.
fol. 200. Natale celebravit.
from thence he went to Oxford, where were present more than the Members of the
Ordinary Curia; convenerunt ad colloquium apud Oxoniam Rex and Magnates
Angliae. Indeed what is then given the King is only from his feudal Tenants,
but that is no argument that therefore no more were there, because the Council
advised him to charge his Tenants; nay, it is very observable that the Historian
does not say that they which were there assembled gave, but ubi concessa sunt
Regi auxilia militaria de quolibet scuto scilicet duae marcae, that is, there
Escuage was given by or upon them, Ma. Par. f. 201.
who held by Knights service, or it might be an aid given generally by every
one according to the number of Acres, or value of his estate in proportion to
the valuation of a Knights Fee. As was usually done in that and succeeding
times.

And then I take it provision was made for the defense of the Kingdom, ( viz.)
that every Nine Knights throughout the Kingdom should find a tenth armed at
all points to be ready in servitio nostro ad defensionem regni quantum opus
fuerit: this to be sure reached further than to the Knights by Military Tenure;
because every one that held a Knights Fee was by his tenure to find a man, and
consequently this would have been a weak'ning of the Kingdom to abate of their
services, but it must needs have extended to all that held to the value of a
Knights Fee, though not by Knights service. This was provided Communi assensu
Arch. Ep. Com. Baronum and omnium fidelium nostrorum Angliae. Rot. Pat. 6 Jo.
m. 2. dorso.
And so a general Land Tax.

And at the same Parliament the King per commune Concilium Regni made an Assise
of Money. m. 7. dors.


In the year 1205. he held his Court at Theokesbery which broke up the first
day. 7 Joh.


Soon after he called together his army, that is, those who were obliged by
their tenure to attend him; for though the Curia de more was confined to
certain days, yet the King made the Court wherever he pleased to appoint it,
and the obligation to attendance at the Court was indefinite; his Military
Council when met, refused to go with him beyond sea as he required, whereupon
with a few of them he sets out to sea, and after he had coasted about a little,
he exacted a great sum of money from those whose tenure could furnish him with
a pretense for it, because they discharged not the duty of their tenure,
occasiones praetendens quod noluerunt ipsum sequi.

The next year he held his Court on Christmas at Oxford. ^ Jo. 1206.
The Historians give no mark of any thing more than an ordinary Curia, Ma. Par.
f. 205.
but the Records do. M. West. f. 266.


There was a grant of subsidy upon every man's personal estate per Commune
Concilium and assensum Concilii nostri apud Oxoniam. Rot. Pat. 8 and 9 Jo. m.
3. dorso.


This in another Record is said to be by the Arch. Ep. Abbates and Magnates
Regni nostri, Rot. Par. 8 Jo. m. 1.

On Whitsontide he held his Court at Portsmouth. 9 Jo. 1207.
In hebdom. Pentecostes exercitum grand. apud Portesmouth congregavit.

But then the Christmas following at Winchester he held a General Council, and
that was on the Court day. Celebravit natale Domini apud Wintoniam praesentibus
Magnatibus regni. Archiepisc. Episc. Abbates, Priores, Comites, Barons Milites
and and alii magnates Regni Angliae. A. 37 H. 3. Fleta. lib. 2. c. 42.
Deinde in purificatione beatae Mariae cepit per totam Angliam tertiam decimam
partem ex omnibus mobilibus and aliis rebus tam de laicis quam de viris
ecclesiasticis and praelatis cunctis, murmurantibus sed contradicere non
audentibus.

Here was a grant of what no way belonged to tenure, and therefore all the
Magnates regni were privy to it, f. 212.
though 'twas done grudgingly.

In the year 1208. he held his Court on Christmas at Windsor, 10 Jo. 1208.
where he distributed coats to his Soldiers.

He held his Christmas Court at Bristol. 11 Jo. 1209.


He held a Great Council on the Feast day at Windsor praesentibus omnibus
Angliae Magnatibus. 12 Jo. 1210.


So the year following at York praesentibus Comitibus and Baronibus regni. 13
Jo. 1211.


1212. 'Twas but an ordinary Court held at Windsor, 14.
fuit ad natale apud Windsor.

1213. He held his Court at Westminster with very few tenants ad natale Domini
tenuit Curiam suam apud Westmonasterium cum pauco admodum Militum comitatu. 15
Jo.


In this year we find a Military summons to more than tenants, and of an
extraordinary nature.

Misit literas ad omnes Vicecomites regni sui sub hac forma: Rex Johannes etc.
Summone per bonos summonitores Comites, Barons, Milites and omnes liberos
homines and servientes vel quicunque Ma. Par. f. 224.
sint and de quocunque teneant, qui arma habere debent vel arma habere possint,
and qui homagium nobis vel ligeantiam fecerunt. Quod sicut nos and seipsos and
omnia sua diligunt, sint apud Deveram ad instant. clausum Paschae been parati
cum equis and armis and cum toto posse suo ad defendendum caput nostrum and
capita sua and terram Angl. Et quod nullus remaneat qui Arma portare possit sub
nomine Culvertagii and perpetuae servitutis. Of being reputed a Turntail or
Runaway.
Et unusquisque sequatur Dominum suum. Et qui terram non habent and arma habere
possint, illic veniant ad capiendum solidatas nostras. Hereby all freemen as
well as the Kings tenants, nay servants, and all that owed allegiance to the
Crown, though not obliged to bear arms, if they could get any, were required to
give their attendance, and those that had not wherewithal to maintain
themselves should have the Kings pay: this was upon expectation of an invasion,
and therefore the assembly seems to have been as general as the summons; but
there is a shrewd circumstance to induce the belief that many considerable men
not holding in Chief, thought themselves not obliged to attendance till
necessity pressed them, for otherwise he would never have been terrified into a
dishonorable peace, the parting with all his right of patronage to the Pope,
and submitting to his pleasure, if he had not been sensible by the absence of
many great men that there was truth in the French King's boast, Mat. Par. f.
225.
Jactat se idem Rex Chartas habere omnium fere Angliae Magnatum de fidelitate
and subjectione.

But that this was not a general Council of the Nation appears by the Statute
of Provisors which declares that the Popes assuming the jus patronatus was an
incroachment, Stat. 25 Ed. 3.
that is usurpation, or unlawful act, which it would not have been, if the
Comites, Barons, and turba multa nimis that unanimously agreed to those
shameful terms which King John yielded, had been enough to constitute a full
representative of the Nation.

If they had been called to Council not to fight, then indeed upon knowledge
that matters of general obligation were to be settled, though but few had come,
they would have concluded the rest.

The Army as it was computed were about 60000, Pryn 's King John, f. 269.
but that being made up of Servants, Villains and all manner of people, it is
not to be supposed that there were there nigh the half of the proprietors,
which must have been present, to make any thing of general obligation without
notice of its being so intended.

Of the same nature with this, was that shameful resignation of the Crown
before mentioned near Dover, whereas the first agrreement was at Dover. fol.
230.


The same year his Tenants who were to maintain themselves in his Court and
Army at their own charge, complain that he had kept them out so long that they
had spent all their money and could follow him no longer unless he supplied
them out of the Exchequer.

This year there was a Great Council at St. Albans where were all the Magnates
regni and there was a confirmation of the laws of Hen. the first, 15. 1213.
whereas we find nothing of that nature at any Curia of the Kings tenants and
Officers only. Mat. Par. fol. 230.


The same year he held his Court on Christmas at Windsor, 15 Jo. Ad natale
curiam suam tenuit, apud Windleshores. M. Paris ad. Tig. f. 238.
but a Great Council was held at Oxford, the Summons to which Mr. Seldom
produces, but says the Record of it for ought he had seen is without Example.

Rex Vicecomiti Oxon salutem, Titles of Honor, fo. 587.
praecipimus tibi quod omnes Milites Ballivae tuae, qui summoniti fuerunt ad
nos a die Omnium Sanctorum in quind. dies, Venire facias cum armis suis.

Upon this part it is observable, that there had been a general notice or
Proclamation of the time when he would have those that owed him Military
Service to attend with their Arms, but the place was not named, for they were
to follow him wherever he would have his Court, and therefore herein was an
apparent Grievance in some measure redressed by his Charter Two years after in
ascertaining the place of Meeting to Consult of Aids and Escuage; but besides
these Tenants, there were others, Corpora vero Baronum sine Armis singulariter
and quatuor discretos Milites de comitatu tuo venire facias ad nos ad eundem
terminum ad loquendum nobiscum de Negotiis regni Nostri. Test meipso apud.
Witten 11 die Nov. Eodem modo scribitur omnibus Vicecomitibus.

Thus much I take to be clear from it, that here was an union of the Ordinary
Curia Regis, the Court of the King's Military Tenants, who were to attend with
their Arms, and of peaceable Senators, in a great Council. If the Barons of
whom the Sheriff was to take special care were only such as were Barons by
tenure, it is not supposable, that contrary to the Obligation of their tenure,
they should be ordered to come unarmed, whilst only their Tenants, or at least
Inferior Tenants to the King had their Swords in their hands; wherefore
Barons here must be taken in the most large and comprehensive sense. But this
is farther observable, that where the Summons was General to all the
Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls, Barons, Knights and
Freeholders, yet there has been a special Inquest summoned or taken out of the
Generality, as in the Summons to attend the Justices in Air. Bracton lib. 3.
p. 109. b.
Summoneas per bonos Sum. Omnes Arch. Ep. Abb. Pri. Commit. Baron. Milites, and
libere tenentes de Balliva tua, So Rot. Finium 8 H. 3. m. 2. dorso.
and de qualibet villa quatuor legales homines and praepositum, The
Head-borough.
and de quolibet Burgo Duodecim Legales Burgenses, etc. And even agreeably to
this Record of the 18 of King John, we find that in the 42 of Henry the third,
it was agreed, that there should be quatuor Milites Inquisitores, Rot. Pat. 42
H. 3.
four Inquisitors in every County, who were to be sworn in the County Court, to
enquire faithfully into the business of every County, in order to represent it
at Parliament, which has no semblance of their being the representatives of the
Counties, only the presenters and methodizers of that business, to which the
Great Council gave their Assent or Dissent.

From this time to the Great Assembly at Rumny Mead, I find neither a Great
Council nor Curia mentioned, that to be sure was of more than the King's
Tenants, as I have already shown; I shall only observe farther, that it
consisted of that Army which was got together on both sides. On the peoples
side was a very great Army Comitum, Mat. Par. f. 241.
Baronum, Militum and Servientium, Peditum and Equitum cum Communibus Villarum
and Civitatum; and after this, they had a great accession, by gaining the whole
City of London, and all that were neutral before, and even most of those that
had kept along with the King: upon this the King condescends to treat, the
place is agreed upon, and accordingly convenerunt ad colloquium Rex and
Magnates, who these were the Record tells us, and the Assembly was as General
as the Concession on the King's side, Magna Charta, 17 Jo. An. 1215.
Concessimus omnibus liberis hominibus nostris Regni Angliae pro nobis and
haeredibus nostris in perpetuum, omnes libertates subscriptas habendas and
tenendas eis and haeredibus suis de nobis and haeredibus nostris.

Even this was a Curia Regis in a large sense, but not the ordinary Curia; and
though 'twere the Common Council of the Kingdom, as 'twas the Assembly of the
whole Community, yet not the ordinary Common Council, for that might be, and I
need not scruple to say that it was, of the King's Tenants and Officers, which
in that sense, and to the purposes for which of course it met, was the Commune
concilium regni, yet like the Kings ordinary Privy Council, or his Courts of
Justice long since settled at Westminster Hall, they could exercise no act of
legislation.

If it be said, that the charging Tenants with more than was due of custom were
such an Act, by the same reason the power of making Bylaws would argue a
legislative power, and there would be a little Parliament in every Village.

Without re-examining particular instances I conceive it is obvious, that admit
the ordinary Curia Regis at any time exercised a power peculiar to the Great
Council, of which I dare boldly say there are very rare if any instances, such
that it can be affirmed with certainty this was an ordinary Curia, without a
more solemn convention, or Summons; yet in irregular times many of them would
not make one legal President, especially against so many declarations and
confirmations of the ancient laws, and free customs, as Princes either to
obtain, or assure the Crown to them swore solemnly, inviolably to observe and
keep.

If sometimes the marks of distinction between the Curia Regis, and the Great
Council are not clearly apparent, in that the Curia only might be summoned ad
colloquium, and in that sense might be styled Parliamentum, Pat. 4 Ed. 1. m. 14.
though not Generale Parliamentum, In primo generali Parl. nostro post
Coronationem.
and the Generale Parliamentum might be, as indeed it always was, Curia Regis,
though not the Curia de more: Yet the certain difference is upon particular
instances, where the full circumstances are set down, always to be known. As
the ordinary Curia consisted of the Kings Tenants, and Officers; and there
appears no grievance worth public notice to have lain on the last, nor on the
first, as to their attendance at the Wars, or as a Court of Justice, the remedy
was properly applied by King John's Charter, to that wherein they were uneasy,
which was the assembling about the matters relating ad servitia to their
services, without convenient notice for time, or for the occasion; so that they
might think it was only for matters of ordinary justice, which might go on well
enough without them, when it was really to charge them in their properties, by
such as should appear, by design and contrivance, which was a great mischief.

Wherefore for this the redress was,

1. That they should have forty days notice. Charta Johannis.


2. That the time, place and occasion of meeting should be ascertained.

And then they that were there were justly concluded by the rest, and had no
reason to complain of the charge.

Thus I conceive, I have given a rational account of this Charter, and I
question whether upon other grounds any man can reconcile it with the Records
and Histories both before and since the Charter till the 49 of Hen. 3. when
it is supposed that more than Tenants in Chief, which composed the Common
Council here mentioned, were let into the Great, or Common Council of the
Kingdom.

If they cannot, I conceive they must take my sense.

For, this Charter was either declarative of the law as 'twas before, or
introductive of a new law.

If the first, then it must be interpreted by the Records and Histories both
before, and since, till a time of change can be assigned with some color.

If introductive of a new law, then we must see what interpretation practice
has put upon it; not that the sense of a law is always to be interpreted by
practice, because then we should think, especially upon the several Statutes
against Provisors, which were rarely executed according to the letter, that we
could not judge of the sense of former laws by the plain words. But if the
words will any way admit of a double sense, that sense is always to be taken
which agrees with constant practice, especially if the sense inclines most
toward the practice.

I have at large shown the evident proofs, that to the Great Council of the
Nation there used to come more than the King's Tenants in Chief, and
consequently this very Charter confirming free customs of every particular the
place, or of the inhabitants of those places. According to this Charter the
Common Council of the Nation by law consisted of more than the King's Tenants
in Chief, and that the Law was thus there is a very strong proof, which turns
upon them who suppose that King John's Charter gives us the full form of the
Great Council, and that none but the King's Tenants in Capite, made the Common
Council or Parliament of the Kingdom till 49 H. 3.

In the thirty ninth year of H. 3. several years after he had granted and
confirmed that famous Charter, An. 1254. 39 H. 3.
which alone obtained the addition of Great, so that the Magna Charta or Grand
Charter of William the first, Hen. the first, King Stephen, Hen. the second,
and King John, all lost their names, and were swallowed up in that, Mat. Paris
^d Tig. f. 884.
the Baronagium or omnes fere Angliae Magnates refused to give a Royal Aid,
demanded of them, the ground of their refusal is very remarkable.

Quod omnes tunc temporis non fuerunt juxta tenorem magnae Cartae suae vocati.
This some would render and call King John's Charter, and that the complaint
was, that the Peers had not their particular Summons according to the tenor of
that Charter. Were it so, 'twould prove nothing for them that urge it; because
it does not appear, but that the aid demanded might have been Escuage or
Taillage, or both, which lay upon the King's Tenants only, such a Common
Council as that Charter I conceive establishes. But it is Cartae suae, not
Cartae Regis Johannis patris Regis nunc: it is the then King Henry the third's
Charter, no man will say that 'twas the Barons Charter, and besides it was the
Great Charter, and no other Charter then maintained that Epithete. But what
puts this out of dispute is, that though H. 3.'s Charter was comprehensive of
all the fundamentals of the Government, and was so many times confirmed, and
explained where it was thought needful; yet there is not one clause referring
to the Great Council of the Nation, but what leaves to every particular place,
and the Inhabitants thereof all ancient Customs and Liberties; so that unless
it be proved that such a Commune concilium Regni as is in King John's Charter,
used to compose the Great Council exclusive of all others, (excepting what is
employed in the general Salvo at the end) they must needs have referred
themselves to the ninth Chapter of Henry the Third's Charter (which indeed is
but a revival of the law affirmed in King John's.)

Whereby the City of London, Mag. Charta, cap. 9.
all Cities, Buroughs, Vills, Townships, or Parishes, the Barons of the Cinque
Ports, and all other Ports were to enjoy all their liberties and free customs.

That by Villae is meant Parishes, or Townships. I think may appear from
Doomsday book, where Villa is taken for the next Division under an Hundred.

Hic subscribitur inquisitio terrarum quo modo Barons Regis inquirunt (viz.)
per sacramentum Vicecomitis scirae and omnium Baronum and eorum Francigenarum
and totius Centuriae presbyteri Praepositi vj. Villani uniuscujusque Villae.
Legier Book of Ely.
Hundred.


Here are the Sheriff, the Great Barons, and Clergymen and Headboroughs within
every Hundred, and six Inhabitants of every Villa, Parish or Township, then
follows an account of the several Lands and Tenures by Hundreds and Villae
within those Hundreds. Now according to the ninth chapter of Magna Charta
custom is to be the Legal Interpreter what was the Great or Common Council of
the Nation, and as the whole Nation is made up of Cities, Buroughs, and
Parishes or Townships, they being the integral parts of every County, all the
Counties of England were to be summoned according to their free customs.

And methinks the right of the Counties for their coming to the Great Council
and its being preserved under the free customs of the Villae, appears from the
Plea of the men of Coventry the Inhabitants of that Villa in 34 Ed. 1.

They plead and their plea is allowed, That in the times of that King and of
his Progenitors, which to be sure reaches to the custom before Magna Charta,
they used not to be taxt as Citizens, Burgesses, or Tenants of the Kings
demesne, but only along with the Community of the County of Warwick, that is,
with the whole County and not with the Cities, Buroughs, and ancient demesne of
the Crown. So that when the Commune Concilium, in K. John's Charter, or the
Kings Tenants in chief, laid any charge or gave an Auxilium or aid, this could
not affect them; but when they came, and agreed to any charge with the Body of
the County, Inter communia de Termino sancti Michaelis, An. 34 E. 1. pro
hominibus villae de Coventre.
as part thereof, then they were liable, and no otherwise: and indeed the
stream of Records of both H. 3. E. 1. and E. 2. evidently prove all this: but
let us touch the Record, Ex part eorundem hominum Regi est ostensum quod cum
villa praedicta, Civitas, Burgus, seu Dominicum Regis non existat, ut homines
villae predictae tanquam Cives Burgenses seu tenentes de Dominico Regis in
aliquibus auxiliis, Tallagiis seu contributionibus Regi seu Progenitoribus suis
concessis non consueverunt talliari, sed tantum cum Communitate Com. Warwic.
etc.

No man will imagine surely the meaning of this Plea to be that the Vill or
Town of Coventry was not liable when the Kings immediate Tenants taxt
themselves only, but they were when such Tenants taxt the whole County; for
that would have been an admittance of a grievance beyond that against which
they petitioned, for by that the Kings Tenants might have excused themselves,
and have laid the burden upon them who were not Tenants in Chief, so that it
would have been their greatest advantage to claim the privilege of being
Tenants to the Crown, and in that capacity to have had a right and privilege
to be parties, and consenting to all charges and grants laid upon them, and
given to the Crown: and for that they might have prayed in Aid and pleaded King
John's Charter, nor should we have met with so many Records in those times,
whereby so many pleaded off the Tenures in Capite as chargeable and
burdensome; nay even the tenure of Barony it self; but on the contrary every
one would have given the King great sums of money to have changed their
tenures to have held in Capite ut de Corona (when indeed it clearly appears
they did the contrary) because they not only could save their individual
Estate, if they had the sole power of making Laws, and giving Taxes, but would
have increased and bettered them by their Services and Tenures, which
capacitated them to lay charge upon all the Barons, Knights and Freeholders of
England who held not in Chief and who were by far the major part, many of which
held of the great Lords by such and such duties or payments pro omni servitio,
and beyond that were not liable without their own consents to be charged; and
all this is demonstrative if any will read over and consider the infinite
number of pleadings in the Ages we speak of, viz. (for some few instances) that
A. B. holds of C. D. of his Manor of E. by paying 10 s. rent or one bow and
arrow, or one horse, or the like, pro omni servitio, or holds of the Honor or
Castle of D. to find one or more men been paratos cum Armis to defend such a
Posterngate or such a Chamber there when summoned by the great Lord pro omni
servitio; but to charge them without their assent further, was to overthrow the
very Salvo in the end of Henry the Thirds, and in King John's Charter, which
runs thus.

Salvae sint Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus, Templariis,
Hospitalariis, Comitibus, Baronibus, Militibus and omnibus aliis tam
Ecclesiasticis personis quam secularibus omnes libertates and consuetudines
quas prius habuerunt.

If King John's Charter, in the particular of which our dispute is, introduced
a new law, then we must examine only what Custom or practice followed upon it,
or who made the Common or Great Councils of the Nation from that time to the
49th of Henry the 3. that is, were of right to come, or to have notice of the
Councils sitting juxta tenorem magnae Cartae suae, as is insisted upon in. the
39th of Henry the 3. as above mentioned. That they were more than Tenants in
Capite, which made the Commune Concilium in King John's Charter, the Record of
the 38th of this King Henry, where two for every County, besides Tenants in
Chief; were summoned, were enough to evince.

We there find Writs to all the Sheriffs of England, to summon the lesser
Tenants in Chief, the omnes alios qui in Capite tenent de nobis, as in K. John's
Charter, and two more to be chosen by every County respectively, Mat. Par. f.
860.
the precepts recite (though 'twere falsum and deceptorium, Nota before the
large and comprehensive acceptance of Magnates Regni.
as the Historian tells us) that the Earls, Barons, and caeteri Magnates regni,
had promised to be at London with Horse and Arms, to go toward Portsmouth, in
order to passing the Seas with the King for Gascony, against the French King
who then was in war with King Henry.

Mandamus (says the Record) quod omnes illos de Balliva tua, Rot. Claus. 38 H.
3. m. 7. c. 12. dorso.
qui tenent viginti libratas terrae de nobis in Capite, vel de aliis, qui sunt
infra aetatem and in custodia nostra ad idem distringas, which was to perform
their personal services, which not requiring their crossing the Seas, here is a
suggestion that 'twas by the advice of the Great Council. But besides the
services of Tenants in Chief, who were to be out upon their charges no longer
than forty days; the King wanted a supply of moneys to maintain them beyond
that time, and therefore for this he directs a representative of the several
Counties.

Tibi districte praecipimus quod praeter omnes praedictos venire faciatis coram
concilio nostro apud West. in Quind. Paschae prox. fut. quatuor legales and
discretos milites de Comitatibus praedictis quos iidem Com. ad hoc elegerint
vice omnium and singulorum eorundem, To the Sheriff of Bedford and Bucks.
viz. duos de uno Com. and duos de alio ad provid. una cum militibus aliorum
Com. quos ad eund. diem vocari fecimus, quale auxilium nobis in tanta
necessitate impendere voluerint.

These were to come vice omnium and singulorum, instead or in the place of all
the Freeholders of the County, which asserts their personal right: but
further, Et tu ipse militibus and aliis de Com. praed. necessitatem nostram and
tam urgens negotiam nostrum diligenter exponas and ad competens auxilium nobis
ad praesens impendend. efficaciter inducas, Ita quod praefati quatuor milites
praefato concilio nostro ad praed. term. Pashae respondere possint super praed.
auxil. pro singulis Comitat.

These were properly to come in the stead of all, for they were only Deputies
to carry the sense of their Principals, the matter was to be propounded in the
County Courts before the Knights there chose, and aliis, and the rest of the
Freeholders; this whole assembly was to be moved to grant a large
contribution, and the Knights were to make the tender of their present, before
the King and his Council; if the County had wholly refused, the Knights had no
power then to grant for them, so says the Record, for it was to be propounded
to all, Ita quod, the Knights might answer for an aid from the County.

And it seems whether the Counties chose Deputies or not, or gave them not full
instructions, the King was not able to work upon them that met at the place and
time then appointed, but they broke up in great discontent.

Et sic cum summa indignatione tristes admodum Proceres recesserunt. Mat. Par.
f. 859.


But if the Tenants in Chief made the Common Council of the Kingdom till 49 H.
3. and had a power to tax the rest of the Nation de Alto and Basso ad meram
voluntatem suam: why this summons for a representative of the Counties?

The very next year, being the 39th abovementioned, the King sollicites them
for Aid.

They tell the King he undertook that War against France, Mat. Par. f. 884.
for which he demanded aid, sine consilio suo and Baronagii sui. And when some
were for complying with the Kings Demands: they Answer,

That all were not called according to the Tenor Magnae Cartae suae, that is,
of this Kings Great Charter. Now whether this were because many who were
exempted from Common Summons (for many such there were by particular Charters)
had not Special summons, Singulatim from the King himself, or that he put a
representative upon them, whereas they might plead that 'twas their free
Custom to come themselves in person, or send as many as they pleased in their
names, I need not determine; it being enough that here were more than Tenants
in Capite. But a mighty Argument has been raised against Inferior Proprietors
or the Barons, Milites and libere tenentes, which held not of the King, being
part of the great or Common Council of the Nation, upon such records as mention
their being summoned coram Concilio. And in effect the force resolves into
this, they are no part of the Kings standing Council, the Assistants to him and
his Lords, or of his Common Council of Tenants and Officers in the Curia,
therefore no part of the great or Common Council of the Kingdom.

To clear this, I need offer but one Instance of many.

At Christmas in the 6th of Hen. the 3. he held his Curia at Oxford, Anno
1221. 6 Hen. 3.
but 'twas more than a Curia de More.

Tenuit curiam suam praesentibus Comitibus and Baronibus Regni, Mat. Par. f.
298.
words of an extensive sense, Mat. West. f. 280.
or Ad natale Dom. fuit apud Oxoniam ubi festa Natalitia solemniter cum suis
Magnatibus celebravit.

We have a Record of a subsidy granted that year, probably in that very Curia,
Coram Nobis and concilio nostro praesentibus Arch. Cant. Ep. Com. and
Magnatibus nostris de Communi Omnium Voluntate. Rot. Claus. 6 Hen. 3. m. 7.


Now many of these were members both of the standing Council and Curia too, and
yet were Coram Nobis and Concilio nostro: but the meaning of it is, that this
was granted either before the King and his standing Council, or the King in his
Curia by all these, That is, here was a conjunction of all Councils in one,
adunatis Conciliis.

But because here are only Com. Bar. and Magnates mentioned as if here were not
any but great Lords: it is to be observed, and cannot be denied by any
Antiquary, that freeholders, and they that came from the Counties as the
representatives of such, had the appellation of Magnates, Inter Communia Term.
S. Mich. 34 E. 1. penes Remem. Dom. These. in Scaccario.
even a long while after: and therefore much rather before, when Lands had
fewer Owners, the Owners, especially such as came in their own persons, were
Magnates.

In the 37 of this King in Parliamento London. so Mat. Westminster. p. 352. Rot.
Claus. 3 E. 2. m. 16. Rastalls Statutes p. 85. 15 E. 3. 25 E. 3. Stat. 27 E. 3.
Statutum Stapulae.
Rex Angliae R. Comes Norfolc. etc. caeterique Magnates Angliae, consented to
the Excommunication of all the Violators of the great Charter. Rex and
Praedicti Magnates, that is, as is explained by Fleta who was Judge in the 16th
of Edward the First, Archiepiscopi, Episcopi, Rot. Pat. 37 Hen. 3. m. 12.
dorso. Fleta f. 93.
Abbates Regni Angliae, Priores, Comites, Barons, Milites, and alii Magnates:
the Record goes on, and Communitas populi protestantur public in praesentia
Arch. Cant. nec non and Episcoporum omnium in eodem colloquio existentium.

In cujus rei test. and in posterum Veritatis testimonium tam Dominus Rex quam
praed. Comites ad Instantiam Magnatum and populi praesentium Scripto Sigilla
sua apposuerunt. Here the Communitas populi were the Communitas Civitatum and
Burgorum; for the rest were Magnates, the King and some Earls subscribed at the
desire of the rest.

Perhaps by this time they that suppose the Commune Consilium regni within King
John's Charter to have been a Full Parliament, or Great Council, till the 49th
of Henry the Third, will compound for their Notion, and will yield, That more
than such often came to Council, but that 'twas of courtesy, and that the
King's immediate Tenants alone could charge the rest, and often did.

For which they have two false grounds; though perhaps but one within the time
we are now upon, yet both are worth notice.

1. They take it for granted, that the Lords used to answer for their Tenants
in Benevolences out of Parliament; and upon this weak, and at least uncertain
foundation, they build the Supposition, That they at other times represented
them in all Great and Public Councils.

2. (Which falls within the time) That it should seem by Record, that the
immediate Tenants have charged others without their Consent.

1. To prove that the Lords answered for their Tenants, they run back as far as
William the Second's Reign; when his Brother Robert sent to him to borrow Ten
thousand Marks of Silver, proffering Normandy for Security for Repayment.

The Bishops, Abbots, and Abbesses, brake in pieces the Silver and Gold
Ornaments of their Churches, the Earls, Barons, and Sheriffs, suos Milites
spoliaverunt, that is, robbed those which were under them; and it is a fine
President for the Right of the thing, which carries Sacrilege and Robbery in
the face of it.

Here the Sheriffs robbed or took away from the Freeholders that were within
their Ball'ia or Balliva, and the Lords took from the Tenants within theirs;
wherefore if the Lords could charge their Tenants, the Sheriffs could the
Freeholders: but I would fain see one President, that the Kings Tenants ever
answered for them that were within their Ball'ia, further than the Sheriffs did
for those within theirs, which at the most was as Collectors under the King, of
what was duly charged upon their Tenants; but generally I take it, they did no
more than certify how many held of the King within their Precinct, as the
Jurisdiction of great Men extended its self within such a compass, they were
best able to give the King an account of those that were liable to any payment
within that Ball'ia.

And thus in Henry the Second's time, Inter Communia de Term. Mich. Anno 28 Ed.
1. Rot. 27. dorso.
the King issues out his Precept, That quilibet Praesul et Baro should certify
quot Milites tenerent de ipso Rege in Capite; this was for Escuage toward the
Marriage of the Kings Daughter, to which all that held in Capite were liable;
and here the great Lords were to certify for the Resiants within the compass
of their Leet or Ball'ia, though they held not of them, but of the King: upon
such Certificate, according to the number they returned, so many were entered
in the Exchequer Rolls, under the name of such a Lord; and thus we find it
expressly in the Case of the Prior of Coventry.

Compertum est in Rotulo 29 Regis H. tertii sub titulo de auxilio ad
primogenitam filiam Regis maritandam, Communiae de Term. Sancti Hill' Anno 17
Regis Ed. 3. penes Remem. Regis in Scaccario.
viz. de quolibet Scuto 20 s. Contineri sic. Prior de Coventry reddit compotum
de 10 l. de december feodis de quibus quidem december libr'. Willi' Tunstall Vic.
dicti Comitatus in compoto suo de Anno 32 ipsius Regis H. oneratus fuit.

Here so many Knights Fees are entered under the Prior's name, but the Sheriff
collected for them.

Upon this the Prior pleads,

Hoc ei non prejudicat in hac part, dicit enim quod auxilia illa non fuerunt
nec censeri possunt esse servitia, imo quaedam subsidia per Magnates et
communitatem regni spontanea et mera voluntate Regi concessa, et tam de
tenentibus aliorum quam de tenentibus de Domino Rege levanda.

It Is observable, the ground of demanding for so many Knights fees was the
entry on the Roll in the 29th. of Henry the 3d. and he pleads, That at that
time the Coumunitas Regni were Parties to the Grant; and that it was charged
by, and lay upon more than Tenants of the King in Chief, but that he was
chargeable upon the account of Aid or Service with but two Knights fees, which
he says may appear by the Certificate of the then Prior, De feodis quae ipse
tunc Prior tenuit de veteri feoffamento, that is, the number of Knights with
which he was to serve, according to the first infeodation from the Crown, and
de novo, which is the number of Knights fees raised under him by
sub-infeodations, the first were all that he could be answerable for, but the
second could not be charged without their own consent, the charges upon such
were, Quaedam subsidia per magnates and communitatem Regni spontanea and mera
voluntate Regi concessa. And thus we find the Records,

(1.) That the Kings Tenants were answerable no farther than according to the
vetus feoffamentum.

So in the 26th. of Henry the 3d. Inter Communia de Term. Paschae penes Rem. in
Scaccario.
The Sheriff is required to show cause why he distrain'd a man for two Knights
fees, who pleads that he held but one, de veteri feoffamento. Monstravit, etc.
Quod cum non teneat de veteri feoffamento nisi feod. unius Militis in comitate
tuo tu exig. etc. Quantum pertinet ad feod. duorum Militum and ea occatione
averia sua cepisti, etc.

(2.) That Lords of Manors could not charge their Tenants without their
consent.

Rex omnibus and libere tenentibus de Episcopatu Land. Rot. Pat. 6. H. 3.
Reciting the great Debts which the Bishop had contracted in the Kings Service,
the King earnestly entreats the Bishops Tenants to make a contribution toward
the supply of his necessities, which surely need never have been, if the Bishop
had by virtue of the Feudal Law, Power of charging his Tenants, or raising upon
them what he had pleased.

Unde vos affectuose rogamus quatenus amoris nostri intuitu efficax ei faciatis
auxilium ad debita sua quibus pro favore nostro honoratus est. Ita quod
exaudita in hac part prece nostra precibus vestris pro loco and tempore nobis
porrigendis aures benignas exhibere debeamus.

(3.) When there was a Grant of more than from the Kings immediate Tenants,
whose Grants were in the nature of Services, Rot. Claus. 19. H. 3. m. 6.
if it reached beyond the vetus feoffamentum, 'twas Spontanea voluntate sua and
sine consuetudine.

(2.) But there is a knocking Record which I wonder I find no where insisted
upon, to prove the Kings Tenants to charge others.

Sciatis quod Arch. Episc. Rot. Claus. 19. H. 3.
Abbates, Priores, Comites, Barons and omnes alii de Regno nostro qui de nobis
tenent in Capite spontanea voluntate sua and sine consuetudine concess. nobis
efficax auxilium, etc. Undeprovisum est quod habeamus de singulis feodis
militum and wardis quae de nobis tenent in Capite duas marcas ad praed.
auxilium.

Here was a Grant only from Tenants in Capite, and yet it may be urged, that
other Records explaining this, show, That the Grant reached to the novum
feoffamentum, as well as the vetus.

But it will be said, That I make an Argument for them, which they are wiser
than to offer, since the Records of this very clearly overthrow it; yet if
there be no better, I may offer this, that they may cultivate and improve it.

The matter of Fact, I take it, was, That the Tenants in Capite Granted by
themselves a charge upon the vetus feoffamentum, and the Record which mentions
their Grant goes no farther, but another Record of a Grant from Ecclesiastic
Tenants in Chief is more express, and explains the other.

Cum peteremus a Praelatis Angliae quod nobis auxilium facerent, Rot. Pat. 15.
H. 3. m. 3.
pro magna necessitate nostra de qua eis constabat, viz. Epis. Abbatibus
Abbissis, Nota Women granting.
Prioribus and Priorissis qui de nobis tenent in Capite ipsi nobis liberaliter
concesserunt auxilium tale, viz. De singulis feodis Militum suorum 40 s. de tot
feodis de quot ipsi tenentur, nobis respondere quando nobis faciunt servitium
militare.

This is express, That the Tenants in Capite, Granted only for so many Knights
fees as were of the vetus feoffamentum, that is, so many as they were to answer
for, when they were to perform their Military Services to the Crown.

But whereas in the 19th. the Tenants in Capite were said to have made such a
Grant, and at the same time there was a Grant which reached to the Tenants de
novo feoffamento, the Record mentioning that, shows us that more than Tenants
were Parties to the Grant.

Rex Vic. Somer. Rot. Claus. 19. H. 3. m. b.
Salutem sciatis quod Comites and Barons, and omnes alii, de toto regno nostro
Angliae spontanea voluntate sua and sine consuetudine concess. nobis efficax
auxilium ad magna negotia nostra expediend* unde provisum est, de consilio
illorum quod habeamus de singulis feodis quae de nobis tenent in Capite and de
wardis tam de novo feoffamento quam de veteri duas marcas.

Whether the Tenants in Capite Granted at this Council by themselves, or all
agreed in one Body, is not material, but here is a grant from all, jointly or
severally; I will show one Instance, which is barely of such a Commune
concilium Regni, as King John's Charter exhibits.

Rex Bar. Inter Communia de Term. Sancti Mich.
Quia per commune concilium Com. Baronum and aliorum Magnatum nobiscum in
Wallia nuper existentium provisum est quod nos and ipsi qui servitium nobis
fecerunt, Anno 42. H. 3. Rot. 4. de scut. levand.
ibidem habeamus scutagium nostrum, viz. De Sicuto 40 s. pro exercitu nostro
Wall' anno Regni nostri 41. vobis mandamus quod de omnibus feodis Militum quae
tenentur de nobis in Capite vel de Wardis in manu nostra existentibus exceptis
feod. illorum qui brevia nostra habuerunt de scutag. suo habendo levari fac.
scutag. nostrum*

Here was a Common Council of Tenants, such is according to their obligation of
their Tenure, had attended the King in his Wars, and they laid Escuage upon
them which did not perform their Services due, which still were only Tenants in
Chief, and the Tenants of the King's Wards which were liable to the same
Service, and they which made default, were to pay Escuage to the King, which he
says was to his Tenants too, in as much as he out of that satisfied their
charges beyond the duty of their Tenure.

I think I have cleared my way to the treasury of Records in this Kings Reign,
which acquaints us with the Members of the Great Council of the Nation.

As before is observed, 2 H. 3. or at least 9.
for the obtaining Magna Charta, and Charta de Foresta, the Arch. Episc.
Abbates, Priores, Comites, Barons, Milites and libere tenentes and omnes de
Regno Granted a Subsidy.

There is a Grant of Carvage, Rot. Claus. 4 H. 3. m. 5.
which Bracton says, used to be consensu Communi totius Regni, not being a
Service, or such as Tenants only used to charge or pay the Reward, has it,
Omnes Magnates and fideles totius Regni nostri, Granted de qualibet carucata
duos solidos.

The King in his Letter to the Pope, Bundela literarum in Turre Land. A. 8 H. 3.
says, That he had Summoned to Northampton, Arch. Episc. Abb'es ac omnes
Magnates totius Regni, to give him concilium and auxilium.

The King undertook a Foreign Voyage, Rot. Claus. 14 H. 3. M. 2. dorso.
De communi concilio omnium Comitum and Baronum nostrorum Angliae.

A Fourth part of their Movables is Granted by the Archiepiscopi, Rot. Claus.
16 H. 3. M. 2. dorso.
Episc. Abbates, Priores and Clerici terras habentes quae ad Ecclesias suas non
pertinent, Comites Barons, Milites, liberi homines, and villani de Regno
nostro.

So that it is plain here, The Clergy that were Landed-men or Freeholders.
who made the Common Conciliu^ Regni, and gave the Subsidy, the Archbishops,
Bishops, Abbots, Priors, inferior Landed Clergymen, the Counts, Barons,
Knights, Free men, it being a Grant of Goods not laid upon Land; and that it
may fully express the Parties to the Grant, the Record tells us there were the
villani the Inhabitants of every Villa. A Provision about the Sheriffs Turns,
Hundred-Courts, Wapentakes, and the Courts of Lords of Manors was

De communi concilio domini Cant. Rot. Claus. 18 H. 3. pars unica. M. 10.
and omnium Episc. Comitum, and Baronum and aliorum.

Comites and Barons and omnes alii de toto Regno nostro concess. Rot. Claus.
19 H. 3. M. 6.
nobis efficax auxilium, etc.

It is provided, Rot. Claus. ^8 H. 3. M. 3. dorso.
coram venerab. Patre Cant. Arch. and coram Majori part Episc. Comitum and
Baronum totius Regni nostri Angliae, that no Assize of Darrein Presentment
shall be taken of any Prebendary belonging to a Cathedral Church.

At a Parliament, Rot. Claus. 21 H. 3. M. 7. dorso.
Cum ad mandatum nostrum convenirent, apud West. Archiepisc. Abbates, Priores
Comites and Barons totius Regni nostri and tractatum haberent nobiscum de
statu nostro and Regni nostri, They grant a Subsidy Archiepis. Abbates*
Priores, and Cler' terras habentes quae ad Ecclesias suas non pertinent.
Comites, Barons, Milites, and liberi homines pro se and suis villanis 30. m.
partem omnium mobilium suarum.

Nus volens and otroiens ke ce ke nostre -- la greignure party de eus ki est
esluz paromis and par le Commune da nostre Roiaume a fet u fera al honir de
dieu and nostre foi and pur le profit de nostre Roiame sicum il ordenera seit
ferm and estable en tuites chesel a tuz jurz commandous a tuz noz faus and
leaus en la fei kill mis devient kill fermement teignent and jurgent a tenir and
meintenir les establissements que sunt fet u sunt a fere par lariont dit
Conseil. Rot. Pat. 24 H. 3. M. 1.


This agrees with what was done afterward, in the 42d. of this King, and it
seems by this, that even in the 24th. par le Commune de nostre Roiaume, by the
whole Realm or Great Council, the King had a special Council Assigned, which
was to have an extraordinary Power.

Magnates nostri ad sedem Apostolicam appellarunt and quosdam pro universitate
totius Baronagii Angliae ad concilium in brevi celebrand' ad appellacionem
pred' prosequendam duxerunt destinandos. Rot. Claus. 29 H. M. 8. dorso.


The Barnagium here according to Mat. Paris, Mat. Par. Anno 1246. vid. more at
large Mr. Petit's Rights of the Commons of England, Asserted from 111, to 115.
were, Barons, Proceres and Magnates, ac Nobiles Portuum maris habitatores,
nec non Clerus, and Populus universus.

The Pope had ordered, De Apostolica se^e, Rot. Claus. 32 H. 3. M. 12. dorso.
that a Years profit of the Churches which were of the gift of Laymen, should
be settled by way of Subsidy upon the Church of Canterbury; but 'twas denied in
full Parliament.

Magnates terrae nostrae noluerunt in ultimo Parliamento nostro quod fuit
London ut de Ecclesiis ad donationem laicorum spectantibus etc.

In Parliamento nostro Oxon. Rot. 42 H. 3. M. 3.
communiter fuit Ordinatum, that was about settling and new modelling some
things relating to the Government, Rot. Pat. 42 H. 3. M. 10.
which the King promises should be done, per concilium proborum et fidelium
hominum nostrorum regni Angliae una cum consilio Legati Domini Papae.

Pur le profit de nostre reaum et a la request de mes hauz homes e prodes homes
e du Comun de nostre Reaume. Rot. Pat. 42 H. 3. M. 4.


The King and People having in the 42d. agreed upon a standing Council, and
that what they did in the way of Settlement, should be effectual, and
acquiesced in on all sides.

Cum etc. promiserimus praedictis proceribus et Magnatibus nostris quod
reformac'onem et ordinac'onem per praedictos vigitni quatuor vel majorem partem
eorum faciend' ratam habebimus et firmam. etc.

Hereupon in the 45th they order a representation of 3. for every County, pro
ea vice, but do not yet settle it for a standing Rule.

Cum ex part Episcopi Wign' Com. Rot. Claus. 45 H. 3. M. 6. dorso.
Leicester and Gloucester ac quorundam aliorum Procerum Regni nostri vocati
sunt tres de singulis Comitatibus nostris quod sint coram ipsis ad Sanctum
Albanum secum tractaturi super communibus negotiis regni nostri.

Here the Lords of the Council exceeded their Power, and, as if the King were a
Cipher in the Government, would have the Knights from the several Shires come
before them; the King, not without reason, jealous of his Honor, commands,
That they which had been summoned to St. Albans, should come to him at Windsor.

Nobiscum super premissis colloquium habituros.

Venerab. Rot. Pat. 48 H. 3. M. 2. N. 5.
Pater G. Eboracensis Arch. Angliae Primas et alii Praelati Magnates Milites
libere tenentes et omnes alii de regno nostro servitium fecerunt et auxilium
ultra qua^ te^poribus retractis in aliis su^monitionibus exercitus nostri
facere consueverunt.

This the King promises should not be drawn into consequence; upon an
extraordinary occasion they that were not accustomed to perform Military
Service, did it then; and they that did owe Services, did more than they were
obliged to by their Tenure; all, as well those that held not of the King in
Chief, as those which did, joined together and made a general charge upon the
Kingdom of Subsidium et auxilium.

In the 48th of this King, Anno 48th. H. 3. 1264.
there was a right Understanding between him and his People, Rot. Pat. 48 H. 3.
pars unica. M. 8. dorso. N. 10.
the Record says, Haec est forma pacis a Domino Rege et Domino Edwardo filio
suo Praelatis et Proceribus omnibus et Communitate regni Angliae communiter et
concorditer approbata, etc.

Amongst other things, 'twas agreed, Ad reformac'onem status regni Angliae,
That they should choose 3 men who should have power from the King to name Nine
that should be the Kings standing Council; and if any of the three displeased
the Community, si videatur Communitati Prelatorum et Baronum, one or more was
to be placed in their room, per consilium Communitatis Praelatorumet Baronum.

And the Record concludes, Haec autem Ordinatio facta fuit apud London de
consensu voluntate et praecepto Domini Regis necnon Praelatorum, Baronum ac
etiam Communitatis tunc ibi praesentium.

The Council so chose as aforesaid, Vid. Rot. Claus. 28 H. 3. M. 12. dorso.
were to advise the King in hiis quae spectant ad Regimen Curiae, et regni.

And at that time, Consideratum fuit in Curia nostra Coram nobis and toto
Parliamento nostro.
or immediately upon it, Rex Statuit et ordinavit, as Mr. Camden tells us,
whose authority I shall enforce, That none of the multitude of Barons should
come to Parliament, but they to whom the King vouchsafed to send his Special
Summons, or were chose by the People, in pursuance of the alia illa Brevia.

What I have already drawn from the bowels of Antiquity, makes me think that
Mr. Seldom was arrived to this maturity of Judgment, when he put out the first
Edition of his Titles of Honor; wherein he received without doubting the
Testimony of the learned Clarenceulx Mr. Camden, Titles of Honor. p. 278.
concerning the new modelling of the Great Council of England, Ex satis antiquo
Authore loquor.
which Mr. Camden tells us, he has out of an Author old enough to know the
truth of his Assertion; upon this authority, Mr. Seldom took it then pro
concesso, that the alteration was as is there shown, and began in the 48th of
Hen. the Third, and that the first Summons accordingly was the 49th; which he
illustrates by the like many years after in Scotland.

Item, Anno. 1427. 23. Jac. 1.
The King with the Consent of the hail Council generally, hes Statute and
Ordained, That the small Baronnes, and free Tennentes, neid not to come to
Parliaments nor General Councels, swa that of ilk Shirefdome their be send,
chosen at the head Court of the Shirefdome, two or maa wise men after the
largeness of the Shirefdome. All Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Dukes, Earls, Lords
of Parliament, and Banrets, the quhilks the King will be received and summoned
to Council and Parliament, be his Special Precept.

This I conceive is an illustration of Mr. Camden's Authority.

Ad summum honorem pertinet, Ordines Angliae. p. 122.
speaking of the word Baro. Ex quo Rex Henricus ex tanta multitudine quae
seditiosa et turbulenta fuit optimos quosque rescripto ad Comitia Parlamentaria
evocaverit: ille enim, (ex satis antiquo authore loquor) post magnas
perturbationes et enormes vexationes inter ipsum Regem, et Simonem de Monte
forti and alios Barons motas, and sopitas statuit and ordinavit quod omnes
illi Comites and Barons Regni Angliae quibus ipse Rex dignatus est brevia
summonitionis dirigere venirent ad Parlament' suum, and non alii nisi forte
Dominus Rex alia illa brevia dirigere voluisset, sed quod ille paulo ante
obitum incepit Ed. 1. ejusque Successores constanter observarunt, unde illi
soli Regni Barons censebantur qui ejusmodi summonitionum ut vocant rescriptis
ad Comitia evocaverant, donec R. 2. Joannem de Beauchamp de Holt Baronem de
Kiderminster diplomate dato 10. October. anno nostri sui. 11. creaverit.

The substance of this is, that the word Baro, was applicable to the whole
people, the Body of Freeholders, especially as assembled in Parliament, till
the King conferred particular Honor upon some by his especial Writs of Summons,
and none other came, but in pursuance of the aliae illa brevia, that is, the
Writs for Elections in Counties, Cities, and Boroughs: that this was begun to
prevent those Tumults, of which both the King, and the Barons, had Fatal
experience.

That this was Enacted in due form of Law; though the Form is not expressed,
yet it is implied under the Statuit and ordinavit, being words of Legislation,
and for confirmation, that it was so, it has been followed ever since: And that
the Barons by Creation, who have ever since their Creation had Right to sit as
of the higher Order previous to their sitting or express Summons, came not in
till the 11th. of Richard the Second.

Against this Mr. Seldom, whose insight into Records and MS's made him take it
ill that any should escape his view, has raised these objections.

(1.) In all occurrences that I meet with* Titles of Honor. fol. 589.
since the Grand Charter of King John, I find no mention of any interest that
those other Tenants in Chief, eo nomine, had in Parliament, who doubtless were
the Persons that were excluded from it, when soever such Law was made.

Tanti viri pace, This objection comes not nigh the point, it not being proved
at least, that King John's Charter gives the Form of a Parliament or General
Council, or of any other than a Council of the Kings Tenants, for matters
belonging to their Tenure: and this sense Mr. Seldom himself confirms, when he
says, that he finds not that the Minores Barons in Chief, or those other
Tenants in Chief, eo nomine, had any interest in Parliament; now not having any
peculiar interest, what need of a particular exclusion?

(2.) Besides, Titles of Honor. f. 589, 590.
we have some good Testimany of Barons being distinguished by holding in Chief,
from others that held not in Chief, long before the end of Henry the Third, or
the time to which that ancient Author refers the Law of alteration, which seems
to show, that there were then Barons by Writ only; as well as ancient Barons by
Tenure: That Testimony in Mat. Paris, Rex edicto public proposito (says, he,
speaking of the 29th. of Henry the Third, Et submonitione generaliter facto
fecit notificari per totam Angliam ut quilibet Baro. tenens ex Rege in Capite
haberet prompta and parata Regali praecepto omnia servitia militaria, quae ei
debentur tam Episcopi and Abbates quam laici Barons. Barons holding in Capite
are mentioned here as if some held not so, Glos. tit. Baro. Proceres nempe and
maneriorum Domini nec non libere quique tenentes, hoc est fundorum
proprietariis Anglice Freeholders, hoc nomine contineri videtur antiquis
paginis.
which must be such as were Barons by Writ only.

Thus much he yields here. If there were not Barons by Writ, there being in
those times other Barons besides Barons by Tenure, Mr. Camden and his Author
were in the right, and the word Baro, was of large extent, that is reached to
every Freeholder, who according to Sir Henry Spelman, had that appellation.

However it does not follow, because there were other Barons besides Barons by
Tenure, that they must be by Writ; for what hinders, but that they might have
been by reason of their Possessions, and the freer from Feudall Tenure, so much
the rather Barons, as Freemen.

The distinction of Barons Majores and Minores, I take it has been moveable,
sometimes all the Tenants in Chief were Majores, as in Henry the Seconds time,
where the Barons Secundae dignitatis, that is, Minores, are added to sit upon
the Judgments with the Tenants in Chief: In King John's time we find Majores
Barons holding in Chief, and alios, so that, the Estates of the Great Barons
being parcel'd out, some that held immediately of the King, were Minores
Barons, by reason of the smallness of their Estates.

But this is clear from Record, That Writs of special Summons made none Barons
out of Parliament, whatever they did in Parliament, except where there was such
an unusual Clause as we find in a Writ of Summons, 27 H. 6. Volumus enim vos
and heredes vestros masculos de corpore vestro legitime exeuntes Barons de
Vescey existere. Claus. 27 H. 6. M. 26. dorso.


Here was a special Clause of Creation to a Barony; but if the usual Writs,
Quatenus, Writs of Summons, made none Barons out of Parliament, and there is
not the least ground of conjecture, that such Writs were devised in the time of
Henry the Third, it follows, That when Henry the Third Summoned only his own
Tenants to perform their Military Services, not to Parliament, and these were
Barons tenentes in Capite, but there were other Barons omitted, that these
Barons must have been such, by reason of their Freehold.

That an usual Writ, or Writs of Summons, made none Barons out of Parliament,
appears very fully in the Case of Thomas de Furnivall, in the Court of
Exchequer.

Thomas de Furnivall had been amerced tanquam Baro. Communia de Term Sancti
Hill' anno 19 Ed. 2. Rot. penes Rem. Domini These in Scaccario.
He pleads in discharge of his amercement, That he was no Baron, nor held by
Barony, or part of a Barony, Licet ipse Baro non sit, nec terram suam per
Baroniam vel partem Baroniae teneat, nihilominus idem Thomas pro quibusdam
defaltis in quibusdam Curiis, Pro Thoma de Furnivall seniore exonerando.
etc. In eisdem Curiis tanquam Baro amerciatus fuit.

Now according to Mr. Selden's Notion, he ought to have pleaded that he was no
Baron, in that he neither held by Barony, nor had received or used to receive
special Writs of Summons to Parliament.

But it is observable, that the only matter put in issue by the direction of the
Court, was, Whether he held by Barony, or no, Et quia Barons ante quam
ulterius, etc. Volunt certiorari super superius suggestis. Concordatum est quod
inquiratur inde and quod Robertus de Nottingham Rememerator hujus Scaccarii
assignetur ad capiend' inde inquis, etc. Et datus and dies prefato Thom. per
Attornatum suum pred hic a die Pasche in unum mensem ad audiend and reccipiend
inde quod Cur. etc.

There was an Inquisition directed into the several Counties, where he had
Lands to know how he held them, and according as his Tenure appeared to be, was
he to receive Judgment upon his Plea; and it is certify'd, upon the Inquisitions
taken, That he held not any Land per Baronium vel partem Baroniae, and
therefore according to the sense of the whole Court, though we find not the
Judgment then given, non fuit Baro.

And yet this man had been called to Thirty Parliaments before the time of his
Plea; and his Son, as I take it, was called to Seven in the lifetime of his
Father, Thomas de Furnivall Sen. Summonitus fuit per breve ad Parl' Rot. Claus.
23 Ed. 1. m. 9. dorso. Rot. Claus. 23 Ed. 1. m. 3. d. 24. Ed. 1. m. 7. d 25. m.
25. d. 27. m. 18. d. 28. m. 16, 17. d. 28. m. 2, 3. d. 30. m. 7. d. 32. m. 2.
d. 33. m. 21. d. 34. m. 2. d. 35. m. 13. d. Rot. Claus. 1 Ed. 2. m. 19. d. 1.
m. 11. d. 1. m. 8. d. 2. m. 11. d. 3. m. 17. d. 3. m. 16. d. 5. m. 17. d. 5. m.
3. d. 6. m. 31. d. 6. m. 17. d. 6. m. 2. d. 7. m. 15. d. 8. m. 25. d. 8. m. 29.
d. 9. m. 22. d. 11. m. 14. d. 11. m. 12. d. 11. m. 8. d. Thomas de Furnival,
Jun. Rot. Claus. 12. d. 2. m. 29. d. 12. m. 11. d. 13. m. 13. d. 14. m. 23. d.
15. m. d. 16. m. 26. d. 17. m. 27. d.

This Great man was no Baron in the sense of the word Baron then appropriated,
the several Writs of Summons had made him no Baron, and yet he was a Lord of
Parliament, and since the King dignatus est brevia Summonitionis ad eum
dirigere, according to Mr. Camden, he being before one of the multitude of
Barons, the word Baro which was applicable to all the Nobility, the
Freeholders in him, pertinebat ad summum honorem. Mr. Selden's last objection
is this,

(3.) That old Author also used by the Learned Camden, Titles of Honor. fol.
590.
speaks of Earls no otherwise than of Barons, as if some like exclusion had
been of any of them also; than which nothing can be more advers to the known
truth both of that Age, and all times, and even in that we have some Character
of the slightness of his Authority, whosoever he were.

This I conceive can be of no great weight, for he might as well have said that
Barons were never excluded before, and by the same consequence not then; for I
know not how any man can prove, that Earls had more Right than Barons, in the
most Honorable acceptance especially.

But this being then made a Law, it is not improbable, that the disposition of
this Honor of receiving particular Writs of Summons to Parliament, might have
been lodged in the breast of the King, who is the Fountain of Honor; nor is it
likely that any Earl, but he that justly forfeited the Kings favor, would have
been denied it; however, he were deprived of no natural Right. Since the 11th.
of Richard the Second, indeed, the Nobility have had settled Rights by Patents,
which are as so many constant Warrants for the Chancellor to issue out the
Writs of Summons, Ex debito justitiae; with this agrees the great Antiquary,
Sir Henry Spelman.

Sic antiquae illa Baronum dignitas secessit in titularem and arbitrariam
regioque Glos. tit. Baro.
tandem diplomate id circo dispensata est.

Upon the dissolution of the separate Court of Tenants, the Tenants still
succeeding to that jurisdiction and preference in the way of being called to
the great Court, which they had in and to the less, without such a provision as
Mr. Camden takes notice of, I will grant, that the Majores Barons holding in
chief, In Charta Johannis.
ex debito justitiae, would have had right to special Summons, but the lesser
Tenants had the same Right to a general Summons; and the Right of being
represented, as properly concluded, the one as the other, unless where the King
had exerted his Prerogative. But where the King ex tanta multitudine Baronum,
differing in their circumstances, (some holding of him immediately, others of
measn Lords, and his very Tenants being divided into two different Classes, of
Majores and Minores) advanced some to be of his particular Council in
Parliament. This, with submission, I take it, made them not Judges in
Parliament, eonomine* because a Court may amerce its own Members, but Counts
and Barons by Magna Charta, are not amerceable but by their Peers, and
therefore none but their Peers could without their own consent be of the Court
with them; which though they might be with consent, as to all Acts amongst
themselves, still it would be a question how far they might without particular
Patent or Writ creating them to such Honor; act in that Station to the
prejudice of others. That special Summons to Parliament, without a Seat there
granted and settled by the King, gives no man Vote amongst those who now have
Right to such Summons, appears, in that the Judges and Masters in Chancery have
had the same Writs with the Lords; and yet are, and have been, but assistants
to them, no Members of their House.

The great Tenants in Chief, and others, in equal Circumstances, were Pares to
one another, and if such an one was chose Knight of a Shire, though the Lord
Coke says, 4. Instit.
the King could not grant a Writ to Supersede his coming that was so chose,
because 'twas for the good of the Commonwealth; yet he being looked upon as one
that ordinarily would be specially Summoned, the King might supersede it; and
thus we find even before any settled Right by Patent.

Rex Vicecomiti Surria salutem, Claus. dors. 7 R. 2. M. 32.
quia ut accepimus tu Thomam Camoys Chivaler, qui Banneretus est sicut quam
plures antecessorum suorum extiterint ad essendum. Titles of Honor. ^609.
Unum militum venientium ad proximum Parliamentu^ nostru^ pro Coo^munitate
Comitatus praedicti de assensu ejusdem Comitatus elegisti, nos advertentes quod
hujusmodi Banneretti, ante haec tempora in Milites Comitatus ratione alicujus
Parlamenti eligi minime consueverunt, ipsum de officio Militis ad dictum
Parlamentum pro communitate Com' praedict venturi exonerari volumus, etc. When
Tenants in Chief, oreorum Pares, werce called by special Writ, they very
properly exercised the same jurisdiction which Tenants did before in their
separate Court.

In the 5th. of Richard the Second, many having refused attendance, and not
owning themselves liable to amercements, because of absence, if Tenure laid not
a special obligation upon them, comes an Act of Parliament which makes it penal
to refuse, or rather delares, that the Law was so of old.

All singular Persons and Communalties* 5 R. 2. cap. 4. Anno 1381.
which from henceforth shall have the Summons of Parliament, shall come from
henceforth to the Parliament, in the manner as they be bounden to do, and has
been accustomed, within the Realm of England of old times, and every Person of
the same Realm, which from henceforth shall have the said Summons (be he
Archbishop, Bishop, Abbot, Prior, Duke, Earl, Baron, Banneret, Knight of the
Shire, Citizens of City, Burgeis of Burgh, or other singular Person, or
Commonalty, do absent himself, and come not at the said Summons, except he may
reasonably and honestly excuse himself to our said Sovereign Lord the King, he
shall be amerced, and otherwise punished, as of old times has been used to be
done in the said Realm) in the said Case.

This shows that of old time, they who were Summoned by the King, or chose by
the People, ought to come to Parliament; but this being before any Patent, or
Writ of Creation to the Dignity of Peer, and to a Seat in Parliament, supposes
no obligation upon the King to give any special Summons; indeed where he had
granted Charters of exemptions from common Summons, there he had obliged
himself (if he would have them obliged by what passed) to give special Summons,
were it not that they might have been chose in the Counties particularly,
(which alters the case from what it were, if every body came, or might come in
their own Persons, some by special, others by general Summon's) but this
exemption, and particular Summon's after it, made none Peers that they found
not so, but they that came were to come as they were Bounden, and insuch
manner, as had been accustomed of old. Which is pregnant with a negative, as if
it were in such manner, and no other Manner, Quality, or Degree: and thus they
used that to come as assistants to the Lords, continue even at this day to come
in the same manner, Vid. Prin^* first part of Parl' Writs. p. 251.
and no otherwise, notwithstanding particular Writs of Summon's eodem modo as
to the Lords of Parliament.

This is further observable, Titles of Honor. fol. 608. Rot. Parl. 1 H. 4. m.
16. n. 59. ib. cited, etc.
that in the forecited Statute, and Records, Bannerets are spoken of as above
Knights of the Shire, and these were certainly some of the Pares Baronum which
often occur to us. If these received their Summons to Parliament, it seems, as
it had been of old accustomed, they were to have Voices with the Barons.

It may be urged, That they which held by Barony, and their Peers, Pares
Baronum, were by the Law exempted from being of Common Juries, because they
were Lords of Parliament: And therefore they were to come of course and right.
Countess of Rutland 's Case, Coke 6. Rep. fol. 53.
To which it may be answerered, That is a privilege above the rest of their
Fellow Subjects, to be owned by them, as being in common intendment likely to
be called to Parliament, and therefore so accounted by the courtesy of England;
but what does this signify to bind the King? who is above the reach of an Act
of Parliament, unless particularly named.

But for this a resolution by all the Judges of England in the Reign of Hen.
the 8th. is a full Authority, where It Is adjudged, that the King may hold his
Parliament without such Lords as come only upon the account of their
Possessions. Standish's Case.
The same in effect Mr. Seldom tells us, Kelloways Rep. 184. 6. Seldom ad Eadm.
in in his Notes upon Eadmerus, Neque eos (speaking of Barons) duntaxat ut
hodie significare, quibus peculiaris ordinum Comitiis locus est, sed universos
qui saltem beatiores regia munificentia etc. Latifundia possidebant. So that he
was of opinion here, that there were several who had great Estates of the
immediate grant of the Crown, who yet had no Seat in the House of Lords.

I would not be thought to assert any thing dogmatically, I only offer by way
of learning, some thing which perhaps will be looked on as Paradoxes at the
least. I divide not my matter into Heads and Positions, because I run counter
to the sense of many great names: and the direct opposing such in Thesi would
be invidious, and gain a disadvantage to the authorities I produce.

If any body will take the pains to show me, by authentic proofs and
warrantable reasons, that all or most of the Records or Histories by me cited,
or others not occurring to me, ought to be taken in a sense contrary to what
has appeared to me, I shall thankfully receive and acknowledge his instructions;
but till then I must crave pardon if I cannot swallow or digest any Learned
Modern Antiquarie's bare ipse dixit, where I find the best of our Historians
and a Series of Records in my Judgment diametrically opposing and contradicting
their Positions and Assertions

I am aware, that besides the many slips of an hasty Pen, and the weakness
perhaps of several of the inferences, which amongst some avocations may have
passed neglected; There is a material Objection against the foundation of the
whole, which is the general agreement of Records and Histories, that till the
48th or 49th of Henry the Third, all Proprietors of Land came to the Great
Council without any settled exclusion* when yet we many times find that the
Councils were held in Churches, or Halls, and yet at those times it is said that
the Populus were there as if the Great Men were the standing Representative
Body of the Nation, and answered for all the People, the Freeholders of the
Nation.

To which I answer, (according to the modus tenendi Synodos, which I may apply
to the civil Councils) That the probi homines, Spelm. Con. 2. Vol. fol. 1.
or bonae conversationis came sometimes in their own Persons, and when they
agreed to it, which was no abridgment of their personal Right, they came by
representation ex electione, and every one was there himself virtually by his
Deputy, but they often met in vast Bodies, and in capacious places, both in the
Saxon times, and after William the First obtained the Imperial Crown.

The whole body of Proprietors were assembled at Runemed between Stanes and
Windsor at the passing of King John's Charter; and if we believe Matthew.
Westminster, Mat. Westminster. fol. 273. Anno 1215.
it was not unusual for the Kings of England long before King John's time, at
that very place to meet their People to treat of the Affairs of the Kingdom.

Maximus Tractatus habebatur inter Regem et Barons de pace Regni inter Stanes
and Windsoram in prato quod dicitur Runemed quod interpretatur pratum Concilii
eo quod ab antiquis temporibus ibi de pace regni saepius consilia tractabantur.

This shows the usual places of Assembling to have been large enough for all
the people, which are in so many Records and Histories Printed and in
Manuscript, said to have been present at the Great or General Councils; I shall
conclude with one Instance of the Parties present at such a Council, which is
delivered with sufficient perspicuity.

Anselm in one of his disputes with Henry the First, Eadmerus, f. 70.
desires the debate may be adjourned till the Easter following.

Differantur haec si placet usqu; in Pascha ut audito Episcoporum, regnique
Primatum consilio, qui modo non assunt respondeam hinc.

Upon this Anselm comes to the Court at Easter, Igitur in Pascha Curiam venit
regni ingenuitatem praesens consulit, Communi consilii vocem accepit, etc.

Here the Council Episcoporum et Primatum, to which he referred himself, was
reciprocal with the ingenuitas regni, Glos. tit. Ingenuus.
that is, as Sir Henry Spelman shows us, the liberi et legales homines, the
good honest Freeholders, some of which were no better than Plebeians.

And therefore this authority alone, especially as it is strengthened by those
others to the same purpose, which I have cited absque dolo et malo ingenio,
evince to me, That he or they who put out the Second Part of Sir Henry
Spelman's Glossary, did not do right to his Memory, in representing him
affirming, That the plebs, the ingenuitas, or liberi et legales homines, as he
himself tells us the word ingenuus, has anciently been used, are no where
amongst the several Councils which he had read of, mentioned to have been
there, from the entrance of William the First, to the end of Henry the Third.
The words to this purpose which I conceive are put upon him, are these,

Sine ut sodes dicam collegisse me centenas reor comitiorum edictiones
(tenoresque Glos. 2d. Part, tit. Parlamentum, ed. Land. Anno 1664.
plurimorum) ab ingressu Gulielmii ad excessum Henrici 3. existentium nec in
tanta multitudine de plebe uspiam reperisse aliquid.

Indeed notice being taken of those Councils where were Optimates et Barons
totius Angliae, and of that famous Assembly at Salisbury-Plain of the Barons
et Vicecomites cum suis Militibus, in pursuance of the Summons of William the
First, the positiveness of the assertion is restrained with a ni in his
dilituerit. But what doubt can be made of those words, whereby they are
expressly mentioned, and that according to the true Sir Henry Spelman, I am not
yet aware of.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 3. l. 16. r. Tzurick for Tours: p. 5. margin. r. contemporaneo* p. 8. l.
12. for William read Hugh: p. 9. l. 9. r. Attendance: p. 10. l. 7. add laici
before omnes: p. 12. l. 29. join a to part: p. 17. l. 4. r. fuerat: p. 25. l 6.
add est de before antiquo: l. 7. dele est de: p. 27. marg. r. Hill. for Mich. p.
35. l. 3. add e before tota: p. 40. l. 22. r. illuc: l. 19. r. Knight for
Knights: p. 45. last l. r. antequam: p. 47. l. 4. dele Comma after Sheriffs: l.
15. r. vias: l. 19. dele s after Knight: p. 53. l. 28. make a Comma after Kings
title: l. 29. r. election: p. 60. l. 28. add is after that: p. 63. l. 18. r. of
for in: p. 64. l. 14. put a Comma after only: p. 65. l. 15. r. 'twas: p. 66. l.
7. put a Comma after Nobility: l. 10. after Londoners make a Comma: so after
Citizens: l. 11. put a Comma after amongst them: p. 68. l. 14. r. Matilda: p.
206. l. 2. r. plectendum: l. 3. r. judicare: p. 217. l. 11. r. affuerunt: p.
228. l. 9. r. Doveram: p. 237. l. 7. add the before free Customs: l. 8. dele
the: 2d. Sheet of p. 237. l. 13. r. militibus: p. 238. l. 9. r. tenants used:
p. 240. l. 20. r. de scuto: l. 28. r. the for their: p. 241. l. 11. dele s
after acquaint: l. 22. r. record: p. 245. l. 2. r. negotium: p. 246. l. 5. r.
retroactis: p. 247. l. 23. r. his instead of this: p. 251. margin. r.
proprietariis: p. 255. r. Baro: l. 21. put a Comma after Freeholders: p. 261.
l. 1. r. that before used: p. 262. l. 20. add s to thing: p. 265. l. 14. add s
to ^^mmuni.

A Catalogue of some Books, lately Printed for Tho. Basset at the George in
Fleet Street.
AN Institution of General History, or the Histo of the World in two Volumns in
folio, by Dr. William Howel, Chancellor of Lincoln. Printed 1680.

Historical Collections, being an exact Account of the Proceedings of the four
last Parliaments of the Renowned Princess Queen Elizabeth, containing the
Journals of Both Houses, with their several Speeches, Arguments, Motions, etc.
in folio, writ by Hayward Townshend Esquire then a Member of Parliament, Printed
1680.

The Ancient Right of the Commons of England Asserted, or a Discourse Proving
by Records, and the best Historians, That the Commons of England were ever an
Essential part of Parliament, By William Petyt of the Inner Temple Esquire

Of the French Monarchy, and Absolute Power, and also a Treatise of the Three
States, and their Power, deduced from the most Authentic Histories, for above
1200 Years, and digested this latter, by Mat. Zampini de Recanati. L. L. D.

The Constitution of Parliaments in England, deduced from the time of King
Edward the Second, Illustrated by King Charles the Second, in his Parliament
Summoned the 18th. Febr. 1660/1. and Dissolved the 14th. Jan. 1678/9. with an
Appendix of its Sessions, in Oct.

The Politics of France, by Monsieur P. H. Marquis of C. with Reflections on
the 4th. and 5th. Chapters: wherein he censures the Roman Clergy, and the
Hugenots; by the Sir l'Ormegregny.

Le Beau Pleadeur, a Book of Entries containing Declarations, Informations, and
other select and approved Pleadings, with Special Verdicts, and Demurrers, in
most Actions real, Personal, and mixed, which have been argued, and adjudged in
the Courts at Westminster, together with faithful references to the most
Authentic printed Law books now extant, where the Cases of these Entries are
reported, and a more Copious and useful Table than has been hitherto Printed
in any book of Entries, by the Reverend Sir Humphrey Winch Knight, sometime one
of the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas.

A Display of Heraldry, manifesting a more easy access to the knowledge thereof
than has been hitherto published by any, through the benefit of Method;
whereunto it is now reduced by the study and industry of John Guillim; late
Pursuivant at Arms. the 5th. Edition much enlarged with great variety of
bearings, to which is added a Treatise of Honor Military, and Civil, according
to the Laws and Customs of England, collected out of the most Authentic
Authors both Ancient and Modern, by Capt. John Logan, illustrated with Variety
of Sculptures suitable to the several subjects; to which is added a Catalogue
of the Atcheivments of the Nobility of England, with diverse of the Gentry for
Examples of Bearings.

Now in the Press Dr. Heylins help to the English History, with very large
Additions.


