MISCELLANIES, VIZ.

I. Day-Fatality. II. Local-Fatality. III. Ostenta. IV. Omens. V. Dreams. VI.
Apparitions. VII. Voices. VIII. Impulses. IX. Knockings. X. Blows Invisible.
XI. Prophesies. XII. Marvels. XIII. Magic. XIV. Transportation in the Air. XV.
Visions in a Beril, or Glass. XVI. Converse with Angels and Spirits. XVII.
Corps-Candles in Wales. XVIII. Oracles. XIX. Exstasie. XX. Glances of Love.
Envy.
XXI. Second-Sighted-Persons.
Collected by I. Aubrey, Esquire

LONDON: Printed for Edward Castle, next Scotland-Yard-Gate by Whitehall. 1696.

TO THE Right Honorable JAMES EARL of Abingdon, Lord Chief Justice in Eire of
all His Majesty's Forests and Chaces on this side Trent.
MY LORD,
WHEN I enjoyed the Contentment of Solitude in Your pleasant Walks and Gardens
at Lavington the last Summer, I reviewed several scattered Papers which had
lain by me for several Years: And then presumed to think, that if they were put
together, they might be somewhat entertaining: I therefore digested them there
in this Order, in which I now present them to Your Lordship.

The Matter of this Collection is beyond Humane reach: We being miserably in
the dark, as to the Oeconomie of the Invisible World, which knows what we do,
or incline to, and works upon our Passions, and sometimes is so kind as to
afford us a glimpse of its Praescience.

MY LORD,
It was my intention to have finished my Reposited in the Mesaeum at Oxon.
Description of Wiltshire [half finished already] and to have Dedicated it to
Your Lordship: But my Age is now too far spent for such Undertakings: I have
therefore devolved that Task on my Countryman Mr. T. Tanner, who has Youth
to go through with it, and a Genius proper for such an Vundertaking.

Wherefore, I humbly beseech Your Lordship to accept of this small Offering as
a grateful Memorial of the profound Respect which I have for You, who have for
many Years taken me into your Favor and Protection.

MY LORD,
May the Blessed Angels be Your careful Guardians: Such are the Prayers of

Your Lordships Most Obliged and Humble Servant, IO. AUBREY.

A COLLECTION OF Hermetick Philosophy.
NAtural Philosophy has been exceedingly advanced within Fifty Years last
past; but methinks, it is strange that Hermetick Philosophy has lain so long
untoucht. It is a Subject worthy of serious Consideration: I have here, for my
own diversion, Collected some few Remarques within my own Remembrance, or
within the Remembrance of some Persons worthy of Belief in the Age before me.
Those who have a desire to know more of Things of this Nature, may be pleased
to peruse History Prodigieuse, Writ by Pere Arnault: As also a Book entitled,
Lux e Tenebris, which is a Collection of Modern Visions and Prophesies in
Germany, by several Persons; Translated into Latin by Io. Amos Comenius,
Printed at Amsterdam, 1655.

I shall begin with Day-Fatality, of which Mr. John Gibbon [Blew-mantle] made a
Collection Printed in Two Sheets in Folio 1678, which I here Reprint with some
Additions Collected by my self.

Day-Fatality: Or, Some OBSERVATIONS OF Days Lucky and Unlucky.
CHAP. I.
Luc. XIX. xlii. In hoc Die tuo: In this thy Day.
THAT there be Good and Evil Times, not only the Sacred Scriptures, but
Profane Authors mention: See 1 Samuel 25. 8. Esther 8. 17. and 9. 19, 22. Ecclus
14. 14.

The Fourteenth day of the First Month was a Memorable and Blessed Day amongst
the Children of Israel: See Exodus 12. 18, 40, 41, 42, 51. Levit. 23. 5. Numb.
28. 16. Four hundred and thirty Years being expired of their dwelling in Egypt,
even in the Self-same Day departed they thence.

A thing something parallel to this, we read in the Roman Histories: That that
very day four Years, that the Civil Wars were begun by Pompey the Father,
Caesar made an end of them with his Sons; Cnaeus Pompeius being then slain, and
it being also the last Battle Caesar was ever in. [Heylyn in the Kingdom of
Corduba.] The Calendar to Ovid's Fastorum says, Aprilis erat menfis Graecis
auspicatissimus, a most auspicious Month among the Grecians.

As to Evil Days and Times; See Amos 5. 13. and 6. 3. Eccles. 9. 12. Psalm. 37.
19. Obad. 12. Ier. 46. 21. And Job hints it, in cursing his Birthday. Cap. 3.
v. 1, 10, 11, See Weaver, p. 458.

Early in a Morning
In an Evil Tyming,
Went they from Dunbarr.
Horace, lib. 2. Ode 13. Cursing the Tree that had like to have fallen upon
him, says, Ille nefasto te posuit die; intimating, that it was planted in an
Unlucky day.

The Romans counted Febr. 13. an Unlucky day, and therefore then never
attempted any Business of Importance; for on that day they were overthrown at
Allia by the Gauls; and the Fabii attacquing the City of the Veii, were all
slain save one. [ Heylyn speaking of St. Peter's Patrimony] And see the
Calendar annexed to Ovid's Fastorum, as to the last Circumstance.

The Jews accounted August 10. an unfortunate day; for on that Day the Temple
was destroyed by Titus the Son of Vespasian; on which day also the first Temple
was consumed with Fire by Nebuchadnezzar. [Heylyn.] The Treasury of the Times
says, the Eighth of Loyon (August) the very same day 679 Years one after
another.

And not only among the Romans, and Jews, but also among Christians, a like
Custom of observing such days is used, especially- Childermas or Innocents-day.
Cominus tells us, that Lewis XI. used not to debate any Matter, but accounted
it a sign of great Misfortune toward him, if any Man communed with him of his
Affairs; and would be very angry with those about him, if they troubled him
with any Matter whatsoever upon that day.

But I will descend to more particular Instances of Lucky and Unlucky Days.

Upon the Sixth of April, Alexander the Great was born. Upon the same day he
conquered Darius, won a great Victory at Sea, and died the same day.

Neither was this day less fortunate to his Father Philip; for on the same day
he took Potidea; Parmenio his General gave a great Overthrow to the Illyrians;
and his Horse was Victor at the Olympic Games. Therefore his Prophets foretold
to him, Filium cujus Natalis, etc. That a Son whose Birthday was accompanied
with three Victories, should prove Invincible. Pezelius in Mellificio Historico.

Upon the Thirtieth of September, Pompey the Great was born: Upon that day he
Triumphed for his Asian Conquest; and on that day he died.

The Nineteenth of August was the day of Augustus his Adoption: On the same day
he began his Consulship: He Conquered the Triumviri, and on the same day he
died. Hitherto out of the Memoirs of King Charles I. Hero's.

If Solomon count The day of ones death better than the day of ones birth,
there can be no Objection why that also may not be reckoned amongst ones
Remarkable and Happy days. And therefore I will insert here, that the Eleventh
of February was the Noted day of Elizabeth Wife to Henry VII. who was born and
died that day. Weaver, p. 476. Brook in Henry VII. Marriage. Stow in Anno
1466. 1503.

As also that the Twenty third of November was the Observable day of Francis
Duke of Lunenburgh, who was born on that day, and died upon the same 1549, as
says the French Author of the Journal History, who adds, upon particular Remark
and observable Curiosity,

Ipa dies vitam contulit, ipsa necem.
The same day Life did give,
And made him cease to Live.
Sir Kenelm Digby, that Renowned Knight, great Linguist, and Magazen of Arts,
was born and died on the Eleventh of June, and also fought fortunately at
Scanderoon the same day. Hear his Epitaph, composed by Mr. Farrar, and recited
in the aforesaid Memoirs:

Under this Stone the Matchless Digby lies,
Digby the Great, the Valiant, and the Wise:
This Age's Wonder, for his Noble Parts;
Skilled in six Tongues, and Learned in all the Arts.
Born on the day he died, the Eleventh of June,
On which he bravely fought at Scanderoon.
It Is rare, that one and self-same day should be
His day of Birth, of Death, of Victory.
I had a Maternal Uncle, that died the Third of March last 1678, which was the
Anniversary day of his Birth; and (which is a Truth exceeding strange) many
years ago he foretold the day of his Death to be that of his Birth; and he also
averred the same but about the Week before his departure. The Third of March is
the day of St. Eutropius; and as to my Uncle it was significative; it turned
well to him, according to that of Rev. 14. 13. Blessed are the Dead, etc. and
that of Ovid Metam. lib. 3.

-- Dicique beatus
Ante obitum nemo supremaque funera debet.
-- None happy call
Before their Death, and final Funeral.
The Sixth of January was five times auspicious to Charles Duke of Anjou. Ibid.
in the Life of the Earl of Sunderland.

The Twenty fourth of February was happy to Charles V. four times. [Ibid.]
Heylyn speaking of the Temple of Jerusalem, hints three of these four; his
Birth; his taking of Francis King of France Prisoner; his receiving the
Imperial Crown at Bononia. And so does also the Journal History before
mentioned.

Of the Family of the Trevours, Six successive principal Branches have been
born the Sixth of July. Same Memoirs.

Sir Humphrey Davenport was born the Seventh of July; and on that day
Anniversary his Father and Mother died, within a quarter of an hour one of
another. Same Memoirs.

I have seen an old Romish MSS. Prayer Book (and showed the same to that
general Scholar, and great Astrologer E: Ashmole Esquire) at the beginning whereof
was a Calendar, wherein were inserted the Unlucky days of each Month, set out
in Verse. I will recite them just as they are, sometimes infringing the Rule of
Grammar, sometimes of Prosodia; a matter, of which the old Monkish Rhymers were
no way scrupulous. It was as ancient as Henry the Sixth, or Edward the Fourths
time.

January. Prima dies mensis, and septima truncat ut ensis. February. Quarta
subit mortem, prosternit tertia fortem. March. Primus mandentem, disrumpit
quarta bibentem. April. Denus and undenus est mortis vulnere plenus. May.
Tertius occidit, and septimus or a Ex re and laedo.
relidit. June. Denus pallescit, quindenus foedera nescit. July. Ter-decimus
mactat, Iulii denus labefactat. August. Prima necat fortem, prosternit secunda
cohortem. September. Tertia Septembris, and Denus fert mala membris. October.
Tertius and denus est sicut mors alienus. November. Scorpius est quintus, and
tertius e nece cinctus. December. Septimus exanguis, virosus denus and anguis.
The Tenth Verse is intolerable, and might be mended thus.

Tertia cum dena sit sicut mors aliena. If any object and say, Deni is only the
Plural; I excuse my self by that admirable Chronogram upon King Charles the
Martyr.

Ter deno, Iani, Lunae, Rex (Sole cadente)
Carolus exutus Solio, Sceptroque secure.
Neither will I have recourse for refuge to that Old Tetrastich, Intrat
Avaloniam duodena. Caterva virorum
Flos Arimathiae Joseph, etc.
because I have even now blamed the liberty of the Ancient Rhymers. He means by
Mors aliena, some strange kind of death; though aliena signifies strange in
quite another sense than there used.

I shall take particular notice here of the Third of November, both because
it is my own Birthday, and also for that I have observed some remarkable
Accidents to have happened thereupon.

Constantius the Emperor, Son of Constantine the Great, little inseriour to
his Father, a worthy Warrior, and good Man, died the Third of November: Ex
veteri Calendario penes me.

Thomas Montacute Earl of Salisbury, that great Man, and Famous Commander under
Henry IV. V. and VI. died this day, by a Wound of a Cannon-shot he received at
Orleance, E MSS. quodam, and Glovero.

So also Cardinal Borrhomeo, famous for his Sanctity of Life, and therefore
Canonized ( Heylyn in his Praecognita, says, He made Milan memorable, by his
Residence there) died 1584. this day, as Possevinus in his Life.

Sir John Perot (Stow corruptly calls him Parrat) a Man very remarkable in his
Time, Lord Deputy of Ireland, Son to Henry VIII. and extremely like him, died
in the Tower, the Third of November 1592. (as Stow says) Grief, and the
Fatality of this Day killed him. See Nanton's Fragmenta Regalia, concerning
this Man.

Stow in his Annals, says, Anno 1099, November 3. as well in Scotland as
England, the Sea broke in over the Banks of many Rivers, drowning diverse Towns,
and much People, with an innumerable number of Oxen and Sheep, at which time
the Lands in Kent, sometimes belonging to Earl Godwin, were covered with Sands,
and drowned, and to this day are called Godwins Sands.

I had an Estate left me in Kent, of which between thirty and forty Acres was
Marsh-land, very conveniently flanking its Up-land; and in those days this
Marsh-land was usually let for Four Nobles an Acre. My Father died 1643. Within
a Year and half after his decase, such Charges and Water-scots came upon this
Marsh-land, by the influence of the Sea, that it was never worth one Farthing
to me, but very often eat into the Rents of the Upland: So that I often think,
this day being my Birthday, has the same evil influence upon me, that it had
580 years since upon Earl Godwin, and others concerned in Low Lands.

The Parliament so fatal to Rome's concerns here, in Henry VIII. time, began
the Third of November (26 of his Reign); in which the Pope, with all his
Authority, was clean banished the Realm; he no more to be called otherwise than
Bishop of Rome; the King to be taken and reputed as Supreme Head of the Church
of England, having full Authority to reform all Errors, Heresies and Abuses of
the same: Also the First Fruits and Tenths of all Spiritual Promotions and
Dignities were granted to the King. See Stow's Annals, and Weaver, page 80.

Not long after which followed the Visitation of Abbeys, Priories, and
Nunneries; and after that, their final Suppression: This Parliament being the
Door or Entrance thereto.

The Third of November 1640, began that Parliament so direfully fatal to
England, in its Peace, its Wealth, its Religion, its Gentry, Nobility, nay, its
Kings. So verifying the former Verse of the Calendar.

Scorpius est quintus, and tertius e nece cinctus.
A Killing day to some or other.
The Third of September was a remarkable day to the English Attila, Oliver.
1650, He obtained a memorable Victory at Dunbar; another at Worcester, 1651.
And that day he died, 1658.

The first two Occurrences wonderfully accord to the preceding Verses. Tertia
Septembris, and denus fert mala membris. Being fatal to the two Members of
Great Britain, Scotland and England. The third, as happy to them both, as the
same day, 1666, was dismal and unhappy to the City of London, and consequently
to the whole Kingdom, with its immediate preceding and two succeeding days,
viz. the Second, Fourth, and Fifth of September.

I come now to the Days of the Week.

Tuesday (Dies Martis) was a most remarkable day with Thomas Becket Arch-Bp. of
Canterbury, as Weaver 201, observes from Mat. Paris: Mars, Secundum Poetas,
Deus Belli nuncupatur. Vita Sancti Thomae (secundum illud Job, Vita hominis
militia est super terram) tota fuit contra hostem bellicosa, etc. The Life of
St. Thomas (according to that of Job, The Life of Man is a Warfare upon Earth)
was a continual Conflict against the Enemy. Upon a Tuesday he suffered; upon a
Tuesday he was translated; upon Tuesday the Peers of the Land sat against him
at Northampton; upon Tuesday he was Banished; upon Tuesday the Lord appeared to
him at Pontiniac, saying, Thomas, Thomas, My Church shall be glorified in thy
Blood; upon Tuesday he returned from Exile; upon Tuesday he got the Palm or
reward of Martyrdom; upon Tuesday 1220, his Venerable Body received the Glory
and Renown of Translation, Fifty Years after his Passion. Thus my Author.

One thing I make bold to gloss upon. His Translation is here mentioned twice.
Note, This is no Tautology of the Historian; but the latter Paragraph is a more
particular Recitation of the first, viz. reference to the time when he was
Translated into the number of Saints and Martyrs: Quando in Divorum numerum
relatus, as Camden.

Wednesday is said to have been the fortunate day of Sixtus Quintus, that Pope
of renowned Merit, that did so great and excellent things in the time of his
Government. See The just weight of the Scarlet Robe, [pag. 101. his desired
Praises.] On a Wednesday he was born; on that day he was made Monk; on the same
he was made General of his Order; on that also, was he successively created
Cardinal, elected Pope, and also Inaugrated. See Heylyn, speaking of the Temple
of Jerusalem.

Friday was observed to be very fortunate to the Great Renowned Captain
Gonsalvo, he having on that day given the French many memorable Defeats.

Saturday was a Lucky Day to Henry VII. Upon that day he achieved the Victory
upon Richard III. being August 22. 1485. On that day he entered the City, being
August 29. [Correct Stow, who mistakes the day.] And he himself always
acknowledged, he had experienced it Fortunate. See Bacon in his Life.

Thursday was a fatal day to Henry VIII. [as Stow, 812.] and so also to his
Posterity. He died on Thursday Ian. 28. King Edward VI. on Thursday July 6.
Queen Mary on Thursday November 17. Queen Elizabeth on Thursday March 24.

Saturday (or the Jewish Sabbath) was fatal to Jerusalem Temple; for on that
day 'twas taken by Pompey, Herod and Titus, successively. Heylyn.

Hitherto by way of Prologue. And be pleased to take notice, as to the Days of
the Month, I have taken such care, that all are according to the Julian or old
Account, used by us here in England. [See Partridges Almanac, Preface to the
Reader] Pope Gregory XIII. brought in his New Style (generally used beyond Sea)
Anno 1585. in October, as asserts the Journal History before recited.

An Old Proverb.

When Easter falls in our Ladies Lap,
Then let England beware a Rap.
Easter falls on March 25. when the Sunday Letter is G, and the Golden Number
5. 13, or 16. As in the late Years 1459, 1638, 1649.

1459, King Henry VI. was Deposed and Murdered.

1638, The Scottish Troubles began, on which insued the great Rebellion.

1648/9, King Charles I. Murdered.

I think it will not happen so again till the Year 1991.

Now for Epilogue and Remarkable Reflection.

Turning over our Annals, I chanced upon a twofold Circumstance: I will not
say, that none else has observed the same; but I protest, ( It a me Deus amet,
ut verum loquor) I do not know of any that have; and therefore must justly
claim to be acquitted from the least suspicion of Plagiarism, or plowing with
others Heifers.

The First is, of William the Conqueror. The Second, of Edward III. (I need
not say any thing of the Eminency of these two; every one knows what great
things they did.) And making reflection upon the Auspicious Birthday of his
Royal Highness the Duke of YORK, I adventured upon the following Composure. [I
cannot be proud of my Poetry; but I cannot but be glad of my BON HEVR, d'avoir
(en lisant) tomb si fortuement sur les evenements d'un si BON IOVR.

Ad Illustrissimum and Celsissimum Principem, JACOBUM Ducem EBORACENSEM, de
Natali suo Auspicatissimo Octobris XIV. Anno 1633.
-- Deus
Anne nefasto te posuit die? Hor. lib. 2. od. 13.
Octobris Decimo quarto Normannus Haraldum
Dux superavit, and hinc Regia sceptra tulit.
Tertius Edwardus, capto pernice Caleto,
( Gallica quo Regna sunt resarata sibi)
Ire domum tentans, diris turbinibus actus
In pelago, Vitae magna pericla subit.
Octobris Decimo quarto, tamen appulit Oras
Nativas. (His quam prosperus ille dies!)
Natali laetare tuo, quam Maxim Princeps;
Fausta velut sunt haec, Omina semper habe.
October's Fourteenth gave the Norman Duke
That Victory, S^ow in An. 1066.
whence he Englands Scepter took.
Third Edward, after he had Calais won,
(The Mean whereby he France did overrun)
Returning home, by raging Tempests tossed,
(And near his Life (so fortunes) to have lost)
Arrived safe on Shore the self same Date. Idem in An. 1347.

(This day to them afforded so fair Fate.)
Great Duke, rejoice in this your day of Birth;
And may such Omens still increase your Mirth.
These Verses I presented in Anno 1672, to a most Honorable Peer of the Land,
and of great Place near his Royal Highness.

Since which time, Old Fabian coming into my hands, from him I got knowledge,
that that advantageous Peace, mentioned by Stow, Anno 1360, (concluded between
the forementioned King Edward III. and the French King) was acted upon the
Fourteenth of October, with grand Solemnity.

The two former Circumstances must needs fall out Providentially: Whether this
last of Anno 1360, was designed by Edward III. or no, (as remembering his former
good hap) may be some question: I am of opion not.

Where things are under a Man's peculiar Concern, he may fix a time; but here
was the French King concerned equally with the English, and many other great
Personages interested. To have tied them up to his own Auspicious. Conceit of
the Day, had been an unkind Oppression, and would have brought the Judgment of
so Wise a Prince into question: We may conclude then, 'twas merely fortuitous.
And therefore to the former Observation concerning this Famous Edward, give me
leave to add, Insuper hoc ipso die (sibi commoda) Grandis
Rex cum Galligenis, foeder a fecit idem.
An advantageous Peace, on day self-same,
This mighty Prince did with the Frenchmen frame.
A memorable Peace (foretold by Nostredamus) much conducing to the saving of
Christian Blood, was made upon the Fourteenth of October 1557. between Pope
Paul IV. Henry II. of France, and Philip II. of Spain. Nostredamus says, These
great Princes were frappez du Ciel, moved from Heaven to make this Peace. See
Garenciers Comment on Nostredamus, page 76.

A Lucky day this, not only to the Princes of England; but Auspicious to the
Welfare of Europe.

John Gibbons, 1678.


Thus far Mr. John Gibbon. The Latin Verses of the Twelve Months quoted by him
out of an old Manuscript, I have seen in several Mass-books: And they are
printed in the Calendar to the Works of Venerable Bede. It Is to be presumed,
that they were grounded upon experience; But we have no Instances left us of
the Memorables of those Days.

As for the Third, and Tenth of September, I have here set dow some Extractions
from a little Book called The Historians Guide, or Britain's Remembrancer;
which was carefully collected by a Club. It begins at the Year 1600, and is
continued to 1690. There cannot be found in all the time aforesaid, the like
Instances.

Tertia Septembris, and denus fert mala membris. September 3. 1641. The
Parliament Adjourned to the 20th. of October next, and the Irish Rebellion
broke out, where were 20000 Persons barbarously Murdered.

September 3. 1643. Biddiford, Appleford and Barnstable surrendered to the King.

September. 3. 1650. Dunbar Fight.

September. 3. 1651. Worcester Fight.

September. 3. 1651. Earl of Darby defeated at Preston.

September. 3. 1654. A Third Parliament at Westminster.

September. 3. 1658. Oliver Protector died.

September. 3. 1675. The Town of Northampton near burnt down to the ground by
accidental Fire.

September. 3. 1662. William Lenthal Speaker of the House of Commons died.

September. 3. 4. 1665. Four Dutch Men of War, two East India Ships, and several
Merchantmen taken by the Earl of Sandwich, with the loss only of the Hector.

September. 2. 1644. The Earl-of Essex fled to Plymouth, and the Army submitted
to the King.

September. 2. 1645. The Scots raised the Siege from before Hereford.

September. 2. 1653. The Londoners petition the Parliament to continue Tithes.

September. 2. 1685. The Lady Lisle beheaded at Winchester for harboring Hicks a
Rebel.

September. 4. 1643. Exeter taken by Prince Maurice.

September. 4. 1653. General Blake buried at Westminster.

September. 5. 1652. The French Fleet beaten by the English.

Memorables on September the Tenth.

September. 10. 1643. The Siege of Gloucester raised. I remember over that Gate
which leads to Nimphs-field was this following Inscription in Freestone: The
Walls are now pulled down.

Always remember
The Tenth of September
One thousand six hundred forty three,
And give God the Glory.
September. 10. 1645. Bristol surrendered to the Parliament.

September. 10. 1649. Drogheda taken as appears by Cromwell's Letter to the
Speaker Lenthal.

September. 10. 1660. Peace with Spain proclaimed.

September. 10. 1670. Peace concluded between England and Spain in America, was
this day ratified at Madrid.

September. 10. 1673. This day his Majesty commanded the Earl of Ossory to take
the Command of the Fleet at the Buoy in the Nore, in the absence of Prince
Rupert.

September. 12. 1679. The King takes from the Duke of Monmouth his Commission of
General.

September. 11. 1680. Mrs. Celier tried at the Old-Bailey, for Publishing a Book
called, Malice Defeated, etc. and found Guilty.

September. 12. 1683. The Siege of Vienna raised (after the Besieged had lost
10000 Men, and the Besiegers 70000) by the King of Poland, and the Duke of
Lorrain.

May 29. 1630. King Charles II. born.

May 29. 1660. Restored.

May 29. 1672. The Fleet beaten by the Dutch.

May 29. 1679. A Rebellion broke out in the West of Scotland, where they
Proclaimed the Covenant, and put forth a Declaration.

The Emperor Charles V. was born on February 24. 1500.

He won the Battle of Pavia, February 24. 1525.

Clement. VII. Crowned him. Emperor, February 24. 1530.

Raphael d' Vrbin [the famous Painter] was born on a Good Friday, and died on a
Good Friday.

At Feltwell in Norfolk [which lies East and West] a Fire happened to break out
at the West end, which the West Wind blew and burned all the Street: On that
day Twenty Years, another Fire happened there, which began at the East end; and
burned it to the ground again. This I had from a Reverend Divine. Quaere de hoc.

Colonel Hugh Grove of Wiltshire was beheaded at Exeter [together with Colonel
John Penrudock] on the Ninth day of May 1655: On that very day Three Years, his
Son and Heir died at London of a Malignant Fever, and about the same hour of
the day.

A very good Friend of mine and Old acquaintance was born on the 15th of
November: his Eldest Son was born on the 15th of November, and his Second Son's
First Son on the 15th of November.

Day-Fatality of Rome, Written by John Pell, D. D. from whom I had it.

They that called the City of Rome, Vrbs Aeterna, seemed to believe, that Rome
could never be destroyed. But there have been great numbers of Men, that did
verily believe, that it shall have an irrecoverable overthrow. Writers have
proceeded so far, as to foretell the time of Rome's final Ruin. Some said that
Rome's Perdition should happen in the Year of Christ 1670. They have now been
decryed Nine whole Years: So that few take care to know what Reasons moved them
to pitch upon that Number.

A Lutheran Historian, Anno 1656 wrote thus: Finem Iubileorum Ecclesiasticorum
omniumque temporum in Scriptura revelatorum, desinere in Annum Christi
Millesimum sexcentesimum and septuagesimum, antehac observavit Beatus Gerhardus
cum Philippo Nicolao. But all Men are not of Dr. Gerhard's Opinion. Many Men
believe, that some of the Prophesies in the Revelation do reach far beyond our
times, and that the events of future times will unclasp and unseal a
considerable portion of the Apocalypse.

One of the Reasons that recommended the Number of 1670, was because it is the
Sum of 410, and 1260.

Historians agree, that in the Year of Christ 410, in the Month of August Rome
was trampled under foot, and her Heathen Inhabitants were miserably slaughtered
by the Victorious Army of Alaric, a Christian King of the Goths. Paulus
Diaconus says, August the 24th was the day of King Alaric's taking Rome.
Kedrenus says, it was August the 26th, perhaps the Army first entered the 24th,
and the King followed not till two days after.

As for the other Number 1260. It is twice found in the Revelation of St. John
Chap. 11. 3. My two witnesses shall Prophecy a thousand two hundred and sixty
days. And chap. 12. 6. Should feed the Woman in the Wilderness a thousand two
hundred and threescore days. And it is there expressed in another form [42
times 30] chap. 11. 2. The Gentiles shall tread the holy City under foot forty
and two Months. chap. 13. 5. Power was given to the Blasphemous Beast to
continue forty and two months. chap. 12. 14. The woman is nourished in the
Wilderness for [(...)] a season and seasons, and half a season. See Act. 1. 7.
360 and 720 and 180 are equal to 1260. So it seems every (...) has 360 days,
or twelve Months at thirty days to a Month. No doubt Daniel had given occasion
to this expression, chap. 7. 25. A time, and times, and the dividing of time.
No Man can ground any distinct reasoning upon such general words. But at the
end of the Chapter, he left off his Chaldean Tongue, and wrote Hebrew in the
rest of his Book; and chap. 12. 7. he speaks more distinctly [For a season,
seasons, and a half his word [Moyed ((...)) from (...) condixit, indixit,
constituit] is not so large a word, as the other Hebrew words which we
Translate Time. But yet it is not tied to a just number of days (as 360) but is
capable of various interpretations in several Prophesies. Daniel uses a Plural
in both places, and not a Dual [Two times, and two seasons] Nor does John say,
Two seasons: But by his Numeral Illustration, he teaches us to understand him,
as if he had said (chap. 12. 14.) For three seasons and half a season: I say
Numeral Illustration. For I take it to be no other than an easy example (12
and 24 and 6 are 42) to direct the Sons of the Prophets not yet arrived to the
skill of dealing with difficult supputations of Numbers not then discoverable
(...) Revel. 13 18. Here is Wisdom, Let him that has Understanding count the
number of the Beast.

By 1260 days almost all the Interpreters understand so many Years, but not a
Year of 360 days; because they find no Nation that has so short a Year. The
Egyptians had a year of just 365 days; but before St. John was born, the Romans
had forced them to allow 365 as we use now in England.

In an enquiry concerning Rome it is fit to consider the length of a Roman
Year. (I may justly say a Roman Moyed; for no City ever had (...) Years length
and form of a Calender Determined, Settled, and Commanded with so much absolute
Authority as Rome had) Julius Caesar by an Edict commanded that Number of 365
to be observed, and therefore it is called a Julian year. Three Iulians and an
half have days 1278 3/8 But Julian Years 1378 3/8 are 1278 Julian Years, and
days 13631/32; or almost 137 days.

Almost 100 years ago, Pope Gregory the XIII. by a Papal Bull introduced a
Calendar wherein the Years length is supposed to have days 36597/400. Then
three Gregorian Years and an half have days 1278279/800. But Gregorian Years
1278279/800 are 1278 Julian Years and days almost 118. Wherefore instead of
adding 1260, add 1278, add 137 days to the Year of our Lord 410, August 26. The
sum shows the Year of our Lord 1688 August 163, that is, Ten days after the end
of December 1688 Old style. This is the utmost, or farthest day, beyond which
no Apocalypse account (reckoning from Alaric) can point out a time, for the
final Destruction of the City of Rome.

Again (instead of adding 1260) add 1278 Years, and days 118 to the Year of our
Lord 410 August 24. The sum shows the Year of our Lord 1688 August 142, that
is, Eleven days before the end of December 1688 Old style. This (December 20)
is the nearest or soonest day that can be gathered by Apocalyptic account
(reckoning from Alaric) to point out the time of Romes final Ruin. But if it
happens not before the Eleventh of January, Men will make no more reckoning of
Alaric; but begin a new account from Attila in the Year of Christ, 453.

Calculation to a day (when we can do it) may be defended by a great example.
Exodus 12. 41. at the end of 430 Years, even the self same day, etc.

Io. Pell.

Dr. Pell told me, that St. Augustine writes somewhere, to this purpose, viz.
That it were to be wished, that some skilful Mathematitian would take the pains
to examine and consider the Mathematical parts of the Holy Scripture.

CHAP. II.
Of Fatalities of Families, and Places.
THE L. Chancellor Bacon says, Essay XIV. of Nobility.
As for Nobility in particular Persons, It is a reverend thing to see an
Ancient Castle or Building not in decay; or to see a fair Timber Tree sound and
perfect; how much more to behold an Ancient Noble Family, which has stood
against the Waves and Weathers of Time: For new Nobility is but the Act of
Power; but Ancient Nobility is the Act of Time.

But Omnium rerum est vicissitudo: Families, and Places have their Fatalities,
according to that of Ovid Fors sua cuique loco est --

This piece of a Verse puts me in mind of several Pla^es in Wiltshire, Fastorum
Lib. IV.
and elsewhere that are, or have been fortunate to their Owners; and e contra.

Sturton [the Seat of the Lord Sturton] was belonging to this Family before the
Conquest. They say, that after the Victory at Battle, William the Conqueror
came in Person into the West, to receive their Rendition; that the Lord Abbot
of Glastenbury, and the rest of the Lords and Grandees of the Western parts
waited upon the Conqueror at Stourton-house; where the Family continues to
this day.

The Honorable Family of the Hungerfords is probably of as great Antiquity as
any in the County of Wilts. Hungerford [the place of the Barony] was sold but
lately by Sir Edward Hungerford Knight of the Bath; as also the Noble and
Ancient Seat of Farleigh-Castle, about An. 167... But that this Estate should
so long continue is not very strange; for it being so vast, 'twas able to make
several with-standings against the Shock of Fortune.

The Family of Gawen have been long at Norrington in the Parish of Alvideston
in Wiltshire. It was sold by -- Gawen Esquire to Sir Wadham Windham one of the
Judges of the Kings Bench about 1665. They continued in this place Four hundred
fifty and odd Years. Then also was sold their Estate in Broad-Chalk, which they
had as long, or perhaps longer. On the South Down of the Farm of Broad-Chalk is
a little Barrow called Gawen's Barrow; [which must be before Ecclesiastical
Canons were constituted; for since, Burials are only in Consecrated ground.]
King Edgar gave the Manor and Farm of Broad-Chalk to the Nunns of Wilton-Abby,
which is 900 Years ago.

Mr. Thin in his Explanation of the hard words in Chaucer, writes thus,
Gawyn, fol. 23. p. 1. This Gawyn was Sisters Son to Arthur the Great, King of
the Britains, a most famous Man in War, and in all manner of Civility; as in
the Acts of the Britains we may read. In the Year 1082 in a Province of Wales
called Rose was his Sepulcher found. Chaucer in the Squires Tale. This strange
Knight that came thus suddenly
All armed, save his head, full royally
Sulued the King, and Queen, and Lords all
By order as they sitten in the Hall
With so high Reverence and Obeisaunce
As well in Speech as in Countenance,
That Gawain with his old Courtesy,
Though he came again out of Fairie,
He could him not amend of no word. --
Sir William Batton of Tockenham Baronet [the Father] told me, that his
Ancestors had the Lease of Alton-farm [400 l. per Annum] in Wilts (which
anciently belonged to Hyde-Abby juxta Winton) four Hundred Years. Sir William's
Lease expired about 1652, and so fell into the hands of the Earl of Pembroke.

Clavel of -- in the Isle of Purbec in the County of Dorset was in that place
before the Conquest, as appears by Doomsday Book, The like is said of Hamden,
of Hamden in Bucks: Their Pedigree says, that one of that Family had the
Conduct of that County in two Invasions of the Danes. Also Pen of Pen in that
County was before the Conquest, as by Doomsday Book.

Contrary wise, there are several places unlucky to their Possessors. e. g.
Charter House on Mindip in Somersetshire never passed yet, to the Third
Generation. The Manor of Butleigh near Glastonbury, never went, yet, to the
Third Generation.

Bletchington in Oxfordshire continued in the Family of the Pauures, for about
300 Years: It was alienated by -- Pauure to Sir John Lenthall about the Year
1630, who sold it again to Sir Thomas Coghill about 1635. He sold it to William
Lewis Esquire whose Relict made it over to the Duke of Richmond and Lenox, about
the Year 166..., His Grace sold it to Arthur Earl of Anglesie about 166...

Fatality of Proper Names of Princes. e. g. Augustus the first Roman Emperor
and Augustulus the last. Constantine the first Grecian Emperor and Constantine
the last. The like is observed of the first and last Mexican Experors: And the
Turks have a Prophecy that the last Emperor will be a Mahomet.

John has been an unfortunate Name to Kings. All the Second Kings since the
Conquest have been unfortunate.

Londonderry was the first Town in Ireland that declared for the Parliament
against King Charles the I. and for the Prince of Orange against King James the
II. It was closely Besieged both times without effect. The Kings Party were
once Master of all the Kingdom except Londonderry and Dublin, and King James
had all in his power but Londonderry and Iniskilling. One Tailor a Minister
was as famous for his Martial feats in the first Siege, as Walker in the last.

It Is certain, that there are some Houses unlucky to their Inhabitants, which
the Reverend and Pious Dr. Nepier could acknowledge. See Tobit chap. 3. v. 8.
That she had been married to seven Husbands, whom Asmodeus the evil spirit had
killed, before they had lien with her.

The Fleece-Tavern in Covent Garden [in York-street] was very unfortunate for
Homicides: there have been several killed, three in my time: It is now (1692) a
private House.

A handsome Brick-house on the South side of Clerken-well Churchyard has been
so unlucky for at least Forty Years that it was seldom Tenanted; and at last,
no body would adventure to take it. Also a handsome House in Holbourn that
looked toward the Fields; the Tenants of it did not prosper, several, about six.

At the Sign of -- over against Northumberland House near Chearing-Cross died
the Lady Baynton [Eldest Daughter of Sir John Danvers of Dantesey.] Some years
after in the same House died my Lady Hoby [her Sister] of the Smallpox, and
about twenty years after died their Nephew Henry Danvers Esquire of the Smallpox,
aged Twenty one, wanting two Weeks. He was Nephew and Heir to the Right
Honorable Henry Danvers Earl of Danby.

Edmund Wyld Esquire has had more Deodands from his Manor of Totham in Essex,
than from all his Estate besides: Two Mischiefs happened in one Ground there.

Disinheriting the Eldest Son is forbid in the Holy Scripture, and Estates
disinherited are observed to be unfortunate; of which one might make a large
Catalogue. See Dr. Saunderson's Sermon -- where he discourses of this Subject.

Periodical Small-Poxes. The Smallpox is usually in all great Towns: This
Account I had from Mr. Tho. Ax.
But it is observed at Taunton in Somersetstire, and at Shirburne in
Dorsetshire, that at one of them at every Seventh Year, and at the other at
every Ninth Year comes a Smallpox, which the Physicians cannot master, e. g.

Smallpox in Shirburn during the year 1626 Extracted out of the Register-Book.
And during the year 1634 From Michaelmas 1642 to Mich. 1643 From Michaelmas
1649 to Mich. 1650 From Michaelmas 1657 to Mich. 1658


In the Year 1667 from Ian. to Sept. 1667 Mr. Ax promised me to enquire the
Years it happened there after 1670, and 1680; but Death prevented him.

Smallpox in Taunton all the Year 1658 Out of the Register-Book.
Likewise in the Year 1670 Again in the Year 1677 Again very mortal in the Year
1684


Mr. Ax also promised me to enquire at Taunton the Years it happened there
after 1660.

It were to be wished that more such Observations were made in other great
Towns.

Platerus makes the like Observations in the second Book of his Practice, page
323. He practiced at Basil 56 Years, and did observe, that every Tenth Year
they died of the Plague there.

See Captain I. Graunts Observations of the Bills of Mortality at London
[indeed, written by Sir William Petty, which in a late Transaction he
confessed] for the Periodical Plagues at London, which (as I remember) are
every Twenty fifth Year.

CHAP. III.
Ostenta, or Portents.
HOW it comes to pass, I know not; Discourse of Nich. Muchiavels Book I. chap.
LVI.
but by Ancient and Modern Example it is evident, that no great Accident
befalls a City or Province, but it is presaged by Divination, or Prodigy, or
Astrology, or some way or other. I shall here set down a few Instances.

A Rainbow appeared about the Sun before the Battle of Pharsalia. See Appian;
and Mr. T. May's V. Book of his Continuation of Lucan,

Ex Chronico Saxonico, P. 112. Anno MCIV. fuit primus Pentecostes dies Nonis
Iunii, and die Martis sequente, conjuncti sunt quatuor Circuli circa Solemn,
albi coloris, and quisque sub alio collocatus, quasi picti essent. Omnes qui
videbant obstupuerunt, propterea quod nunquam ante tales meminerant. Post haec
facta est Pax inter Comitem Robertum de Normannia, and Robertum de Baelaesme --
Our Chronicles tell us, that Anno Secundo Reginae Mariae 15 Feb. two Suns
appeared, and a Rainbow reversed: See the Bow turned downwards, and the two
ends standing upwards; before the coming in of King Philip.

This following Phenomenon was seen at Broad-Chalk in Wiltshire, on the first
day of May, 1647. It continued from about Eleven a Clock [or before] till XII.
It was a very clear day; but few did take notice of it, because it was so near
the Sunbeams. My Mother happened to espy it, going to see what a Clock it was
by an Horizontal Dial; and then all the Servants saw it. Upon the like occasion
Mr. Io. Sloper B. D. Vicar there, saw it, and all his Family: and Servants of
Sir George Vaugham [then of Falston] who were Hunting on the Downs, saw it. The
Circles were of Rainbow color; the two Filots, which cross the greater Circle
[I presume they were Segments of a Third Circle] were of a pale Color. The Sun
was within the Intersections of the Circles. See Sir W. Dugdale's Hist.
The next remarkable thing that followed was, that on the Third of June
following, Cornet Joyce carried King Charles I. Prisoner from Holdenby to the
Isle of Wight. The Isle of Wight lies directly from Broad-Chalk, at the X a
Clock point.

This following Phenomenon was seen in the North side of the Churchyard of
Bishops-Lavington in Wiltshire, about the latter end of September 1688, about
Three a Clock in the Afternoon.

This was more than a Semicircle. Horizon.


B B Two Balls of light. They were about Eleven degrees above the Horizon by
the Quadrant; observed by Mr. Robert Blea, one of the Earl of Abingdon's
Gentlemen.

Cicero de Natura Deorum Lib. II. Multa praeterea Ostentis, multa ex eis
admonemur, multisque rebus aliis, quas diuturnus usus ita notarit, ut artem
Divinationis efficeret. -- CHAP. IV.
Omens.
BEfore the Battle at Philippi began, two Eagles fought in the Air between the
two Armies: Both the Armies stood still and beheld them, and the Army was
beaten, that was under the vanquished Eagle. See Appian's Hist. Part. II. Lib.
4.. 2.

The Silver Cross that was wont to be carried before Cardinal Wolsey, fell out
of its Socket, and was like to have knocked one of the Bishop's Brains out. A
very little while after, came in a Messenger, and arrested the Cardinal, before
he could get out of the House. See Stow's Chronicle.

It Is commonly reported, that before an Heir of the Cliftons of Clifton in
Nottinghamshire dies, that a Sturgeon is taken in the River Trent by that place.

Thomas Fludd of Kent, Esquire told me, that it is an old Observation, which was
pressed earnestly to King James I, that he should not remove the Queen of Scots
Body from Northamptonshire where she was beheaded, and interred: For that, it
always bodes ill to the Family, when Bodies are removed from their Graves. For
some of the Family will die shortly after, as did Prince Henry, and, I think
Queen, Anne.

A little before the Death of Oliver Protector, a Whale came into the River
Thames and was taken at Greenwich... foot long. It Is said, Oliver was troubled
at it.

When I was a Freshman at Oxford 1642, I was wont to go to Christ-Church to see
King Charles I. at Supper: Where I once heard him say, That as he was Hawking
in Scotland, he rode into the Quarry, and found the Covey of Partridges falling
upon the Hawk; and I do remember this expression farther, viz. and I will swear
upon the Book it is true. When I came to my Chamber, I told this Story to my
Tutor; said he, That Covey was London.

The Bust of King Charles I. carved by Barnini, as it was brought in a Boat
upon the Thames, a strange Bird [the like whereof the Bargemen had never seen]
dropped a drop of Blood, or Blood-like upon it; which left a stain not to be
wiped off. This Bust was carved from a Picture of Sir Anthony Van Dyke's
Drawing; the Sculptor found great fault with the Forehead, as most
unfortunate. There was a Seam in the middle of his Forehead (downwards) which
is a very ill sign in Metoposcopie.

Colonel Sharington Talbot was at Nottingham, when King Charles I. did set up
his Standard upon the top of the Tower there. He told me, that the first night,
the Wind blew it so, that it hung down almost horizontal; which some did take
to be an ill Omen.

The day that the Long Parliament began 1641, the Scepter fell out of the
Figure of King Charles in Wood in Sir -- Trenchard's Hall at Wullich in Dorset,
as they were at dinner in the Parlour: Justice Hunt then dined there.

The Picture of Archbishop Lawd in his Closet fell down [the string brake] the
day of the sitting of that Parliament. This is mentioned in Canterbury's Doom
by W. Prynn.

The Psalms for the Eleventh Day of the Month are 56, 57, 58, etc. On the 11th.
day of one of the Months in the Summer time, the Citizens came tumultuously in
great Numbers in Boats and Bardges over against White Hall, to show, they would
take the Parliaments part. The Psalms aforesaid, both for Morning and Evening
Service are as Prophecies of the Troubles that did ensue.

When the High-Court of Justice was voted in the Parliament House, as
Berkenhead [the Mace-bearer] took up the Mace to carry it before the Speaker,
the top of the Mace fell off. This was avowed to me by an Eyewitness then in
the House.

The Head of King Charles Is. Staff did fall off at his Trial; that is commonly
known.

The Second Lesson for the 30th. of January in the Calendar before the
Common Prayer, is concerning the Trial of Christ: which when Bishop Duppe read,
the King was displeased with him, thinking he had done it of choice: but the
Bishop cleared himself by the Calendar, as is to be seen.

King Charles II. was Crowned at the very conjunction of the Sun and Mercury;
Mercury being then in Cord Solis. As the King was at Dinner in
Westminster Hall, it Thundered and Lightened extremely. The Cannons and the
Thunder played together.

King Charles II. went by long Sea to Portsmouth, or Plymouth, or both: an
extraordinary Storm arose, which carried him almost to France. Sir Jonas Moor
(who was then with his Majesty) gave me this Account, and said, that when they
came to Portsmouth to refresh themselves, they had not been there above half an
Hour, but the Weather was Calm and the Sun shone: His Majesty put to Sea again,
and in a little time they had the like Tempestuous Weather as before.

The Gloucester-Frigot cast away at the Lemanore, and most of the Men in it,
the Duke of York escaping in a Cock-boat Anno 1682. May the fifth, on a Friday.

When King James II. was Crowned [according to the Ancient Custom, the Peers go
to the Throne, and kiss the King] the Crown was almost kissed off his Head. An
Earl did set it right: And as he came from the Abbey to Westminster Hall, the
Crown tottered extremely.

The Canopy [of Cloth of Gold] carried over King James IIs. Head by the
Wardens of the Cinque Ports, was torn by a puff of Wind as he came to
Westminster Hall: It hung down very lamentably: I saw it.

The top of his Scepter [Flower de Lis] did then fall, which the Earl of
Peterborough took up.

Upon Saint Mark's day, after the Coronation of King James II. were prepared
stately Fireworks on the Thames: It happened, that they took fire all
together, and it was so dreadful, that several Spectators leaped into the
River, choosing rather to be drowned than burned. In a Yard by the Thames was
my Lord Powys's Coach and Horses: the Horses were so frighted by the
Fireworks, that the Coachman was not able to stop them, but ran away over one
who with great difficulty recovered.

When King James II. was at Salisbury, Anno 1688, the Iron Crown upon the
Turret of the Councel-house was blown off.

In February, March, and April, two Ravens built their Nests on the
Weathercock of the high Steeple at Bakwell in Darbyshire.

I did see Mr. Chr. Love beheaded on Tower Hill, in a delicate clear day: About
half an hour after his Head was struck off, the Clouds gathered blacker and
blacker: and such terrible Claps of Thunder came, that I never heard greater.

It Is reported, that the like happened after the Execution of Alderman Cornish
in Cheap Side, October. 23. 1685.

Anno 1643, as Major John Morgan of Wells was marching with the Kings Army into
the West, fell sick of a Malignant Fever at Salisbury, and was brought
dangerously ill to my Father's at Broad-Chalk, where he was lodged, secretly,
in a Garret. There came a Sparrow to the Chamber Window, which peck'd the Lead
of a certain Panel only, and only one side of the Lead of the Lozenge, and
made one small hole in it. He continued this pecking and biting the Lead,
during the whole time of his sickness (which was not less than a Month) when
the Major went away the Sparrow desisted: and came thither no more. Two of the
Servants that attended the Major, and sober Persons, declared this for a
certainty.

Sir Walter Long's [of Dorset in Wilts] Widow did make a solemn promise to him,
on his Deathbed, that she would not marry after his Decease. But not long
after one Sir -- Fox, a very Beautiful young Gentleman did win her Love: so
that notwithstanding her Promise aforesaid, she married him: She married at
South-wrax-hall, where the Picture of Sir Walter hung over the Parlour door, as
it does now at Dracot. As Sir -- Fox led his Bride by the hand from the Church
(which is near to the House) into the Parlour, the string of the Picture brake,
and the Picture fell on her shoulder, and cracked in the fall: [it was painted
on wood as the fashion was in those days.] This made her Ladyship reflect on
her Promise, and drew some Tears from her Eyes.

See Sir Walter Raleigh's History Book IV. chap. 2.. 7. p... The Dogs of the
French Army, the night before the Battle of Novara, ran all to the Swisses
Army: the next day the Swisses obtained a glorious Victory of the French. Sir
Walter Raleigh affirms it to be certainly true.

The last Battle fought in the North of Ireland between the Protestants and the
Papists was in Glinsuly near Letterkenny in the County of Donegall. Veneras was
the Popish Bishop of Clogher, and that of the Parliament Army Sir Charles Coot.
They pitched their Tents on each side the River Suly. And the Papists
constantly persist in it to this very day, that the Night before the Action, a
Woman of uncommon stature all in white appearing to the said Bishop, admonished
him not to cross the River first to assault the Enemy, but suffer them to do
it, whereby he should obtain the Victory. That if the Irish took the water
first to move toward the English, they should be put to a total rout, which
came to pass. Ocahan, and Sir Henry O Neal who were both killed there, saw
severally the same Apparition, and dissuaded the Bishop from giving the first
onset, but could not prevail upon him. In the mean time I find nothing in this
Revelation, that any common Soldier might not conclude without extraordinary
means.

Near the same place a party of the Protestants had been surpised sleeping by
the Popish Irish, were it not for several Wrens that just wakned them by
dancing and pecking on the Drums as the Enemy were approaching. For this reason
the wild Irish mortally hate these Birds to this day, calling them the Devils
Servants, and killing them where ever they catch them; They teach their
Children to thrust them full of Thorns: You Will see sometimes on Holidays a
whole Parish running like madmen from Hedge to Hedge a Wren-hunting.

Anno 1679, After the Discovery of the Popish Plot, the Penal Laws were put in
execution against the Roman Catholics: So, that if they did not receive the
Sacrament according to the Church of England in their Parish Church, they were
to be severely proceeded against according to Law: Mr. Ployden, to avoid the
Penalty, went to his Parish Church at Lasham near Alton in Hampshire: when Mr.
Laurence [the Minister] had put the Chalice into Mr. Ployden's hand, the Cup of
it (wherein the Wine was) fell off. It Is true, It was out of order before; and
he had a Tremor in his hand. The Communion was stopped by this accident. This was
attested to me by two of the Neighboring Ministers, as also several Gentlemen
of the Neighborhood.

When King James II. first entered Dublin after his Arrival from France 1689,
one of the Gentlemen that bore the Mace before him stumbled without any rub in
his way, or other visible occasion. The Mace fell out of his hands, and the
little Cross upon the Crown thereof stuck fast between two stones in the
street. This is very well known all over Ireland, and did much trouble King
James himself with many of his chief Attendants.

CHAP. V.
Dreams.
-- (...) Homer Iliad A.
HE that has a mind to read of Dreams, may peruse Cicero de Divinatione, Hier.
Cardani Somniorum Synesiorum Lib. IV. and Moldinarius de Insomniis, etc. I
shall here mention but little out of them, my purpose being chiefly to set down
some remarkable, and Divine Dreams of some, that I have had the honor to be
intimately acquainted with, persons worthy of Belief.

Cicero de Divinatione Lib. I. Hannibalem, Coelius scribit, cum Columnam
auream, quae esset in fano Iunonis Laciniae, auferre vellet, dubitaretque utrum
ea solida esset, an extrinsecus inaurata, perterebravisse: cumque solidam
invenisset, statuissetque tollere, secundum quietem visam esse ei Iunonem
praedicere, ne id faceret; minitarique, si id fecisset, se curaturam, ut eum
quoque oculum, quo been videret, amitteret: idque ab homine acuto non esse
neglectum: itaque ex eo auro, quod exterebratum esset, buculam curasse
faciendam, and eam in summa columna collocavisse.

-- Cum duo quidam Arcades familiares iter una facerent, and Megaram venissent,
alterum ad cauponem divertisse; ad hospitem alterum. Qui, ut coenati
quiescerent, concubia nocte visum esse in somnis ei qui erat in hospitio, illum
alterum or are ut subveniret, quod sibi a caupone interitus pararetur: eum
primo perterritum somnio surrexisse: deinde, cum se collegisset, idque visum
pro nihilo habendum esse duxisset, recubuisse: tum ei dormienti eundem illum
visum esse rogare, ut quoniam sibi vivo non subvenisset, mortem suam ne inultam
esse pateretur: se interfectum in plaustrum a caupone esse conjectum, and supra
stercus injectum: petere, ut mane ad portam adesset, priusquam plaustrum ex
oppido exiret. Hoc vero somnio commotum mane bubulco praesto ad portam fuisse,
quaesisse ex eo, quid esset in plaustro: illum perterritum fugisse, mortuum
erutuum esse, cauponem re patefacta poenas dedisse. Quid hoc somnio dici
divinius potest?

-- Somnium de Simonide, qui cum ignotum quendam projectum mortuum vidisset,
eumque humavisset, haberetque in animo navem conscendere, moneri visus est, ne
id faceret, ab eo, quem sepultum affecerent: si navigasset eam naufragio esse
perituram: itaque Simondem redisse; perisse caeteros, qui tum navigassent.

Cicero de Divinatione, Lib. II. Somnium Alexandri. Qui, cum Ptolomaeus
familiaris ejus in praelio telo venenato ictus esset, eoque vulnere summo cum
dolor moreretur, Alexander assidens somno est consopitus; tum secundum quietem
visus ei dicitur draco is, quem matter Olympias alebat, radiculam ore far, and
simul dicere quo illa loci nasceretur (neque is long aberat ab eo loco:) ejus
autem esse vim tantam, ut Ptolemaeum facile sanaret. Cum Alexander experrectus
narrasset amicis somnium, emisisse qui illam radiculam quaererent. Qua inventa,
and Ptolemaeus sanatus dicitur, and multi milites, qui erant eodem genere teli
vulnerati.

Cardanus Somniorum Synesiorum. Lib. IIII. Cap. 2. Narrat Plinius 25 Lib. Not.
Hist. vir ab omni superstitione alienissimus, Historiam hujusmodi. Nuper
cujusdam militantis in Paetorio matter vidit in quiet, ut radicem sylvestris
Rosae (quam cynorrhodon vocant) blanditam sibi aspectu pridie in fruteto,
mitteret filio bibendam: In Lacetania res gerebatur, Hispaniae proxima part:
casuque accidit, ut milite a morsu canis incipiente aquas expavescere,
superveniret epistola orantis ut pareret religioni: servatusque est ex
insperato, and postea quisquis auxilium simile t^ntavit.

Ibid. Galeni tria Somnia. -- Tertium magis dignum miraculo, cum bis per
somnium admonitus ut arteriam secaret quae inter pollicem and indicem est,
idque agens liberatus sit a diuturno dolor, quo infestabatur ea in part, qua
septo transverso jecur jungitur, idque in libri de sectione venae fine testatus
est. Magno certe exemplo, quod tantus vir in medicina eam adhibuerit somnio
fidem, ut in seipso periculam vitae subierit, in art propria. Deinde
probitatem admiror, ut quo potuerit solertia ingenii sibi inventum ascribere,
Deo cui debebatur, reddiderit. Dignus vel hoc solo vir immortalitate nominis,
and librorum suorum.

In his fourth Book, chap. 4. De exemplis propriis, he owns the Solution of
some difficult Problems in Algebra to his Dreams.

Plinii Not. Hist. Lib. XXII. cap. 17. Vernula charus Pericli Atheniensium
Prinpi, cum is in arce templum aedificaret, repsissetque super altitudinem
fastigii, and inde cecidisset, hac herba [Parthenio] dicitur sanatus, mostrata
Pericli somnio a Minerva. Quare Parthenium vocari coepta est, assignaturque ei
Deae.

Augustinus, Cui etiam praeter sanctitatem, plena fides adhiberi potest, duo
narrat inter reliqua, somnia admiranda. Primum, quod cum quidam mortuo nuper
patre venaretur tanquam de pecunia quam pater illi ex chirographo debuisset,
dum incastus viveret, ex hac causae nocte quadam umbram patris videt, quae
illum admonuit de persoluta pecunia and ubi chirographum esset repositum. Cum
surrexisset, invenit chirographum loco eo quem umbra paterna docuerat,
liberatusque est ab injusto petitore.

Alterum adhuc magis mirum.

Praestantius, vir quidam, a Philosopho petier at dubitationem quandam solvi:
quod ille pernegavit. Nocte sequente, tametsi vigilaret Praestantius, vidit
sibi Philosophum assistere, ac dubitationem solvere, moxque abire. Cum die
sequenti obviam Praestantius eundem habuisset Philosophum, rogat, Cur cum
pridie rogatus noluisset solvere illam quaestionem, intempesta nocte non
rogatus, and venisset ad se and dubitationem aperuisset. Cui Philosophus. Non
quidem ego adveni, sed somnians visus sum tibi hoc officium praestare.

The Plague raging in the Army of the Emperor Charles Vth, he Dreamt, that the
Decoction of the Root of the Dwarfe-Thistle [a Mountain Plant since called the
Caroline Thistle] would Cure that Disease. See Gerards Herbal, who tells us
this.

In Queen Mary's time, there was only one Congregation of Protestants in
London, to the number of about 300. One -- was the Deacon to them, and kept the
List of their Names: One -- of that Congregation did Dream, that a Messenger
[Queens Officer] had seized on this Deacon, and taken his List; the Fright of
the Dream awaked him: He fell asleep and dreamt the same perfect Dream again.
In the Morning before he went out of his Chamber, the Deacon came to him and
told him his Dream, and said, it was a Warning from God; the Deacon slighted
his advice as savouring of Superstition; but -- was so urgent with him, that he
prevailed with him to deposite the List in some other Hand, which he did that
Day. The next Day the Queens Officer attacqued him, and searched (in vain) for
the List, which had it been found, would have brought them all to the Flame.
Fox's Martyrology.

When Archbishop Abbot's Mother (a poor Clothworker's Wife in Gilford) was
with Child of him, she did long for a Jack, and she dreamt that if she should
Eat a Jack, her Son in her Belly should be a great Man. She arose early the
next Morning and went with her Pail to the Riverside (which runs by the
House, now an Alehouse, the Sign of the 3 Mariners) to take up some Water, and
in the Water in the Pail she found a good Jack, which she dressed, and eat it
all, or very near. Several of the best Inhabitants of Gilford were invited (or
invited themselves) to the Christning of the Child; it was Bred up a Scholar in
the Town, and by degrees, came to be Archbishop of Canterbury.

In the Life of Monsieur Peiresk, Writ by Gassendes, it is said, that Monsieur
Peiresk, who had never been at London, did Dream, that he was there, and as he
was walking in a great Street there, espied in a Goldsmiths Glass-Desk, an
Antique Coin, he could never meet with (I think an Otho.) When he came to
London, walking in (I think) Cheapside he saw such a Shop, and remembered the
Countenance of the Goldsmith in his Dream, and found the Coin desired, in his
Desk. See his Life.

When Doctor Harvey (one of the Physicians College in London) being a Young
Man, went to Travel toward Padoa, he went to Dover (with several others) and
showed his Pass, as the rest did, to the Governor there. The Governor told him,
that he must not go, but he must keep him Prisoner. The Doctor desired to know
for what reason? how he had transgrest. Well it was his Will to have it so. The
Pacquet-Boat Hoised Sail in the Evening (which was very clear) and the Doctor's
Companions in it. There ensued a terrible Storm, and the Pacquet-Boat and all
the Passengers were Drowned: The next day the sad News was brought to Dover.
The Doctor was unknown to the Governor, but by Name and Face; but the Night
before, the Governor had a perfect Vision in a Dream of Doctor Harvey, who came
to pass over to Calais; and that he had a Warning to stop him. This the
Governor told to the Doctor the next day. The Doctor was a pious good Man, and
has several times directed this Story to some of my Acquaintance.

My Lady Seymer dreamt, that she found a Nest, with Nine Finches in it. And so
many Children she had by the Earl of Winchelsey, whose name is Finch.

The Countess of Cork (now Burlington) being at Dublin, dreamt that her Father
(the Earl of Cumberland) who was then at York, was Dead. He died at that time.

It Is certain, that several had monitory Dreams of the Conflagration of London.

Sir Christopher Wren, being at his Father's House Anno. 1651. at Knahil in
Wilts, (a young Oxford Scholar) dreamt, that he saw a Fight in a great
Marketplace, which he knew not; where some were flying, and others pursuing;
and among those that fled, he saw a Kinsman of his who went into Scotland to
the King's Army. They heard in the Country, that the King was come into
England, but whereabout he was they could not tell. The next Night his Kinsman
came to his Father at Knahill, and was the first that brought the News of the
Fight at Worcester.

When Sir Christopher Wren was at Paris about 1671, he was Ill and Feverish,
made but little Water, had a pain in his Reins. He sent for a Physician, who
advised him to be let Blood, thinking he had a Pleurisy: But Bleeding much
disagreeing with his Constitution, he would defer it a Day longer: That Night
he dreamt, that he was in a place where Palm Trees grew, (suppose Egypt) and
that a Woman in a Romantic Habit, reached him Dates. The next Day he sent for
Dates, which Cured him of the pain in his Reins.

Since, I have learned that Dates are an admirable Medicine for the Stone, from
old Capt. Took of K. Take 6 or 10 Datestones, dry them in an Oven, pulverize
and searce them; take as much as will lie on a 6 d. in a quarter of a Pint of
White Wind Fasting; and at Four in the Afternoon: Walk or Ride an Hour after:
In a Weeks time it will give ease, and in a Month Cure. If you are at the Bath,
the Bath Water is better than White Wind to take it in.

Sir John Hoskin's Lady, when she lay in of her Eldest Son had a Swelling on
one side of her Belly the 3d. day when the Milk came, and Obstructions: She
dreamt that Syrup of Elderberries and Distilled water of Woormwood would do her
good; and it did so: she found ease in a quarter of an Hour after she had taken
it. I had this Account from her Ladyship's own Mouth.

Captain -- Wingate told me, that Mr. Edmund Gunter of Gresham College did cast
his Nativity, when he was about 17, or 18 Years old; by which he did
Prognosticate that he should be in danger to lose his Life for Treason. Several
Years before the Civil Wars broke out, he had dreamt that he was to be put to
Death, before a great Castle, which he had never seen; which made a strong
impression in his Memory. In Anno 1642, he did oppose the Church Ceremonies,
and was chosen a Member of Parliament, then was made a Captain, and was taken
Prisoner at Edgehill by Prince Rupert, and carried to Kenelworth Castle, where
he was Tried by a Council of War, and Condemned to Die: But they did better
consider of it, and spared his Life; for that he being so considerable a
Person, might make an exchange for some of the King's Party: And he was
exchanged for the Right Honorable Montague Earl of Lindsey (Heir of the
General). Since the Restoration he was made one of the Commissioners of the
Excise-Office in London. Capt. -- Wingate was a Prisoner in Oxford after
Edghill Flight, 1642.
He did Protest that Kenelworth Castle was the very Castle that he saw in his
Dream.

Sir Roger L'Estrange was wont to divertise himself with Cocking in his
Father's (Sir Hammond L'Estrange's) Park; he dreamt that there came to him in
such a place of the Park a Servant, who brought him News, that his Father (who
had been Sick a good while) was departed. The next day going to his usual
Recreation, he was resolved for his Dream sake to avoid that way; but his Game
led him to it, and in that very place, the Servant came and brought him the Ill
News according to his Dream.

Mr. Edmund Halley R. S. S. was carried on with a strong Impulse to take a
Voyage to St. Hellens, to make Observations of the Southern Constellations,
being then about 24 Years Old. Before he undertook his Voyage, he dreamed that
he was at Sea Sailing toward that place, and saw the Prospect of it from the
Ship in his Dream, which he declared in the R. Society that it was the perfect
Representation of that Island, even as he had it really when he approached to
it.

A Gentlewoman dreamed that a Pul^ess of Blew-Corans, would Cure her sore
Throat; and it did so: She was a pious Woman, and affirmed it to be true.

Anno 1690 one in Ireland dreamed of a Brother, or near Relation of his, (who
lived at Amesbery in Wiltshire) that he saw him riding on the Downs, and that
two Thieves Robbed him and Murdered him: The Dream awaked him, he fell asleep
again and had the like Dream. He Writ to his Relation an account of it, and
described the Thieves Complexion, Stature and Cloths; and advised him to take
care of himself. Not long after he had received this Monitory Letter, he Rode
toward Salisbury, and was Robbed and Murdered: And the Murderers were
discovered by this Letter, and were Executed: They hang in Chains on the Road
to London.

'Twas revealed to a King of Scots, that if he drank of the Water of Muswell,
he should be Cured -- After great enquiry, they heard of such a place, not far
from Hornsey in Middlesex. See Weaver's Funeral Monuments of the Well: And Io.
Norden's Description of Middlesex. Here was afterward founded a
Religious-House for Austin Monks: Since it belonged to Sir Tho. Row: and in
1677, was pulled down, and the Materials sold. Anciently the King's of Scotland
were Feudatory to the King's of England, and did their Homage every Christmas
Day. They had several Lodges belonging to them for their Reception in their
Journey; as at Huntingdon etc. See Caxton's Chronicle concerning this.

The Water of this Spring is drank for some Distempers still.

Somnium ex Euburnea porta. Mrs. Cl. of S. in the County of S. had a beloved
Daughter, who had been a long time Ill, and received no benefit from her
Physicians. She dreamed that a Friend of hers deceased, told her, that if she
gave her Daughter a Drench of Yewgh pounded, that she would recover, she gave
her the Drench and it Killed her. Whereupon she grew almost distracted: Her
Chamber Maid to Complement her, and mitigate her Grief, said surely that could
not Kill her; she would adventure to take the same her self; she did so, and
died also. This was about the Year 1670, or 1671. I knew the Family.

A Gentlewoman of my acquaintance dreamed, that if she slept again, the House
would be in danger to be Robbed: She kept awake, and anon Thieves came to break
open the House; but were prevented.

Mr. Winstanly (Surveyor of the King's Works) has built a handsome House at
Littlebury in Cambridgshire near Audely-Inn where are to be seen several
Ingenious Machines; one whereof is thus: A Wooden Slipper finely Carved lies
on the Floor of a Chamber about a Yard and an half within the Door, which the
Stranger is to take up (it comes up pretty stiff) and up starts a Skeleton. I.
H. Esquire had been there: And being at West-Lavington with the Earl of Abbington,
dreamed December the 9th, that he was at Mr. Winstanly's House, and took up the
Slipper, and up rose his Mother in Mourning: And anon the Queen appeared in
Mourning. He told his Dream the next Morning to my Lord, and his Lordship
imparted it to me (then there). Tuesday Dec. 11. in the Evening, came a
Messenger Post from London to acquaint Mr. H. that his Mother was dangerously
Ill: He went to London the next Day: his Mother lived but about 8 Days longer.
On Saturday Dec. 15. the Queen was taken Ill, which turned to the Smallpox, of
which she died December. 28 about two a Clock in the Morning.

There are Millions of such Dreams too little taken notice of; but they have
the truest Dreams, whose IXth House is well dignified; which mine is not: But
most have some Monitory Dreams. The Germans are great Observers of them. It is
said, in the Life of Vavasor Powell, that he was a great Observer of Dreams, (
P. 17 and 114 of his Life) that he had many Warnings from them; that God had
spoken to himself and others by them; for Warning, Instruction, or Reproof: And
it is also there averred, that Angels had appeared to him. See P. 8. of his
Life.

In Mr. Walton's Life of Sir Hen. Wotton, there is a Remarkable story of the
discovery of stolen Plate in Oxford by a Dream which his Father had at Borton
Mulharb in Kent. See in Ath. et Fasti Oxon. Vol. 1. P. 351.

CHAP. VI.
Apparitions.
CYnthia [Propertius's Mistress] did appear to him after her death with the
Beril-Ring on her Finger. See Propertius Eleg. --

St. Augustine [in -- ] affirms, that he did once see a Satyr or Demon.

The Antiquities of Oxford tell us, that St. Edmund Archbishop of Canterbury
did sometimes converse with an Angel, [or Nymph] at a Spring without St.
Clements Parish near Oxford: as Numa Pompilius did with the Nymph Egeria. This
Well was stopped up since Oxford was a Garrison.

Charles the Simple, King of France, as he was hunting in a Forest, and lost
his Company, was frighted to simplicity by an Apparition.

Philip Melancthon, writes, that the Apparition of a Venerable Person came to
him in his Study, and bade him to warn his Friend Grynaeus to depart from him
as soon as he could, or else the Inquisitors would seize on him: which monitory
Dream saved Grynaeus life.

Mr. Fiennes Morison in his Travels, says, that when he was at Prague, the
Apparitiof his Father came to him; and at that very time his Father died.

See the Life of John Donn D. D. Dean of St. Paul's writ by Mr. Isaac Walton,
where it is affirmed, that the Dean did see the Apparition of his Wife.

Henry IV King of France, not long before he was stabbed by Ravellac, as he was
hunting in the Forest (I think of Fontain Bleau) met in a Thicket the Gros
Veneur, who said to him, Demandez vous? [or Entendez vous?] he could not tell
whether of the two.

There is a Tradition (which I have heard from Persons of Honor) that as the
Protector Seymor and his Duchess were walking in the Gallery at Sheen [in
Surrey] both of them did see a Hand with a bloody Sword come out of the Wall.
He was afterward beheaded.

Mr. Caisho Buroughs was one of the most beautiful Men in England, and very
Valiant, but very proud and blood-thirsty: There was then in London a very
Beautiful Italian Lady, who fell so extremely in Love with him, that she did
let him enjoy her, which she had never let any Man do before: Wherefore, said
she, I shall request this favor of you, never to tell any one of it. The
Gentlewoman died: and afterward in a Tavern in London he spoke of it: and
there going to make water, the Ghost of the Gentlewoman did appear to him. He
was afterward troubled with the Apparition of her, even sometimes in company
when he was drinking; but he only percieved it: Before she did appear he did
find a kind of Chilness upon his Spirits; she did appear to him in the Morning
before he was killed in a Duel. This account I have from an intimate Friend of
mine, who was an acquaintance of his.

Anno 1647, the Lord Mohun's Son and Heir (a gallant Gentleman, Valiant, and a
great Master of Fencing and Horsemanship) had a Quarrel with Prince Griffin;
there was a Challenge, and they were to Fight on Horseback in Chelsey-fields
in the Morning: Mr. Mohun went accordingly to meet him; but about Ebery-Farm he
was met by some who quarreled with him and Pistol'd him; it was believed, by
the Order of Prince Griffin; for he was sure, that Mr. Mohun being so much the
better Horseman etc. would have Killed him, had they Fought. In Iames-street in
Covent Garden did then Lodge a Gentlewoman a Handsome Woman but Common, who was
Mr. Mohun's Sweetheart. Mr. Mohun was Murdered about Ten a clock in the
Morning; and at that very time, his Mistress being in Bed, saw Mr. Mohun come
to her Bedside, drew the Curtain, looked upon her and went away: She called
after him but no answer: She knocked for her Maid, asked her for Mr. Mohun; she
said, she did not see him, and had the Key of her Chamber door in her Pocket.
This Account my Friend aforesaid, had from the Gentlewomans own Mouth, and her
Maids.

A parallel Story to this, is, that Mr. Brown, (Brother-in-law to the Lord
Conningsby) discovered his being Murdered to several. His Phantome appeared to
his Sister and her Maid in Fleet Street about the time he was Killed in
Herefordshire, which was about a Year since, 1693.

Sir Walter Long of Draycot (Grandfather of Sir James Long) had two Wives; the
first a Daughter of Sir -- Packinton in Worcestershire; by whom he had a Son:
His second Wife was a Daugter of Sir John Thin of Longleat; by whom he had
several Sons and Daughters. The second Wife did use much Artifice to render the
Son by the first Wife (who had not much Promethean Fire) Odious to his Father;
she would get her Acquaintance to make him Drunk; and then expose him in that
Condition to his Father; in fine she never left off her attempts, till she had
got Sir Walter to disinherit him. She laid the Scene for the doing this, at
Bath at the Assizes, where was her Brother Sir Egrimond Thin an Eminent
Sergeant at Law, who drew the Writing; and his Clerk was to sit up all Night to
Engross it; as he was Writing, he perceived a shadow on the Parchment, from the
Candle; he looked up, and there appeared a Hand, which immediately vanished; he
was startled at it, but thought it might be only his Fancy, being sleepy; so he
Writ on; by and by a fine White-hand interposed between the Writing and the
Candle (he could discern it was a Woman's Hand) but vanished as before; I have
forgot it appeared a Third time. But with that, the Clerk threw down his Pen,
and would Engross no more, but goes and tells his Master of it, and absolutely
refused to do it. But it was done by some body, and Sir Walter Long was
prevailed with to Seal and Sign it. He lived not long after; and his Body did
not go quiet to the Grave, it being Arrested at the Church Porch by the
Trustees of the first Lady. The Heir's Relations took his part, and Commenced a
Suit against Sir Walter (the second Son) and compelled him to accept of a
Moiety of the Estate; so the Eldest Son kept South-Wranchester, and Sir Walter
the second Son Dracot Cernes, etc. This was about the middle of the Reign of
King James the First.

I must not forget an Apparition in my Country, which appeared several times to
Doctor Turbervile's Sister, at Salisbury; which is much talked of. One Married
a second Wife, and contrary to the Agreement and Settlement at the first Wife's
Marriage, did wrong the Children by the first Venture. The Settlement was hid
behind a Wainscot in the Chamber where the Doctor's Sister did lie: And the
Apparition of the first Wife did discover it to her. By which means Right was
done to the first Wife's Children. The Apparition told her that she Wandered in
the Air, and was now going to God. Dr. Turbervile (Oculist) did affirm this to
be true. See Mr. Glanvill's Sadducismus Triumphatus.

One Mr. Towes who had been School-fellow with Sir George Villers, the Father
of the first Duke of Buckingham, (and was his Friend and Neighbor) as he lay
in his Bed awake, (and it was Daylight,) came into his Chamber the Phantome of
his dear Friend Sir George Villers: Said Mr. Towes to him, Why, you are Dead,
what make you here? Said the Knight, I am Dead, but cannot rest in peace for
the Wickedness and Abomination of my Son George at Court. I do appear to you,
to tell him of it, and to advise and dehort him from his Evil ways. Said Mr.
Tows, the Duke will not believe me, but will say, that I am Mad, or Dote. Said
Sir George, Go to him from me, and tell him by such a Token [some Mole] that he
had in some secret place, which none but himself knew of. Accordingly Mr. Towes
went to the Duke, who Laughed at his Message. At his return home, the Phantome
appeared again; and told him, that the Duke would be Stabbed (he drew out a
Dagger) a quarter of a Year after: And you shall outlive him half a Year; and
the Warning that you shall have of your Death will be, That your Nose will fall
a bleeding: All which accordingly fell out so. This Account I have had (in the
main) from two, or three; but Sir William Dugdale affirms what I have here
taken from him to be true, and that the Apparition told him of several things
to come, which proved true, e. g. of a Prisoner in the Tower, that should be
honorably delivered. This Mr. Towes had so often the Ghost of his old Friend
appear to him, that it was not at all terrible to him. He was Surveyor of the
Works at Windsor (by the favor of the Duke:) Being then sitting in the Hall,
he cried out, The Duke of Buckingham is stabbed: He was stabbed that very
moment.

This Relation Sir William Dugdale had from Mr. Pine, (Neighbor to Mr. Towes
without Bishop-gate) they were both great lovers of Music, and sworn Brothers.
Mr. William Lilly Astrologer, did Print this Story false, which made Sir Edmund
Wyndam (who Married Mr. Pines Daughter) give to Sir George Hollis this true
Account contrary to Mr. Lilly.

Mr. Thomas Elyot, Groom of the Bedchamber, Married Sir Edmund Wyndham's
Daughter, and had the Roll (of near a Quire of Paper) of the Conferences of the
Apparition and Mr. Towes. Mr. Elyot was wont to say, that Mr. Towes was (not a
Bigot, or did trouble himself much about a Religion, but was) a Man of great
Morals.

Sir William Dugdale did farther inform me that Major General Middleton (since
Lord) went into the Highlands of Scotland, to endeavor to make a Party for
King Charles the First. An Old Gentleman (that was second-sighted) came and
told him that his endeavor was good; but he would be unsuccessful, and
moreover, That they would put the King to Death: and that several other
Attempts would be made, but all in vain: But that his Son would come in, but
not Reign; but at last would be Restored. This Lord Middleton had a great
Friendship with the Lord Bocconi, and they had made an Agreement, That the
first of them that Died, should appear to he other in extremity. The Lord
Middleton was taken Prisoner at Worcester Fight, and was Prisoner in the Tower
of London under Three Locks. Lying in his Bed pensive, Bocconi appeared to him;
my Lord Middleton asked him if he were dead or alive? he said, Dead, and that
he was a Ghost; and told him, that within Three Days he should escape, and he
did so, in his Wives Clothes. When he had done his Message, he gave a Frisk,
and said, Givenni givanni it is very strange,
In the World to see so sudden a Change.
And then gathered up and vanished. This Account Sir William Dugdale had from
the Bishop of Edenborough. And this, and the former Account he has Writ in a
Book of Miscellanies, which I have seen, [and is now reposited (with other
Books of his) in the Musaeum at Oxford.]

Anno. 1670, not far from Cyrencester, was an Apparition: Being demanded,
whether a good Spirit, or a bad? returned no answer, but disappeared with a
curious Perfume and most melodious Twang. Mr. W. Lilly believes it was a Farie.

So Propertius --
Omnia finieret; tenues secessit in auras:
Mansit odor; posses scire fuisse Deam.
The Learned Hen. Jacob, Fellow of Merton College in Oxford, died at Dr.
Jacob's M. D. House in Canterbury. About a Week after his Death, the Doctor
being in Bed and awake, and the Moon shining bright, saw his Cousin Henry
standing by his Bed, in his Shirt, with a white Cap on his Head, and his Beard
Mustaches turning up, as when he was alive. The Doctor pinched himself and was
sure he was awaked: He turned to the other side, from him; and after some time
took courage to turn the other way again toward him; and Henry Jacob stood
there still, he should have spoken to him, but he did not; for which he has
been ever since sorry. About half an Hour after, he vanished. Not long after
this, the Cook Maid, going to the Woodpile to fetch Wood to dress Supper, saw
him standing in his shirt upon the Woodpile. See the whole Story in Ath. and
Fas^^i Oxon. Part. ^. p. 91. This very Story Dr. Jacob told me himself being
then at my Ld. Teynhams in Kent, where he was then Physician to my Eldest Son;
whom he recovered from a Fever.
This Account I had in a Letter from Dr. Jacob 1673, relating to his Life, for
Mr. Anthony Word; which is now in his Hands.

When Henry Jacob died, he would fain have spoken to the Doctor but could not,
his Tongue faltered. It Is imagined, he would have told Doctor Jacob, with what
Person he had deposited his Manuscripts of his own Writing: (they were all the
Riches he had) it is suspect'd that one had them and Printed them under his own
Name. -- See there in the said Athenae Vol. or Part 2. P. 90.

Mr. T. M. an old Acquaintance of mine has assured me, that about a quarter of
a Year after his first Wives death, as he lay in Bed awake with his little
Grandchild, his Wife opened the Closet-door, and came into the Chamber to the
Bedside, and looked upon him, and stooped down and Kissed him; her Lips were
warm, he fancied they would have been cold. He was about to have embraced her,
but was afraid it might have done him hurt. When she went from him, he asked
her when he should see her again? she turned about and smiled, but said
nothing. The Closet-door striked, as it uses to do, both at her coming in and
going out. He had every Night a great Coal-fire in his Chamber, which gave a
light as clear almost as a Candle. (He was Hypocondrical.) He Married two Wives
since; the later end of his Life was uneasy.

Anno. 165... At -- in the Moorlands in Staffordshire, lived a poor Old Man,
who had been a long time Lame. One Sunday in the Afternoon he being alone, one
knocked at his Door: He bade him open it, and come in. The Stranger desired a
Cup of Beer: The Lame Man desired him to take a Dish and draw some, for he was
not able to do it himself. The Stranger asked the poor Old Man, how long he had
been Ill? The poor Man told him. Said the Stranger I can Cure you. Take two or
Three Balm-leaves steeped in your Beer for a Fortnight, or three Weeks, and you
will be restored to your Health: But Constantly and Zealously serve God. The
poor Man did so, and became perfectly well. This Stranger was in a Purple
shag-gown, such as was not seen or known in those parts: And no body in the
street (after Even-song) did see any one in such a colored Habit. Dr. Gilbert
Sheldon, (since Archbishop of Canterbury) was then in the Moorlands, and
justified the truth of this, to Elias Ashmole Esquire from whom I had this Account:
And he has inserted it in some of his Memoirs, which are in the Musaeum at
Oxford.

Mr. Io Lydill of Trin. College Soc. Oxon. March 11 1649, 50. Attests the
ensuing Relation, in a Letter to Mr. Aubrey, thus,
Mr. Aubrey,
COncerning that which happened at Wood-stock, I was told by Mr. W. Haws (who
now lives with Sir William Fleetwood in the Park) That the Committee which sat
in the Mannor-house, for Selling the King's Lands, were frighted by strange
Apparitions; and that the Four Surveyors which were sent to Measure the Park,
and Lodged themselves with some other Companions in the Manor, were pelted out
of their Chambers by Stones thrown in at the Windows (but from what Hands the
Stones came they could not see) that their Candles were continually put out as
fast as they lighted them; and that one with his Sword drawn to defend a
Candle, was with his own Scabbard in the mean time well Cudgelled; so that for
the blow, or for fear, he fell Sick, and the others forced to remove; some of
them to Sir William Fleetwood's House, and the rest to some other places. But
concerning the cutting of the Oak, in particular I have nothing.

Your Friend, to be commanded to my power, John Lydall.


One Lambert a Gun-Smith at Hereford, was at Carmarthen, to mend and put in
order the Ammunition of that County before the first Expedition to Scotland,
which was 1639. He was then a Young Man, and walking on the Sand by the
Seaside, a Man comes to him (he did verily believe it was a Man) and asked
him, if he knew Hereford? Yes, quoth he, I am a Hereford Man. Do you know it
well, quoth the other? Perfectly well, quoth Lambert. That City shall be begirt
[he told me he did not know what the word begirt meant then] by a Foreign
Nation, that will come and pitch their Camp in the Hay-wood, and they shall
batter such a Gate, which they did, (I have forgot the name of it) and shall go
away, and not take it. The Scots came in 1645, and Encamped before Hereford in
the Hay-wood, and Stormed the -- Gate, and raised the Siege. Lambert did well
remember this Discourse, but did not heed it till they came to the Hay-wood:
Many of the City had heard of this story, but when the -- Gate was Stormed,
Lambert went to all the Guards of the Town, and encouraged them with more than
ordinary Confidence: And, contrary to all humane expectation, when the Besieged
had no hope o^ Relief, the Scots raised the Siege, Sept. 2. 1645, and went back
into Scotland, re infecta. I knew this Lambert, and took this Account from his
own Mouth; he is a modest poor Man, of a very Innocent Life, lives Poor, and
cares not to be Rich.

-- A Minister, who lived by Sir John War in Somersetshire about 1665,
walking over the Park to give Sir John a Visit, was rencountred by a Venerable
Old Man, who said to him, Prepare your self for such a Day (which was about
three Days after) You shall die. The Minister told Sir John War and my Lady
this Story, who heeded it not: On the Morning fore-warned Sir John calls upon
the Parson early to Ride a Hunting, and to Laugh at his prediction: His Maid
went up to call him and found him stark Dead. This from my Lady Katharine
Henley, who had it from my Lady War. But Dr. Burnet in the Life of the Earl
of Rochester, makes it a Dream.

This put me in mind of a Story in the Legend, etc. of King Edward the
Confessor being forewarned of his Death by a Pilgrim, to whom St. John the
Evangelist revealed it: for which the King gave the Pilgrim a rich Ring from
off his Finger: And the event answered. The Story is well Painted in Glass, in
a Window of the South Isle of Westmimster-Abbey (the next Window from that over
the Door that opens into the West walk of the Cloister) it is the best Window
in the Church: Underneath the Two Figures, viz. of the King and the Pilgrim are
these following Verses, Viz.

Rex cui nil aliud praesto fuit, accipe, dixit,
Annulum, and ex digito detrahit ille suo.
-- Evangelistae -- villa Iohannis.
-- gratia petit.
The Verses under the Pilgrim are not legible. This story is in Caxtons
Chronicle.

Dr. -- Twiss Minister of the New Church at Westminster told me that his Father
[Dr. Twiss Prolocutor of the Assembly of Divines, and Author of Vindiciae] when
he was a Schoolboy at Winchester, saw the Phantome of a Schoolfellow of his
deceased [a Rakebell] who said to him, I am damned. This was the occasion of
Dr. Twiss [the Fathers] Conversion, who had been before that time (as he told
his Son) a very wicked Boy, [He was Hypochondriacal]. There is a story like
this, of the Conversion of St. Bruno, by an Apparition: Upon which he became
mighty devout, and founded the Order of the Carthusians.

John Evelyn Esquire R. S. S. showed us at the Royal-Society, a Note under Mr.
Smyth's Hand [the Curate of Deptford] that in November 1679, as he was in bed
sick of an Ague, came to him the Vision of a Master of Arts, with a white Wand
in his Hand: And told him, that, if he did lie on his back three Hours, viz.
from ten to one, that he should be rid of his Ague. He lay a good while on his
back; but at last being weary he turned, and immediately the Ague attacqued him
afterward, he strictly followed the Direction, and was perfectly cured. He was
awake, and it was in the daytime.

This puts me in mind of a Dream of old Farmer Good, a Neighbor of mine at
Broad-Chalk, who being ill, dreamt that he met with an old Friend of his (long
since deceased) by Knighton-Ashes (in that Parish) who told him that if he rose
out of his Bed, that he would die. He awaked and rose to make Water, and was
immediateiy seized with a shivering Fit, and died of an Ague, aged, 84.

The Lady Viscountess Maidston told me, she saw (as it were) a Fly of Fire, fly
round about her in the dark, half an hour before her Lord died: He was killed
at Sea: and the like before her Mother in Law [the Countess of Winchelsea died,
[She was then with Child.]

A Dutch-Prisoner at Wood-bridge in Suffolk, in the Reign of Charles II. could
discern Spirits; but others that stood by could not. The Bell tolled for a Man
newly deceased. The Prisoner saw his Phantome, and did descibe him to the
Parson of the Parish, who was with him; Dr. Hook the Parson of the Parish, has
often told this Story; of which I know many more Particulars.
exactly agreeing with the Man for whom the Bell tolled. Says the Prisoner, now
he is coming near to you, and now he is between you and the Wall, the Parson
was resolved to try it, and went to take the Wall of him, and was thrown down;
but could see nothing. This story is credibly told by several Persons of Belief.

Vavasor Powell saw several Apparitions. See page 8. of his Life.

There is a very remarkable story of an Apparition, which Martin Luther did
see. Mentioned in his Commensalia, or Table-talk, which see.

Those that are delirous in high Fevers, see [waking] Men and things that are
not there. I knew one Mr. M. L. that took Opium, and he did see (being awake)
Men and things that were not present (or perhaps) not in being. Those whose
Spleens are ill-affected have the like Fantasies. The Power of Imagination is
Wonderful.

De seipso duplicato.

Cardanus. Synes. Somniorum. Lib. 11. Cap. 12. In somniis mortis est signum,
quia duo fiunt, cum anima separatur a corpore. Est et signum morbi in ipsis
aegrontantibus, nec tum aliud quicquam significat.

As concerning Apparitions of a Man's own self, there are sundry Instances,
some whereof I shall here set down.

The Countess of Thanet (Earl John's Lady) saw as she was in Bed with her Lord
in London, her Daughter my Lady Hatton, who was then in Northamptonshire at
Horton Kirby, the Candle was burning in her Chamber. See Mr. Baxters Last Book.
Since viz. Anno. 167... this Lady Hatton was Blown up with Gunpowder set on
Fire by Lightning, in the Castle at Garnsey, where her Lord was Governor.

The Beautiful Lady Diana Rich, Daughter of the Earl of Holland, as she was
walking in her Father's Garden at Kensington, to take the fresh Air before
Dinner, about Eleven a Clock, being then very well, met with her own
Apparition, Habit and every thing, as in a Looking glass. About a Month after
she died of the Smallpox. And it is said, that her Sister the Lady Isabella
(Thin) saw the like of her self also before she died. This Account I had from
a Person of Honor.

Mrs. E. W. Daughter of Sir W. W. affirms that Mrs. I. (her Father's Sister)
saw her self (i. e.) her Phantome half a Year before she died, for a quater of
an Hour together. She said further that her Aunt was sickly Fourteen Years
before she died, and that she walked Living, (i. e.) her Apparition, and that
she was seen by several at the same time. The like is reported of others.

Mr. Trehern B. D. (Chaplain to Sir Orlando Bridgman Lord Keeper) a Learned and
sober Person, was the Son of a Shoemaker in Hereford: Gne Night as he lay in
Bed, the Moon shining very bright, he saw the Phantome of one of the
Apprentices sitting in a Chair in his red Wastcoat, and Headband about his
Head, and Strap upon his Knee; which Apprentice was really abed and asleep with
another Fellow-apprentice in the same Chamber, and saw him. The Fellow was
Living 1671. Another time, as he was in Bed he saw a Basket come Sailing in the
Air along by the Valence of his Bed; I think he said there was Fruit in the
Basket: It was a Phantome. From himself.

When Sir Richard Nepier M. D. of London, was upon the Road, coming from
Bedfordshire, the Chamberlain of the Inn, showed him his Chamber; the Doctor
saw a dead Man lying upon the Bed: He looked more wistly, and saw it was
himself: He was then well enough in Health. He goes forward in his Journey --
to Mr. Steward's in Berkshire, and there died. This Account I have in a Letter
from Elias Ashmole Esquire. They were intimate Friends.

In the Deserts of Africa, Pliny's Natural Hist. Lib. VII. Chap. II.
you shall meet oftentimes with Fairies appearing in the shape of Men and
Women: But they vanish quite away like fantastical Delusions.

I Captain Henry Bell do hereby declare both to the present Age and also to
Posterity, that being employed beyond the Seas in State Affairs diverse Years
together, both by King James, and also by the late King Charles in Germany. I
did hear and understand in all places great Bewailing and Lamentation made, by
reason of destroying and burning of above Fourscore Thousand of Martin Luther's
Books: Entitled, His last Divine Discourses.

Upon which Divine Work or Discourses the Reformation, begun before in Germany,
was wonderfully promoted and spread in other Countries.

But afterward it so fell out, that the Pope then living, viz. Gregory XIII.
understanding what great hurt and prejudice he, and his Religion had already
received by reason of the said Luther's Discourses, and also fearing that the
same might bring further contempt and mischief upon himself and his Church, he
therefore to prevent the same, did fiercely stir up and instigate the Emperor
then in being, viz. Rodolphus III. to make an Edict through the whole Empire,
that all the foresaid Printed Books should be burned, and also that it should
be Death for any Person to have or keep a Copy thereof, but to burn the same:
Which Edict was speedily put in Execution accordingly; insomuch that not one of
all the said Printed Books, nor any one Copy of the same, could be found out,
or heard of in any place.

Yet it pleased God, that in Anno 1626, a German Gentleman named Casparus Van
Sparr, with whom in my stay in Germany about King James's business I became
familiarly known and acquainted, having occasion to build upon an old
Foundation of a House, wherein his Grandfather dwelt at that time, when the
said Edict was Published in Germany, for the Burning of the said Books, and
digging deep into the ground under the said old Foundation, one of the said
Original Printed Books was there happily found, lying in a deep obscure hole,
being wrapped in a strong Linen Cloth, which was waxed all over with Beeswax
within and without: whereby the said Book was perserved fair without any
blemish.

And at the same time Ferdinandus II. being Emperor of Germany, who was a
severe Enemy and Persecutor of the Protestant Religion, the foresaid Gentleman,
and Grandchild to him that had hidden the said Book in that obscure hole,
fearing that if the said Emperor should get knowledge that one of the said
Books were yet forthcoming, and in his custody, whereby not only himself might
be brought into trouble, but also the Book be in danger to be destroyed, as all
the rest were long before; and also calling to mind that I had the high Dutch
Tongue very perfect, did send the said Original Book over hither into England
unto me: Related to me the passages of the preserving and finding the said
Book; and earnestly moved me in his Letter, to Translate the said Book into
English.

Whereupon I took the said Book before me, and many times began to Translate
the same, but always I was hindered therein, being called upon about other
Business; in so much that by no possible means I could remain by that work.
Then about six Weeks after I had received the said Book, it fell out, that
being in Bed with my Wife, one Night between Twelve and one of the Clock, she
being asleep, but my self yet awake, there appeared unto me an Ancient Man,
standing at my Bedside arrayed all in White, having a long and broad white
Beard, hanging down to his Girdle steed, who taking me by the right Ear, spoke
these words following unto me; Sirrah, Will not you take time to Translate that
Book which is sent unto you out of Germany? I will provide for you both place
and time to do it: And then he Vanished away out of my sight.

Whereupon being much affrighted, I fell into an extreme Sweat, insomuch that
my Wife awaking, and finding me all over wet, she asked me what I ailed? I told
her what I had seen and heard; but I never did heed or regard Visions nor
Dreams. And so the same fell soon out of my mind.

Then about a Fortnight after I had seen the Vision, on a Sunday I went to
Whitehall to hear the Sermon, after which ended, I returned to my Lodging which
was then in Kingstreet at Westminster, and sitting down to Dinner with my Wife,
two Messengers were sent from the Council Board with a Warrant to carry me to
the Keeper of the Gate House at Westminster, there to be safely kept, until
further Order from the Lords of the Council; which was done without showing any
Cause Whatsoever was pretended, yet the true cause of the Captains Commitment
was, because he was urgent with the Ld. Treasurer for his Arrears: which
amounting to a great Sum, he was not willing to pay, and to be freed from his
clamours clapped him (...) into Prison.
at all, wherefore I was Committed; upon which said Warrant I was kept there
Ten whole Years close Prisoner; where I spent Five Years thereof about
Translating of the said Book: Insomuch as I found the words very true which the
Old Man in the aforesaid Vision said unto me, I will shortly provide you both
place and time to Translate it.

Then after I had finished the Translation, Dr. Laud Archbishop of Canterbury,
sent to me in the Prison by Dr. Bray his Chaplain Ten Pounds, and desired to
peruse the Book; he afterward sent him by Dr. Bray Forty Pounds. There was a
Committee of the House of Commons for the Printing of this Translation, which
was in 1652.

CHAP. VII.
Voices.
Cicero de Divinatione. Lib. I. -- SAepe etiam and in praeliis Fauni auditi,
and in rebus turbidis veridicae vuces ex occulto ^issae esse dicuntur. Cujus
generis duo sunt ex multis exempla, sed maxima. Nam non multo ante Vrbem captam
exaudita vox est a Luco Vestae, qui a Palatii radice in novam viam devexus est,
ut muri and portae reficerentur: futurum esse, nisi provisum esset, ut Roma
caperetur. Quod neglectum cum caveri poterat, post acceptam illam maximam
cladem explicatum est. Ara enim Aio loquenti, quam septam videmus, and adversus
eum locum consecrata est,

-- Neque solum deorum voces Pythagorei observaverunt, sed etiam hominum, quae
vocant omnia --


Taciti Annals. Lib. XIV. Nero -- and lo'n dit qu'on entendoit un son de
trumpette dans les collines d'alentour, des gemissemens sur le tombeau de sa
mere.
In the Life of King Henry IV of France, writ by the Archbishop of Paris, it
is recorded, That Charles IX (who caused the Massacre) was wont to hear
Screaches, like those of the Persons Massacred.

St. Augustine heard a Voice, saying, Toll, lege. He took up his Bible, and
dipped on Romans 13. 13. Not in rioting and drukenness, not in chambering and
wantonness, etc. and reformed his Manners upon it.

One Mr. Smith a Practitioner of Physic at Tamworth in Warwickshire, an
understanding sober Person, reading -- Hollinshead's Chronicle, found a
relation of a great Fight between Vortigern and Hengest, about those parts, at
a place called Colemore: A little time after, as he lay awake in his Bed, he
heard a Voice, that said unto him, You shall shortly see some of the Bones of
those Men and Horses slain, that you read of: He was surprised at the Voice,
and ask't in the Name of God, who 'twas that spoke to him. The Voice made
answer, that he should not trouble himself about that; but what he told him
should come to pass. Shortly after, as he went to see Colonel Archer (whose
Servants were digging for Marle) he saw a great many Bones of Men and Horses;
and also Pot-sherds; and upon the view it appeared to be according to the
description in Hollinshead's Chronicle; and it was the place where the Fight
was; but it is now called Blackmore.

This was about the Year 1685. and I had the Account from my worthy Friend and
old Acquaintance Tho. Mariett of Warwickshire Esquire who is very well acquainted
with Mr. Smith aforesaid.

It was since the Restoration of King Charles II. that Martin Luther's
Table-Talk was Translated into English, by -- but about half a Year before as
he lay in his Bed awake, he heard a voice, which did bid him Translate that
Book: but by reason of some business he neglected it. The Voice demanded, why
he had not done it; he replied he had not leisure: Said the Voice, You shall
have leisure enough shortly: And shortly after, he was Arrested and put in the
Gate House at Westminster; where he remained many Months: and there was the
Translation finished. See the Preface before the Book.

Extracts out of the Book, Entitled, Relation de la Noueille France, 1662, and
1663. 21.
Les Sauvages avoient eu de presentiments aussi bien que les Francois, de cet
horrible Tremble-terre. Voicy la de position d'une sauvage age 26. fort
innocente, simple, and sincere. La nuict du 4 ou 5 de Febr. 1663 estant
entirement eveillee, and en plein jugement, assise comme sur mon seant, j'ay
entender une voix distinct and intelligible, qui m'a dit, Il doit arrive
aujourdhuy de chooses estrangees, la Terre doit tremble. Ie me trouver ay pour
lors saisie d'une grand frageur, parce que je ne voyois person d'ou peut
provinir cette voix: Remplie de crainte, ja taschay a m'endormir auec assez de
peine: Et le jour estant venu, je dis a mon mary cequi in'estoit arrive. Sur le
9, ou le 10 heure de mesme jour, allant au bois pour buscher, a peine j'estois
entree en la Forest que la mesme voix se fit -- entendre, me disent mesme
chose, and de la mesme facon que la nuict precedente: La peur fuit bien plus
grande, moy estant tout seal. She got her burden of Wood, and met her Sister
who comforted her, to whom she told this Story, and when she came to her
Fathers Caban, she told the same Story there; but they heard it without any
reflections. -- La chose en demeure la, jusquez a 5, ou 6 heures du soir du
mesme jour, ou un tremblement de Terre survenant, ils reconnurent par
experience, que cequ'ils m'auoient intendu dire avaunt Midy, n'estoit que trop
uray.

Envoyee au R. P. Andre Castill on Provincial de la Province de France par les
Missioners de Peers de la Campagnie de Jesus. Imprimie a Paris, 1664.

Livy makes mention, that before the coming of the Gauls to Rome, Marcus
Ceditius a Plebeian acquainted the Senate, that passing one Night about Twelve
a Clock through the Via Nova, he heard a Voice (bigger than a Man's) which
advised him to let the Senate know the Gauls were on their March to Rome. How
those things could be, it is to be discoursed by Persons well versed in the
Causes of Natural and Supernatural Events: For my part I will not pretend to
understand them, unles (according to the Opinion of Some Philosophers) we may
believe, that the Air being full of Intelligences and Spirits, who foreseeeing
future Events, and commiserating the Condition of Mankind, gives them warning
by these kind of Intimations, that they may the more timely provide and defend
themselves against their Calamities. But what ever is the Cause, Experience
assures us, that after such Denuntiations, some extraordinary thing or other
does constantly happen.

CHAP. VIII.
Impulses.
Cicero de Natura Deorum. Lib. II. PRaeterea ipsorum Deorum saepe praesentiae,
quales supra commemoravi, -- declarant, ut ab his, and Civitatibus, and
singulis hominibus consuli. Quod quidem intelligitur etiam significationibus
rerum futurarum, qua tum dormientibus, tum vigilantibus portentantur. -- Nemo
vir magnus sine aliquo afflatu divino unquam fuit.
Oliver Cromwell had certainly this Afflatus. One that I knew, that was at the
Battle of Dunbar, told me that Oliver was carried on with a Divine Impulse; he
did Laugh so excessively as if he had been drunk; his Eyes sparkled with
Spirits. He obtained a great Victory; but the Action was said to be contrary to
Human Prudence. The same fit of Laughter seized Oliver Cromwell, just before the
Battle of Naseby; as a Kinsman of mine, and a great Favorite of his, Colonel
I. P. then present, testified. Cardinal Mazerine said, That he was a lucky Fool.

In one of the geat Fields at Warminster in Wiltshire, in the Harvest, at the
very time of the Fight at Bosworth Field, between King Richard III, and Henry
VII, there was one of the Parish took two Sheaves, crying (with some intervals)
Now for Richard, Now for Henry: at last, lets fall the Sheaf that did represent
Richard; and cried, Now for King Henry, Richard is slain: This Action did agree
with the very Time, Day and Hour. When I was a Schoolboy, I have heard this
confidently delivered by Tradition, by some Old Men of our Country.

Monsieur de Scudery in his Poem, Entitled Rome Vaincus, fancies an Angel to
be sent to Alaric to impel him to overrun the Roman Empire with his swarms of
Northern People. The like may be fancied upon all Changes of Government; when
Providence destines the Ends, it orders the Means.

By way of parallel to this, Pope -- by the like instinct, being at Rome in the
Consistory, did speak of the Engagement in the Famous Battle of Lepanto, and
that the Christians were Victors. The Fight at Sea being 200 Miles or more
distant from them.

King Charles the First, after he was Condemned, did tell Colonel Thomlinson,
that he believed, That the English Monarchy was now at an end: About half an
Hour after, he told the Colonel, That now he had an assurance by a strong
Impulse on his Spirit, that his Son should Reign after him. This Information I
had from Fabian Philips Esquire of the Inner Temple, who had good authority for the
truth of it: I have forgot who it was.

The Lord Roscomon, being a Boy of Ten Years of age at Caen in Normandy, one
day was (as it were) madly extravagant in Playing, Leaping, getting over the
Table-boards, etc. He was wont to be sober enough: They said, God grant this
bodes no ill Luck to him: In the heat of this Extravagant Fit, he cries out, My
Father is Dead. A Fortnight after, News came from Ireland, that his Father was
Dead. This Account I had from Mr. Knolls, who was his Governor, and then with
him; since Secretary to the Earl of Strafford, and I have heard his Lordships
Relations confirm the same.

A very good Friend of mine and old Acquaintance, has had frequent Impulses:
When he was a Commoner at Trin. College Oxford, he had several. When he rode
toward the West one time in the Stage-Coach, he told the Company, We shall
certainly be Robbed, and they were so. When a Brother of his a Merchant died,
he left him with other Effects, a share of a Ship, which was returning from
Spain, and of which News was brought to the Exchange at London of her good
Condition; he had such an Impulse upon his Spirit, that he must needs Sell his
share, though to loss; and he did Sell it. The Ship came safe to Cornwall (or
Devon) and somewhere afterward fell upon the Rocks and sunk: Not a Man
Perished; but all the Goods were lost except some Parrets, which were brought
for Queen Katherine.

The good Genius of Socrates is much remembered which gave him Warning. The
Ethnic Genii are Painted like our Angels; strong Impulses are to be referred
to them.

The Learned Dr. John Pell, has told me, that he did verily believe, that some
of his Solutions of difficult Problems were not done Sine Divino auxilio.

Mr. I. N. a very understanding Gentleman, and not Superstitious, Protested to
me, That when he has been over-perswaded by Friends to Act contrary to a
strong Impulse, that he never succeeded.

CHAP. IX.
Knockings.
MR. Baxter's Certainty of the Worlds of Spirits. A Gentleman formerly seeming
Pious, of late Years has fallen into the sin of Drunkenness; and when he has
been Drunk, and slept himself Sober, something Knocks at his Beds-head, as if
one knocked on a Wainscot; when they remove the Bed, it follows him; besides
loud Noises on other parts where he is, that all the House hears.

It poseth me to think what Kind of Spirit this is, that has such a care of
this Man's Soul, (which makes me hope he will recover.) Do good Spirits dwell
so near us? Or, are they sent on such Messages? Or, is it his Guardian Angel?
Or, Is it the Soul of some Dead Friend, that suffers, and yet retaining Love
to him, as Dives did to his Brethren, would have him Saved? God keeps yet
such things from us in the Dark.

Major John Morgan of Wells did aver, That as he lay in Bed with Mr. -- Barlow
(Son of the Dean of Wells) they heard Three distinct Knocks on the Bed: Mr.
Barlow shortly after fell sick, and died.

Three or four Days before my Father died, as I was in my Bed about Nine a
Clock in the Morning perfectly awake, I did hear three distinct Knocks on the
Beds-head, as if it had been with a Ruler or Ferula.

Mr. Hierome Banks as he lay on his Death Bed in Bell-yard, said Three Days
before he died, that Mr. Iennings of the Inner Temple (his great Acquaintance,
Dead a Year or two before) gave Three Knocks, looked in, and said, Come away.
He was as far from believing such things as any Man.

Mr. George Ent of the Middle Temple, told me some Days before he died, that he
had such a deceptio Visus, as he called it.

In Germany when one is to Dye out of ones Family, or some Friends, there will
sometimes likewise happen some Token, that signifies the Death of one, e. g.
some (or one) in the House hears the Noise, as if a Meal-sack fell down from
on high upon the Boards of the Chamber; they presently go up thither, where
they thought it was done, and find nothing; but all things in order.

Also at Berlin, when one shall Die out of the Electoral House of Brandenburgh,
a Woman Dressed in white Linen appears always to several, without speaking, or
doing any harm, for several Weeks before. This from Jasper Belshazer Cranmer, a
Saxon Gentleman.

CHAP. X.
Blows Invisible.
MR. -- Brograve -- of -- near Puckridge in Hertfordshire when he was a young
Man, Riding in a Lane in that Country, had a Blow given him on his Cheek (or
Head): He looked back, and saw that no body was near, behind him; anon, he had
such another Blow; I have forgot if a Third. He turned back and fell to the
Study of the Law; and was afterward a Judge. This Account I had from Sir John
Penrudock of Compton-Chamberlain (our Neighbor) whose Lady was Judge
Brograve's Niece.

Newark (Sir G. L's.) has Knockings before Death. And there is a House near
Covent Garden that has Warnings. The Papists are full of these Observations.

The like Stories are reported of others.

CHAP. XI.
Prophesies.
CIcero de Divinatione Lib. I. -- gentem quidem nullam video, neq tam humanam
atque doctam; neque tam immanem tamque barbaram, quae non significari futura,
and a quibusdam intelligi, praedicique posse censeat.

To pass by the Prophecies of Holy-writ, the Prophecies of Nostraedamus do
foretell very strangely; but not easily understood till they are fulfilled. The
Book is now common.

Peter Martyr in his Decads, tells us, That there was a Prophet among the
Salvages in America, that did foretell the coming in of Strangers in Ships,
which they had not known.

The Prophecies of St. Malachi, are exceeding strange. He describes the Popes
by their Coats of Arms, or their Names, or their Manners: If his Prohecies be
true, there will be but 15 Popes more. It is Printed in a Book in Oct.
Entitled Bucelini Historiae Nucleus. 1654. in calce Libri, thus, Prophetia
Malachiae Monachi Bangorensis, et A. Episcopi Ardinensis, Hiberniae Primatis.
1655. in two Leaves.

Mr. Lancelot Morehouse in the time of the Civil Wars, rescued a sheet of
Parchment in Quarto most delicately Writ, from a Taylor's Sheers. It was part
of a Book, and was a Prophecy concerning England in Latin Hexameters; I saw it
1649. It pointed at our late Troubles: He gave it to Seth Ward, Bishop of
Salisbury, and is lost among other good Papers.

In a Book of Mr. William Lilly's are Hieroglyphick Prophecies, viz. of the
great Plague of London, expressed by Graves and dead Corpse; and a Scheme with
ascending [the Sign of London] and no Planets in the XII Houses. Also there is
the Picture of London all on Fire, also Moles creeping etc. perhaps Mr. Lilly
might be contented to have People believe that this was from himself. But Mr.
Thomas Flatman (Poet) did affirm, that he had seen those Hieroglyphics in an
old Parchment Manuscript Writ in the time of the Monks.

In the Nave of the Cathedral Church at Wells, above the Capitals of two
Pillars, are the Head of the King, and the Head of a Bishop: It was foretold,
that when a King should be like that King, and a Bishop like that Bishop; that
Abbots should be put down, and Nuns should Marry: Above the Arch, is an Abbot
or Monk with his Head hanging downwards; and a Nun with Children about her. The
inside of the Arch is Painted Blew, and adorned with Stars, to signify the
Power and Influence of the Stars. This Prophecy was Writ in Parchment, and hung
in a Table on one of those Pillars, before the Civil-Wars. Dr. Duck (who was
Chancellor of Wells) said, that he had seen a Copy of it among the Records of
the Tower at London. It was Prophesied 300 Years before the Reformation. Bishop
Knight, was Bishop here at the Reformation, and the Picture (they say) did
resemble him.

In the Spanish History it is mentioned, that a Vault being opened in Spain,
they found there Moors Heads, and some Writings that did express, When People
resembling those Heads should come into Spain, they would Conquer that Country:
And it was so. See this Story more at large in James Howell's Letters.

There is a Prophecy of William Tyndal, poor Vicar of Welling in the County of
Hertford, made in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign. I have seen it: It
is in English Verse, two Pages and an half in Folio. It foretold our late
Wars. I know one that read it Forty Years since.

A Prophecy

Sexte verere Deos: vitae tibi terminus instat,
Cum tuus in medio ardebit Carbunculus igne.
These Verses were made by George Buchanon; but (perhaps) the Prediction was
made by some second-sighted Person. King James of Scotland the Sixth was taken
with an Ague, at Trinity College in Cambridge; he removed to Theobalds (where
he died); sitting by the Fire, the Carbuncle fell out of his Ring into the
Fire, according to the Prediction. This Distick is Printed in the Life of King
James by --

Before the Civil-Wars there was much talk of the Lady Anne Davys's Prophecies;
for which she was kept Prisoner in the Tower of London. She was Sister to the
Earl of Castlehaven, and Wife to Sir John Davys, Lord Chief Justice in Ireland;
I have heard his Kinsman (Counselor Davys of Shaftsbury) say, that she being
in London (I think in the Tower,) Fasti Oxon, p. 432.
did tell the very time of her Husbands Death in Ireland.

CHAP. XII.
Miranda.
OUR English Chronicles do Record, That in the Reign of King Henry III. a Child
was Born in Kent, that at Two Years old Cured all Diseases. Several Persons
have been Cured of the King's Evil by the touching, or handling of a Seventh
Son. (It must be a seventh Son, and no Daughter between, and in pure Wedlock.)

Samuel Scot, seventh Son of Mr. William Scot of Hedington in Wiltshire, did
when a Child, wonderful Cures by touching only, viz. as to the King's Evil,
Wenns, etc. but as he grew to be a Man the Virtue did decrease, and had he
Lived longer, perhaps might have been spent. A servant Boy of his Fathers was
also a seventh Son; but he could do no Cures at all. I am very well satisfied
of the truth of this Relation, for I knew him very well, and his Mother was my
Kinswoman.

It Is certain, the Touch of a dead Hand, has wrought Wonderful Effects, e.g.
-- one (a Painter) of Stowel in Somersetshire near Bridgewater, had a Wenn in
the inside of his Cheek, as big as a Pullets Egg, which by the advice of one
was Cured by once or twice Touching or Rubbing with a dead Woman's Hand, (e
contra, to Cure a Woman, a dead Man's Hand) He was directed first to say the
Lord's Prayer, and to beg a Blessing. He was perfectly Cured in a few Weeks. I
was at the Man's House who attested it to me, as also to the Reverend Mr.
Andrew Paschal, who went with me.

Mr. Davys Mell (the famous Violinist, and Clock-maker) had a Child
Crook-back'd, that was Cured after the manner aforesaid, which Dr. Ridgely M.
D. of the College of Physicians, averred in my hearing.

The Curing of the King's Evil by the Touch of the King, does much puzzel our
Philosophers: For whether our Kings were of the House of York, or Lancaster, it
did the Cure (i. e.) for the most part. ('It Is true indeed at the Touching there
are Prayers Read, but perhaps, neither the King attends them nor his Chaplains.)

In Somersetshire, it is confidently reported, that some were Cured of the
King's Evil, by the Touch of the Duke of Monmouth: The Lord Chancellor Bacon
says, That Imagination is next Kin to Miracle-working Faith.

When King Charles I. was Prisoner at Carisbrook Castle, there was a Woman
Touched by him, who had the King's Evil in her Eye, and had not seen in a
Fortnight before, her Eyelids being glued together: As they were at Prayers
(after the Touching) the Woman's Eyes opened. Mr. Seymer Bowman, with many
others were Eyewitnesses of this.

At Stretton in Herefordshire in Anno. 1648. when King Charles I. was Prisoner,
the Tenant of the Mannor-house there, sold excellent Cider to Gentlemen of the
Neighborhood; where they met privately, and could Discourse freely, and be
merry, in those Days so troublesome to the Loyal Party. Among others that met,
there was old Mr. Hill B. D. Parson of the Parish, Quondam Fellow of
Brason-nose College in Oxford: This Venerable good old Man, one Day (after his
accustomed fashion) standing up, with his Head uncovered to Drink his Majesty's
Health, saying, God bless our gracious Sovereign, as he was going to put the
Cup to his Lips, a Swallow flew in at the Window, and pitched on the brim of
the little Earthen-cup (not half a Pint) and sipt, and so flew out again. This
was in the presence of the aforesaid Parson Hill, Major Gwillim, and two or
three more, that I knew very well then, my Neighbors, and whose joint
Testimony of it I have had more than once, in that very Room. It was in the
Bay-window in the Parlour there; Mr. Hill's Back was next to the Window. I
cannot doubt of the veracity of the Witnesses. This is Printed in some Book
that I have seen, I think in Dr. Fuller's Worthies. The Cup is preserved there
still, as a Rarity.

In Dr. Bolton's Sermons is an Account of the Lady Honywood, who despaired of
her Salvation. Dr. Bolton endeavored to comfort her: Said she, (holding a
Venice-glass in her Hand) I shall as certainly be Damned, as this Glass will be
broken: And at that word, threw it hard on the Ground; and the Glass remained
sound; which did give her great comfort. The Glass is yet preserved among the
Cimelia of the Family. This Lady lived to see Descended from her (I think)
Ninety, which is mentioned by Dr. Bolton.

William Backhouse of Swallowfield in Berkshire Esquire had an ugly Scab that grew
on the middle of his Forehead, which had been there for some Years, and he
could not be Cured; it became so nauseous, that he would see none but his
intimate Friends: He was a Learned Gentleman, a Chimist and Antiquary: His
custom was, once every Summer to Travel to see Cathedrals, Abbeys, Castles,
etc. In his Journey, being come to Peterborough, he dreamt there, that he was
in a Church and saw a Hearse, and that one did bid him wet his Scab, with the
drops of the Marble. The next Day he went to Morning-Service, and afterward
going about the Church, saw the very Hearse (which was of Black Say, for Queen
Katharine, Wife to King Henry VIII.) and the Marble Gravestone by. He found
drops on the Marble, and there were some Cavities wherein he dipped his Finger,
and wetted the Scab: In Seven Days it was perfectly Cured. This accurate and
certain Information, I had from my worthy Friend Elias Ashmole Esquire who called
Mr. Backhouse Father, and had this Account from his own Mouth. (May Dew is a
great Dissolvent.)

Arise Evans had a fungous Nose, and said, it was revealed to him, that the
King's Hand would Cure him: And at the first coming of King Charles II. into
St. James's Park he Kissed the King's Hand, and rubbed his Nose with it; which
disturbed the King, but Cured him. Mr. Ashmole told me.

An Advertisement.
A true Relation of the Wonderful Cure of Mary Maillard (Lame almost ever since
she was Born) on Sunday the 26th of November 1693.

With the Affidavits and Certificats of the Girl, and several other credible
and worthy Persons, who knew her both before and since her being Cured. To
which is added, A Letter from Dr. Wellwood, to the Right Honorable the Lady
Mayoress, upon that Subject. London, Printed for Richard Baldwin, near the
Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane. 1694.

A Narrative of the late extraordinary Cure, wrought in an instant upon Mrs.
Eliz. Savage (Lame from her Birth) without the using of any Natural means.

With the Affidavits which were made before the Right Honorable the Lord
Major; and the Certificates of several Credible Persons, who knew her both
before and since her Cure.

Enquired into with all its Circumstances, by Noted Divines, both of the Church
of England, and others: And by Eminent Physicians of the College: And many
Persons of Quality, who have expressed their full satisfaction.

With an Appendix, attempting to prove, that Miracles are not ceased. London,
Printed for John Dunton at the Raven, and John Harris at the Harrow in the
Poultry. 1694.

CHAP. XIII.
Magic.
IN Barbary are Wizards, who do smear their Hands with some black Ointment, and
then do hold them up to the Sun, and in a short time you shall see Delineated
in that black Stuff, the likeness of what you desire to have an answer of. It
was desired to know, whether a Ship was in safety, or no? There appeared in the
Woman's Hand the perfect Lineaments of a Ship under Sail. This Mr. W. Cl. a
Merchant of London, who was Factor there several Years, protested to me, that
he did see. He is a Person worthy of belief.

There are wonderful Stories of the Bannians in India, viz. of their
Predictions, Cures, etc. of their Charming Crocodiles, and Serpents: And that
one of them walked over an Arm of the Sea; he was seen in the middle, and never
heard of afterward.

The last Summer, on the Day of St. John Baptist [1694] I accidentally was
walking in the Pasture behind Montague-House, it was XII a Clock. I saw there
about two or three and twenty young Women, most of them well Habited, on their
Knees very busy, as if they had been Weeding. I could not presently learn what
the matter was; at last a young Man told me, that they were looking for a Coal
under the Root of a Plantain, to put under their Heads that Night, and they
should Dream who would be their Husbands: It was to be found that Day, and Hour.

The Women have several Magical Secrets handed down to them by Tradition, for
this purpose, as, on St. Agnes Night, 21 Day of January, Take a row of Pins,
and pull out every one, one after another, saying a Pater Noster, or Our
Father, sticking a Pin in your Sleeve, and you will Dream of him or her you
shall Marry. Ben. Johnson in one of his Masks, makes some mention of this.

And on sweet Saint Agnes Night
Please you with the promised sight, It Is Printed St. Ann's Night, falsely.

Some of Husbands, some of Lovers,
Which an empty Dream discovers.
Another. To know whom one shall Marry.
You must lie in another County, and knit the left Garter about the Right
Legged Stockin (let the other Garter and Stockin alone) and as you rehearse
these following Verses, at every Comma, knit a Knot. This Knot I knit,
To know the thing I know not yet,
That I may see
The Man (Woman) that shall my Husband (Wife) be,
How he goes and what he wears
And what he does all the Days.
Accordingly in your Dream you will see him; if a Musician, with a Lute or
other Instrument; if a Scholar, with a Book, etc.

A Gentlewoman that I knew, confessed in my hearing, that she used this Method,
and dreamt of her Husband whom she had never seen: About Two or three Years
after, as she was on Sunday at Church, up pops a young Oxonian in the Pulpit:
She cries out presently to her Sister, This is the very Face of the Man that I
saw in my Dream. Sir William Somes Lady did the like.

Another way is, Some say any other New Moon is as good.
to Charm the Moon thus; At the first appearance of the new Moon after
New Years Day, go out in the Evening, and stand over the Sparrs of a Gate, or
Style, looking on the Moon and say, All Hail to the Moon, In Yorkshire they
kneel on a groundfast Stone.
all Hail to thee,
I prithee good Moon reveal to me,
This Night who my Husband (Wife) must be.


You must presently after go to Bed.

I knew two Gentlewomen, that did thus when they were young Maids, and they had
Dreams of those that Married them.

Alexander Trallienus, Of Curing Diseases by Spells, Charms, etc. is cited by
Casaubon, before John Dee's Book of Spiritis: It is now Translated out of the
Greek into English.

The Great Historical, Geographical, and Poetical Dictionary. Abracadabra, a
Mysterious Word, to which the Superstious in former times attributed a Magical
power to expel Diseases, especially the Tertian-Ague, worn about their Neck in
this manner.

Some think, that Basilides the Inventor, intends the Name of GOD by it. The
method of the Cure was prescribed in these Verses, Inscribes Chartae quod
dicitur Abracadabra
Saepius, et subter repetes, sed detrahe summam
Et magis atque magis desint elementa figuris
Singula quae semper capies and caetera figes,
Donec in angustum redigatur Litera Conum,
His lina nexis collo redimire memento.
Talia languentis conducent Vincula collo,
Lethalesque abigent (miranda potentia) morbos.


Mr. -- Scoot a German has Writ an excellent Book of Magic: It is Prohibited
in that Country. I have here set down Three Spells, which are much approved.

To Cure an Ague, Write this following Spell in Parchment, and wear it about
your Neck. It must be Writ Triangularly.

ABRACADABRA
ABRACADABR
ABRACADAB
ABRACADA
ABRACAD
ABRACA
ABRAC
ABRA
ABR
AB
A
With this Spell, one of Wells has Cured above an Hundred of the Ague.

To Cure the Biting of a Mad Dog.
Write these Words in Paper, Viz.
Rebus Rubus Epitepscum, and give it to the Party, or Beast Bit, to Eat in
Bread, or etc. A Gentleman of good Quality, and a sober grave Person, did
affirm, that this Receipt never fails,

To Cure the Toothache, out of Mr. Ashmole's Manuscript Writ with his own Hand.

Mars, hur, abursa, aburse.
Jesus Christ for Marys sake,
Take away this Toothache.
Write the words, Three times; and as you say the Words, let the Party burn one
Paper, then another, and then the last. He says, he saw it experimented, and
the Party immediately Cured.

Mr. Ashmole told me, that a Woman made use of a Spell to Cure an Ague, by the
Advice of -- A Minister came to her, and severely repremanded her, for making
use of a Diabolical help, and told her, she was in danger of Damnation for it,
and commanded her to burn it. She did so, and her Distemper returned severely;
insomuch, that she was importunate with the Doctor to use the same again: She
used it, and had ease. But the Parson hearing of it, came to her again, and
thundered Hell and Damnation, and frighted her so, that she burnt it again.
Whereupon she fell extremely Ill, and would have had it a Third time; but the
Doctor refused, saying, That she had contemned and slighted the power and
goodness of the Blessed Spirits (or Angels) and so she died, The cause of the
Lady Honywoods Desparation, was that she had used a Spell to Cure her.

Jamblicus de Mysteriis de nominibus divinis.

Prophyrius quaerit, cur Sacerdotes utantur nominibus quibusdam nihil
significantibus? Iamblicus respondet, omnia ejusmodi nomina significare aliquid
apud deos: quamvis in quibusdam significata nobis sint ignota, esse tamen nota
quaedam, quorum intepretationem divinitus accepimus, omnino vero modum in eis
significandi ineffabilem esse. Neque secundum imaginationes humanas, sed
secundum intellectum qui in nobis est, divinus, vel potius simpliciore,
praestantioreque modo secundum intellectum diis unitum. Auferendum igitur omnes
excogitationes, and rationales discursus, atque assimulationes naturalis vocis
ipsius congenitas, ad res positas in natum. Et quemadmodum character symbolicus
divinae similitudinis in se intellectualis est, atque divinus, ita hunc ipsum
in omnibus supponere, accipereque debemus, etc.

To Cure an Ague, Tertian or Quartan.

Gather Cinquefoil in a good Aspect of to the, and let the Moon be in the
Mid-heaven, if you can: and take -- of the Powder of it in White Wind: If it be
not thus gathered according to the Rules of Astrology, it has little or no
Virtue in it. With this Receipt -- Bradely, a Quaker at Kingston upon Thames,
(near the Bridge-end) has Cured above an Hundred.

To Cure the Thrush.

There a is certain piece in the Beef, called the Mouse-piece, which given to
the Child, or Party so affected, to Eat, does certainly Cure the Thrush. From
an experienced Midwife.

Another to Cure a Thrush.

Take a living Frog, and hold it in a Cloth, that it does not go down into the
Child's Mouth; and put the Head into the Child's Mouth till it is dead; and then
take another Frog.

To Cure the Toothache.

Take a new Nail, and make the Gum bleed with it, and then drive it into an
Oak. This did Cure William Neal, Sir William Neal's Son, a very stout
Gentleman, when he was almost Mad with the Pain, and had a mind to have
Pistoll'd himself.

For the Iaundise.

The Iaundise is Cured, by putting the Urine after the first Sleep, to the
Ashes of the Ash-tree, Bark of Barberries.

To Cure a Bullock, that has the Wisp, (that is) Lame between the Clees.

Take the impression of the Bullock's Foot in the Earth, where he has trod;
then dig it up, and stick therein five or seven Thorns on the wrong side, and
then hang it on a Bush to dry: And as that dries, so the Bullock heals. This
never fails for Wisps. From Mr. Pacy a Yeoman in Surrey.

To Cure a Beast that is Sprung, that is Poisoned. It lights mostly upon Sheep.

Take the little red Spider, called a Tentbob (not so big as a great Pins-head)
the first you light upon in the spring of the Year, and rub it in the palm of
your Hand all to pieces; and having so done, piss on it, and rub it in, and let
it dry; then come to the Beast and make water in your Hand, and throw it in his
Mouth. It Cures in a matter of an Hours time. This rubbing serves for a whole
Year, and it is no danger to the Hand. The chiefest Skill is to know whether
the Beast be Poisoned, or no. From Mr. Pacy.

To stanch Bleeding.

Cut an Ash of One, two or three Years Growth, at the very Hour and Minute of
the Sun's entering into Taurus: a Chip of this applied will stop it. If it is a
Shoot, it must be cut from the Ground. Mr. Nicholas Mercator, Astronomer, told
me that he had tried it with effect. Mr. G. W. says the Stick must not be
bound, or holden; but dipped or wetted in the Blood. When King James the second
was at Salisbury 1688. his Nose Bled near two Days; and after many essays in
vain, was stopped by this Sympathetick Ash, which Mr. Will. Nash a Chyrurgeon
in Salisbury applied.

Against an evil Tongue.

Take Vnguentum populeum and Vervain, and Hypericon, and put a red-hot Iron
into it; you must anoint the Backbone, or wear it on your Breast. This is
Printed in Mr. W. Lilly's Astrology. Mr. H. C. has tried this Receipt with
good success.

Vervain and Dill,
Hinders Witches from their will.
A House (or Chamber) somewhere in London was Haunted; the Curtains would be
rashed at Night, and awake the Gentleman that lay there, who was Musical, and a
familiar acquaintance of Henry Laws. Henry Laws to be satisfied did lie with
him; and the Curtains were rashed so then: The Gentleman grew lean and pale
with the frights, One Dr. -- Cured the House of this disturbance, and Mr. Laws
said, that the principal Ingredient was Hypericon put under his Pillow.

In Herefordshire, and other parts, they do put a cold Iron-bar upon their
Barrels, to preserve their Beer from being sowred by Thunder. This is a common
practice in Kent.

To hinder the Nightmare, they hang in a string a Flint with a hole in it
(naturally) by the Manger; but best of all they say, hung about their Necks,
and a Flint will do it that has not a hole in it. It is to prevent the
Nightmare (viz.) the Hag from riding their Horses, who will sometimes sweat
all Night. The Flint thus hung does hinder it.

Mr. Sp. told me that his Horse which was Bewitched, would break Bridles and
strong Halters, like a Sampson. They filled a Bottle with the Horse's Urine,
stopped it with a Cork and bound it fast in, and then buried it under Ground:
And the party suspected to be the Witch fell ill, that he could not make Water,
of which he died. When they took up the Bottle, the Urine was almost gone: So,
that they did believe, that if the Fellow could have lived a little longer, he
had recovered.

It is a thing very common to nail Horse-shoes on the Thresholds of Doors:
There are very memorable Stories of Witches in Gages Survey of the West Indies
of his own knowledge.
Which is to hinder the power of Witches that enter into the House. Most Houses
of the West End of London have the Horse-shoe on the Threshold. It should be a
Horse-shoe that one finds. In the Bermudas, they use to put an Iron into the
Fire when a Witch comes in.

At Paris when it begins to Thunder and Lighten, they do presently Ring out the
great Bell at the Abbey of St. German, which they do believe makes it cease.
The like was wont to be done heretofore in Wiltshire; when it Thundered and
Lightened, they did Ring St. Adelm's Bell at Malmsbury Abbey. The curious do
say, that the Ringing of Bells exceedingly disturbs Spirits.

CHAP. XIV.
Transportation by an Invisible Power.
A Letter from the Reverend Mr. Andrew Paschal B. D. Rector of Chedzoy in
Somerset, To John Aubery Esquire at Gresham College London.
SIR,
I Last Week received a Letter from a Learned Friend, the Minister of
Barnstable in Devon, which I think worthy your perusal. It was Dated May 3.
1683. and is as follows. [He was of my time in Queens College in Cambridge.]

There having been many Prodigious things performed lately in a Parish a
joining to that which Bishop Sparrow presented me to, called Cheriton Bp by
some discontented Demon, I can easily remember that I owe you an account
thereof in lieu of that which you desired of me, and which I could serve you in.

About November last, in the Parish of Spreyton in the County of Devon, there
appeared in a Field near the Dwelling House of Phil. Furze, to his Servant
Francis Fry, being of the age of 21 next August, an aged Gentleman with a Pole
in his Hand, and like that he was wont to carry about with him when living, to
kill Moles withal, who told the Young Man he should not be afraid of him; but
should tell his Master, i. e. his Son, That several Legacies that he had
bequeathed were unpaid, naming 10 s. to one, 10 s. to another, etc. Fry
replied, that the party he last named was Dead. The Spectrum replied, he knew
that, but said it must be paid to -- and named the next Relation, These things
being performed, he promised he would trouble him no further. These small
Legacies were paid accordingly. But the young Man having carried 20 s. ordered
by the Spectrum to his Sister Mrs. Furze of the Parish of Staverton near
Totness, which Money the Gentlewoman refused to receive, being sent her, as she
said, from the Devil. The same Night Fry lodging there, the Spectrum appeared
to him again, whereupon Fry challenged his promise not to trouble him, and said
he had done all he desired him, but that Mrs. Furze would not receive the
Money. The Spectrum replied, that is true indeed. But bid him ride to Totness
and buy a Ring of that value, and that she would take: Which was provided for
her; and received by her. Then Fry rode homewards attended by a Servant of Mrs.
Furze. But being come into Spreyton Parish, or rather a little before, he
seemed to carry an old Gentlewoman behind him, that often threw him off his
Horse, and hurried him with such violence, as astonished all that saw him, or
heard how horridly the Ground was beaten; and being come into his Master's
Yard, Fry's Horse (a mean Beast) sprung at once 25 Foot. The trouble from the
Man-Spectre ceased from this time. But the old Gentlewoman Mrs. Furze, Mr.
Furze's second Wife, whom the Spectre at his first appearance to Fry, called,
That Wicked Woman my Wife, (though I knew her, and took her for a very good
Woman) presently after appears to several in the House, viz. to Fry, Mrs.
Thomasin Gidley, Anne Langdon born in my Parish, and to a little Child which
was forced to be removed from the House; sometimes in her own shape, sometimes
in shapes more horrid, as of a Dog belching Fire, and of an Horse, and seeming
to ride out at the Window, carrying only one pane of Glass away, and a little
piece of Iron. After this Fry's Head was thrust into a narrow space, where a
Man's Fist could not enter, between a Bed and a Wall; and forced to be taken
thence by the strength of Men, all bruised and bloody; upon this, it was
thought fit to Bleed him; and after that was done, the Binder was removed from
his Arm, and conveyed about his Middle, and presently was drawn so very
straight, it had almost killed him, and was cut asunder making an ugly uncouth
noise. Several other times with Handkerchiefs, Cravats and other things he was
near strangled, they were drawn so close upon his Throat. He lay one Night in
his Periwig (in his Master's Chamber, for the more safety) which was torn all
to pieces. His best Periwig he enclosed in a little Box on the inside with a
Joind-stool, and other weight upon it; the Box was snapp'd asunder, and the Wig
torn all to flitters. His Master saw his Buckles fall all to pieces on his
Feet: But, first I should have told you the fate of his Shoe-strings, one of
which a Gentlewoman greater than all exception, assured me that she saw it come
out of his Shoe, without any visible Hand, and fling it self to the farther end
of the Room; the other was coming out too, but that a Maid prevented and helped
it out, which crisp'd and curled about her Hand like a living Eel. The Clothes
worn by Anne Langdon and Fry (if their own) were torn to pieces on their backs.
The same Gentlewoman, being the Daughter of the Minister of the Parish, Mr.
Roger Specott, showed me one of Fry's Gloves, which was torn in his Pocket
while she was by. I did view it near and narrowly, and do seriously confess
that it is torn so very accurately in all the Seams and in other places, and
laid abroad so artificially, and it is so dexterously tattered (and all done in
the Pocket in a Minutes time) as nothing Human could have done it; no Cutler
could have made an Engine to do it so. Other fantastical Freeks have been very
frequent, as, the marching of a great Barrel full of Salt out of one Room into
another; an Andiron-laying it self over a Pan of Milk that was scalding on the
Fire, and two Flitches of Bacon descending from the Chimney where they hung,
and laid themselves over that Andiron. The appearing of the the Spectrum (when
in her own shape) in the same Clothes, to seeming, which Mrs. Furze her
Daughter-in-law has on. The intangling of Fry's Face and Legs, about his Neck,
and about the Frame of the Chairs, so as they have been with great difficulty
disengaged.

But the most Remarkable of all happened in that Day that I passed by the Door
in my return hither, which was Easter-eve, when Fry returning from Work (that
little he can do) he was caught by the Woman Spectre by the Skirts of his
Doublet, and carried into the Air; he was quickly mist by his Master and the
Workmen, and great enquiry was made for Fran. Fry, but no hearing of him; but
about half an Hour after Fry was heard Whistling and Singing in a kind of a
Quagmire. He was now affected as he was wont to be in his Fits, so that none
regarded what he said; but coming to himself an Hour after, he solemnly
protested, That the Demon carried him so high that he saw his Master's House
underneath him no bigger than an Hay-cock, that he was in perfect sense and
prayed God not to suffer the Devil to destroy him; that he was suddenly set
down in that Quagmire. The Workmen found one Shoe on one side of the House, and
the other Shoe on the other side; his Periwig was espied next Morning hanging
on the Top of a tall Tree. It was soon observed, that Fry's part of his Body
that had laid in the Mud, was much benumbed, and therefore the next Saturday,
which was the Eve of Low-Sunday, they carried him to Crediton to be let Blood;
which being done, and the Company having left him for a little while, returning
they found him in a Fit, with his Forehead all bruised and swollen to a great
bigness, none being able to guess how it came, till he recovered himself, and
then he told them, That a Bird flew in at the Window with a great force, and
with a Stone in it is Mouth flew directly against his Forehead. The People
looked for it, and found on the Ground just under where he sat, not a Stone,
but a weight of Brass, or Copper, which the People were breaking, and parting
it among themselves. He was so very ill, that he could not ride but one Mile or
little more that Night, since which time I have not heard of him, save that he
was ill handled the next Day, being Sunday. Indeed Sir you may wonder that I
have not Visited that House, and the poor afflicted People; especially, since I
was so near, and passed by the very Door: But besides that, they have called to
their assistance none but Nonconforming Ministers, I was not qualified to be
welcome there, having given Mr. Furze a great deal of trouble the last Year
about a Conventicle in his House, where one of this Parish was the Preacher.
But I am very well assured of the truth of what I have written, and (as more
appears) you shall hear from me again.

I had forgot to tell you that Fry's Mother came to me, grievously bewailing
the miserable condition of her Son. She told me, that the Day before he had
five Pins thrust into his Side. She asked, and I gave her the best Advice I
could. Particularly, that her Son should declare all that the Spectre,
especially the Woman gave him in Charge, for I suspect, there is aliquid
latens; and that she should remove him thence by all means. But I fear that she
will not do it. For I hear that Anne Langdon is come into my Parish to her
Mother, and that she is grievously troubled there. I might have written as much
of her, as of Fry, for she has been as ill treated, saving the Aerial Journey.
Her Fits and Obsessions seem to be greater, for she Scrieches in a most Hellish
tone. Thomasin Gidley (though removed) is in trouble, as I hear.

Sir this is all my Friend wrote. This Letter came enclosed in another from a
Clergyman my Friend, who lives in those parts. He tells me, all the Relations
he receives from diverse Persons living in Spreyton and the Neighboring
Parishes agree with this. He spoke with a Gentleman of good fashion, that was
at Crediton when Fry was Blooded, and saw the Stone that bruised his Forehead;
but he did not call it Copper or Brass, but said, it was a strange Mineral.
That Gentleman promised to make a strict enquiry on the place into all
particulars and to give him the result: Which my Friend also promises me; with
hopes that he shall procure for me a piece of that Mineral substance, which
hurt his Forehead.

The occasion of my Friends sending me this Narrative, was my entreating him
sometime since to enquire into a thing of this nature, that happened in
Barnstable, where he lives. An account was given to me long since, it fills a
Sheet or two, which I have by me: And to gratify Mr. Glanvil who is Collecting
Histories for his Sadducism. Triumphatus. I desired to have it well attested,
it being full of very memorable things; but it seems he could meet only a
general consent as to the truth of the things; the Reports varying in the
Circumstances.

Sir, yours


A Copy of a Letter from a Learned Friend of mine in Scotland, Dated March 35.
1695.
Honored Sir,
I received yours Dated May 24 1694. in which you desire me to send you some
instances and examples of Transportation by an invisible Power. The true cause
of my delaying so long to reply to that Letter, was not want of Kindness; but
of fit Mateterials for such a Reply.

As soon as I read your Letter of May 24 I called to mind a Story which I heard
long ago, concerning one of the Lord Duffus (in the Shire of Murray) his
Predecessors, of whom it is reported, That upon a time, when he was walking
abroad in the Fields near to his own House, he was suddenly carried away, and
found the next Day at Paris in the French King's Cellar with a Silver Cup in
his Hand; that being brought into the King's Presence and questioned by him,
Who he was? And how he came thither? He told his name, his Country, and the
place of his Residence, and that on such a Day of the Month (which proved to be
the Day immediately preceding) being in the Fields, he heard the noise of a
Whirlwind, and of Voices crying Horse and Hattock (this is the Word, which the
Fairies are said to use when they remove from any place) whereupon he cried
(Horse and Hattock) also, and was immediately caught up, and transported
through the Air, by the Fairies to that place, where after he had Drunk
heartily he fell a-sleep, and before he awoke, the rest of the Company were
gone, and had left him in the posture wherein he was found. It Is said, the King
gave him the Cup which was found in his Hand, and dismis'd him.

This Story (if it could be sufficiently attested) would be a noble Instance
for your purpose, for which cause I was at some pains to enquire into the truth
of it, and found the means to get the present Lord Duffus's opinion thereof;
which shortly is, That there has been, and is such a Tradition, but that he
thinks it fabulous; this account of it, his Lordship had from his Father, who
told him, that he had it from his Father, the present Lord's Grandfather, There
is yet an old Silver-Cup in his Lordship's Possession still, which is called
the Fairy Cup; but has nothing Engraven upupon it except the Arms of the Family.

The Gentleman by whose means I came to know the Lord Duffus his sentiment of
the forgoeing story, being Tutor to his Lordships eldest Son, told me another
little passage of the same nature, whereof he was an Eye witness. He reports,
that when he was a Boy at School in the Town of Forres, yet not so Young, but
that he had Years and Capacity, both to observe and remember that which fell
out; he and his School-fellows were upon a time whipping their Tops in the
Churchyard before the Door of the Church; though the Day was calm, they heard
a noise of a Wind, and at some distance saw the small Dust begin to arise and
turn round, which motion continued, advancing till it came to the place where
they were; whereupon they began to Bless themselves: But one of their number
(being it seems a little more bold and confident than his Companions) said,
Horse and Hattock with my Top, and immediately they all saw the Top lifted up
from the Ground; but could not see what way it was carried, by reason of a
Cloud of Dust which was raised at the same time: They sought for the Top all
about the place where it was taken up, but in vain; and it was found afterward
in the Churchyard, on the other side of the Church. Mr. Steward (so is the
Gentleman called) declared to me that he had a perfect remembrance of this
matter.

The following Account I received November last, from Mr. Alexander Mowat a
Person of great Integrity and Judgment, who being Minister at the Church at
Lesly, in the Shire of Aberdene, was turned out for refusing the Oath of Test,
Anno. 1681. He informs, That he heard the late Earl of Cathnes who was Married
to a Daughter of the late Marquess of Argyle tell the following Story, viz.
That upon a time, when a Vessel which his Lordship kept for bringing home Wine
and other Provisions for his House, was at Sea; a common Fellow, who was
reputed to have the Second-sight, being occasionally at his House; the Earl
enquired of him, where his Men (meaning those in the Ship) were at that present
time? The Fellow replied, at such a place, by name, within four Hours Sailing
of the Harbor, which was not far from the place of his Lordship's Residence:
The Earl asked, what Evidence he could give for that? The other replied, that
he had lately been at the place, and had brought away with him one of the
Sea-mens Caps, which he delivered to his Lordship. At the four Hours end the
Earl went down himself to the Harbor, where he found the Ship newly arrived,
and in it one of the Seamen without his Cap; who being questioned, how he came
to lose his Cap? Answered, that at such a place (the same the Second-sight'd
Man had named before) there arose a Whirlwind which endangered the Ship, and
carried away his Cap: The Earl asked, if he would know his Cap when he saw it?
He said he would; whereupon the Earl produced the Cap, and the Seaman owned it
for that, which was taken from him.

This is all the Information which I can give at present concerning
Transportation by an invisible Power. I am sorry that I am able to contribute
so little to the publishing of so curious a piece as it seems your Collection
of Hermerick Philosophy will be. I have given Instructions to an Acquaintance
of mine now living at Kirkwall, and took him engaged when he left this place,
to inform him concerning the old Stone Monuments, the Plants and Cures in the
Orcades, and to send me an Account. But I have not heard from him as yet, though
I caused a Friend that was Writing to him, to put him in mind of his promise;
the occasions of Correspondence betwixt this place and Orkney are very rare.

SIR, Your Faithful Affectionate Friend and Servant, I. G.


Sir,
It Is very likely my Lord Keeper [ North] (if an Account of a thing so
considerable, has not been presented to him by another Hand) will take it
kindly from you. I would Transcribe it for Dr. Henry More, to whom, as I
remember, I promised some time since an Account of the Barnstable Apparition;
but my Hands are full of Work. May I beg of you to visit Dr. Whitchcot Minister
of St. Laurence Church, and to communicate a sight of this Letter from
Barnstable: Probably he will be willing to make his Servant Transcribe it, and
convey it to Dr. More. Pray present my humble Service to him, as also my
affectionate Service to our Friends Mr. Hook and Mr. Lodwick. I ever rest

SIR, Your most Faithful Chedzoy. and Affectionate Servant, Andrew Paschal.


There was in Scotland one -- [an Obsessus] carried in the Air several times in
the view of several Persons, his Fellow Soldiers. Major Henton has seen him
carried away from the Guard in Scotland sometimes a Mile or two. Sundry Persons
are living now (1671.) that can attest this Story. I had it from Sir Robert
Harley (the Son) who Married Major Henton's Window; as also from E. T. D. D.

A Gentleman of my Acquaintance Mr. -- M. was in Portugal, Anno. 1655. when one
was Burnt by the Inquisition for being brought thither from Goa in East India,
in the Air, in an incredible short time.

CHAP. XV.
Visions in a Berill, or Crystal.
A Berill is a kind of Crystal that has a weak Tincture of Red; it is one of
the Twelve Stones mentioned in the Revelation. I have heard* Dr. I. Pell.
, that Spectacles were first made of this Stone, which is the reason that the
Germans do call a Spectacle-Glass [or pair of Spectacles] a Brill.

Dr. -- Pocock of Oxford in his Commentary on Hosea, has a Learned Discourse
of the Vrim and Thummim: as also Dr. -- Spenser of Cambridge, That the Priest
had his Visions in the Stone of the Breast Plate.

The Prophets had their Seers, viz. Young Youths who were to behold those
Visions, of whom Mr. Abraham Cowly writes, thus, With hasty wings, time present
they outfly,
And tread the doubtful Maze of Destiny;
There walk and sport among the years to come,
And with quick Eye pierce every Causes Womb.


The Magicians, now, use a CrystalSphere, A Mineral-Pearl.
or Mineral-Pearl for this purpose, which is inspected by a Boy, or sometimes
by the Querent himself.

There are certain Formula's of Prayer to be used before they make the
inspection, which they term a Call. In a Manuscript of Dr. Forman of Lambeth
(which Mr. Elias Ashmole had) is a Discourse of this, and the Prayer. Also
there is the Call which Dr. Nepier did use.

James Harrington [Author of Oceana] told me that the Earl of Denbigh then
Ambassador at Venice did tell him, that one did show him there several times in
a Glass, things past, and to come.

When Sir Mermaduke Langdale was in Italy, he went to one of those Magi, who
did show him a Glass, where he saw himself kneeling before a Crucifix: He was
then a Protestant; afterward he became a Roman Catholic. He told Mr. Thomas
Henshaw R. S. S. this himself.

I have here set down the Figure of a Consecrated Berill, now in the possession
of Sir Edward Harley Knight of the Bath, which he keeps in his Closet at
Brampton-Bryan in Herefordshire, amongst his Cimelia, which I saw there. It
came first from Norfolk; a Minister had it there, and a Call was to be used
with it. Afterward a Miller had it, and both did work great Cures with it (if
Curable) and in the Berill they did see, either the Receipt in Writing, or else
the Herb. To this Minister the Spirits or Angels would appear openly, and
because the Miller (who was his familiar Friend) one day happened to see them,
he gave him the aforesaid Berill and Call: By these Angels the Minister was
forewarned of his Death. This Account I had from Mr. Ashmole. Afterward this
Berill came into somebodies hand in London, who did tell strange things by it;
insomuch that at last he was questioned for it, and it was taken away by^
Authority [it was about 1645.]

This Berill is a perfect Sphere, the Diameter of it I guess to be something
more than an Inch: It is set in a Ring, or Circle of Silver resembling the
Meridian of a Globe: The stem of it is about Ten Inches high, all gilt. At the
Four quarters of it are the Names of Four Angels, viz. Vriel, Raphael, Michael,
Gabriel. On the top is a Cross Patee.

Sam. B^isardus has writ a Book de Divinatione per Crystallum.

A Cloathier's Widow of Pembridge in Herefordshire, desired Dr. Shirburn [one
of the Canons of the Church of Hereford, and Rector of Pembridge] to look over
her Husbands Writings after his Decease: among other things, he found a Call
for a Crystal. The Clothier had his Clothes oftentimes stolen from his Racks;
and at last obtained this Trick to discover the Thieves. So when he lost his
Clothes, he went out about Midnight with his Crystal and Call, and a little
Boy, or little Maid with him [for they say it must be a pure Virgin] to look in
the Crystal, to see the likeness of the Person that committed the Theft. The
Doctor did burn the Call, 1671.

Visions without a Glass, or Crystal. About the later end of the Reign of King
James the First, one -- a Tailor in London had several Visions, which he did
describe to a Painter to paint, and he writ the description himself in an ill,
Taylorlike hand, in false English; but legibly: It was (at least) a Quire of
Paper. I remember one Vision is of St. Iame's Park, where is the Picture of an
Altar and Crucifix. Mr. Butler of the Toy-shop by Ludgate [one of the Masters
of Bridewel] had the Book in Anno 1659; The then Earl of Northampton gave Five
Pounds for a Copy of it.

CHAP. XVI.
Converse with Angels and Spirits.
DR. Richard Nepier was a Person of great Abstinence, Innocence, and Piety: He
spent every day two Hours in Family Prayer: When a Patient, or Querent came to
him, he presently went to his Closet to Pray: and told to admiration the
Recovery, or Death of the Patient. It appears by his Papers, that he did
converse with the Angel Raphael, who gave him the Responses.

Elias Ashmole Esquire had all his Papers, where is contained all his Practice for
about Fifty Years; which he, Mr. Ashmole, carefully bound up, according to the
Year of our Lord, in -- Volumes in Folio; which are now reposited in the
Library of the Musaeum in Oxford. Before the Responses stands this Mark, viz. R
Ris. which Mr. Ashmole said, was Responsum Raphaelis.

In these Papers are many excellent Medicines, or Receipts for several Diseases
that his Patients had; and before some of them is the aforesaid Mark. Mr.
Ashmole took the pains to Transcribe fairly with his own hand all the Receipts;
they are about a Quire and half of Paper in Folio, which since his Death were
bought of his Relict by E. W. Esquire R. S. S.

The Angel told him, if the Patient were curable, or incurable.

There are also several other Queries to the Angel, as to Religion,
Transubstantiation, etc. which I have forgot. I remember one is, Whether the
Good Spirits, or the Bad be most in Number? R Ris, The Good

It is to be found there, that he told John Prideaux D. D. Anno 1621, that
Twenty Years hence [1641] he would be a Bishop, and he was so, sc. Bishop of
Worcester.

R Ris, did resolve him, That Mr. Booth of -- in Cheshire should have a Son
that should inherit, Three Years hence [ Sc. Sir George Booth, the first Lord
Delamere] viz. from 1619. Sir George Booth aforesaid was born December 18. Anno
1622.

This I extracted out of Dr. Nepiers Original Diary, then in the possession of
Mr. Ashmole.

When E. W. Esquire was about Eight Years old, he was troubled with the Worms: His
Grandfather carried him to Dr. Nepier at Lynford. Mr. E. W. peeped in at the
Closet at the end of the Gallery, and saw him upon his Knees at Prayer. The
Doctor told Sir Francis, that at Fourteen Years old his Grandson would be freed
from that Distemper: and he was so. The Medicine he prescribed was, to drink a
little draught of Muscadine in the Morning. 'Twas about 1625.

It is impossible, that the Prediction of Sir George Booth's Birth, could be
found any other way, but by Angelical Revelation.

This Dr. Richard Nepier was Rector of Lynford in Bucks, and did Practice
Physic; but gave most to the Poor that he got by it. It Is certain, he foretold
his own Death to a Day and Hour; he dyed Praying upon his Knees, being of a
very great Age, 1634. April the First. He was nearly related to the Learned
Lord Nepier Baron of M.... in Scotland; I have forgot whether his Brother. His
Knees were horny with frequent Praying. He left his Estate to Sir Richard
Nepier M. D. of the College of Physicians London, from whom Mr. Ashmole had the
Doctor's Picture, now in the Musaeum.

Dr. Richard Nepier Rector of Lynford was a good Astrologer, and so was Mr.
Marsh of Dunstable; but Mr. Marsh did seriously confess to a Friend of mine,
that Astrology was but the Countenance; and that he did his business by the
help of the blessed Spirits; with whom only Men of great Piety, Humility and
Charity, could be acquainted: And such a one he was. He was an Hundred Years
old when my Friend was with him; and yet, did understand himself very well.

At Ashridge in Buckinghamshire, near Berkhamsted, was a Monastery, (now in the
Possession of the Earl of Bridgwater,) where are excellent good old Paintings
still to be seen. In this Monastery was found an old Manuscript Entitled
Johannes de Rupescissa, since Printed (or part of it) a Chimical Book, wherein
are many Receipts; among others, To free a House Haunted with Evil Spirits, by
Fumes: Mr. Marsh had it, and did Cure Houses so Haunted by it. Ovid in his
Festivals has something like it. See Thesaurus Exorcismorum writ by -- e
Societate Jesus. Oct. Wherein are several high Physical and Medicinal things.

Good Spirits are delighted and allured by sweet Perfumes, as rich Gums,
Frankincense, etc. Salt, etc. which was the reason that the Priests of the
Gentiles, and also the Christians used them in their Temples, and Sacrifices:
And on the contrary, Evil Spirits are pleased and allured and called up by
Suffumigations of Henbane, etc. stinking Smells, etc. which the Witches do use
in their Conjuration. Toads (Saturnine Animals) are killed by putting of Salt
upon them; I have seen the Experiment. Magical Writers say, that Cedar-wood
drives away evil Spirits; it was, and is much used in Magnificent Temples.

Plinii Natural Hist. Lib. XII. Cap. XIV. Alexandro Magno in pueritia sine
parsimonia thura ingerenti aris, paedagogus Leonides dixerat, ut illo modo, cum
divicisset thuriferas gentes, supplicaret. At ille Arabia potitus; th^re
onustam navim misit ei, large exhortatus, ut Deos adoraret.



One says why should one think the Intellectual World less Peopled, than the
Material? Pliny in his Natural History Lib. -- Cap. -- tells us, That in Africa
do sometimes appear multitudes of Aerial Shapes, which suddenly vanish. Mr.
Richard Baxter in his Certainty of the Worlds of Spirits, (the last Book he
Writ, not long before his Death) has a Discourse of Angels: and wonders they
are so little taken notice of, he has counted in Newman's Concordance of the
Bible, the word Angel in above 300 places,

Hugo Grotius in his Annotations on Jonah, speaking of Nineve, says, That
History has diverse Examples, that after a great and hearty Humiliation, God
delivered Cities, etc. from their Calamities. Some did observe in the late
Civil Wars, that the Parliament, after a Humiliation, did shortly obtain a
Victory. And as a threefold Chord is not easily broken; so when a whole Nation
shall conjoin in fervent Prayer and Supplication, it shall produce wonderful
Effects. William Lawd (Archbishop of Canterbury) in a Sermon Preached before
the Parliament, about the beginning of the Reign of King Charles I. affirms the
power of Prayer to be so great, That though there be a Conjunction or
Opposition of Saturn or Mars (as there was one of them then) it will overcome
the malignity of it. In the Life of Vavasor Powel is a memorable Account of the
effect of fervent Prayer, after an exceeding Drought: And Mr. Baxter (in his
Book afore-menioned) has several Instances of that Kind, which see.

St. Michael and all Angels.

The Collect.

O Everlasting God, who have Ordered and Constituted the services of Men and
Angels, after a Wonderful manner: Mercifully grant, that as thy Holy Angels
always do thee service in Heaven: So by thy Appointment, they may succor and
defend us, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.



CHAP. XVII.
Corps-candles in Wales.
Part of a Letter to Mr. Baxter.
SIR,
Mr. Baxter's Certainty of the Worlds of Spirits, page 137.
I am to give you the best satisfaction I can touching those Fiery Apparitions
[Corps-candles,] which do, as it were mark out the way for Corpses to their
(...), and sometimes before the Partie^ (...) fall Sick, and sometimes in their
^^^kness. I could never hear in England of these, they are common in these
Three Counties, viz. Cardigan, Carmarthan and Pembroke, And in Radnor.
and as I hear in some other parts of Wales.

These (...) in our Language we call Canhwyllan Cyrph ( i. e.) Corps-candles;
and Candles we call them, not that we see any thing besides the Light; but
because that Light does as much resemble a material Candlelight, as Eggs do
Eggs, saving, that in their Journey these Candles be modo apparentes, modo
disparentes, especially, when one comes near them; and if one come in the way
against them, unto whom they vanish; but presently appear behind and hold on
their course. If it be a little Candle pale or bluish, then follows the Corpse
either of an Abortive or some Infant; if a big one, then the Corpse of some one
come to Age: If there be seen 2, or 3, or more, some big, some small together,
then so many and such Corpses together. If two Candles come from diverse places,
and be seen to meet, the Corpses will the like; if any of these Candles are
seen to turn sometimes a little out of the way, or path, that leads to the
Church, the following Corpse will be forced to turn in that very place, for the
avoiding some dirty Lane, or plash, etc. Now let us fall to Evidence. Being
about the Age of Fifteen, dwelling at Lanylar, late at Night, some Neighbor
saw one of these Candles hovering up and down along the RiverBank, until they
were weary in beholding it, at last they left it so, and went to Bed. A few
Weeks after came a proper Damsel from Montgomery-shire, to see her Friends, who
dwelt on the other side of that River Istwith, and thought to Ford the River at
that very place where the Light was seen; being dissuaded by some lookers on
(some it is most likely of those that saw the Light) to adventure on the Water,
which was high by reason of a Flood: She walked up and down along the
River-Bank, even where, and even as the aforesaid Candle did, waiting for the
falling of the Water; which at last she took, but too soon for her, for she was
Drowned therein. Of late my Sexton's Wife, an Aged understanding Woman, saw
from her Bed, a little bluish Candle on her Tables-end, within 2, or 3, Days
after came a Fellow enquiring for her Husband, and taking something from under
his Cloak clapped it down upon the Tables-end; it was a Dead-born Child.

Another time, the same Woman saw such another Candle upon the end of the
self-same Table; within a few Days after a weak Child newly Christened by me,
was brought to the Sexton's House, where presently he died: And when the
Sexton's Wife, who was then abroad came home, she found the Child, on the other
end of the Table, where she had seen the Candle.

Some 30, or 40 Years since, my Wife's Sister, being Nurse to Baronet Rudds
three Eldest Children, and (the Lady Mistress being Dead) the Lady Comptroller
of the House going late into the Chamber where the Maidservants lay, saw no
less than Five of those Lights together. It happened a while after, that the
Chamber being newly Plastered, and a Grate of Coal-fire therein kindled to
hasten the drying of the Plaster, that five of the Maid servants went to Bed
as they were wont (but as it fell out) too soon; for in the Morning they were
all Dead, being Suffocated in their Sleep with the steem of the new-tempered
Lime and Coal.

This was at Langathen in Carmarthan-shire -- Io. Davis.
See more -- Generglyn, March 1656.

To this Account of Mr. Davis, I will subjoin what my worthy Friend and
Neighbor Randal Caldicot D. D. has affirmed to me many Years since, Viz. When
any Christian is Drowned in the River Dee, there will appear over the Water
where the Corpse is, a Light, by which means they do find the Body: And it is
therefore called the Holy Dee. The Doctor's Father was Mr. Caldicot of Caldicot
in Cheshire, which lies on the River.

CHAP. XVIII.
Oracles.
Hleronimus Cardanus Lib. III. Synesiorum Somniorum, Cap. XV. treats of this
Subject, which see. Johannes Scotus Erigena, when he was in Greece, did go to
an Oracle to enquire for a Treatise of Aristotle, and found it, by the Response
of the Oracle. This he mentions in his Works lately Printed at Oxford; and is
quoted by Mr. Anthony a Wood in his Antiquities of Oxon, in his Life. He lived
before the Conquest, and taught Greek at the Abbey in Malemsbury, where his
Scholars stabbed him with their Pen-knives for his Severity to them. Keland
mentions that his Statue was in the Choire there.

CHAP. XIX.
Ecstasy.
Cardanus, Lib. II. Synes. Somniorum. Cap. VIII. -- IN Ecstasin multis modis
dalabuntur homines: aut per Syncopen, aut animi deliquium, aut etiam proprie
abducto omni sensu externo, absque alia causa. Id vero contingit consuetis
plerunque, and nimio affectu alicujus rei laborantibus; -- Ecstasis medium est
inter vigiliam and somnium, sicut somnus inter mortem and vigiliam seu vitam --
Visa in Ecstasi certiora insomniis: Clariora and evidentiora -- Ecstasi
deprehensi audire possunt, qui dormiunt non possunt.
Anno 1670. A poor Widow's Daughter in Herefordshire went to Service not far
from Harwood [the Seat of Sir John Hoskins Baronet R. S. S] She was aged near
about twenty; fell very ill, even to the point of Death, her Mother was old and
Feeble, and her Daughter was the Comfort of her life; if she should die, she
knew not what to do: She besought God upon her Knees in Prayer, that he would
be pleased to spare her Daughters life, and take her to him: At this very time,
the Daughter fell into a Trance, which continued about an Hour; they thought
she had been Dead: When she recovered out of it, she declared the Vision she
had in this Fit, viz. That one in black Habit came to her, whose Face was so
bright and glorious she could not behold it; and also he had such brightness
upon his Breast, and (if I forget not) upon his Arms: And told her, that her
Mother's Prayers were heard, and that her Mother should shortly dye, and she
should suddenly recover: And she did so, and her Mother dyed. She has the
character of a modest, humble, virtuous Maid. Had this been in some Catholic
Country, it would have made a great noise.

It Is certain, there was one in the Strand, who lay in a Trance a few Hours
before he departed: And in his Trance had a Vision of the Death of King Charles
the II. It was at the very Day of his Apoplectick Fit.

There is a Sheet of Paper Printed 16... concerning Ecstasies, that James Usher,
late Lord Primate of Ireland, once had: But I have been assured from my
Honored Friend James Tyrrel Esquire (his Lordship's Grandson) that, this was not
an Ecstasy; but that his Lordship upon Reading the 12, 13, 14, etc. Chapters of
the Revelation, and farther reflecting upon the great increase of the Sectaries
in England, supposed that they would let in Popery, which Consideration put him
into a great Transport at the time when his Daughter (the Lady Tyrrel) came
into the Room; when he Discoursed to her diverse things (tho not all) contained
in the said Printed Paper.

CHAP. XX.
Glances of Love, Malic.
AMor ex oculo: But (as the Lord Bacon says) more by Glances, than by full
Gazings; and so for Envy and Malice.

Tell me dearest, Mr. Fletcher in Cupid's Revenge.
what is Love?
It Is a Lightning from above:
It Is an Arrow, it is a Fire,
It Is a Boy they call Desire.
It Is something Divine and Inexplicable. It is strange, that as one walks the
Streets sometimes one shall meet with an Aspect, (of Male or Female) that
pleases our Souls; and whose Natural sweetness of Nature, we could boldly rely
upon. One never saw the other before, and so could neither oblige, or disoblige
each other. Gaze not on a Maid, says Ecclus. 9. 5.

The Glances of Envy and Malice, do shoot also subtly; the Eye of the
Malicious Person does really Infect (and make Sick) the Spirit of the other.
The Lord Bacon says, it has been observed, That after Triumphs, the
Triumphants have been sick in Spirit.

The Chemist can draw subtle Spirits, that will work upon one another at some
distance, viz. Spirits of Alkalies and Acids, e. g. Spirits Celestial (Sal
Ammoniac and Spirit C. C. will work on each other at half a Yard distance, and
smoke); but the Spirits above mentioned are more subtle than they.

Non amo te Sabati, nec possum dicere quare. But if an Astrologer had their
Nativities, he would find a great disagreement in the Schemes. These are
Hyperphysical Optics, and drawn from the Heavens.

Infants are very sensible of these Irradiations of the Eyes: In Spain, France,
etc. Southern Countries, the Nurses, and Parents, rents are very shy to let
People look upon their young Children, for fear of Fascination. In Spain they
take it ill if one looks on a Child, and make one say, God Bless it. They talk
of mul de ojos. We usually say, Witches have evil Eyes.

AN Accurate Account OF Second-Sighted-Men IN SCOTLAND: IN Two Letters from a
Learned Friend of mine in Scotland.

OF Second-Sighted-Men IN SCOTLAND.
To Mr. John Aubrey Fellow of the Royal-Society.
SIR,
FOR your Satisfaction I drew up some Queries about the Secondsighted Men, and
having sent them to the Northern parts of this Kingdom, some while ago I
recieved Answers to them from two different Hands, whereof I am now to give you
an Account, viz.

Query. I.

If some few credible well-attested Instances of such a Knowledge as is
commonly called the Second-sight, can be given?

Answer.

Many Instances of such Knowledge can be given, by the Confession of such who
are skilled in that Faculty: For instances, I refer you the Fourth Query.

Query. 2.

If it consists in the discovery of present, or past Events only? Or, if it
extend to such as are to come?

Answer.

The Second-sight relates only to things future, which will shortly come to
pass. Past Events I learn nothing of it.

Query. 3.

If the Objects of this Knowledge, be sad and dismal Events only; such as
Deaths and Murders? Or, joyful and prosperous also?

Answer.

Sad and dismal Events, are the Objects of this Knowledge: As sudden Deaths,
dismal Accidents: That they are Prosperous, or Joyful, I cannot learn. Only one
instance I have from a Person worthy of Credit, and thereby judge of the
Joyfulness or Prosperity of it, and it is this. Near 40 Years ago Macklend and
his Lady, Sister to my Lord Seaforth, were Walking about their own House, and
in their return, both came into the Nurses Chamber, where their young Child was
on the Breast: At their coming into the Room, the Nurse falls a Weeping; they
asked the cause, dreading the Child was Sick, or that she was scarce of Milk:
The Nurse replied, the Child was well, and she had abundance of Milk; yet she
still Wept; and being pressed to tell what ailed her; she at last said,
Macklend would dye, and the Lady would shortly be Married to another Man. Being
enquired how she knew that Event, she told them plainly, that as they came both
into the Room, she saw, a Man with a scarlet Cloak and a white Hat, betwixt
them, giving the Lady a Kiss over the Shoulder; and this was the cause of her
Weeping. All which came to pass after Macklend's Death: the Tutor of Lovat
Married the Lady in the same Habit the Woman saw him. Now by this instance,
judge if it be Prosperous to one, it is as Dismal to another.

Query. 4.

If these Events, which Second-sighted Men discover, or foretell, be visibly
represented to them, and acted, as it were, before their Eyes?

Answer.

Affirmatively, they see those things visibly; but none sees but themselves;
for instance, if a Man's Fatal-end be Hanging; they will see a Gibbet, or a Rope
about his Neck: if Beheaded, they will see the Man without a Head; if Drowned,
they will see Water up to his Throat; if unexpected Death, they will see a
Winding Sheet about his Head: All which are represented to their View. One
Instance I had from a Gentleman here, of a Highland Gentleman of the
Mackdonalds, who having a Brother that came to visit him, saw him coming in
wanting a Head; yet told not his Brother, he saw any such thing; but within 24
Hours thereafter, his Brother was taken, (being a Murderer) and his Head cut
off, and sent to Edinburgh. Many such Instances might be given.

Query. 5.

If the Second-sight be a thing that is troublesome and uneasy to those that
have it? and such as they would gladly be rid of?

Answer.

It Is commonly talk'd-by all I spoke with, That it is troublesome; and they
would gladly be freed from it, but cannot: Only I heard lately of a Man very
much troubled in his Soul therewith, and by serious begging of God Deliverance
from it, at length lost the Faculty of the Second-sight.

Query. 6.

If any Person, or Persons, truly Godly, who may justly be presumed to be such,
have been known to have had this Gift or Faculty?

Answer.

Negatively, not any Godly, but such as are Vicious.

Query. 7.

If it descends by succession from Parents to Children? Or, if not, Whether
those that have it, can tell how they came by it?

Answer.

That it is by Succession, I cannot learn; how they came by it, is hard to
know, neither will they tell; which if they did, they are sure of their strokes
from an invisible Hand. One Instance I heard of one Allen Miller, being in
company with some Gentlemen, having gotten a little more than ordinary of that
strong Liquor they were Drinking, began to tell Stories and strange passages he
had been at: But the said Allen was suddenly removed to the farther end of the
House, and was there almost strangled; recovering a little and coming to the
place where he was before, they asked him, What it was that troubled him so? He
answered, he durst not tell; for he had told too much already.

How came they by it?

Answer.

Some say by Compact with the Devil; some say by Converse with those Demons we
call Fairies. I have heard, that those that have this Faculty of the
Second-sight, have offered to teach it to such as were Curious to know it; upon
such and such Conditions they would teach them; but their proffers were
rejected.

This is all I could learn by Tradition of that Faculty, from Knowing and
Intelligent Men. If this satisfy not these Queries aforesaid, acquaint me, and
what can be known of it, shall be Transmitted.

I cannot pass by an Instance I have from a very honest Man in the next Parish,
who told me it himself. That his Wife being big with Child near her Delivery,
he buys half a Dozen of Boards to make her a Bed against the time she lay in.
The Boards lying at the Door of his House, there comes an old Fisher-woman, yet
alive, and asked him, Whose were those Boards? He told her they were his own;
she asked again, For what use he had them? He replied, for a Bed; she again
said, intend them for what use you please, she saw a dead Corpse lying on them,
and that they would be a Coffin: Which struck the honest Man to the Heart,
fearing the Death of his Wife. But when the old Woman went off, he calls
presently for a Carpenter to make the Bed, which was accordingly done; but
shortly after the honest Man had a Child died, whose Coffin was made of the
ends of those Boards.

Sir, The Original, whereof this that I have Writ, is a true Copy, was sent by
a Minister, living within some few Miles of Inverness, to a Friend of mine whom
I employed to get Information for me; as I insinuated before: I have other
Answers to these Queries from another Hand, which I purposed to have
communicated to you at this time; but I find there will not be room enough for
them in this Sheet; howbeit, in case you think it fit, they shall be sent you
afterward.

In the mean time, I shall tell you what I have had from one of the Masters of
our College here (a North Countryman both by Birth and Education, in his
younger Years) who made a Journey in the Harvest time into the Shire of Ross,
and at my desire, made some enquiry there, concerning the Second-sight. He
reports, That there they told him many Instances of this Knowledge, which he
had forgotten, except two. The first, one of his Sisters, a young Gentlewoman,
staying with a Friend at some 30 Miles distance from her Father's House, and
the ordinary place of her Residence; One who had the Second-sight in the Family
where she was, saw a young Man attending her as she went up and down the House,
and this was about Three Months before her Marriage. The second is of a Woman
in that Country who is reputed to have the Second-sight, and declared, that
Eight Days before the Death of a Gentleman there, she saw a Bier or Coffin
covered with a Cloth which she knew, carried as it were to the place of Burial,
and attended with a great Company, one of which told her it was the Corpse of
such a Person, naming that Gentleman, who died Eight Days after. By these
Instances it appears, that the Objects of this Knowledge are not sad and dismal
Events only, but joyful and prosperous ones also: He declares farther, that he
was informed there, if I mistake not, by some of those who had the Second
sight, That if at any time when they set those strange Sights, they set their
Foot upon the Foot of another who has not the Second-sight, that other will
for that time see what they are seeing; as also that they offered, if he
pleased, to communicate the Second-sight to him. I have nothing more to add at
present, but that I am

SIR Your Faithful Friend and Humble Servant,


To Mr. John Aubery Fellow of the Royal Society at Gresham College, London.
Honored Sir,
SInce my last to you, I have had the favor of two Letters from you: To the
first Dated February 6. I had replied sooner, but that I wanted leisure to
Transcribe some farther Accounts of a Second-sighted Man, sent me from the
North, whereof (in obedience to your desire) I give here the Doubles.

May the 4th 1694.

A Copy of an Answer to some Queries concerning Second-sighted Men, sent by a
Minister living near Inverness, to a Friend of mine.
Query. 1.
That there is such an Art, commonly called the Second-sight, is certain, from
these following Instances,

First, in a Gentleman's House, one Night the Mistress considering why such
Persons whom she expected, were so late, and so long a coming, the Supper being
all the while delayed for them; a Servant Man about the House (finding the
Mistress anxious) having the Second-sight, desires to cover the Table, and
before all things were put on, those Persons she longed for would come in:
Which happened accordingly.

A Second Instance, concerning a young Lady of great Birth, whom a Rich Knight
fancied and came in suit of the Lady, but she could not endure to fancy him,
being a harsh and unpleasant Man: But her Friends importuning her daily, she
turned melancholy and lean, Fasting and Weeping continually. A common Fellow
about the House meeting her one Day in the Fields, asked her, saying, Mrs.
Kate, What is that that troubles you and makes you look so ill? She replied,
that the cause is known to many, for my Friends would have me Marry such a Man
by name, but I cannot fancy him. Nay, (says the Fellow) give over these
Niceties, for he will be your first Husband, and will not Live long, and be
sure he will leave you a rich Dowry, which will procure you a great Match, for
I see a Lord upon each Shoulder of you: All which came to pass in every
Circumstance; as Eye and Ear Witnesses declare.

A Third Instance, of a Traveller coming in to a certain House, desired some
Meat: The Mistress being something nice and backward to give him Victuals; you
need not, says he, churl me in a piece of Meat; for before an Hour and an half
be over, a young Man of such a stature and garb will come in with a great
Salmon-fish on his Back, which I behold yonder on the Floor: And it came to
pass within the said time.

A Fourth Instance, of a young Woman in a certain House about Supper time,
refused to take Meat from the Steward who was offering in the very time Meat to
her; being asked why she would not take it? replied, she saw him full of Blood,
and therefore was afraid to take any thing of his Hands. The next Morning, the
said Steward offering to compose a difference between two Men, at an Alehouse
Door got a stroke of a Sword on the Forehead, and came home full of Blood. This
was told me by an Eye Witness.

Query. 2.
Those that have this Faculty of the Second-sight, see only things to come,
which are to happen shortly thereafter, and sometimes foretell things which
fall out Three or four Years after. For instance, one told his Master, that he
saw an Arrow in such a Man through his Body, and yet no Blood came out: His
Master told him, that it was impossible an Arrow should stick in a Man's Body
and no Blood come out, and if that come not to pass he would be deemed an
Impostor. But about 5 or 6 Years after the Man died, and being brought to his
Burial-place, there arose a Debate anent his Grave, and it came to such a
height, that they drew Arms and bended their Bows, and one letting off an
Arrow, shot through the dead Body upon the Bier-trees, and so no Blood could
issue out at a dead Man's Wound. Thus his Sight could not inform him whether
the Arrow should be shot in him Alive or Dead, neither could he condescend
whether near or afar off.

Query. 3.
They foresee Murders, Drownings, Weddings, Burials, Combats, Manslaughters,
of all which many Instances might be given. Lately (I believe in August last
1695.) one told there would be Drowning in the River Bewly, which came to pass:
Two pretty Men crossing a Ford both Drowned, which fell out within a Month.
Another Instance, a Man that served the Bishop of Catnes, who had 5 Daughters
in his House, one of them grudged, that the burden of the Family lay on her
wholly: The Fellow told her that ere long she should be exonered of that Task,
for he saw a tall Gentleman in black walking on the Bishop's Right Hand whom
she should Marry: And this fell out accordingly within a quarter of a Year
thereafter. He told also of a covered Table, full of Varieties of good Fare,
and their Garbs who sat about the Table.

Query. 4.
They see all this visibly acted before their Eyes; sometimes within, and
sometimes without-doors, as in a Glass.

Query. 5.
It is a thing very troublesome to them that have it, and would gladly be rid
of it. For if the Object be a thing that is terrible, they are seen to sweat
and tremble, and shreek at the Apparition. At other times they Laugh, and tell
the thing cheerfully, just according as the thing is pleasant or astonishing.

Query. 6.
Sure it is, that the Persons that have a sense of God and Religion, and may be
presumed to be Godly, are known to have this Faculty. This evidently appears,
in that they are troubled for having it, judging it a Sin, and that it came
from the Devil, and not from God; earnestly desiring and wishing to be rid of
it if possible, and to that effect have made application to their Minister, to
Pray to God for them, that they might be exonered of that Burden. They have
supplicated the Presbytery, who judicially appointed public Prayers to be
made in several Churches, and a Sermon Preached to that purpose in their own
Parish Church by their Minister, and they have compeired before the Pulpit,
after Sermon making Confession openly of that Sin with deep sense on their
Knees; renounced any such Gift or Faculty which they had to God's dishonor; and
earnestly desired the Minister to pray for them; and this their Recantation
Recorded, and after this, they were never troubled with such a sight any more.

A Copy of a Letter, written to my self by a Gentleman's Son in Straths-pey
being a Student in Divinity, concerning the Second-sight.
SIR,
I Am more willing than able to satisfy your desire: As for instances of such
a Knowledge, I could furnish many. I shall only insert some few attested by
several of good Credit yet alive.

And First, Andrew Mackpherson of Clunie in Badenoch, being in suit of the
Lord of Gareloch's Daughter, as he was upon a day going to Gareloch, the Lady
Gareloch was going somewhere from her House within kenning to the Road which
Clunie was coming; the Lady perceiving him, said to her Attendants, that yonder
was Clunie, going to see his Mistress: One that had this Second-sight in her
company replied and said, if yon be he, unless he Marry within six Months,
he will never Mary. The Lady asked, how did he know that? He said, very well; for
I see him, says he, all enclosed in his Winding Sheet, except his Nostrils and
his Mouth, which will also close up within Six Months; which happened even as
he foretold; within the said space he died, and his Brother Duncan Mackpherson
this present Clunie succeeded. This and the like may satisfy your fourth
Query, he seeing the Man even then covered all over with his dead Linens. The
Event was visibly represented and as it were acted (before his Eyes) and also
the last part of your second Query, viz. That it was as yet to come. As for the
rest of the Questions, viz. That they discover present and past Events, is also
manifest, thus: I have heard of a Gentleman whose Son had gone abroad, and being
anxious to know how he was, he went to Consult one who had this Faculty, who
told him, that that same Day 5 a Clock in the Afternoon his Son had Married a
Woman in France, with whom he had got so many Thousand Crowns, and within two
Years he should come home to see Father and Friends, leaving his Wife with
Child of a Daughter, and a Son of six Months Age behind him: Which accordingly
was true. About the same time two Years he came home, and verified all that was
foretold.

It is likewise ordinary with Persons that lose any thing, to go to some of
these Men, by whom they are directed; how, what Persons, and in what place they
shall find it. But all such as profess that Skill, are not equally dexterous in
it. For Instance, two of them were in Mr. Hector Mackenzi Minister of Inverness
his Father's House; the one a Gentleman, the other a common Fellow; and
Discoursing by the Fireside, the Fellow suddenly begins to Weep, and cry out
Alas! alas! such a Woman is either Dead or presently expiring. The Gentlewoman
lived 5 or 6 Miles from the House, and had been some Days before in a Fever.
The Gentleman being somewhat better expert in that Faculty, said, No, says he,
she is not Dead; nor will she dye of this Disease. O says the Fellow, do you
not see her all covered with her Winding Sheet? Ay, says the Gentleman, I see
her as well as you do; but do you not see her Linen all wet? which is her
Sweat, she being presently, cooling of the Fever. This Story Mr. Hector himself
will testify. The most Remarkable of this sort, that I hear of now, is one
Archibald Mackeanyers, alias Mackdonald, Living in Ardinmurch within 10 or 20
Miles, or thereby, of Glencoe, and I was present my self, where he foretold
something, which accordingly fell-out. In 1683. this Man being in Strathspey in
John Mackdonald of Glencoe his Company, told, in Balachastell before the Lord
of Grant, his Lady, and several others, and also in my Father's House; that
Argyle, of whom few or none knew then where he was, at least there was no word
of him then here; should within two Twelve Months thereafter, come to the
West-High-lands, and raise a Rebellious Faction, which would be divided among
themselves, and disperse, and he unfortunately be taken and Beheaded at
Edinburgh, and his Head set upon the Talbooth, where his Father's Head was
before him: Which proved as true, as he foretold it, in 1685. thereafter.
Likewise in the beginning of May next after the late Revolution, as my Lord
Dundee returned up Spey-side after he had followed General Major Mac Kay in his
Rear down the length of Edinglassie, at the Milatown of Gartinbeg the Machleans
joined him, and after he had received them, he Marched forward, but they
remained behind, and fell a Plundering: Upon which, Glencoe and some others,
among whom was this Archibald, being in my Father's House and hearing that Mac
Leans and others were Pillaging some of his Lands, went to restrain them, and
commanded them to March after the Army; after he had cleared the first Town,
next my Father's House of them, and was come to the second, there standing on a
Hill, this Archibald said, Glencoe, If you take my Advice, then make off with
your self with all possible haste, for ere an Hour come and go, you will be put
to it as hard as ever you was: Some of the Company began to droll and say, what
shall become of me? Whether Glencoe believed him, or no, I cannot tell; but
this I am sure of, that whereas before he was of intention to return to my
Father's House and stay all Night, now we took leave and immediately parted:
And indeed, within an Hour thereafter Mac Kay, and his whole Forces appeared at
Culnakyle in Abernethie 2 Miles below the place where we parted, and hearing
that Cleaverhouse had Marched up the Waterside a little before, but that Mac
Leans and several other stranglers had stayed behind, commanded Major Aeneas
Mac Kay, with 2 Troops of Horse after them; who finding the said Mac Leans at
Kinchardie in the Parish of Duthel, Chased them up the Morskaith: In which
Chase Glencoe happened to be, and was hard put to it, as was foretold. What
became of Archibald himself, I am not sure, I have not seen him since, nor can
I get a true Account of him, only I know he is yet alive, and at that time one
of my Father's Men whom the Red-coats meeting, compelled to guide them, within
sight of the Mac Leans, found the said Archibald's Horse within a Mile of the
place where I left him. I am also informed, this Archibald said to Glencoe,
that he would be Murdered in the Nightime in his own House Three Months
before it happened.

Touching your 3d. Query, The Objects of this Knowledge, are not only sad and
dismal; but also joyful and prosperous: Thus, they foretell of happy
Marriages, good Children, what kind of Life Men shall Live, and in what
Condition they shall Die: Also Riches, Honor, Preferment, Peace, Plenty and
good Weather.

Query. 6. What way they pretend to have it? I am informed, that in the Isle of
Sky, especially before the Gospel came thither; several Families had it by
Succession, descending from Parents to Children, and as yet there be many there
that have it that way; and the only way to be freed from it is; when a Woman
has it her self and is Married to a Man that has it also; if in the very Act
of Delivery, upon the first sight of the Child's Head, it be Baptized, the same
is free from it; if not he has it all his Life: By which it seems, it is a
thing troublesome and uneasy to them that have it, and such as they would fain
be rid of. And may satisfy your 5th Query. And for your farther contentment in
this Query; I heard of my Father, that there was one John du beg Mac Grigor a
Reanach-man Born, very expert in this Knowledge, and my Father coming one Day
from Inverness, said by the way, that he would go into an Alehouse on the Road,
which then would be about 5 Miles off. This John Mac Grigor being in his
Company, and taking up a Slatestone at his Foot, and looking to it, replied;
Nay, says he, you will not go in there, for there is but a matter of a Gallon
of Ale in it even now, and ere we come to it, it will be all near Drunken, and
those who are Drinking there, are Strangers to us, and ere we be hardly past
the House, they will discord among themselves: Which fell out so; ere we were two
pair of Butts past the House, those that were Drinking there went by the Ears,
wounded and mischieved one another. My Father by this and several other things
of this nature, turned curious of this Faculty, and being very intimate with
the Man, told him he would fain learn it: To which he answered, that indeed he
could in 3 Days time Teach him if he pleased; but yet he would not advise him
nor any Man to learn it; for had he once learned he would never be a Minute in
his Life, but he would see innumerable Men and Women Night and Day round about
him; which perhaps he would think wearisome and unpleasant, for which reason my
Father would not have it. But as Skilful as this Man was, yet he knew not what
should be his own last End; which was Hanging: And I am Informed, that most, if
not all of them, though they can foresee what shall happen to others; yet they
cannot foretell, much less prevent what shall besal themselves. I am also
informed by one who came last Summer from the Isle of Sky, that any Person that
pleases will get it Taught him for a Pound or two of Tobacco.

As for your last Query. For my own part, I can hardly believe they can be
justly presumed, much less truly Godly. As for this Mac Grigor several report,
that he was a very civil discreet Man, and some say he was of good Deportment,
and also unjustly Hanged. But Archibald Mackenyere will not deny himself, but
once he was one of the most Notorious Thieves in all the Highlands: But I am
informed since I came to this Knowledge which was by an Accident too long here
to relate, that he is turned honester than before.

There was one James Mack Coil-vic-alaster alias Grant, in Glenbeum near
Kirk-Michael in Strathawin, who had this Sight, who I hear of several that were
well acquainted with, was a very honest Man, and of right blameless
Conversation. He used ordinarily by looking to the Fire, to foretell what
Strangers would come to his House the next Day, or shortly thereafter, by their
Habit and Arms, and sometimes also by their Names; and if any of his Goods or
Cattle were missing, he would direct his Servants to the very place where to
find them whether in a Mire or upon dry Ground; he would also tell, if the
Beast were already Dead, or if it would Die ere they could come to it; and in
Winter if they were thick about the Fireside, he would desire them to make
room to some others that stood by, tho they did not see them, else some of them
would be quickly thrown into the midst of it. But whether this Man saw any more
than Brownie and Meig Mallach, I am not very sure: Some say, he saw more
continually, and would often be very angry-like, and something troubled,
nothing visibly moving him: Others affirm he saw these two continually, and
sometimes many more.

They generally term this Second-sight in Irish Tashitaraughk, and such as have
it Taishatrin, from Taish, which is properly a shadowy substance, or such
naughty, and thing, as can only, or rather scarcely be discerned by the Eye;
but not caught by the hands: for which they assigned it to Bugles or Ghosts, so
that Taishtar, is as much as one that converses with Ghosts or Spirits, or as
they commonly call them, the Fairies, or Fairy-Folks. Others call these Men
Phissichin, from Phis, which is properly Foresight, or Foreknowledge. This is
the surest and clearest account of Second-sighted Men that I can now find, and
I have set it down fully, as if I were transiently telling it, in your own
presence, being curious for nothing but the verity, so far as I could. What you
find improper or superfluous, you can best compendise it, etc.

Thus far this Letter, written in a Familiar and Homely style, which I have
here set down at length: Meg Mullack, and Brownie mentioned in the end of it,
are two Ghosts, which (as is constantly reported) of old haunted a Family in
Straths-pey of the Name of Grant. They appeared, the first in the likeness of a
young Lass: The Second of a young Lad.

Dr. Moulin (who presents his service to you) has no aquaintance in Orkney;
but I have just now spoken with one who not only has acquaintance in that
Country, but also entertains some thoughts of going thither himself, to get me
an account of the Cures usually practiced there. The Cortex Winteranus
mentioned by you as an excellent Medicine, I have heard commended as good for
the Scurvy; if you know it to be Eminent or Specific (such as the Peruvian
Bark is) for any Disease. I shall be well pleased to be informed by you.

Thus, Sir, you have an account of all my Informations concerning
Second-sighted Men: I have also briefly touched all the other particulars in
both your Letters, which needed a Reply, except your Thanks so liberally and
obligingly returned to me for my Letters, and the kind sense you express of
that small service. The kind reception which you have given to those poor
trifles, and the value which you put on them, I consider as effects of your
kindness to my self, and as engagements on me to serve you to better purpose
when it shall be in the power of

Your Faithful Friend and Servant.


Additaments of Second-sight.
DIembroke in his Book de Peste, gives us a story of Dimmerus de Raet, that
being at Delft, where the Plague then raged, sent then his Wife Thirty Miles
off. And when the Doctor went to see the Gentleman of the House, as soon as he
came in, the old Chair-woman that washed the Clothes fell a weeping: He asked
her, Why? said she, My Mistress is now dead: I saw her Apparition but just now
without a Head, and that it was usual with her when a Friend of hers died, to
see their Apparitions in that manner, though never so far off. His Wife died at
that time.

Mr. Th. May in his History Lib. VIII. writes, that an Old Man (like an Hermit)
Second-sighted, took his leave of King James the First, when he came into
England: He took little notice of Prince Henry, but addressing himself to the
Duke of York [since King Charles I.] fell a weeping to think what misfortunes
he should undergo; and that he should be one of the miserablest unhappy Princes
that ever was.

A Scotch Noble Man sent for one of these Second-sighted Men out of the
High-lands to give his Judgment of the then great Favorite George Villiers,
Duke of Buckingham; as soon as ever he saw him, Pish, said he, he will come to
nothing. I see a Dagger in his breast; and he was stabbed in the breast by
Capt. Felton.

Sir James Melvin has several the like Stories in his History.

A certain Old Man in South Wales told a Great Man there of the Fortune of his
Family; and that there should not be a Third Male Generation.

In Spain there are those they call Saludadores, that have this kind of Gift.
There was a Dominican Friar one -- a Portugues belonging to Queen Katharine
Dowagers Chapel, who had the Second-sight.

FINIS.

