THE FAITHFUL SURVEYOUR: Discovering Diverse errors in Land-measuring; And
showing How to measure all manner of ground, and to plot it, to shut it, and to
prove the shutting, by the Chain only; as quickly, exactly, and with less help
then with any Instrument whatsoever: as also to take distances of a mile-space
by the Chain without measuring of them, and the situation of any building.

Teaching likewise The making and use of a new and general Instrument, called A
Pandoron; which, as exactly and with less charge, supplies the use of the
Plain-Table, Theodelete, Quadrant, Quadrat, Circumferentor, and any other
observing Instrument.

To this is added A Discovery of diverse secrets touching conveying and
cleansing of water, flowing and drayning of grounds, quenching houses on fire,
etc.

With An Appendix unfolding errors in board and timber-measure, with
directions for making a Carpenters-Ruler.

By GEORGE ATVVELL, alias WELLS, now Teacher of the Mathematics in CAMBRIDGE.

Printed for the Author, at the charges of Nathanael Rowls, Doctor of Physic.
MDCLVIII.

To the Reverend, and his highly honored friend, WILLIAM DILLINGHAM, Doctor of
Divinity, and Master of Emmanuel College in CAMBRIDGE.
THat speech of him was neither false, nor frivolous, who said, Librorum
fortuna nihil fere a liberorum condition dissentit: in his edendis insudat
corpus; animus in illis aestuat. And, as there is need of a midwife, to help
bring them forth: so is there also need of a nurse, to help attend and defend
them. Sir, you have been the midwife (I must needs confess) already, without
whose help (I dare boldly say) this piece had never seen the light of the Sun.
I see a company of sorry Pamphlets daily come forth with easy passage; that
neither benefit Church, nor Commonwealth, and are good for nothing but to
corrupt the minds of youth: Eunuchi gignunt, steriles pariunt: plures haec
aetas (...) tales in uno anno extrusit, quam quibus ipsa Arithmetica su^ficiat
enumerandis; So that we may well take up the complaint of Famianus Strada,
Obruimur libris, oculi legendo, manus volutando dolent. But as for this work,
notwithstanding that not I my self alone, but also all that have seen it, do
judge it to be both as necessary and beneficial to a Commonwealth, as any at
this day extant; and the matter whereof it treats (for the most part) such as
was never yet handled by any; (as measuring of all kind of ground by the Chain
only, as quickly, and exactly, as by any Geodetical Instrument whatsoever, And
what can be more beneficial then quenching an house on fire? with diverse other
such Problems.) Yet, not only this, but several other pieces, as commodious
and beneficial to a Commonwealth as this is; as, My direction and method of
teaching school: (which your self, Sir, have both read and examined; together
with another piece of Common Arithmetic, and The Doctrine of Triangles, and a
fourth piece of Dialling.) whereof both the Reverend Vice Chancellor, and
others the Heads of the Universitie, have so willingly and freely long since
granted me their hands for license of impression; hitherto have wanted the good
hap of being able so much as to crack the shell, till now that this is got
forth and flown abroad; but at Doctor Rowls his cost: for amongst all our
Booksellers none would ever bid me a penny for my copy; so that I have lost
all mine own labor, and a great deal of charge in transcribing; so that had
not Doctor Rowls begged a pardon for it, it had gone to the pot. When the other
will be printed, God knows, they are ready: the children are brought to the
birth, but there is no power to bring forth. I fear I shall not speed so well,
as the report goes of a Kentish Carpenter, who going from home on Mondays, and
coming home on Saturdays; for a month together, each several Saturday his
wife welcomed him home with a new babe. If I could have but one of these in a
month, I should think it well. And since this is born, it must be kept:
therefore my humble request to you is, That you would be pleased to take it
into your protection; though I am not able to put it in so fine a dress as
others can, yet remember (I beseech you) Sub sordida vest saepe latet
scientia. You are the best able to protect it, of any I know, in regard of your
excellent knowledge in all kind of good learning; and more particularly (which
is the main reason of my taking Sanctuary at your Castle;) in Geodesie, the
subject matter of this Discourse, which I know, your love is such to the
furtherance of all good Arts, that you will not refuse to harbor and shelter.
Which so accepting, you shall for ever oblige,

Your most subject servant, GEO. ATVVELL.

The Author to the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
HAd I fancied the giddy humor of obscure wits, who deliver their dry notions
as dubiously, as the deceitful Oracles did their responses of old; lest by
speaking too plain their shallowness be made manifest to all men: I might have
spoke as little sense in as few words to as little purpose. But (leaving these
to their folly) I never accounted their design either prudent, or politic;
who, having enlarged their stock of knowledge by the good improvement of their
opportunities, deliver themselves so darkly to the world, as if they had a mind
only to satisf^e it what they could do, and not what they should. I like
Pythagoras his counsel, (...). Either speak to purpose, or hold your tongue:
and, methinks, his counsel pleases me the better; when I remember the curious
Naturalist's observation, That men have a double fence to keep in this slippery
member; which insinuates thus much to us, That one had need be wary, -- (...),
Hom. Odyss. (...). v. 230.
What and How he speaks. ^^w, to walk secure from the default of each of these
by-ways is the drift of my present writing: which, had not the profit of others
more stirred me up to; then the profit, pleasure, or honor I could have
proposed to my self in such an enterprise, it might have lain buried in
oblivion: but I remembered that saying of Tully; Non nobis, sed patriae nati
sumus. The Law of humanity enjoins us all with one shoulder to help forward any
useful or profitable design, and to treasure up our notions and observations
for the good of others.

Condo, and compono, quae mox depromere possum. Horat. Ep. 1. lib. 1.

I lay up, that I may lay out: and we never so well discharge our selves of our
talents, as when we most largely diffuse them to the improvement of humane
society. Seeing then my lot is fallen among the scriblers of this present age,
I make a double request to two sorts of Readers. First, To the ingenious
Scholar; who may, perhaps, nauseate this homely fare and domestic language,
and may, it is not unlike, find flaws in the unwary connection of the sense, or
unpolished contents: my Apology is only this, that I write to be understood of
all, and so bent my country-stile to the capacities of those I supposed would
chiefly put the contents of it in practice. My Second request is to the honest
country- farmer, or whosoever he be who intends to mete his ground by my
chain; that he would go through with it, and make it his own as he goes: for by
so doing he may find benefit assuredly. My last request is to both jointly;
Not to reject the grounds of it without good reason, nor without a pair of
spectacles to convince experience, (...), the mother of Arts, as the
Philosopher calls her. I might put this into the balance to weigh down the
censure of both, -- (...). but I forbear; lest I should tire the Reader's
patience with too tedious a Prologue, letting truth stand on its own bottom:
and commend it in general to the well-improvers of it, and rest thy friend to
serve thee,

GEORGE ATWELL.

The Author to his Book.
GO, little book, and travel through the land:
None will refuse to take thee in their hand.
Fear neither Momus mouth, nor Zoilus quill:
Assuredly, there is none, can do thee ill.
Both simple, gentle; Barons, Lords, and Knights,
Will take thee for the chiefest of delights.
Thou teach them to measure all their ground;
Which, certainly, will save them many a pound.
Plain-Table, and Pandoron with its sight,
Circumferentor, and Theodelite,
Quadrat, Quadrant, and Chain alone; with these
Thou Wilt teach them for to measure with great ease.
Some give a penny to a fire that is past:
But thou giv'st pounds, for to prevent the wast.
Thou cleansest water, flow'st and drain'st their grounds,
And bring water plenty to their Towns;
Thou teach also to enrich their mold:
And in the mean while to fill their chests with gold.
Thus doing, thou shall never be forgotten;
But thou shall live, when I am dead, and rotten.
G. A.

Upon his wolthy Friend, Mr. George Atwell, and this his exact Method of
Surveying.
So, n^w the Press has a new labor past,
Which she will her b^st acknowledge, if not last.
Never did her letters such a posture show,
So advantageous, since they first did know,
TO instruct the world how they their Acres should
Cast-up and measure by the perch or rood.
'Twas but of late, since which applause we viewed
Some labors in this kind, and thought them good:
But they themselves will now no more aspire
To further praise; but all consent to admire
Content, since thou art come. So when we spy
A curious piece, that entertains our eye
With livelyness, w' approve't; yet, when we part,
Forget it in a livelyer pieces art.
Me thinks, I see how with a glance men lay
Others aside, and by their longer stay
Speak their contentment of thy book, and stand
Surveying that as thou of late their land;
With such exactness. -- Here thine art's by thee
So raised, that truth meets with facility.
Before we did by Sines and Tangents go,
Theodelete, Circumferentor too;
Ways, that I sigh to think of: which at the sight
Of the marshalled figures able were to affright
An unassured eye: who without fear
Against such a rallied number dared appear?
Armies of figures in the field then stood,
Foresight it was (though without fear of blood)
To reach an Herbam porrigere. Prove.
herb; a sign we could not know
TO or'^come that bed, where lately it did grow.
This by thy chain alone thou do; and we
Admire thine art, admire thy brevity.
Men of thy temper, and that own a mind
As thine, so searching, we may seek, not find:
At thoughts of it we can securely cry;
The acutest mind still has the piercing'st eye.
John Hutchinson, Trin. Coll.

To his honored friend, Mr. George Atwell, on his Faithful Surveyour.
SEe the style alters; Poets did but feign:
Counter- Pandora with her box again.
Sals-bury-stones, that posed the baker's loaves,
Might here have set themselves in these thy groves.
Thy hand has meted, and be sure to try
There Is nothing in it but squared by Geometry.
But sound thy Art, and teach us how to get
Some lands, as thou have taught to measure it:
For, while we other's mete, our spirits rise,
And in their acres we but Tantalize.
Yet, it is too true, estates take no degree
In The Confines of our University.
He, who was asked, Where our possessions lay,
Might well have thus resolved, In Terr' Incognita,
Or, In the Isles, that well may bear the date,
From their unlucky seat, Unfortunate.
Help out, invention; and assist, ye hands:
It Is Scholars fate, you see, to have no lands.
If any they appropriate will have,
They must, Ben-Syra-like, mete out their grave:
Or else, if all plots fail, may try their skill
To take the angles of Parnassus hill:
But we will suspend our judgment, and not dare
To question, till we see thy Finis there.
The Welsh-mans sentence was content to stay
The Apostles leisure till the Judgement-day:
And, shall not we with patience wait to see
The true Effigies of thy Art and thee.
Till then we will try our skill, no spirit raise,
Without a Charm, to encircle thee with bays.
I. Charles, T. C. Philomath.

To the praise of the Ingenuous Book of his honored friend, Mr. George Atwell,
called his Faithful Surveyour.
On the Authors name, GEORGIUS ATWELL. Anagram. AGROS E VVLTV LEGI.
THis book's thine own, none need to fear,
Each leaf thy picture in it does bear.
It Is the Idea of thy mind,
And face to both are here conjoined.
On his Book.
I Do not wonder that Medusa's head
At sight could render living mortals dead;
Since the perusal of this book (whose vein
The richest gems of wisdom does contein)
I seeing wondered, wondering dead I fell,
To view so much locked in so small a shell.
On the Author.
WHat splendor can, or Jove, or Saturn add
(Who borrow all) to Sol most richly clad
In golden vestiments? to Sol, whose rays
Each morn foretells to all their Halcyon days?
Muse. T'averre he wants no praise.
WHat glory then ( dear Muse, I prithee, tell)
To him (whose name subscribed shows all is done well)
Ought we to give? to him, whose pregnant wit
Shall live, while others may in silence sit.
Muse. On earth there is none, that is fit.
ON earth there is none, that is fit? then soar the skies,
Brave George! whose fame beyond the clouds does rise
In spite of envies Clog, and does aspire
Heavens Canopie beset around with fire.
Thither thy self retire.
D. Jenner, A. B. Trin. Coll.

To his much respected Friend, Mr George Atwell, upon his Book Of Surveying,
etc.
TO dress my lines in praise of Thee, my quill
I Would wish to dip, where Poets once did fill
Their versing pens; whose thoughts when they would rehearse,
Like metal in a mould would run to verse:
I Would show my self then gratefuller to Thee,
Then these detracting times could spiteful be.
Here you the Curtain draw, and let us see
The now-known worth of concealed mystery.
'Twas Nature formed the Earth, gave treasure:
But how to give the price, and measure
With lines unparalled the embroidred ground;
To GEORGE alone his praise it must redound:
It Is ATWELL gets the start of Fancies raisd;
They at HIS published work may stand amazed.
Let all the BOOK now view; give her the praise,
That made the tools: but reach to him the bays,
That is the Artist, and who undertook
To make himself the Author of this Book,
To dissolve Riddles, make Aenigmaes plain,
Which have required an OEdipus his brain.
Envy, be gone, Apollo; be their guide:
To see what Gordian knots are here unty'de;
And couched handsomely what might in short
Please both the Learned and the Vulgar sort.
H. Rich, A. B. Coll. Gone. and Caii.

The Contents of the Chapters in The Faithful Surveyour.
Chap. I. OF errors in Land-measure. Page. 1 Chap. II. Of making and keeping
the Field-book, and measuring Pasture by the Plain-Table. Page. 7 Chap. III.
How to set down your notes in your Field-book, and to draw your station-lines
by the Plain-Table. Page. 9 Chap. IV. Of plotting at home, and of several ways.
Page. 23 Chap. V. Of Calculation, or casting up. Page. 25 Chap. VI. Of
measuring a Wood. Page. 29 Chap. VII. Of dividing or laying out of ground.
Page. 29 Chap. VIII. To measure arable-common-field-land. Page. 31 Chap. IX. Of
hilly grounds. Page. 32 Chap. X. Of reducing a Plot from a greater to a lesser.
Page. 37 Chap. XI. Of measuring Pasture-ground by the Chain only, and that as
speedily and exactly, as with any Instrument whatsoever, and with less help,
though in mystie weather; and to plot, shut, and prove the plot thereby also.
Page. 39 Chap. XII. To measure a Wood by the Chain only. Page. 43 Chap. XIII.
Of taking distances by the Chain only. Page. 46 Chap. XIV. To take the
declination of any straight upright wall for Dialling, by the Chain only.
Page. 48 Chap. XV. Of Coloring and beautifying of Plots. Page. 52 Chap. XVI.
To measure all manner of ground by the Pandoron, or any other graduated
Instrument. Page. 53 Chap. XVII. In measuring by graduated Instruments, to know
if your Plot will shut, or no. Page. 57 Chap. XVIII. To take terrestrial
distances by the Plain-Table, or Pandoron, as by the Table. Page. 58 Chap. XIX.
To do the like by the Pandoron as it is a Quadrant, or by any graduated
Instrument. Page. 58 Chap. XX. Of taking altitudes and distances Celestial by
the Pandoron, or Quadrant. Page. 61 Chap. XXI. Of taking altitudes terrestrial
by the Quadrant. Page. 63 Chap. XXII. Of taking altitudes terrestrial by the
Quadrant or Pandoron. Page. 66 Chap. XXIII. To take the situation of a place
for a Dial, with the declination and reclination thereof by the Pandoron. Page.
71 Chap. XXIV. Of conveying water. Page. 76 Chap. XXV. Of Instruments for
conveying water, and their use. Page. 82 Chap. XXVI. Of flowing of Grounds.
Page. 8^ Chap. XXVII. Of drayning of Grounds. Page. 88 Chap. XXVIII. To cleanse
a ditch, whether it be full of flaggs, or mud, and not empty out the water.
Page. 93 Chap. XXIX. Of cleansing a Pond six or seven pole broad, being grown
over with a coat of weeds, that it will near bear one, without abating the
water. Page. 93 Chap. XXX. Of cleansing water. Page. 94 Chap. XXXI. Of
quenching an house on fire. Page. 95 Chap. XXXII. Of keeping a fire light all
night, without a farthing charge. Page. 99 Chap. XXXIII. Of laying down of
ground for Pasture. Page. 100 Chap. XXXIV. Of the choice of a rich ground.
Page. 102 Chap. XXXV. Of enriching lean ground. Page. 104 Chap. XXXVI. Of
planting Willows. Page. 110 Chap. XXXVII. Of reducing Wood-land to
statute-measure, and statute to Wood-land. Page. 111 Chap. XXXVIII. To find
any scale that a plot is made by, the content being known. Page. 112 Chap.
XXXIX. Of making an Index, or Table, whereby readily to find out any grounds
that ever you have measured, and to tell the quantity of them an hundred years
after, and draw a plot of them, without going again into the field. Page. 113
The Contents of the Chapters in the Appendix to The Faithful Surveyour.
Chap. I. OF making the Rule. Page. 116 Chap. II. Of measuring of boards by the
Rule. Page. 121 Chap. III. Of making of a Table of timber-measure for square
timber, to make the scale of square timber-measure by: as also the
under-measure. Page. 123 Chap. IV. Of measuring solids, as stone, timber, etc.
and first of square timber. Page. 125 Chap. V. Of round timber. Page. 127 Chap.
VI. Of the proof of these scales by Arithmetical calculation. Page. 129 Chap.
VII. Showing the manner of placing these upon the Rule. Page. 130 Chap. VIII.
Of taper-timber, whether Conical or Pyramidal. Page. 135 Chap. IX. Of the
making of four other lines on the flat-sides, etc. Page. 139
Addenda and Emendanda.
Gentle Reader,
I desire thee to take notice of these my Additions, and Emendations, before
thou read my Book.

G. A.


Page 9. l. 8. for first, read where. page 14. line 12. put out no^ page 21.
for subtendents CX 674, and 756. which are at the top of the third column, s^t
them at the bottom of the first and second columns. p. 27. against line 21,
etc. set in the margin, To bring links into acres and poles. p. 28. l. 5. for
7. read 77. p. 36. l. 23. after quadrant, read book or pastboard. p. 37. l. 2.
read, tran viz. from the line drawn. p. 42 l. 10. for is, r. in. and line 15.
likewise you may. and l. 33. r. to the line. p. 43. l. 11. r. a spinny of wood.
p 45. l. 21. r. save only if in measuring you have any sorry bound book or
past-beard: and against line 23. write, How to set out a perpendicular into an
angle with the chain only, p. 57. l. 28. for mark r. work. p. 63. l. 19. r.
the whole angle B. p. 64. l. 10. r. A, I find. and l. 13. at D, I find. p.
65. l. 7. for 10, r. 16. and l. 11. and l. 13, for L. r. lin. p. 69. l. 12. for
edge, r. eye. and l. 29. r. 100 of the Quadrate. p. 70. l. 34, for you, r. I.
p. 72. l. 9. for declination, r. the angle of the wall and Sun. p. 73. l. 10
put out, As the Radius to the sine of the Suns greatest declination 23.31. and
write it thus; As Radius To sine of the Suns greatest declination 23 31. So is
the sine of the Sums distance from the nearest Equator ^ To the sine of the
declination desired 10 4
p. 74. there is a better figure in page 51. p. 78. the commaes should be left
out, and l. 10. for lines, r. times. p. 85. l. 33. r. a foot and an half long.
and l. 36. r. seriles. p 96. l. 29. for tre-sole, r. trefoot. p. 112. l. 20.
for 32 82, r. 23 82.

In the Appendix.
Page 130. line 12. for square, read stroke. l. 15. distinguish at third: at l.
16. at that. l. 25. for sines, r. sives. l 30. r. 5, 10, 15. l. 33. for 38 r.
30. p. 135. l. 31. for 2. r. 12. p. 141. l. 20. distinguish a^ 8. p. 142. l. 9.
for set, r. get.

The Faithful Surveyour.
CHAP. I. Of errors in Land-measure.
Diverse are of that opinion, That if two pieces of land are of equal
peripherie, that those two pieces are both of one and the same content. But
that is easily discovered false; for let one piece of land lie in a true
square; being a quarter of a mile square, or 80. poles square, viz. a mile in
all; the content is just 40. acres. For every one knows, that 40. pole long,
and 4. pole broad; or 80. pole long and 2. pole broad, make an acre. Therefore
80. pole long, and 80. pole broad, must needs make 40. acres, and that 80.
times 80. is 6400. pole, which divided by 160. (the poles in an acre) is just
40. acres. But in a Circle of a mile about, viz. 320. pole, if (according to
Archimedes) we multiply the Circumference by 7. which is 2240. and divide it by
22. it gives 101 11/22 the diameter: now then, if we multiply half the diameter
50 and 20/22, or 50 and 10/11 by half 320. the Circumference, viz. 160. (which
are also the poles in an acre) first 160. by 50. is 50. acres: then multiply
160. by 10. facit 1600. which divide by 11. it gives 145. pole and ^/11. so
that the Circle contains more then the square by more then a fifth part. And as
in land, so in timber; and therefore that must needs be a false way of
measuring round timber, to gird it about, and to take the fourth part thereof
for the square, as plainly appears in this; that, when they have hewed it, they
make more of it then they made before. Also a square is more capacious then an
oblong; for every Shepherds boy can tell, that if he has but 24. hurdles in
his fold, and that it goes upon a rood, where he has b^^ ^ne at each end, and
11 on each side; his sheep will lie thicker a great deal, then if his fold goes
six on each side, and end: though he knows not the proportion, yet he perceives
a sensible difference; and so well he may as being more then three to one ods.
For it is as 11 to 36. for once 11. is but 11, and six times six is 36. And for
want of this knowledge many surfeit their sheep in summer, by lying too hot. If
I may advise, they shall never lay sheep thicker, then to allow 20. foot of
ground to each sheep, so that if you have rod hurdles of 8. foot a piece, viz,
64. foot; in one hurdle square I would not put above 3 sheep and; nor in slat
hurdles of nine foot long, above four sheep; and so doing, if your 24. nine
foot hurdles go square, it may hold 96. sheep, and your 24. eight foot hurdles
84. sheep.

Another great error I have known maintained by a great Rabbi Surveyour; that
in measuring a triangle, it holds good to take the half of any side for the
base, and the whole perpendicular from the angle opposite to that base, to the
middle of that base, and vice versa, and their product to give the content. But
this is demonstrated to be false thus. In this oblong figure ABCD, let the two
sides AB, and CD be 30 a piece, and the two sides AC, and BD 40 a piece, so 30
multiplied by 40 gives 1200 the content of this oblong, which is divided into
two rectangle triangles, by the Hypotenuse AD, which two triangles ABD, and ACD
are both equal; for that the sides AB, and CD are equal by construction, also
the AC and BD are equal by construction, and AD is common to both; therefore
the two angles B and C are equal: likewise the two triangles ABD, and ACD are
equal; per 4. prop. Element the 1. Axiom. the 7. Qua ejusdem sunt dimidia,
inter se sunt aequalia: therefore either triangle must contain 600. Now in the
triangle ACD, to discover the falsehood we must first find the length of the
line ED thus. First, square the line CD, 30, facit 900. also square CE, 20,
facit 400; then C being a right angle, and we seek ED, the Hypotenuse, we must
add 400, and 900, facit 1300, whose square root is ED 36 ^/^3, multiply this
by 20, the half of AC, facit 721, 1/10, the content, too much almost by a sixth
part, being it should be but 600. and so you shall find it, if you multiply
AC, 40 by half CD, 15. for the oblong AFHC, is equal to the oblong FBDH,
therefore it is the half of ABCD Also the triangle DGH, which is taken out of
the triangle DCA, is equal to the triangle AFG, added to it.

Or if you will, make AD the base, upon which you may let fall a perpendicular
from the angle C; but then it must not fall on the middle of the line, except
it be the base of an ^sosceles triangle, but if you will needs find the true
place of the field where the perpendicular must fall, I know no instrument you
can work by, be it plain-Table, Theodelete, Quadrant, Circumferentor, no not so
simple as the chain alone, but you may set out a square by it; therefore set up
your instrument in the station-line, going forward straight in it, till you
ghuesse that a line out of the angle will cut your sta^^^n-line squire-wise;
which if you think you are far enough, set up your instrument there and first
let it behold the mark you came from; if it does not then behold also the mark
you go to, you are out of your line, and must remove it side-wayes which having
rectified it that way, then see if it look right into the corner: which if it
do, it gives you the place in the station-line desired, which is 32 from A, and
but 18. from D, viz. at I, which is thus made good. As the base 50. is to 70.
the sum of 30, and 40. the two other sides AC, and CD; so is the difference
of the same two sides 10, to 14. which 14 being taken out of 50, the whole
base, the perpendicular shall fall on the middle of the remain 36, the half
whereof is 18, to which add 14, it makes 32 from A to I, as before; and that
taken out of 50. leaves ID, 18, as before. Now to find the length of the
perpendicular CI, if you measure it in the field you will find it 24 pole,
which is thus proved. Take the square of the side AI, 32, which is 1024. out of
the square of AC, 40, viz. 1600, rests 576, whose square root is 24, the
perpendicular desired. Now if you multiply 50 the whole base by 12. the half
perpendicular: or 25. the half of 50. by 24, you have 600, as before. Thus you
see it double proved, that this way of taking the middle of the base for the
fall of the perpendicular, is for the most part an extreme false way: and the
sixth part of the ground and more may be easily got and lost hereby: insomuch
that I have known by this very error above twenty pounds got and lost in one
day between the buyer and seller, several times, and by several men. But
whether Balls of London used this way, or worse, I know not, who was sent down
by the Lady Morrison, to survey a Farm at Hardwick near Shefford in
Bedfordshire, whereof she had let a new lease for 21 years to one Child at
five shillings the acre. Balls makes of it 400 acres just: Child thinks
himself wronged, sends for me, desiring me to measure it, not saying a word to
me upon what terms, or that it had been measured before. I set to work, and
having done, I give in mine account for 322 acres. He asked me if I would
justify it. I told him, I accounted him as my friend, I would stay for
satisfaction a twelve-moneth; let him keep my plats, if in that time I were
disproved two acres, I would have nothing for doing it. Whereupon he works to
the Lady to send another to measure it; but durst not let her know he had
measured it, but that his reapers, and mowers, nor his seed never gave it for
so much. He prevails with her, she sends another; he measures it, knowing as
little of any man's measuring, as I did of Balls. Upon his account we two
differed but one rood in the whole thing, which he had made it less then I
did, by reason I measured half Shefford-brook more then he did. So I saved him
19 pounds ten shillings per annum; which if it had been yearly payment, at ten
in the hundred, as money was then, compound interest came to above 1200.
pounds, but being half yearly payments, nine pounds 15 shillings, half yearly,
42 payments at five in the 100, which was the common reckoning both then and
how still for half a year, comes to above 1300 pounds, a good Farmers estate.
Therefore it behooves every man that has, or may for himself or friend have
occasion to let or hire, buy or sell land or timber, not to go on other men's
legs, nor to see with another man's eyes, that have such easy means to attain
the skill of it themselves. I make no doubt but that there are many Gentlemen,
who have spent much time in the Universitie in Music, yea, and other studies
too, do wish at this day, (and more would wish, if they could see it) they had
at least spent some of that time in the Mathematics; whereby they might have
benefited both themselves and their Country: which in commendations of it,
Pitiscus in his Preface to his book Geodaeticorum says, Socrates hunc
principalem Geometriae finem esse statuebat, ut agrum planum metiri,
dividereque possit. I have seen some spend eight years in learning Music; if
they would bestow but two years in the Mathematics, it would have done them
more good, and they might have done the Commonwealth good. Of all the seven
liberal Sciences that may best be spared, as least beneficial to a
Commonwealth; and for my part, I had rather (if you will believe me) that my
feet could pace 1000 acres of land of mine own, then my fingers to play 1000
lessons on the best Lute in the town, though I might have it for my labor; and
he that is not of my mind, it is pity, if ever he have 1000 acres, but he
should change them for a fiddle. Recreation, I confess, is good; but I would
not have it made an occupation. They will account it small recreation hereafter
to be able to say, Post habui tamen illorum mea seria ludo.

Diverse such falsities I have seen; but I am loath to digress too much. Diverse
other false ways there are; but I had rather I were come to lay down true ways,
then to discover errors. Therefore that we take not a false way to our
purposed end, we will ride straight on to the next town; viz. the uncertain
ways: where we must stay a little, and give our pen drink too, that so we may
the easier find the true way in such uncertain ways.

First, it is no certain way to lay a great deal of land upon a little paper,
as to work by the scale of 32 as many do, whereby upon each inch of paper they
lay six acres, one rood, 24 pole; and it is an easy matter for a good Artist
with good instruments to fail an acre in an hundred, much more with so small a
scale, and blunt compasses: neither is there any that ever I knew use so small
a scale, that can or dare say, that he is able to distinguish a quarter of a
pole, whereby oft-times there is six in the hundred got and lost, not in a
year, but in a day.

Secondly, To trust only to the needle in any graduated instrument, as
Circumferentor, Theodelete: and partly for fear of a loadstone near; and also
it is a hard matter by an ordinary needle, though of four or five inches long,
to distinguish a degree, much less five or six minutes.

Thirdly, For overcurious ways, such as if I shall spend so much more time
then ordinary, that the gain or loss will not countervail the time bestowed on
it: therefore as upon buying and selling there is some land of 20 or 40 pound
the acre: some I have measured where every man in the town has hired the tithe
communibus annis, for two shillings per acre; others have undertook plowing for
2 shillings six pence, others have let for five shillings, as the Lady M^rrison
aforesaid. Now I will not stand so curiously upon that of five shillings per
acre, nor work by so large a scale, as for that of 30 or 40 pounds the acre.
This comes to five shillings the pole, the other very little above half a
farthing a pole. Two pole got or lost in the first is the Surveyour's ordinary
days wages; whereas five acres of the other will but do it. Again, as there
may be curiosity in measuring, so there may be in casting: but let the same
rule be the guide in both: and although Pitiscus has done exceeding learnedly
through all his book, as like a Mathematick-Professour, and well skilled in the
doctrine of triangles; yet he that shall seek out his sides, bases, and
perpendiculars by Sines, Tangents, or Logarithmes; or cast them up by
Logarithmes, as some others have taught of late: yet neither Pitiscus nor his
followers have shown themselves practitioners; neither of them ever measured,
plotted, and cast 900 acres in three days, whereof for a mile together the side
was as straight as Hockley-brook, as the Proverb is: (for it was Hockley-brook
it self,) yet platted and cast every crook; and so did I Shefford brook also:
and Mr. Wingate has measured 1000 on a day near Biggleswade in Bedfordshire. I
deny not but these men may and have good skill in the Theorie, but as little
in the Practick as the Londoner, that asked the countrey-Maltster if malt did
not grow upon trees. Such a London Mathematician (perhaps) was Balls aforesaid,
a perfect Surveyour, but never saw acre of land measured; so that he missed but
78 acres in 322.

CHAP. II. Of making and keeping the field-book, and measuring pasture by the
plain-Table.
. 1. IF you intend to practice Surveying, make you a book of a quire of good
strong paper, so folded, that the breadth of the leaves may be in octavo, and
the length thereof may be the length of two quarters, well bound with vellum,
that you may lay it on your left arm to write: and if it be your first book
that you have filled, write on the cover a great (A). If the second (B). On the
third (C), etc. Then page your first part of your book (A), all but some 12
leaves at the latter end, on each several page whereof you shall write a
several letter of the Cross-row in Alphabetical order, and so your book is
ready to go to work.

How to choose their first standing in Pasture-ground for the plain-Table.
. 2. As soon as you come into the field make a mark, as some hole with a
paddle-staff, or stick up some paper, or both, at the first corner you come at;
which if it be adjoining in that place to another pasture, then choose your
station or hole (if be possible) that it may be right against some gap, gate,
or style (which commonly in all pastures there are near the corners, or else
you will be forced to cut an hole through the hedge with a bill, that so from
that station you may see to the further side of that ground, or so far as you
can, to strike a line. But let that hole or mark be set four or five foot from
any hedge or ditch, so that you may set up your instrument, and have firm
standing to see in a straight line to the further side of the ground you are
in, both on your left hand, and on your right: so that you touch not upon the
hedges, nor incumber your self with wood, bushes, houses, nor waters, though
you are driven to go nine or ten poles off at one end, and but nine or ten
links at the other. Whatsoever others bid you always go parallel to the hedge,
regard it not; for if you do so, you shall have work enough till Wednesday.
What will these men do when they come at Hockley-brook? It will hold them a
week to measure a furlong straight; and they have no way left, but only to
equal one place with another by ghuess; neither, alas poor men! do they know
which way to go about to plot it; whereby though they do hit the true quantity
by chance, as the blind man may shoot and hit a crow, is that a true plat of
the form? and who knows not but brooks, rivers, and the very seas themselves
alter in time, witness Hercules-pillers? and how can they go parallel by this
whim-wham? Besides, that by the plain-Table they do plot all as they go, so
that they had need have a great deal of fair weather, no dewie mornings* and
because they know neither how to measure nor plot such a piece, we have not had
one that has wrote of Surveying these thirty years, but have been all as mute
as fishes in it.

CHAP. III. How to set down your notes in your Field-book, and to draw your
station-lines by the plain-Table.
HAving made choice of your first station, before you begin to measure, take
your field-book, and on the top of the first page write the name of the Parish
first the ground lies in. Secondly, the year and day. Thirdly, the name of the
close. Fourthly, measured by me, and for I. R. contra W. R. or if you are
indifferently hired on both sides, write inter I. D. and D. I. Fifthly, your
directour. Sixthly, your helper. And Seventhly, which way you went forward,
whether cum Sole, or contra Solemn: Cum Sole in a pasture is, when the hedge is
on your left hand; contra Solemn, when on the right.

Then in your field-book about two inches from the left side of the leaf, draw
a line with your pen straight down to the bottom of the leaf, and on the left
side about an inch from the line write A, signifying the first station, or the
mark you stand on, and close to it on the same side, write O, signifying the
beginning of the line; then if you intend to go contra Solemn, measure how many
links are to the hedge or ditch on your right hand, and set them down right
against A on the right side of the line; so all your lengths, as you go in the
station-line, must be set down on the left side of that downright line, and
all the breadths on the right side. Yet before you go forward, you must know
these several things.

Prolegomena. First, That always a ditch must be measured with that ground on
which the hedge stands.

Secondly, That you never need set up your Table at A, unless there be another
close adjoining, which you are also to measure; nor yet at the last angle: so
that if the ground have four angles, you need set up your instrument but at the
second and third; neither is there necessity of setting it up at the third, if
you be sure you have measured all the station-lines right, calling your Angles
BCDE in order, etc. by reason you may set out the two last station-lines of any
ground whatsoever by the scale and compasses, by tranning the first of them,
and pricking the last, as shall be shown more at large, when we come to speak
of measuring by the chain only.

Thirdly, If one of your sides be bushy, woody, watery, etc. that you cannot
come at the hedge for such things, leave that for the last, so that it be a
straight side; for your plot will give you that side: so that, if you have done
all right thitherto, you cannot fail in that, neither need you measure it, save
for trial sake.

Fourthly, You must know, that wheresoever you have two closes to be measured
joining together, the station-line in one close serves also for the other, and
the additions in one close are the subtractions from the other.

Fifthly, If a fair plot in colors be required, you must still, as you go in
your station-lines, take notice and set down in your field-book all Churches,
houses, rivers, ponds, gates, ways, paths, styles, arbors, wind-mills, great
single trees, woods etc. which fall within compass of your plot or square, and
set them down in your distance from the station-lines. If they be not on the
same side of the station-line that the hedge is on, mark them with a cross,
and draw them all in your fair plot in prospective in their proper colors,
with their manner of situation, East or West, North or South, and your needle
in any of your instruments will help you always, making the North-side of your
plot the over end, as you may see in plots of countries; and at the bottom
setting a scale of poles beautified with compartiments, and a pair of
compasses: but your scale for this plot may (if the ground be very large) be
smaller then that you measure by.

Sixthly, Before you begin you must make choice of your scale, wherein you are
to consider the bigness of the ground, the bigness of your paper, and the
price or value of the ground, and whether on purchase, or hiring, and that for
a longer or shorter time; yet howsoever it is good, though it be upon letting,
not to be too careless in it: for I have been employed upon letting between
Sir John Crofts and Sir William Briars, yet before they concluded, they agreed
on a purchase by the acre upon the same measure; therefore I seldom measure
upon purchase with a scale more then 8, never above 10 in the inch; nor upon
hiring seldom above 10, never above 12.

Seventhly, Before you begin, you must consider whereabouts of your ground you
begin, that so turning the length of the Table to the longest way of the
ground, and beginning at the like place of the paper as you do on the ground,
you may (not taking too small a scale) lay all that ground upon that sheet of
paper, or (at least) all that you can measure that day; for it is somewhat
troublesome to shift your paper in the field, or to fall beside it for a piece
of a close; for which, if you do, we will give you these five remedies.

1. If it be but a small matter, and presently comes on again, you may lift up
the rulers, and that paper which they hold down cut it so, that so much as you
need may lie upon the rulers.

2. If that will not be enough, you may make your station-line that you came,
or else do come on, shorter then indeed it should be by 10 or 20 pole, taking
the next angle upon the same line as if it were the end of it; and then making
a new plot at home, your own reason will direct you better then I can show it:
for it is easier perceived upon trial in the field, then expressed by word or
scheme; but then you must lay down none but station-lines and angles.

3. The most common help that Surveyours use is to remove the paper nearer one
end of the Table, and then with a piece of mouth-glue, which they usually carry
with them, they glue on what paper they think they shall need, and then fasten
it down with the rulers again.

4. If your plain-Table be also a Pandoron, or have a semicircle, or a
Quadrant, you may at any time, either in this case or case of moist weather,
take off your paper, and help your self thereby, as shall be shown hereafter.

5. By the chain only and your field-book; whereof also hereafter in its place.

Eighthly, Before you begin you must know, that both at the beginning and ending
of every station-line, and every crook of the hedge, both inward and outward,
you must measure the nearest distance between the station-line and the hedge
(for all breadths must cut the station-line squire-wise) and so make two right
angles at the station-line, and that is the best way: and so doing, all the
pieces on the outside the station-line will be either rectangle triangles, or
else compounded of an oblong and a rectangle triangle: the area of both which
is found by adding the breadth at both ends together, and take of it for the
common breadth, which multiply by the whole length, and you have the content.
And sometime your best way to find the shortest distance into an angle, is to
set up the Table right in the station-line: if standing at the fore-mark you
see by the edge of the Table the backer mark, and then standing at the backer
end you see the fore-mark, then are you right in the line. If now withal one
or both of your other sides look right into the angle, then are you right. And
all these lines must be entered into your field-book, which fall perpendicular
upon the station-line, every one in their order on the right side of the line,
and on the left side right against each of them their correspondent lengths,
how far each of them is off from the last station. Or else you may strike a
station-line into the angle, and so make scalenum triangles, but that is not so
certain, and asks more labor.

Ninthly, Before you go forward you must propound to your self a mark to go
upon on the farther side the ground, or if it be quite beyond the ground,
though it be a mile, it matters not: so that standing at A you may see it clear
from the hedge, yet as near to the hedge as you can; whether it be parallel or
no, care not. If you can see no such mark neither near the further side, nor
beyond, then either you must send one before to stick up a stick with a cloth
or paper on it; or to stand there till you come, with some white before his
breast. And moreover see, if you can see some other mark between him and you
right in the same line, be it either flower, weed, grass, dung, etc to be a
guide for the foreman, to keep him right in the line, that carries the
fore-end of the chain.

Tenthly, Whereas you must have ten sticks about a foot long apiece, whitled
and sharpened at the great end, let two take the chain, one at one end, the
other at the other: let the former take the sticks, and let him be sure to lead
straight in the line, which for his guide therein he has these helps. First,
How to set themselves right in a line.
he must always be right in the line with his two marks before him, till he
comes at the first. Secondly, after he is come at the first, let him every time
he sticks down a stick, look backward to set himself right in a line with those
two. And thirdly, if there be no middle-man, let the hindmost standing at A
guide the foremost right in a line to B: and after the first chains length, let
the hindmost guide the foremost, and the foremost the hindmost: for if the
hindmost see the foremost right in a line between him and B, and the foremost
see the hindmost right in the line between him and A, then are they both in the
right line between A and B. Then, to go forward, let the foreman take all the
sticks, and tell them at the beginning at each change, and at the end (for the
most common mistake is the losing or mis-telling of a stick) and carry all save
one in his left hand, and that one and the chain in his right, and let him go
on straight in his station-line, not looking behind him till he feel the chain
check him, then stick down that stick, and away as fast you can run, and as you
go shift an other stick into the right hand ready to stick down again. In the
mean time the hinder-man, first holding the chain in his right hand at A, let
him look the chain be not tangled, and away on till he come to the stick, and
then clapping his ring of the chain to the foreside of the stick, let him take
it up with the same hand he carries the chain, and away after his leader. And
when the sticks are all run, and that they are not yet at the end of that
station-line, let the foreman run one chain more, holding still the ring in
his hand; and at the end thereof set his toe, there standing still, and let the
hinder-man take up the tenth stick, and hold that still in one hand and the
other nine in the other, and deliver the nine to the foreman, setting his toe
to the fore-mans: then let the foreman tell the nine, and, if they be right,
away; if not, you must measure all that course again, and seek the stick; for
you know not which of you lost it; and so going to the end of that
station-line, or within so much of the end of it, that you may have liberty to
set up the Table, and see to the further end of the next station-line, as you
did at A, without any encumbrances; which, if you work by a diagonall scale,
may be in any place; but if by a plain scale, you had best to have it at some
even poles; and because by Gunther's chain of an hundred links (which is the
best way) you work not by the diagonall scale, by links, but by the foot chain,
by the decimall scale, and by poles, and parts of poles. Set that length in
your note-book, on the left side of the line, close by the line, and a Bright
under A; and on the right side the line write, [ station]. Then go on still in
the said line, till you come to the outside of the ground, which in pasture
will always be beyond the station; but in woods short of it. Set down that
length also on the left hand, and the breadth from the station-line at the end
thereof, to the hedges you came by on the right; and then draw a line cross
over your book, and so at the end of every other station-line. But you must not
forget, that all along as you come you take (as I said before) the breadths
from the station-line to the hedge, both at the beginning and ending, and every
crook both inward and outward, with their correspondent lengths, and to set
them down as before. Also, if a fair plot in colors be required it will be
needful to set down the true lengths of each station line to every man's hedge
that shoots upon your plot, beside the ornaments, that you may show part of
their corners, as also in case they are their grounds that employ you in it.
And sometime also, if you are to measure two closes being together, and that
you would come forth upon that point in the station-line; it will also be
needful to set it down in your note-book, and often save labor marking it
with an X.

Now if you begin at A, and have two closes lie there together to be measured,
then take up your Table there, and having turned the length of the Table to the
length of the ground, and proportioned the A of your Table to the A of the
ground, set up your sights with the ruler upon the Table, and having screwed it
fast, turn them upon the Table, till you see the mark at B. Also see some mark
in the close adjoining on the further side, or a mile beyond: and because I see
just there begins a triangle on the right hand, which falls short of the length
of the other line, therefore I draw a third station-line from A, representing
the right-side line of that triangle; so I leave that close till I have made an
end of the other, so having drawn my line AB, I go to measuring it by Gunther's
chain, and I find at O of the line AB are five links to the hedge, I enter
them as before. At 200. I cross a path, which I enter next on the left side;
but because there is no crook in the hedge right against it, therefore I take
no breadth, but write ( path-gap.) At 437. the breadth is 60. I set them down,
because here is both a crook, and right against the parting of two closes that
shoot upon this: thirdly, it is right against a gap to come out from the
further end of the first line in the second close, whereby measuring that and
75. links of another station-line, and setting up the Table twice, that close
will be measured, as shall be seen anon: fourthly, it will be a good place to
make choice of, to save us some labor in teaching to measure by the chain
only, as shall be shown in its due place. Hence I go on to 900. there I choose
my next station, both because if I do go further, my next station-line, BC,
will be encumbered with the hedge, as also I shall have no ground to set the
Table on; but here I take no breadth, being the hedge goes out straight to the
end: only I set down 900 station, and then measure straight on to the outside
907. where the breadth is 8. so I set down 907. on the left hand, and 8 on the
right, out, that is, without the ground. Then having finished AB, I strike a
line cross the book, and set up my Table again at B, and having made choice of
my scale, which I made no use of till this second station, I take off 900. with
my compasses from the scale, and set it in that first station-line from A,
where I make a prick, and a little roundle round about it, as also at A. And
here I write B; and now that which was forgotten at A, do now: viz. one thing
was, to take notice what degree the South-end of the needle bore upon at A: for
if there be no error, it will bear upon that degree quite through the plot,
unless you remove the paper. And a second thing is, if you are to give in a
fair plot in colors, it will be needful to strike a meridian-line through the
plot, unless you lay the North-end of the needle upon the Flowre-de-lice,
which, in case a fair plot be required, I confess, is the best way: for so you
shall draw your plot in the field according to the four winds, whose borders
shall be parallel to the edges of the Table.

Now having set up your Table at B, lay your ruler with sights upon the line
AB, directly placing your self between the Table and the end of the line, and
your face toward A, in such a posture as if you were discharging a musket, and
winking with one eye, having both your hands on the two corners of the Table
next you, turn the Table till through the sights you see the mark at A: then
scrue the Table fast, that it turn no more, and turning your back to the hedge
you came by, having propounded to your self another mark to go to at the
further side of the ground, by the next hedge-side, as you did at A, lay your
ruler close to the prick B, with that end next you, and keeping one point of
your compasses, or needle, or scriver, in that prick with your right hand, and
the ruler close to it, lay your left hand, being spread, upon it, and turn the
further end of it, till through both the sights you see that mark at C, and
then holding it steadfast with your left hand draw that station-line BC also.
Now if when you were at A, you had set up a mark at C, and another at D, and
stroke AC and AD: and thus now also you had here at B struck BD, as well as BC,
being the close has but four angles; you need not have set up your Table any
more, no, though you had but struck AD, nor yet have measured any more of it,
if you be sure the hedges be all straight, (which is seldom seen in ancient
enclosure) and that the marks at C and D be set just in the angles. This way, I
confess, is something quicker then to go round about, but not so exact: yet
this way one Mr. Sheppard of Maldon in Bedfordshire used, who formerly was my
Scholar, and who ought Redburn-Parsonage in Hartfordshire, letting every man
his tithes at two shillings per acre communibus annis. He took me along with
him, and each of us a plain-Table, and finding almost all, four-corner'd
closes, and straight hedges, we measured but one line in each ground. And
indeed, where breadth and lengths are near equal, there will be no great
danger; but where there is much odds, they will make such acute angles, that
there will be no trust to them, the lines running so one in another, as it i^
hard to say where they cut; and there fore such as have stufft their books with
such whimsies, shall give me leave to laugh at them. Some show how to measure
the depth of a Well (but that is not well) by the plain-table; others teach to
measure a piece of ground at two stations, 9 or 10 pole asunder, in the middle
of the ground; but there is no trust to any of those ways, that give such acute
angles. Let the^ talk of never so many ways, this one way of going round is
instar omnium. Whether they take the line AB or CD in this first figure for
their station-line, they shall never make good work of it. And what will they
do in such a figure as the second?

I confess, in such a case as the third figure, if there be a trapezium on the
outside of my station-line, such as CDEF; and suppose my ordinary
station-line to be AB, sometimes I use this way. Right against the hedge CD, I
set up the Table at A, and having placed the Table in his right situation, I
strike these three lines, AD, AE, and AF, and then measure on from A to B, and
then set up again, and then again I strike BC, BD, and BE, and never measure
any of those six. And after the same manner, if I have a good large triangle on
the outside of my station-line, if my station-line be one side thereof. But in
this case, when I come at home, if I determine to keep my note-book and to draw
a plot of it 20 or 30 years after; I then draw the like figure in my fieldbook
in its proper place, with the length of each line, and the scale I wrought by.

I once was asked by a famous Mathematician (but I forbear to name him) what
instruments I use to measure by? I told him, sometime by the plain-Table,
sometime the Theodelete, sometime by the Quadrant, etc. Quoth he, There is a
deal of lumber indeed: I Will carry nothing but an high stool a field, and with
two sticks a cross I Will stand upon that in the midst of the field, and take the
distances to every angle, and I Will measure three acres to your one. I gave him
his saying: risum teneatis amici, but truly I could not. But let us to our work
again. Having now at your station B drawn all the lines you will draw, and
drawn a line cross your fieldbook, go on to measure the station-line BC, where
the breadth at 0. is the same which was your distance in your last station-line
between 900. the station, and 907 out: viz. 7. set it down on the right-side of
the downright line under the overthwart line in your book, and 0. in the
left-side, then go on at 700 0. at 350 0. at 560 a square stroke into the angle
30. at 563 a station C 568 out. Now having finished this line, take again the
distance between BC, 563, upon the same scale you took your 900, and set it on
your plot from B. Then if you did not set up at A, or if you did not draw the
line DA when you were at A, but that there wants two outside-lines to draw
still, then set up your Table again at C, and laying your ruler on the line BC,
turn the Table till through the sights you see the mark B, which if you do,
then see if the South-end of the needle do strike the same degree it did at A
and B: if not, there is some fault, which most commonly is in the last line
save one, and must be rectified before you go further.

But there is a second way of trial infinitely better, which is this; Having
placed CB line right upon B, lay your ruler upon the two pricks C and A, if
then through the sights you see A, all is right; if there be a fault, it is
commonly in the length of the last station-line save one, which if you came
contra Solemn, and your sights look on the left hand of A, your book is more
then your plot, and vice versa. If you have rectified it, set out your next
station-line CD, and measure as before, and make your station, if you can see A,
at the very end, and can go free from all impediments: else make it short as
before. And then begin to measure that CD line, having drawn a line cross the
book, say at 0, 5. at 200 40, at 200 10, at 656 out, station 12. Where you see,
because I need not to set up my Table any more, for there is but one line more
to measure; therefore I drive the station-line CD to the very outside; so I
take the whole length of the line where my breadth is 12. This length 625 I set
on the plot from C to D, where I make a prick within a little circle, and write
D: then before I measure the last line DA upon the ground, I measure it first
upon the plot, setting one foot of the compasses in D, and the other in A; and
then applying that distance to your scale, that will give you the true length
of the line DA, before you measure it. So that when you have measured it, if
the line on the plot and the line on the ground agree, then all is right; and
this we call the true shutting of a plot, which if it agree within a pole, or
20 links, most Surveyours count it well shut: I think it too much, neither do I
remember that ever I missed so much in all my life. I once measured a wood
called Horsley-wood in Luton-Parish for Judge Crawley, where one Master
Lawrence was my Antagonist for Sr. Robert Napier: he puts me to measure it, and
he goes by and takes the angles as I drew, and set them down in his field-book;
but seeing that we were forced to make 14 station-lines, and hilly ground too,
he offered to wager five shillings, that I should not shut within five pole; I
offered to accept it* in regard whereof at the last station, I giving him the
distance on the plot, would needs set my Table to try what hopes that gave me,
and finding it stroke right upon my A, I then offered to take his wager, to
shut within a yard; but I missed not a foot. We two had been four times
Antagonists for the same men before, one after another, and our greatest
difference was never but five pole at a time in sixty or seventy acres.

An Example.
We will give you now an example of the Field-book, and plot of three closes
lying together, partly real, and partly supposed.

Chesterton, Cambridgeshire, June 21. 1656.
Measured by me G. A. three closes, called Church-closes, I for A. B, John
Dampot for C. D. upon purchase, S L. directour. I begin with the East-close at
North-West, going contra Solemn.

Links in length. Links in breadth. A 0 5 200 a path. X right against a hedge.
435 60 14137 B 900 station 907 out 7 15742 0 7 100 0 350 356 0 00000 560 into
angle 30. 3150 C 563 station 568 0 out 120 0 5 200 40 450 200 10 these 2
breadths are both in one place. D 656 out. station 10. 4560. A 0 0 500 0 0000
740 meets A 15. 1837 745 out. the N. W. close enters. all the borders 40346
Subtende. CX 674 D X 756 N. W. close ente^s at 5 from A Westward. A parallel by
the North hedge of 15. next station-line AE. Next station-line AFG. A 0 0 F 650
50. stat-lin. F E G 825 60 850 out 0. GX Turn South. G 0 30 75 25.3d close
enters. 3d close enters. 75 25 400 25 X 900 1200 140 1500 200 H 1550 station.
1575 out. 0 25 300 160 500 160 I 800 station 56 956 out 0 0 156 300 60 860
against C 1340 out 0. against X Subtend from out* to X 1090. thence to l. 947.



Here you see in this plot, the station-lines, being pricked lines, are not
drawn parallel to the hedges, or outsides of the ground: if we should do so;
how many stations should we make in stead of that line I L? Likewise we must
make three for CD; yet these are nothing to Hockley-brook.

Besides, in working this way my station-lines cut one another more
perpendicular, then any other way whatsoever, which is much to be regarded in
working by the plain-Table. The only way to take an acute angle, is with
graduated instruments to take the quantity of the angle, and to calculate it
by sines and tangents by the doctrine of triangles; but he that goes that way
to work, may chance to measure ten acres, whilst another does an hundred. Add
hereto that I can more easily see every crook in the hedge in going round, then
any other way.

CHAP. IV. Of plotting at home, and of several ways.
THey that use to go parallel to the hedges do seldom use any field-book, but
plot as they go by the plain-Table, because they suppose themselves to go in
the hedges, and therefore allow a parallel from the hedge; but if at any time
they cannot go parallel, by reason of houses, waters, bushes, or the like, then
they are much troubled, and must of necessity plot as they go, for want of a
field-book: whereby they spend much more time abroad, both they and their
helpers, then they need, and which they themselves might do in half the while
at home; besides that, the least mist drives them out of the field: for though
they could measure by the chain only (which I am sure was never heretofore
published by any, but has ever been thought a thing impossible to plot and
prove a plot by: of which (God willing) hereafter;) yet can they no way help
themselves for want of a field-book also; the form whereof being already laid
down unto you, together with the plot to which it belongs, being compared
together will direct you better then many words; yet because I desire to make
all things so plain, that we may be sure you can stick at nothing, we will lead
you through one line, and then turn you footloose.

First therefore, if you have not yet done in the field, and the weather
serves, and your helpers are ready, then take your plot off your Table, and
cover it with a new sheet of paper and away into the field, lose no time there,
especially if you are far from home; for you may plot and cast at all times at
home, but you cannot always measure in the field. But if otherwise, then take
your Table from his foot, and the socket from the Table and your plot still
upon it, lay your field-book before you, and take your scale and compasses in
your hand, and beginning at A, both of your book and plot, seeing 5 (which
signifies 5 linkes in breadth) is right against A on the rightside of the line,
and that you go contra Solemn, which gives the hedge you go by to B on the right
hand; therefore take those 5 with your compasses from off the same scale you
laid down your station-line by, and set them from A to the right hand, which
although you work by a scale of 8 or 10 in the inch, you cannot take with your
compasses, therefore ghuess at them, and then make a prick. Next take with your
compasses your next length on your left hand, which is 200, that set in the
station-line from A, that is set one foot in A (as you must do likewise with
all the other lengths) and the other where it falls in the said station-line
toward B, but because there is no crook of the hedge, either inward or
outward, save only the path, which shows that there you crossed the path,
therefore only draw a stroke, or two* if it be broad, cross the station-line.
Then take your next length 435 and set it likewise in the station-line from A
toward B, and for that right against it you have 60 breadth, therefore take 60
and set on the right hand of your station-line, and because I see also ( hedge)
it tells me that a parting hedge of two closes shot right against that 60,
therefore I give a little touch with my pen, till I come to set out the rest of
it in the other closes. My next length, being my station 900 B, is set out
already. Lastly, because my last length is 907, that is 7 beyond 900, and that
the breadth against it is 7 also, therefore take 7 with your compasses, and set
it both forward and on the right-side, and thus have you pricked out the hedges
against this station-line. Now you must draw lines with your scale and
compasses from prick to prick, and then with ink: so these parcells between
the line and the hedge must be additions to that within the station-lines to
this first close; but subtractions from the other where one station-line serves
to two closes, as that part of AB from A to 435 does both for this and the next.

CHAP. V. Of calculation or casting up.
The figures or parts to be measured are either squares, oblongs, triangles* or
trapezias, such as are compounded of an oblong and a triangle. For the square,
and the oblong, one rule may serve both, viz. multiply the breadth in the
length.

Triangles are of diverse sorts, we make use only of two the rectangle and the
scalenum, the rectangle without the station-lines, the scalenum within. For the
rectangle and trapezium one rule will serve both, at least those trapezas*
which have two right angles at the station-line. Add the breath at both ends
together, take half for the common breadth, and multiply it by the length these
breadths and lenghts our book will give us. For scalenums within the
station-lines the way is thus. Look how many angles your station-lines do make,
so many triangles will there be save two, by drawing diagonall lines from
corner to corner; these diagonalls are fittest for your bases: unless if it be
a single triangle, then commonly the longest side. Take the length of your base
therefore with your compasses, and apply it to your scale, and what it gives
set it down, take also the shortest distance between the angle opposite to that
base and the base it self, apply it also to the scale, and what it gives set
down also; now take half the base and all the perpendicular, or half the
perpendicular and all the base, and multiply one by the other, so have you the
content of that triangle. But commonly where there are more angles then three,
one base will serve two triangles, and add both perpendiculars together, and
take half of both and the whole base, or half the base and both them, and
multiply: so have you the contents of both triangles.

And thus shall you cast up all your out-borders, just as you found them by the
chain; and many times the bases of your triangles also. So that by this way it
is impossible to fail much, if any heed be taken; whereas by the common way of
plotting without a field-book it is almost impossible, to come near the truth;
especially working by so small a scale, as I have known some do, mixing those
crooks without with the triangles within: so that they lose wholly the benefit
of their measuring by the chain; not taking one line as they measured it, they
trust rather to taking up their outside lines by the scale and compasses, then
to their chain: and yet they will confess, that with the scale of 32 in the
inch (which I have known a famous Artist use in no great ground) that they
cannot distinguish a quarter of a pole. So a quarter missed at laying down, and
a quarter at taking up, there is half a pole missed in the length of each
perpendicular, and as much in each base; and these multiplied, I see not, but a
man may pase a ground as near the truth as they. And thus in general.

We will now come to the particular parts, and first of the outsides. We showed
even now how an oblong must be measured by multiplying the breadth by the
length; and likewise the rectangle triangle, and trapezia, by adding both ends
together and taking the half for the mean breadth.

Now therefore in the first close beginning at A subtract the first length 0 out
of the next, against which you find a breadth viz. 435, there remains the
length of that rectangled trapezium 435, and for the breadth of it, add the
first breadth 5, 10 the next 60, it makes 65, the half whereof is 32 1/2, which
multiplied by 435, gives 14137, the content of that trapezium to be set against
the latter of the two numbers or breadths 60. Where note by the way, that you
shall never have any other fraction to multiply by but, and for that you must
work from the left hand to the right, saying, Half 4 is 2, half 3 is 1, half 15
is 7, as here you see. ^

Then again take your last length 435 out of 907 (for you have no breadth at
900) rests 472, the length of that trapezium, also add your two breadths, 60
and 7 together make 67: (for every middle breadth of each station-line must be
twice added, save where you have two several breadths fall in one place, as in
the line CD, where you have the length 200. twice together) the half of 67 is
33, by which multiply 472, facit 15742 to be set against the latter breadth 7.
Then go to the second line BC, where the first length is 100, the common
breadth 3 gives 350, and so go on according as the example gives: then if you
add all those primes or square links into one sum, you shall find it to be
40346, that keep till you have cast up the triangles within the station lines,
and likewise all the other slabs. Therefore I draw a diagonall from A to C,
which will be the base to both triangles, and half the length is 504. the
perpendicular falling from B is 514, that from D is 494, the sum of both is
1008. then these multiplied, the sum of both perpendiculars by half the base,
or the whole base by half of them, it gives 508032, which added to the sum of
the borders 40346, it makes that first close to give 548378 square links in
all. Now to bring these links into acres, you need but only cut off the five
right hand figures, the rest to the left hand are acres, viz. five acres: the
reason is, there are 25 links in the length of a pole, that squared gives 625
square links in a pole, and that multiplied by 160 (the poles in an acre) gives
100000 links, by which divide your sum of your links, or for the five ciphers
cut off five places, the rest are acres; and the five so cut off are the
numerator of a fraction of an acre; whose denominator is ^00000. So 548378
gives five acres.

Now to bring these five figures into poles, you may either divide them by 625
the primes in a pole: or else multiply those two of the five next the left hand
always by six, and set them a place nearer the right hand, and then add those
two which you multiplied, and the two which are under them together, and
increasing them so many unites as are sixes in the next two, and you shall have
7 pole and 253 links..

If now that when you have cast up a close you have more then half 625 primes
remaining; ordinarily it is accounted for a pole: if less, then for nothing.
But if you have more closes adjoining, you may reckon it with the next close.
Suppose your ground has the outside of this form, whose station-line is AD,
you may set it down in words thus in your note-book. At A it is 10 to the brook
from the station-line 0, at B where I have ^ gone 20 pole in the station-line,
there is a square line to a crook stroke with the edge of the table, in which
at 15 on the left hand is 20, at 28 is 25 on the left hand, and 15 on the right
hand; at 44 is 28 on the right hand, at 56 is 33 on the right hand, at 70 is 0.
on the left, and 30 on the right hand: then at 30 in the station-line is 10, at
which 30 also I strike a station-line forward, which when I have stroke it I
find the fore-most acute angle by my scale of chords to be 70 degrees, that
also I enter in my book: by help whereof and a diagonall line from angle to
angle, I can draw the plot of any ground, though many years after, without
going to it again.

And after the same manner you may plot and set down single lands in the
common-field, or a close that is narrow and long.

CHAP. VI. Of measuring a Wood.
THe difference of measuring a wood and pasture is in these two things: First,
in pasture you measure on the inside, but woods on the outside. Secondly, in
pasture all your trapezia are to be added to that within the station-lines,
unless your station-line be in the close adjoining; but in this to be
subtracted.

CHAP. VII. Of dividing or laying out of ground.
OF this there are three degrees, each more difficult then other. The first is
when the length of a ground is given, and a given quantity desired; as if you
would lay out two acres of grass in a pasture which is 36 pole long, and you
desire the breath: First, I turn my two acres into square links, it is 200000,
which I divide by 900. (for 25 times 36 is 900) it gives 224, the which if you
divide by 25, the links in a pole, it gives 8 pole 22 links in breadth; and
this needs no plotting. Or, if you would do by the foot-chain, say two acres is
320 pole, that divided by your length 36, gives 8 pole and ^2/36, which
abbreviated is 8/9: and to know how many half-feet that is, because there are
33 half-feet in a pole, therefore I multiply 33 by 8, facit 264, that divide by
9, gives 29 half feet, and 3/9 or, that is, 8 pole, 14 feet, 8 inches.

Secondly, In pasture-ground, suppose a pasture with crooked hedges is equally
to be divided between two men. First I plot it and find it 52 acres, 2 roods,
10 pole, that is 26 acres, 1 rood, 5 pole a piece: I ghuess as near as I can to
strike a line over the middle of my plo^, but measuring one end upon the plot,
I find it wants 264 pole of his due; therefore I measure the length of the
dividing line, which I find to be 56 poles. Now to work by the decimal chain,
I multiply 264, my poles wanting by 625, the square links in a pole, they make
165000 likewise I multiply 56 pole, the length, by 25, the links in a poles
length, they make 1400, by which divide 165000, it quotes 117 6/7: that is 4
poles 17 6/7 links. But by the foot-chain, if you divide 264 by 56, it quotes 4
poles and 40/56: which to bring into half-feet, multiply the numerator 40 by 33
the feet in a pole, facit 1320, which divide by 56, it gives 28 half-feet and
16/56 of a half-foot, in toto 4 pole, 14 feet, 2 inches almost. And so much
must you remove your dividing line at both ends: and this may be done as well
on the outside as on the inside,

Thirdly, To divide a standing wood of 200 or 300 acres, and to drive a
straight line from a mark on one side thereof to any mark on the other, though
the wood be twenty years growth, and a hill in the midst; A rare secret.

Be sure to plot and measure enough, or more, then you desire to take out of
it, and where you intend your dividing-line shall come, there, in your
station-line, on the first side set a mark, keeping also good marks at every
station, so going on till you be sure you are far enough on the other side
also. Then draw your dividing-line by ghuess, keeping one end thereof still
upon the mark in your station-line, then measure that part upon the plot, as in
the former ground, and add or subtract from your dividing-line as before; save
that here you need not remove the further end, if the difference be but small,
but double the breadth at the last. But if you rather think fit to remove both
ends, your best way is to do it first on your plot, and make that perfect, and
then draw your new line quite through to the station-line on both sides. But
there is the mystery, how shall I give directions how in my absence to drive a
straight line cross the wood from a mark in this station-line to a mark in the
other on the other side, through standing wood of 20 years growth, and a hill
in the midst, as once I laid out 60 acres of Wilsteed-wood being 160 acres
between Sr. Thomas Hillersden and Sr. Oliver Luke; and another time in a wood
at Hytchin. But not to detein you. If you work by the plain-Table, look which
side is clearest from impediments, that you may go some 10 or 12 pole outward
from the wood, then set up your Table at that point in your station-line, that
your dividing-line falls upon, and laying your index on the last
station-line, turn your Table, till through the sights you see either your last
station before that, if it be not too near, and having lengthned out your
dividing-line as far as possibly you can, lay your index upon that lengthened
line, turn your back to the wood, and sending one before some 10 or 12 pole,
let him there move to and fro sidewise as you shall direct him by looking
through the sights, and then at both your standings drive good stakes, or lay
stones, or make holes; so a line driven through the wood continued straight
with these two will carry you to your first mark in the other side, if you did
not remove that end; or if you did, then to that mark, where now you must set
it: so that look how much you removed it forward or backward in the plot, so
and so much must you remove it here also; and then set a good mark here also.
But if when you have placed your Table on your station-line as before, there is
but little space left to draw your directing-line, you may, and indeed far
better, lay your index all along your dividing-line and by it direct your man.

CHAP. VIII. To measure arable-common-field-ground.
IN diverse countries much arable lying in common fields lies in small
parcells, some places an acre, some places half an acre, and some places a
rood, and that so crooked, that none will desire a plot of such ground; yet,
for as much as a man in time may have his rood grown to half a rood, by his
neighbors plowing of it away, and to find at any time afterward, if it be so
diminished or not, and in what place: you shall set it down in your field-book
in this manner.

Chest^rton. East-field in Broad-oake-furlong. Begin on the East Side of the
furlong three lands per estimate three half-acres. TA on the East, GD West,
copy of Dame Anne: begin North at 0, 106 at 400 163. at 400 more 101, at 346
out 100, containing 134500 (that is) one acre 55 pole 125 links. One rood more
in the same furlong. RN. East, J.D. West, free of S. John's: begin South at 0,
24 at 400, 27, at 300 more 28, at 244 more out 30. Content ^25526 (that is) one
rood, one pole fere.

Note that in this kind of ground where we say (at 0) we mean two or three pole
within the land's end: for there is no certainty in taking the breadth at the
very end, for the turning up the plow will get or lose egregiously. Moreover in
such ground the best way is, the leader to take all the sticks anew, every time
you take a breadth, which had best be not above 400 or 500, especially by the
foot-chain, at 16 or 17 pole, as easiest for account, unless the measure or
decrease of the land requires otherwise.

CHAP. IX. Of hilly-grounds.
IF a ground have the bottom and top-lines both level, and both sides rising
alike, it is to be accounted but as a declining level, and to be measured as a
level ground.

But suppose a ground be level at one end, and both sides, and rising in the
middle, and a hill rising along up the middle, as the Lady Farmer's
Washrods-wood in Westoning-Parish in Bedfordshire: or perhaps two hills rising,
one toward one side, and another toward the other, and a level run through
between them; this is far more troublesome. For if you shall begin to measure
and plot your two level side-lines, and level end-line first, and then
measure your line at the other end, it will not lie between the two side lines
by a great deal. Again, If you should shove out those side-lines, that you
might lay that line at the length you measured it, you would drive the hedges
into the adjacent grounds, and make them too little: as shall apear. But if you
are to give a fair plot of a Lordship, where diverse grounds border together,
your plot must be according to the form, and yet you must write down the true
quantity too. And because we cannot represent a round solid upon a flat paper,
therefore we must content our selves only with the lines of level for our
plot: which how they are obtained we will here show three ways.

First, by a Quadrant, or a semicircle (choose which you will, they work both
alike) made for the same purpose: (made by Mr. Hayes at the Cross-daggers in
Moore-fields) the use of it is thus. Suppose you stand at the foot of an hill,
and setting a mark at the top of equal height with your eye to the ground,
setting it level on your Table, by help of the plummet, you see through the
sights the mark at the top of the hill, you then look what degrees are cut in
the limb, which I find, suppose 34, then I measure up so far as the hill
keeps that scantling of rising, suppose 35 pole, keeping the edge of the
standard at the 34 degree of the limb. I find that 35 of the standard cut to
the 29 line of the plate, which is the line of level that you must plot, though
you have gone 35: all these I enter into my field-book. If the hill still rise,
you must set again, and as it rises, or falls so you must alter: so far as it
goes level, plot it as level; and what is hilly plot it as hilly. And what is
here said of going up, the same understand of going down.

But never go about to cast up by this plot, though you have shut it never so
true: as indeed in such a case it is very ticklish; therefore in this case we
may well allow to miss a pole or two in shutting, and yet account it well done
too. But for casting it up, this way that it is measured helps not to the
finding the true quantity, though the extending that last line does come near
to the truth, and may indifferently serve in case of letting, because it always
is a little under the length, as will easily appear in this diagram.

Suppose this triangulated figure ABEHGF to be one half of the foresaid wood,
and that standing at A, I set up my Table with the foresaid Quadrant upon it,
and looking up to CI find it to ascend 34 degr. measuring from A to C, I find
it 35 pole: so then keeping the standard at 34 of the limb, 35 of the standard
gives you both 29 for your line of level, and 19 both upon the plate at once:
viz. AD, the line of level, and CD the perpendicular; now if you add AD, and
FG, together, being right angled at GD, and multiply the half thereof by DG,
you shall fall so much too short, by how much the multiplication by your DG, is
shorter then it ought to be: for in as much as FH is level, and AD so much
rising as DC, it must needs follow, that GD rises up to C, as appears in the
other figure. For it is the Hypotenuse to GD, a line of level, and CD a
perpendicular. For suppose GD and AC in the first figure to be both of one
length, viz. 35 pole a piece, and GD in the first figure, and AD in the second
be all one, as if it were the line of level; but now if you lift up AD to AB,
it will not reach to C, by the distance of BC in the second, viz. 5; for if you
subtract 29 out of 35 which is AB, there rests BC, viz. 5: so that your
triangle GAD in the first is less then the triangle ADC in the second, by the
triangle BCD in the second, which comes to near 50 pole in that triangle. But
hereby you see, that having this level plot, and your degrees ascending, and
lengths of your lines ascended, you may find out your perpendiculars: and by
them, and the lengths of such lines as shoot upon them, I mean, having the
height at both ends, which you shall always take in going round* you may both
find the ascents of those cross lines, and lengths of them also by your
Quadrant, without measuring them by the chain. For this instrument having the
angle of ascent (whose complement is the angle of descent) and any one of the
three sides of a rectangle triangle does give you both the other, always making
the standard the Hypotenuse, and having any two of the sides, it gives both the
angles of ascent, and descent.

Secondly, To work this by the limb of any common Quadrant. Take the angle of
ascent as before, and measure the ascending line AC, let the angle be 34, and
the line 35, as before; and I desire first the line of level AD: secondly the
perpendicular DC. First, draw the line AC upon the center A, making the angle A
34 degr. which is done after this manner. Take 60 from the scale of chords,
with that wideness set one foot in A, and with he other tran the arch DB, and
take off 34. d. from the same scale of chords, and set it in the said tran from
B to D, then draw the line AD, then take 17 being the half of 35, and set from
A to E, and again from E to D, making pricks in E and D. Keep one foot of the
compasses at E, and with the same wideness make a prick at D, and another at C
so shall AD be your line of level, and DC the perpendicular; both which if you
take with your compasses, and apply to your scale of equal parts, you shall
find AD the line of level, to be 29, and CD 19 ^/3, as before.

If an hill run straight along a ground, if by one side it will be a mere
declining level, if through the middle it will be two declining levels, and
that line so running along the top will be a line of level, and equal to the
line of level under it; therefore if you add both ends together, as you
measured them by the chain, and multiply half of them by the length of that
line you have the content, if it be of equal height at both ends. But if it be
unequal at both ends, though it be a declining level, and have more then three
angles, your best way is, to part it in several triangles, whose Hypotenuses
and perpendiculars you may find by either of the two former ways, without
measuring them by the chain.

Thirdly, If you have no Quadrant, nor plain-Table at all save only the chain,
and any board of a foot or 14 inches long with one straight edge of ten or
eleven inches broad; draw a straight line close and parallel to that side, and
near one end thereof stick a pin in the line with thread and plummet hanging on
it; then if you are at the bottom of the hill, and look upwards, turn that end
with the plummet from you; but if you are at the top, turn it toward you; and
as you epsy the mark, let a stander by (on that side the plummet is on) lay
his hand gently on the bottom of the board, and with his thumb press down the
thread, there holding it till you have made a prick right under it, in a good
large tran first drawn with 60 of some large scale of chords, whose center
shall be the hole where the pin sticks; then take with your compasses the
distance between the said prick in the said tran, and the beginning of the said
tran, and apply it to the same scale of chords you drew the tran by, it gives
the complement of the angle ascending, viz. the d^grees of the angle
descending. But if you are at the top, and look downward, it gives the
complement of the top-angle, and degrees of the bottom ascending. But if you
will but erect a perpendicular upon the same center, and take the distance
between the prick and it, it gives the contrary.

CHAP. X. Of reducing a plot from a greater to a lesser.
ALthough there are several ways of performing this, as likewise of a lesser to
a greater (whereof there is great use in turning statute-measure into the
eighteen-foot pole, etc.) we will lay down only this one general rule.

First, beginning at any one angle, as at A, and so go round in order from angle
to line, and from line to angle: Suppose the plot (A) to make another, viz. B
but a quarter so big: yet like it both in form and content, only it is drawn
with a scale of half that bigness* for the bigness gives but, because of is but
and so make but 1/9 part so big, because of is 1/9. First draw the line AB of
the figure B, representing the line AB of the figure A, regard not though it be
as long as it or longer: at the end thereof make a prick for a center, and
write, or suppose (A) to be there written, then open your compasses to any
wideness, as to F in the figure (A) and tran FG; with the same wideness do the
like in the figure B, take FG in the figure A, and set it in the figure B, then
take either ^/2 the line AB of the figure A, and set it the same way in the
line AB in the figure B: or else take half the length thereof from the same
scale the figure A was drawn by; do the like by the angle B, as you did by the
angle A, and likewise by the line BC and so angle after angle, and line after
line, till you have done. And thus may you make a plot bigger or lesser, as you
please, only by changing the scale, yet the area, or content, will be the
same, as before. But if the borders of your-plot be very crooked, it will be
needful to draw straight lines, either within or without both the plots, like
station-lines in both the old plot and new, and to take the crooks from those,
just as you did in the field, if you will have it equal in bigness to the
other, and that your straight lines be of like length in both; then set the
same wideness in your new plot from your station lines, each against its proper
length: but if your new be bigger or lesser, then apply those distances to your
scale, and take or or more or less, according to the proportion of your two
plots.

Or Secondly, If you desire a plot equal to another, you may oil a paper,
dry it well, then put it over the other plot, that it stir not, through which
you may see the lines on the nether plot, then draw them with your pen on the
oyled paper, then take it off to prick it, then pounch a new paper and draw it.

Or Thirdly, Having drawn a line representing AB in your new plot, take the
line AB off the old, either all, or or according to your desired proportion,
and set it on the new. Also take the proportion of the line (AE) and set one
foot in (A) and tran where you think (E) will fall in your new. Take also the
like proportion of the distance of (BE) and set in the said tran, and so you
have (E), the same 2 distances will set out (D) also (D and B) will set out (C)
and so you have all your angles, then draw their lines, and you have your plot
desired.

CHAP. XI. Of measuring pasture-ground by the chain only, and that as speedily
and exactly, as with any instrument whatsoever, and with less help though in
misty weather, and to plot, shut, and prove, the plot thereby also.
ABout the midst of one of your longest station-lines, and some known length in
the same (as at X in the first or third close, chap 3d page 2^) set up a mark,
and mark it in your book, both with its proper length and letter, then having
measured round about the ground on the inside, or at least all but the last
side: if you have more then three angles; in stead of measuring it from angle
to angle: viz in the first close, from A to C, or from B to D, you shall
measure from C to X, and from X to D, so making a triangle the more then
otherwise; which two subtende^ts will easily be run whilst you can set up the
Table once, so you shall need less help by one to carry your Table, for that is
wholly one bodies work* and these two subtendents must be set down at the
latter end of your notes of that close in your field-book. Then if you measure
the last side AD having plotted the rest, if that AD on the ground, and AD on
the plot agree, all is right, neither ever need you divide any more lines then
one in the whole ground or close throughout, so that at least none of the
station lines strike outward, for then it must be accounted as another close,
so much of it till the last line that struck inward being continued straight
out do meet with the other plot again. See more chap. third.

Now to plot such a ground measured by the chain only; suppose it be the said
first close, ( chap third) first I draw the line AXB, making a mark at X, and
another at B: secondly you must either take the sub^endent XC, setting one foot
of the compasses in X, and tranning where you think C will fal^; or else take
the station-line BC with your compasses and set one foot in B tran at C and
then take the other of these two last lines, viz. XC. setting one foot on its
proper mark X, and with the other make a prick in the said tran, and so have
you placed C in his right place, then draw the line BC, next take CD with your
compasses, set one foot in C, and tran where you think D will fall, then take
the subtendent DX, set one foot in X and make a prick in the said tran, and
that sets out D, then draw the line CD, and because D is your last station, and
that A and D are both set out already; therefore, draw also the line AD, now if
AD on the plot and AD in your book agree, then all is right, else not. So that
in this kind of plotting there are only these three positures. First, draw a
station-line; secondly, tran with a subtendent; thirdly, prick with the next
station line.

Nevertheless in great larg plots, it will be needful to use a good larg pair
of compasses, because you must take the whole length of your lines with them.
In which case a pair of beam-compasses, with a beam of deal, willow, or sallow,
or some such soft wood, is best of all, of 17 or 18 inches long, with a piece
of an awl-point near one end, and a sliding button to be moved pretty and
stiffly up and down, and to be stayed with a screw-pin, or wedge at any
distance, with an other short point in the end thereof.

Now we will show you how to continue your plot out of one ground into another,
that so you may lay all the grounds of a Lordship together in one entire plot
by the chain only, and that we will do by several rules; for the
understanding thereof we will refer you to the plot in the latter end of the
third chapter, as also in the end of the book. The knowledge whereof consists
in four rules in the obtaining the first station line in the close which you go
unto. As for example.

First, Suppose I would go out of the first close at A, and would plot the
station-line AG: now because in plotting these kinds of grounds you must always
reduce all into triangles, therefore standing at A you may measure two chains
length in the line AF, or AG, likewise two chains back-ward from A toward B,
in the line AB in the first close; then measure the distance between those two
lengths, and plot them after this manner: First, your best way is (though you
have measured but two chains length a piece, yet) in stead of two, take the
double, if the station-lines be long, you may triple that distance, setting one
foot in A, and extending the other toward B; there make a prick in that line,
and tran from thence with that wideness where you think the line AF, or AG will
fall: then look what the distance was between the two lines at the end of your
two chains a piece; if doubled before, then double again that distance upon
your scale, and set it in the tran from the line AB in the first close to the
line AF in the second, and draw the line AFG through that prick ad infinitum.
Thus have you got a line in the second close, by help of a part of the line AB,
which in this kind you must always take, viz. that station-line, whereof the
whole or part belongs to both the closes. But because in this case you must
always mete through the hedge, from the two chains of one close to the two
chains of the other: therefore to avoid the trouble of cutting a hole through
the hedge, if there be ever a gap, gate, or style near unto those lengths, you
may take more or less of those two lines as you please: now because here is a
gap at two chains and an half from A, in the line AB, you may measure two
chains and an half of either of them, or two and an half in that, and three in
the other, as you please; and measure the distance upon the ground between
those two pricks: then you may double all three distances upon your scale, as
before, and set out the proper distances between those two pricks, as before, and
then draw your line AG upon your plot in the second close.

But, Thirdly, because we have measured the distance between A and X in the
first line, which is one side of the triangle of that second close, and
likewise have measured from A to G on the second side, and have a gap also at
X: therefore if you measure GX, you will have all the sides of that great
triangle, which you may use as aforesaid: First, you have the line AX already
placed. Secondly, take the length of AG with your compasses upon your scale,
and with that wideness, set one foot in A, and tran where you think G will
fall. Do likewise with the line GX, taken also upon your scale, set one foot at
X, and the other is the foresaid tran, and there is your center G.

And after the same manner may you go out of that close, into the great close
from G, by help of the line AG. Now having the line AF, or AG, you may easily
set out the triangle AFE, as you did AXG. Likewise you set out the triangle
that is between the the line XG and the hedge, between the two closes only by
the distance of G to the entrance of the great close.

A second way of going out of one close into another is, when I have a station
near the middle of a station-line, and that there I would go into another
close. For example:

Suppose I would go out of the great close into the first close, right against
the station-line BC in the first from L in the station-line of K; then when you
come right against BC, the station line, lengthen that line BC back-ward into
the great close from L to M two chains length; measure also two chains lengths
in the station-line IK; and measure two chains lengths from L to I back again;
and measure the distance between two chains of the one, and two chains of the
other, and that gives you the quantity of the angle KBC. Then from the line
LK; you may take from your scale four chains length, and you may tran from the
line KL, toward the line LC, or BC, with one foot set in L, and double the
distance of the two pricks in the other close, and take that with your
compasses, and set from the line LK, to the LC, and where it falls draw the
line LC ad infinitum. After the same manner might you have drawn a line by the
South Side of the hedge by BC or LC. Also so might you at X in the first close
have gone either into the great close, or into the little close, by drawing a
station-line on which side of the hedge you will.

A third way is by continuation of such a station-line as shoots upon the
corner of a close; and thus suppose you would go out of the great close into
the little close at K, if you had but continued your line LK to A; and this is
the easiest way of all.

A fourth way, If on the West Side of the hedge AK there were a spinny wood of
two or three pole broad all along by the sides thereof, and that you desire to
go out of the first close into that little close, but there is no gap, save
only you can strike a squire-line from the station-line AB, at either end of A
and K; then may you both at A and at X erect a perpendicular into the first
close ward; and then may you continue those two perpendiculars, so far as you
shall need them, till you are free from the spinny, and may draw a line from
one to the other by the spinny side, and truly plotting out either
perpendicular from the last station-line.

CHAP. XII. To measure a wood by the chain only.
BEcause a wood cannot be measured on the inside; and herefore no subtendents
can be taken, as they may in pasture-ground, we will therefore endeavor how to
do it by taking of angles with the chain.

Now because the meeting of the station-lines gives but one angle, which is the
wood corner, or at least so near to it, that no subtendent can be taken from
any part of one of those lines to the like, or any other part of the other, yet
if you cross or lengthen them out beyond their meeting one or two chains length
a piece, you shall then have three angles more, whereof the opposite angle to
the wood angle will be the same with the wood angle, and either of the other
will be the complement of it to 180 degrees; so that if you can but take one
short line in any of those three angles, you are well enough: as suppose A to
be a wood, and at the angle C, I had two station-lines met, viz. AC, and CG, I
continue AC forward to D one chains length, or else set CG backwards to F a
chains length, and likewise set back AC to B one chain of 100 links: now
suppose I find FB or DE to be 60. now for that CB and CF are each of them 100
and FB 60. I first plot them, first striking a line, then I take 100 from some
scale of equal parts, as CB in the figure B. And because CB and CF are equal,
therefore I set one foot in C, and tran FB, also from B to FI set 60 of the
same equal parts, then draw the line FC through C, and it gives the
station-line CG; Or more easily, if you draw out the line AC unto D, and make
CD and CE 100. a piece, finding DE to be 60 then may you take 100 of any scale
of equal parts and tran DE then set 60 of the same parts in the said tran from
D toward E, make there a prick and draw the line CG through E. But if by reason
of impediments you can neither measure DE nor FB at 100 a piece, you may tran
CB 200, and FC 100, or either of them what you will, so that you plot them
accordingly; as if CE be 130, CD 100 and DE 50: then first set out CD ^00 in
the line CD, secondly take CE 130, set one foot in C and tran with the other,
and thirdly take DE 50, set one foot in D, and with the other make a prick in
the tran and draw the line from C through E as before. Now if through
impediments by none of the foresaid ways you can measure neither of the
foresaid angles, then see what you can do to the angle FCD, or the angle
opposite to the angle of the wood: for this therefore you must both lengthen AC
to D forward; and CG to F backward, each of them 100 or more from C; then
measure the distance DF, and apply it to your scale of equal parts, and what it
gives set down in your note-book, as likewise you must do all the other
lengths. Then supposing CD, and CF to be 100 a piece, I take 100 and set one
foot in C, and tran from E* then suppose I had found DF 160. I take therefore
160, and set from D in the said tran, and it reaches to F; therefore draw F ad
infinitum, and it gives the next station-line CG.

But in all this that hitherto we have spoken of measuring by the chain only,
we would have you to understand, that we have only spoken spoken of measuring
and plotting of the station-lines: for as for measuring, casting up, and
plotting of the outsides, that is the same as before, serving as well to this
as to the Table.

And as for measuring hilly-ground, we have showed before in chap. 9, that also
may be measured by the chain alone, save only any sorry board with one
straight edge; and it matters not greatly whether it have a straight edge or
no. If in measuring the outsides you go upon a station-line, as in the line
AFG of the second close, ( chap. 3) from which you desire to strike a
perpendicular into an angle: First, ghuess at the place, so near as you can,
where it will fall; there set one of your counting-sticks, set another 80 links
backwards, directly in the station-line; another at 60 from the first stick
into the angle; then let one hold one end of the chain at the stick that was
set backward, and the other at the stick set in the angle-line; if they two
meet just at the chains end, (I mean Gunther's chain of 100 links) then is it a
true perpendicular into the angle; if it fall short, you are not far enough; if
gone, then you are too far.

If a ground be very large or bushy, you may measure it on the outside like a
wood; or measuring a chains length or two of each station-line, and their
subtendent on the inside from the angle.

Thus have we showed you how to measure all manner of ground by the chain
only, for which I expect as much thanks at the instrument-makers hands, as
Culpepper at the College of Physicians. And indeed I was determined to have
published it above forty years agone, had not Mr. Allen and Mr. Thomson
dissuaded me from it, upon this reason, That if ignorant people see the most
famous Artists go so to work, they will be ready to judge, that he that goes
with a plain pair of poles, and a square board, to set out a square withal, is
a better workman then he. And indeed, I cannot deny but that they judge
according to their tools which they see, rather then according to their skill
they see not.

Whereupon I have forborne till now, considering I am even dropping into my
grave, and considering that my Savior would not cease casting out devils,
because he was thought to do it through Beelzebub; no more will I longer
forbear this, it being so lawful, and honest, and beneficial to a
Commonwealth. And truly had I regarded men's sayings I must have given over
surveying long ago, or else to give over profession, for that I was judged (by
no small fools) to work by the devil, for that I could tell a distance before I
measured it.

CHAP, XIII. Of taking distances by the chain only.
ALthough we have shown the measuring of all manner of land by the chain, yet
since we are speaking of the use of it, I hope you will not think your time
ill-spent to read a lesson or two more that will be effected by it.

Let there be two forts C and D of a good distance asunder, beyond a river a
mile or two broad; to tell the just distance how far they are asunder, how far
each is from A, and each from B, and the breadth of the river: First, I draw
the line AB 40 pole, a tenth part (at least) of the greatest distance; let it
run parallel, but straight, by the river, 9 or 10 pole off; then from AI set
out both backward from A to E directly backward in the station-line six pole,
and six from A to F in AC line, then E and F are four pole asunder. Also I
measure from B to G, and from B to H 6 a piece, and 6 between them also; and
from A toward B and D 6 piece, and they are 4 asunder, and from B toward A and
C 6 apiece, they will be 3 asunder: but it is best to draw your station-line
with a very small scale; but set out your angles with a very great one: then
draw AD and BD, till they meet at D, likewise AC and BC, till they meet at C,
and a right line from C to D, for the distance of the two forts: and another
from B to K for the breadth of the river, so shall you find all your desired
distances of you see them set down upon their lines; your station-line AB,
being your common scale, viz. 40 poles: for if you take that line with your
compasses, look how often you find that length in any of the other, so many
furlongs, or so many times forty poles are in that line, and what is more,
take it with your compasses, and set one foot at A, and the other forward in
the said station-line or scale, and it gives the odd poles. But if you would
only take the breadth of the river KL, observe a mark on the farther bank, as
at K; then in your station-line at 8 pole long, and 8 from the river, measure
their distance, and plot that triangle, continue your cross-line toward your
mark; then lengthen your station-line to a fourth or fifth part of the breadth
of the river; thence also measure 8 pole right toward the foresaid mark, and 8
in the station-line backward; measure their distance and plot it, continuing
the mark-line till it meet with the other: so your scale to both the other will
be the station-line as before.

CHAP. XIIII. To take the declination of any straight upright wall for Dialling
by the chain only.
TO do this you must find out a meridian-line by any of these ways following.
First setting your back to the wall right under the plain, where you will have
the dial, look by some true clock or watch just at noon where the sun is, and
set up two sticks a pole or more asunder in a straight line between you and the
sun, then go to the furthest and look back to the wall, and just in that line
make a mark on the wall: for there shall you plumm down your meridian-line of
your dial. But yet take not up your sticks, whereof let the furthest of them be
50 links from the wall. Secondly, if you neither have help of watch, nor clock,
take a smooth board and lay it level, stick upright a wier of 2 or 3 inches
long in the midst of it, and about nine of the clock in the morning lay the
board at the foot of the wall aforesaid, mark where the shadow of the top of
the wier falls, there make a prick: then take out your wier, and set one foot
of your compasses in that center, and open the other ^o the former prick, and
there draw a circle, and then set up your wier upright as it stood before,
neither deeper nor shallower then before; you may apply a squire to it, to see
it stand upright, or measure with your compasses from the circle to the top of
the wier, if it be alike all 4 ways. If it be right, set up two sticks right in
a line between it and the Sun as before. Then again about three a clock in the
afternoon watch where the Suns shadow falls just on the same circle again, and
then set up two other sticks, so that they may meet in the same center: divide
the space between the two furthest sticks into two equal parts, and mark that
for your meridian-line. But lest the Sun should not shine when it comes to that
circle, you may make several circles upon the board, and stick up marks where
the Sun comes at them forenoon and afternoon.

If both these ways fail, this third way is better then either of them. In the
evening go Southward of the place, where you would have your dial, three or
four pole, turn your face Northward, moving Eastward or Westward till you see
the North Pole and the place where you will have the meridian of your dial
both in a line, which by looking over the house you may the better do, if you
get one to hold a pole a slope with a line tied to the end thereof and a
plummet to it. If now the line, the meridian-place on the wall, and the
North Pole are all in a line, you are right* there stick up a stick till
morning, another right behind it; for just there is your meridian-line.

Now to know the pole you may easily ghuess at it near enough, for it is a
point in the heavens in a right line between the hinder horse of Charles-wain
called Alliot and the polar-star, so far off from the pole star, as the
pole star is from the next star to it: so that if Alliot be just beyond the
polar star then is the polar-star full North, and e contra.

A fourth way is this; in some plain place near hand where you may see both
ways set a mark, go South two or three pole, then move Eastward or Westward
till you see the pole star right beyond the first staff, there set another, or
rather pitch two good stones, like grave stones in Churchyards: for so they
will not only serve for this business, but also give the hour of the night to
a minute by knowing the right ascension of the Sun and stars.

The use we make of it here is double* first it helps us to set out the
meridian-line every where near hand; for if standing here at the North stone
you see the Sun right over a stick or pole holden at the South, you run
presently and set your back against the wall where you would have your dial,
and set up two sticks between the Sun and you, you have a meridian-line desired.

Now having gotten this meridian-line: to find the acute angle that this
meridian makes with the wall; first, measure with your chain one chain, or half
a chain in this meridian, and as much by the wall-side, and their distance for
a third side, and plot it; then find the quantity of the angle of int^section
of the meridian and wall-line by the scale of chord^* the complement thereof is
the declination of the wall. Suppose the line AB to be a meridian-line, and AC
to be the wall-line, in either of which I measure from A to C, and from A to B
50 links, and I find the distance of CB to be 24, this I plot as before is
shown. Then to find how many degrees the angle CAB makes, take 60 from some
scale of chords, and set one foot in A, and tran DE: then take DE with your
compasses, and apply to your scale of chords, and it gives the angle of the
wall, and meridian DAE, or CAB, which is all one, to be 30 degrees, and the
complement thereof 60 is the declination of the wall; which if it were taken in
the morning, it is a South-west dial, declining Westward 60 degrees: (for
always the distance of the wall-line to the East or West-line is the
declination of the wall:) if the Sun shine on it at noon, it is a South dial;
if it shine longer on it in the afternoon, then in the fore-noon, it is a
South-west, and e contra.

Having a meridian in some open and plain place, to find the Azumeth, set up a
stick at the South-end of your meridian-line, measure back in it 50 links there
make your center A, thence measure 50 forward in the Sun-line; measure the
distance of those two fifties; and plot it, then take 60 off your scale of
chords, and do as in the last rule.

Having the Azumeth, to find the angle of the wall and Sun by help of the last
figure.
Sometime you are in such a place where you cannot set out a meridian-line, yet
you may always set out an Azumeth, or Sun-line, which elsewhere I call the angle
of the wall and Sun. Now finding your Azumeth, as in the last rule, come
presently from thence, not staying to cast it up or plot it; but presently
measure 50 by the wall, and 50 in the Sun-line, and their distance, and then
plot both the triangles, and find the degrees of both angles at the center, as
before; so have you both the Suns Azumeth, and the angle of the wall and Sun.
Then making a circle with two cross diameters, first set out your Azumeth from
the South; if it was taken in the morning, then on the East; if in the
afternoon, on the West. Then always reckon backward the angle of the wall and
Sun in the course of the Sun; and from thence draw a line through the center
representing the wall-line, (as in the last diagram) the distance between that
and the East and West line in the circle is the declination of the wall desired.

And although the Sun be newly gone off the wall, or not yet come on, by help
of the shadow of the end of the wall, and these former helps you may find the
declination. Only in stead of setting your Azumeth backward, you must set it
forward in the course of the Sun, if you take it before it shines on the wall.
And all this may be done by a two-foot rule or yard, or a boys cat-stick.

CHAP. XV. Of coloring and beautifying of plots.
IN beautifying of plots, it is necessary that you draw a square round about
the plot, the upper-end whereof shall represent the North-side, the nether line
the South; the right-side line the East: but you must help your self to these
by taking a meridian-line first in the field, and drawing a meridian-line
through the first plot.

Secondly, Examine your former plot, how many chains or poles your plot
reaches from North to South, and from East to West, and thereby make choice of
such a scale, that you may lay the whole Lordship within the said square,
according to the Northing, and Southing, and distance. Or else you may draw
your plot, first, by what scale you will, and then draw the square afterward.

Thirdly, Fill the out-borders between the square and the demeans, at least
such as border next to the demeans, with the bordering hedges, and names or
owners names of the grounds.

Fourthly, Whatsoever you write, write it from West to East: unless it be the
proper name of some river, or highway, or such like. For if the North be
upward, the West will be on the left hand.

Fifthly, Describe all houses, ways, rivers, Churches, wind-mills, arbours,
great lone-trees, gates, styles, etc. that fall within your plot, as also the
Lordship-house, with other edifices in a corner by it self, and the Lords coat
in another corner: the house being drawn in prospective.

Sixthly, Describe at the bottom the scale that you drew it by, adorning it
with compasses, ovalls, squares, and compartiments, etc.

Seventhly, Having drawn all your several grounds, and distinguished them with
their hedges, it will not be amiss first to pounce over the paper or parchment
with some stanish grain, and burnt Allome, and a double quantity of pounced
rosen, both finely searced, and lightly pumiced, thereby to preserve the paper
or parchment from through-piercing with the colors.

Then lay on your colors in manner following, being first ground and bound
with gum-water very thin and bodiless. Arable for corn you may wash with pale
straw-colour made of yellow-ocre and white-lead. For meadows take pink and
verdigrease in a light green. Pasture in a deep green of pink, azure, and
smalts. Fenns a deep green, as also heaths of yellow and indico. Trees a sadder
green of white-lead and verdigrease. For mud-walls and ways mix white-lead, and
rust of iron, or with ocres brown of Spain* for white-stone take umber and
white: water or glass may be shown with indico and azure, or black-lead: for
seas, a greenish sky-colour of indico, azure, smalts, white-lead, and
verdigrease.

CHAP. XVI. To measure all manner of ground by the Pandoron, or any other
graduated Instrument.
THe Pandoron is an Instrument compounded of, First, an ordinary foot, with
three legs for a plain Table. Secondly, a Table and folding-rulers like it,
save that it is a true square. Thirdly, the box and needle. Fourthly, it has
on one corner a center, in which is a screw-pin, on which a moveable ruler with
sights turns. Fifthly, in the two outsides furthest from the center is drawn
the Quadrate for terrestrial altitudes and distances. Sixthly, next to it is
the limb of the Quadrant, both for celestial and terrestrial altitudes and
distances, whether upright, flat, or aslope. Seventhly, Gunther's Quadrant for
your own latitude for hours both of night and day; and Azumeths, and diverse
other problems. Eighthly, Fale's Quadrant for Planetary hours. Ninthly, a
circle and scale for finding the declination of a plain. Tenthly, a neck of 14
or 15 inches long, to put on the top of the staff, the Table being taken off,
with a pin on the side to hang the Table on, to take all manner of altitudes
and distances aslope. Eleventhly, a beam of 6 or 7 foot long about two inches
square of deal, and a trough on the top gouged all along half an inch deep, to
fill with water for a water-level, having a sight at each end, having a lath
crossing the beam in the middle above and below 6 foot long, fastened with
screw-pins and brackets above and below, with an hole in the bottom of the
middle of the beam, in stead of a socket to stand on top of the three-foot
staff. So that there is nothing that all or any observing Instruments can do;
but this does it. By this you measure land as by the plain-Table, then if the
weather be moist, or in hilly ground, you may uncover the Table, and work by
the Quadrant, whereby you may save the charge of hill-ground sights, which are
as costly as all the rest of the Instruments. Besides which if you know how to
work by the Quadrant, you cannot be ignorant of working by the Theodelete or
semicircles; the difference being only this, that they take only at once,
which if it be above 90 degrees, by the Quadrant you first take some part of
it, and then the rest of it afterward, yet all at the same station, and then
plot it by your scale of chords. Indeed by the Circumferentor you take all the
angles by observing the cutting of the South-end of the needle, and then either
plot the angles by a protractor, and the lines by a scale of equal parts, or
else you may plot the angles either by your scale of chords, or by the
Circumferentor it self, both which I hold better ways then the first. So that
there being nothing desirable in an observing instrument, but this gives it,
it so pleased Mr. Hender Roberts, (the Lord Roberts youngest son, a Gentleman
every way fitted with a genius for the Mathematics, whom I cannot name without
honor,) who had the first of them to give it the name of (...), omne donum. So
that in showing the use of it as it is a Quadrant, we shall with the same
labor show the use of all graduated Instruments in measuring of land; and as
for working by it as by the plain-Table, we refer you to the ten first chapters
of this book. Now therefore for working by the Quadrant, (yet herein we will
speak of nothing but what is within the station-lines, contenting our selves
for the rest with that which has been spoken before in the use of the
plain-Table,) all the difference consists in three things: first, the taking of
the angles: secondly, in keeping the field-book: thirdly, in plotting.

First, For taking of the angles, you need not set up your Quadrant oftener then
you did the plain-Table; therefore suppose this figure ABCDE to be a plot of
ground to be measured on the inside: I begin at A, not setting up the
Instrument, but find AB to be 20 pole, that I set down in my note-book,
besides the breadths from the station lines, which I omit here as sufficiently
spoken of before Then being come to B, there I set up the Quadrant, and find
it just 90 degrees, I set down B 90 degrees, so that all the lengths are
measured by poles or links, and all the angles by degrees: then I measure BC,
and find it 28, and set it down: now I come to C, I lay the sharp edge of the
rule to the line of the Quadrant, where the degrees begin, and then screw down
the sights for stirring* AB. 20. p. B 90. d. BC. 28. p. C. 106. d. CD. 36. p.
D. 108. d. DE. 22. p. E. 101. d. EA. 27.. p
but turn the Quadrant till through the sights you see a mark at B, (as when
you were at B you saw at A.) Now seeing that mark at B screw the socket pin,
that the Quadrant turns not, but turn your sights to D: but I cannot, for they
fall besides the board; but I have espied a mark at near the middle of the
ground, viz. a tree, I turn my sights to that, and see the sharp edge of the
rule cut 60 degrees, that I keep in mind, then I lay the sharp edge of the
rule again on the beginning of degrees, and turn the Qu^drant till I see the
same tree again through the sights; then stir not the Table, but stir the
sights till you see D through them: then looking by the edge of the ruler, I
find it cuts at 46, which added to 60 gives the whole angle C 106: and so of
the rest.

To plot a plot taken by gradu^ed Instruments.
Now for your plotting it, first draw the line AB, set out 20 of your scale of
equal parts upon it, then take always 60 off your scale of chords, set one foot
at the end of your 20 in B, and with the other foot tran always from the last
line, which here is AB, toward the place where you think your next line BC
will fall. Then take your angle B which is 60, and set it in the said tran from
the line AB forward, there make a prick, and from B through that prick draw the
line BC ad infinitum. In which line set out ^8 of equal parts; there make a
prick for your station C. Then take again your 60 of chords, set one foot in C,
and tran from the last line BC, toward CD. Now because your angle C is more
then 90 and that your compass tran at 60, therefore first set out that 60 in
the said tran to B, and because there wants yet 46 of 106, therefore take those
46 with your compasses, and set them on forward from 60; there make a prick,
and draw your line CD through it, and so of the rest. So that there are but
these things: first, draw a station-line: secondly, tran your angle with 60 of
chords: thirdly prick out the degrees of that angle.

CHAP. XVII. In measuring by graduated Instruments, to know if your plot will
shut, or no.
Because in working by graduated Instruments, you always plot at home but never
in the field; and that if any thing be mistaken in the field (as often it comes
to pass to be so) then will not your plot shut at home: therefore either you
must look to your needle at every plantation, or else you must measure all the
angles, which by the plain-Table you need not do: therefore with such
Instruments the needle is more needful, then with the plain-Table; and yet the
Circumferentor will hardly help you herein neither, though you work all by the
needle, unless you work by taking angles by it, which is the slower way. Now
having measured all the angles, if on the inside of a ground, because all the
three angles of a right line triangle are equal to two right angles, or 180
degrees, and that there are so many triangles save two as are angles; therefore
if you reckon so many angles save two, for each of them 180, and find that and
the quantities of all your angles to agree, there is great hope your plot will
shut, else not. As if there be a triangle, they must all make 180; if a
quadrangle, 360; if a pentangle, 540; an hexangle 720; a septangle 800; an
octangle 950; but if you measure on the out side, as a wood, then every outward
angle is the complement to 360 of its inner angle; therefore to take all those
complements, is your best way both to prove and plot it by, and less labor, if
you are far from your mark, and not to go to it again, it oft-times will quit
your pains, lest you are forced to spend perhaps an whole days-work about that
you have done, or at least would have done already, to prove your angles after
this manner.

CHAP. XVIII. To take terrestrial distances by the plain-Table, or Pandoron, a^
by the Table.
WE have spoken of taking them by the chain only, in chap. 13. between that
and this there is very little difference. We will here suppose the same
oppositions as there: viz. two houses beyond a river, between which I desire
the distance, also between each of them, and each of my stations: the chiefest
difference is this, that by this your best way is to have your station-line as
near the river as you can, which let be as before AB 40 pole long. First set
your ^nstrument at A and turn the sights to DC, and B, and draw their lines;
measure thence to B 40 poles, there make a prick* but lay down your 40 pole
with a very small seal, if the distances be long, so that the 40 pole be
little above an inch long. Then set up your Instrument at B, laying your index
on your station-line of your plot turn it till through the sights you epsy A,
then fasten your Table and one end of your ruler turning upon the center B,
turn the sights first to C, then to D, then draw lines, whose intersections
with the former will give you all your distances desired.

CHAP. XIX. To do the like by the Pandoron as it is a Quadrant, or by any
graduated Instrument.
LEt the same example be propounded as before, and let your station-line be AB
40 pole as near the riverside as you can. I set up the Quadrant first at A,
where I find BAD 110 degrees, and CAD is 50 degrees: likewise set up at B, then
CBA is 104, whereof CBD 50; this station-line 40 and these angles thus plotted
extend you lines till they meet, and their intersections will give you the
desired distances as before: yet if you will bestow the time and pains to cast
it up by the doctrine of Triangles you may come somewhat nearer.



First for the triangle BAD, seeing that BAD is 110 degrees, and the angle ABD
54: which make being added 164, which take out of 180, rests the angle ADB 16
degrees.

Now in the same triangle having all the angle and the line AB: to find the
side AD. As the sine ADB 16. Comparithmes 055966 is to AB 40. 160206 So sine
110 degrees, that is sine 70, 997.99 to 136 3/10 BD. 213.61
Also to find AD, As sine ADB 16. Compar. 055966 is to AB 40 pole: 160206 so
sine DBA 54 degrees 990796 to 117 4/10 AD. 206968
Then in the triangle CBA, CBA is 104 and BAC is 60, these added together make
164, which taken out of 180 leaves the angle BCA 16 degrees. Now to find BC. As
sine 16 d. Compar. 055966 to AB 40 p. 160206 so is sine CAD 60 993753 to BC 125
and 7/10 209925


Also to find AC. As sine ACB 16. Compar. 055966 to AB 40: 160206 so sine 104,
that is sine 78 998690 CBA to AC 140 8/10 214862
Lastly having the two sides AC 140 8/10 and AD 117 4/10 and the angle CAD 50
in your triangle CAD to find CD. As the sum of the sides 258 1/10. Compar.
658804 to the difference of the same sides 23 4/10 236922 so is the tang. of
the sum of the angles unknown 65 to the tang. of their difference 11 degrees,
033133 which add to 65 d. facit 76 the greater 928859
angle D. But subtracted from it makes the angle 54 degrees: and then as sine
54. Compar. 009205 to 117 4/10: 206967 so sine 50 degrees. 988425 to CD 111
2/10 204597


CHAP. XX. Of altitudes and distances celestial by the Pandoron or Quadrant.
FOr taking of altitudes and distances celestial, or altitudes terrestrial, it
is a matter of necessity, that besides your Quadrant and three-legg'd foot, you
get also a neck or piece of close-grain'd wood, whose Diameter may be about
three inches, or somewhat more. Let the nether end be turned with a socket,
that instead of the socket of your Table you may put on that, so that it may
turn on the top of the staff as the socket does, having also a screw-pin in the
side of it, to hold it at any situation. Also about two or three inches below
the top turn it like a bowl, in the midst whereof bore an hole with an
inch-wimble, to which fit a pin of the same wood, so hard both driven in and
glewed in that it stirs not, but let* one end thereof be so big and so long as
to fit the brass socket, that the socket may turn very stiff about it; and let
the little end of the pin reach past the hole of the bowl, almost the depth of
the socket, and then you may fit that end of the pin either to that or any
other Instrument, by glewing upon it a piece of its own wood, turned like a
little salve-box; then upon this pin put the socket of your Instrument, and
work as follows.

To take the altitude of the Sun.
Take the string of your plummet in your hand, and apply it to the edge of your
Instrument, and hang it plumb: then screw it fast, then move the ruler with
sights up and down, till the Sun shining through the sight next the limb, the
shadow of the thread run straight along the rule, then look how many degrees
are between the edge of the rule, and the bottom of the limb, so many degrees
is the height of the Sun: and this you may do by setting it on a stool.

To take the height of a star.
To do this, having hanged your Instrument on the pin of the neck, and plumbed
one edge by the light of a candle, look by the edges of both sights, moving the
ruler till you see the star desired in a straight line with them both, then
screw the ruler, and take down the Table, accounting the degrees from the
bottom to the edge of the rule for the height of the star.

To take the distance of two stars howsoever situate.
If both be near the Horizon and near of one altitude, and within 90 degrees of
each other, you need not use the neck at all, but only lay your ruler on the
beginning of the degrees, then screw it, and turn the Table till by both sights
you see one of the stars; then fasten the Table, and move the sights to the
other star, and the degrees on the limb of the fiduciall edge of the rule gives
their distance.

If they be both in one and the same half of a vertical circle, take both their
heights as before, subtract the lesser altitude from the greater, you have your
desire. If they are in several halfs of the vertical circle, take the
complements of both their heights, and add them together, and actum est.

But if they lie aslope, and yet are within 90 degrees one of another, then
besides the foot and Quadrant, or Pandoron, get you two round sticks as big as
your thumb, about six foot long a piece, sharpen their little ends, and nayl
their great ends together within five or six inches of the top, with one nayl
only, that they may open and shut like a pair of tongs: also you shall take a
joynd-stool and cushion, and having put the neck upon the foot, and the
Pandoron on the pin of the neck, close the three feet together with your
right hand, and lay them on the cushion, and with your left hand under-set the
neck with the tongs, opening and shutting them as need is or setting them
nearer or further from you as need is, all with the same hand, and turning it
aslope with the right hand. Then having first placed the sights at the
beginning of the degrees, turn it till by the edges of both sights you see one
of the stars you desire; then keep the Table f^st there, and move the sights
till by them you see the other star, and voti compos ^ris.

CHAP. XXI. Of taking of altitudes terrestrial by the Quadrant.
THere are diverse ways whereby these altitudes may be discovered, whether they
be perpendicular, as properly they signify, or Hypotenuses, or bases: for all
of them are comprehended under the notion of Altitude; because the bases may be
as well found by the help of the perpendiculars, as perpendiculars by the help
of bases, and any of these may be found several ways by the Pandoron, either
as it is a Quadrant, or as it is a Geometrical Quadrat: of eit^er of which we
will lay down some Problemes, and first as it is a Quadrant.

Probl. I. A distance being given and the angle of the base, to find an
altitude.
Measure the distance AC ^00, and the angle A 9 deg^^ 0 min. by your Pandoron,
the Complement whereof is the angle B 60 d. 20. n. ergo as fine ABC 60 d 20 m.
993898 is to the line AD ^00. 230103 so sine BAC 29 d. 40 m. 969496 to CB 114
(03. 205700


II. Likewise the height CB given, to find AC the distance.
As BAC 29 degrees. 40 min. 969496 is to CB 114 (03. 230103 so B 60 degrees. 20 min.
993898 to AC 200. 230103
To find either of them by the scale and compasses, having the angle A, and
distance AC.

First draw the line AC, set from A toward C 200 of some scale of equal parts
upon C erect a perpendicular, and upon A make an angle of 29 degrees. 40 min. which
line will meet CB, and you shall find CB 114 fere. So measuring the height CB,
and the angle B, and plotting it, you shall have AC 200.

III. The height BC and angle A being given, to find the Hypotenuse AB.
As A 29 degrees. 40 min. to BC the height 114 (03: so ACB 90 degrees. to AB 230 (17.
To find it by the scale. Draw the line AC let it be 200 of equal parts* upon
C erect the perpendicular BC, and on A make an angle of 29 degrees. 40 min. so the
Hypotenuse AB will be 230 (17.

The part of the distance DA in the same diagram being known to find DC or AC.
Let AD or OF be 90 foot and I desire FG or DC, but I cannot measure it for
impediments, therefore first take the angle of altitude B at both stations A
and D, at AI find A 29 degrees. 40 min. so that the angle CBA is 60 degrees. 20 min.
at DI find the same angle D 46 degrees. and DBC 44 degrees. subtract 44 degrees. from 60
degrees. 20 min. rests ABD 16 degrees. 20 min. then say, As fine ABD 16 degrees. 20 min.
to AD 90 foot: so is BAD 29 degrees. 40 min. to DB 158 ^/10. Then again, As 90 to
BD 158 ^/10: so is DBC 44 degrees. to DC 110, which added to 90 AD makes AC 200, as
before. By the scale thus, draw the lines AC and AB ad infinitum, making the
angle 29 degrees. 40 min. then set 90 feet from A in the line AC to D where you
found the angle DBC to be 46 degrees. because the angle CDB is 44, for they are the
complements one of the other, therefore plot the angle BDC and it will be 46
degrees. and the BD 158 (4^ then from B let fall a perpendicular upon AC, and it
cuts it at C making DC 110 and AC ^00 as before. To let this perpendicular fall
divide either AB or DB into two equal parts, and with the compass at that
wideness set one foot in the intersection and the other in the line DC at C and
there falls the perpendicular BC and the end of the line AC.

Likewise any part of the altitude being known, the rest of it may be found by
turning the height into the distance, and the distance into the height.

Any part of the distance being known to find the Hypotenuse. In the former
diagram, subtract the angle BDC. 46 degrees. out of 180 degrees. or (which is all one)
add DBC 44 degrees. to C 90. there rests the obtuse angle BDC 134, to which add the
angle BAD 29 degrees. 40 min. they make 163 degrees. 40 min. whose complement to 180 is
the angle ABD ^6 degrees. ^0 min. Now say, As sine 16 degrees. 20 min. is to 90 feet:
so is ^34 degrees. which because it is obtuse above 90 degrees. you must subtract it
from 180, rests 46 degrees. the acute angle BDC, and they give the Hypotenuse AB
230 (17. And for DB say, As sine ABD 16 degrees. 20 min. to 90 feet: so is sine DAB
29 degrees. 40 min. to DB 158 (4: for the plotting, if you mark how it is done in
the last problem, you cannot fail in this. But as ^for taking all these
Altitudes aforesaid, considering they are only to be taken upon plain ground
and that the chiefest use of this skill is to take such altitudes as stand upon
an hill: (For although several writers talk of taking the heights of Castles*
Towers, Forts, etc. yet they describe them all as if they were upon plain
ground, whereas it is a common thing to find a Castle on hilly ground: so that
I know not one Author that gives any rules how to find the height of a Castle
standing on the top of an hill.) I have therefore here in this diagram
demonstrated the same. Let ACF be an hill on which the Castle CD stands; I
set up my Quadrant at A and I find the line AC which is the ascent of the hill
to the bottom of the Castle 28 degrees. of height, and the angle FAD 31 degrees. to the
top, the difference is 3 degrees. which is the angle CAD: then I measure up in the
line AC to B 200 foot: where if you suppose another horizontal BG parallel to
AF, then must the angle GBC be 28. degrees. as before, by Euclid, prop. 28.
Element. 1. there also I take the top-line by my Quadrant, viz. BD, and find
the altitude thereof GBD 32 degrees. the difference is 4 degrees. which is the angle
CBD and that taken out of 180 degrees. leaves the angle DBA 176 degrees. by prop. 13.
Element. 1. to which add CAD 3 degrees. facit 179 degrees. that taken out of 180 degrees.
leaves ADB 1 degrees. also add CBG 28 degrees. to CGB 90 degrees. they make 118 degrees. which
taken from 180 degrees. rests 62, BCG. prop. 49. Element. 1. and the same 118 degrees.
is the angle DCB, for which in the analogy we take 62 the acute angle or
complement to 180 degrees. for the obtuse. Now to find the sides say, As sine ADB
1 degrees. Compar. 1758144 to AB 200. 2301030 so sine CAD 3 degrees. 8718800 to BD 600.
2777974


Secondly, As sine DCB 118 degrees. vel 62 degrees. Compar. 0054164 to BD 600. 2777974
so sine CBD. 4 degrees. 8843588 to CD 47 the Castles height. 1675726


But this will not be found very exactly by plotting, by reason of the meeting
of the acute angles, and the lines running so far one in another, especially AD
and BD, that you cannot distinguish their intersection, and thus also we have
not only found the height of the Castle 47, but also the rest of the hill line
by measuring AB 200 a part of the same line, and up an hill also, for if you
add BCD 118 degrees. to CBD 4. degrees. they make 122: which subtracted from 180 degrees.
rests 58 degrees. the angle CDB. Then say, As CBD 4 degrees. Compar. 1156416 to CD 47:
1675726 so CDB 58 degrees. 9928420 to BC 776 (2. 2760562
which added to AB 200, gives the whole line 976 (2. And now if you intend to
begin your mine at B. your best way is to go 10 or 12 foot first in BG line, as
you ghuess half the breadth of the fort to K, and thence draw the line KL
parallel to BC, which two lines are of equal length. Elem. 1. prop. 26. and
then keep that line up to the top, for that must be your line of direction,
that if by occasion of some rock, or other impediment, you are forced to raise,
or sink, or go side-ways, you may by help of this line drawn on paper with a
large scale, keeping account still how far you are gone in the said line, and by
help of the Quadrant at each station, be able to plot how much you are above or
below your line of direction; and by help of your Needle to find how far you
are gone side-ways; but your best way is to draw one line for ascents and
descents, and another for variations side-ways, besides your line of direction,
and it will not be labor in vain also, beside both these lines to set down in
a note-book the inches raised by themselves above the line of direction, and
the fallings by themselves, that so you may subtract the sum of the lesser
from the sum of the greater; just as in conveying of water, whereof we shall
speak anon. Likewise set down the variations on the right hand by themselves,
and those on the left by themselves, and against what part of your
directing-line each of them is. Thus when you come within ten or twelve foot of
the floor, there begin your Oven.

CHAP. XXII. Of taking altitudes terrestrial by the Quadrant, or the Pandoron.
THe sides of the Quadrat SK, and K^ (of which SK is called of Pitiscus the
right shadow, and KL the contrary) are nothing else but the natural tangents of
arches less then a Quadrant, which if each of these sides be divided by decimal
division, they will agree with the Tables of natural tangents, either of
Blundevil, or Pitiscus, which holds in the contrary shadow, but because the
contrary shadow is not continued straight on, but is turned again at 1000;
therefore there it begins to be reckoned back again to 0, as Mr. Wingates, or
Mr. Gunthers rule is. So that now if you turn AS down-ward, then KL will be the
right shadow.

But to distinguish the right and contrary shadow, you must first consider
whether your Quadrant goes with a moveable rule and sight upon it, as Pitiscus
has it; if so, then one edge is always plumb'd, then the right shadow is the
horizontal above, and the left shadow is perpendicular; which if the ruler
falls on it, the thing seen is lower then 1000 parts by his account. But by
Gunthers Quadrat, which is with a plummet only, and the center upward, the
plummet falls in the right shadow, when the thing is seen lower then 45 degr.
of the Quadrant, or a 1000 of the Quadrat. But Mr. Gunther has (in my
judgment) expressed himself in doubtful terms, in defining right and contrary
shadow, where he says that the right shadow of a Quadrat is that which is
nearest to the horizontal. May I not well ask what horizontal line he does
mean? or where is there an horizontal line in that kind of Quadrat? Certainly
there is none at all; what does he then mean? he means that that is the right
shadow, that in taking any height lies most level; and so it agrees with
Pitiscus: and although Gunthers rules are fully sufficient for his Quadrant,
yet will they not serve to Pitiscus without some alteration. We will therefore
beg leave of Mr. Gunther to borrow his rules, and to fit them to both.

1. Any point being given to find whether it be level with the edge, by
Gunthers, thus.
If looking through the sights, and seeing your desired mark, the plummet falls
in the the downright line next to you, then it is right and level with the
eye. But by the other, fix the ruler on the lower side to the beginning of the
degrees; then plumb the other edge next the center; if then by looking through
the sights, you epsy the mark, then is it level with the bottom of the Table;
or if you see by the top, then it is level with it.

2. To find an height at one observation by Gunthers.
If looking through the sights and seeing the mark, the plummet fall^ng on 100
of the Quadrat, or 45 degrees of the Quadrant, then the distance between the
mark that is level with your eye it self, is equal to the height above the said
mark. But if the plummet falling there, you see below it through the sights,
then go further off; if above, then go nearer.

By the other, First, fasten your sights on 100 or 45 degr. of the Quadrant;
then having plumb'd the side next you, go further off, or nearer, till you see
the top desired through the sights of the ruler: then by looking by the
over-edge of the Quadrat, see some mark by it also: so the distance from it to
your eye shall give the height from the mark to the top desired. And what is
here said of 100 of the Quadrat to give the true distance, understand the same,
the plummet falling on 50 of right shadow, and the ruler on 50 of contrary,
then to give a distance double to the height: if 25, the height is but a
quarter of the distance; if 75, then three quarters: for as often as the
plummet falls on the parts of the right shadow, or the ruler in the other on
the contrary shadow, as 100 to the parts on which the thread falls, or rule
cutteth; so is the distance to the height required: and contrarily, as the
parts cut by the thread or ruler in the said shadows are to 100, so is the
height to the distance. But when the thread shall fall on the parts of the
contrary shadow, or the ruler on the right; if they fall on fifty parts, the
height is double to the distance; if on 25, it is four times as much as the
distance: for as often as the thread falls on the parts of the contrary
shadow, or the ruler on the right, as the parts cut by the thread or ruler are
to 100; so is the distance to the height; and on the contrary, as 100 are to
the parts cut, so is the height to the distance: and what is here said of the
height and distance, the same may be understood of the height and shadow.

To find the height or distance at two observations by Mr. Gunthers way, by
the Quadrat.
As if the place which is to be measured might not otherwise be approached, and
yet it were required to find the height BC, and the distance: First, I make
choice of a station at E (in the last diagram) where the thread may fall on 100
parts of the Quadrat, or 45 degrees of the Quadrant, or the ruler cut the like
parts, the distance EB would be equal to the height BC: then if I go further
off in a direct line with the former distance, and make choice of a second
station at D, where the thread may fall on 50 parts of right shadows, or the
number 50 of contrary shadows, the distance BD, would be double to the height
BC. Wherefore if I measure the difference between the two stations E and D, and
this difference ED will be equal both to the distance EB, and to the height BC:
or if you cannot make choice of such stations, I take such as I may, one at D,
where the thread cuts 50 parts of right shadow, and the rule 50 of the
contrary; the second at A, where they fall on 40 parts of their like shadows.
Then suppose the height BC to be 100 (for easiness of calculation, though it be
but 16) I find, as 50 parts are to 100, the side of the Quadrat; so 100 the
supposed height to 200, the distance BD. And as 40 parts at the second station
unto 100, so 100 the supposed height to 250, the distance BA. Wherefore the
difference between the two stations D and A should seem to be 50, and then if
in measuring of it you find it more or less, the proportions will hold, as
from t^^ supposed difference to the measured difference; so from height to
height, and from distance to distance: as if the difference between the two
stations D and E being measured were found to be 30; As 50 the supposed
difference unto 30, the true difference; so 100, the supposed height, to 60 the
true height; and 200 the supposed distance to 120 the true distance, and 250 at
the second station to 150 the distance BE.

CHAP. XXIII. To take the situation of a plain for a dial, viz. the declination
and reclination thereof by the Pandoron.
APply one edge of your Pandoron to the plain, and the plummet to the edge next
you; if that edge be upright, the plain is upright: if it rec^ine, take off the
ruler, and apply o^e of the edges next the center that are not divided to the
plain, so the degree cut by the thread gives the inclination. But if it
recline, then turn the center downward, and holding that thread in your hand,
moving it to and fro with your thumb upon it a little above the limb, till the
thread fall on the center: so the degree cutting the line, shall be the
reclination. Or you may put on the rule, taking out the sights, turn the center
downward, and one of the sides next it to the plain, turning the rule till the
thread fall in the middle of it, then the siducial edge thereof will give the
degree of reclination.

But for the declination: Although you may go somewhat near by help of your
needle and card, if there be no iron near you; yet work as exactly as you can,
I will be ^oth to trust it, but rather I will go further about, and find it by
the Azumeth; which to do, I must first by my Pandoron take the angle of the
wall and Sun, thus* Apply one of the edges thereof next the center to the
plain, and turn the ruler till the Sun shows the shadow of the thread of the
sight next the Sun, along the midst of the rule, then shall the fiduciall edge
of t^ ruler give the degree of declination. But you must mark whether it be
taken in the fore-noon or afternoon, and likewise the month and day of the
month: likewise you must at the same moment take the Suns altitude, thus;
Either hang the Pandoron on the pin of the neck, or rather ^et one of the
undivided edges on a stool, and plumb the other; then turn the edge of the
Table to the Sun, moving the ruler up and down, till the shadow of the thread
in the sight next the Sun shine straight along the middle of the rule, so the
fiducial edge gives the Suns altitude in the degree of the limb. Now knowing
these things, you may find the Azumeth either by calculation, or by your
Pandoron, if you have Gunthers Quadrant drawn on it. First, by calculation
having the month and day, you know the Suns place by this rule: 10 10 11 11 13
13 13 13 12 11 10 9 Mar. Apr. May. June. July. Aug. Sept. October. Nov. Dec. Jan.
Feb. 2 tens, 2 elevens, 4 thirteens, 12, 11, 10, 9. These are the days of each
month the Sun changes his sign, beginning with March. If the day you seek
the Suns place be after the change day in any month, subtract the change day
out of the day you seek, and you have the degree of the sign of that month.
Example. I desire the Suns place April the 25.16 6. I find by this rule April
10, the Sun entered, take 10 out of 25, rests 15: so I conclude, the Sun is in
the 15 degree of that day.

But if the day you seek be before the change day in any month, then first you
must subtract that day from the change day, and then the remain always from 30.
So April the fifth take five out of ten, there remains five; and that taken
from 30, there rests 25 degr. which being it is Leap-yeare, you may make it 26
of, of the month preceding.

Then you must seek the Suns declination either out of some Table for that
purpose, or by this analogy: as the Radius to the sine of the Suns greatest
declination 23 degr. 30 min. so is the distance from the nearest Equinoctial to
the declination desired. Suppose April 5. the Sun in 26 degr. of, that is 26
degr. from the nearest Equinoctial; say, As the Rad. to the sine of the Suns
greatest declination 23 degr. 30 min. 23 degr. 30 min. 960070 26 064184 so is
the distance from the nearest Equinoctial to the declination desired 10 degr. 4
m. 924254
which because it is in a Northern sign, as, therefore it is North
declination, and is so much nearer then 90 degr. to the North Pole, as the Suns
declination is, viz. 79 degr. 56 min. Now add this distance, the complement of
the altitude, and the complement of the latitude, all three together, and from
the half sum subtract the distance from the pole, and note the difference. Let
us suppose the Suns altitude taken about nine of the clock in the morning for
the latitude of 5^ degr. 15 min. took by the Quadrant as you are directed in
Chap. ^0, to be 32 degr. then proceed thus; The Suns North declin. 10 degrees 4 m.
distance from the pole 79 d 56 m. latitude 52 degr 15 m. complement 37 45 the
Suns altitude 32 degr. complement 58 00 Now say* As the Radius 90, Sum 175 41
to sine of the compl. of altit. 32 d. i. e. S. 58. d. 992842. half sum. 87 50
hence take 70 56 so cosine 52 d. 15 m. or S. ^7 d. ^5 m. 978690. difference 7
54 to a 4th sine 21 d. 17 m. 971532. As this fourth sine 21 d. 17 m. Comp. Ar.
028467 to the S. of the half sum 87 d 50 m. 599969 so is the S. of the
difference 7 d. 54 m. 913813 to a seventh sine 15 d. 20 m. 1942249
Add to it the Radius, the half (971124 30 d. 58 m.) thereof is the mean
proportional, being the sine of 30 d. 58 m. whose comp. is 59 d. 2 m. that
doubled is 118 d. 4 m. the Azumeth from the North.

Now suppose you had taken the wall and Sun 40 degrees. that must always be set
backward in the course of the Sun from the Sun or Azumeth: viz. from West to
South, from South to East, etc. so then our angle of wall and Sun being taken
in the morning, the Sun must needs be on the East Side of the Meridian line,
and being found 118 degrees. 4 min. from the North, that is 28 degrees. 4 min. beyond
the East, now if I set back 40, that is take 28 degrees. 4 min. out of 40. there
rests 11 degrees. 56 min. from the East toward the North; and there was the Sun
when first it shone on the wall thence draw your wall-line through the center,
and always the distance between the East or West-line and the wall-line is the
declination desired 11 degrees. 56 min. as before in Chap. 14. Now because the Sun
shines on it at noon: therefore it is a South dial; and because the Sun shines
on it longer in the fore-noon then in the afternoon, therefore it is a South
declining Eastward 11 degrees. 56 m. But if having the day of the month April 5,
you take it in the morning and the Suns altitude 32 degrees. and the angle of the
wall and Sun 40 degrees. as before, and you have Gunthers Quadrant drawn on your
Quadrant for your own latitude, and that you have your line of the Suns
declination drawn on the ruler as well as on the left-side of the Quadrant. And
thus you desire to know all things by it without any calculation; First lay
your ruler on the day of the month; see what degree of declination is cut by
that 12 of clock hour which is proper to the time, whether it be summer or
winter, carry that degree to the Ecliptique and you have the Suns place. Also
carry it or take the same degree in the declinations on the left side* it
gives the time of Sunrising in the fore-noon-hours and the setting in the
afternoon. Lay the ruler on the degrees. of the Suns altitude in the limb reckond
from the left hand, and your degrees. of declination gives the hour of the day:
carry it to the right-side and reckon the altitude from thence, and the same
degrees. of declination gives the Azumeth either for summer or winter: but not from
the North, but from the South. Then may you cast up your declination of the
wall, having your Azumeth as you did before, or else find it by help of a
scale of chords drawn toward the top of the Quadrant on the right hand with a
circle of the Suns Radius divided with two cross Diameters, and marked with
East, South, West, North, and thereby with your compasses take your distances
from your scale and set them out upon your circle. Further if you bring your
degrees. of declination upon your ruler to the Horizon, you have the Suns Amplitude
in the Horizon also lay your rule on the place of the Sun in the Ecliptique it
gives its right ascension. If you bring your degrees of declination to the Horizon,
the edge of the rule shows in the limb the Ascentionall difference; which
known, turn this Ascentionall difference into time, allowing an hour for each
15 degrees. and 4 min. of an hour for each degrees. it shows how long the Sun rises
before six of the clock in summer, and after six in winter. If you bring the
degree of the Suns declination in summer to any of the winter hours, and for
morning hours of the one take the afternoon hours of the other, it gives in the
limb the depression of the Sun below the Horizon. Bring the ruler to 18 degrees. of
the limb, and see where in summer the degrees. of declination cuts the winter
afternoon hours, and that hour is the break of the day* but in the fore-noon
hours for daylight shutting in and the contrary; lay your ruler on the day of
the month, make a mark upon the rule, where it cuts the sixth hour in Faels
Quadrant, then lay your ruler on the Suns altitude in the limb and your mark,
which give you the planetary hour. But it was not my purpose to show all that
may be wrought by the Pandoron, so I may have work enough for a good while; but
only to show the use of it in measuring of land, taking of altitudes, and
conveying of water. They that desire more of the making and use of it in these
things, let them see Gunthers book it self, or for the use of it let them see a
little book thereof by it self sold by Mr. Moxon at the sign of the Atlas in
Corn-hil, together with printed papers of the said Quadrant for London-latitude
only. But if any desire the making of it for other latitudes, let them peruse
my Fale redivivus or Sunshine of shadows wherein they shall find Gunthers
first chapter touching the making of this Quad^ant explained, with Tables to
make it for all latitudes throughout all England, and also Tables for all
Horizontall dials, and for all erect South and North, East and West, and all
decliners from one degrees. to 90 for each whole degrees. as also for all Polars, and
all these for nine several latitudes from 50 to 56, as also diverse others
curious dials Quadrants and Nocturnals.

CHAP. XXIV. Of conveying water.
I Find great difference among our best Authors concerning the odds or
difference between the true and water-levell. Mr Hopton in his 24th chapter of
his Topographical-glass says, that after the ordinary manner to bring it in
pipes, the ground must be lower by 4 inches for each mile, then at the
springhead: so that I suppose his meaning is, if it be 10 miles, it must be
each mile alike, viz. ten times 4 and that is 45 inches, or three feet nine
inches; but neither demonstrates it nor gives any reason for it. Again Mr.
Diggs in his Pantometria ( lib. 1. chap. 3.) says that in ten miles distance,
the water-level is below the true nine paces, four foot eleven inches: which if
every mile give a like we have five foot in a mile. And because there is such a
vast difference, I will lay down both Diggs his rule to find it, and his
example, as he calculated it in his own words: his rule is thus. First it
behooves you to get the distance of the fountain from the place whither you
will convey the water, which distance you shall multiply by it self, adding the
off come to the square of the earths semidimetient, and from the sum extract
the square-root, and out of which root subtract the earths semi-diameter, the
remain is the difference desired. His example is this. Admit the distance BE 10
miles. The semi-diameter of the earth EB 5011 Italian miles. But how the
semi-diameter can be 5011 Italian miles, I cannot imagine: for if the
semi-diameter be 5011, the whole diameter must be 10022, which multiplied by 22
gives 220484: that divided by 7 gives 31498 the circumference; which divided by
360 degrees. gives 87 Italian miles to a degree.

Now because an Italian mile is 1000 pases, and an English mile 1056, say, As
1056. 1000: 87. 82. So that by this account there should be 82 English miles to
a degree, which was never heard of; our common account is but 60. our modern
Artists hold 66, the most that ever was reckoned of is less then 69, but this
is 13 more.

But suppose the semi-diameter to be, as he says, 5011 and the distance 10
miles, each mile 1000 pases, each pase five foot; the square of 10000 pases,
that is 10 miles, the distance is 100000000, and the semi-diameter in pases is
5011000, the square thereof is 25, 1101, 2100, 0000, add both these squares
together, they make 25110221000000 hence extract the square-root, it is 5011009
9801919/10022019 If hence you subtract the semi-diameter in pases 5011000,
there rests 9 9801919/10022019 or 10 pases fere, that is 50 foot, whereas
Hopton has 10 lines 4, that is 45 inches, or 3 foot 9 inches, so 40 miles
distance requires 48 poles. Now whether we reckon the semi-diameter 5011
Italian miles, or 3436 English miles, 60 miles to a degree, or 3780 English
miles, 66 to a degree, that decides not the controversy, whether of these
either Hopton or Diggs is right, or either of them both, or neither of them
both.

First for Hopton I cannot think him to be true; for that he shows no reason,
nor demonstration of it: and although 4 inches may serve the first mile, yet I
cannot think every mile is alike, for this water-level must of necessity be
supposed to be a right line drawn or running from the top of the earths
hemisphear, there making an acute angle with the tangent, and running between
the said tangent and the earths Perimeter, such as the tangent-line BG in the
last diagram. Now there may be infinite such lines supposed between the said
tangent and the earths circumference, and is there not as good reason for all,
as for any, for one as for another; there must be a terminus ad quem given, as
well as a terminus a quo.

Besides all this, all these lines will be in the air above the earth; but the
water must not run above the earth (that is Gods decree) but in the earths
Perimeter.

Therefore this difference of levels must needs be a line falling from the
tangent-line, that runs from the top of the earth to any distance desired,
which (according to Digs) is the excess* of an Hypotenusal above the Radius, or
earths semi-diameter, running from the center of the earth to any distance of
miles, poles, pases, or feet desired; or it is the natural secant of the arch
which it cutteth in meeting with any distance of the said tangent assigned.

In the former diagram, let ABCD represent the upper hemisphear of the earth, E
the center, EB or ED, or any of the pricked parallels falling on ED, conceive
them all to be semi-diameters of the earth, B the top of the earth, BG the
tangent line, BN a line in the air between the tangent and the circumference
of the earth: now for that it is impossible to make his example to appear to
the eye out of the said diagram, both by reason the said secant falls so near
the semi-diameter EB; and that there is no apparent difference between the said
tangent and the earths Perimeter, let us suppose the semi-diameter of the earth
both EB and BG, to be either of them 100 miles, and let the distance BF be 40
miles, then the secant or Hypotenuse is OF, which for that it is longer by FO.
then EB; therefore FO. is the difference of the levels found, as is before
declared.

And although Digs neither does set down the reason of his finding it after
this manner; yet it is easily perceived of every one that has any
understanding in triangles: for it is but the finding out of the Hypotenuse of
a rectangle right-line triangle, having the two legs given, and it may also be
wrought by the Logarithmes; but with little less labor.

Some think also that the line FP is the difference of the levels: but since
the difference in 100 miles is almost insensible between those two, we will
only demonstrate it to you, and then let every man use his own discretion.



Let us suppose in this diagram ABFD the upper hemisphear of the earth, whose
semi-diameter EB is 3780 English miles, 66 to a degree, to which is equal both
BG, and FM, and ED: for ED is equal to EB, Element. 1* Defin. 15. and BG and
ED. Element. 1 Prop. 36. therefore it is equal to EB, Axiom. 1. Element. 1. and
FM is equal to EB, Elem. 1. Def 15. and BG, and ED Elem. 1. Prop. 36. therefore
equal to EB, Axiom. 1. Elem. 1 and ME is equal to FB* Elem 1. Prop. 36. And
because in the other example we could not distinguish one thing from another,
because of the nearness of things one to another; therefore we will take the
distance BF, which suppose 1500 miles, which (to save labor) we will keep
still in miles.

First therefore, to find EO, OF, and OF, first EO is = to EB, Elem. 1. Def.
15. for OF square EB, 3780. it is 14288400. also square BF, 1500, it makes
2^91000. these added make 16538400. whose square root OF is English miles 4066.
Whence take EB, equal to EO. Elem. 1. Def. 15. 3780. rests OF, English miles
286 ^/4.


Then to find BEF. As 3780 Comp. Ar. 642250 is to Radius: so is 1500 317609.
to tangent 21 d. 39 m. of BEF, 959859.
whose arch is BO, whose natural tangent BF is 39694 parts, and that is equal
to LP. Elem. 1. Prop. 36. which is sine of 23 d. 24 m. for as 3780 3,577492. to
Rad. So 1500 13,176091. to S. 29 d. 24. m. 9,598599.
whose complement is 66 degr. 36 m. and the sine thereof MP 91775, and the
versed sine thereof FP is equal to LB 8225 parts.

And to reduce them into miles, say, 100000. 9225 3780. 311. FP. whence take ^F
286 ^/4, the difference is 24 miles difference in 1500.

But how can we do so? since Mr. Frost (then Manciple of Emmanuel College in
Cambridge, since Sword Bearer to the Lord Mayor, and since that a Secretary to
the Council of State, a man beyond all exception for integrity of life, an
excellent Mathematician, one that brought the water from the Spittle-house to
Emmanuel, and thence to Christ's College,) told me, that he came upon a time
(by mere accident) in the Fenns to a place where an old river had run down some
four miles, and was brought four miles back again in a new cut; and when they
met, the water in the old was but four inches above the water in the new. Now
the question is this, Does not this confirm, or rather outvie Hoptons tenent
of four inches and an half to a mile, seeing here is but four inches in eight
miles, which is half an inch for a mile? Truly I think not, for wheresoever you
conceive your self to be, there is the true top of the earth: if there you are
withal neither above nor below the true circumference of the earth, such as I
conceive the Fenns for the most part to be* having formerly been made level, as
being part of the sea, I see not but that the water may run both ways as well
as in the sea, if not all four ways, as well as the four rivers in the garden
of Eden. And by this means if the meeting place was not some bowing of the
earth of four inches thick, why might not they have met of equal height.

Every one (I suppose) will confess with me, that I being at B, the water will
run to C, and to o; and if you turn C uppermost, will it not run from C to B as
well? are no places uppermost but B, because I am not there: certainly I am
some wonderful virtuous fellow: well, I will get thither, and then it will run
thither. If any dislike this answer, let him give us a better.

CHAP. XXV. Of Instruments for conveying of water, and their use.
IF your distance be not above an 100 poles or thereabouts, you may hang your
Pandoron or Quadrant on the pin of the neck, and then set up a staff, or rather
let one hold it upright, with his face toward you at the head of the water,
moving a sheet of paper up or down, as you, standing 8 or 10 pole off in the
water-way, shall direct him by the sign of your hand, till you having there
set up your Instrument, and plumb'd it truly level, you see either through the
sights, or over side of the Quadrant, the nether edge of the paper; having
first screwed the ruler fast, and placed the thin edge thereof precisely upon
the upper Horizontal line of the Instrument: now take not your stations above
10 pole at the most from your standings, both in regard of the refractions of
the air which will deceive your sight, as also for that though your Instruments
be never so true, yet if you fail either in your plumbing it, or in laying your
ruler but one tenth part of an inch false, (which is easily done) you will fail
so many tenths as are Tables lengths between your Table and your staff; which
if your Table be 18 inches Radius, and your station ten pole, will come to
eleven inches in that distance, enough to mar your whole work.

Now he having placed his paper, let him bring it staff and all to you without
stirring it, and then you having a two-foot rule, and a stick in your hand
about four foot and an half long, measure first the height of your sights above
the ground, also from the bottom of his staff to the nether edge of the paper:
if both be alike, then those two places are level; if not, then see which is
most, and how many inches there are odds: if his be more then yours, then your
ground is risen more then his, so many inches as the difference is; but if you
are more then he, then you are lower, and then the water will run, or else not.
For it will never run higher naturally upward, unless your former falls do
countervail your rise.

Having thus found the difference, you must in a note-book make two Tables, one
for the risings, and another for the falls at each station, with their titles
of rising and falling over them, and the number of inches at each station, and
the number of the stations on the left hand: and you may do well also to
measure the distance with a chain, and set down on the right side the distance
from the springhead, and at each station to observe some mark. And having all
done, you must cast up the Tables each by it self, the inches of the falls by
themselves, and the ascents by themselves: then subtract the lesser total from
the greater; if the descents be most, it will run, so that there be no station
in the way that is higher then the springhead: which if you suspect, cast up
both your Tables only so far, and you may easily know. Yet if it should, that
will not cut you off altogether: for though you cannot help your self by
digging deep; yet it is hard, if you cannot by going about.

Having thus measured and found the difference, you may for triall-sake
exchange places, and let him stand where you stood, and do you stand at the
fountain. If there you find the descent to be the same as you did before, all
is right: and that you will hardly do, unless your Instrument be both very
large, and very exact.

But now you must know, that there is a difference between your being between
the springhead and him, and his being between it and you: for now, if he be
most, he is lowest; for always he that is most is lowest.

Now if you will, you may either your self go on forward, and let your
assistant stand; or rather your self stand there still, if you remove not to
prove, as I said; and so you may take two distances at one station; especially,
if you have two assistants, and all you three are in one direct line: so if you
keep your work in a straight line, if two assistants stand in the water-way, if
you stand in the middle in a right-line, if you see to one of them, you see to
the other without stirring the Instrument any ways.

Again, so far as you go in a direct line, if you have once set two marks
level, you may easily by them set up a third and fourth as far as it goes in a
straight line, and when it turns then use your Instrument as before.

Also it so falls out that water is to be brought out of some pond or level
water: if you bore holes in two boards like trenchers, and sharpen sticks of
equal height with white papers on them, if the boards lying in the water, two
assistants hold the sticks that you may set up a third in a straight line with
them, with a mark upon it agreeing level with the other marks; if they are too
high remove them lower* but both alike, or your own higher, and contra: only
take just notice how high the two are above the water, and then go on with a
fourth and fifth so long as you go in a straight line, and then use the
Instrument as before.

Also it may happen that you desire to bring water from some spring or head,
but you have neither level, nor level water, nor straight water-way, but you
suppose it will run, and the way is not long, and you would willingly try;

First then begin at the head, and make a little trench of three or four pole
long toward the way that it will run straight, whether this be straight or
crooked it matters not; then let run so much water as may only fill this
trench: if you find it dry, or shallower of water at the head, then at the
other end, it shows the ground to be falling; then do the like with three or
four poles more, still making the water to follow you, till you be gone three
or four pole in your straight line, then having filled it that the water may
stand level at both ends, stick up two sticks, one at one end, the other at the
other, of equal length about four foot above the water, then go on 10 or 12
pole in the same line, where set up a mark, so that you standing behind it,
and looking to the middle mark, either all the tops or all the bottoms,
according to which you measured your equal heights, may agree; then if that
stick be longer beneath the mark then the other two, it shows descent: if any
rising places be in the midst, you may easily find their rise by setting up a
stick, and measuring it as before. For finding how high you may set your cock
in a house, see the last page of this Book.


But for long distances, although I have fully shown the use of it already in
the Pandoron, yet because of the shortness of the lines, there is as little
reason for to use that in doubtful cases, as for one to shoot at wild-geese a
furlong off with a pistol, or to take on observation with a Quadrant of 3
inches Radius. I will therefore here give the making of a most excellent
Instrument, soon made, and cheap enough. First, let AB be a piece of deal, or
some light and soft wood, about two inches square, or inch and half, and seven
or eight foot long: in the upper-side thereof let there be a groove or chanel
made with a round plane, like the chanel for a bed-cord, about an inch wide,
and of like depth: likewise let ED and FD be two pieces of an inch broad
apiece, and a foot long, and half an inch thick a piece; to make brackets to be
lapp'd one over the other at D, and likewise the beam with screw-pins made of
pieces of old keys, to screw only into the wood, without any forills at all,
and likewise an other piece DG of six foot long, a quarter of an inch thick,
and an inch broad, with a jage-stroke down something toward one side of it,
that you make the screw-holes beside it: this must be screwed together with the
two brackets, within an inch of the end, all three with one pin. Also you must
screw it to the beam at C, that the jage-stroke may be exactly perpendicular to
the beam: this hole must be bored close to the bottom of the groove, and in the
bottom of the beam you may glue on a piece of some eighteen inches long, in the
middle, of two inches broad and an inch thick, to thicken it; because just in
the middle you must make an hole so big and so deep, that it may fit to go on
the top of the three-foot staff, or foot of the Pandoron, when both it and the
neck are took off; yet you must take heed you bore it not quite to the groove,
and let it go on as stiff as you can possibly. Also at either end glue on a
piece of an inch thick, eight inches long, and of the breadth of the beam, or
nayl them on to the beam, and cut the bases true and square: then get two thin
sights made after the manner of this figure, eight inches long, and nayl them
on to the ends at AB, so that the sight-hole of the one may look over the flat
of the other, and when you will use it put it on the staff, and put on a
plummet and thread of the length of the jage-stroke; then set it up and move it
by the feet till the plummet hangs right with the jage-stroke, then fill the
groove with water: if it be truly plumb'd and that set perpendicular to the
beam, then may you fill the groove so full of water, that it will rise so high
above the wood at both ends, that you may thrust a needle through it close to
the beam, and yet the water will be above the needle.

CHAP. XXVI. Of flowing of grounds.
MIne intent is not here to describe the manner of making engines, sluices,
Cochleas, mills, etc. to mount the water withal, as being too great a charge
for a small piece of ground of nine or ten acres: for it often falls out, that
if a piece of ground be ten acres, yet all of it will not be overflowed; so
that, if you bestow any great cost, we may say -- materiam superabit opus^ yet
this I have seen in one of these dry years in a meadow near Hartford, that one
man, having a piece of ground encompassed with the river, flowing it made five
pound of an acre of his first crop, where his neighbor made scarce twenty
shillings an acre of the ground adjoining* although naturally in other years
before as good. Yet this is not comparable to land-flouds; for these, partaking
of a slimy and muddy substance, being brought into meadows or pastures in the
spring, either by drains, dams, turning of town-ditches, sewers, highways,
streets, filths, do both moisten and fat them; whereas the river-water fats
nothing so much: as Virgil has it, -- huc summis liquuntur rupibus amnes,
Declivemque trahunt limum. --
And in another place, Et cum exustus ager morientibus aestuat herbis,
Ecce, supercilio clivosi tramitis undam
Elicit, illa cadens raucum per levia murmur
Saxa ciet, scatebrisque carentia temperat arva.


And does not all the world know how the river Nilus fats with his slime the
whole land of Egypt?

But now having by drains and dams brought your water to the highest part of
the ground that you would slow, you shall cut a little trench, as level as you
can ghuess by the eye, which in your ground let not be above nine inches broad,
and seven or eight inches deep; so going not above a pole at once, laying your
turves on the lower side of the trench and close by it with the grass downward;
that, if you think good, you may put them in again, or carry them away: and
now let in so much water, as will fill up that trench. If you have the water
run over at the last end a little, it is the better; that so, stopping your
trench (...) a turf, your water may run over in any place. But if you are risen
so, that the water will not follow you; then you should have a spade for the
nonce with a long crooked handle crooking up like a fire-shovel, that therewith
you may deepen your trench, and take out the moulds; and then go a little lower
the next time, still making the water to follow you as you go to the
further-side of the ground: then according as the ground falls you may make a
cross-trench, one or more, in the middle, or at ends four or five pole
downward; and at every four or five pole make trenches the same way you did at
the first, till you have done: so that you shall need no water-level for this
work, unless perhaps you need it to try whether it will come to the ground or
no.

If you are to bring it over some ditch or brook, where the water is lower then
your water-way; then must you either make a bridge over it, or else shoot four
boards, and nayl them together, and make a trough, which may lie both under the
ditch, and through the mounds of the ditch.

CHAP. XXVII. Of drayning of grounds.
THe drayning of grounds is often found to be as advantageous and profitable,
not only in arable, but also in low meadows, and woods, and bogs upon hills,
as the flowing of them: if not far more; by reason more grounds, for the most
part, will be drained, then flowed, both in less time and with less charg.

The Instruments for this work may be a plow, spades, scopets, shovels, and
bills, and forks.

In some Parishes they have a town-plow, that will hold eight or nine yoke of
oxen, and a couple of horses before for boys to ride on to guide them, and three
or four horses with drivers on them, others to hold the plow (one one while,
another another while) booted up to the middle, others following with bills,
forks, spades, scopets, shovels; that, if any grass, or turf-ground fall in
after (...) plow, some may cut it to pieces with their bills, and others throw
it out with their forks; but in plowed grounds with spades, scopets and
shovels: thus yearly, about All Saints, do they serve their pease-stubble,
barley-stubble, and low meadows, especially commons. But this plow must have a
piece of wood either screwed or cotered to the right-side of the beam somewhat
toward the fore-end of it, to make another coulter-hole; that in sward-ground
you may put in another coulter, that may cut both sides of the furrow: and let
the ground-wrist be five or six inches broad, and the broad-wrist be longer,
and stand out broader then the ground-wrist by an handful, to throw both
earth, and turf a good way off. But, if you are in clay-ground, you may make a
broader point then on stones or gravel; but howsoever let there be a whole pan
and a finne-share.

Thus if you will make any new drain, ditch for quick-setting, brook, or river:
first set up your mark at each nine or ten pole on both sides for the riders to
guide on the horses, then plow once all over that breadth, and throw out the
moulds* then set your horses single, and with any other lighter plow plow again
and throw out, till you are deep enough: thus may you do more in an hour then
in three days otherwise.

Likewise, I have known diverse highways, where one furlong has abutted upon
them, and another run long-wise by the side of it, where the way has not been
above a pole broad, that the plow continually carrying out moulds upon it has
so raised that linsy-side, that it has been so linsy that not a laden cart
has gone on it in harvest or hay time since the memory of man, yet the most
necessary harvest-way; this have I mended, and made level with mine own plow
and mine own people in two hours, a quarter of a mile together; and the like
have I done to raise a road-way in the middle by plowing and throwing up both
sides.

Also I have known one Mr. Field of Aspley-bury in Shidlington parish in
Bedfordshire, who there with his plow made a larg moat only by plowing and
throwing out the moulds, and making a ware for the horses to go in and out.

The same man also being at an especial friends house in Hartfordshire, his
advice was requested about cleansing of a brook, which was filled with stones
driven down the hill by land-flouds, neither could they dig it with spades, nor
strike in a mattock; if they did, the water would fly in their faces, and the
cold water overflowed the banks winter and summer, and spoiled all about: he
gets a strong plow with a narrow-pointed share, and plows one hour in the
fore-noon, and gets good store of laborers with forks and shovels, and throws
out what the plow had raised, and then to plow another hour in the afternoon:
and thus made quick speed without trouble or let.

Another time the same man stocked up a wood; and having only stockt up the
wood, he makes a plow, whose neck and handle were both one piece: with this
plow he plows this ground, and never dug at all, only he had two following
him with mattocks, that if the plow was hanged in the middle of a great root,
that the horse could not break it, then they cut it in sunder.

And lastly, one exploit more was by a plow done by Mr. Taverner of Hexton in
Hartfordshire Esquire, Lord of the Town, who (because their highway to
Luton-market was up an extreme steep hill for two or three furlongs space, and
oftentimes both in frost and rain so exceeding slippery an horse could scarce
stand, being all a rock of hurlock;) gets a plow, and the neighbors willingly
bear him company: they plow about in a spiral line, and so plowed furrow after
furrow, all one way, turning all the moulds down the hill; and so when they had
plowed it broad enough once over, then they begin and plow two or three furrows
of the moulds twice over, and the highest side deeper: thus doing, till they
had made the highest side lowest only by plowing; so that they can now draw
five quarters of wheat more easily up that hill with three horses, then up the
other with five.

And thus have we the way to drain such grounds, wherein you may have the help
of the plow. It follows now to speak of those that must be done either chiefly
by the spade, or one-by the spade. Chiefly by the spade, called
water-furrowing, that is, when you have new sown any grain whatsoever, then
presently water-furrow it, either with plow, or spade, or both.

But if it fall out that in a flood the water goes not away so fast as it
comes, though within two or three days after it will be clean gone; yet you are
never the near, it has done already what hurt it can do, your grain is
drowned, and the fault is in the main drains; yet not in their depth, because
they will be dry within two or three days after, but in their breadth.

Now, if this had been a new drain, you might have made it with the plow, as
was said before: or if you will deepen this old one with the plow, it may be
you may; but to make it broader you cannot, if it be either very deep, or very
narrow in the bottom; therefore you must widen with the spade only.

And for that where cattle go over such drains, they commonly tread in the
earth, and stop up the water, therefore to prevent it, get good oaken timber,
hew two sides of each piece, which let it be eleven or twelve inches Diameter,
slit these in the middle, let them be two or three foot longer then the breadth
of the ditch, lay them edge to edge, the sawn side upward, nayl ledges on the
outsides, and lay gravel or earth on the top, and stop up with bushes, or
ditch up, or both, the old going over.

For bogs and quagmires.
These for the most part come of spewing springs that are in a vein most
commonly of gravel, near the superficies of the ground, and drawn still more
upward by the heat of the Sun, or else in such places as formerly have been all
water, as the Fenns sometime have been, and so growing of weeds at first, they
rotting have turned to earth, and the crop thereof every year turning to earth,
in process of time swells and grows up to a great height: as is manifest by
diverse rivers formerly navigable, now quite grown up. I have seen in
Maldon-moor the roots of two willow-trees in the bottom of a drain, about a
yard deep in moorish-ground, within three pole of the firm ground, where one
might see the stroke of the axe that felled them to this day: this ground about
was excellent good turf, and on a sudden* perfect sound, and so all along for
twenty miles* long, and in some places 30, 40, 50, 60 pole wide, it is good
turf-ground: which makes me judge all was a navigable river in times past; as
also the Towns names bordering upon it, as Temsford-Islands, Seaford,
Fleet-haven, and Fleetwick. Secondly, one William Quayt of Maldon, who yet is
or lately was living, plowed up an anchor in a field called Wickham-field,
adjoining to the river. Thirdly, there is evident mention of a very strong
Castle, at a place called Bedlow, situate upon a firm rock of hard red stone
hard by this moor-side, and now it grows daily more solid by draining, and I
persuade my self will ere long come to be firm pasture: yet I do fully persuade
my self it will scarce be so profitable then to the owner, as now it is. I
remember before cutting of turves was known, a man might have bought in
Westoning-moore in Bedfordshire an acre of meadow the free state for ten
shillings: nay it was so bad, that scarce any man knew his own, they so little
regarded it; yet since they have made forty pounds of an acre, and yet have
their ground still, which in 30 or 40 years they make as much more. Now if your
bogs be so tender, that one cannot go on them, then at the upper part where it
first rises make a large and deep ditch, so deep that it may be lower and
deeper then the springs by a foot or two. This convey so, that no water may
stand in the ditch, so that the water of the springs may so be cut off; making
a ditch, though not so big, round about: and when it has drained thus a while
that you can go upon it, then dig drains with turf-spades ascue up the hill, as
deep as you can, and some twenty foot asunder. And thus (in short space) you
may have either good turf-ground, or hop-ground, or Orchard, or pasture at your
pleasure.

CHAP. XXVIII. To cleanse a ditch, whether it be full of flaggs, or mud, and
not empty out the water.
IF it be full of weeds, get a drag or dung-rake with three teeth, and drag out
the weeds: likewise for the mud get a mud-pan, which is made of the back of an
armor, make a socket, and slit the little end forked, and flat it, and spread
it four or six inches, and rivet it on the plate, then rivet another round
piece, both close by the socket, and also into the bottom of the plate to
strengthen the forks, setting it coming toward you as your drag^rake does.
Then, if there be much mud, draw out some of it first all along the ditch, and
when that is hard, so that you can go upon it, then draw out more. Thus may you
go to it when you will, and leave when you will, without dressing you, or
damming the water. And thus one man will draw out as much in an hour, as three
men will throw out with scopets.

CHAP. XXIX. Of cleansing a Pond six or seven pole broad being grown over with
a coat of weeds, that it will near bear one, without abating the water.
YOu shall for this purpose get a boat and a haling-line, good store of drags,
cutting-knives of both sorts, such as they cut mows or hay-stacks with, both
like sithes, and stabs, also wheel-barrows, and half-inch boards of six or
seven foot long a piece. If this coat of weeds be very soft, you were best to
nayl two boards together, with ledges like a door: but if it be any thing hard,
let them go single. Then begin with your crones or drags, and cleanse the
outsides with them first as far as you can reach, and let the barrows carry it
away out of your way: then take your boat and spret, and for want of a boat
take a Brewers cooler, and let two folk go into it, and row your selves to the
crust, and laying your boards on it, and you standing on them, cut with your
sith pieces as long and broad as the board, then take up that board as you
stand on the other, and remove it beyond it, then take you the crones that
stand on the bank, and having fastened your haling-line both to the crone and
to the stale of it, by knitting a knot at the handle-end, let them on the bank
draw out those pieces: which that they may do the more easily, they may level a
place about an handful above the water, and pull them thither, and then cut
them smaller with their stabs, and then draw them up.

Now then having thus gone round, and cleared it from the sides round about,
pitch all your crones into one side of the core or crust, and try if you can
draw it to the bank-side (for these kind of cores never grow to the bottom,
especially if the water be deep) which if you so draw it, then may you standing
on the bank finish all with your crones. But if you cannot move it, then with
your sithe-knife, and help of your doors and boards, you may slit it all along,
either in the midst, or as much as you think you can move at once. But now
because you must move your boards and doors end-long, (which is harder to do
then side-ways) your best way is to have a hook at the end of your haling-line,
and make a mortes at one end or both of each board, and thus put the hook in
the mortes of the hinder door, and raising it a little at the end with a couple
of chisils, or such like, draw it till it is entered upon the nether door,
then having a board lie by the side of it, stay your self on it, till the
hinder be drawn along upon the other, and lie foremost, and thus may you divide
and draw piece after piece till you have finished.

CHAP. XXX. Of cleansing of water.
SOmetime you are to bring water to an house, but you have none but such as
comes from noisome places: now to purify such water, if you make a trench of a
foot and an half deep and three or four pole long (the longer the better) and
fill it a foot deep with hurlock or clunch cut in pieces, as it were for the
lime-kill, then fill it an handful higher with pebles, then fill it up with
gravel or earth; it will so purify it, that it will be fit for brewing, or the
pot, or laundressing, or any thing else: if you cannot get hurlock, content
your self with pebles. Also it greatly mendeth water in a pumpe or well, first
to cleanse out the mud, and then to put in clunch into it. It will likewise
purify the water very much, if you would lay clunch or hurlock as high as the
water rises in your well, in the same form that they use to lay their bricks:
so will the water cleanse it self by draining through the body of the clunch.

CHAP. XXXI. Of quenching an house on fire.
THe Instruments for this purpose (not to speak of the water-squirt, which will
throw a whole hogs-head of water to the top of an house at once; for that such
are scarce to be had, save in some great Towns or Cities) are pikes, spits,
mawkins, pike-staves, forks, wet-blankets, ladders, buckets, scopets, pails,
etc. and the materials, water, coal-dust, turf-ashes, wood-ashes, sand,
horse-dung, dust, dirt, and in extremity even drest-grain it self. I know you
will think it strange that I should mention pikes, and spits, dust, sand, and
ashes; but I speak on often experience, that four men, that know how to use
these things, will sooner quench a fire, then 100, that go to work with ladders
and buckets to strip houses, and hooks to pull them down. It Is a misery to
speak it, when the rude multitude are once come together every man will have
his own way. If it be a dwelling house, some will busy themselves to carry out
brass, pewter; but their chief aim is at the monychest; whilst others wait to
take it of them, and carry it away: others perhaps, of more honesty but less
wit, will be ripping the house, and so let the fire have the more air to burn
the more violently; that, whereas they think thereby to save other houses that
are near to it, they use (for the most part) the only way to fire them: for
the greater the flame is, the more is the danger, and the farther the sparks of
fire will fly. And now, if you will vouchsafe the reading, which is no great
labor for you, I shall endeavor (God willing) to give you such directions,
whereby you may with least loss, least help, and most speedily quench any fire,
wheresoever it begins, or howsoever it comes.

The first rule is this. If it be in house or chimney, do not by any means open
any vent to let it out, especially upwards; but rather stop all the holes you
find. If the foot of a brick or stone-chimney be on fire, discharge a pistol
twice or thrice upon it; so foot and fire and all falls together. If it be a
wooden-chimney, and that all the timber, both ground-sells, studs, mantle tree,
beams, and all are on fire at once; then first with your pike-staff, fork, or
spit, rub down all the coal, then throw on water, and then ashes, and all is
done. And thus did I my self, all alone, quench a fire at Westoning in
Bedfordshire, where coming that way accidentally, and meeting a woman coming
out of a yard wringing her hands and crying, I asked her the reason, but she
gave me no answer; (whether it were for that I was a stranger to her, or
whether for grief she could not speak, I know not;) but away she runs as fast
as she could. I fearing some such matter ran into the yard, but finding the
door locked, and hearing withal a fluttering of fire, I took up an hogs-trough
which lay there, and ran against the door, and broke it open, and went in;
where I found a buck of clothes standing on a tree sole, and a great many turves
under it almost burnt out; yet the buck had no hurt, but they had fired the
end-groundsels, studs, and all the timber of the chimney. I having been at the
Fullers earth-pits, not far from Oburn, to survey them, had the foot of my
plain-Table in my hand, wherewith I rubbed down all the coals, and then took
the buck-cloth by all the four corners, and threw up the ashes into the
chimney, and finding a pail, I ran and fetched turf-ashes and water together,
and quenched all quite in a quarter of an hour. All this while not one body
came; so I was going thence, and as I was going out at the gate, there came
near half a score, which she brought out of the field from haying: with these I
went back again, fearing lest they should do hurt; so presently some of them
get ladders, and to pulling off the thatch; but I prevailed with them with much
ado to let it alone, and willed them by all means to keep it into the chimney:
if they found any holes that it could come out at, to stop them up with dirt or
cow dung, and throw dirt or cow dung on the thatch if they would, and if they
saw any more fire in the chimney to cover it with a wet blanket.

If it be within a dwelling house, on any ground-sels, or studs, it is easily
quenched, doing as before.

If it be between parget and loft-boards, wheresoever it breaks forth, lay on
wet woollen-cloths, hair-cloths, cow dung, or hors-dung, with water, ashes, or
sand.

If it be on the inside of an house either thatched or tiled, between the
parget and the roof, cover the outside with wet blankets, hair-cloths, etc.
that neither the flame get out, nor air get in. And on the inside be sure there
be no vent in the parget, but stop it with cow dung, etc.

If it be on the outside of a roof, cover it with wet woollen; or on the top
of a mow: and throw no water, but ashes, sand, hors-dung, etc.

If it be on the inside of the roof of a thatcht house, cover the outside with
wet cloths as before. If there be no parget, your only Instrument is a scovel,
or mawkin, or mop often wetted, and with them sweep down the fire. And thus I
and a boy with a scopet, throwing in malt instead of ashes, did at Tame quench
a thatcht-house adjoining to another in the marketplace, which was on fire in
eight places at once on the inside, hard by the eavs; yet being new thatch and
hard, it glaunced up to the roof* and broke not out, till it came at the ridge,
where were on the out side as many people as could stand on ladders, ready with
water, that no sooner could a flake of fire peek out of the ridge, but straight
they saluted ^t with a bucket of water: but for all that, so soon as the fire
had broke out at the eavs, (which had been, had not we two assuaged it,) they
must all have sought a new way down, or else have gone through the fire.

If it begin likewise upon hemp, or flax, cover it with coverlets, blankets,
hair-cloths, etc. and throw on ashes. If it be on the side of a mow, hang wet
hair-cloths, or woollen-cloths before it, and cover it at the top, that no
flame get out, holding the fore-side-cloths as close to it, as possibly you
can. Thus have we showed the ways, how to quench fire in any house, where or
howsoever it shall begin, without pulling down. Now to prevent fire coming from
another house, cover it with hair-cloths, coverlets, etc. and throw on them
watered ashes, dirt, dung, etc. Also if an house be pulled down, by no means
let it lie there; but, be it what it will, timber, or grain; hay, or straw;
quench it thoroughly, and get carts and away with it into the field, and there
spread it. I saw one at Burton in Bedfordshire at one Francis Woodward's, who
had his barn burnt down, that it kindled again in the carts before they got a
furlong from home. And I have heard my Father speak of it often, that there was
a Parsonage-barn, with much corn in it, burnt down at Leighton-Buzzard, where
he was born, and they did not carry it away, but watched it continually; but
for eight nights together still about midnight it broke out again, that they
were forced to ring the bells, and to carry all away at last, when they had
wearied them with watching.

If any shall doubt of the efficacy of these things, I desire him to consider
of these five things.

First, He sees daily, that an extinguisher puts out a candle; yea a candle
puts out it self by turning the flame downward: then a blanket on a chimney, or
any where else, much more.

Secondly, If any doubt the blanket will burn; it may be so, if it have holes
in it: but they are easily stopped with throwing on horse-dung, or dirt. And for
both these let him try this conclusion: Let him take a woollen rag, and a
burning coal either of wood, sea-coal, or turf, (which of all other is hardest
to be extinguished, and therefore we use to take a piece of turf and wet it,
and rake it up in the ashes to keep fire, yet) let him wrap this coal in his
cloth, or lay it on the hearth, and cover it close that no air can get in, and
your coal quickly dies.

Thirdly, Ask any soldier, and he will tell you, that the best way to put out
his match is to put it into the mouth of his piece with the coal down-ward.

Fourthly, You may easily see the effect of dust, sand, hors-dung, or such
like, if ever you saw an hearth of char-coal burnt, and quenched.

Fifthly, If a mow should be covered at the top, and not at the end, you will
say it will burn underneath like an oven: I answer, put a whole sedge-sheaf
into an oven at once, let it be at full fire; stop up the oven, and presently
the fire goes out.

CHAP. XXXII. Of keeping a fire light all night with a farthing-charge.
I Have before, in the last chapter, showed you how to put out fire: now in
this I will show you how to keep fire a long while light with a little charge.
Suppose you dwell in a lone-countrey-house, where one is sick, and you have but
one farthing-candle in the house, and borrow you cannot, and you would fain
have it last burning a whole long-winters-night; then do thus. Cut your candle
in two pieces, light one of them; and heat a great pin, and thrust it into the
great end of the candle long-wise half the pins length, then fill a pail with
water so deep that the length of the candle, pin and all, will not reach the
bottom, then holding the candle by the light, let it down gently into the water
with your forefinger and thumb, till it comes to the flame, there staying it a
while till the water be still, and then take away your hand; so still, as the
candle burns the flame will raise it: and which answers the whole business,
that the fire will go no otherways, save upward to his own element.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of laying down of ground for pasture.
OF all ground the best to lay for sward is the black-mould, o^ strong clay.
And although the black-mould be excellent both for Wheat, Barley, and Beans;
yet in the low level ground it is infinitely more commodious for pasture in
summer; that the three years crop of grass without any charge at all is more
worth then your two crops of grain with all your two years seed, your dung, and
carriage, and five or six plowings, harrowings, rowlings, and weedings. But you
will say, ground is long in grassing, and I am but a Tenant, and have but a
short time in my lease; when I have made it fit for another, my Landlord will
turn me out, or make me pay more rent. This, I confess, is something, and in
some cases may serve for an answer: but yet upon this condition thy Landlord
will renew thy lease for one and twenty years, (if he be wise) and then you are
well enough: for whereas you say it it long in grassing, that is remedied with
one years charge of arable; for if thou first plow it, and lay it flat, and
with as few furrows as may be, about November, and then dung it, then plow it
again, about the beginning of March, still laying it flat, and filling up the
furrows; then sow it with hay-dust, or chaff-dust, which every hors-keeper, if
they are spoken to about Michaelmas before, will (for a trifle) save for you on
purpose. If you harrow in this, you shall have a crop of grass at Mid-summer,
will be worth 30 or 40 shillings an acre, and still be better and better. But
by all means plow in your dung. I have laid some in that manner, and some I
have dung'd above ground three times, yet this will not be comparable to the
other; yet but a furrow of a plow between, and both laid down 40 years ago.

And by no means lay down any ground, that is worn out of heart; for by that
means if ever thou get good grass of it in 40 years, I Will never be trusted,
unless thou dung it extraordinarily; and yet it will not do. Rather this do; if
it be enclosure, take nothing but the mowing crop for diverse years together,
and so doing that crop will be more worth then two whole years crops taken as
ordinarily. I speak all this of mine own experience upon my own grounds.

But I have often heard of, and in part seen another sort of speedy grassing,
which is this. They sow their ground with seed of claver-grass, a very small
quantity on an acre, and in some places they mow it twice in a year, yet never
sow it but once. Whether they plow it or not, I cannot justly tell: I think
not. Thus I have seen at Maddingley three miles from Cambridge, they save their
common fallow fields till Midsummer; and then have an exceeding crop of claver,
and then fallow. But whether they sow for each crop, or whether it be of the
nature of Mustard Seed, that need never be sown* but once, though the ground
has lien sward 40 years before, I know not.

But you will say, yours perhaps is common-field, if you should lay it sward,
you should lay it for other folks. And what of that? If you have more benefit
that way, then you had before, never grudge at it, though others take a part.
2ly, Thou shall take part with others of it, as they do with thee. And in most
places one acre of sward has as good right of common as three, or in some
places five acres of arable has. 3ly, There is no doubt but others seeing thy
good and speedy success will soon second thee, and then thou shall have as good
benefit of his, as he has of thine.

Ob. But if every one should lay sward that would, how shall we do for bread? I
answer, I do not say I would have every one that list should lay down for
sward; but this I say, I would have all ground turned to the most advantage,
first of the Commonwealth, then of the owner: I would not have such ground, as
will bear two or three load of as good hay as ever beast eat, turned to arable,
when the next acre to it being sown some years has scarce yielded the seed
again. Where an ordinary acre of pasture is worth 50 shillings per annum, and
the best arable not above 8 shillings, for as for an acre of sward, though it
be worth but 20 shillings to the owner, yet to the Commonwealth it is worth 30
shillings the after-pasture, where it is reckoned at a third part of the rent;
with us at Cambridge far more: and that is not lost, it does not vanish into
air; and though the Master get it not, the Commonwealth does: and how would
Luton and Hitching do for hay, were it not for Harlington, Pullox-hill,
Gravenhurst. Or how would Cambridge do, were it not for the Fenns? Yea, I have
known that hay has been carried out of Bedfordshire to London, thirty five
miles. And I am sure, that it is an easier matter to drive fat cattle an
hundred miles, then to carry corn forty by land. Neither would I have
Chiltern-ground turned to pasture, because there an acre of arable is more
worth then an acre of pasture. Yet certainly it plainly appears by this, that
generally there is more want of pasture in England then of arable; for that we
have daily fat cattle brought out of Ireland and Scotland, but never any go
out; but where grain comes in once, it goes out ten times.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of the choice of a rich ground.
FOr a general fat soil, and such as is good for all things, or at least most
things, both grass and grain, (for indeed no ground is fit for all things, Non
omnis fert omnia tellus) the black ground of a good deep staple, with a mixture
of gravel or sand, is not unworthily commended of the Poet, Lib. 3. Georgic.
Pinguis item quae sit tellus hoc denique pacto
Discimus; haud unquam manibus jactata fatiscit,
Sed picis in morem ad digitos lentescit habendo:
Humida majores herbas alit, ipsaque justo
Laetior^ ah, nimium ne sit mihi fertilis illa,
Neu se praevalidam primis ostentet aristis.
For this we commend Ailes-bury.

And some extol as highly earth that is of a reddish color; as the ground
about Armagh in Ireland, which (some report) has had no manner of manuring
since the memory of man. I know some such black ground in Pullox-hill
aforesaid, but I know no such red. Virgil also says, That if you dig a deep
hole in the ground, and fill it up again, if you cannot tread in the earth
again, then it is rich arable ground, 2. Georgi^. -- alteque jubebis
In solido puteum demitti: omnemque repones
Rursus humum: and pedibus summas aequabis arenas.
Si deerunt; rarum pecorique, and vitibus almis
Aptius uber erit: sin in sua posse negabunt
Ire loca, and scrobibus superabit terra repletis
Spissus ager: glebas cunctantes, crassaque terga
Expecta, and validis terram prosci^de juvencis.


Also a sweet smell after the first rain, or a drought, or after new plowing,
is a token of a rich soil. Also where thistles, nettles, or other weeds grow
rank. Also where trees grow long and upright. Also where fruit, especially
pears, are more pleasant in taste then in other places: for if a young pear tree
bears pleasant pears in a good ground, and you remove it into a bad ground, you
will think the fruit not to be of the same kind; yet all grounds are not alike
for all things: -- Non omnis fert omnia tellus. And for the most part, those
grounds that are most barren above, are richest within, as stone-pits,
fullers-earth, lead, coal, tin, silver and gold-mines.

Some grounds are fitter for wood, then either for corn or grass. I have seen a
ground in Hartford-shire, that has been laid two years, where were grown
naturally black and rank sallows all over the ground in tussocks, some six,
some seven foot high, so that the crop of wood was more worth then the crop of
grass.

CHAP. XXXV. Of enriching lean ground.
LEan grounds are either enriched with rest, or with dunging. As for pasture,
if you neither eat nor mow it two or three years, or only mow it once a year;
or if you will eat it, by no means eat it too low, and you will greatly thereby
both better the ground, and get a speedier increase of the crop; for after it
once covers the ground, it grows more in a week, then in six weeks before, by
reason it keeps the ground both hot and moist, yet not so hot as to be scorched
with the Sun: therefore be sure to spare such barren grounds by Candle-mass at
the furthest. As for lean arable, though common-field ground, it is a common
thing in diverse places, where they have a great deal of lean land that lies far
from any Town, to let some thereof lie lea six or seven years; and the longer
it lies, the more heart it gets.

As for dunging, the benefit of hors-dung and cow dung is every where known in
part, yet not to all alike; some will not lay it on their land till it is
rotten, but will carry it out of their yards, and lay it on dung-hills in the
field, either at the lands end, or some place near to it, though the land be
not then sown: whereby they make a double labor, and lose a double benefit of
their dung, which they may easily find by this, that a great part of the
strength of it goes into the ground it lies upon, as appears in this; for if
they lay it in small heaps on the land where it should be spread, if it lies
long unspread, let them spread it as clean as they can, yet those places will
be ranker corn then the rest. A second benefit which they lose is the stiving
upward, which in dry weather should be the only nourishment to the corn. If
you please to try two acres of like land lying together, and carry out twenty
loads of hors-dung about Mid-summer, that is new-made, as such you may have at
an Inn, and lay that on a heap in the field by it self till February or March,
and then fetch twenty loads more of the like; lay these twenty on one of the
acres, and the heap on the other, but let your loads from the Inn be alike, and
then tell me which acre is the best barley. But though you find but little
difference in the barley-crop, you shall find a vast difference in the
peas-crop. And if you will sow them three years together, there will be no
small odds; for the stiving of the dung will be over in two or three years. And
this also will appear, if you take a load of straw, and lay it in some Orchard,
where no cattle come, upon planks, boards, or stones, and spread it so that the
^ain may get into it, and turn it three or four times in a year; and by three
years end you will hardly have a quarter of a load of dung left, and that which
is left will be turned to earth also: yet I deny not but that earth may be
better then ordinary.

Also street-earth, especially in Market Towns, Street-earth.
where goes store of sinks from stables, kitchens, dairy-houses, but especially
cisterns for malting. I have known them that have got up all the piss they
could get in a Market Town, and carried it to their land in a tun, and there
strewed with good success. But if they, that have such convenience for
carriage, would but make trial of the water of the sink of a Chees-press, or
of cistern-water, I doubt not but in short time there would be little of it
lost.

And we see now how much soot is set by, Soot.
which within these fifty years men would not suffer to be thrown upon the
dunghill, but into the midst of the street.

And although, by Moses Law, Salt.
some great offenders were to have their land sown with salt; and likewise in
Judges ix.45. Abimelech, when he took Sichem, destroyed it, and sowed it with
salt; the reason was, that it should never bear grass nor grain. And indeed it
is an easy matter, either with soot, salt, pigeon-dung, or piss, to over-dung
and spoil all. I have known some carry out pigeon-dung in sacks in May, and lay
a sack-full on a heap upon the corn; but they could not gather it up so clean,
but they killed all the corn as far as the heap lay.

I have sown pigeon-dung in an extreme hot and dry year Pigeon-dung.
upon barley, on an hot and dry land, when at harvest the barley has scarce
peeked out of the hose, yet it has been the best in the furlong. Again, I have
in a wet year sown pigeondung on sand, when my crop has been more worth then
the fee-simple, or value of the ground.

Folding of land.
^and that is folded a little before, or presently after the sowing, does far
better then otherwise. But herein many men wrong themselves in surfeiting their
sheep in Summertime, when their fold goes on single-lands as on roods or
half-acres, in laying them so thick, that they over-heat one another; thinking
that if they have as many hurdles as they had before, that then they lie as
thin as they did before, but this I have spoken of before in the first Chapter;
where also I have showed the disproportion, and therefore to it I refer you.
Yet before I leave this, I must add further, that I see no reason why other
countries may not fold in Winter as well, or rather, then Oxfordshire, or
Buckinghamshire: nay, far rather, either upon sward or arable, especially
Hartfordshire, or Middlesex, if they will do as they do, that is, wind their
hurdles on two sides with broom, and remove their hay-rack and cratches with
their folds. Hartfordshire has far drier laire, their sheep more hardy and
sound, and never rotting, more hedges to shelter them, and dung infinitely
dearer. And if they broom their hurdles to keep them warm, then why not to keep
them warm by keeping them together? I never knew sheep take hurt by lying warm
in Winter. If you will not fold your arable, yet fold your sward, if not your
sward remote from the hedges, yet at lest your hedg-rows. It is the office of a
land-meter, to give the quantity or mensuration; but the office of a Surveyour,
to acquint you with all means of melioration.

Rags and Horn-shavings.
Now we are come to rags and horn-shavings. It is almost incredible the odds of
an acre of the best barley in Hitching-parish fifty years ago, and twenty years
ago, and all by buying rags and horn-shavings at London, carrying up malt, and
bringing them down all the year long. As for their rags, they carry them to the
land, and lay them on heaps like dung heaps, but not so big; then chop them in
pieces on a stick with a hand-bill, and then plow them in, and these and
horn-shavings endure a long-while, and have so mended their soil thereby, that
whereas about fifty years ago, an acre of their barley was not above three
pounds ten, or four pounds the best; now about twenty years ago, I was
requested to measure two acres of barley in a field called Kings-field in
Hitching-parish that the very crop of them was sold for nine pounds an acre by
the Statute-pole.

Malt-dust also is little inferior to Pigeon-dung. Also lime, Malt-dust, Lime,
Ashes, Chalk, etc
five or six quarters to an acre. Ashes of all sorts. Chalk for all red
grounds, both arable and sward. Scowring of old ditches, good for all white
grounds and clay. Also marl of ponds, where sinks of yards run into them; but
in a spring or running water, though the mud look never so black, there is no
heart in it, except helped by land-flouds, because there is no salt in it; for
salt is the strength of all dung: therefore let it alone, unless to lay on a
white ground, for mixing of earths; for if you lay an hungry gravel on an
hungry clunch, and contra, they fertilize each other.

Also any sward plowed up, and thrown on the land, or laid on heaps till it be
rotten: or making a dunghill, and laying stratum super stratum, a laying of
street-earth, and a laying of these turves, laying upon laying, till they be
rotten, makes an excellent compost for many years.

The burning of hawm upon the ground, commonly called Devonshiring (because
much used in Devonshire) is not unworthily a little extolled of the Poet:
Georgic. lib. 1.

Saepe etiam steriles incendere profuit agros,
Atque levem stipulam crepitantibus urere flammis:
Sive inde occultas vires, and pabula terrae
Pinguia concipiunt: sive illis omne per ignem
Excoquitur vitium, atque exsudat inutilis humor:
Seu plures calor ille vias, and coeca relaxat
Spiramenta, novas veniat qua succus in herbas:
Seu durat magis, and venas adstringit hiantes;
Ne tenues pluviae, rapidive potentia Solis
Acrior, aut Boreae penetrabile frigus adura^.
To this give me leave to add a little of mine own experience. About the year
1607/8, was such a frost, without snow, that it killed all our wheat: one Mr.
How of North-Myms had but two bushels growing of thirty acres sown. I sowed
most part of mine again with barley in March, only I had one head-land that
looked most gloriously, covered green all over, as thick as grass in a meadow.
I thought this might do well enough, I let it alone till mid- May, then I began
to mistrust by the blade, that all were but wild-oats. I dug up a turf as
broad as my hand, wherein I found two wheat-corns, but 200 wild-oats, grown to
that height all of one depth perfectly upright, as thick as they could stand
one by another, just as letters are set in a frame to print a book. How they
should come there at all, the Lord knows, much more in that manner. Well then,
I saw there was no hope of a crop of wheat, and thought it too late to sow
barley, neither had I any left, save a little tary-head-corn, that I took and
steeped it a day and a night in water of an hors-dunghill. I sowed all that
head-land; but one quarter of it, which had been trodden with horses turning
upon it in wet weather after it was sown. This barley, when harvest came, was
the first I had ripe, clean without tares, or any other soil, as thick as it
could stand, and every way the best that ever I had growing: but the wheat not
worth the reaping; wherefore I let it stand till harvest was home; but had I
mowed it green, it had been the best hors-meat of all other, as afterward I
found in wild-oats and beans. When harvest was home, on a fair day, the wind
sitting right, I set fire on it: but he that had seen that fire, and heard the
noise, and had not read Virgil before, would have said certainly Virgil was at
that fire before he made his book, and that there he learnt it, or else he
could never have found out such an Epithete, as -- Crepitantibus urere flammis:
for whether it was by reason of the wild-oats, in every hors-footing made by
turning on in wet weather, or otherwise, there was such a noise as if twenty
muskets had gone off at once, insomuch that an herd of cattle being a quarter
of a mile off, seeing the fire, and hearing the noise, as if they had been out
of their wits, or rather stark mad, set up also such a running, roaring,
bellowing, and howling, that it made me to run as fast as they, to hear such an
hideous noise, and the fire so violent, the weather being dry, and the whole
crop being still there which was very great, and the wind full in one end, and
whistling, insomuch that all the ground for two or three and twenty pole long,
and a pole and half broad, was all on fire at once: this past my skill to
quench, neither would all the blankets in the Town have served the turn, if I
had had them there. But that this was soon out, I think neither the Sicilian
Aetna, that throws stones sixty miles* nor Hecla in Iseland, nor Vesuvius in
Campania, that sends his ashes more then two hundred miles off; (or, if you
will believe Cassiodorus, in the time of Titus and Vespasian, they flew into
Asia, Syria, and Egypt: and lastly, breaking out again in the year 1632,
Crepitus miliaria centum auditus: and did you not hear this crepitus? certainly
it was because either you were deaf, or not near enough) could present a
greater terror. But notwithstanding all this, my wild-oats were not yet
killed; and then I was vexed with my self, that I had not mowed them green for
hors-meat: for out of every hors-footing, contrary to my hopes, I could takeup
whole-yea psonds, that were never the worse for the fire, save only their
smell. Then I filled my hand-kerchief and both my pockets with them, to carry
home to my hoggs, hens, pigeons; but not a corn any of them would touch. All
this was still worse and worse. About All-Saints-day following, there came a
frost and a little snow, upon that there was so many flesh-crows, that you
would have thought that there had been proclamations set up in all woods,
groves, fields, and yards through the whole land to summon them thither; or
whether that was their beacon when I burnt it, or no, I know not. These for a
fortnight together so covered the ground, that you could not choose but say, it
was far blacker then ink: for this was of a double die, one of black crows, and
another of black ashes. The frost breaking, those that they had not eaten they
trod into the ground with their feet, so that by the later end of the month,
no meadow could be thicker of green grass, then that was of green-oats. I
plowed them in, and by Candle-mass it was green again; I plowed it again, then
it lay till the later end of April, and was green again; then I steeped my seed
as I did the year before, and sowed it with barley, and had a very good crop,
and so killed the wild-oats.

Burning of queach, etc.
The burning of queach also, in some ground, is exceeding profitable. And not
only the steeping seed in dunghill water helps greatly, but also in lime
and water, by reason that which gives it heart lies close to the root. Some
also wash seed-wheat and rye in lime and water in the seed-leap in the field,
and then sow it, and so no crows nor pigeons will ever touch it.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of planting Willows.
INstead of beetle and stake, or crow of iron, make you an augre like a
pump-augre, make it after this manner: Make a plate like a peel of a foot or
fourteen inches square, well steeled, and turn it as an augre is turned; let it
have a socket like a peel, but apiece, into which put a stake of good
tough ash two foot long, and apiece, as the socket is, with a bar or hoop
of iron about it at the top, to keep it from cleaving: let it be two inches
square at the least upward, in which near to the top bore an hole, or else make
a mortes to put in a cross piece to turn it by, and to take it out by, then
enter it a little with your spade, as you do a carpenters wimble with a gouch,
and then bore your holes; which in strong clay is an exceeding speedy way.
Besides that, if the sets be not very great, you will have room enough to ram
the moulds down to the bottom.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of reducing wood-land to statute-measure, and statute to
wood-land.
I Have several times measured ground by statute, which should have been done
by the eighteen-foot pole; but never the contrary. One amongst the rest was a
close in Hexton in Hartfordshire, where three Copyholders had each of them
apart expressed in their several copies, how much by measure; but not by what
measure: thereupon it was taken for granted, that it must be statute-measure.
One of the three had held all in his occupation diverse years together, and
lying in stitches, and no banks between had plowed one amongst another. A and B
would have theirs again. A must have so much on the East Side, B so much on the
middle, and C the rest; for C would neither show his copy, nor yet make known
how much he should have. So I laid out each man his share accordingly, and took
a plot of the whole. Still it runs in B his mind, that his part was not so
good as it had been formerly, mistrusting that I had done him wrong in laying
it forth; so that he acquainted the Lord of the Manor with it, who demanded
of him by what measure he had measured it: he answered by the statute-pole;
Then, quoth the Lord, there is the error, the custom is eighteen foot, and
was the measure taken in Henry the eight his time. This being known and
reduced, C showed his copy, and there was not a pole difference in the whole
thing: so I gave them direction to alter it without going to the ground. To do
this there are several ways. First a statute-pole is sixteen feet and an half,
or 33 half foot long, therefore 33 half-feet square is 1089 square half-feet in
a statute-pole: but in an eighteen-foot pole, which is 36 half-feet square, are
1296: so then if you multiply your statute-poles by 1089, and divide the
product by 1296, you have the number of eighteen-foot poles, which divided by
40 gives you the roods, and vice versa. And thus six acres of statute, which is
960 poles, multiplied by 1089 makes 1045440, and that divided by 1296 gives 806
864/1^96 or which is five acres six pole of the 18 foot.

Likewise five acres of 18 foot is 800 pole; that multiplied by 1296 produces
1036800, which divided by 1089, quotient 952 72/1089 pole, that is 5 acres, 3
rood, 32 pole. And this is the best way. So that the analogy is thus.

As 1089. 1296 800. 18 foot pole to 956.1089, id est, 5 acres, 3 roods, 32 pole
72/1089. And as 1296. 1089 800 statute, to 672 2/9, id est, 4 acres, 3 roods,
32 poles 2/9. And this is your best way: and thus may you do with all other
poles.

Another way is; if upon your scale you have two scales, one of 11 in the inch
and another of 12: if you lay down sta^^^e-measure by the scale of 12, and then
measure the same plot by the scale of 11, it gives you the wood-land measure,
and likewise on the contrary.

CHAP. XXXVIII. To find any scale that a plot is made by, the content being
known.
SUppose any scale, as 10, and measure it by that; now if by measuring it by
the scale of 10, it comes to but 23 acres 82 parts: but it is truly 34 acres,
31 parts; therefore find a mean proportional between these two; which, because
the work is somewhat difficult, I will therefore show you the manner of it.

First multiply 32.82. by 34 31. as here it is set down: so you see it
produces 817264^. And because ^ there are four figures in the Fractions of the
two Factours; therefore there are also four in the product; so the whole ^
number is 817 and 2642, the Fraction, the square-root is 2859. which is the
mean proportional desired; then say, As the lesser of the two numbers, viz.
23,82. is to your mean proportional 28. 59: so is your supposed scale to 12.
the true scale, as 23. 82. 28. 59 10. 12. See the work.

^ But because there is too much difficulty to find it this way, and so
little by the line of numbers, and so soon done, and is exact enough; therefore
by it divide the distance between 23,82, and 34,31. into two equal parts, and
the compasses will fall at 28,59. then because 28,59. is more then 23,82.
therefore set one foot in 10, and turn the other upward; it will fall at 12,
the scale desired.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of making an Index or Table, whereby readily to find out any
ground, that ever you have measured, and to tell the quantity of them an
hundred years after, and draw a plot of them without going again into the field.
I Showed before (in Chap. 2.) the manner of keeping your field-book; by help
of that, and this, you may readily obtein your desire.

All the field-books, that ever you fill with notes, page them all; writing at
the top of each page the name of the Parishes, or Parish, wherein the land ^^th
cont^ined in that page: and, at every beginning of a new man, set down his
name; and likewise at the beginning of every new field, furlong, or parcel in
a furlong, set down the name of the close, field, furlong, or par^ell. Also
write on the cover of your first book, A; on the second, B; on the third, C;
etc. Then reserve four and twenty pages at the end of your first book, A; which
shall not be paged, or else make a little book by it self: and on the cover
thereof write INDEX, and on the top of each page, write A, B, C, etc. in
Alphabetical order. Then under each several letter write: first the Towns name
beginning with that letter; secondly, The man's name, for whom you measured;
thirdly, The books name, in which you wrote it; and fourthly, The pages: either
all of them, or, at least, the first and last. And whereas you may think this
way will not be so beneficial ^o you, as to go measure it again; for that you
may do as you see good: you need not find it, unless you will. Besides that,
you deserve pay both for surveying, plotting, and notes; as if you had measured
it. And if you will measure it again, these notes will do you no hurt. See an
example: P.
Purton. (...) Norton. lib. C. page 31, 32, 33, 34. Panchurch. Rob. Audley.
lib. B. page 64. ad 76. Putford. Tho. Dennie. lib. K. page 97. ad finem.


Refer this following to page 85. line 13.
But if you would bring water to your house from a conduit, where you desire to
place a cock as high as you can, and that without Instruments: First, begin at
the conduit, and dig a trench near a foot deep there; but as you go farther
off, let it be still shallower for five or six pole in length, more or less,
according to the fall of the ground; so that the water may but just follow you,
and when it begins to run over, there stay it, and begin a new depth as before:
but he sure the fall of it be downright like a stair, and so go on till you
come where you would be: then add the fall at the conduit, and all your stairs
together; and so high may you set your cock above the level of your trench.

FINIS.
An Appendix to my Faithful Surveyour.
WE have, in the book it self spoken of measuring such things, as are measured
by observing Instruments, as the Pandoron, plain-Table, Quadrant, Quadrat,
Theodelete, Circumferento^, etc; viz. of measuring of land, taking of Altitudes
and Distances, taken by the chain: here we will speak of such superficies as
are done by a two-foot-rule, as board, glass, pavement, wainscot; and of solid,
as stone and timber: forbearing those things, that seldom, or never, come in
question; as globes, regular bodies, and the like. First, Because land-measure
and those seldom meet together in one man; Secondly, Neither would I have the
book to be of two big a price; and Thirdly, Because my little time I have, has
need to be spent to the best advantage for the common good.

CHAP. I. Of making the Rule.
FIrst, I would have the Rule, (whether it be of box, or of brass; whether
joynted in the middle, or straight out) to be just two-foot-long by some
standard of brass, kept by the Clerk of the Market and not, as I have seen
some; that have been half an inch too long. Let it be an inch and an half broad
at the least, and a third part of an inch thick with a square stroke struck
round about it just in the middle of the length thereof. Let one edge be besild
off: which serves that if you have occasion to draw lines with a pen, if you
turn that side downward, you need not fear blotting: if your rule chance to be
blackt with ink, if you rubb it well with sorrel, that will fetch it out.
Through the midst of this besill strike a Gage-stroke: an another along the
midst of the other edge: divide the rest of this side, beside the besill, into
eight equal parts with seven Gage-strokes. In the 4 next co^umnes save one to
the besill, you may place all the under-measure of this Table of board-measure
following, which will not fall in a scale upon the rule, viz. all inches,
halves, and quarters from one inch to six, or if you will to ten inches, in
small spaces the inches of the breadth of the hoard, in the column next save
one to the besill: the feet required to a foot foreward at the breadth in the
next* the odd inches in the third and the Gentesmes in the fourth. And
adjoining to this Table toward the middle of the Rule, in the first of those
four columns se^ one inch divided into ten equal parts, and each of those
into halves, and each of those halves into five; or suppose them so divided: so
is it divided into 100 parts or Centesmes: from which inch you shall take off
all your Centesmes with your compasses, that are to be set in any of your
scales.

For making the scale of board-measure.
Before you can make this scale, you must have one column, on the otherside the
Rule, next the besill, parted into three small parts with Gage-strokes, and
divided in the middle of the length of the rule into two equal parts or feet:
whereof divide one of them into ten equal parts, and each of them into ten
more, and each of them suppose at least to be divided into ten other; so shall
that foo^ be dvided into 1000. and this Gunther calls foot-measure: which
must be reckoned both ways, first from the beginning of the rule to the
middle, thus, 1, 2, 3, etc. and backward again, and thus, 11, 12, 13, etc. and
because the other foot makes ten of these inches, and these ten make twelve of
them, therefore divide the other foot into twelve equal parts or inches, and
each inch into eight parts, and number it from the end toward the middle with
1, 2, 3, 4, etc. but from the middle to the end with 13, 14, 15, etc. and this
he calls inch-measure. By help of this inch-line and the inch aforesaid, and
by help of your Tables for board and timber-measure, are made your scales for
board and timber-measure. And this Table of board-measure is thus made: First,
for all whole inches divide 144 by the inches of the breadth, and you have the
inches forward to a foot. If any thing remain after division, it is the
Numerator of a common Fraction, whose Denominator is the Divisor; to which
remain annex two ciphers on the right hand, and divide again by the same
Divisor, and you have the Centesme desired. Example.

Let a board be seven inches broad, I desire to know how many inches forward
makes a foot. Divide 144. by seven, it gives twenty inches; or one foot eight
inches ^/7. Now to bring ^/7 into centesmes, annex two ciphers to the remain
four, it makes 400* which divide again by seven, it gives ^^/100. But for
half-inches reduce the breadth into an improper Fraction, as 6 is 1^/2; then
multiply 144 by the Denominator 2, it gives 288: so that you must always divide
288 by the Numerator, or number of half-inches of the breadth of the board,
which is 13; so have you 22, or one foot, ten inches, 15 centesmes. But if your
breadth be an odd quarter, or three quarters: First, reduce it into quarters,
and divide 576 by it: so ^ is 27 quarters, therefore divide 576 by 27, it gives
21 inches; or one foot, nine inches, 9/27, or 33 centesmes. The Table follows.

A Table showing how many feet, inches, and centesmes of inches forward are
required to make a foot of board measure at all breadths, both whole inches,
half-inches, quarters, and three-quarters, from one inch in breadth to 36
inches.
Quar. Board. feet. inch. cent. Quart. feet. inch. cent. Qu. inch. cent. quar.
inch. cent. 1 0 12 0 0 8 0 1 6 0 15 9 60 22 6 55 1 9 7 20 1 1 5 46 1 9 44 1 6
47 2 8 0 0 2 1 4 94 2 9 29 2 6 40 3 6 10 29 3 1 4 46 3 9 14 3 6 33 2 0 6 0 0 9
0 1 4 0 16 9 0 23 6 26 1 5 4 0 1 1 3 56 1 8 87 1 6 19 2 4 9 60 2 1 3 16 2 8 73
2 6 13 3 4 4 36 3 1 2 77 3 8 57 3 6 6 3 0 4 0 0 10 0 1 2 40 17 8 41 24 6 0 1 3
8 31 1 1 2 5 1 8 32 1 5 94 2 3 5 15 2 1 1 76 2 8 22 2 5 88 3 3 2 40 3 1 1 35 3
8 12 3 5 82 4 0 3 0 0 11 0 1 1 9 18 8 0 25 5 76 1 2 9 88 1 1 0 80 1 7 81 1 5 70
2 2 8 0 2 1 0 51 2 7 78 2 5 65 3 2 6 31 3 1 0 25 3 7 68 3 5 59 5 0 2 4 80 12 0
1 0 0 19 7 58 26 5 54 1 2 3 41 1 0 11 76 1 7 48 1 5 48 2 2 2 18 2 0 11 52 2 7
39 2 5 43 3 2 1 4 3 0 11 29 3 7 29 3 5 38 Qu. Inch. Cent. 6 0 2 0 0 13 0 11 8
20 7 20 27 5 33 1 1 11 4 1 10 87 1 7 11 1 5 28 2 1 10 15 2 10 67 2 7 2 2 5 24 3
1 9 33 3 10 46 3 6 94 3 5 19 7 0 1 8 57 14 10 29 21 6 86 28 5 14 1 1 7 86 1 10
11 1 6 78 1 5 11 2 1 7 2^ 2 9 93 2 6 69 2 5 5 3 1 6 58 3 9 76 3 6 62 3 5 1

Q. I. C. Q. I. C. Q. I. C. Q. I. C. 29 4 97 31 4 65 33 4 36 35 4 12 1 4 93 1 4
61 1 4 33 1 4 9 2 4 89 2 4 58 2 4 30 2 4 6 3 4 84 3 4 54 3 4 27 3 4 3 30 4 80
32 4 50 34 4 24 36 4 0 1 4 76 1 4 46 1 4 21 2 4 73 2 4 43 2 4 18 3 4 69 3 4 39
3 4 15

Now to place this Table upon the rule, divide the second, third, fourth, and
fifth columns next to the besill, at one end into small squares that may hold
two figures a piece, in which set over-most the inches of the breadth, in the
second the feet required in length, at each inch, half inch, and quartern. In
the next the odd inches, and in the next the odd centesmes: and this you must
do to six inches, you may do it to ten inches if you will. Then at the end of
ten inches, set one inch divided into ten equal parts, and each of them into
halves, and suppose each half into five, so will it be supposed to be divided
into an hundred parts, as before. Then from six inches to 36 you shall set all
in the column next the besill, with small strokes, after this manner: First, I
begin with six inches and a quarter, to which I find in the Table there
belongs one foot, eleven inches, four centesmes, that is eleven inches, four
centesmes from the middle cross stroke of the rule. But because my compasses
will not reach so far, I only take 56 centesmes from the former inch, which
makes it just two foot from the same end, which I set the under measure at.

Another example let be 9, for which I find in the Table one foot, three
inches, 56 centesmes. First, I take with my compasses 56 centesmes from my inch
of centesmes, and prick it down upon a line upon a paper. Also with my
compasses I take three inches in the foot-line of inch-measure on the other
side of the Rule: set that distance also on the paper at the end of the 56
Centesme in the same line; then take with your compasses the whole length of
both, set one foot in the middle-cross-line of the Rule, and in the said scale,
and the other toward the beginning of the Rule, and it gives the length
correspondent to nine inches and ^/4, from the stroke to the end of the Rule.
Thus do with all the rest; marking each whole inch with its proper number to
24, also 30, and 36.

And now, before we proceed to show you the making of the Table of
timber-measure, we will first show the measure of boards.

CHAP. II. Of measuring of boards with the Rule.
THere are diverse ways of measuring of boards: of which the fundamental way is
this; 12 inches in length, and 12 in breadth, that is twelve times twelve, or
twelve inches square, which is 144 inches, make a foot of board: therefore
multiply the inches of the length of the board by the inches of the breadth,
and divide the product by 144, you have the content in feet. If any thing
remain, divide it by twelve, it gives the odd inches, or twelve parts of a
foot: for an inch is the twelfth part of a foot, let the foot be what it will.
Example.

Let a board be 13 foot five inches long, that is 162 inches long, and nine and
an half broad, these multiplied give 1529 and an half, which divided by 144,
give ten foot, and 89 square inches and remains, which divided by 12 is 7 fere
inches of board. Secondly, If you multiply the length in feet, 13 feet 5
inches, by the breadth in inches 9: first, 9 inches by 13 foot, is 9 foot 9
inches; and half of 13 is 6, and 6 square inches; and 9 times 5 inches is 45
square inches; and half five inches is two and an half square inches. First
then, add all your inches together, 45, 6 and 2 make 53 and, which divided by
12, gives 4 board inches, and 5 square inches, or half a board inch fere. Now
add these 4 inches to 9 and 6 inches, they make 19 inches, that is, one foot,
seven inches, to which add 9 foot, it gives ten foot, seven inches fere, just
as before: and both those ways are performed by any common Rule that ^ath no
board-measure on it. Hence then is discovered this error, that if a board be
nine inches broad, to take 15 inches forward to make a foot, that is so much
more then twelve, as nine is less, whereas our Table says you must take 16, is
a false way: for nine times 15 is but 135, which wants nine square inches of
144, and is always the square number of half the difference of nine and 15
equally distant from 12, whose square is 9. So likewise 8 and 16 being
multiplied make 124, which wants 16 of 144: and because they are equidistant
from 12, and their half difference is 4, therefore their product is less by
sixteen, the square number of four, then the square of twelve.

3. A third way of measuring board is by this rule, Measure the breadth of the
board; if it be less then six inches, your Table of under-measure will show you
how much forward you must take to a foot forward. If it be broader, and under
36 inches, then the strokes on your scale give it.

4. Some measure all the breadths of the boards with a line, then stretch the
length on a block, and so measure the breadths of all the stock at once, and
then measure the length of a board, then multiply the length in feet and parts,
by the breadth in feet and parts: So suppose the breadth of all the boards is
ten foot, nine inches, and the length 154 inches, instead of nine inches, I
take of a foot, and instead of four inches I take or one inch, and the work
will be thus, and it makes 164 feet, 1 inch and an half. ^

And this is a very good way in case a block be hewn eight-square, before it be
sawn: which if it be fit for boards, it is pity it should be hewn any other
way; so will it be no loss of timber, the boards will be all streight-edged. If
it be sold in timber, and measured as eight square, (as shall be shown) there
will be no loss either to buyer or seller.

CHAP. III. Of making of a Table of timber-measure for square timber, to make
the scale of square timber-measure by: as also the under-measure.
FIrst know that a foot of timber is twelve inches every way breadth, length
and thickness, and therefore contains 1728 square inches, for 12 times 12 is
144, that is, a foot of board or a superficies, and twelve foot of board make
1728 inches; therefore to proceed to the Table. First, For whole inches: square
the square of the piece, that is, multiply the square by it self, and by that
product divide 1728. Example. Suppose the piece be 8 inches square, the square
of 8 is 64, by which divide 1728, it gives 27 inches, or two foot, three inches
But if you have odd half-inches, then you must reduce as before all your inches
into half-inches, or an improper Fraction, by whose Denominator (which will
always be 4) multiply 1728, it gives 6912, which must always be divided by the
Numerator of the Fraction. Suppose the square given be 6, that squared is 42
which reduced is 169 quarters; by which 169 divide 6912, it gives 46 inches, or
3 foot 4 inches ninety Centesmes. Again if the square be of odd quarterns or
you must work as before, and then your divide^t will be 16 times 1728, that is,
27648. Example. Let your square be 6, that squared is 45 and 9 sixteenths:
which reduced into 16 parts by multiplying 45 by 16 and adding 9, it gives 7 19
sixteenths. Therefore divide 27648 by 729 it gives, 7 inches, or 3 foot, 1
inch, 92 Centesmes.

Here follows the Table of timber-measure.
Inch squar. feet. inch. cen. inch squar. feet. inc. cent. Inc. Inc. C. Inc.
Inc. C 1 0 144 0 0 8 0 2 3 0 15 7 68 22 3 57 1 92 1 92 1 2 1 39 1 7 43 1 3 49 2
64 0 0 2 1 11 91 2 7 19 2 3 41 3 47 0 24 3 1 10 57 3 6 97 3 3 34 2 0 36 0 0 9 0
1 9 33 16 6 76 23 3 27 1 8 5 33 1 1 8 19 1 6 54 1 3 20 2 23 0 48 2 1 7 14 2 6
35 2 3 13 3 19 0 60 3 1 6 25 3 6 16 3 3 6 3 0 16 0 0 10 1 5 28 17 5 98 24 3 0 1
13 7 55 1 1 4 44 1 5 81 1 2 94 2 11 9 6 2 1 3 67 2 5 64 2 2 88 3 10 2 88 3 1 2
95 3 5 48 3 2 82 4 0 9 0 0 11 1 2 28 18 5 33 25 2 76 1 7 11 67 1 1 1 65 1 5 19
1 2 71 2 7 1 33 2 1 1 6 2 5 5 2 2 66 3 6 4 75 3 1 0 51 3 4 91 3 2 61 Inch. Inc.
C. In. In. C. In. In. C. 5 0 5 9 12 12 12 0 19 4 78 26 2 56 1 5 2 69 1 11 51 1
4 66 1 2 51 2 4 9 12 2 11 6 2 4 55 2 2 46 3 4 4 26 3 10 63 3 4 43 3 2 41 6 0 4
0 0 13 10 29 20 4 32 27 2 37 1 3 8 23 1 9 82 1 4 21 1 2 33 2 3 4 89 2 9 48 2 4
11 2 2 29 3 3 1 92 3 9 14 3 4 1 3 2 25 7 0 2 11 27 14 8 82 21 3 92 28 2 21 1 2
8 88 1 8 52 1 3 83 1 2 17 2 2 6 72 2 8 22 2 3 74 2 2 13 3 2 4 77 3 7 90 3 3 66
3 2 9

In. In. C. In. In. C. In. In. C. In. In. C. 29 2 6 31 1 80 33 1 59 35 1 41 1 2
2 1 1 77 1 1 56 1 1 39 2 1 99 2 1 75 2 1 54 2 1 37 3 1 95 3 1 72 3 1 52 3 1 35
30 1 92 32 1 69 34 1 49 36 1 33 1 1 89 1 1 66 1 1 47 2 1 86 2 1 64 2 1 45 3 1
83 3 1 61 3 1 43

To place this Table on the Rule.
Begin at the other end of the Rule taking those 4 columns next the thick edge
save one, and divide them into little spaces, as you did for board-measure,
setting on them all the under measure to 8 inches and an half square, yet you
may do it to 12 inches, if you will; setting the square inches of the block in
that column next save one to the edge: then the feet required to make a foot
forward in the next: then the odd inches in the next to that, and the Centesmes
in the last of the 4. Then from 8 and to 36 you may take off your inches from
your line of inch-measure, and your Centesmes from your inch of Centesmes, as
you did in board-measure, and place it backward or forward, according as it
shall be more or less then a foot.

CHAP. IIII. Of measuring solids, as stone, timber, etc. and first of square
timber.
FOr measuring all kind of solids the fundamental or general way is to multiply
the inches of the breadth by the inches of the depth, and that product by the
inches of the length, and divide the last product by 1728. This is so plain, it
needs no example: and this is the best way for stone of all other.

2. A second way of measuring square timber is by this Ruler. Having the square
of the piece given look on the Rule, and see how often you find the length
required at that square between that and the end of the Rule in the length of
the block, so many foot of timber is in that block.

To find the true square of a piece broader one way then another.
But to find the true square of the piece, multiply the breadth by the depth,
and from the product extract the square-root.

As let the breadth be eight, and the depth 14, these multiplied make 112,
whose square root is 10 1^/21, according to which square you must measure the
piece. Which disproveth a common error; which is this, To add both sides
together, and to take thereof for the square: for so 8 and 14 make 22, the half
thereof is 11. And although there seems but small difference, viz. less then
an inch between their numbers or roots 10 12/21 and 11: yet between their
squares there is no less then 9 inches difference, for 11 times 11 is 131, but
8 times 14 is but 112.

3. Now therefore because every Carpenter cannot extract the square-root, and
to them that can do it, it is but a slow way: and thirdly we never set any
scales of timber-measure upon Rules, but for inches, halves and quarters: take
this for the best way of all other, where there is such difference of the sides
measure it first that false way, then take out of it always a square piece of
the difference of the sides, quite through the block; so in our example 8 and
14, their difference is 6, the thereof is 3: therefore take a piece of 3 inches
square through the length of the block, for that 3 squared gives 9* which is
the difference between the square of it and the rectangle of 8 times 14.

CHAP. V. Of round t^mber.
BEcause to every circle there belongs 3 squares, first the square without
the circle, or the square of the diameter; secondly, the square equal to the
circle, not in Peripherie, but in the area; for if the area of a circle of a
mile round, and a mile about in a square be compared, we shall find the square
to contain just 40 acres, whereas the circle of the same Peripherie contains
50 acres, 3 roods, 25 poles 5/11; and thirdly the side of the square within the
circle: therefore we will first show the manner of making these 4 scales, and
then the measuring of round timber: yet before we show the making of them our
best way is to take Virgil's advice, and to do as he does with his Bees.
Principio seeds apibus statioque petenda. So before we show the making of them
we will first find out a seat for each of them, and then the making of them
one after each other. First; in the beginning of the first chapter we showed
that we would have one of the edges on one side besild off: and the rest of
that side divided length wise into eight equal columns with 7 Gage-strokes upon
the besill, the length of the Rule, you may set a scale of 20 in the inch
dividing each inch into halves and quarters. Numbering each half-inch with 10,
20, 30, etc. save that half-inch next the beginning, which must not be
accounted for any of the tens: but that must be divided into ten equal parts
by it self, to take the odd inches above even ones, that any round block or
circle is about.

Besides this, you have three other scales that are for round measure, that
show the three squares belonging to the circle: and any of these four being
known, all the rest are known only by taking the number thereof upon its
proper scale with your compasses, and apply that distance to the scale proper
to the thing desired: and these three scales for these squares are one for the
Diameter, or side of a square without the circle, and that each side thereof
touches the circle. Another is the side of a square within the circle, or of
the chords of 90 degr. and the other is a side of a square, whose content is
equal to the content of a circle. For Example. Let a block be girded about with
a nealed wire, and then that wire laid along upon the block, being found to be
88 inches, I set one foot of the compasses in 80 of the said circle scale, and
the other foot in 8 of those 10 odd parts next the beginning of the Rule,
reckoned from ten upward, being the contrary way to the other 80. If then you
desire to know the Diameter of the circle, or side of the square including the
circle, you shall find it just 28 inches, by setting one foot of the compasses
in 25 of the Diameter scale, and the other will fall in three odd parts, which
added make 28: for all these three last scales must be divided into fives, and
numbered with 5, 10, 15, etc. and five odd ones above, at the beginning.
Likewise if you apply the same wideness of the compasses to the scale of the
square within the circle, that is, to the square, that a block being round will
be, being hewed just to the four edges: then set one foot of the compasses in
one of those great divisions by fives, so that the other may fall amongst the
odd small divisions, and it gives you 19 fere.

And lastly, if you apply the same wideness of the compasses to the scale for
the square equal, setting one foot in the great divisions, so that the other
may fall in the five odd small ones, it gives 24 and about.

And in like manner if any of the other three scales be given, as if the
Diameter 14 be given; if you take 14 upon the Diameter, and carry that to the
circle; it gives 44; if to the square equal, it gives about 12, and so of the
rest.

CHAP. VI. Of the proof of these scales by Arithmetical calculation.
FIrst, for the circle-scale, that needs no proof, so that it be truly divided:
for that is the basis, on which the other are built; or scale, by which they
are made.

Secondly, For the Diameter Archimedes gives this rule, Multiply the
Circumference by seven, and the product divide by 22, so have you the Diameter:
so on the contrary. Thus our circle 88, multiplied by seven, gives 616, which
divide by 22, quoteth just 28, as before.

Thirdly, For the square within the circle this is the rule. The square without
the circle is double in content to the square within. Or thus, The content of
the square within the circle is to the content of the circle as 7 to 11: First,
therefore by the content of the square without, we found the Diameter, or side
of the square to be 28, that squared or multiplied by it self is 784, the
content thereof. Therefore the content of the square within is but 784, that
is, 392. whose square-root is 19 31/39, as before. Secondly, by the content of
the circle: for which Archimedes says, half the Diameter multiplied by half
the Circumference gives the content, so 44, the half of the Circumference,
multiplied by half the Diameter 14, gives 616, the content of the circle. This
therefore multiplied by seven, makes 4312, which divided by eleven gives 392,
just as before.

Fourthly, For the square equal to the circle, having by this last rule found
the content of the circle to be 616, we need but extract the square-root
thereof, which is 24 40/49, which does discover a most monstrous, and a most
gross error in measuring round timber, of which hereafter.

CHAP. VII. Showing the manner of placing these upon the Rule.
FIrst, To set out the Diameter, you may take the nether part of the third
column of the besil'd side, to set it on from the middle square stroke of the
Rule. Then Gunther (in his Use of the line of numbers in broad-measure, Prop.
11.) has this proportion. Having the Circumference of a circle, to find the
Diameter: As 3143 to 1000, so is the Circumference, suppose it 4713 to the
Diameter 15: so that if you take 4713 in your circle-scale, and set in that
column from the middle square downward, so shall you set out 15 in that
distance, run that distance as often as you can to the bottom of the Rule, which
will be 4 times more, divide each of them into 3 equal parts, and the uppermost
third into 5 equal, and number all the other great parts, save that with 5, 10,
15, etc. or if you will you may double 4713, that is 94, 26, and take it from
the circle-scale, set it there they will be 30; then half it, and they will be
15, then third it into fives.

2. To find how to proportion the square within the circle by the Diameter.
Let the Diameter be the Radius 1000, then will the chord of 90 degrees, which
is the side of the square included, be the natural sine of half 90: viz. 45
degrees, the sine whereof is 707, therefore then because I would divide my
scale into even sines, if therefore I take 7 times 5, that is 35, the
proportion will be 707. 1000 35. 4950. or 49: therefore if you take 49 on the
Diameter, and set it on the scale of chords, and divide it into 7 equal parts,
and that part next the end into 5 small parts, numbering all but that with 5,
10, 15, etc. you have your scale of chords or square within the circle. Or (if
you think it troublesome to divide it into 7 equal parts) you may take 6 times
5, that is 30. and say 707. 1000 38. 4243, so then you may take 4243 of the
Diameter, and set on your scale of chords, and then divide each of them into
halves, and each half in to 3 parts.

Otherwise thus, The content of this circle according to Archimedes is just the
content of the square of the Diameter. Suppose the Diameter 24, the square
thereof is 576, the half whereof is 208, the root whereof is 17 fere, then say;
If 17 in chords require 24 Diameter, what shall 40 in chords, or any other even
number of fives? Answer, 56: therefore take 56 of the Diameter, and set it in
the scale of chords, which because it gives 8 times 5, first divide it into
halves, then into quarters, then into eight.

3. It may also be made by this Rule of his, The area of the square within the
circle is to the content of the circle as 11 to 7, so that the circle begin
known, the content is thus found: the Diameter multiplied in the Circumference
gives the content of the circle, which if you multiply by 7, and divide the
product by 33, it gives the content of the square within: whereof take the
square-root, and you have the side desired; therefore 198. 88 20. 889, or as
Mr. Wingate has it (in Problem 33. of his Appendix to his Rule of Proportion)
225. 1000 20. 889. So that take 889 from the Circumference and set it on this
scale, and divide it into four fives, and this scale may be set on the lower
half of the besil'd edge.

4. Having the content of the Circumference, to find the side of the square
equal. Take the square-root thereof: so we found before that the Circumference
being 88, the content is 616; whose square root is 2440/49, that is more then
24. or more easily, because, as Gunther has it, the Circumference is to the
side of a square equal as 1000 the Radius to 282, therefore say, 282. 1000 20.
709. Therefore take 709 of the Circumference, and set it in the scale of the
square equal, it gives 20 of that scale; with which distance set out all the
twenties the side will bear, dividing each 20 into four fives, and the last
into five little ones, and numbering them by five as before: and this scale may
be set in the over part of the third column nexthe square edge.

Error in round timber to take a quarter of the circumference for the square.
5. And here I must acquaint you with that monstrous error in measuring round
timber which I spoke of before, which is this, to gird the piece about, and to
take the fourth part for the square thereof: as suppose the piece be 80 inches
about, then by this account the square should be but 22 inches: whereas in the
last section we found it to be above 24, whereby the full fifth part of the
timber is lost to the seller; which notwithstanding the most of them know to be
extreme false, by reason that when they have hewed it, they make a great deal
more of it, then they did before it was hewed. But what is their excuse? Even
this they say, That will scarce pay for the hewing, and it is but sap and bark.
I answer, The goodness or badness of any thing is considered in the price; but
neither in the measure nor the manner of measuring. I have seen a sack of fine
seed, white wheat, sold for ten shillings a bushel, another of gray wheat at
seven, sold the same day all to one man: yet he had no more measure of the
course gray, then of the fine wheat. Secondly, In that they say, They had need
have that for hewing: I say, They never hew what they rend to laths, pales,
rails, plow-timber, cart-timber, wheel-timber, boles, trenchers, dishes,
spoons, and infinite other, which they rend, and sell sap and all. Thirdly,
When they do hew any timber, they leave it so wany, that (in Cambridge-shire
especially) they leave it nearer round then square; and yet allow nothing for
the wanes: so that in all other things, whether sold by weight or measure, the
buyer is to have the draught, though it be but in an ounce of pepper, in this
he must want of his measure, and that no small matter; for they seldom hew
nigher to square in this Country, then that the four wanes are as broad as the
four flats, all which are equal to a square piece of the breadth of one of
those wanes; and although those wanes be less in some places then in other, yet
will they be of no service so deep as the deepest wane goes. And what sense or
equity is there, that in buying they should desire so much over-measure, and
yet in selling it hewed sell so much short, as in buying? Has not he that
buyeth wane-timber, that the wanes run not straight, as much need, and as much
reason, to have allowance for the wanes, and to have the knots and bark left on
them for hewing, as you to have the fifth part and more, and yet never hew a
great deal of it at all? Besides, you have a trick, when you buy round-timber
with the bark on it, be it thick or thin, you will cut a notch round about the
piece in the middle of the block, sometimes deeper then the bark, saying, That
is but a boin: now you buying by measure, what right have you to the bark,
which you measure not? yet when it is hewed, they that buy it must be content
with air instead of timber. And yet further, I have known a Wheel-wright, that
used to buy all his timber by the foot of fourteen inches every way to the
foot, and to girdle it, and to take the fourth part for the square; thus did he
overreach the sellers, who thought it to be but a seventh part more then
ordinary, and that he gave a penny or two pence more in a foot then others
gave, they thought themselves well enough; whereas (poor simple fools!) they
sold above two foot for one.

6. If you buy round timber that is ordinarily taper, little or much, then you
will be sure to gird it in the middle, or nearer the little end, whereby you
gain no small matter.

Lastly, How common a thing is it with Wood-mongers, to have one Rule to buy
by, and another to sell by: one a quarter of an inch too long* another as much
too short? And great pity it is, that considering there are so many abuses in
measuring land and timber, it is not a whit looked into, whereas in all other
things sold by weight or measure the abuses are punished by the Clerk of the
market.

Now for correction of this false measure in round timber; committed by this
way of taking the fourth part for the square, if it be a perfect Cilinder, and
not taper, you may help your self by this Table, taken out of Mr. Stirrup's
Plain-scale, or Carpenters new Rule, page 60, which you may draw into a scale,
as you do for square timber or board-measure; all but the first seven inches,
which are under-measure, and set those 7 in four columns, between the two
Tables of board and timber under-measure.

Squar. Inch. Feet. Inch. Cent. Squa. Inch. Inc. Cen. Squa. Inch. Inc. Cen. 1
113 1 71 11 11 22 21 3 11 2 28 3 42 12 9 42 22 2 80 3 12 6 85 13 8 3 23 2 56 4
7 0 85 14 6 92 24 2 35 5 4 6 30 15 6 3 25 2 17 6 3 1 71 16 5 30 26 2 0 7 2 3 70
17 4 69 27 1 86 8 1 9 23 18 4 19 28 1 75 9 1 4 76 19 3 76 29 1 61 10 1 1 57 20
3 39 30 1 51

The use of this Table is thus.
Girt the piece about, and take the fourth part for the square, as if it were
the true square, and therewith enter this Table; and it gives the feet, inches,
and Centesmes required forward to make a foot forward at that false square. So
44 inches circle gives 11 inches for the fourth part, which in the Table gives
11 inches, 22 Centesmes, forward to a foot-square of timber. Or else having
taken the Circumference with a nealed wier, and there made a twist, and
measured the number of inches about, take off so many with your compasses, and
apply that wideness to the scale of the square-equal, and you have the square
you must measure it at. And because as I said before, that to hew a log for
boards, the best way is to hew it eight-square, both for saving timber, and to
have all the boards streight-edged; so neither shall the sawyers be paid for
more then they saw, nor he that buieth the boards or the block it self, want,
or have too much: we will now therefore give you one rule whereby to measure
all equal-sided timber, so that it be not taper, how many sides soever it has.
First, find the center of your piece, and measure the semi-diameter thereof to
the middle of one of the equal sides; then add all the sides together, multiply
half thereof by the semi-diameter: so have you the content of the base, and
that multiplied in the length gives the content of the piece. So in the figure
the 8 sides are ten a piece, that is, 80; the half whereof is 40; the
semi-diameter or perpendicular AB is 1^, that multiplied by 12 makes 480, which
is the content of the base, that is, one inch sawed off of the end of the
piece. Then if either you multiply 480 by the inches of the length of the
piece, and divide the product by 1728, you have the content of the piece. Or
else you may extract the square-root of 480, which is 22 fere, and then measure
it, as if it were 22 inches square. And thus may you measure all manner of
timber, not taper, by measuring one inch at the end, as if it were land: then
extract the root, and measure is as if it were so much square.

CHAP. VIII. Of taper-timber, whether Conical or Pyramidal.
FOr such kind of timber of either sort, measure it as if it were a whole
Cilinder or Prisme, that is, First, find the area of the base, and multiply it
by the whole length, thus; Let a Prisme be apiece, the side 12, the area
of the base is 144, and suppose the length 100, these multiplied make 14400.
But by the Corollary of the 7th Prop. 12. lib. Euclid. every Pyramid is the
third part of a Prisme, having the same base and altitude: therefore divide
14400 by 3, it gives 4800 the content of the Pyramid. But suppose it be an
imperfect Pyramid, that runs not to a point, but has his top cut off: you
shall then continue out the sides to a perfect Pyramid, by plotting it in
paper, or else find how much it wants by the Rule of three. Example.

The side of the base being twelve, the length of the piece fifty, and the
side there is six, so that there is six lost in fifty; but the whole side of
the base is but twelve, whence take six, six rests. Then say 6. 50 6. 50. and
50 and 50 make an hundred, as before. Now then for this little Pyramid, the
side or Diameter of the base thereof being six, whose square is 36, the third
part whereof is twelve, that multiplied by 50, gives 600, the content of the
lesser Pyramid. Subtract this perfect Pyramid out of the great perfect Pyramid
4800, rests 4200, the imperfect Pyramid. And the reason, that holds between the
Prisme and Pyramid, holds also between the Cilinder and Cone, Prop. 10.12.
Euclid. Every Cone is the third part of a Cilinder, having the same base and
altitude.

Of the Cone.
Let us now suppose a Cone also divided in length into 50 and 50, the greater
Diameter at the base to be twelve, and six in the middle. First, to find the
Circumference to 12, the Diameter: 12 multiplied by 22 is 264, that divided by
7 is 37 5/7, the Circumference. Then multiply half 37 5/7 (that is) 18 6/7 by
half the Diameter, (that is) six, it gives 115 5/7, the greater area, which
multiplied by 100 the length, it gives 11514 2/7 the Cilinder, the third part
whereof is 3838 2/21 the greater Cone, Now for the lesser, the Diameter is six,
multiply it by 22, it is 132, that divided by seven, is 18 6/7 the base, which
multiply by the length 50 is 942, the third part thereof is 314 2/7 the lesser
Cone.

Now take 314 2/7 out of 3838 2/21, rests the imperfect Cone 3520, which is
almost twelve times as big as the lesser. Or, if you rather desire 12 and 6,
the bases of the Pyramid, to be the sides of the square within the circle, as
there they are, and then to see their dimensions: then first, if twelve be a
side of a square within the circle, since the content, or square thereof, is
but half the content of the square of the Diameter: therefore double the square
thereof, and out of the double extract the square root, and you have the
Diameter: so 12 squared is 144, that doubled is 288; whose square-root is 17
fere, the Diameter.

Now to find the Circumference, multiply 17 the Diameter by 22, facit 374.
that divide by seven, it quoteth 53 ^/7 the Circumference: then multiply half
the Circumference 26 5/7 by half the Diameter 8, it gives the area of this base
227 ^/14, which multiplied by 100, the length, gives 22707 ^/7 the Cilinder,
which divided by 3 gives the great Cone 75695. Likewise for the lesser square
within, which is six, the square is 36, that doubled is 72, the square-root
whereof is 8 fere, the Diameter. Multiply 8 by 22, it gives 187; which divided
by 7 gives 26 5/7 the Circumference, then multiply half 26 5/7 (that is) 13
5/14, by half 8 and an half (that is) 4, and you have 56 577/879 or 72 fere,
the content of that area; which multiply by 50 the length gives 2835: the third
part thereof is 945, the lesser Cone. Take this lesser 945 out of the greater
7569, rests 6624, the imperfect Cone: So that the imperfect Cone is more then
seven times as big as the little one.

The discovery of several errors in measuring the Pyramid and Cone: and first
of the Pyramid.
Some hold that to be true, To add the areaes at both ends together, and
multiply the 1 half thereof by the length of the piece, as in our example the
area of the great end is 144, and the little end nothing therefore half 144 (
i. e.) 72 multiplied by 100 is 7200, but it should be but 4800: it is too much
by 2400.

A second error is to take the area at the third part from the great end, as
in this figure, at C and C, but there the square or side is 8, and the square
number or area thereof is 64, which multiplied by 100 is 6400, too much by 1600.

A third error is to take the square in the midst of the piece, as at B and B,
where the side is 6, the area 36: that multiplied by 100 the length gives 36^0,
which is too little* for take 3600 out of 4800, the difference is 1200; a just
quartern lost of the timber to the seller; so that it falls near the middle
between B and C, where it is 7 inches, for that gives 5900, yet there it is too
much by an hundred.

Secondly in the Cone.
The common practice is to gird it in the middle, and to take the fourth part
for the square. In measuring the cilinder, there was more then the fifth part
lost to the seller: but here that it is taper also, is a more intolerable loss.
For if in the square Pyramid was lost a full quartern only by reason of
tapering: what will here be lost where two such errors combine in one to wrong
a man? The Circumference in the midst of the piece is 26 5/7, the fourth part
thereof is 6, which squared is 45 and that multiplied by 100 makes 4556 ^/4,
which taken out of 75 9^ there is lost to the seller 3013, which is almost one
half thereof. Yet this goes so for current in all places, that he that
contradicts it is scorned as a fool, and accounted as a knave.

CHAP. IX. Of the making of four other lines on the flat-sides, whereof three
are Mr. Gunthers lines, of numbers, sines, and tangents; and instead of the
Meridian-line, which is only useful for Navigation, whereof Carpenters make
little or no use, we have added a sextant of chords.
ALthough Mr. Wingate (in his book called The Rule of Proportion,) has set
down the making of them: yet for that he has done them after another manner
then here is shown, neither will an ordinary Rule bear all those lines, we will
therefore content our selves with Mr. Gunther's, and the line of chords only.
You shall divide the rest of the Rule beside the columns of feet and
inch-measure before spoken of, into four other great columns, and divide each
of them into two equal, and one of them into two also; so the great shall be
for figures, the other 2 for strokes. These two of Mr. Gunthers you may set in
the three middle columns, and the line of chords on the other outside.

First, for making the line of numbers.
I told you before that I would have you strike a stroke round about cross the
Rule, I would also have another at each end of the Rule so close as possibly
you can, only to set one point of the compasses on. Then first set out your
great division in each foot; viz. the thousands, if your number consist of four
figures, or howsoever they are to be the left hand figures of any number, as 3
in 3 32.346.3654.37046, etc. and must be marked with the 9 digits in either
foot, and the first last and middle-most with one, so that you may understand
as many ciphers with it as shall be requisite, so that it may signify
1.10.100.1000. and then if one signify 10 the next two will naturally signify
20, but not always. Now to take and set the number 2 in his right place, take a
Table of Logarithmes of absolute numbers, and look either the Logarithme of
2.20. or 200. and take the three next figures to the Characteristick, which are
301: then with your compasses take 301. viz. three inches, no tenth part of an
inch, and 1/10 of a tenth part or Centesmes of an inch, and set one foot in the
nether-most cross stroke, where you set the first one, and turn the other
upward in the same column, and there set your 2 likewise with the same numbers,
set one foot in the middle cross stroke where you set the middle one, and turn
the other upward toward the uppermost one, and there set your 2 also: likewise,
do with 3 whose Logarithme is 477 ( id est) 4 inches, 7 tenths, 7 Centesmes:
also with 4. And these figures for the making of this line we will call
hundreds, the next subdivision tens, and the least Centesmes. But now because
we will suppose your compasses will not well reach beyond the figure 4, whose
Logarithme is 602, that is above 6 of those inches: therefore first, let us set
on the tens so far on both feet, and then the rest of each foot afterward. Next
set out each fifth tenth so far: because you must mark them with longer
strokes, then each single ten: so then you must not account the next of those
fifths to 1 as 5. (for then you will account the one for nothing) but you must
account it for 15. or 150. and so take the Logarithme thereof, which is 176.
Likewise 25, or 250, is 398, which you must take with your compasses, and set
in their places in in both feet, and in like sort shall you do with all your
single tens; accounting that next ^ not for 1, nor 2, but for 11. Or instead of
taking them off with your compasses, strike out all the first foot with a fine
small striking squire of brass, laying it upon the Log. in the line of
foot-measure, and then set out the other foot with your compasses by this.

Now for the rest of each foot, look out the Logar. of your numbers, and take
the distance between it and the middle cross-stroke, and with that wideness set
one foot in the upper 1, and where the other falls, there is the place of that
number. Example. I would set out 70, the Log. is 845; I take the distance
between it and the middle-stroke of the Rule, or the Arithmetical complement of
it, 154, and set it both from the upper stroke and middle-stroke downward, and
you set out seventy. But your over-foot may bear unites to 20, and from thence
to 40, divide each tenth into five, and from thence to the end into two.

To make the line of sines.
First, you must know that neither the line of sines, nor tangents, enter the
Rule till 35 minutes: where you see the two next figures to the characteristick
8, are both ciphers; there also the characteristick changes from 7 to 8: for
your characteristick shows what foot you are in: therefore since we reckon the
minutes only by tens, our first number or division upon the Rule will be at 40
minutes of the first foot, shown by the characteristick 8: for 9 is the last,
and therefore belongs to the last foot; so that whereas you see that the Log.
of one minute has 6 the characteristick, and 463 the three next figures:
therefore one minute would be above a foot and half before the entrance on the
Rule, and likewise would the first minute of the tangents be. Now the Logar. of
40 minutes has beside the characteristick 8 the three first figures 066 fere:
therefore take off 0 inch, 6 tenths, and 6 centesmes, or 5 centesmes, and 7
millesmes, if you ca^ ghuess so near, and set them from the nethermost
cross-stroke at the beginning of the line of sines forward. And thus do for all
under two degrees, be it sine or tangent: but from thence to sine 5 degr. 45
min. or tangent 5 degr. 43 min. (As suppose the sine of 4 degr. whose Logar.
beside the characteristick is 843:) you shall take the distance between 8
inches, 4 tenths, 3 cent. and ten inches, and apply that distance from the
middle-stroke down-ward: and so of the rest of the quarter. But for all both
sines and tangents in this first foot: you may by their Logarithmes strike them
with a square, as you did the line of numbers.

Now for the upper part showed by the characteristick for all sines and
tangents to 20 degr. as suppose the tangent of 20 degr. the Logarithmes of 20
degr. tangent is 56: set it from the middle-stroke forward, but from thence to
the sine of 90, and tangent of 45 degr. as the sine of 40, whose Logar. is 808;
take the distance between it and the middle-cross-line, and apply it in the
line of sines from the upper cross-stroke down-ward: then number all the whole
degrees to ten, with 1, 2, 3, and after that in the sines with 20, 30, 40, etc.
to 90, and the tangents with 10, 20, to 45, and back with 50, 60, to 80 degrees.

Lastly, for making the sextant of chords.
Set a pair of beam-compasses, with a beam of willow, deal, or sallow, near
half an inch thick, and ^/4 broad; make a little nut of good tough wood, with a
mortes in it, that the beam may slide in it to and fro, indifferently stiff,
and in all places alike, with a short prick, or little piece of an aule-blade
in one end, and another longer in one edge of the beam hard by the end, so long
from the beam as the other point is. If it goes not stiff enough to stand and
tran with at any place; make the mortes a little the deeper one way to put in a
wedge, or else help your self with a screw-pin, then go to some smooth loft
boards, opening your compasses to 23 inches, and with that wideness tran an
arch, that may be two foot long at the least, and with each foot of the
compasses make a prick in the said arch, and set it likewise upon the Rule;
then divide that space in the arch into two equal parts, which will be 30 degr.
a piece, and each of them into three apiece, which will be 10 degr. apiece, and
each of them into two, which will be five apiece, and each of them into five
simple ones. Then take them off from the floor, and set them on the Rule, one
after another, and number them with 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, and this will be
wonderful beneficial in Dialling, and also in many other things, as to divide
a circle into any number of equal parts, or to make an angle of any number of
degrees, or to find the quantity of any angle, and so by the line of
foot-measure you may also divide a straight line into as many parts as you will.

Now as I have showed the use of all the lines on the other side of the Rule,
and also of both the outside lines on this side; so for the other three I must
content my self to show you the use in general: for if I should descend to
particulars, all the paper in Cambridge would be too little to hold them. First
therefore, you see already, that as by the line of foot-measure, and Table of
Logarithms these lines are made; so may you by these lines find the Logarithme
of any absolute number, tangent or sine, as if it were by the Table of
Logarithms.

Secondly, By these two lines of numbers and foot-measure may be resolved all
questions whatsoever, that common Arithmetic can resolve. And more; for hereby
may be resolved all questions of Interest, Purchases, Annuities, etc.

Thirdly, By these three lines of numbers, sines, and tangents is resolved the
whole doctrine of Triangles, and whatsoever may be performed by them, either in
Measuring, Dialling, Geography, Geometry, Arithmetic, Navigation, Cosmography,
Astronomy, etc.

But, because (gentle Reader) I would have thee learn now to go alone; I will
commit these to thine own consideration, knowing that that chicken that will
peck up never a corn, but what the hen puts in the mouth, will never be a fat
chicken.

Now if the Rule of three is accounted of all men worthy for its excellency of
the name of the Golden-Rule (which is but the least part of the use of one of
the lines of this Ruler) then justly may this Ruler be called the Golden-Ruler.

FINIS.

