Astrological Predictions OF ENGLANDS Happy Success, AND Complete VICTORY OVER
THE FRENCH, DVTCH, and DANE, This Year 1667.

The Rebuilding and Flourishing of the City of LONDON in great Glory; The Kings
Commanding the Treasures of his Enemies, to repair her Ruins.

With several Remarkable Prophesies of the same nature.

Juvat haec meminisse.

Licensed according to Order.

LONDON Printed for Robert Pawlet, at the sign of the Bible in Chancery Lane,
1667.

Astrological Predictions OF ENGLANDS Happy Success AND Complete VICTORY OVER
THE FRENCH, DVTCH, and DANE, This Year 1667.
IT is not any part of my intended brief Work, to write an Eulogy for
Astrology, the Art of Science it self being able to dilate her own praises; but
my design ayms to give a satisfaction, how far either in general or particular,
the same Art has predicted or foretold good fortune and happy success to
attend all the affairs of Great Britain, in this present year current, and the
future; and also what miseries and calamities shall attend the malicious
Enemies thereof, well knowing, that there is hardly any greater encouragement
to the attaining of high and honorable things, then when the undertakers are
drawn by an assured confidence of a promised and even ascertained success: To
the creating of which encouraged confidence, be pleased to observe, that Mr.
Booker in March this year, says, If health, wealth, plenty, peace, and all
that is good Much good is promised to this Nation, as well to Prince and other
Grandees, as also to the Generality of the People.

Flow in upon us, if 't be not withstood
By our unthankfulness, then we have cause
Greatly to joy; but by the Starry Laws
Of this rare Speaking of Conjunction of Mars and Jupiter in Febr.
Revolution, it is decreed,
Of our misfortunes, that we shall be freed.
And to prove that there is something of certainty in the said Art, hear what
the same person avoucheth concerning the late burning of London: I shall tell
the World, says he, that the late fearful destructive Fire, that has so
lamentably defaced London, was long since above an hundred years ago predicted,
I believe Astrologically. Michaell Nostredamus of St. Remy in Provence,
Physician to the King, and a great Mathematician and Astrologer, who dyed the
2. of July 1566. aged 62. years, published certain Quadrins in French, which
was printed 1555. The Book is in diverse men's hands, I my self have had one
above 40 years, amongst the rest in Quadrin 51. are these words; Le sangue du
Just a Londres fera faut
Bruslez par foudres, de Vingt trois, les six,
La Dame Antique cherra de place haut,
De mesme sect plusieurs serront occis.
Englished; For the Just man's blood at London spilt, the same
By Thundering Fire shall be reduced to flame;
That ancient Lady's lofty head must droop,
And many of her Cit'zens forced to stoop.
Amongst all the Astrological Predictions mentioned in any age, either ancient
or modern, or in any History I ever yet read, this is the most remarkable, and
of it self able to stop the mouths of All Astrologomastiers: I have given the
translation or reposition of the same, and leave it to posterity to admire it.
Thus much he says of what is past; hear something more of what is to come. For
he, speaking of the Suns Vernal Ingress, and the position of the Heavens at the
same time, breaks forth into these words. A most admirable position, and if we
should retrocalculate the Suns Ingress for 500 years, we should not meet with
such a wonderful position of expected good success in omnibus, in all the
Kings Reigns since William the Conqueror. To be short, it signifies health,
wealth and prosperity both to King and People, victory over Enemies, or
agreement betwixt those that have been at odds, perfect amity amongst Friends,
notable occurrences about Ecclesiastical affairs, and results about Religion,
the preferment of some Pious and Religious Persons, happy Navigations, and
prosperous return of many rich Ships, to the Kings great profit, and weal of
the Public, many notable Embassyes from Foreign parts concerning high matters,
to the great joy and content of all from the highest to the meanest.

Mr. Gadbury in his Poetical Observations, says thus in January: Saturn is
rampant yet, and with the Sun
(The second day) is in Conjunction;
Joves Sextile rays do qualify the hate,
And turn the fury to some neighbor State;
Great Britain is secure, her Worthies free,
Whose fates concur with her felicity:
And in February thus: England upon her Enemies may be
Avenged to purpose for their surquedry.
And in June he says thus: The two last Junes great slaughters were on Sea,
Strange discontents and Treacheries on shore,
The Dutch and French have cause to rue the day
They slighted Englands friendship heretofore;
If wise for future they may thrive, and then
The French, a Kingdom; Dutch, High-states again.
And in July he proceeds: But now a Thundering Aspect does appear,
Threatening great Navies to be drawing near;
Bright Sol's in Cancer, Chrono's in the Goat,
Holland and her Confederates change their note,
Stout Mars, Great Britains Planet, rules alone!
Makes July, June! OBSERVE IT EVERY ONE:
And in August: Let England keep but peaceable at home,
No State of Europe dare her room
At Land or Sea: She Is made for Victory;
Thrice happy Nations that with her comply.
And in his discourse of the Suns Vernal Ingress, he says; Mars the Patron of
England, is found strong and powerful, etc. intimating a more then ordinary
activity in the Genius of the English Nation; not only inclining, but prompting
them to high and eminent Engagements with Foreign Nations, and promising them
Victory over their Enemies, and giving them a sufficiency of power to prescribe
Laws and limits to them. Adding further; They shall overcome them, and that so
remarkably, that they shall tread them under their feet; and for that Year,
shall very rare (if at all) receive any interruption or check in their hopes,
victories or successes.

Mr. Wing says in April: Holland cannot thrive, neither can we forget her
Treachery: France holds up her head a while. And in June and July; Is not
England Victorious? if so, then Holland gets little, and France less; for great
alterations and changes in the World may be shortly expected; Most look to
hear, of Peace this Year;
But if not so, then Hollands woe.
And speaking of the Suns entering Aries, he has these words. I might here
speak somewhat of the present War between us and Holland, and see what may be
said Astrologically touching the event and issue thereof, but I shall at
present say little; yet this I say, There is no Configuration of the Celestial
bodies that may dismay us in the least, or that does in any wise promise them
Victory.

Mr. Trigg in his Monthly observations expresses himself thus. France aim not
to high, thy Grandeur may suffer an Eclipse as great as in the year 1651, if
with great prudence thou do not prevent it; thy Counsels may do more by
Peace then War. Therefore Frenchmen and Hollanders be not too forward, your
repentant hour is near, unless in time you be so wise as to make peace with
the English Nation, all whose Enemies shall truckle under her; so that there
will be great hopes of concluding an honorable Peace with one or more Nations,
who now begin to find, that fighting against the English (a People from the
beginning ordained for victory) is to no purpose, since the Stars have designed
them never to take the foil (unless by Treachery from within herself) from
any people in the whole world.

Mr. Fly says, Our Enemies begin to comply, be more mild, and think of
friendship. And speaking of cloudy inconstant weather, It is, says he, much
like our Enemies, the French and the Dane, who are still plotting and
contriving against us, but to little purpose; Glad would they be to be quiet.

Mr. Andrews in several of his monthly Observations, declares himself thus.
Providence smiles upon the Kingdom of England. And we doubt not, but that the
Heavens will favor the English, and that his Majesty's Subjects will be in a
thriving and good Posture; And his Armies and Navyes wherever employed, will
be very successful in all their undertakings, and perform some business of
consequence. The Emperors Dominions not quiet. The Swedes are active; The
Danes full of troubles: but still we find the Kingdom of England in a
flourishing temper, and the English seem very formidable in sundry parts of the
world, so that we have great cause to predict good success to the Forces and
Navyes of his Majesty of Great Britain, wherever engaged. Moreover, about July,
the Hollander or Datch may be sufficiently sensible of the malicious aspects of
the Stars, for assuredly their Forts and Ships are not far off from danger,
and if God have not ere then composed the differences between his Majesty of
Great Britain and that people, viz. the Dutch, then they must expect to be very
much humbled by the English. Toward the Baltique Sea somewhat very
considerable may happen, wherein the Danes and Hollanders may be highly
concerned, and if they shall appear with their Fleet and Navy in a Warlike
posture against the English in August; then let them take what follows; viz. a
total or fatal overthrow. Lastly, we do perfectly discover by the Positions and
Configurations of the Stars, that his Majesty's Kingdoms and Dominions will
be in a prosperous condition, and be blessed in their undertakings, even to the
very amazement of Foreign Countries. But afflictions, miseries, troubles and
misfortunes shall attend the Dutch this year, and they must expect no good
success, unless God in mercy shall grant them the favor of his Majesty of
Great Britain before the Spring 1667, or if Heaven have not ere that time
directed those people unto a happy compliance or composition of controversies
with him.

Then speaking of London, he says, and assuredly we have now great cause to
affirm, that London our English Metropolis shall be in a flourishing state
again, and in a very prosperous condition, so that people may safely build
houses there, as being confident (according to the rules of Art) of the great
felicity that shall ere long attend that City.

Then turning his discourse to France, he says, We have sufficient cause to
predict, that some sad and disastrous Events will in this year 1667. befall the
City of Paris, and that the French Kings Affairs will find much interruption in
sundry parts of the World; and the French and Dutch will be in a sad condition,
unless they comply with England; and we hope the World toward the latter end
of 1667. will appear in a more settled condition then formerly.

Mr. Saunders says; From good and rational grounds I pronounce, that the
Revolutions of the Heavens this Year, promise much prosperity to come to
formerly afflicted London, and her Governors, in her re-edification; and that
such Prizes or Composition may probably be brought in from the amazed and
depressed Dutch, that may add much to her felicity, and well replete his
Majesty's Treasures; for till a Submissive Peace be concluded, the English will
gain ground of that elated Nation, who proudly assume the Attributes of the
Creator, calling themselves High and Mighty, which Blasphemy will sufficiently
be rewarded by the next Revolution 1668. which time will set his Majesty of
England free, with Victory and Honor over all his Enemies; therefore (though
things be banded to and fro, and look upon us with a face of unsettlement in
the mean time) let us rest assured in this, That the year (1668.) will be a
Jubilee to England, and I derive this Judgment from warrantable grounds of
Art: But this present year will be a time of Action, much business and great
designs attempted: But the language of the Stars in general speak prosperity to
England, with good success, and especially to her famous Metropolitan London,
which the Almighty will miraculously (to her glory) raise out of the ashes,
and, like Job, redouble her fame and losses, and command the very Treasures of
her Enemies to repair her Ruins; and those noxious natural qualities, which
both affected and infected the Earth, her air and waters, are now spent and
exhausted, which likewise predicts her happiness, as to health, for many
succeeding years.

Mr. Lilly pronounces his Judgment in these terms, viz. The King of France
and his Kingdom, or the several Provinces, Dukedoms or Principalities thereof,
are threatened this year; more particularly he is to suffer great damage in his
Affairs, by the death of some eminent Ecclesiastical person, or one of the
prime Magistrates of his Kingdom; as also by reason of some general turbulent
commotion of his oppressed Subjects. And it may also be rationally affirmed,
that some sudden occasion of War will much discompose the great Affairs of his
Imperial Majesty, from an Eastern people, or in his own Eastern Patrimony or
Dominion; nor is there like to be any handsome Unity between the Monarch of
France and him, but rather that a fierce War will ensue betwixt the Germans and
French. When this War does break forth, then will France suffer great mischief,
as well internally in the bowels of her Country, as externally from the
Invasions of several other people; We do also probably conj^cture, that in or
near the Years 1672. or 1673. there will be some irruption made into Poland, or
other Countries toward those parts, by the rude Tartars, and many fresh
Controversies or Differences will fall out betwixt the Swedes and Crown of
Denmark. Secondly, we find in one of the Sybils, a Prophecy, thus written,
viz. That a Star shall arise in Europe over the Iberians, toward the great
House of the North, whose beams shall unexpected enlighten the whole World; and
this person is to appear, when most Nations being wearied with War, shall
willingly embrace Peace; so that a Great and Warlike King or Prince shall arise
out of the North, whose Wars and Actions shall be diametrically opposite to the
present Times; and at last he shall settle the distracted condition of many
Nations in peace.

If the rules of the Ancients hold true, we must adjudge happiness to England;
therefore let no true English heart fail him, or be much troubled with the
rumor of the Times, or be weary in assisting his Majesty in person or purse;
for at the Suns entrance into Aries, there is the most promising position of
Heaven for his Majesty's successes against all Enemies whatsoever, that yet
has been since the Wars we have had, be they Dutch, Dane, or French: And we
may judge the greatest Transactions of Europe, and of highest concernment, will
be managed by his Majesty of England, his Counselors and Conductors, both as
to War and Peace, with great m^gnanimity and haughtiness of Spirit as unto the
Martial part, and with as great Gravity and Prudence on the Civil. And although
the general Affairs of Christendom seem to be managed something confusedly, yet
in England they are carried on with great courage and vivacity of Spirit, with
sincerity, and upright hearts and intentions. In some Countries matters are
carried on with high words, and great brags and boastings; in other places with
nothing but deceit, fraud, juggling, and underhand dealing; in other places
with subtle delays, Treacheries, and feigned devices; however great
preparations are ordering as well for Sea as for Land, for the major part of
this year we must expect Military actions: And truly some high design will be
in hand, which will almost put the world to a stand what it may be; if it be
lawful to conjecture the series of it, we have great confidence that the whole
Honor and Glory of that action, that design or designs, be they by Sea or
Land, shall redown'd unto the high Renown and Honor of his Majesty of Great
Britain, and to his Naval Forces wherever engaged; and against whatsoever
Enemy or Enemies either Dutch, Dane, or French, and this to the great comfort
of all his Majesty's loving Subjects; for the configurations of Heaven were
never more propitious for advancement of the whole British affairs then in
this year 1667.

All the Planets argue, that neither the Hollander or their Confederate the
French, though highly industrious and Active, are very ready or well provided
for any action toward the Spring; yet (as was said before) they use great
industry: but whoever fight against Providence, are sure to be worsted and
vanquished, as we do not question both Dutch and French will be, whenever they
shall dare either singly or jointly to encounter his Majesty's Navy or Navies.
Nay, more probably, the Plague is like to come among the Hollanders, both into
their Cities, and Towns, and Ships amongst their Seamen; then follows a
consumption and decay of their Estates and Fortunes in all the habitable parts
of the World, wheresoever they Traffic; Besides, they are threatened with
irreconcilable differences and discords amongst their Principal Officers and
Grandees, as also commotions and murmurings in the vulgar sort of people, nay
perhaps one Province against another.

True it is, the Heavens seem to give hopes of accommodation in the present War
with Holland and France, if we could believe the Hollanders were as yet
sufficiently chastised for their former insolences, or had suffered that
measure of misfortune, which Providence has assigned for them, both by a
fearful Plague, Pestilence, Insurrections, Deluges by Inundations, and
drowning part of their Territories, scarcity of all sorts of Provisions, loss
in their Fishing-trade, loss of their Navies and Merchants Ships in all and
every Place, Kingdom and Country. A wilful and obstinate people they are
signified to be, in not embracing those gracious opportunities of Peace, which
otherwise might be obtained from his Majesty of Great Britain. Its probable
they expect, or are in hopes of assistance from the French King, and Denmark,
and perhaps aid is intended them; but it seems for a time either retarded, or
their Ally not capable in condition, or may stand upon some Articles or
Covenants not before mentioned or thought upon: And we say further, that
Providence, it is like, directs his Majesty's Forces or Navies so happily, that
they keep Mounsieur from acting or joining with them so that the Holl^nder
shall meet with all manner of impediments, hindrances and delays in all their
Affairs, and a general ill disposition of whatever belongs to them in their own
Dominions; And that their Rich men, their Ancient men, their Ministers, their
Boores or Rustical people, their Mariners and Seafaring men, every one in his
kind will be weary of this their War with England; Et blasphemabunt se invicem:
viz. They will blaspheme and curse one another, and all those who at first
introduced them to this fatal and unlucky War.

And shortly after, in his discourse upon the Ingress of the Sun into Cancer,
the 11th of June, he says: If the Lord God in mercy to the Hollanders incline
not their hearts to mediate for Peace ere this time, (as there is no great
probability they will) then is their Condition represented to be sad within a
few months following: For (says he) that King who rules over Gemini (and that
is the King of England) shall be exalted, or much magnified, and shall be
Victorious over his Enemies.

In his Monthly Observations are these passages: Many reports fly abroad, as if
some Treaty for Peace were in hand; People willingly embrace that Intelligence,
but time makes it appear a Vapor. Our Enemies have not yet had a sufficient
share of the second Comets influence, let them expect it with a sad interest in
this Summer; but we may expect an happy Unity among our selves, and perceive
Gods mercies generally to smile upon the Actions of his Majesty, and Grand
Affairs of the whole Nation, infinitely to the satisfaction of all sober
persons. An appearance of drawing Forces into Normandy, the French King being
active, but Providence seems to contradict his intentions; and the prudence of
his Majesty of England prevents all fear of French Invasion. Whether the French
King resolve upon War or Peace, is no matter, if his Navies will peep out of
their Harbors, they must return home again if they can; but assuredly
destruction, or captivity, or sinking will be the final end of most of those,
who shall encounter his Majesty of Great Britains Sea Forces this year.

And in March he says thus: The Monarch of Great Britain seems in greatest
readiness for Action, and best provided: The Dutch fearful of a Plague, and
Consumption of their Seamen, nor in a present capacity of undertaking any great
design. The French seem at a stand, some emergent misfortune having happened
unto them, or feared to happen among themselves suddenly. Ne verbum quidem de
Dano: The Dane cannot get out of his Harbors; No penny, no Pater-nosters: The
Swedish Nation seem the most active of all Europe, and there is reason, for
some violent storm is like to break forth upon them from a barbarous people, if
not prevented. The Amsterdam Merchants, as also the Generality of Holland, find
great opposition in their Vocations and Callings, they seem now more sensible
of their present sad condition, then for some years before; for whenever the
Hollanders come out to Sea, they are sure to be worsted, by firing, burning or
taking their best and most serviceable Ships, killing and destroying their most
able and serviceable Commanders and men; neither will the Dane or French speed
better: The Dane seems to lose his honor by not fighting, and much aspersed
therefore; Providence seems to bless the French King with answerable success;
viz. with the Captivity of many of his Ships and men; but this Nation seems
blessed with some remarkable testimony of Gods favor, in or near the month of
May, highly to the honor of his Majesty, and satisfaction and content of the
whole Kingdom, for there is probability of much Honor conferred on deserving
persons: And we have cause to believe, his Majesty to be much honored near the
time, by several Ambassadors from Foreign parts, to congratulate his successes:
but Heaven, we fear, has not such blessing for the Hollanders, Divine
Vengeance having as yet not scourged them sufficiently for their former
insolences. The King of Denmark threatened with War, and many sad mischances
near his own confines, a sturdy Enemy and powerful, watching all opportunities
against him. The French King seems to expend much money, and to make great
preparations to little purpose; he will in a short time be sensible of the
first Comets influence for evil, and not for good. About June strange News from
Holland, as if all were in an uproar, we believe they will be then in a sad and
fearful condition.

The Hollander from the ill success he shall find in July, if he submit not
before unto a Peace, shall perceive its in vain to strive against the King of
England, whose Forces (though not without much blood) shall obtain so
remarkable a Victory over both French, Dutch, and Danes, as the like has not
been heard of in any age: If Providence have assigned that month for a
Sea Fight, its the Ultimum vale of the Hogens: But if Providence retard the
actions intended in July, until August, then they seem more ponderous and
weighty at that time, all parties being better prepared: And those Navies,
those Soldiers who are under the Dominion, or dwell in the Land of Mars, (as
the English do) shall overcome their Enemies, because there is much of choler,
anger and boldness in them, whereas in Saturnine people (such are the
Hollanders) there is much fear and cowardice, by reason of their want of heat.

Toward September men's minds begin to hearken after Peace, and many general
rumors dispersed and spoken of to that purpose, yet some of the male
configurations in August may manifest their sad influences in September, unto
the greater glory of England; but exceeding misfortune of our Enemies, whether
Dutch, Dane, or French, whose imperious King finds great obstructions in his
Civil affairs at home, and lesser satisfaction in his Military proceedings
abroad; so that we may truly say of him, he may expect little gain, nor
gainful returns in such things and actions from which he thought to have
reaped great gain, his Confederates will reap no benefit from his assistance,
and therefore there will follow Controversies and disgusts between them, viz.
there is much probability of a breach of the League betwixt him and the Dutch,
and others. In November the Monarch of Great Britain visited from parts beyond
the Seas by several Agents, for settlement of all differences and
controversies, so that if the Dutch be not ordained for a full destruction, a
peace in probability is near at hand; but if they shall still wilfully neglect
his Majesty's civility and clemency, let them note this Prediction, which will
operate and be in full force against them all 1667. viz. unexpectedly they
shall receive much damage from whence they least expected it; constantly
troubled with quarrellings and controversies amongst their Martial Commanders,
by whose malice much detriment happens unto them; a sudden wreck or subversion
of their Estates (which is most part in Ships;) with shame and scorn many will
be deposed from their Authority; they will in 1667 be so shaken with all manner
of misfortunes, they will not know what to do.

The Prophecy of ARISE EVANS in his Book called The Light of the Jews, written
10 years since. In which Book he positively foretold the King's Restoration,
and that it should be so miraculously as it was, viz. without Bloodshed. He
afterward speaking of a War that should arise between Holland and the King, he
pronounces these following words to declare the success of that War.
THE false, envious, perfidious, ungrateful, covetous Hollander, being proud,
reproacheth the King with foul language, because of his former afflictions, by
which God refined and fitted him for future glory, and takes all occasion and
advantage to do what mischief they can to the King and his Subjects; neither
will they forbear, but still go on in their malice against the King, that God
might utterly destroy them, and blott out their Names from being a STATE under
Heaven; for proud Holland shall be made the first Object of God's wrath for
fighting against King Charles, and despising him. Therefore blessed and happy
shall those Kings and People be, that shall take their Power and Authority from
King Charles, and live under his protection; for all his proud Enemies that
shall despise him, and refuse to submit unto him, shall be destroyed. Before
this time, when the Hollander begged a relief from England, and had it, they
then called themselves The poor distressed States; but now being rich and
proud, they disdain all Kings, and call themselves The High and Mighty States
of HOLLAND, and would have England to be theirs; but the English shall destroy
them.

The same in his Echo to the Voice from Heaven, recites a Prophecy of Mr.
Truswells, the Recorder of Lincoln, which is as follows:

The Lilly shall remain in a merry World, and he shall be moved against the
seed of the Lion, and he shall stand on one side amongst Thrones of his Kingdom
and Country; which Kingdom is the Land of the Moon, which is to be divided
throughout all the World.

And there came the Son of Man, bearing three wild Beasts in his Arms, with a
Company of People, he shall pass many Waters, and he shall come to the Land of
the Lion looking for help with the Beasts of his own Country.

And in that year there shall come an Eagle out of the East, and his Wings
spread with the Beams of the Son of Man.

And in that year shall be destroyed Castles upon Thames, and there shall be
great fear over all the World, and in part of the Land. There shall be great
Battles among many Kingdoms.

That day shall be the Bloody Field, and the Lilly shall lose his Crown, and
there shall be Crowned the Son of Man.

And in the fourth year, many Battles shall be for the Faith, and most of the
World shall be stoopen; but the Son of Man, with the Eagle, shall be preserved,
and there shall be a Universal Peace over all the World. Then shall the Son of
Man receive a miraculous Token, and there shall be great plenty of Fruits, and
then he shall go to the Land of the Cross.

I will not undertake to interpret the aforesaid Prophecy, only from my Author
take notice, That by the Lilly is meant France; and by the Son of Man bearing
three wild Beasts in his Arms, is meant the King of England; The rest will be
then understood of course.

Thus we have led you through the learned Judgments of all our famous and most
knowing Astrologers, who, as you heard, do all una voce fore tell Happiness and
Success to his Majestye in all his Undertakings; May they all prove unto him
the words of Truth and Certainty: and truly there is little reason to doubt,
since they have walked by the rule of that Art, which, although it lays no
claim to Infallability, yet has never in it self been detected of Falsehood.
For proof of which, I will quote you an Assertion out of Gaffarell's unheard of
Curiosities, ( c. 13. sect. 3.) and so conclude. His words are these:

All the Learned among the Ancients called the Heavens Sacred Books, among whom
the Learned Origin, interpreting after this manner, that is subtly and
queintly, that Passage in Genesis, Et er unt in signa, affirms, (as he is
reported by Eusebius) That the Stars were placed in this order in the
Heavens, for no other end but to show by their diverse Aspects, Conjunctions and
Figures, whatever is to happen while the World endures, as well in general as
particular; yet not so, as if They were the Cause of these Things, never any
such thing came into the Thought, much less into the Writings of this Learned
Man; For as the Prophesies that are written in Books, are not the cause those
Events which they foretell, but the sign: In like manner, says he, may the
Heavens very justly be called a Book, wherein God has written all that has
been is, and hereafter shall be. And for confirmation of this, he cites a
Passage out of a Book, the Title whereof is, Narratio Joseph, a Book in his
time highly esteemed by all men, wherein the Patriatch Jacob giving his
Blessing to all his Children, tells them, That he had read in the Tables of
Heaven all that ever was to befall them and their Posterity. Whence the same
Origin concludes, as well in his Tract on this Question, Utrum Stellae aliquid
agant, as in his Book de fato, cap. 6. that some Mysteries may surely be read
in the Heavens.

Let no Man therefore cavil at, or question the aforementioned Judgment; but
rather heartily pray, That they may be certainly fulfilled, to his Majesty's
Honor and Glory, and his Peoples Happiness and Satisfaction.

FINIS.

