A POETICAL ESSAY TOWARD AN EPITOME OF THE GOSPEL OF THE BLESSED JESUS.

Nec verbum verbo curabis reddere, fidus
Interpres: nec defilies imitator in arctum,
Unde pedem proferre pudor vetet, aut operis lex.
Hor. de Art Poet. device containing royal coat of arms C R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1678.

To the READER.
TO say nothing of this Essay, might perhaps argue me of pride, and putting a
slight upon the Reader; to say much, of vainglory, and setting too great a
value upon my Verse, or the Prose wherewith I would recommend it.

The concealing the Author's name, may bring his little Work into suspicion, as
if it were a Birth of which the Parent is ashamed; for otherwise it may be
imagined that my vanity would be uniform to its self, and would cause me to own
what it made me think worth the Printing.

But in things of this nature every Man is guided by his particular fancy, and
it is mine, that whoever gives his name to the Critics, does as good as send
them a challenge, and defy them to find fault with what he has done: for my
part, I have not leisure to contend for the propriety of every expression, or
the justness of the sense, which I have put upon holy writ; yet I may say, it is
what I thought I found there in other words; and this being penned only for my
private satisfaction, I took no pains to see if others were of the same mind
with me; nor can I charge my misprisions to the account of any Commentator.

But as I should be sorry to bring upon my self the guilt of misleading any one
that trusted to my sentiments; so it would be a great rejoicing to me, and I
should obtain my end in making this public, if, like a weak ray, it might but
lead to that Fountain of Light and saving Truths, from whence it issued, and
which cannot but guild the very Clouds that are drawn over it by my unskilful
Hand: an attempt to illustrate these sacred, many of them Eternal verities,
would be to hold a Candle to the Sun, or to enamel a Diamond: I pretend to no
more than, as an Index, to invite to the perusal of what is contained under
such excellent Heads, as cannot but occur in this abstract.

I have endeavored a continued Poem, and possibly the Reader may find a
connection of the whole by transitions not very obscure.

If the Twenty third Chapter proves to be a Satyr against some sort of Men, I
hope they that observe the Parallel will not be severe upon my version; if any
that look into it have made themselves parties, I cannot help their falling
into the way: I aimed at no body, I have received no provocation, neither would
I give any: I at first only used the Christian liberty of free thought; which I
had still kept to my self, if I had believed it could do any mischief in the
World, either in giving just scandal, or breaking the peace of that community,
for the maintaining which every one ought to contribute his Talent, and his
Prayers.

I wrote in charity with all Men, and at that time of the year, when in all
Ages, succeeding the Nativity of our Blessed Savior, the acts of Charity have
been most attended to, and cultivated with the greatest ceremony.

I shall add no more than what it may be is obvious, that I have taken St.
Matthew Chapter by Chapter, and gathered the most remarkable passages out of
the other Evangelists, as they seemed for time, coincident with, or prior to
any part of St. Matthew's Divine Record.

An ESSAY toward an EPITOME of the GOSPEL of the BLESSED JESUS.
FAther of Lights! assist me from above. James 1.17.

Whilst I recount the wonders of thy love,
That love, which lay in Night and Mystery,
'Till the Day Star brought comfort from on high, John.

(The tidings of Salvation drawing nigh)
That Phospher showed the yielding of the shade,
The Sun of Righteousness our clear day made. Mal. 4.2.

At sundry times, in diverse ways, thy Grace Heb. 1.1.

Before had visited fallen Mortal Race,
Thy Prophets, like thick Stars, adorned the night,
They now are drowned in the large source of light.
When the just fullness of the time was come, Ephesians. 1.10.

Our Sun rose not from Seas, but from the Virgins womb.
For us this Child was born, to us God 's Son is given Jsa. 9.6.

The greatest Boon to Earth, and Gift of Heaven:
Angels to see it clapped their Wings, and Sung, Luke 2.13

And the enlight'ned Air with Anthems rung;
Glory to God, peace and good will on Earth, V. 14.

Were the choice themes peculiar to this Birth;
The Shepherds, and the Wisemen saw his ray, Mat. 2.11. and Luke. 2.8.

Which led them where the Infant-glory lay;
To the Consecrated Stable of an Inn Luke 2.16.

This Pilgrim came, who traveled for our Sin.
All Prophets until John, did Christ declare, Mat. 11.13.

He, and devout old Simeon saw him here; Luke 2.25.

This Consolation Simeon had in view,
The revealed Promise he with joy found true,
He saw the Anointed e're Death closed his Eyes; V. 26.

Sings his Dimittis, and goes home and Dies: V. 29.

"To a great Age he happily arrived,
"Who thus the misery's of Age survived.
Anne this reward had for pure Widowhood, V. 37.

She her Redeemer early understood; V. 38.

"The Spirit Printed in her spotless Breast
"Those noti^s, whereby she made the test.
Now he begins to show himself Divine,
His opening Glory's in the Schools do shine; V. 46.

But by degrees he to the World is shown,
Nor is his function yet to his Mother known. V. 48, 49, 50.

To grace the Ministry of John he stays, Mat. 3.

And till his being Baptized keeps in his rays; V. 13.

But then the Heavens the shouts of Angels rend,
The Holy Ghost does visibly descend,
The Son of God does Echo through the Air,
Myriads of Spirits his great Name declare.
Satan makes the last effort of despair; Mat. 4.

His Kingdom, threatened the first day of's Reign, Genesis 3.15.

He now saw falling to decay amain,
He knew 'twas fruitless, yet must bite his Chain;
Therefore he does all his Temptations lay
The Captain of Salvation to betray, Heb. 2.1^. Mat. 4.2.

He watched his time, found him with Fasting faint,
"(Yet surely then even Man has most of Saint.)
First he attempts him with great policy,
And his reliance on his God does try, V. 6.

But he is silenced by a quick reply: V. 7.

The God of this World, does for his last blow, 2 Cor. 4.4.

Offer him all the Empires here below, Mat 4.9.

The God of Heaven, who their Foundations laid,
By these poor trifles could not be betrayed;
The Prince of fallen-lights retired with shame,
And 'bout their Master Minist'ring Spirits came; Heb. 1.14. Mat. 4.12.

To Galilee he goes in holy Flame:
Dev'ls and Diseases fly before his Word, V. 23.

And the most Rebel Powers confess the Lord:
Four Spiritual Vicegerents here he chose, V. 18.

His Laws and Heavenly mission to disclose.
Here the first transcript of those Laws he shows: Mat. 5.

He makes it plain they are for our good designed,
That Blessedness is to obedience joined, a V. 3, ad V. 12.

With a Meek, Righteous, Patient, Peaceful mind.
He cleared the Moral Law, or natural,
(As in him was fulfilled the typical.) V. 17.

The Pharisees had long usurped the Chair Mat. 23.2.

Their Glosses did the Statutes force impair
It Is reinforcement was our Savior's care.
To prevent Sin he took it at the head,
And checked those thoughts which all its sally's led.
Anger, and Lust with a committing Eye Mat. 5. a 22, ad 26, 28, and 29.

(Those Embrio's of Sin) he bids us fly.
Divorce he regulates, enacts this Law,
But for Adult'ry none from Wives withdraw. V. 32.

A prescript against false Swearing was in force, V. 33.

All kind of Oaths he banished, from discourse. a 34, ad 37.

Severe retaliation he withstood, a 38, ad 42.

For Evil he enjoined returns of good,
To love our Enemies, and wish them well, V. 44. V. 45. Sic Sen. de Benesiciis.
Et sceleratis Sol oritur.

To strive in goodness like our God to excel,
God, who communicates his Sun to all,
Whose welcome showers even on the unjust fall.
Alms free from pomp, Prayers from Hypocrisy, Mat. 6. a V. 1, ad 6.

He bids us give, and use, in privacy,
Least our reward, here, in applause should lie:
He shows us where, and how we ought to Pray, V. 6, and 7.

And does a perfect Form before us lay: a 9, ad 14.

Teaches to keep our Fast unto the Lord, V. 16.

And not by sullen Face Proclaim't abroad:
"Secrecy Love, Religion that requires,
"Who would in either happy be, retires,
"Each by himself, with the object of his love
"Sufficient Theater, or Church, may prove: Satis amplum alter alteri Theatrum
sumue.

"They who act to the World with Pomp and show,
"Those Secret Charms and Blessings rarely know;
"Yet though themselves cannot the pleasure find,
"They provoke others to be good, and kind.
We Are taught to slight the per'shing Goods below, V. 19.

And seek them where the Eternal Fountains flow. V. 20.

Christ proscribes Avarice, that Lust oth' Eye, V. 23.

From Christian confines forces it to fly,
Directs on God, not Mammon to rely; V. 24.

To trust his Providence, who Life did give, V. 25.

Nor will withold what is requisite to live:
To seek Heavens Kingdom, Righteousness, its way, V. 33.

Then these refreshments he will before us lay.
Our future ills we should not Quid enim necesse est mala accersere, and satu
cito patienda cum venerint, praesumere. Est sine dubio stultum quia quandoque
sis futurus miser, esso jam miserum. Sen. Ep. 24.
antedate; V 34.

But set our strength to bear the present weight.
Each day yields pain enough of its own store,
Surely we need not lay about for more:
But yet what e're our present pressures prove,
We may have power to bear them from above;
If we are sinking, God will them remove.
Want is the chiefest ill we feel, or fear;
But the most helpless Creatures are Gods care,
Witness those thoughtless Animals of the Air. V 26.

God spreads their Table on the fruitful Ground,
Where the untreasur'd Seeds lie scattered round,
He feeds, he decks them out with painted Wings,
And supplies Vegitables from hid Springs. V. 28.

He gives the Verdure to the Grassy Field, V. 30.

And the enamel to the Flowers does yield:
Their various Colors his free Pencil drew,
He keeps them fresh steeped in the Morning Dew.
He gives (though he don't satisfy desire)
What e're the natures of his Works require:
He who has made us knows our needs the best: V. 32.

Let Us trust in God, and he will do the rest.
We Are taught to avoid the cens'ring other Men, Mat. 7.1.

Least the same Measure be returned again, V. 2.

Nor can our greater faults escape their note,
While we bespatter them with open Throat. a 3, ad 5.

Where we advise, or give, he bids us weigh; V. 6.

That neither may be idly thrown away:
For what we want, with Faith in God to pray; V. 7.

For if a Mortal Father pity bears V. 9, 10, 11.

To's hungry Child, who asks for Bread with Tears,
Much more our Heavenly Father kindly hears.
If we ask daily Bread, seek Spiritual Grace, V. 7, and 8.

Or knock against the Door of Heaven for place,
He gives, he grants, he opens to our cries,
And nothing to our fervent Prayer denies.
"Much of this power of Prayer Nature conceived,
"But now it with assurance is believed;
"And that old Text, do as you would have done, V. 12.

"A confirmation from his Word has won.
"Of future State Nature was in the dark,
"Under the Law 'twas Veiled like the Ark: Exodus 40.3.

"Immortal Life our Savior brought to view, 2 Timothy 1.10.

"And its unbeaten Path did plainly show;
But yet he tells us, difficult's the way, V. 13.

False Prophets will attempt to make us stray, V. 15.

Him we must follow with much pain and care,
And of those Wolves in Sheep skins clad beware:
Works the Criterion are, whereby to know V. 16.

Whether they are real, or mere mask and show.
Not every one that is long, and loud in Prayer; V. 21.

But he who does Heaven's Will, in Heaven shall share;
Their great pretenses will appear but thin, V. 22.

Though Zealots they shall have the price of Sin. V. 23.

On yielding Sand they build a stately Pile, V. 26.

Where every Wind makes sport with all their toil:
The Righteous on a Rock Foundations lay, V. 24.

Their well-wrought Fabric never shall decay;
Firm against all assaults of Wind and Rains;
For Christ, their Rock, his Edifice maintains.
"Thus the great Oracle with clearness taught,
"And that hid knowledge unto Nations brought,
"Which Prophets strove to look into in vain, Luke 10.24.

"And Ages had expected long with pain: Colos. 1.26.

"These Truths with numerous beams of goodness joined,
"Enlighten the dark corners of the mind.
Thus having filled Men's minds, his second care
Is that their Bodies in his help should share,
And at a Wedding this does first appear. John 2.11.

"He did for mirth as well as want provide,
"While he by Miracle their Wine supplied.
"By double Sanction Marriage proves Divine,
"In the first Gift of Woman, now of Wine.
Palsy, and Leprosy, those mocks of Art, Mat. 8.6, and 3.

At the most powerful means, his Word, depart.
His touch removed the Fever from the Veins, V. 15.

He did but feel the Pulse to end the pains.
In two poor wretches Satan held his Throne,
Keeping them under by's black Legion; Mark 5.9.

Long had they revell'd in their harrast Land,
But quit their Conquest at his sole command.
An Herd of Swine are given them for their prey, Mat. 8 33.

"Thus doing hurt they go more pleased away.
Our Savior further still his pity shows,
And hears the Widow's cries, relieves her woes; Luke 7.12.

His Mother's only Son left her alone,
She mourned her loss, the joy of life was gone:
Life to her Son, the Son to her he gave,
Mocking the jaws of the expecting Grave.
Whilst he was hastening at the Ruler's Prayer, Mat. 9.18.

His Daughter's mouldring House of Clay to repair,
His Virtue to a believing Woman flows, Luke 8.46.

Whose Bloody Flux Art did in vain oppose; V. 43.

"Although amidst a pressing crowd he stands, V. 45.

"He feels her Faith more than an hundred Hands;
"How much soever that did from him drain,
"Enough to Cure the World did still remain.
They who had closed Jairus his Daughter's Eyes,
Laughed when he said, behold asleep she lies! Mat. 9.24.

But were confounded when they saw her rise;
"She rose to meet her King, and shall again,
"At his more pompous coming to his Reign.
"Those two Blind Men whose Eyes he did restore V. 27.

"The Light, Eclipsed by filme, had seen before;
"But now a newborn Sun more brightly shined;
"And yet perhaps to that they still were Blind.
His wonders the Dumb Spirit did express, V. 32.

And soon the silent Fishes do no less. Mat. 14.17. and Mat. 15.34.

"Things most insensate duller Man upbraid
"At his command even Stones would have obeyed, Mat. 4.3.

"And Bread of their reformed substance made.
Now he his Deputies does reinstate Mat. 10.

In Empire uncontrolled by Hell or Fate; Mat. 16.18.

Twelve were those Spirit'al Hero's, whom he chose, Mat. 10.1.

Dev'ls and diseases trembling powers to oppose;
With large Commission he does send them out,
To deal his common Grace to all about:
"Thus he his Kingdom carefully divides,
"For all by'mself, or Ministers provides:
He bids them offer terms to Israel first, V. 6.

Israel which for Heavens darling had been Nursed.
That they the Worthy should salute with Peace, V. 13.

From importuning the unworthy cease.
They should not trust unguarded innocence, V. 16.

But take to it Wisdom for its best defense,
Under the covert of omnipotence.
Serpentine Wisdom, Dove-like purity,
Without the Almighties shield will useless be.
He furnishes with wards against all blows,
Who every thrust, and different posture knows:
Yet does not always Miracles engage,
His Saints should flee when persecut'ions rage: V. 23.

Though God assist not in a noted way,
Yet he the Plot for their escape may lay.
But should the insulting Enemies prevail,
Their malice of the wished success will fail.
Death is the greatest mischief of their hate, V. 28.

Such death cannot punish, or annihilate,
But does to everlasting life translate:
God only can the Soul to pain confine;
Eternal freedom comes from their design.
In a good cause who would not choose to dye?
The ill of death in the circumstance does lie.
For God, or for one's Country to expire,
Is the ambition of a noble Fire.
His Soul has little of the orig'nal heat,
Who'd in a just, though dangerous cause, retreat.
Who danger seeks too much, his courage boasts,
It Is but a tempting of the Lord of Hoasts:
He to such straglers promised no supply,
They Are but the Martyrs of their vanity.
Peace, the first blessing of a prosperous Reign, V. 34.

In an unsettled Kingdom's sought in vain:
Till Christ our Monarch, is owned absolute,
Each for his privilege will hold dispute;
Parents and Children diverse factions head, V. 35.

With zeal the Armies for the cause are led.
From Rights, and Life, see the malignants hurld,
TO attend their Sovereign in the other World;
Happy the suff'rers on the Loyal side,
For them their Royal Captain fought, and died;
Through him we more then Conquer, though oppressed,
And take the Garland in Eternal Rest;
There our imperfect Services, sincere,
Immense Reward shall through his merits bear. V. 42.

To John, the Messenger of Peace from Heaven, Mat. 11.10.

An earnest of his pay by Christ is given.
"To firm assurance many' a Man pretends,
"The doubt of his our Savior's plaudit ends.
"The World for such a Vision who'd not give?
"And till the expected hour in Prison live? V. 2.

"The Soul would be enlarged to Heaven, its home,
"By inchoation of the bliss to come:
"To such a ground of hope none may pretend;
"Yet lesser lights shall reach that glorious end:
For Jesus proffers to unloose those Chains,
Which tie us unto Sin, that source of pains. Lerna malorum.

The laboring with their Sins he does invite,
Because his Yoke is easy, burden light.
He shows that God does Humane wants regard, Mat. 12. ad V. 8.

And that necessity's from nothing barred,
Which the Jews cavill'd when they saw, and heard.
The withered Hand restored gave them a blow, V. 10, and 13.

Yet whence it came the faithless would not know;
But fancy Satan would himself or'ethrow. V. 24.

He shows that Sins repented pardon find,
But what are to Blaspheme the Holy Ghost designed: V. 31.

But yet he cautions us with tender care,
That we of every idle word beware, V. 36.

Words which lose Heaven, and often here ensnare; V. 37.

They issue from the Heart, the Fountain head, V. 34.

As is the Spring, such streams about are spread;
Except Repentance all does purify,
For them at Judgment large accounts will lie. V. 36.

He marks the danger of relapse in Sin, V. 44.

Sickness, and Fiends return much worse again. V. 45.

TO encourage Righteousness, he does declare,
Who do his Fathers Will his Brethren are, V. 5^.

And shall paternal Blessings with him share.
God does his Sacred Seed to all divide, Mat. 13. a 3, ad 9.

And would have the whole World in Christ allied;
The product is according to the Ground,
He casts his Seed to all the Furrows round,
But strength in few to ripen it is found.
Satan, their natural hardness, or acquired,
Will disappoint the Harvest long desired;
Yet still God's ready with his proffered Grace,
Till it to obstinacy yields the place;
Judicial hardness then succeeds to theirs,
And they are wholly left the Devils shares:
They then are blinded 'cause they would not see, V. 13, and 14.

The greatest light to them will darkness be.
But oh! how Blessed are those opened Eyes, V. 16.

That see this Truth, and Worship where it lies!
From small beginnings Truth does strangely thrive, V. 32.

Where they to propagate it is Seed do strive,
In the prepared Soil does quickly rise,
Adorns the Earth, and reaches to the Skies;
It Is way like Leaven, through the whole it makes, V. 33.

Which thence a wholesome Savor freely takes,
The Son of Man imparts this Seed, this Leav'n, V. 37.

By which we are styled Sons of God, Upon Earth they go by other and worse
Names, according to that in Homer, (...).
in Heaven:
Whilst Angels drive the rest to deep despair, V. 41.

At the last day, they will hug their Wards, their care,
Proud of their charge will take them through the Air;
Wing them through all the Story's of the Sky,
Until they reach the Throne of the Deity;
In that Celestial Kingdom they shall rest,
For ever singing, and for ever blessed.
Who would not give the Indies for this Field, V. 44.

Which unknown Treasures, will, for ever, yield?
What Merchant would not for this Jewel Trade? V. 45.

If we will strike, Christ has our bargain made;
They who neglect lose all they had before,
And never shall obtain the proffer more.
The pain of loss, and twinging pain of sense V. 50.

Eternally to last, shall then commence.
Christ came to fish for Men, and all would take, V. 47.

They who prove bad fall to the Infernal Lake,
That Lake which burns with a sulphurous Fire,
Where all degrees of Punishment conspire.
These awful Truths, and Works, spoke more than Man, Mat. 14.1.

Their spreading Fame through all the Confines ran:
The Tetrarch Herod trembled when he heard,
And, conscious of his fault, John's Ghost he feared. V. 2.

"Vain was his fear, but vainer his surmise,
"To think that John could with such Glory rise;
"Those borrowed beams shot from the Neighboring Sun,
"To him the name of Lucid body won.
" John was the Moon in the Starry Hemisphear, Greatest amongst the Prophets.

"But at the greater light must disappear;
"To Rival him, or Herod, was too low;
Christ does in private to the Desert go; V. 13.

(Yet still the Multitude his steps pursue,
"He Is too conspicuous to retire from view)
With double food does there five thousand feed, Luke 9.14.

"And multiplies his blessings to their need;
Two Fishes, and five Loaves, do even exceed. Mat. 14.17.

To take an earthly Crown he is strongly pressed, John 6.15.

But by retirement shuns their mean request;
There he converses with his God alone, Mat. 14.23.

In contemplation go's to his Native Throne;
Thence his Disciples need does call him down. V. 24.

They in a Tempest had their Anchor lost,
Quitting their hold on him as they were tossed:
Although they saw him on the Waters come, V. 25.

Their fear made him a Ghost to threat their Doom; V. 26.

His charming voice allays their stormy fears. V. 27.

Next on the Winds, and Seas, its Power appears.
From having calmed the Sea, he goes to Men,
And there his infl'uence spreads at large again.
His every touch Diseases force controuls, V. 36.

His Cloths Cure Bodies, as his Words do Souls. The Cloths of his thoughts.

The Pharisees, and captious Scribes he taught, Mat. 15.1.

That God regards the Heart, and inward thought, V. 19.

Whilst that is pure no action can be naught.
Our rule we should not from Tradition seek;
But hear what God, not Rabbi Doctors speak.
At first a Woman Begging he denied, V. 22.

But grants when he her Faith had fully tried. V. 28.

Now with few Fishes, and seven Loaves of Bread, V. 34.

Mirac'lously four thousand Men are fed. V. 38.

The Jewish Doctors of their two chief sects, Mat. 16.1.

With admirable knowledge he detects.
That latent Leaven, which ferments their Mass, V. 6.

Can by no means his great discernment pass;
He sees the Poison lie within the Glass.
He does his Character more full express,
And says, the Church shall him it is Rock confess; V. 18.

That with his Ministers he will trust its Keys, V. 19.

To let in, or exclude whom e're they please:
He gave this comfort to lead in the News,
That they should soon their sacred Master lose:
But Peter, like his Successors, is bold, V. 22.

And contradicts what Truth it self had told;
But the Messiah checked his worldly thought; V. 23.

Thence a discourse of the price of Souls he brought; V. 26.

He shows that they may well the Cross endure,
To whom he would the Life to come ensure:
Their Souls above this lower World should mount;
Since for their love to it they must account,
When he the glory's of his Throne displays, V. 27.

Circled with Angels, clad in's Father's rays.
Of his Disciples only three he chose, Mat. 17.1.

To whom his Heavenly Aspect he would disclose.
"The skirts of Glory Moses did explore, Exodus 33.23.

"It Is shining Face was never seen before.
"Of old by goodnesss God himself expressed, V. 19.

"With it is full prospect Man but now was blessed.
"Moses left life before he reached this Land;
He, and Elias, now do in it stand: Mat. 17.3.

Transported Peter fain would settle here, V. 4.

And erect Tabernacles in the Air;
While he asks leave Heaven does enclose him round, V. 5.

The Clouds divide, and make way for this sound,
This is my dutiful, beloved Son,
I will that unto him ye for Instruction run.
This sound amazing to a Mortal Ear, V. 6.

The rapt Disciples could not stand to hear,
But kiss the Ground, for reverence, and fear.
Again to help the wretched he descends,
And to his proper place the Devil sends. V. 13.

The want of Faith had rendered vain his Grace; V. 20.

So against the Servants Satan kept the place. V. 16.

To Faith, and to it is Author, all things yield,
Mountains remove, and Spirits quit the Field;
But yet the Lord of all things Tribute pays, V. 24.

And does by Miracle the Money raise:
Lo! in the Mouth of a Seafish it is brought, V. 27.

The Sea to own subjection thus is taught.
Earth's Powers obeyed. He shows what Heaven does please, Mat. 18.

That the Humble minded thither rise with ease; V. 4.

That we like Children should be innocent, V. 5.

To aid those darlings of the Almighty bent;
Since it is of great concernment so to do,
Their Guardian Angels standing in God's view; V. 10.

Where they the several Grievances disclose,
And each the Man that hurt their Infant shows.
He bids us Hand, or Foot, or Eye remove, V. 8, and 9.

That instrumental to offenses prove,
For there will be no want of them above.
He does profess he came to save, to find,
Those wretched straglers, that lost Flock, Mankind;
That in his Arms he hugs the bleating Stray,
More fond of one returned, than all the rest that stay. V. 13.

Through him his Father's ready all to save;
Amongst our selves we should like Mercy have:
Our Brother's faults should pardon, and conceal, V. 15.

If he goes on to two or three reveal, V. 16.

Who with grave admonitions should begin:
The Power Ecclesiastic next comes in. V. 17.

The Church, so long at least, the Keys retains, 1 Cor. 5.5.

As Satan over the excluded Members Reigns.
All kind of Blessings are to the Church conveyed,
Whilst Men Petitions in Christ's Name are made;
Where two or three shall join in Common-Pray'r, V. 20.

He Will grace the Service with his Presence there.
How great soe're's our Debt, if we submit
Without full payment we shall stand acquit; V. 27.

Then others to forgive is highly fit: V. 33.

If we on them, God will exact on us, V. 35.

To the unmerciful he is rigorous.
The Doctors jealous of this true new light, Mat. 19.

Forcing it self upon their Scene, the Night,
That Night, where Laws for retribution lay,
With Clouds of Cavils strive to obscure the day;
To them his Law of Marriage he maintains, V. 9.

That nothing but Adultry breaks it is Chains; V. 10. All Men cannot receive
this saying, save they to whom it is given.

But intimates, if God give continence,
A single Life is best, and freest from offense.
"He Is happy, who his thoughts on Heaven does place,
"Strong Nature being curbed by stronger Grace, V. 12. There be Eunuchs which
have made themselves Eunuchs for the Kingdom of Heavens sake: He that is able
to receive it let him receive it.

"That manifests it is only Divine Love,
"Makes him insensible to others prove:
"But Men will still be Men though they believe;
"This immaterial Doctrine few receive:
"Nor is it expected of them, for if 'twere,
"They Would need those harsh initiations bear,
"Which superstitious Heathenism required,
"To purge the Soul from all it here acquired:
"And bring it to the state, supposed, it had
"E're 'twas with an infecting Body clad;
"That Body which must now be satisfied,
"As well as the thin substance to it tied:
"Pleasure's the gluten which does both cement,
"That perished, they will part in discontent.
Here Grace on Children our Archbishop sheds,
His Hands in Confirmation bless their Heads, V. 15.

To all that come he bright instruction spreads.
A Rich young Man in heat to Heaven would go, V. 20.

And the possessions 'bove the Stars would know;
But would not part with his acquists below:
He loved his God, and Neighbor, Mammon too:
Our Savior thence takes notice of the snares, V. 23.

Which lie in Riches, and in worldly Cares:
The God of comforts large account will make
Of whatsoever we part with for Christ's sake;
His twelve Apostles on twelve Thrones he will place, V. 28.

And give Eternal Life to the self-denying race.
God no respect will to Man's merit bear, Mat. 20. ad

Who e're will Work shall equal payment share;
Although we come in the closing of the day.
When e're we answer to the call, he will pay. V. 10.

Many come in at first, but fail at last, V. 16.

For ever happy he whose Tryal's past!
The merit of Christ's Death being thus declared,
For the Description of it they are prepared. V. 18, and 19.

"The name of Death is not so direful known,
"As when its circumstance and manner's shown;
But now they are strong enough, to bear that, grown.
It thus being plain his Kingdom's not below,
For an high place above he is pressed for two; V. 21.

But he declares Ambition's not the way.
Their Master, here, himself did lowest lay. V. 28.

Illuminating thus the dark'ned mind,
He next with groapt-for Sight salutes the Blind. V. 30.

He does his right in worldly Goods to share Mat. 21.

But once (and for a Prophecy) declare; V. 4.

For that, the Ass, and Colt he did command V. 2.

(The Word of the Lord no Owner could withstand.) V. 3.

Then on the Beast, so Sanctified, did ride, V. 7.

While the admiring crowd Hosanna cried. V. 9.

Come to Jerusalem he takes no Crown,
But pulls their Idols from the Temple down. V. 12.

Money usurped the Worship due to God, V. 13.

Under his Feet their bafled hopes he trod.
Sinners he to him took, but to reform,
He thrusts them from the Temple in a Storm.
He that by's presence, and his Works does cleanse,
And drives Diseases and sick minds from thence; V. 14.

Approves himself a Prophet, and a Prince.
Recounts the blessings of his happy Reign,
That Prayers through him are never put up in vain; V. 22.

His Power is questioned by Phanatick Jews, V. 23.

Which he at large with their rejection shows, a 33, ad 42.

Who the last method of God's Grace refuse.
God has invited many to his Feast; Mat. 22.

But it is rare to find a worthy Guest; Luke 14.5.

Some for their Master Mammon cannot come, Mat. 22.5.

Some for expecting Mistresses at home: Luke 14.20.

His Feast these undervalue, more despise,
And to their scorn his Servants sacrifice. V. 6.

One will pretend to be God's chosen one; V. 11.

But by his filthy rags of Sin is known,
And into utter darkness justly thrown. V. 13.

Our Lord does all by means sufficient call,
Themselves do render't ineffectual.
The Pharisees who found themselves reproved
(Correctors of great faults are seldom loved)
Before his life, his words now, sought to ensnare, Mat. 21.48. They sought to
lay hands on him.

To take him from his guard they reverence bear, V. 16.

He, like an Oracle of doubtful sense,
Sends them away in wonder, and suspense: V. 22.

The Sadduces, more drowned in body, thought V. 23.

They had a Question far more subtle brought;
He answered clearly, yet above their Spheres,
For he brought Spir'ts and Angels to their Ears: Acts 23.8.

But now the Pharisees rally again, Mat. 22.34.

They thought the Lawyer might their Plea maintain, V. 35.

His single Quere soon is satisfied, a 36, ad 41.

He dare not move again to have it tried,
Does Christ's abridgment of the Law approve,
That it is all contracted into love,
Only to know it is true extent does move; Luke 10.29.

Christ shows it reaches to the highest Heaven,
And over the Earth where any object's given;
He is our Neighbor who does want our aid, Luke 10.37.

Vicinity is by distresses made:
To all that need, like God, we should be nigh:
None durst ask more, as none could now reply. Mat. 22.46.

Our Savior next, as for late times describes Mat. 23.

Lay Elders, Pharisees, the Teachers, Scribes, V. 2. V. 7.

Affecting Rabbi, as ours, name of Saint;
More then the Whore they lash, bedaub'd with Paint: Of Babylon. V. 27. V. 6.

The precious Teacher must have the upper place,
Whence he deals blessings to his Babes of Grace.
His zealous Prayer does sanctify the Meats, V. 14.

More the Devotion with which he eats:
He swallows Widows, House, and Soul and all,
Whilst the poor silly Flock answer his call;
But these, alas! much greater Bigots grow, V. 15.

(For the most ignorant are always so.)
But sure they could not wheedle many in,
If Cobweb-niceties they did not spin, a 16, ad 23.

Whereby with a distinction Men may Sin.
Except their Tribe, they Heaven deny to all, V. 13.

But unto them it is unconditional:
Yet about room they need not be severe;
For they are never likely to come there,
Whilst they the utmost of Religion place
In the preciseness of the Garb, and Face;
In little rigors which God never required,
And the Traditions of a Man admired,
But pass-by justice, mercy, charity, V. 23.

Let them as lower dispensations lie;
Yet their Redeemer taught them better things,
And for this scattered Fowl extends his Wings. V. 37.

Sin being taxt. he fore-tells punishment, Mat. 24.

Revealing angry Heavens most dire intent:
The desolation of the stubborn Jews,
A faint resemblance of the World's, he shows;
That great Catastrophe he saw most clear;
Yet would not fix the time, but point to it near: V. 33.

He marks the Symptoms of the World's decay,
What tumults to its fever lead the way:
False Prophets, and false Christ's shall fill the Stage, V. 24.

Ills in themselves, as they the last presage:
Even the Elect had need be on their Guard,
Against them and the great foll'wing day prepared;
The careless they will to their subjection bring,
Apeing with wonders the Prophetic King;
He will the Earth from these foul Monsters clear;
But in a day unlooked for will appear: V. 42, and 50.

Angelick Trumpeters shall go before, V. 31.

Whilst through the Clouds our Sovereign Judge is bore,
To circuit all the whole Creation over;
Who would not let him here possess his Throne,
Their base Rebellion shall for ever moan:
They for a while may Lord it over the Elect; V. 49.

Christ soon will cast them down, his own Erect.
They may oppress, and revel with their spoil;
But sure-avenging Heaven does mock the while,
Heaven, that at their calamity will smile:
But they who true to their Great Master proved, V. 46.

Shall be to advancement in the Skies removed,
Their prudence, justice, temperance, being approved.
Such Spiritual promotion all would reach, Mat. 25.

That many fail this Preaching King does teach;
Not through the want of the blessed Bridegroom's call,
Though the Oil were not, that was general: V. 8.

Who have not the conditions of their own,
Trust vainly supererrogation: V. 8.

God gave to all Talents enough to improve, V. 15.

That others thrive does but our sloth reprove:
He will exact a just and full account,
Whilst it lies still the Interest high will mount. V. 27.

Those happy Servants that put out to Trade,
Returns inestimable will have made, a 35, ad 41.

Especially for what with' Poor is laid;
Christ takes upon himself what they contract,
They as receivers under him do act;
Who those his Ministers misuse or slight,
He at the Righteous Judgment will requite:
Good, and ill Offices with him are weighed,
And to the full large compensation made.
The Teachers, and the Elders of the Jews, Mat. 26.3.

Whose miserable lot he plainly shows,
Vexed by that Mouth, which proclaimed future Fire,
To put to Death the Lord of Life conspire. V. 4.

At Simon's House as he at Table sat, V. 6.

She her own memory did consecrate,
Who on his precious Head the Oil did pour; V. 7.

That unction took against the supreme hour.
Our Savior knowing that his end was nigh,
His House in order sets before he dye,
Blessed Tokens of his love he leaves behind,
Symbols to represent himself designed: V. 26, 27, 28.

"O Lord! for evermore give me this Bread, John 6.34.

"That Wine, that precious Blood for Sinners shed.
"Now the last Scene of wickedness is near,
"The Clouds forerunners of the Storm appear;
"The Serpent spreads his Venom in a kiss, V. 49.

"(To ills there always a fair preface is)
"Who Troops of Angels had at his command,
"Would not usurping Earthly powers withstand;
"His Kingdom, like the Path he shows, is peace,
"'It Was told, War and its Emblems, Swords, should cease, Isa. 2.4.

"He here in part made good that Prophet's word,
"Whilst in his service he condemns the Sword. V. 52.

Himself he does to his Rebels Prisoner make; V. 57.

His Servants then their captive Lord forsake; V. 56.

Yet Peter always forward, followed near, V. 58.

But soon discovered the worst kind of fear;
"(So hot-heads always prove when danger's nigh,
"Only the moderate promise constancy:)
His Lord he had opposed, but now denied, Mat. 16.22.

This out of weakness, the other out of pride,
Moved with the sense of Guilt he went and cried. Mat. 26.75.

But still the hardened Jews their Work pursue, Mat. 27.1.

Put on those Chains they must for ever rue, V. 2.

And unto Pilate brought their Prisoner bound;
But Pilate soon their cankered envy found: V. 18.

Besides, an Angel on his Wife impressed V. 19.

Those characters of Christ, which filled her breast,
Till she declared them she could have no rest.
"Yet see the Power of importunity!
"His Judgment, and his Wife he does deny;
"'Cause for pretended Justice loudly urged,
He yields, and by no Water can be purged. V. 24.

He loads with stripes him who did bear our Sins; V. 26.

"The condemnation of the Jews begins:
"Hence is their Epoch of mournful times;
They cloth him with the color of their crimes: V. 28. A Scarlet Robe.

A Crown of Thorns they planted on his Head; V. 29.

In his Right Hand for Scepter placed a Reed;
To this mocked King they in derision bow,
Their freedom by unrobing him avow, V. 31.

Treat him with blows and supercilious brow.
They further yet their poisoned malice own,
Nothing but Crucifiction could atone,
That Prophecy, and that their rage required,
And they obtained the issue they desired: V. 35.

With two known Thieves he that secured Mankind, V. 38.

TO improve the malice by the scandals, joined.
"Happy that chosen Thief whom God did make,
"To show how soon he will Man to Mercy take!
Christ with him carried the late penitent,
To Paradise immediately he went. Luke 23.43.

If Men to Heaven their former habits This life is the time of our preparation
for our future state, such a temper and disposition of mind as a Man carries
with him out of this life, he shall retain in the next. It Is true indeed,
Heaven perfects those holy and virtuous dispositions which are begun here; but
the other World alters no Man as to his main State. Tillotsons Sermons, page
33. Edit. 2.
bear,
Perhaps it may seem strange what he does there;
But the frame of his mind was altered here.
Who Will say that so late penitence as this,
Can now be true, or have reward with his?
Yet that becomes not us to look into,
Let us but keep what is revealed in view:
See how Christ's goodness triumphed over his foes,
Even to his Murderers he blessings throws: Luke 23.34.

He, who never asked in vain free pardon brought
For them could think they did but what they ought.
Some thought they did God service by his end,
Who did not to his Miracles attend;
Their ignorance might with care have conquered been:
They stood in need of Pardon for that Sin.
"And thus that Holy Lamb both lived and died,
"Equal to God without assuming pride, Philip. 2.6.

"And yet to Man in flesh and pain allied.
Affright'ned Nature trembling shook the Earth, V. 51.

To see him dye who gave to all things Birth;
The Rocks divide, while Men their Hearts did close,
The Temple Rent, and sleeping Saints arose: V. 52.

"And well they might, his death did Hell control,
"And to the Grave infused a quickening Soul.
Good Joseph his own name kept from decay, V. 57.

While he embalmed the God-head's Corpse of Clay,
And did in's Tomb that sacred relick lay. V. 60.

Christ, who prepares our Mansions in the Skies, Mat. 28.

Had done the same for what entombed here lies:
Now it he reassumes to show to Men; V. 9.

His Church being fixed, with it returns again:
Thither to intercede for Man he went,
Whence Grace through him is from the Father sent:
He promised, and it is sure he never ly'd,
He will for ever with his Church abide; V. 20.

"Yet to it here his Sp'rit's by measure given,
"Whilst it remains a Candidate for Heaven,
"That place, which he arose to assure to his,
"Consummates Grace in an unmeasured bliss:
"May I, the meanest Member that attain,
"And, Lord! subject me here to thy most equal Reign!
SIT SOLI DEO GLORIA.
FINIS.

