A COLLECTION OF SUNDRY PETITIONS Presented to the KINGS Most excellent
Majesty. AS ALSO To the two most Honorable Houses, now assembled in
PARLIAMENT. AND OTHERS, Already signed, by most of the Gentry, Ministers, and
Freeholders of several Counties, in behalf of Episcopacie, Liturgy, and
supportation of Church-Revenues, and suppression of Schismatics. Collected by
a faithful Lover of the Church, for the comfort of the dejected Clergy, and
all moderatly affected Protestants. Published by his Majesty's special Command.

Ezekiel. 34.18, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. Seems it a small thing unto you to have
eaten up the good pasture, but you must tread down with your feet the residue
also. Therefore thus says the Lord God, Because ye have thrust with side and
with shoulder, and pusht all the diseased with your horns, till you have
scattered them abroad; therefore will I save my flock, and they shall be no
more a prey; and I will judge between Cattle and Cattle. And I will set up
one Shepherd over them, and he shall feed them, even my servant David; he
shall feed them, and he shall be their Shepherd. J the Lord will be their God,
and my servant David a Prince among them. J the Lord have spoken it.

Printed for William Sheares, 1642.



The Collector to the Reader.
READER,
LET me put thee in mind (as these times do me) of a special Law in (that
singular Pattern of a well composed State) Sparta. So sensible were they of
the ill effects of Innovations in Government, that who ever proposed a new Law,
presented himself with a Halter about his neck, his Head paid the trespass of
a new invented Prejudice. But oh; Quantum mutantur Tempora, quantum nos, So
rare a gift have the illuminated fancies of this all-knowing age, That old
women without Spectacles can discover Popish plots, young men and prentizes
assume to regulate the Rebellion in Jreland, Seamen and Mariners Reform the
House of Peers, Poor men, Porters, and Laborers spy out a malignant party,
and discipline them; The country clouted-shoe renew the decayed trade of the
City. The Cobbler patch up a Religion, and all these petition for a
translation, both of Church and State, with so little fear of the Halter, that
they would think themselves neglected, if they had not thanks for their care
of the Re-publicke; only he that desires the ratification of an old Law, or of
a long settled Ecclesiastic Government, looks as if the Halter were his share;
And though there be thirty thousand hands subscribed to it; It Is ods, not one
of all those dares prefer a Petition to that purpose: Oh! Quis pudor quod non
praestet fides quod praestitit infidelitas. Oh! what a shame is it that an
ignorant Seperatist shall covertly draw Subscribers out of blind zeal to loose
papers, and those to be annexed to some Embryon yet unhatcht, and delivered in
the name of a County, with confidence, when a Knight of a shire shall perhaps
smother the true child, and dares not own it. That a few Innovators shall be
able to summon to Black Heath, South-warke, and Saint-george his fields,
thousands of credulous people, with implicit faiths, to go along with
Petitions shall be showed them when they come there, for the alteration of
Laws, and Government: and the Resolutions of an assizes or Sessions of
Justices, published in all Parishes, signed by all the Freeholders of a County
for the supportation of Laws and Government, shall not produce one Patriot to
present the unanimous desires of a County: yet it falls out often* so when
single hearted men are encountered by a faction, each man thinks he stands
alone unassured of a second; when ten of the other confederated make more noise
then 10000. silent men. Episcopacy and Lyturgie are both legally planted at
this time both violently assaulted: The question is, whether the battery, or
the defense be the stronger: the one side charges furiously; the other suffers
silently, patiently, and a reserved strength often masters a violent: But each
orthodox son of the Church thinks himself in Eliahs case, that he alone is
left of all the Prophets, and alas, what can he do? And perhaps thou my
Reader art one of those, Courage man; the same God that taught him to know, he
had reserved seven thousand, that had never bowed their knees to Baall, when he
opens thy eyes, can show thee not seven, but seventy times seven thousand true
Protestants, that will lend their hands and hearts to uphold that Apostolic
order, this blessed form of divine service. The business is, it is a hard time,
every man's afraid to break his shins by being foremost: But the Ice is broke
already. This Collection of these many sleeping Petitions will show every County
that the way is open: And since noise and number are taken into consideration,
the forwardness of the Assaylants will, I believe, put shame upon the
Defendants to be so far behind. The Judges being honorable, and impartially
receiving the arguments on both sides, I presume none will discover a distrust
of a fair acceptance, or betray a Trust (out of a personal respect) by
detayning such Petitions, as the Counties have committed into their hands. If
all such as are already signed see the light, I am sure this volume will be a
large one, and the Number, and quality of the Defendants, as much over-sway the
Opponents; as their arguments drawn from the Laws of God and man, will
outweigh the Motives of those, who only will, because they will. As if it were
cause enough to overthrow established Laws, that they have desired it, though
they show no reason for it: But if all other Counties, all true Protestants
with like liberty express their affections; the distractions of the Church
will be quickly settled; To that good work I have lent my hand, by lending thee
and the world this light. Farewell.

A PETITION DELIVERED In to the Lords SPIRITUAL and TEMPORAL. By Sir THOMAS
ASTON Baronet, from the County Palatine of Chester, concerning EPISCOPACY.
To the High and Honorable Court of PARLIAMENT. The Nobility, Knights, Gentry,
Ministers, Freeholders, and Inhabitants of the County Palatine of Chester,
whose Names are subscribed in the several Schedules hereunto annexed. Humbly
show;
THat whereas diverse Petitions have lately been carried about this County,
against the present form of Church-governement, (and the hands of many persons
of ordinary quality solicited to the same, with pretense to be presented to
this Honorable Assembly) which we conceiving not so much to aim at
Reformation, as absolute Innovation of Government, and such as must give a
great advantage to the Adversaries of our Religion, we held it our duty to
disavow them all.

And humbly pray, that we incur no miscensure, if any such clamours have
(without our privity) assumed the name of the County.

We, as others, are sensible of the common grievances of the Kingdom and have
just cause to rejoice at, and acknowledge with thankfulness, the pious care
which is already taken for the suppressing of the growth of Popery, the better
supply of able Ministers, and the removing of all Innovation; and we doubt
not, but in your great Wisdoms you will regulate the rigor of
Ecclesiastical Courts, to suit with the temper of our Laws, and the nature of
Freemen.

Yet when we consider, that Bishops were instituted in the time of the
Apostles; That they were the great lights of the Church in all the first
general Counsels; That so many of them sowed the seeds of Religion in their
bloods, and rescued Christianity from utter extirpation in the Primitive
Heathen persecutions; That to them we owe the redemption of the purity of the
Gospel we now profess from Romish corruption; That many of them for the
propagation of the truth, became such glorious Martyrs; That diverse of them
(lately and) yet living with us, have been so great assertours of our Religion
against its common enemy of Rome; And that their Government has been so long
approved, so often established by the Common and Statute-lawes of this Kingdom;
And as yet nothing in their Doctrine (generally taught) dissonant from the Word
of God, or the Articles ratified by Law. In this case to call their Government,
a perpetual Vassalage, an intolerable Bondage; And (prima facie and inaudita
altera part) to pray the present removal of them, or (as in some of their
Petitions) to seek the utter dissolution and ruin of their offices (as
Antichristian) we cannot conceive to relish o^ justice or charity, nor can we
join with them.

But on the contrary, when we consider the tenor of such writings, as in the
name of Petitions, are spread amongst the Common People; the tenants preached
publicly in Pulpits, and the contents of many printed Pamphlets, swarming
amongst us; all of them dangerously exciting a disobedience to the established
form of Government, and their several intimations of the desire of the power
of the Keys, and that their Congregations may execute Ecclesiastical censures
within themselves, we cannot but express our just fears that their desire is
to introduce an absolute Innovation of Presbyterall Government, whereby we who
are now governed by the Canon and Civil Laws, dispensed by twenty-six
Ordinaries (easily responsall to Parliaments for any deviation from the rule of
Law) conceive we should become exposed to the mere Arbitrary Government of a
numerous Presbitery, who together with their ruling Elders, will arise to near
forty thousand Church Governors, and with their adherents, must needs bear so
great a sway in the Commonwealth, that if future inconvenience shall be found
in that Government, we humbly offer to consideration, how these shall be
reducible by Parliaments, how consistent with a Monarchy, and how dangerously
conducible to an Anarchy, which we have just cause to pray against, as fearing
the consequences would prove the utter loss of Learning and Laws, which must
necessarily produce an extermination of Nobility, Gentry, and Order, if not of
Religion.

With what vehemence of Spirit, these things are prosecuted, and how plausibly
such popular infusions spread as incline to a parity, we held it our duty to
represent to this Honorable assembly; And humbly pray. That some such present
course be taken, as in your Wisdoms shall be thought fit, to suppress the
future dispersing of such dangerous discontents amongst the Common People. We
having great cause to fear, that of all the distempers that at present
threaten the welfare of this State, there is none more worthy the mature and
grave consideration of this Honorable assembly, then to stop the Torrent of
such Spirits before they swell beyond the bounds of Government: Then we doubt
not but his Majesty persevering in his gracious inclination to hear the
complaints, and relieve the grievances of his Subjects in frequent Parliaments,
it will so unite the Head and the Body, so indissolubly cement the affections
of his people to our Royal Sovereign, that without any other change of
Government, He can never want revenue, nor we justice.

We have presumed to annex a Copy of a Petition (or Libell) dispersed, and
certain positions preached in this County, which we conceive, imply matter of
dangerous consequence to the peace both of Church and State. All which we
humbly submit to your great Judgments, praying they may be read. And shall
ever pray.

Subscribed to this Petition. Four Noblemen. Knight Baronets, Knights and
Esquires fourscore and odd. Divines, threescore and ten. Gentlemen, three
hundred and odd. Freeholders, and other Inhabitants, above six thousand.
All of the same County.

To the High and Honorable Court of PARLIAMENT: The humble Petition of the
University of OXFORD.
Shows,
THat whereas the University has been informed of several Petitions
concerning the present Government of this Church, and maintenance of the
Clergy, which have of late been exhibited to this Honorable Assembly; We
could not but think our selves bound in duty to God, and this whole Nation,
charity to our selves and Successors, who have, and are like to have more then
ordinary interest in any resolution that shall be taken concerning
Church-affaires, in all humility, to desire the continuance of that form of
Government, which is now established here, and has been preserved in some of
the Eastern and Westnerne Churches, in a continued Succession of Bishops,
down from the very Apostles to this present time; the like whereof cannot be
affirmed of any other form of Government in any Church. Upon which
consideration, and such other motives as have been already represented to this
Honorable Parliament from other Persons and places (with whom We concur) in
behalf of Episcopacy. We earnestly desire, that you would protect that
ancient and Apostolical Order from ruin or diminution.

And become farther Suitors for the continuance of those pious Foundations of
Cathedral Churches, with their Lands and Revenues,

As dedicate to the Service and Honor of God, soon after the Plantation of
Christianity in the English Nation:

As thought fit and useful to be preserved for that end, when the Nurseries
of Superstition were demolished, and so continued in the last and best times,
since the blessed Reformation, under King Edward 6. Queen Elizabeth, and King
James, Princes renowned through the World for their piety and wisdom:

As approved and confirmed by the Laws of this Land, ancient and modern:

As the principal outward motive and encouragement of all Students, especially
in Divinity, and the fittest reward of some deep and eminent Scholars:

As producing or nourishing in all ages, many godly and learned Men, who have
most strongly asserted the truth of that Religion We profess, against the
many fierce oppositions of our adversaries of Rome.

As affording a competent portion in an ingenuous way to many younger Brothers
of good Parentage, who devote themselves to the Ministry of the Gospel:

As the only means of subsistence to a multitude of Officers and other
Ministers, who with their Families depend upon them, and are wholly maintained
by them:

As the maine authors or upholders of diverse Schools, Hospitals, Highways,
Bridges, and other public and pious Works:

As special causes of much profit and advantage to those Cities where they are
situate, not only by relieving their poor, and keeping convenient
Hospitality, but by occasioning a frequent resort of Strangers from other
parts, to the great benefit of all Tradesmen, and Inhabitants in those places:

As the goodly Monuments of our Predecessors Piety, and present Honor of this
Kingdom in the eye of Foreign Nations:

As the chief support of many thousand Familes of the Laity who enjoy fair
estates from them in a free way:

As yielding a constant and ample revenue to the Crown:

And as by which many of the learned Professors in our University are
maintained.

The subversion or alienation whereof must (as we conceive) not only be
attended with such consequences as will redound to the scandal of many well
affected to our Religion, but open the mouths of our adversaries, and of
Posterity against us, and is likely in time to draw after it harder conditions
upon a considerable part of the Laity, an universal cheapnesse and contempt
upon the Clergy, a lamentable drooping and defection of industry and knowledge
in the Universities; which is easy to foresee, but will be hard to remedy.

May it therefore please this Honorable Assembly, upon these and such other
Considerations as your great Wisdoms shall suggest, to take such pious care
for the continuance of these Religious Houses, and their Revenewes, according
to the best intentions of their Founders, as may be to the most furtherance of
Gods glory and service, the Honor of this Church and Nation, the advancement
of Religion and Learning, the encouragement of the modest hopes and honest
endeavors of many hundred Students in the Universities

Who do and shall ever pray, etc.
Dat. Anno Dom. Millesimo sexcent' quad' primo e Domo Convocationis, in celebri
Conventu Doctorum ac Magistrorum, omnibus and singulis assentientibus.
Honoratissimis viris Equitibus, Civibus, and Burgensibus Supremae Curiae
Parliamentariae SENATORIBUS Consultissimis. Summa cum demissione.
Senatores Honoratissimi,
NOn veremur ne voluentibus tanta negotia molesti simus Accademia
Cantabrigiensis, cum nihil sit aut ad Religionem certius, aut ad splendorem
nominis excelsius, quam suscipere Litterarum clientelam. In quo studio, cum
singu^aris animi vestri propensio semper eluxerit, tum nulla in re magis possit
eminere, quam si Ecclesiae honestamenta ea, quae sub optimis Regibus tam diu
optinuerunt, indelibata tucamini.

Non enim agitur unius Accademiae, non unius aetatis causa; nam nec industria
poterit non relanguescere, nec bona indoles ali, atque augeri nec vota parentum
non in irritum cadere, nisi spe non vana suffulciantur. Quam praematurum
putemus bonis artibus oc^asum imminere, si stipendium idem Militi sit quod
Imperatori? Sun^ qui exp^diendis Scholasticorum ambagibus, evoluendis
antiquorum Patrum monumentis, expurgandae feci Romanae, velut Augiae stabulo,
se totus impenderunt; nec aliam mercedem prensant, quam in Ecclesia Cathedrali
tandem aliquando quasi in portu conquiescere; it a fit, ut quod ignavis Asylum
incitiae est, id candidioribus ingeniis pro stimulo sit ad optima persequend^,
nec aequitas juditiorum vestrorum ferret, improbitatem nonnullorum in publicam
calamitatem redundare. Impetigo Romana quam amplam tum sibi nacta videbitur se
diffundendi materiam, cum non sit nisi imbelles adversarios habitura? neque
enim certamini, vacare possunt, qui id unice agunt, ut in rostris Concionibus
sudent; etiam* number percentiscere nobis videmur undam atque inanem Accademiam,
and antiquam paupertatem quasi p^aeludio perhorrescimus: nec vestra progenies
non aliquando ventura est in tantarum miseriarum parts. Quin itaque Senatores
Amplissimi, per spes Parentum, per illecebras industriae, per subsidia simul
and ornamenta pietatis, per vincula, nervos, and firmamenta Literarum, velitis
splendorem Ecclesiae, qui longissimis ab usque temporibus, ad nostra tempora
deductus est, authoritate vestra communire. Sed quia Lingua nativa dolores and
desideria sua faelicius exprimit, annexam Literis Peti^ionem benevolis auribus
excipietis.

Honori vestro Deditissimi Procancellarius, reliquusque caetus Accademiae
CANTABRIGIENSIS.
Datae e frequenti Conventu nostro Cantabr. tertio Idus Aprilis 1641. Lecta 12.
Maii 1641.
To the Honorable the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the House of Commons
assembled in Parliament. The humble Petition of the University of CAMBRIDGE.
Shows,
THat your Petitioners having heard of diverse suggestions offered to this
Honorable Court by way of Remonstrance, tending to the subver^^on of Cathea
all Churches, and alienation of those Lands, by which they are supported, being
the ancient Inheritance of the Church, Founded and bestowed by the Religious
bounty of many Famous and Renowned Kings and ^rinces of this Land, and other
Benefactours, both of the Clergy and Laity, and established and confirmed unto
them by the Laws of this Kingdom, and so accordingly have been employed to
the advancement of Learning, the encouragement of Students, and preferrement of
Learned men, besides many other pious and charitable Uses.

May it please this Honorable Court, out of their great wisdom, and tender
care for the cheerishing of Learning, and furtherance of the Studies, and
pains of those who have, and do devote themselves to the service of the
Church, graciously to Protect, and secure those Religious Foundations from
ruin, and Alienation; and withal to take order that they may be reduced to
the due observation of their Statutes, and that all Innovations and Abuses,
which have by some men's miscarriages crept in, may be reformed, that so the
Students of our University, which by the present fears, both are, and will be
much sadded and dejected may be the better invited to pursue their Studies
with alacrity, and the places themselves disposed to the most serviceable and
deserving men; according to their first Institution.

And your Petitioners as in duty bound shall ever pray, etc.

To the Honorable House of Commons now assembled in the high Court of
Parliament. The most humble Petition of the Nobility, Gentry, Clergy, and
Commons within the County of Nottingham.
Humbly showing,
THat whereas we are informed, that a Petition, together with a Remonstrance,
has in the Name of this County, been heretofore presented to this Honorable
House, for the alterations in Church Government.

We do humbly crave leave to certify your Honors, that the same was done
without our knowledge, or consent, and that we do hereby dis-avow the same.
And with the like humility, do desire That the long established Government of
the Church may still continue, and that the abuses and errors of some
particular persons may not cause the alteration of the ancient Government; but
rather, that such persons should suffer according to their Demerits. And we
likewise humbly crave, the Book of Common Prayer, by Law established, may
continue in force, with such alteration (if there be cause) as to your Honors
Wisdoms shall seem meet.

And as in Duty bound, We shall daily pray, etc. Subscribed by one Viscount,
five Knights, above a hundred Gentlemen of quality, all the Clergy of the
County, and above six thousand Commoners, being all of them Communicants.

The Remonstrance and Petition of the County of Huntington, the Knights,
Gentlemen, Clergy, Freeholders, and Inhabitants. To the Right Honorable the
Lords, and Commons assembled in Parliament, for the continuance of the
Church Government, and Divine Service, or Book of Common Prayer.
Presented to the House of Peers by the Lord Privy Seal the 8. of December,
1641.
We humbly show,
THat whereas many attempts have been practiced, and diverse Petitions from
several Counties, and other places within this Kingdom, framed and penned in
a close and subtle manner, to import more than is at first discernable by any
ordinary eye, or that was imparted to those who signed the same, have been
carried about to most places against the present form and frame of
Church Government, and Divine-Service, or Common Prayers, and the hands of many
persons of ordinary quality solicited to the same, with pretense to be
presented to this Honorable assembly in Parliament, and under color of
removing some Innovations lately crept into the Church, and Worship of God, and
reforming some abuses in the Ecclesiastical Courts, which we conceiving and
fearing not so much to aim at the taking away of the said Innovations, and
Reformation of abuses, as tending to an absolute Innovation of
Church Government, and subversion of that Order and Form of Divine Service
which has happily continued amongst us ever since the Reformation of Religion:
Out of a tender and zealous regard hereunto, we have thought it our duty, not
only to disavow all such Petitions, but also to manifest our public
affections, and desires to continue the Form of Divine Service, and
Common Prayers, and the present Government of the Church, as the same have
been continued since the first Reformation, and stand so established by the
Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom.

For when we consider that the Form of Divine Service expressed and contained
in the Book of Common prayer, was with great care, piety, and sincerity,
revised and reduced from all former corruptions and Romish Superstitions, by
those holy and selected Instruments of the Reformation of Religion within this
Church, and was by them restored to its first purity, according as it was
instituted and practiced in the Primitive times, stands confirmed,
established, and enjoined by Act of Parliament, and Royal Injunctions, and
has ever since had the general approbation of the godly, and a public use
and continuance within this Church. And that Bishops were instituted, and have
had their being and continuance ever since the first planting of Christian
Religion amongst us, and the rest of the Christian World, that they were the
lights and glorious Lamps of Gods Church, that so many of them sowed the seeds
of Christian Religion in their bloods, which they willingly powered out
therefore, that by them Christianity was rescued and preserved from utter
extirpation in the fierce and most cruel Persecutions of Pagan Emperous, that
to them we owe the redemption of the purity of the Gospel, and the
Reformation of the Religion we now profess, from Romish corruption, that many
of them for the propagation of that Truth became glorious Martyrs, leaving unto
us an holy example, and an honorable remembrance of their faith and Christian
fortitude, that diverse of them lately, and yet living with us, have been so
great Assertours and Champions of our Religion against the Common enemy of
Rome, and that their Government has been so ancient, so long approved, and so
often established by the Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom, and as yet
nothing in their Doctrine (generally taught) dissonant from the Word of God, or
the Articles established by Law, and that most of them are of singular learning
and piety. In this case to call the form of Divine Service and Common Prayers,
Erroneous, Popish, Superstitious, Idolatrous, and Blasphemous, and to call the
Government by Bishops, a perpetual vassallage, and intolerable bondage: and
at the first step, and before the parties concerned be heard, to pray the
present removal of them, or the utter dissolution and extirpation of them,
their Courts, and their Officers, as Antichristian and Diabolical, we cannot
conceive to savor or relish of piety, justice, or charity, nor can we join
with them herein, but rather humbly pray a Reformation of the abuses, and
punishment of the Offenders, but not the ruin or abolition of the Innocent.

Now on the contrary, when we consider the tenor of such writings, as in the
name of Petitions are spread amongst the Common people, the contents of many
printed Pamphlets swarming at London, and over all Countries, the Sermons
preached publicly in Pulpits, and other private places; and the bitter
invectives divulged, and commonly spoken by many disaffected persons, all of
them showing an extreme averseness and dislike of the present Government of
the Church, and Divine Service or Common Prayers; dangerously exciting a
disobedience to the established form of Government and Church Service, their
several intimations of the desire of the power of the keys, and that their
congregations may be independent, and may execute Ecclesiastical censures
within themselves, whereby many Sects, and several and contrary opinions will
soon grow and arise, whereby great divisions and horrible factions will soon
ensue thereupon, to the breach of that union, which is the sacred band and
preservation of the Common peace of Church and State: their peremptory desires
and bold assuming to themselves the liberty of conscience to introduce into the
Church whatsoever they affect, and to refuse and oppose all things which
themselves shall dislike, and what they dislike must not only to themselves,
but also to all others be scandalous and burdensome, and must be cried out
upon, as great and unsupportable grievances, yea though the things in
themselves be never so indifferent, of never so long continuance in use and
practice, and never so much desired and affected of others, so that where three
or four of them be in a Parish, though five hundred others desire the use and
continuance of things long used, all must be altered or taken away as scandals
and grievances for these three or four, though to the offense of many others,
and whatsoever they will have introduced, must be imposed upon all others, and
must by all be admitted without scandal or offense, whereby multitudes of
godly and well-affected people are in some things deprived or abridged of what
they desire and take comfort in, and have had a long and lawful use and
practice of, and other things imposed upon them against their wills and liking,
as if no account were to be made of them, or no liberty of conscience were
left unto them: which bold attempts of some few to arrogate to themselves, and
to exercise over all others, what high presumption is it? and how great a
tyranny may it prove over the minds and consciences of men? The great increase
of late of Schismatics and Sectaries, and of persons not only separating and
sequestring themselves from the public Assembly at Common Prayers and Divine
Service, but also opposing, and tumultuously interrupting others in the
performance thereof in the public Congregation, the frequent and many
Conventicles held amongst them, and their often meetings at all public
conventions of Assizes, Sessions, Faires, Markets, and other public
Assemblies, their earnest laboring to solicit and draw the people to them,
and the general correspondence held amongst them to advance their ends herein.
Of these things we cannot but take notice, and must needs express our just
fears, that their desires and endeavors are to work some great change and
mutation in the present state of the Church Government, and in the Form of the
public Worship of God, and Divine Service, and Common Prayers.

Of the Common grievances of the Kingdom, we as others, have been and are
sensible, and do profess that we have just cause with joy and comfort to
remember, and with thankfulness to acknowledge, the pious care which is
already taken for the suppressing of the grouth of Popery, the better supply of
able and painful Ministers, and the removing of all Innovation, and we doubt
not but in your great Wisdoms you will regulate the rigor and exorbitancy of
the Ecclesiastical Courts to suit with the temper of our Common Laws, and the
nature and condition of Freemen: And we hope and humbly pray, that the present
Form of Church Government, and of Church Service, and Common Prayers, now
established by the Statutes of this Kingdom shall be settled, and that all
such as shall oppose themselves against the same, or shall do, or speak any
thing in derogation or depraving of the said Divine Service, or Book of Common
Prayer, may without any further tolleration or connivence undergo the pains,
punishment, and forfeitures due therefore; and that such care shall be taken
for placing of Orthodox and peaceable men, Lecturers in all places, whose
Doctrine may tend rather to sound instruction and edification, then lead to
Schism and Faction; All which we humbly submit to your great judgments, and
shall pray to God to assist and direct you from above with his heavenly
wisdom, to guide and bring all your consultations to happy conclusions.

To the High and Honorable Court of Parliament now sitting. The humble
Petition and Remonstrance, of the Knights, Gentry, Clergy, Freeholders, and
Inhabitants of the County of Somerset.
Delivered to the House of Peers, by the Lord Marquess Hartford, the 10. of
December, 1641.
We humbly show;
THat having with grief of mind heard of sundry Petitions, which have been
exhibited to this Right Honorable Assembly, by some of the Clergy and Laity
about London, and some Counties, tending to the subversion of the
Church Government established in this Kingdom; We therefore, tendering the
Peace and Welfare of Both, Do in all humbleness presume to make known our
Opinions and Desires concerning the same: Nothing doubting, of the like good
acceptance of our humble Petition and Remonstrance in this behalf; being
tendered with no less good Affection to the Peace and Happiness of the Church,
the prosperity of His Sacred Majesty, and this whole Kingdom.

For the present government of the Church, we are most thankful to God,
believing it in our hearts, to be the most pious and the wisest, that any
People or Kingdom upon earth, has been blessed withal, since the Apostles
days: though we may not deny, but through the frailty of Men, and corruption
of Times; some things of ill consequence, and other needless, are stolen, or
thrust into it; which we heartily wish may be reformed, and the Church
restored to its former Purity. And to the end it may be the better preserved
from present and future Innovation; We wish, the wittingly and maliciously
guilty, of what condition soever they be (whether Bishops or inferior Clergy)
may receive condign punishment. But, for the miscarriage of Governors, to
destroy the Government; we trust it shall never enter into the hearts of this
wise, and Honorable assembly.

We will not presume to dispute the Right of Episcopacy, whether it be Divine
or not; It suffices us to know, that the Church Government by Bishops is
ancient, even near to the Apostles days: and that it has pleased God from
time to time, to make them most glorious instruments for the propagation, and
preservation of Christian Religion: which with their blood, they have
frequently sealed to Posterity. And how much this Kingdom in particular is
indebted to them, for their Piety, their Wisdoms, and Sufferings; we trust
shall never be forgotten. Our hearts desire therefore is; That the Precious may
be separated from the Vile; that the bad may be rejected, and the good
retained. Furthermore, having credibly heard, that our Common Prayer has been
interrupted and despised of some misunderstanding or misled people, to the
great scandal of the Religion professed in our Church; We humbly beseech you
to take into your care the Redress thereof, as of an Impiety not to be endured:
as also to take order for the severe punishment of those men (if they may be
discovered) who frequently publish Pamphlets, under a veil of Religion, yet,
conducing to confusion and Rebellion.

All which we humbly offer to your Wisdoms as the thoughts and desires of
this County. And as we are persuaded of multitudes of the sound Members of the
Church of England, and his Sacred Majesty's most loyal Subjects.

Beseeching God to direct and prosper your Counsels, and ye to pardon our
Errors; We rest At your Commands Knights, Esquires, Divines, Gentlemen,
Freeholders; Inhabitants of the County of Somerset, (none of them Papists, but
all Protestants of the Church of England) and his Majesty's loyal Subjects.
14350 Whereof, Knights, Esquires, and Gentlemen -- 200 Divines -- 221

Io: BROWN Cler. Parliament.
To the high and honorable Court of PARLIAMENT. The humble Petition of the
Knights, Esquires, Gentlemen and Householders in the County of RVTLAND; in
behalf of our selves, and our Families.
And of the Parsons, Vicars and Curats for the Clergy, in behalf of themselves
and their Families.
Humbly showing,
THat whereas there have been diverse Petitions exhibited to this Honorable
Court, by persons dis affected to the present Government, for the utter
extirpation of the apostolical Government of the Church by Bishops; They by
sedulity, and zeal supplying the want of fair pretenses for the abolition of
that, which we hope, no just reason can condemn: and on the otherside, many
pious persons, true sons of the Church of England, have represented their
just desires of the continuance of it, upon great and weighty causes, both in
Divinity and true Policy; we also, lest we might seem unconcerned, and for
fear lest our silence should be exacted as a crime at our hands if we be
deficient, to what we are persuaded is the cause of God; In pursuance of their
pious intendments, and in allowance of their Reasons, do also press to your
great Tribunal, and beg of you that which is the honor of Kings, to be
Nutricij of the Church, and her most ancient and successive Government.

We therefore humbly beg of you, to leave us in that state the Apostles left
the Church in; That the three Ages of Martyrs were governed by; That the
thirteen Ages since them have always gloried in, (by their Succession of
Bishops from the Apostles, proving themselves members of the Catholic and
Apostolic Church) that our Laws have established, so many Kings and
Parliaments have protected, into which we were baptized; as certainly
Apostolical, as the observation of the Lords Day, as the distinction of Books
Apocryphal from Canonical, as that such Books were written by such
Evangelists and Apostles; as the consecration of the Eucharist by Presbyters;
as any thing which you will do by upholding the Government of the Church by
Bishops, which we again and again, beg of you to do, having pity on our
Consciences, and not forcing of us to seek Communion, as yet we know not
where. So shall we be bound to pray with a multiplied Devotion, for the
increase of public, and personal blessings to your Honorably assembly, to
your Noble Persons.

We also do with all Humility beg leave to represent these our
Considerations, subjoyned, which we hope you will favorably expound to be a
well-meant zeal, and at least, a confidence of duty, and charity to those our
Fathers, from whom we have received, and daily hope to receive, many issues of
spiritual Benison.
1 We consider that Christ, either left his Church without a lasting
Government, or else Bishops and Presbyters under them are that Government; the
former we fear to say, lest we might seem to accuse the Wisdom of the
Father, of Improvidence, in the not providing for his Family; the Feeder and
the Ruler in Scripture being all one in Office, ^n expression, in person: So
that, if he left no Rulers, he left no Feeders; The latter we are more
confident of, for that Christ did clearly institute a disparity in the Clergy,
(which is the maine Stone of offense) appears in the Apostles, and seventy two
Disciples, to whom, according to the voice of Christendom, and traditive
Interpretation of the Church. Bishops and Presbyters respectively do succeed;
and also many actually did succeed the Apostles in their Chaires, being
ordained Bishops by the Apostles themselves that did survive, and also beyond
all exception that Christ did institute a Government; appears in those
Evangelicall words, (who then is that Faithful and wise Steward whom his Lord
shall make Ruler over his household, etc.) which Rulers are Bishops, and Priests
under them, or else the Church has been Apostate from her Lord, she having
clearly for fifteen hundred years had no other Rulers then such.

2. We consider that, whether it can be a Church or no without Bishops, is at
least a question of great consideration, and the Negative is maintained by
Apostolical, and Primitive men and Martyrs, and by the greatest part of
Christendom; and those few (in respect of the whole, that dissent being most
certainly, not infallible, to be sure with Episcopacy, it may be a Church
eatenus, therefore it is the surest course to retain it, for fear we separate
from the Church, the Pillar and ground of Truth.

3 No Ordination never was without a Bishop, and if any Presbyter did impose
hands, unless in conjunction with a Bishop, he was accounted an Usurper, and
anathematized by public and unquestioned authority; and so without Bishops, no
Presbyter, then no absolution, no consecration of the Sacraments of the Lords
Supper, and for these wants no man can make a recompense or satisfaction.

4 No Presbyter did ever impose hands on a Bishop, Viz. De jure, non eidem de
facto, till 555 years after Christ, and then but once in the case of Pope
Pelagius, and that irregularly and never since unless by Papal usurpation.
which if so famous a resolve, or public voice of Christendom may have an
estimate, shows their disparity, and that a Bishop has a Character, which
cannot be imprinted without at least, an equal hand.

5 Without Bishops no Confirmation of Children, and yet confirmation (called
in Scripture Imposition of hands) Saint Paul in his famous Catechism accounts
a Fundamental point, and the Church has always used it, and it was
appropriate to Bishops, by the laudable custom of Christendom, and by the
example of the Apostles, in the case of the Samaritane Christians, whom Phillip
the Evangelist had converted, and is charged upon the Parents of Children, that
they bring their children to Bishops to be confirmed, and it was never
otherwise, but just as in the case of Ordination, (videlicet) by singularity
and usurpation, till of late that the Jesuits to enlarge their Philacteries,
have striven to make Bishops not necessary, by communicating Confirmation to
the Priests of their Order.

6 To take away Bishops, is against the Wisdom of the State of England, ever
since the Reformation, and having been attempted by clancular practices, was
checked by the Princes respectively, and their Council, and confidently, by
the wisdom of preceding Parliaments, and this although the Bishops then were
less learned, and as much infamed.

7 We are sure that Episcopal Government has consisted with Monarchy, ever
since the English Monarchy was Christian, and we are to try whether any
innovated Government can or will.

8 We consider, that if it could consist with Monarchy, when it was biased by
the Popes prevalent incroachment, much more since the Reformation, when the
King has the raines in his own hand, and can give them Laws, and ascertaines
them by their immediate dependence, both for their Baronies, and Election, and
personal Jurisdiction on the Crown, and by the Statute of Submission.

9 We consider that Saint Hierome (pretented as the maine Authenticke enemy
against Episcopacy) yet says, Comment in Epist. ad Titum.
That Bishops were constituted as an antidote and deletory to dis-improve the
issues of Schism, and that by the Apostles, who best knew the remedies. And
now that Schisms multiply, there is more need of Bishops, so that they cannot
be taken away, upon pretense their Regiment is not necessary, for the taking
them away makes them more necessary by the multiplication of Schisms.

10 All Learning will be discountenanced, if not extinguished, upon the
demolition of Episcopacy, the Bishops being parties for the advancement of
Learning; and on the other side, if the Government should be in the hands of
Presbitery, or lay Elders, we know no reason sufficient to stifle our fears,
lest preferment be given to people unlearned and unfit to have the mannaging of
Souls, especially, since a learned Clergy will be suspected by their
Lay Elders, as too knowing to be ruled by their Dictates, which will not have
so much artifice and finenesse, as to command by strength of reason: which our
fears are also increased, by considering that by the multiplication of
Lay Elders, or other Governors, their personal interest being increased
partiality must be more frequent, and all this is besides their incompetency of
judging the abilities of Scholars.

11 The remove all of Bishops would be a scandal, not only to many weak
Christians, who fear all Innovation, as guilty of some ill intendments upon
their consciences, but also to the strongest, which shows it to be the fault
of the giver, not the weakness of the receiver; and if we must not scandalize
our weak brethren, much less our strong; since this will entrench upon us in
a high measure, they not being apt to be scandalized upon umbrages, and
impertinencies.

12 Where Bishops are not, there is not an Honorable, but Familike Clergy,
against the Apostolical rule of double honor.

13 By putting down Episcopacy, we deprive our selves of those solemn
benedictions, which the Faith of Christendom, and the profession of the Church
of England, enjoining the Bishop rather to pronounce the blessing at the end of
the Communion, appropriates to Episcopal pre-eminence above Priestly authority.

14 Two parts of three of the Reformed Churches are governed by Bishops, or
Superintendents (which is properly the Latin word of Bishops) and the other
part that wants them, have often wished them, as their own Doctors do
profess.

15 It is against the liberties of the Clergy, indulged to them by the Magna
Charta, granted and confirmed by so many Kings, and about thirty Parliaments in
express act, and the violation of any part of it by intrenchment upon the
right of the lay Subject, justly accounted a great grievance, the Charter it
self being as Fundamental a Law (as we conceive) as any other, and any of us
may fear lest his Liberties may be next in question.

16 The four great General Councels, in estimation next the four
Evangelists, and by the Statutes of the Kingdom, made the rules of judging
Heresies, were held by Bishops, the greatest fires and pests of Christendom,
the old Heresies, were by their Industry extinct; Timotheus* Titus. Clements*
Linus. Marcus. Dyonysius. Onesimus. Caius. Epaphroditus. Iacobus Hierosolimit.
Evodias. Simeon.
Church Discipline, and pious constitutions by them established, many Nations
by them converted, many Miracles done for the confirmation of Christian Faith,
one of the Gospels written by a Bishop (Saint Mark of Alexandria) if we
believe as authentike Records, as any are extant; Three Epistles of Saint Paul
written to Bishops; Seven Epistles by the Holy Ghost himself, recorded in the
Revelation, and sent to seven Asian Bishops, as all ancient Fathers accord; the
names of twelve men, beside Apostles, mentioned in Holy Scripture, which all
antiquity reports to have been Bishops; Most of the Fathers, whose works all
Posterity embraces with much zeal and admiration, were Bishops; these also in
our apprehensions advance that holy Function, to a high and unalterable
estimate.

17 Very many of the fairest Churches and Colleges, and places of Religion,
were built by Bishops; which are fair Caracters to show their promptness to
do public acts of Piety, and that persons so qualified as they were, that is,
Governors and Clergy, and fairly endowed, is an excellent composition to
advance public designs for the honor of God in the Promotion of public
Piety.

18 Since it has pleased this Honorable Court, of late to commend a
Protestation to us, which we by solemn Vow engaged our selves to attest with
our lives and fortunes, the established Doctrine of the Church of England, we
consider, that since the 36. article has approved and established the book of
Consecration of Bishops; the abolition of Episcopacy would nullify that
article, and should not we make humble Remonstrance to the contrary, we should
suddenly recede from our great and solemn Protestation for maintenance of our
Church Doctrine.

But may it please this Honorable Assembly, we consider on the other side.

19 The introducing of Lay Elders, must needs bring an insupportable burden to
all Parishes, by maintaining them at the Parish charge (for they must be
maintained, or else a transgression is made against an Apostolical Rule. For
the principal, and indeed the only colorable pretended place for Lay Elders,
injoynes their maintenance: So that, either the people must be oppressed with
so great burdens, or else Saint Paul's Rule not obeyed, or else there is no
authority for Lay Elders, as indeed there is not.

20 And also there can be no less fear of Usurpation upon the Temporal
power by the Presbitery, then is pretended from Episcopacy, since that
Presbitery challenges cognizance of more causes and persons, then the
Episcopacy does, (so making a dangerous entrenchment upon the Supremacy) and
derives its pretense from Divine Institution, with more confidence, and more
immediate derivation then Episcopacy, though indeed most vainly as we
conceive.

21 We crave leave also to add this, that these two (viz.) Episcopacy and
Presbitery being the only two in contestation, if any new design should
justle Episcopacy, we are confident that as it hitherto wants a name, so it
will want a face, or form of reason (in case of Conscience) when it shall
appear.

Signed by Knights, Justices, Gentry, and Freeholders, about 800. By Ministers,
about the number of 40.


The Cheshire Petition for establishing of the Common-Prayer-Booke, and
Suppression of Schismatiques, presented to the Kings Majesty, and from him
recommended to the House of Peers, by the Lord KEEPER. To the Kings most
Excellent Majesty, and to the Right Honorable the Lords, and the Honorable
the House of Commons Assembled in Parliament.
The humble Petition of diverse of the Nobility, Justices, Gentry, Ministers,
Freeholders, and other Inhabitants of the County Palatine of Chester, whose
Names are nominated in the Schedule annexed.
Your Petitioners with all cheerfulness and contentation, ^ffying in the
happy settlement of the distractions both of Church and State, by His Majesty's
pious care, and the prudent and religious endeavors of this Honorable
Assembly, and with due humility and obedience submitting to the unanimous
conclusions thereof, yet conceive themselves bound in Duty.
HVmbly to represent to your mature considerations, that the present disorders
of many turbulent and ill disposed Spirits, are such, as give not only
occasion of present discontent to your Petitioners, but seem to import some
ill event without early prevention.

The pure seed of our Faith (the Doctrine of the true Reformed Protestant
Religion) established by so many Acts of Parliament, and so harmoniously
concurring with the confessions of all other Reformed Churches, being tainted
with the Tares of diverse Sects and Schisms lately sprung up amongst us.

Our pious, laudable, and ancient form of Divine Service, composed by the holy
Martyrs, and worthy Instruments of Reformation established by the prudent Sages
of State (your religious Predecessors) honored by the approbation of many
learned foreign Divines, subscribed by the Ministry of the whole Kingdom,
and with such general content received by all the Laity, that scarce any
Family or person that can read, but are furnished with the Books of Common
Prayer: In the conscionable use whereof many Christian hearts have found
unspeakable joy and comfort, wherein the famous Church of England, our dear
Mother, has just cause to glory; And may she long flourish in the practice of
so blessed a Liturgy; yet it is now, not only depraved by many of those who
should teach conformity to established Laws, but in contempt thereof in many
places wholly neglected. All these daily practiced, with confidence, without
punishment: To the great dejection of many sound Protestants, and occasioning
so great insultation and rejoicing in some Separatists, as they not only seem
to portend, but menace some great alteration; And not containing themselves
within the bounds of Civil Government, do commit many tumultuous, (if not
Sacrilegious) violences both by day and night upon diverse Churches.

Therefore your Petitioners being all very apprehensive of the dangerous
consequences of Innovation, and much scandalized at the present disorders.

Do all unanimously pray,

That there be admitted no Innovation of Doctrine or Liturgy, that holy
public Service being so fast rooted by a long settled continuance in this
Church, that in our Opinion and Judgments it cannot be altered (unless by
the advice and consent of some National Synod) without an universal
discontent. And that some speedy course be taken to suppress such
Schismatiques and Separatists, whose factious Spirits do evidently endanger
the peace both of Church and State.

And your Petitioners shall ever pray, etc.

The Petition signed by Lords, Knights, Justices of the Peace, and Esquires:
94. By Gentlemen of quality, 440. By Divines, 86. By Freeholders and others, in
all; 8936.


To the Kings Most Excellent Majesty, And to the High Court of Parliament. The
humble Petition of Colleges and Halls, and others, well-willers to Piety and
Learning, throughout the Kingdom of England.
Shows,
THat whereas many Persons disaffected to the present form of Government of
the Church of England (established not only by the Ecclesiastical, but also
by the Common Law of this Realm, and diverse Acts of Parliament) have of late
in great multitudes petitioned this Honorable Court against the Orders,
Honor, Jurisdiction, and means of the Clergy; And have published such their
desires in print, and Pulpit, and daily seek to advance and propagate the
same: To the great disheartning of all Learning, (if such designs find favor)
the grievous scandal of the Reformed Religion as unstable, and the
unspeakeable advantage of our Enemies of Rome.

We therefore (well weighing, that the Seminaries must decay when the Garden
shall be wasted) in all humility most heartely pray Your Majesty, and this
Honorable Court, that all the Orders of Holy Church, of Bishops, Priests, and
Decons, which from the Apostles times till these, have withstood so many
Practices, may have yet hopes to flourish under Your gracious Protection. And
that by your assistance, under our most Religious Sovereign, the ancient
Catholic Faith, and Discipline, as also the devout and decent service of God,
in our Church Liturgy, may be defended from all Innovations, and Novelties:
The means and liberties of the Churches, as well Cathedral, and Collegeat, as
Parochial, to them hitherto of right belonging, according to the pious Wills
of their blessed Founders, may be continued and preserved: Many thousand
Families which on them depend, secured from ruin: And that our Nation, whose
Laws already favor as much as any in the World, the right of the First borne,
may retain Ecclesiastical promotions, as the Patrimony of younger Children,
the prize of labor and study, an incitement of learning, and a reward of those
that can entitle themselves thereto by honest desert.

And your Petitioners shall ever pray, etc. This Petition is subscribed,
generally by all the Doctors, Masters, and Batchelours of all Degrees and
Faculties in the University of Oxford; And by very many other persons of
quality: Baronets, Knights, Esquires, Ministers, and Gentlemen, within the
Counties of Oxford, Berks, Wilts South-hampton, Dorset, Kent, Surrey,
Westmerland, Cumberland, and other Shires.

Devonshire Petition. To the Right Honorable the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, now assembled in the House of PARLIAMENT. The humble Information and
Petition, of the Knights, Esquires, Gentlemen, and others of ability, within
the Diocese of Exeter.
We whose Names are underwritten, have for these many years, found the
benefit and comfort of Episcopal Government, under which we have lived
hitherto peacebly, and happily, with great freedom and frequency of the
Preaching of the Gospel, and encouragement of the conscionable and painful
Preachers thereof. As we bless God for his favor to us in the behalf, So
we do humbly and earnestly profess our desire that the same Government may
be still continued both to us, and our posterity, submitting all personal
offenses, and redress of abuses to your Honorable Wisdoms.

In witness whereof we have hereunto subscribed. Signed by Knights, Esquires,
Gentlemen, and other Inhabitants, near upon Eight thousand.

The Staffordshire Petition. To the Right Honorable the LORDS, and COMMONS
assembled in the High Court of PARLIAMENT. The humble Petition of the Knights,
Gentlemen, Ministers, Freeholders, and other Inhabitants, within the County of
STAFFORD, hereunto subscribed.
Who Most humbly pray,
THat the present public form of Gods Worship, and administration of the
blessed Sacrament, with other Rites agreeable to Gods holy Word, and purest
antiquity, which has been formerly, sundry times established by godly Acts of
Parliament, may now again in these broken and troubled times, be to Gods
glory, and the Churches Peace, re-established, and confirmed.

That Episcopacy being the ancientest, and Primitive Government of the Church,
renowned for successes, victorious against Schisms, and Heresies, and
especially of late years, against that Hydra of Heresies, the Roman Papacy,
glorious for ancient and late Martyrdomes, happy before the corruption of
Popery, and since the Reformation in the Plantation, and Preservation of Truth,
and Peace; eminently serviceable to this Commonwealth, most compliable with
the Civil Government (into the Fabric, and body of which it is riveted, and
incorporate) and most apt and easy a^ all times by the State to be reduced
into Order, may for the future, as formerly, by your Great Authority be
continued, and maintained for the glory of God, preservation of Order, Peace,
and Unity, the Reformation and suppression of wickedness and vice, and the
mature prevention of Schisms, Factions, and Seditions. The which we, your
humble Petitioners, the more earnestly beseech your Honors to grant, For that
strong fear do possess our hearts, that the sudden mutation of a Government
so long settled, so well known, and approved, cannot recompense with any
proportionable utility, the disturbances, and disorders which it may work by
novelty, being most confident, in your Honors, Wisdom, and Justice; That all
excessive exorbitances, and encroachments, which shall be found issuing, not
from any poison in the nature of the Discipline, but rather from the infirmity,
or corruption of the person (unto which the very best Government is subject,
shall be duly regulated, and corrected.

And your Petitioners shall duly pray for your Honors happiest proceedings.
Subscribed by 3000. of the best quality of the County.

To the Kings Most Excellent Majesty, And to the Right Honorable the LORDS,
and the Honorable the House of COMMONS assembled in PARLIAMENT. The most
humble Petition of diverse Baronets, Knights, Justices, Gentry, Ministers, and
Freeholders, Inhabitants of the County of KENT, within the Diocese of
CANTERBURY.
Most humbly showing,
THat notwithstanding this Kingdom, has by the singular providence of
Almighty God, for many years last past, happily flourished, above all other
Nations in the Christian World, under the Religion and Government by Law
established: Yet has it been of late most miserably distracted through the
sinister practices of some private persons ill affected to them both.

By whose means the present Government is disgraced and traduced, The Houses
of God are profaned, and in part defaced, The Ministers of Christ are
contemned and despised, The Ornaments, and many Vtensils of the Church are
abused, The Liturgy and Book of Common Prayer depraved, and neglected, That
absolute model of Prayer, The Lords Prayer, vilified, The Sacraments of the
Gospel in some places unduly administered, in other places omitted, Solemn
days of fasting observed, and appointed by private persons, Marriages
illegally Solemnized, Burials uncharitably performed, And the very Fundamental
of our Religion subverted, by the publication of a new Creed, and teaching the
abrogation of the Moral Law. For which purpose, many offensive Sermons are
daily Preached, and many impious Pamphlets printed, and in contempt of
authority, Many do what seems good in their own eyes, only as if there
were no King, nor Government, in this our Israel.

Whereby Almighty God is highly provoked, his sacred Majesty dishonored, The
peace of the Kingdom endangered, The Consciences of the people disquieted, The
Ministers of Gods Word disheartened, and the Enemies of the Church emboldned in
their enterprises.

For redress whereof, May it please this Great and Honorable Council,
speedily to command a due observation of the Religion and Government, by Law
established; in such manner, as it may seem best to the Piety and Wisdom of
his Royal Majesty, and this Honorable Court.

Your Petitioners as they shall Confidently expect a blessing from Heaven upon
this Church and Kingdom, So shall they have this further cause to implore the
Divine Assistance upon this Most Honorable Assembly. Subscribed by Knight
Barronets, and Knights 24. Esquires and Gentlemen of note, above 300. Divines
108. Freeholders, and Subsidy men 800.
All within the Diocese of Canterbury.

To the Honorable the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the House of Commons
assembled in Parliament. The humble Petition of the Gentry, Clergy, and other
Inhabitants, subscribed, of the Counties of Flint, Denbigh, Mountgomery,
Carnarvan, Anglesey, Merioneth, being the six Shires of Northwales.
As it was presented this present March the 5. 1641. Acccompanied with thirty
thousand hands.
WHereas the present condition of the Church of England (in the public Liturgy
thereof, in the ancient liberties and form of Government, as they do now
stand established by Law) has been lately brought in question, and manifold
Petitions from the several quarters of this Kingdom, and other such like
addresses concerning the same, have been presented to this Honorable House.

We his Majesty's faithful Subjects in the Principalities and Counties of
North Wales whom it equally concerns, and as strongly tied in duty and
conscience, do likewise presume to make our humble Remonstrance, and we do
it after a long silence and expectation, joined with some fears.

And first, for those things which concern the public Service of God, as
they be of nearest importance, and we nothing doubt, but you will take unto
your tendrest thoughts, so we do earnestly propound and prostrate before you
that dangerous consequence of Innovation in matters of so high concernment, as
we conceive, and leave it to your own great Wisdoms to Judge, what scruples
and jealousies are like to arise, if we be taught a new and different way of
serving God after a full persuasion of the lawfulness of that which is
prescribed according to the Word of God, not without the deliberate, and
concurrent approbation and industry of the most learned of the Protestant
Church, of this and other Nations, and the possession of so many years in the
practice thereof, and all since the blessed time of Reformation.

The mere report hereof has already produced no good effect, breeding in the
minds of ill-disposed persons Insolence and contempt, in others perplexity and
grief, not knowing how to settle themselves, or form their obedience in such
distractions, and sometimes repugnancy of commands.

Then for the outward policy and form of Government, under the Jurisdiction of
Bishops, bounded by Law, and kept within their own limits.

It is as we believe, that form which came into this Island, with the first
Plantation of Religion here, and God so blessed this Island, that Religion came
early in, with the first dawning of the day, very near, or in the time of the
Apostles themselves. And in the succession of all after Ages, the same has
been constantly maintained among us, and that without any eminent
interruption, or gaine-saying, even till these our days.

And now from the comfortable experience which we feel, and which our Fathers
have told us, of the convenience and moderation of this Government, together
with the antiquity of the same (a strong argument of Gods special Protection.)
We do in all humility represent, and pray that the same may be still
preserved entire in all the parts thereof, professing yet withal, that we
heartily disclaim all scandalous Innovation, and Popish corruption whatsoever.

And we are the more encouraged in this suit, because we find it to be the
unanimous and undevided request and vote of this whole Country, who cannot
without some trembling entertain a thought of change. In all which we do not
presume to give any rules, but as it becomes us, humbly declare and open our
own breasts, and labor to deliver our own souls in testimony of our
loyalties, and discharge of our Consciences, who shall ever take comfort to
find the same way of honoring God, continued in his own House of Prayer, the
laws of the land put to actual execution, the Peace and Government of the
Church preserved, the rumor'd alterations declined, and the distractions
already too visible arising thereupon avoided.

And as we doubt not but your great Wisdoms will take care that our Doctrine
and Discipline established, shall be still in force, and observed, until by
some absolute law, and the opinions of learned Convocations, or Synod
(according to the Customs of our prudent Forefathers in best times) it be
otherwise ordained.

So shall we never cease to pray for a permanent blessing upon your Counsels
and Resolutions, to the general happiness of Church and Kingdom.
To the sacred MAJESTY, of our most Gracious Sovereign Lord, King CHARLES; by
the grace of God, of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, KING: Defender of
the Faith. The humble Gratulation and Petition of diverse, His Majesty's
faithful Subjects (of the true Protestant Religion) within the County Palatine
of Lancaster.
Most gracious Sovereign,
THe most Real and convincing'st testimonies of your Princely care, for the
advancement of Gods true Religion in your Majesty's Realms: And the common
good of all your Subjects. Could no less then draw from us (who have hitherto
in these stirring Times sat still) this humble acknowledgement of our due and
necessary thanks.

We with the inmost and choicest thoughts of our souls, do esteem and prize
your Majesty's most righteous intentions, of governing your liege people,
according to the wholesome Laws of this Kingdom. A thing so often, and with
such earnestness avowed by your sacred Majesty, whereunto we yield that hearty
credence, which is due to so religious a Prince. We do also with all humility
and thankfulness acknowledge your manifold and evident manifestations, (to the
world) that you affect not an Arbitrary Government, But the common prosperity,
and happiness of all your loyal subjects: by your readiness to join with your
Parliament in speedy raising of forces for a timely suppression, of that odious
Rebellion in Ireland, by your late. Proclamation for the putting in due
execution the Laws against Papists. By your most gracious condiscending to the
desires of your Great Council, in signing the Bill for the trienniall
Parliament, for the relinquishing your Title of imposing upon Merchandise, and
power of pressing soldiers. For the taking away the Star Chamber: and High
Commission Courts, for regulating of the Council Table, As also for the Bills
for the Forests and Stannerie Courts, with other most necessary acts.
Moreover, we are confident, and well assured of your Majesty's zeal, for the
advancement of the true Protestant Religion. And with inexpressible joy do
understand your most Christian and pious resolution, for the preservation of
those powerful encouragements of Industry, Learning, and Piety, the means and
honor of the Ministry, for the maintenance and continuance of our Church
Government, and solemn Liturgy of the Church, of long continuance, and
general approbation of the most pious and learned of this Nation, and of other
countries: Composed (according to the Primitive Pattern) by our blessed
Martyrs, and other religious and learned men. As also your gracious pleasure,
that all abuses of Church and State shall be reformed, according to the model
of Queen Elizabeth's days, (of ever blessed and famous memory.) By the one you
have weakened the hopes of the sacrilegious devourers of the Churches Patrimony
(if there be any such:) And by the other provided against all Popish Impieties
and Idolatries: and also against the growing danger of Anabaptists, Brownists,
and other Novelists. All which Piety, Love, and Justice, we beseech God to
return into your Royal bosom. But yet most gracious Sovereign, there is one
thing that sads our hearts, and hinders the perfection of our happiness, which
is the distance and misunderstanding between your Majesty and your Parliament,
whereby the hearts of your subjects are filled with fears and jealousies
(Justice neglected, sacred ordinances profaned, and Trading impaired, to the
impoverishing of many of your liege people. For the Removal whereof we cannot
find out any lawful means without your Majesty's assistance and direction.

Wherefore we humbly beseech your most excellent Majesty, to continue your most
Christian and pious Resolution of ruling your people, according to the Laws of
the Land, and maintaining of the same, of being a zealous Defender of the
estabilshed Doctrine, Liturgy, and Government of our Church from heresies,
Libertinisme, and prophannesse; an advancer of Learning, Piety, and Religion;
an Encourager of Learned, Painful, Orthodox Preachers. And whatsoever your
Parliament shall offer to your Royal view, conducing to this blessed end, the
common good and tranquillity of your subjects, to be pleased to condescend
unto, and graciously to confirm, and withal to declare unto us some expedient
way, how we may make a dutiful address unto your Parliament, for the taking
away of these differences and impediments, which stay the happy proceedings (of
that most honorable Assembly, whereof your Majesty is the Head) which once
removed, we doubt not, but you will be as near your Parliament in Person, as
in affection. That there may be a blessed harmony, betwixt your Highness, and
that great Council, we shall with all alacrity oserve the same. Humbly
rendering our lives, and fortunes for the preservation of your Royal Person,
Crown, and Dignity, according to our bounden duty, and allegiance. And
heartily praying for your Majesty's long and prosperous Reign over us.

We the Subscribers of this Petition, do hereby give authority unto the
Bearers hereof, to put our names to such Transcript hereof, as shall be
presented to His Majesty. Attested by Knights and Esquires 64. Divines 55.
Gentlemen 740. Freeholders near 7000.

To the Kings most Excellent MAJESTY. The humble Petition of the County of
Cornwall.
We your Majesty's loyal subjects, In all duty render unto your Majesty all
thankfulness, for your Majesty's unexampled favor, and grace in granting unto
your Subjects (in concurrence with your Parliament) such Laws and Freedoms,
which have most fully expressed your Majesty's Gracious Goodness unto your
people, And we most thankfully receive your Majesty's free offer of a general
pardon, whereof we most humbly desire to be made Partakers. And we most
humbly beseech your Majesty never to suffer your Subjects to be governed by an
arbitrary Government, nor admit an alteration in Religion. And your Petitioners
being most feelingly grieved for your Majesty's discontents: partly occasioned
by diverse scandalous Pamphlets; and no way lessened by seditious Sermons: Do
wish a confluence of all comforts, honor, and happiness unto your Majesty:
and do heartily pray for the reconcilement betwixt your Majesty and your
Parliament. And in all thankfulness for your Majesty's said Grace and
Goodness, your Petitioners do offer themselves most ready to maintain, and
defend with their lives, and fortunes, your Majesty's sacred Person, Honor and
Estate: And lawful Prerogative against all persons whatsoever, according to
the oaths of allegiance and Supremacy. May 22. 1642.

Jndorsed,
We the Petitioners to this Petition, do constitute, and appoint Peter
Courtney, Walter Langdon, Benatus Bellot, and Nevill Bligh, Esquires, to
deliver this Petition, in the name of the county of Cornwall to His sacred
Majesty.



To the Honorable House of Commons, assembled in Parliament. The Humble
Petition of the Gentry, Ministers, and Commonalty of the County of Kent, agreed
upon, at the general Assizes of the County.
Most Humbly shows,
THat we cannot but take notice, how welcome to this Honorable House, many
Petitions have been, which yet came not from an assembled body of any county
(as this does) we do therefore hope to find as gentle and favorable a
reception of this, as any other have found of their Petitions, our hearts
witnessing unto us, as good, peaceable, and pious purposes as the best.

These are therefore the true and Ardent desires of this County.

1 That you will be pleased to accept our due, and hearty thanks for those
excellent Laws (which by his Majesty's grace and goodness) you have obtained
for us.

2. That all Laws against Papists, be put in due execution, and an account
taken of their disarming, and that all children of the Papists may be brought
up in the reformed Religion.

3. That the soelmn Liturgy of the Church of England (Celebrious by the piety
of the Bishops and Martyrs who composed it) established by the supreme Laws of
this Land, attested and approved by the best of all Foreign Divines,
confirmed by the subscription of all the Ministry of this Land, a Clergy as
able and Learned as any in the Christian world ere enjoyed, and with a holy
Love embraced by the most and best of all the Laity, that this holy exercise of
Religion may by your authority be enjoyed quiet and free from interruptions,
scorns, profaneness, threats and force of such men, who daily do deprave
it, and neglect the use of it in diverse Churches, in despite of the Laws
established.

4. That Episcopal Government, as ancient in this Island as Christianity it
self, deduced and dispersed throughout the Christian world, even from the
Apostlicall times, may be preserved (as the most pious, most prudent, and most
safe Government) for the peace of the Church.

5. That all differences concerning Religion and Ceremonies, may be referred to
a lawful free, and National Synod, as your Remonstrance promises, to a
general Synod of most grave, learned, pious and Judicious Divines, (the proper
agents) whose interests, gifts, and callings, may quicken them in that great
Work, whose choice to be by all the Clergy of the Land, because all the Clergy
are to be bound by their Resolutions, and the determination of this Synod to
bind us all, when you have first formed them into a Law, and this we take to be
according to the ancient and fundamental Law of this Land, confirmed by Magna
Charta.

6. That some speedy and good provision may be made (as by his Majesty has
been, and is by all good men desired) against the odious and abominable
scandal of schismatic and seditious Sermons and Pamphlets, and some severe
Law made against Laymen, for daring to arrogate to themselves, and to execute
the holy function of the Ministry, who (some of them) do sow their impious and
discontented Doctrine even in sacred places, by abuse of sacred Ordinances, to
the advancing of Heresy, Schism, Profaneness, Libertinisme, Anabaptisme,
and Atheism.

7. That if the coertive power of Ecclesiastical Courts by way of
Excommunication be already abrogated, or shall be thought fit so to be, that
there be some other power and authority speedily established, for suppressing
the heinous, and now so much abounding sins of Incest, Adultery, and
Fornication, and other crimes, and for recovering Tithes, repayring of
Churches, Probate of Wills, Church assesses, providing Bread and Wine for the
Communion, and choice of Churchwardens, and other Officers in the Church, and
especially for Ministers, who neglect the Celebrating of the Holy Communion,
and the Parishioners for not Receiving.

8. That the Professors of that Learned faculty of the Civil Law, and (without
which this Kingdom cannot but suffer manifold Inconveniences) may not find
discouragements, and so divert their studies and Professions.

9. That honor and profits the powerful encouragements of Industry, Learning,
and Piety, may be preserved without further dimination to the Clergy.

10. That you please sadly to consider the bleeding wounds of our Brethren in
Ireland, and with speedy succors endeavor to preserve them, whereunto his
Majesty has promised a gracious concurrence.

11. That you will please to frame an especial Law for the Regulating of the
Militia of this Kingdom, so that the Subject may know how at once to obey,
both his Majesty, and both Houses of Parliament, a Law whereby may be left to
the discretion of Governors, as little as may be, but that the number of
Arms, and what measure of punishment shall be inflicted upon the offenders,
may be expressly set down in the Act, and not left to any Arbitrary power, and
that according to the president of former Laws, the offenders may not be
tried out of the County.

12. That the precious liberty of the Subject (the Common birthright of every
English man) may be as in all these points preserved entire, so in this also,
that no order of either of both Houses, not grounded on the Laws of this Land,
may be enforced on the Subject, till it be fully enacted by Parliament.

13. That his Majesty's gracious Message of the 20. of Jan. last, for the
present and future establishment of the Privileges of Parliament, the free
enjoying of our estates and Fortunes, the Liberty of our persons, the security
of the true Religion professed, the maintaining of his Majesty's just and
Regal Authority, the establishing his Revenue, may be taken into speedy
consideration, the effecting whereof will satisfy the desires of all us, his
faithful and loving Subjects.

14. That all possible care may be taken, that the Native Commodities of this
Kingdom, may have a quick Vent, and that Clothing, and other Manufactures may
be improved, wherein the livelihood of many thousands do consist, and that
Trade may be balanced, that the importation do not exceed the exportation,
otherwise it will prove a consumption of the Land.

15. That you please to frame some Laws concerning Depopulations, Purveyances,
Cart-taking, delays in Justice, Traffic, Fishing in the Coasts, Fulling
earth, that our Sea Forts may be repaired, and our Magazines renewed.

16. That you please to consider the general poverty that seems to overgrow
this Kingdom.

17. Lastly, We humbly beseech you to consider the sad condition, that we and
the whole Land are in, if a good understanding be not speedily renewed
between his Majesty, and both Houses of Parliament.

Our hopes are yet above our fears, secure them we beseech you, God direct
and guide your consultations for the removing of all distrusts and Iealousies,
for the renewing that tie of confidence and trust, (which is the highest
happiness) between our gracious Prince, and his loving Subjects.

And you shall have the daily prayers of your humble Orators of the Commonalty
of Kent.
To the Honorable the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the House of Commons
assembled in Parliament. The humble Petition of the Baronets, Knights,
Esquires, Gentlemen, Clergymen, Freeholders, Subsidy-men, and others of good
Rank and Quality in the County of OXFORD.
Agreed upon, and subscribed, at the times of their meetings to take the
Protestation sent unto them.
Humbly showing,
THat whereas some Petitions have been exposed, in print, the common view
under the names of the Knights, Gentlemen, Freeholders, Subsidy-men, of the
best Rank and Quality of the County of Oxford, as preferred to the Honorable
House of Parliament.

We do hereby crave leave, to show to this Honorable House, that such
Petitions have not received Public Examination among us, at any General
meeting directed by Authority, for the service of the County.

ANd we your now Petitioners, knowing our selves to be to Major part of those
degrees within this County, and as desirous to express our Gratitude in this
Honorable House, for your unwearied labors, and the happy effects thereof,
for the good of this Land and State, do hereby offer up in all Humility, the
greatest expression of our Thankfulness: And in like manner, our unanimous
desires.

That the Government of this Church may continue, as is now by Law established:
And that the Liturgy may be settled with such alterations (if there be cause)
as your Wisdoms shall approve.

That the Laws against Papists which oppose our Religion, And against
Sectaries (of late dangerously increased among us) that trouble the Peace
thereof, may be put in full execution: And where those Laws are defective,
such further remedy therein may be provided, as to your wisdoms shall seem
fit.

That a free Synod of Orthodox and peaceable Divines may be convened,
according to the form of the Primitive, and Purest times of Christianity, for
composing of all differences in Doctrine, and Ceremonies of Religion.

That the Safety of this County and Kingdom may be provided for, by the
disposing of such a Militia, as may consist with the native Liberties of the
Subject.

That you would be pleased to continue your Care in hastening the further
Relief of our distressed Brethren in Ireland.

And your Petitioners shall be ready to maintain, with their Lives and
Estates, his Majesty's Person, Honor, and Estate, together with the Rights and
Privileges of Parliament.

And your Petitioners shall ever pray, etc.

To the Most Honorable and High Court of PARLIAMENT: The humble Petition of
the Gentlemen, and other of the Inhabitants of the County of Cornwall.
HAving seen and heard the many (though scarce diverse) Petitions to this
Honorable Assembly, by the Inhabitants of diverse Counties and Cities of this
Land, as also Corporations, Companies, and Trades, some against Bishops, some
against the Common Prayer, and all against such Judicial, and things
Super-elementary to the region of their capacity of judging, and matters only
belonging to the Judicature of this grave Synod, which seems either to
distrust, or direct, or both, your great Wisdoms; We therefore the Gentlemen,
and other the Inhabitants of Cornwall, with as many hearts, though not hands,
with as many good wills, though not persons, not in imitation, but rather by
provocation, and necessity, in these times, to show our good minded affections,
do humbly prostrate the utmost of our service to your feet. In which (or
rather after which) we take leave humbly to beg.

THat you will be pleased to bend your auxiliary and good affections to the
redress of the distress of the miserable Protestants in Ireland. To gain
whose good, prosperity, peace, and tranquillity, to preserve the Sovereignty of
that Land to our Royal King, and to maintain His, and this Kingdoms Honor,
We shall willingly lay down our lives and fortunes.

That you will be pleased to continue your great respect, dutiful love, and
true obedience, to our Royal Sovereign, by maintaining his just, and no way
Antilegall Prerogative.

That you will be pleased to put the Laws in due execution against all
Jesuits, Seminaries, Papists, and Recusants.

That you will be pleased to look upon the other side, and duly weighing the
actions (or rather factions) of some, (whom most men call Citizens) to scourge
their irregular and disorderly Schism, and Heretical Sects, into right paths
of serving God, to frequent his House, and to Pray as well as Hear, to allow
Order, and obey Conformity, to reverence Learning, and bow to Authority, to be
under a Discipline, and live in order.

That you will be pleased to maintain and establish the Ancient,
Fundamental, and most venerable Laws, Order, and Discipline, both of our
Church and Commonwealth, to continue the reverenced Office, and punish the
offending persons of Bishops, to have in high account, and eternize (as far
as in you lies) the Divine and excellent form of Common Prayer, to correct
braine-forg'd doctrine, by your examplary precepts strike a Reverence of Gods
House into every man's breast.

That you will be pleased to intimate to the people, your Honorable and wise
intentions concerning Divine Service, lest while you hold your peace, some
rejecting it in part, others altogether, they vainly conceive you countenance
them.

Lastly, (not to trouble your great affairs any longer) That you will be
pleased to take into your Sage consideration, those Scandalous and ill-affected
Pamphlets, which fly abroad in such swarms, as are able to cloud the pure air
of Truth, and present a dark ignorance to those who have not the two wings of
Justice and Knowledge to fly above them.

Now to polish this our work with a smooth demonstration of our modest
intents, that the tinctures which in Introduction fell on the forementioned
presents, may slide without a stain from this; We do in all humility
declare, that neither distrust of your intentions, nor opinion of any of our
Counsels worthy your ears, ever tainted our thoughts, but that we have still
been, and are confident, that this most wise Synod has ever thought fit,
resolved, and will confirm into action, what we now humbly request; therefore
this our present, not so much a Petition, as a Prayer of willing and thankful
hearts for the hoped sequel, is only to show our true intentions and good
will toward his gracious Majesty, and this High Court, as Instruments of the
peace of our souls and bodies, for which we are unanimously, and immutably
resolved to spend our dearest blood.

Published by I.B. Gent.

To the Right Honorable the LORDS, and COMMONS assembled in the high Court of
PARLIAMENT. The humble Petition of the Knights, Esquires, Gentlemen, Ministers,
Freeholders, and other Inhabitants, within the County of HEREFORD.
Who Most humbly pray,
THat the present public form of Gods Worship, and the Administration of the
blessed Sacraments, with other Rites agreeable to Gods holy Word, and purest
Antiquity, which have been sundry times established by godly Acts of
Parliament, may now again in these broken and troubled times, be to Gods
glory, and the Churches Peace, re-established and confirmed; That Episcopacy
being the Ancient and Primitive Government of the Church, Renowned for
Successes, Victorious against Schisms, and Heresies; and especially, of late
years against that Hydra of Heresies, the Roman Papacy, Glorious for ancient
and late Martyrdomes, Happy before the corruption of Popery, and since the
Reformation in the plantation and preservation of Truth and Peace, eminently
serviceable to this Commonwealth, most compliable with the Civil Government,
into the Fabric and Body of which it is riverted and incorporated, and most
apt and easy at all times by the state to be reduced into Order: may for the
future (as formerly) by your great authority be continued and maintained, for
the glory of God, the preservation of Order, Peace, and Unity, the Reformation
and suppression of wickedness and vice, and the mature prevention of Schisms,
Factions, and Seditions, That Cathedrals, the Monuments of our Forefathers
Charity, the reward of present Literature and furtherance of Piety, be also
continued.

The which we your humble Petitioners the more earnestly beseech your Honors
to grant, for that strange fears do possess our Hearts, that the sudden
Mutation of Government, so long settled, so well known, and approved, cannot
recompense the Disturbances and Disorders which it may work by Novelty, with
any proportionable utility, being most confident, in your Honors, Wisdoms,
and Justice, that all Excesses, Exorbitances, and Encroachments, that shall be
found issuing not from any poison in the nature of the Discipline, but rather
from the infirmity and corruption of the Persons (unto which the very best
Government is subject) shall be duly regulated and corrected.

And your Petitioners shall pray, etc. Subscribed by Knights, Esquires, and
Gentlemen of Quality, 68 Doctors, 8 Ministers of good repute, as will appear
by the Original Petitions, 150 Freeholders and Inhabitants of the County of
Hereford. 3600


To the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the Honorable House of Commons
assembled in PARLIAMENT. The humble Petition of the Knights, Esquires,
Gentlemen, Ministers, Freeholders, and other Inhabitants, of the County of
Cornwall.
Humbly showing,
THat we are no less thankful for the many excellent Laws which by his
Majesty's grace and favor, and your care and assiduousnesse, you have obtained
for us; then those who have been more forward to present you with Petitions;
doubting not, but you will welcome this with as hearty acceptance, as you have
done any other, it proceeding from loyal hearts to our Sovereign, a tender
care of our Protestation, and abundance of affection to the Commonwealth; And
whereas we understand that there is a purpose, if not a presentment already to
this honorable House, of a Petition heretofore by some Justices of the Peace
tendered to the grand Enquest, at our last Assizes, to be by them considered,
whether fit to be presented to this Honorable House; which on deliberate
debate was much disliked, as it was laid; but since (as we are informed)
indirectly obtruded on diverse persons, without reading or peru^all; many of
them since retracting their opinions, and wishing back their hands; and we
having resolved to rest upon the abilities, and care of our Knights and
Burgesses, our hands and mouths, for matter of our particular concernments; yet
since their absence from us, and attendance in Parliament, finding and feeling
our own grievances, giving us just grounds and fear of sudden misery, by
disobedience and contempt of Laws; thus provoked with bleeding hearts, we beg
the help of your Wisdoms, to advise and apply some speedy remedy for these
felt and feared evils, And for as much as there are lately risen amongst us
some few of the Clergy, and many of the Laity, public contemners and depravers
of the Ceremonies and the Service of the Book of Common Prayer, by Law
established, irreverent vilifiers of Gods House, and Church Assemblies in
Prayer times, and generally disobedient to Ecclesiastical Government, of whom
many have subscribed or subsigned to the recited Petition; Although the said
Ceremonies and Book of Common Prayer, are by far the greater and discreeter
part of our Congregations inoffensively and reverently received and approved.

1 WE pray (no way presuming) to prescribe rules, but submitting to your graver
Judgments, that a National Synod of our learned, and approved Clergy, by the
rest to be chosen, may be convened, and some Parliamentary course speeded, for
the ordaining, confirming, and establishing of the said Service Book, and
Ceremonies, or some of them, or others not repugnant to Gods Word, tending most
to the peace and purity of our Religion and Church; before which settlement,
our humble desires are, that a Parliamentary Declaration, may speedily issue
forth, for requiring of obedience to the Laws established.

2 We likewise humbly pray the continuance of that ancient and ever reverenced
Episcopal Government in our Church, and that the Delinquences of any
particular person, may not cause that high and holy Office, or Calling, to
suffer.

3 We pray likewise that in every Parish unprovided, there may be a Preaching
Minister, and a competent maintenance raised for him, and where Impropriations
are, and Preaching Ministers not sufficiently cared for, allowance may be had
or bettered.

4 We pray likewise that such of our Clergy, as upon enquiry, shall be found
either Scandalous or not Orthodox, may be admonished, and bound for the better
supply and discharge of their Cures, or removed.

5 We pray likewise that some positive Law may be Inacted for Parsons and
Vicars recovery of their Tithes, and that such course may be taken for the
obtaining of them, as may be most speedy, and least chargeable; That so those
that Minister at the Altar, may live by the Altar.

6 We pray likewise that for the restraining and preventing of inordinate
licenciousnesse, there may be some penal Law Inacted for the punishment of
Adulteries, and diverse other offenses not punishable by the Common Law.

7 As likewise that there may be some Coersive power or Law, ordained for
compelling of refactory men to the payment of their rates, and for the
reparations of their Parish Churches, in which of late some are grown very
remiss and backward.

8 We pray likewise that great care may be taken not only for disarming of
Recusants, but for the Education of their children in the Protestant Religion.

9 We likewise pray that some speedy course may be taken for the Redemption
of those woeful Christian Captives in Barbary, the want of whom, has
occasioned an extraordinary decay and poverty in our Maritine Towns and
Parishes, and that our Coasts may be sufficiently gaurded and secured.

10 We likewise pray that whereas this County has been and is surcharged
double, at least, with Arms, and very high in Subsidies, much above our
abilities, and the respective charge of diverse parts of this Kingdom; we may
(in consideration hereof) be relieved in future.

11 We likewise pray that the Sheriffs Turn, now grown an unnecessary
Court, and only used to the grievous oppression of the meaner sort of people,
may be suppressed, and taken away, it being more burdensome then the Office of
the Clerk of the Market formerly has been.

12 We likewise pray that such Dutchcy Tenants as within our County pay over
their rightful Rents and Duties unto the Duchy Officers may not be doubly
charged by Process out of the Exchequer, as now they are, by extreme and
continual Amercements.

13 We likewise pray that there may be a reparation of the decay of the
Castle of Saint Mawes, and that there may be a supply of the wants of
Ordnances, Carriages, Powder, and Ammunition, in all which, it is extremely
defective.

And thus with all humblenes, Craving pardon for withholding you from your
other Weighty Affairs, but persuaded that the cause is considerable, and may
well challenge a part of your thoughts, and be put in action; for the effecting
of which, as of all things standing to the Purity and Peace of our Church, and
Religion, as for the safe Defense and Honor of his Majesty, his Royal
Posterity, and Kingdoms; And in these, your and our happiness, as for uniting
of his Gracious Majesty and this Honorable Assembly in a mutual consent and
compliancy, as for the unanimous and prosperous proceedings of this Parliament,
we do, and ever shall, with humble hearts implore Gods gracious assistance
and blessing.
The Index of the Petitions.
CHeshire. Page 1 Oxford University. Page 4 Cambridge Universitie. Page 6
Nottingham. Page 8 Huntington. Page 9 Somerset. Page 13 Rutland. Page 15
Cheshire. Page 21 Colleges, Halls, etc. Page 23 Exeter Diocese. Page 24
Stafforashire. Page 25 Diocese of Canterbury. Page 26 Six Counties of
North-Walles. Page 27 Lancashire. Page 29 Cornwall. Page 32 Kent. Page 33
Oxford County. Page 36 Cornwall. Page 37 Hereford. Page 39 Cornwall. Page 40

