A Joyous Welcome To the most Serene, and most Illustrious QUEEN of BRIDES
CATHERIN, The Royal SPOUSE and Consort OF CHARLES the SECOND KING of Great
Britain, France, and Ireland: Presented to Her MAJESTY UPON THE River of
THAMES, At Her first coming with the KING to the City o(...) LONDON, AUGUST the
23. 1662,

By WILLIAM AUSTIN Esquire

-- Rex and Regina beati.
Devenere locos laetos and amoena vireta
Fortunatorum nemorum, sedesque beatos.
Largior hic campos ether, and lumine veslit
Purpureo: Solemque suum sua sider a norunt.
Virg. AEneid. lib. 6. Upon Her most Sacred MAJESTY CATHERINE, QUEEN of Great
BRITAIN, Her most happy and most glorious coming to London.
Who Are sad now, hence, to that strange land retreat,
Narna or Narnia a City of Umbria.
Where showers raise dust, and dirt's produced by heat.
Bacchus So called for the virtue of wine to acuate the wit.
, the Muses mate, from whose Bacchus his rod.
Thyrsus
Milk, wine and honey-rivers flow to us,
From He is said to travail up and down the World to be beneficial to others
in what good he could teach them.
foreign parts come hither over the Main,
London.
Where the They say Bacchus as he slept was bit by the Amphisbaena, i.e. a
serpent with two heads, which with a vine branch he destroyed.
Amphisbaena of our state was slain,
To end his travails, he, like As Hercules in the West, so Bacchus in the East,
they say, set up his Pillars.
Hercules,
Erects the pillars of his rest and ease.
Be heathen Brachmanes were Indians who drank only water.
Brachman's who are abstemious,
And drink A Well, which whosoever tastes, loatheth wine ever after. The same
effect does Clitorius; Clitorio quicunque sitim de font levavit, Vina fugit,
gaudetque meris abstemius undis.
Azanium and Clitorius.
To such our feast now reads the destiny
Of cursed Torn in pieces by his mother and sisters for contemning Bacchus.
Pentheus and Destroyed with her sisters and servants by Bacchus for contemning
his rites.
Alcithoe.
We sit round A fountain in Baeotia, not far from Helicon, that Pegasus is
said to have made with his foot.
Hippocrene, where to us
Nectar springs from the thumps of Pegasus.
The A mountain sacred to Apollo and the Muses: but is is often, as it is here,
put for Hippocrene.
Helicon for our Queen's happy Reign
Sluice out, till Bacchus so enrich your vein,
With touches poured as Bacchus gave him a virtue to turn all he touched into
gold.
Midas's, ye all
Convert Earths globe into a golden Ball;
Which while Her virtue towr's above the skies,
May bide below as its despised prize.
Blessed prodigy of light this day displayes,
Made by our Sun's and his The Moon so called.
Lucina's rays,
Her lustre's joined with his to make all day,
And clouds, shades, nights chase hence all quite away.
A famous painter who painted Venus, but lived not to finish it.
Apelles died ere Venus finished was.
If his soul was exhaled by her bright rays;
Here he might look t'expire, ere his first touch,
Before Her his Venus excels so much.
All Mnason the Tyrant gave Asclepiodorus a painter 300 l. a piece for making
of 12. gods
Mnason spent on Gods cost him so dear,
Makes but a Gypher just to figure Her.
VVho'de work her some marble Minerva's Image.
Palladium,
Or compose her vast worth's A pavement, or such work wherein are wrought very
curious figures in diverse colors
Asarotum,
Will all confused rear piles of hearts to be
Stones that being set on fire burn continually.
Asbesti of zeal to her Majesty.
VVho'd hew in pieces One that was turned into a Diamond.
Celinus, and say
He would with diamonds pave all her way,
Fitly in Emblem this to us he would hint,
Eternity shall put her steps in print.
True words of Two Angels, as the Mahumetans say, sent from heaven, with a set
form of words, able to convey those who repeat them to heaven.
Arotus and Merotus
Her Merits be, to make Heavens wings for us.
Were it a crime might ever pard'ned be,
Great Queen, to set a soul at liberty
Now, when all ours truly are, as they seem,
Subjected t'you, we should unbody him,
Who after our A mountain in Thessaly, so high it is top is said to reach up to
heaven, for which therefore it is often use(...) by Poets.
Olympus's new birth,
Prophanes our Sphere with his conceit of Earth.
Nothing's here Earth but tongues, your sacrifice,
As Objects of the taste.
honey, milk and wine were Venus's.
That Earth's changed too: they are the air to hand
Your worth's loud Echo over each sea and land.
Nothing's here Earth but eyes. Your Realms all be
One that had many eyes, employed by Juno.
Argus, fixed on your Juno's Majesty.
Those are changed too: they are the light to dispense
Your kinder rays and brighter influence.
Nothing's here Earth but hearts. You Pallas these
Panting give Jove as Dionysus being dismembered by the Titans, Minerva is said
to have carried his heart alive to Jupiter.
Dionysus's.
Those are changed too, to be our swift convoy
Into the fiery Element of loyal joy.
VVho'le not expect this Orbs best period here,
At your great Beauties Sun's approach so near?
Well may the Sabbaths be compared to Queens:
After our long wars toilsome labor ends,
Our hearts at rest, bid the six days adieu
Bring us now Queen and Sabbath both in you.
A Sabbath, yes, where none fasts but to be
A Jew in death, in life a The Pharisees boast, I fast twice a week is rendered
Iejuno bis in Sabbato.
Pharisee.
AEgle with her sisters Erethusa and Hesperitusa, called Hesperides, daughter
of Hesperus, had orchards where the trees did bear golden fruit.
AEgle with both her sisters beg you would please
T'accept the treasure of their golden trees.
The An horn of Plenty that Jupiter had.
Amalthaea, when your bounteous hand
Would pour out plenty, stands at your command.
A River in Spain said to have golden sand.
Tagus petitions, and A River in India abounding with gold, and precious stones.
Hydaspes too
To make Islands in Lybia for their fertility and pleasantness called the
Fortunate Isles.
Atlantic Islands under you.
The choicest ornaments A Country in Asi famous for cloth of gold.
Carmania
Shows, to vie splendor with the brightest day,
And those soft shining silks of An Island in the AEgean sea; in which are made
exquisite silk ornaments for women.
Coos, such
None knows if pleasing most to the eye or touch,
(The pride of Art and Nature) ready be
To shadow over your bright Majesty.
See all our hearts one offering. Bid them give
What e're your gracious hand daigns to receive.
But to your worth all we can give or say,
Makes but An Egyptian Idol to which they offered hay.
Apis's sacrifice of hay.
Poetries best robes over your worth, express
The Minerva's shield that was covered over with a goat's skin.
AEgis just in a rough goats skin dress.
Her worth taxes with silence every wight,
As the world's form did the great The form of the World is not described by
Aristotle.
Stagyrite.
Our Charles's Triumph-arches raised to be
Trophies of his last bloudless victory;
Fall all to kiss her feet, who freely grants
They cancel all records of Rebels rants,
Cease all content'ous tongues now dare to brave,
Who One who had an apple of gold to give to Iuna, Venus, or Pallas, which of
them he accounted the most beautiful.
Paris's apple of gold should have,
Or the other Hippomanes being to contend with Atalanta in running, Venus gave
him three apples of gold to cast in her way, and so tempt her to loose ground
by stooping to take them up.
three of Venus. Our Queen She
Invested with a triple Soveragnitie;
Receivs three from three several Realms, as known
For Juno, Venus, Pallas all in one.
Amber is said in some Islands to drop from the Cedars upon the rocks.
Cedars rich perfumed drops on rocks you will say
Do tears of gold resemble in her way
That (as from pleasing dropping eyes) show forth
Joys piteous cheer weeping for want of worth.
The The daughters of the Sun, who bewailing their brother Phaeton's death,
were turned into Poplar trees, of whose tears Amber was made.
Heliades still weeping harmony
Now Is composed by her brighter Majesty.
For their joys interest they all desire
To pay their eys-tribute her beams require.
The Syrians, who great fish deify'd
In A River in Syria, in which were exceeding great fish, very gentle and
familiar, accounted by the Syrians for Gods.
Chalus, sure in the same sphere beside,
Had placed Southampton-river- Two of them were taken in Southampton river, a
male and a female, about the beginning of May last, which was a little before
her Majesty's arrival in England.
Sturgeons came
To welcome here their great Seas Royal Dame.
Mnason's so prized twelve Gods want worth to be
Signs to the Months of this Year's Jubilee.
At her approach bliss flows to our desires,
And every heart swells up with joyous fires.
Thus the Luna dum supra horizontem Maris paulatim sese effert, ex obliquo
spargit radios suos in mare, suoque lumine, quod a Sole habet, calefaciens,
exhalationes mari commixtas disgregat and dilatat, quibus dilatis paulatim mare
crescit, intumescit and accessum suum efficit.
Ocean when fair Phoebe moves on
To make her progress up it is Horizon.
Venus once mourned in Venus in Theocritus celebrated the funeral of Adonis,
(...), caerulea vest amicta in a skie-coloured gown.
clouds. To ours that vest
Now for her triumphs splendor suites the best.
While Heaven her bright Majesty invites
T'adorn her with rich gemms of spangling lights,
Its liberal hands round her in showers display
Matchless gifts, for her Junkets, banqueting-stuff, and such like, that were
wont to be thrown upon the Brides head at her first ingresse into her husband's
house.
(...).
Since she has virtued our A fountain in the land of Promise of exceeding
great virtue to cure diseases. Callirrhoe is also a fountain in Athens that had
nine springs; Et quos Callirrhoe novis errantibus undis, Implicat. This water
the Bride was wont to bathe in before she bedded with her husband.
Callirrhoe,
A mountain of Thessalie where the Muses are said to be born.
Pierus left, the Muses hither flee;
Where while into one flowing bed they steer
Each spring, turn Sirens, and inhabit here;
The Heaven dwells here giving them such advice,
Shows them the streams be those of Paradise.
Diomedes changed armor with Glaucus, from whom he had his of gold for his
own of brass.
Glaucus and Diomedes now change arms.
VVe've gold for brass, and bliss for all our harms.
From her virtues, for sound Philosophy,
We can maintain An opinion some Philosophers held.
our worlds Eternity.
All we says this, each Carpocrates now
Denies God made this orb, see it made by you.
All we do now while we'd our joys express,
Loses it is nature into Holiness.
Thus the Temple sanctifies all that we
Give to it, like your sacred Majesty.
The Opinion of Basilides thought there was as many Heavens as days in the year.
Basilides proves true,
So many Heavens we have as days with you.
The first great work the whole World did begin
After the Flood, and were confused in,
Yo've done alone (and with applause too given
By Heaven it self) made Earth reach up to Heaven.
What Atheist denies there is a God, where he
Stands and beholds the adored Divinity
Rays from your presence, as he changes shape,
His frighted Soul out of his eyes escape,
And he be fast fixed there the Porphyre tower,
And hieroglyphick of your Sovereign power.
Let Soliman the Turk had this heaven sent him by Ferdinand the Emperor:
wherein all the Planets had their several courses, the Spears, Sun and Moon
had their proper motions. The work was in a frame, to be unframed at the
Emperor's pleasure.
Solyman's silver Heaven now be shown:
That and his The Earth the place and mold it came f(...).
Heaven's Heaven too we trample on.
We leave to be unfram'd before his eyes
That Earthly bulk of humane artifice.
While for that famed, made Made of wood in Germany by John de Monte-Regio.
Eagle they relate
Flew after th'Emp'rour to the City gate;
The wings of bliss you have both made us (that be
Effluxes of your joined resplendency)
We shall, to follow after ye, displaie
When Times wings and plumes all are dropped away.
VVe'le feast at The Table of the Sun in AEthiopia prepared always with great
vatieties for all comers.
Solis mensa, and there eat
Of all the delicates in Acts 10. 11.
Peter's sheet.
With thunder of her praise then all consent
To make our voices cleave the firmament:
Then enter in, while Earth's gold Angels here
Remain to figure out blessed beings there.
The A latere movetur trepidando octavus orbis, ab Austro in Septentrinem. Et
hino rursusin Austrum.
eight sphere with trepidation move: show forth
Your sense of joy, and dance from South to North.
Ye Nymphs, with us attend our Royal Bride,
Made He learned Music of certain Nymphs he heard sing about the lake
Torrhebia and taught in the Lydians, and they deified him for it.
Carius sing and be deifi'd.
Mingle each others souls in such notes now,
May with your breath make us ascend up too,
And the three English Realms the while employ,
Like the Islands near the lake Torrhebia (quae tibiarum cantu in ambitum
moventur, and in symphoniae cantu ad ictus modulantium pedum moventur) which
are said to dance.
Calaminoe, to dance for joy.
While thousands of Heavens winged Quire conveen
To anthem joyous welcome to the Queen,
Ye Stars stand thick together in array,
To make her sacred feet the Milky-way.
William Austin Esquire
Aug. 23. 1662.

