A TREATISE OF FRUIT TREES, SHOWING The manner of Planting, Grafting, Pruning
and ordering of them in all respects, according to Rules of Experience.

Gathered in the space of Thirty seven Years.

Whereunto is Annexed, Observations upon Sr. Fran. Bacons Natural History, as
it concerns Fruit Trees, Fruits, and Flowers.

ALSO, Directions for Planting of Wood for Building, Fuel, and other uses;
whereby the Value of Lands may be much Improved in a short time, with small
Cost and little Labor.

The Third Impression, Revised, with Additions, By R A. AUSTEN, Practiser in
the Art of Planting.

Deuteronomy. 20.10. Thou shall not destroy the Trees, being Trees for meat; for the
Tree of the Field is man's life.

Amos 4.4. They shall Plant Gardens, and eat the fruits of them.

OXFORD, Printed by William Hall, for Amos Curteyne, 1665.

IMPRIMATUR ISTE LIBER

ROBER. SAY, VICE-CANCEL. OXON.
June the 9th 1665.
TO THE HONORABLE ROBERT BOIL Esquire The Worthy PATRON and EXAMPLE Of all VIRTUE.
Honored Sir,
AMong other of your many Learned and Profitable Labors, (which have much
Enlightened the World) You have been pleased (together with the Honorable and
Royal Society, whereof You are a Worthy Member) to take into Consideration the
Work of Planting and Preserving all sorts of Trees; not only of Forrest-trees
for Building, Fuel, and other uses, but also of Fruit Trees, especially in
Relation to (the most wholesome Drink) Cider; which has (together with many
other of Your undeserved Favors toward me) imboldned me to make this humble
Address unto You, entreating Your Favor and further Help in this good and
profitable Work. And conceiving that I have so much Interest in Your Honors
Favor, as to have liberty to make such Proposals unto You, as concern the
Profit of the Public (not doubting of Your good acceptance of them) I do
humbly submit these following particulars to Consideration, which I judge to be
material, if not necessary, as to many persons.

1. First, That there be a Law made to enjoyne the Work, as we have in other
Cases of far less concernment then this; and according to the Example of other
Nations in the same thing: For although many that are Ingenious Persons, will
not need such an Excitement, yet the Common vulgar People (which are the
greatest part of the Nation) will do but little without it.

2. Secondly, That there be Overseers or Officers appointed to look after the
Work, from year to year, (without which, some Laws will have but a feeble
Execution) and these Overseers to have due Encouragement one way or other: This
is no more then what is done in other Cases of far smaller advantage then this
would be.

3. Thirdly, That there be Books Printed and Published for instruction in this
business, which may have these Characters.

1. First, That they be of small Bulk and Price; Because great Volumns (as many
are upon this Subject) are of too great a Price for mean Husbandmen to buy; as
also take up more time to peruse then they can spare from other Labors.

2. Secondly, That the Style and Expressions be plain, and suited to the
Vulgar (even to the Capacities of the meanest, for these (Generally) must be
the Workmen and Laborers thereabout. Now, we know that many Pieces upon this
Subject, are in Latin, French, and other Tongues; yea, and some that are in
English; being the Works of some Learned and Eminent Persons, (whose Faculties
are raised by Study and Education, far above the reach of common Capacities)
their Expressions are answerable, and therefore not so profitable to the
Vulgar, though Excellent in themselves, and very useful unto those that
understand them: But when Men are spoken to, and taught in any Art in their own
Language, (in their common familiar style) things are more easily received, and
take the deeper Impression in their minds, and are better remembered.

3. Thirdly, That these Books for Instruction, be Experimental; according to
what is tried and practiced from year to year.

Many that have Written upon this Subject (especially some Ancient Authors)
have been merely Contemplative men; and have presented us with little else but
their Notions and Apprehensions: And though some things may be rational and
useful, yet many are not so, which when they come to be tried by the Touchstone
of Experience, fall off and deceive men, to their loss of Time, Cost, and
Labor, with discouragement; and discover themselves (as Sir Francis Bacon
observes in his Advancement of Learning) to be but mere Putative things: And
hereunto he adds, That it were to be wished, (as that which would make Learning
indeed solid and fruitful) that Active or Experimental men, would, or could,
become Writers: And the oftener Experience in things is renewed and repeated,
from year to year, the more it is Confirmed, and so fittest to be Communicated
and Practiced.

Now, how that which is here done (in the ensuing work) answers to these
things, I leave to others to Judge, not doubting but that You [Honoured Sir]
will continue your Endeavors for the carrying on this good and profitable Work
of Planting. A Work wherein not only the most Learned Philosopher, and
Exquisite Indagatour into the Mysteries of Nature, may exercise his Judgment,
and please his Mind; but also a work Pregnant with Profits, Real and
Substantial to all people all their life long, from the Cradle to the Grave: A
Work that (instead of empty and fruitless speculations) will fill the Belly and
cloth the Back. A Work that will enrich the Poor, and adorn the Rich: A Work
that will Increase the Kings Revenues, and the Substance of all his Subjects: A
Work Praised and Practiced by the Greatest and most Eminent Persons in all
Ages. In a word, It is a Royal Work, and worthy the most serious Considerations
and Endeavors of the Royal Society; whereby those Worthies may raise to
themselves perpetual Honor, as being Instrumental to promote and carry on the
same, to a greater and more general profit.

Wherefore [Worthy Sir] You being a principal Wheel in this great and famous
Engine, [framed on purpose for great and profitable Works] are able to move it
strongly and effectually to that end; which that you would be pleased to do, is
earnestly desired; whereby you may engage, not only the present Age, but also
many Generations to come; to be acknowledged by many, but especially

SIR, By Your already greatly obliged Servant, RA: AUSTEN.


TO THE READER*
THe Art of Planting fruit trees is (among Ancient Authors) called Husbandry,
Quid sit Agricultura. vid. p. 11.
being it is one part of the Husbandmans work, though in many parts of this
Nation Husbandmen have little skill in it, their labor being chiefly Tillage
of the ground for Corn. But this is a part of the Husbandmans work as well as
that; yea, and the chiefest and worthyest part. Adam in time of his Innocence
was employed in this part of Husbandry about Fruit Trees, as is showed page 22.

But when he had sinned, he was put away from this work to Till the ground, a
lower and inferior labor. Genesis 3.23. The Lord God sent him from the Garden of
Eden to Till the ground.

We see likewise the Scripture calls it Husbandry: Noah is called an Husbandman
when he Planted a Vineyard, Genesis 9.20. God (blessed for ever) is called an
Husbandman, for that he Pruneth, Purges, and orders his Mystical Vine-tree
the Church, Joh. 15.1. So that I shall keep the phrase throughout the Work.

I have seen (I suppose) the best Works, both of ancient and late Writers upon
this Subject, and have learned from them what I could, for the accomplishing of
this Art, and have observed the practice and experiments of many from time to
time, concerning it, and have improved them to my own advantage.

And likewise I have set my self to the Practice of this work about Thirty and
seven years, endeavoring to find out things of use and profit, by Practice and
Experience, that I might speak upon better and surer grounds, than some others
who have written upon this Subject; for Experience guides, and informs Reason
in many things in which (without Experience) it would often err. Some who have
taught this Art of Planting Fruit Trees, have been in it only Contemplative
men, having little or no Experience in it; so that in many things they have
erred, and that grossly, as shall appear in due place; See page 165, 166, etc.

A Learned Author says, ^. Ba. Advanc. Lea^.
The writings of speculative men upon active matter, (for the most part) seems
to men of Experience to be but as dreams and dotage:

Study and Practice (by degrees) frame new Arts, and add to the old: Per varies
usus Meditando extunderet Arts: Virg. Geor.
paulatim. Experience is called the Perfecter of Arts, and the most sure and
best teacher in any Art: Contemplation and Action are the two legs whereon Arts
run steedily and strongly, and the one without the other can but hop, or go
^amely: They are the two Eyes wherewith men see Natures secrets clearly, but
the one alone discerns but dimly. And hence it follows, that some who were only
Contemplators of nature without experience, and would needs adventure to write,
and give instructions touching the Practique part of Planting Fruit Trees, have
in many things (as the aforesaid Author says) presented us with smoke, instead
of the lucide flames of light: They have indeed showed us a comely and beautiful
body, Painted according to Art, but yet lifeless and without a spirit, and have
offered us shells and husks instead of kernels.

But now, speculation and action, are as Soul and Body united, which laboring
together, work out both Profit and Pleasure, many advantages to our selves and
others. Experience (as a Philosopher says) is the Root of Art, and it may well
be so called, from which springs a numerous multitude of new Experiments: for
from one Root, or single Experiment, (though perhaps a poor and mean one in it
self) if thoroughly weighed with reason and judgment, may arise many rich and
rare inventions: And its most true, which the Lord Bacon says to this purpose:
As through a small hole or cranny, a man may see great Objects; so through
small and contemptible instances, men may see great Axioms, singular secrets of
nature. Men will labor hard, and a long time in some labors full of hazard
and danger, and perhaps unjust too, and all for a little profit; but here, in
this employment, men may with a little labor, in a short time, without hazard
or danger, and that justly, obtain great and many profits, and those with
pleasures superadded.

Works, and labors, which have in them but a vain and unprofitable pleasure,
are approved but only of some sensual persons; and such labors as have but
only Profit, and do not ease the Pains with some pleasantness in them, are yet
harsh, and disliked of many, but such as yield both Profit and Pleasure, are
universally liked, and allowed of all, according to the Poet, Omne tulit
punctum, qui miscuit utile dulci.

Either of these is the better, because of the other joined with it, when they
run along hand in hand; the Profit is the more, because of the Pleasure; and
the Pleasure is more* because of the Profit.

Now therefore, That men may obtain yearly, a plentiful Harvest of Profits and
Pleasures, I have endeavored to remove whatsoever might hinder; and have laid
down some Arguments of Encouragement to set upon, and prosecute the means to
obtain them; discovering the best way I can find out, how they may be gotten
with most speed, and kept with most security.

If any man think the Divine and Humane Arguments (preceding the work) to be
needless, because generally men know, that Planting Fruit Trees is a very
profitable work, none doubt it.

I Answer; Some know it by Experience, many others do not.

And although men are convinced of the profitableness of the work, yet there is
need of some quickening Motives to it, as to some persons; And I know none more
prevalent than those taken from Profits and Pleasures, considered in so great
and so many respects.

Accept of what is made ready at present, which as it may be profitable to some
in respect of Encouragements and Directions in the practice of the Work, so
also I desire it may be a means to stir up others to do something in the like
kind for Public profit.

There are many good Wits exercised about Toys and Trifles: some men bestow
excessive Time, Cost, and Labor, about mere shadows, empty speculations; and
well deserve Martials Motto.

Turpe est difficiles habere nugas.
Et stultus labor est ineptiarum.
While they might in the mean time, by the Study and Practice of this Art, (in
searching out many hidden secrets of nature and experiments) much advantage
themselves, and many others, both in respect of Temporals and Spirituals. An
Ancient Author says, Not he that knows many things, but he that knows
things Fruitful is Wise.

This Art is a full Store house, out of which may be brought both Meat, Drink,
and Money: It is a Rich Mine, without bounds or bottom, out of which we may
dig profits and pleasures, great and many, and worthy the study and labor of
the most Wise and Learned, and may be called the Philosophers-stone, (virtually
and effectually (though not properly) for it turns, by the help of nature
(though not Metals, yet) Trees and Fruits, yea, Earth and Water, into Gold and
Silver in a short time.

The good of this Employment, both in the Theorique and Practique part, spreads
it self over all places in the world, to all persons in the world, from the
Cradle to the Grave, from the beginning of the world, to the end of it; so that
no work can be more universally good than this.

Now therefore, seeing there is so much profit and advantage to be received
from this employment of Planting Fruit Trees, both in Temporal and Spiritual
respects, Let us set about it, and labor in it, either with body or mind, or
both, That thereby the Glory of God, and public profit (together with our own
advantages) may be promoted.

The blessing of God go along with us, and give the increase in all our
labors, and prosper the works of our hands.

This is my advice to men, and Prayer to God. Who am

Thine in the best Services RA: AUSTEN.

THE ANALYSIS.
PRofits of Planting Fruit Trees in Corn and Pasture grounds, the best way of
Improvement of Lands. p. 1.

Objections concerning Planting Answered.
1. Coldness of the Country. p. 6. 2. Robbing of Fruit Trees. p. 7. 3. Long
expectation of Fruits. p. 9.
The praises of Fruit Trees and Art of Planting.
1. From Ancient Authors. p. 11* 12, etc. 2. From Modern Authors. p. 11* 12,
etc.
Eight Divine Arguments of the dignity and value of Fruit Trees and Art of
Planting. page 21.
1. Argument; Adams Imploymen in Innocence. page 22. 2. Argument; Fruits were
the first Food given to Man. p. 23. 3. Argument; from Examples page 23, 24,
etc. 1. God blessed for ever. 2. Noah. 3. Abraham. 4. King Uzziah. 5. King
Solomon. 6. Susanna. 7. The Jews. 8. Our Savior Christ.
4. Argument; from similitudes page 26. 27, etc. 1. Esaias ^ 1, 2. My beloved had
a Vineyard in a fruitful hill. 2. Psalm. 1.2. Like a Tree planted by the Rivers
of Waters, etc. 3. Ioh. 15.1. I am the true Vine, and my Father is the
Husbandman. 4. Romans 11.17. If some of the branches were broken off, etc. 5.
Cant. 4.12, 13. A garden enclosed, is my Sister, my Spouse. 6. Rev. 22.2. There
was the tree of Life.
5. Divine Argument; from Gods withholding them in displeasure. p. 29.
Instances.
1. Exodus 9.25. Hail brake every Tree of the Field, etc. 2. Amos 4.9. I have
smitten your fruit trees, etc. 3. Joel 1.12. The Vine is dried up, the Fig Tree
languisheth, etc. 4. Deuteronomy. 28.39. Thou shall Plant, but shall neither drink of
the Wine nor gather the Grapes.
6. Divine Argument; from Gods promising, and giving them in Mercy. p. 31.
Instances.
1. Ier. 29.5. Plant Gardens, and eat the fruits of them 2. Amos 9.4. They
shall Plant Gardens, and eat the Fruits of them. 3. Neh. 9.25. They took strong
Cities, Vineyards, and Olive-yards, and Fruit Trees in abundance. 4. Ezekiel.
34.27. And the Tree of the Field shall yield her Fruit, etc.
7. Divine Argument from two Commands. 1. Tit. 3.4. Let ours also learn to
maintain good Works for necessary uses. p. 33. 2. Phil. 4.8. Whatsoever things
are true, whatsoever things are lovely, of good Report, etc. page 33.
8. Divine Argument from Gods special Charge to preserve fruit trees above all
other Trees. Deuteronomy. 20.19. Thou shall not destroy the Trees, being Trees for
Meat; for the Tree of the Field is man's life. p. 35.
4. Humane Arguments of the dignity of Fruit trees and Planting from the 1.
Presidents of the greatest Persons. page 36. Cyrus King of Persia Philometrus,
Heronius, Archelaus, Attalus, Kings of Asia. Evax, Avicen, Kings of Arabia.
Telaphanus Antonius Pius. Elizeus. Numa. Sp^rtanus. Alcinous. Mithridates the
great, Alexander the Great. Solomon King of Israel. And many others.
2. Praises of all people. p. 39. See Instances of many, page 6, 7, 8, etc.


The Third Humane Argument from Profits.
1. To the Estate 1. In respect of Housekeeping 1. In Meats. page 40. 2. In
drinks. page 40.
2. In respect of Sale. 1. Fruits in their kinds p. 40. 2. Wins made of them.
p. 40.

2. To the body 1. In respect of health, page 40. 1. By Moderate Exercises. p.
41. 2. Fresh Aires. p. 41. 3. Pleasant odors. p. 42. 4. Wholesome Meats. p. 44.
2. In respect of long life, page 44. 1. By operation upon the spirits, through
the Organs of the body. Ear page 61, 62, 63, etc. Touch page 61, 62, 63, etc.
Smell page 61, 62, 63, etc. Sight page 61, 62, 63, etc. Taste page 61, 62, 63, etc.
2. Through the affections of the Mind. Hope. p. 44. Joy. p. 48. Admiration* p.
49, etc.


3. To the Mind. 1. In respect of knowledge. Natural p. 50. Moral p. 50.
Spiritual p. 50.
2. In respect of Meditations* page 57.
4. To the Name. 1. In this Life, by Gifts and Benefits. 2. After Death; by
Fruit Trees, as living Monuments. page 56.
5. To others 1. To the Poor Friends or Enemies. p. 60. 2. To the Rich. Friends
or Enemies. p. 60.

The Fourth Humane Argument from Pleasures.
1. To the Ear. 1. By sweet tunes of Singing Birds. p. 60. 2. By gentle Motion
of boughs and leaves. p. 60.
2. To the Touch. 1. By cool Fruits, boughs and leaves. page 61. 2. By cool
fresh Airs. p. 61.
3. To the Eye. 1. By decent forms of Trees, Allies, Walks, Seats and Arbours.
page 64. 2. By curious colors of blossoms, leaves, and fruits. p. 65.
4. To the Smell. 1. By fresh Earth dug up. page 66. 2. From blossoms and
leaves. page 67.
5. To the Taste. 1. From Ripe and Raw Fruits. page 69. 2. From Dishes and
Drinks made of them. p. 70.

A Cauton in the use of Earthly blessings.
No Earthly thing to be enjoyed properly, but used only. page 74. Difference
between using and enjoying of a thing. page 75.
The Nursery; in it consider,
1. Sowing 1. Seeds of Fruits 1. The time* page 79. 2. The manner. p. 80.
2. Stones of Fruits 1. The time* page 79. 2. The manner. p. 80.

2. Weeding and Watering the young Plants. page 81. 3. Transplanting them in
Autumn. page 83. 4. Inoculating or Ingrafting them* page 45.
In Grafting observe.
1. Time of Grafting. 1. General time* the Spring. p. 45. 2. More special, in
respect of different kinds. p. 45.
2. Instruments for the Work. 46* 3. Manner of the Works 3. ways. 1. Of small
Stocks. p. 46.47* 2. Of great Stocks. p. 46.47* 3. A middle sort of Stocks. p.
46.47*
4. Choice of Grafts. 1. As they fit several stocks. p. 92. 2. In respect of
good bearing kinds. p. 93.

In Inoculating, observe
1. The time. page 96. 2. The Buds 1. In respect of growth. p. 51. 2. In
respect of kinds. p. 97.
3. The Stocks 1. The small and young. p. 97. 2. Those full of sap. p. 98.
4. Unbinding the Buds, some sooner, some later* 99.
In Transplanting, observe
1. The time: Early removing best. page 117. 2. Pruning 1. The Roots. of Plants
page 120. 2. The Branches of Plants page 120.
3. Manner of setting. 1. Standards. In respect of 1. Deepness. p. 120 2.
Distance p. 122. 3. Order. p. 128.
2. Wall trees. In respect of 1. Deepness. p. 120 2. Distance p. 122. 3. Order.
p. 128.


In Pruning, cut
1. Wall-trees 1. In Summer. page 131. 2. In Winter. page 132.
2. Standards 1. All dead boughs. p. 133. 2. All superfluous living boughs page
133.

Order the Roots
1. In opening them. p. 134. 2. In laying fit soyls to them. page 134, etc.
Diseases incident to fruit trees.
1. Mossiness. 1. Causes page 137.138. 2. Cur^^ page 137.138.
2. Bark-bound 1. Causes page 137.138. 2. Cur^^ page 137.138.
3. Canker 1. Causes page 137.138. 2. Cur^^ page 137.138.
4. Worms 1. Causes page 137.138. 2. Cur^^ page 137.138.

Mischiefs incident to fruits
1. Caterpillars Remedies thereof* page 139, 140, etc. 2. Ants. Remedies
thereof* page 139, 140, etc. 3. Earwigs Remedies thereof* page 139, 140, etc. 4.
Snails Remedies thereof* page 139, 140, etc. 5. Wasps Remedies thereof* page 139,
140, etc. 6. Birds Remedies thereof* page 139, 140, etc. 7. Winds Remedies
thereof* page 139, 140, etc.
The use of fruits
1. The Alimental Use of 1. Apples. p. 144.145 2. Pears. page 154. 3. Quinces.
page 155. 4. Cherries page 156* 5. Plums. page 158. 6. Aprecots page 159. 7.
Pea^hes. page 160. 8. Mulberries. p. 160. 9. Figgs. page 161. 10. Grapes. page
111. 11. Medlers page 162. 12. Wallnuts. p. 163
2. The Physical Use of 1. Apples. p. 144.145 2. Pears. page 154. 3. Quinces.
page 155. 4. Cherries page 156. 5. Plums. page 158. 6. Aprecots page 159. 7.
Pea^hes. page 160. 8. Mulberries. p. 160. 9. Figgs. page 161. 10. Grapes. page
111. 11. Medlers page 162. 12 Wallnuts. p. 163

Errors Discovered in the
1. Theory Of the Art of Planting. page 165. 2. Practice Of the Art of
Planting. page 165.
In the Theory are three sorts.
1. Instructions hurtful and dangerous 1. To Graft the first Spring. page 167.
2. Not to Prune Roots page 168. 3. To use Treble Grafts. page 169. 4. To use
Grafts swelling. page 168. 5. To remove the Clay. 169. 6. To underprop Grafts.
169. 7. To mixed things in Grafting. page 170. 8. Not to Plant against a Wall.
page 170. 9. To remove after Winter* page 171. 10. To Plant on Hills. page 171.
11. To set Stones a foot deep. page 172. 12. To set buds on knobs of Stocks.
page 172. 13. To set Apple Trees 20 foot a sunder. p. 173. 14. To cut away the
shoots of the last year. p. 174.
2. Instructions for effecting things impossible to be effected by the means
prescribed* and other things impossible to be effected by any means. 1. To mix
diverse kinds of Fruits, page 174. 2. To change the species of fruits, page 176.
3. To make fruits have good tastes, page 176. 4. To make fruits have good
Colors, page 180. 5. To have Nuts without Husks, page 183. 6. To have early
and late Fruits, page 184. 7. To have Fruits with Inscriptio^s on them, page
185.
3. Affiguing wrong causes to effects. 1. That Grafting causes early bearing,
and makes Fruits better. page 187. 2. That Grafting in the Old of the Moon,
causes barrenness many years, page 190. 3. That Sap descends from the
Branches to the Roots, and works several effects, page 191, 192, etc.

Errors in Practice of the Art of Planting, Are
1. Planting Trees too near together, page 205. 2. Planting Trees unfit for the
Country, page 205. 3. Choosing the greatest Plants, page 206. 4. Setting Trees
without disbranching, page 206. 5. Planting Trees in worse mould, page, 207. 6.
Setting the Graft and Stock smooth on the outside, p. 207. 7. Grafting long, or
forked Grafts, page 208. 8 Suffering Fruit trees to grow like Timber Trees,
page 208. 9. Giving too much nourishment to Fruit Trees* page 209. 10. Pruning
off too many shoots from Wall-trees, page 210. 11. Grafting Seed-plants before
removing, page 210. 12. Not Pruning the Roots of Plants. page 210. 13. Breaking
off Buds before grafts grow, page 211. 14. Grafting Great Trees in the Cleft,
211.
A TABLE, Showing the Principal things contained in the Ensuing Work.
HOw to prepare ground for a Nursery; and to Sow and Set Seeds, Stones,
Kernels, etc. Page 78, 79 Preserve Seeds from Mice, and weed them page 80
Remove the biggest Seed-plants by themselves, and the least by themselves, and
remove all Seed-plants p. 82, 83 January, the best Month to graft Cherry, and
Plum-grafts p. 85 Grafts may be kept in Mould many weeks p. 85 Necessary
Instruments for Grafting p. 86 Several ways of Grafting; that of Packing on is
more sure and easy, less hurt to the grafts and stocks, then in the cleft. The
Reasons p. 87 To join the inner sides of the stock and graft, is a special Rule
in Grafting p. 91 The thickest grafts are (for the most part) the best p. 92
Cut off the tops of Grafts p. 92 Choose Grafts from the best bearing Trees p.
93 Unbind Grafts in due season, and strengthen the grafted place p. 93 Prune
off all side branches of Grafts that are for Standards, and preserve only one
strait shoot p. 95 Time to Inoculate is about Midsommer, yet some Buds sooner
than others p. 96 Inoculate Buds into fit stocks p. 97 Unbind Buds in due time
p. 99 How to carry Buds many Miles p. 100 Mark stocks to know the kinds p. 101
To choose right kinds of grafts and buds, and to set them on fit stocks, is
(above all things most necessary in this Art p 101, 102 Juice of the black
heart, and great bearing Cherry, special good to make Cherry-wine, or to color
Cider to make it as Clarret-wine p. 106 The driest Plums, (as the Musle,
Damazeen, etc.) are the best p. 108 Aprecot-trees, and Peaches, are propagated
by the bud only, not by grafting p. 109 The great Blew Fig comes to perfect
ripeness with us, if set against a South wall p. 111 Vineyards formerly in
England p. 112 The Parsley Vine, and white Muskadine, bear store of good fruits
p. 112 Portugal Quince the best kind p. 113 Black Mulberry trees bear
abundantly p. 114 Choose the fairest Walnuts of thinnest shells, and good
bearers, to set p. 115 Graft old Trees, if bad bearers, or bad fruits p. 115
Arbors of Fruit Trees, better than of Privet, etc. p. 116 Begin to Transplant
betime; diverse advantages by it p. 117 The largest plants not best p. 119 Set
not below the soil p. 120 Prune the branches and Roots p. 120 Lay Dung or
Weeds about new set Plants p. 121 How to prepare Trees for carriage p. 122 In
setting Trees observe a fit distance, see the advantages p. 123 Distance of
Wall trees p. 125 How to set and order Cherry and Quodling hedges p. 125
Nearness of trees best in some respects p. 127 Order in setting p. 128 Put some
good Mould next the roots of Plants in setting p. 129 Ordering Plants the first
year of setting, is of special concernment p. 130 Suffer not the main branches
of Wall-trees to rise upwards, but spread them on the sides of the wall p. 131
Wall-trees must be pruned and ordered, both in Summer and Winter p. 131 Error
in Pruning Wall-trees; Cutting off too many shoots p. 133 An Observation in
Pruning p. 133 Bare old Trees at the Roots about October, and lay some good
soyls to them p. 134 Piggeons-dung, Hens dung, Blood of Cattle, or the like, is
special good to cause Trees to bear well p. 134 Mowing of Orchards is exceeding
hurtful to Fruit Trees, but suffering Cattle to lie among them, is very
profitable p. 135 Moss on Fruit Trees, caused by coldness and barrenness of the
ground p. 137 Cut off the branches of Trees Bark-bound p. 138 Cut out the
Canker of Fruit Trees p. 139 Cut worms out of the bark of Trees p. 139 Destroy
Catterpillers in breeding p. 140 Preserve the fruits from Ants, Erewigs, Snails
Wasps, Birds, and Winds as much as may be p. 141, 142 Apples best for Cider p.
144 Increase the best kinds for Cider p. 145 Some Cider sooner ready then other
kinds p. 145 How to make Cider and Perry p. 146 Of Botling Cider p. 147 How to
keep Bottles of Cider p. 147 Of the healthfulness of Cider p. 148 How to keep
Apples p. 151 Apples are singular good to cure the Strangury, and other
diseases proceeding of the difficulty of making water; see how ordered p. 153
Pears are more nourishing than Apples p. 154 A Wine of Pears, not inferior to
French-Wines p. 154 Quinces, Cordial Fruits, and of manifold uses p. 155 How to
keep Quinces a year or two p. 156 Cherries breed good blood in the body p. 156
A pleasant refreshing Wine made of Cherries, more fit for Summer than hot Wines
p. 157 Cherries boiled in broths and drinks, good for hot and feverish bodies
p. 158 Kernels of Cherry-stones break the bladder stone p. 158 Plums cast out
chollerick humors, and are good in hot diseases p. 158 The infusion of dried
Aprecots, is profitable in sharp fevers p. 159 Peaches cool, and keep the
belly soluble, eat them (as all other fruits) moderately, and drink a cup of
Wine after p. 160 Wine of Mulberries, a small quantity of juice will color
White Wind, Cider, Perry, etc. and makes a pleasant sauce p. 1^0 Juice of
Mulberries, good against a sore mouth or throat, they stir up a languishing
appetite p. 161 Figs nourish much, and breed store of blood; are accounted
restorative; they help an old cough (boiled with Isop) are for many other
purposes p. 161 Medlers fortify digestion, stay vomiting and looseness of the
belly; kernels (with parsley roots, etc.) mightily drive out stones and gravel
from the kidneys p. 162 Walnuts help digestion, with other things they resist
Poison; green Walnuts distilled, preserve against the Pestilence p. 163 Errors
discovered concerning the Art of Planting: First, in the writings of some:
Secondly, in the practice of others; see the particulars p. 165, 166, 167, etc.
Situation of an Orchard^ p. 212 Soil of an Orchard p. 213 Cold and moist
grounds p. 215 Hot and dry grounds p. 215 Cold clay grounds p. 215 Stony gravel
grounds p. 216 Low bottom grounds p. 216 Shelters for an Orchard p. 217
Walnut-trees good shelters p. 218 Quantity of ground for an Orchard p. 220 Such
as begin to Plant soonest, will have most profit p. 220 Great profits, with
little cost and pains p. 221 Orchard and garden on the South side p. 221 Build
the House in the midst of the Orchard p. 222 Sweet fresh Air, conduces to
health and long life more than diet p. 222 Many stocks of Bees may be kept in a
great O^chard p. 223 Plant Fruit Trees in the Fields and Hedges p. 224 Observe
right kinds of Trees p. 224 Plant high Trees in Fields p. 225 Manner of
Planting in the Fields p. 226 Shade and droppings, no considerable prejudice p.
227 Great profit of Fruit Trees by Cider and Perry p. 227 Cider more healthy
than other liquors p. 228 Long Experience proves the healthfulness of Cider p.
228 Windiness of Cider only at first p. 229 Cider of some Apples is cordial p.
230 Apprehensions of good, makes men seek after it p. 231 Health and Long-life
p. 231 Riches and Profits p. 231 The Philosophers stone p. 232 Let Landlords
and Tenants agree to Plant p. 233 An increase manifold p. 233 Husbandry the end
of men's other endeavors p. 234 Nations subsist by Husbandry p. 234 Plant Oak,
Ash, Elm, and all sorts of Wood p. 235 Land not worth Twenty shillings an
Acre, is made worth five pound in few years p. 236 Wood on good Land worth
Sixty pounds an Acre p. 236 One hundred Ashes sold for five hundred pounds p.
237 Fifty thousand pounds worth of Wood raised in an Age, by one man p. 237 A
necessity of planting Wood p 237 It is desired the Higher Powers would enjoin
this work p. 238 Reasons for it p. 238 Other nations look more after planting
p. 239 How to have great store of young Oaks, Ashes, etc. p. 240 How to get
Elm Plants p. 240 Cut not the Tops p 241 Draw many Plants, and leave the rest
p. 241 Willow, Osier, Withy, Sally, etc. p. 241 Soil best for a Plantation p.
242 Of Vine yards in England p. 243 Camdens Testimony of Vineyards in England
p. 243 Mr. Parkinsons judgment of Vineyards in England p. 244 A Vineyard must
have all advantages with us p. 245 An Experienced way for good Wines p. 245
Various things Promiscuously.
1 MAke some Wall-trees, Dwarf-trees p. 246 2 Keep the ground bare, under and
about them p. 247 3 Wet grounds bad for Trees p. 247 4 Helps to Fruit Trees in
bearing p. 247 5 Take heed that Pismires, Efts, and such like, be not about the
Roots of Trees p. 248 6 Fruit Trees advantage Grass some ways p. 248 7
Fruit Trees profitable many ways p. 248 8 Helps for barren Vines p. 249 9 How
to keep Grapes p. 249 10 Much profit by planting in one Age p. 249 11 Remedies
against Coneyes, Mice, etc. p. 250 12 To have Cherries and other Fruits late p.
250 13 Destroy Snails in Gardens p. 251 14 To have fruit grow within doors p.
251 15 Apples that have lain a certain time, make the best Cider p. 252 16 Tun
up Cider as soon as may be p. 252 17 What flags are best to bind withal p. 252
18 Fit grafts and stocks in bigness p. 253 19 Cut grafts in due Season p. 253
20 Seed-stocks better than wood-stocks p. 254 21 Weed the Nursery p. 255 22 Cut
not off side-branches too soon p. 255 23 How to get great boughs, with Roots
from Trees p. 255 24 Look that seeds lie not above ground p. 257 25 Lay dung
upon the Roots of new set Plants p. 257 26 Leave a Bud on the outside p. 258 27
Preserve some ungrafted Trees for Cider; Sow Acornes, Ashkeyes, and other Seeds
p. 159
A Table showing the Principal things contained in these Experiments and
Observations.
ACceleration of Germination, by sowing seed upon a hot bed Page 2 Steeping of
seeds, kernels, stones, etc. in Liquors before sowing, to make them spring up
the sooner p. 3 Watring of Strawberries, to hasten ripening p. 4 Blood, and
other things applied to the Roots of Trees p. 4 Fruits upon the south and east
sun, ripen soonest p 5 Digging about the Roots of some Trees is profitable p. 6
Rose-trees bud forth in the house p. 6 Flowers with Bulbous Roots, grow a time
in water p. 7. Pease, Radish, etc. Early p. 7 Water necessary to fruit trees
but not over much p. 8 Plants housed seasonably, bud soonest p. 8 To make Roses
come late, several means p. 9, 10* 11 Stones, Weeds, Muck, etc. laid about the
Roots of new set Trees, makes them prosper better p. 11 Keep Trees stedy at
first setting p. 1^ Cut away suckers and side branches at need is p. 13 How to
take off the boughs of some Trees with Roots p. 14 No descention of sap in
Trees, diverse Arguments against it p 14, 15 How to make barren Trees fruitful
p. 15 Trees against a South-wall, bear fruits ripe soonest p. 16 Pull not off
leaves too soon p. 17 Fruits on low boughs, ripe soonest p. 17 Graft Trees that
bear not, or bear not good fruits, with grafts of good bearing kinds p 19
Digging about the Roots of Trees, profitable to some p. 19 Opening the Roots of
old Trees, and putting in good mould, is necessary in barren ground p. 20
Transplant Trees from bad ground, to better p. 21 Cutting, or scoring the bark
of Trees, sometimes profitable p 21 Shade good for some Trees p. 22 Pull off
blossoms in some cases p 22 Grafting helps not Trees, except the Grafts are
of good kinds p. 23 Grafts do govern, yet partake somewhat of the stock p. 24
Fruit Trees of some kernels, bear good fruits p. 26 Remove flowers into fresh
earth p. 26 Regrafting the same graft, makes not fruits greater p. 27 Cut not
off the tops of young fig trees p. 28 Black Mulberry-trees great bearers p. 28
Lees of Wine, Blood, etc. good especially to old Yrees p 29 Terebration of
Trees, good for some Trees p. 29 Pricking, or scoring of Trees profitable p 29
Swines dung good for trees, if moderately used p. 30 Simply grafting does not
meliorate fruits p. 30 Choose the best Grafts and Stocks p. 30 Rouen dung best
for Trees p. 31 Fruit growing in Pots p. 32 Set not any Trees below the soil
p. 33 Fruits upon warm walls ripen soonest p. 33 Graft upon the best stocks p.
34 The Causes of Barrenness of Trees p. 35 Of Compounding fruits, making of
several kinds, one new kind p. 37 Sympathy and Antipathy of Plants p. 40
Several kinds drawing the same juice or sap, convert it into their own Natures
p. 42 Of making herbs and fruits Medicinable p. 42 Curiosities about Fruits and
Plants p. 44 Fruits of several shapes p. 45 Fruits and Trees with Inscriptions
or Ingravings upon them p. 45 Set Letters on Fruit trees, to know the kinds p.
46 Trees apparelled with flowers p. 4^ Remove flowers into fresh mold p. 47 Lay
flowers to multiply them, see how p 48 Cl^ve gilly flowers, the most useful p
49 White colors more inodorate p. 50 White fruits commonly best p 51 Different
colors from one kind of seed p. 52 Gather seed from the best flowers p. 54 How
to have flowers fair and double p. 54 Roses multiplied by Inoculating p. 55
Fruits without core or stone p. 55 Grafts upon the sweetest stocks, bear the
sweetest fruits p. 57 Degenerating of Plants p. 57 Some flowers degerate and
change through barrenness of the soil p. 58 Seed of some fruits degenerate, see
the Cause p. 59 Peaches come not better of stones then grafting p. 60 Dwarf
trees bear great fruits and many p. 61 Help barren soyls, and such as are too
moist, la^ them dryer p. 63 Some trees bear twice a year p. 6^ Cutting
fruit trees conduces to their lasting in some cases p. 65 How to keep fruits
long p. 66 Wine of Cherries, and other fruits p 68 An excellent drink made of
Pl^ms p. 70 Plant the best bearing Trees p. 70 Most fruits commonly on the
lowest boughs, the Cause p. 71 Good bearing kinds bear betime, and last long p.
73 Get the best kinds upon any rates p. 73 Graft again old Trees, if bad
fruits, or bad bearer^ p. 74 Some Trees grow deeper then others, the cause p.
75 Some Trees take Root of slips p. 76 Vines take not with grafting, lay the
branches in the earth p. 77 Heat hastneth Maturation of Fruits p. 78 How to
keep Cider, and other Liquors, long p. 79 Bottles of Liquor, in Sand, Earth,
etc. p. 80 Fruits cannot be made without cores or stones p. 81 Artificial heat
may help to ripen fruits sooner p. 82
Planting of Fruit Trees, The best way of improvement of Lands.
THE Profits of Orchards and Gardens, and also of planting Fruit Trees in the
Fields and Hedges, (especially by Cider and Pery) are very well know to many in
this Nation, so that the things I here speak of to men, are not doubtful and
questionable, whether advantages will arise or no, when they have bestowed
their time, and labors about them, but Profits are as certain (by the
blessing of, God) as a harvest of Corn in Autumn when the husbandman has
plowed, and sowed, in the spring or other season. Worcestershire,
Herefordshire, Glocestershire, Kent, and many other parts in this Nation, can
sufficiently evidence the Profits of Orchards and fruit trees in the fields and
hedges* And those good Common-wealths-men, who have written of the Improvement
of lands, have all agreed, that this is the highest way of improvement of any
other.

Mr. Blithe in his Book entitled, The Improver improved, has asserted, That
Planting Fruit trees at such a distance as they cannot reach, when they have
attained largest growth, they do advantage the Land, even in respect of Grass,
(although the common prejudice against Fruit Trees in fields is, that they
spoil Grass) so that some Land not being worth above 10s, or 13s 4d. an Acre,
the Grass ( by planting Fruit Trees regularly upon it) was afterward worth
30s, on 40s, or 50s an Acre. And the Fruits upon the Trees may yield some 3l,
some 5l* Or some 6 or 8l an Acre, See Page 262 of his Book.

And that in Kent, Essex, Surrey, Middlesex, and those parts, some Land that
was not worth above 6 or 8s the Acre, was by Nurseries of young Trees, planting
and ordering of them, in certain years brought to be worth 20l an Acre, and
some 40 or more.

And further, he affirms, that some Orchards in those parts a^^ worth to
grase Forty, or fifty shillings, (...) an Acre, and are so let to Tenants: And
the fruits of those Trees seldom yield so little, as Double or treble the
worth of the Grass, many times five or sixfold, or more, see Page 263. of his
Book.

It may (perhaps) be objected: That Fruit Trees so planted make grass (under,
and about them) sower, that it is not so pleasant, and good for Cattle, as some
other, where no Trees are.

It is Answered: Although it be not so pleasant altogether, as that where
there is no shade of trees, yet other advantages do more then make amends. It Is
observed that such Grass is earlier in the spring then upon other grounds,
^and that such grounds bear more, when it is cut for hay, or if pastured it
keeps more Cattle, then Lands of like quantity not so planted: And besides, in
a hot and dry summer, there is grass under, and about Trees, when its burnt up
in other grounds.

My advice is therefore (all these Profits and advantages considered) that men
set themselves diligently to this work of Planting Fruit Trees, for improvement
of their Lands and Estates. Not only, that they plant good Orchards and
Gardens, but also that they Plant round about their fields, and in the ^^elds,
and in their Corn, Pasture, and hay grounds, (as in Kent) the fruit trees at a
large distance one from another, 20 or 30 yards asunder, and that they suffer
no branches to spread, within two yards from the ground, that so they may be
out of the reach of Cattle and may not be troublesome to workmen in plowing,
sowing, reaping, and other works.

If the Plants are fair straight ones, of two yards high, or thereabouts, and
senced about to preserve them from Cattle at the first, (with some stakes or
the like) they will in a few years preserve themselves, and will need but
little labor about them afterward as long as they live,

And hereby men may reap every year two harvests, (from one and the same
piece of land) the one of Corn, the other of fruits of trees, and the latter
(when trees are grown large) probably will be the greater.

And in this respect this way of improvement of Lands, is much better then
other ways of profit; because in getting Corn, or raising profits by any
other ways of improvement, men must of necessity bestow much money, time, and
pains about them every year, which eats up a great part of their profits, but
in Planting fruit trees, the worst is at first, after a few years they yield
great profits, with little cost and labor. So that as was said fruit trees in
a few years with small cost and labor; will double and treble the value of
Lands, and after many years, the advance of Profit will be manyfold.

But it may be Objected, That if all should plant, Ob.
then such great profits could not be made, every man would have of his own.

I answer: that if all should plant fruit trees that may conveniently plant;
yet would there be multitudes every where to buy for all that. Ans.
For consider, in a great City or Town, what a number of people there are, who
have no Lands at all, not so much as a piece of ground belonging to their
house, and many others but very small quantities, these will be buyers of the
husbandmans fruits, and the Cider and Wines that he makes of them.

And let us say what we will or can, there is many that have Lands which they
might Plant, and improve to an exceeding great value, who will yet be idle, and
sloathfull, and object with Solomon's sluggard there is a Lion in the may,
something or other that hinders: yet these men when they see fruits, will be as
eager for them as any others, and therefore will be very good Chapmen to buy
the Fruits of the diligent husbandman.

Objections and Discouragements Concerning Planting; answered.
BEfore I enter upon the work it self, it will be convenient in the first
place, to Answer some maine Objections, to remove discouragements about this
work of Planting Fruit Trees, that have kept off many from this profitable
employment, and may still hinder them, unless removed. And then I will give
some encouragements to it from Divine, and Humane Arguments and Testimonies.

1. Ob.
This is an Objection amongst many in the North parts: they say the Northern
Countries are so cold, that Fruit Trees will not prosper nor bear fruits there.

Ans.
To this I Answer: That although it be true that the Northern Countries lie in a
more cold Climate then Worcestershire, Herefordshire and those Fruit Countries,
yet I doubt not but that if they were as diligent in planting Fruit Trees in
the North parts, as men are in these, they might have store of good fruits: so
that some Cautions be observed in the nature of Trees. Its true: Cold Countries
are not so fit for choice and tender fruits* as warmer Climates; but there are
diverse kinds of hardy fruits, both Apples, Pears Cherries, which yearly
experience shows endure cold, and come to perfection in cold springs, when
many other kinds are spoiled. Procure Grafts, or Young trees ready grafted of
the best bearing kinds, such as are found by experience to bear well, even in
cold springs. See page 53, 54, etc. Let such kinds therefore be sought for and
Planted. Those good husbands in those parts, who are diligent in Planting
Fruit Trees, have Fruits answerable.

Others say, 2: Ob.
that if they should plant Fruit Trees, and bestow much labor and cost about
them, when they come to perfection and bearing fruits they should be robbed of
all, or most, and the Trees would be spoiled, and who would Plant to be so
served.

To this I Answer: Ans.
That if there were no remedy against this mischeife, it might indeed be a just
discouragement: but this fear may be removed diverse ways.

And First: I advise, that having made a good fence about the Orchard, you keep
therein a lusty Mastiffe or two; that will not be charmed in the night time,
and the terror of them will keep men from adventuring upon such an Occasion.

Secondly: some that have good Orchards watch their fruits. If a man keep 2, or
3, or more servants, they may watch in their turns, its no great matter, if you
consider for what time only it is necessary, which is but from the time that
fruits come to be worth getting, till they be ripe, and that is not long. And
consider, it is in a pleasant season of the year, the pains and charge would
be but little to the profit: we see men are vigilant and diligent much more
then this would require upon far less advantages.

3. But there is a third means to keep Orchards from being robbed, which I
esteem best of any other, it is this: I would have every man (that has land)
to plant some Fruit Trees for himself, that so they may not be thieves to
their neighbors: and let those that have much fruit spare a part to the^ that
have but little, or none of their own, and be no niggards but liberal to their
neighbors: And this bounty will bring a double blessing, first from God, to
increase the fruits; secondly from men, not to diminish them.

But I heartily wish that such as make but a sport of robbing an Orchard, See
the second Book of his Confessions. Chap. 4.
would but consider the affliction and terrors of conscience that seized upon
good St. Austen, for this very sin of robbing an Orchard, which he was guilty
of before his Conversion: he confesses it with much grief, and aggravates it
with no less then ten circumstances, crying earnestly for mercy and pardon:
Ecce Cor meum Deus meus, ecce Cor meum, quod miseratus es in imo abyssi. etc.
When God lets loose the least sin to fight against a man, and but to show it
self in its proper shape, it will terrify the stoutest heart: A wounded
spirit who can bear?

But there is another Objection greater then the former: 3. Ob.
Men usually say, should we plant Fruit Trees it would be so long ere they come
to perfection, and bearing fruits, that out hopes would faint before we could
see profit of our labors, perhaps they would not bear fruits of Sixteen, or
Twenty years growth.

I Answer first, Ans.
that though the Objection on were true, that trees Planted would be long ere
they come to bearing fruits, perhaps 20 years or more, yet this should not
discourage us; especially such as may have good hopes to enjoy the profits and
pleasures of them many years after, and then leave them to their Children and
to posterity after them. But secondly, men are generally mistaken upon this
Account, Fruit Trees rightly ordered, will not be so long ere they bear fruits
as they suppose: I shall show a way, that by Planting Fruit trees, and ordering
of them as I give directions (by the blessing of a divine hand that still
attends honest labors) we may receive Profits from them in half Twenty years
yea in half that half, yea in less then in five years: sometimes the third,
sometime^ the second year, (of many kinds of fruit trees) after Grafting:
Experience prove^ it, though we must know, the fruit cannot be much, while the
trees are so small, o^ particulars: yet a multitude of such tree will afford a
multitude of fruits: A Cistern^ of water is but a multitude of drops.

So then; that Fruit Trees may be planted and come to bearing fruits in 5, 4,
or 3 years, or sooner, the means is showed a large in the ensuing work. So
that I hope ^his grand discouragement (which has ^o long and so generally kept
men from his profitable work) will be removed.

Now (as I promised) I will lay down ^ome Excitements, and Encouragements to
^he work of Planting fruit trees.

Many large works have been composed by Ancient Authors, for the Instru^tion
of the husbandman in this his princi^all work: And they have given this
employment many and great commendations and praises, and it is accounted by
them the chiefest of all earthly employments, because of the many Profits and
Pleasures, that come by it.

And because it shall appear what ^pinion and esteem they have had of this
course of life, and with what Praises they have set it forth, I will give you
the particular expressions of some of them in their own words; And then give
the ^mme of what they have said to the plain husbandman, The praises of the
Ancients and some late writers concerning the Husbandman scours of life in
Planting Fruittrees.
and others, that else could not understand them.

Agricultura quid sit.
MIHI videtur nihil aliud esse Agriculturam quam inspecta Plantae na^ura and
Coeli and terrae ei idoneum cultum ribuere, and (ut ita dicam) coelum cum ^erra
maritare, vel societatem perquirere Coeli and terrae ad Arbores: Sed quum
Coelu^ nullo modo queat flecti, oportet ut sedu^^ Agricola situs varietate
utatur, ut C^^ facile Planta associetur. Agricoloe ad dusmetas intendere
debent, ad utilitatem, and ^^ l^ptatem. Agricultura est Ars quae do^ usuram cum
terra facere. Inter omnia en^^ quae utilitatem simul and jucunditatem parunt,
ut ambiguum sit utilitatisue an amaentatis plus habeat. Variis fructibus
delecte^ non tempore uno sed diversis, alio renascen^ alio decidente, ut
unusquisque ex industriay cunditate te afficere sataget: Rami fructib^ onerati
pondere incurvantur, ac se iu^^ decumbenti offerunt.

Aspice curvatos Pomorum pondere ramo^
Ut sua quod peperit vix ferat Arbor onu^
O quam dulcissimum est fructus ex Arbor^ bus quas sevisti, inseruisti, and
coluisti, pr^ priis manibus colligere, and Amicis, ag^ati^ que jactabundus
largiri. Est and alia Arboribus delectatio, Avium scilicet modilatio, ac ex
variorum multitudine dulcissin us efficitur concentus: Auresque cantib^^
demulcent suis, Aves canoros garrulae fundunt sonos:
Et semper Aures cantibus mulcent suis.


Theophrastus Hortum juxta aedes colloc^ vit, quem moriens testamento
Philosophant^ bus reliquit: Democritus Abderites pro^ hortum Cellam habuit.
Palemon Atheniensis ^n hortis docebat. Laidis Cyrenei in hortis chola fuit,
quos Attalus Rex aedificavit. Quid enim hoc opere innocentius vacantibus,
August.
and quid before magna consideratione pru^entibus; Reges and Imperatores sum
mos que magistratus non puduit Hortensia colere: propr^is manibus.
quid majus mirabil^usque spectacu^um est, quam c^m positis seminibus, Plan
^atis surculis, translatis Arbusculis, insitis ^alleolis, tanquam interrogatur
quaeque (vis ^adicis and germinis) quid possit, quidve non ^ossit, unde possit,
unde non possit; cum rerum ^atura humana ratio quodammodo loqui ^otest, quid in
ea valeat numerorum invi^bilis interiorque potentia: quid extrinsecus ^dhibita
diligentia, and in ipsa consideratione perspicere: quia neque qui plantat est
aliquid, neque qui rigat, sed Deus qui dat in rementum. Mira est and
inexplicabilis horti ^ommoditas: nam si necessitatem considero, Agricutura
tanto est humano generi emolu^ento; ut ea carere nullo modo possis; si
^tilitatem, inter primas non postrema, aut ^uaenam illi poterit comparari: si
voluptatem ^ignitati commistam, ea est excellentia etc.

Much, more they speak in praise of ^his work, which here (for brevity sake)
shall omit.

Now that the husbandman (and every ^ue) may understand what has been said ^y
these Authors, and others, I will give more plainly the sum of all.

They define husbandry to be an Ar^ teaching men lawful usury with the earth^
And that it seems chiefly to be the searching, and finding out the nature
Plants and Trees, and of the Heavens an^ the Earth, and then to give unto
Plan^^ fit place and ordering; according to the nature of the Soil and
Climate; And (a^ they say) to marry and match together Heaven, and Earth, or to
procure a society, and near fellowship between heaven and earth, for the
increase and benefit o^ Trees and Plants: But seeing that the heavens can by no
means be bowed, o^ brought nearer to us, therefore it mu^^ be the skill, and
diligence of the hu^^bandman to place and set his Trees in such sort that the
heavens may give their influence and warmth, for increase and refreshing of
them. Husbandmen ough^ to make Account of two harvests yearly the one of Profit
the other of Pleasure for when a man has done what is necessary for his life,
and thence proceeds profit besides all that, great Pleasure springs from the
Profit: and what greater pleasure can there be then that which is Accompanie^
with Profit. Now of all estates of life the husbandman may chiefly challenge
this t^ himself, yea it is questionable whether the Profit or Pleasure of his
life be the greater: God when he would make the life of man Pleasant unto him,
he put him into an Orchard or Garden of delights, that he might labor therein
with pleasure of mind: There a man is delighted with variety of Fruits of
Trees, not in one sea, son only, but in diverse seasons of the year, some
young and springing forth, while diverse other kinds are ready to fall with
ripeness. So that a man does even busy himself with the choice of such
varieties. The Boughs burdened with the weight of Fruits do bow to thee, and
in a lowly manner offer their Fruits, as the Poet notes.

Behold the bending Boughs, with store of Fruits they tear.
And what they have brought forth, (for weight) they scarce can bear.
Oh how sweet and pleasant is the fruit of those Trees which a man has Planted
and ordered with his own hand, to gather it, and largly and freely to bestow
and distribute it among his kindred and friends.

Yea it is a delight to hear the pleasant tunes, and singing of Birds, which
with their variety of notes, make a sweet harmony and concent, and much please
and allure the sense So the Poet, Melodious Ditties chirping Birds indite
whose pleasant songs our ravished ears invite.


Theophrastus planted an Orchard close to his dwelling house, which when he
died, he left to students and lovers of Philosophy, and wisdom. Democritus had
his Chamber near to a garden. Many Philosophers have taught their scholars in
Orchards and Gardens.

Augustine.
What work is more innocent then Planting of Fruit Trees, and what more full of
high speculations to wise men then it is: What is more wonderful to behold
then (in sowing seeds, in planting sprigs, in removing young Trees, in graf^ing
new shoots or grafts) as it were to ask and demand with a man's self, what, by
the nature and virtue of the Roots and Branches may be done, or what may not be
done, for what reason it may be done, or not done (seeing the nature of things
may after a sort be declared by reason) what of many things is of force, and
effect, by an invisible and inward power, and nature, what diligence is
outwardly to be used, etc. In which consideration and search, we may see and
understand these things. Yet for all that, neither he that Plants is any thing,
nor he that waters, but God that gives the increase.

They account this course of life free from many mischeifes, and vexations,
that neces^arily a^tend other affairs: great and many cares, and troubles are
found in honors, and high places, but this course of life about Orchards and
Gardens, is full of sweet rest, honest business, and modest pleasures, which
many famous and learned men have had recourse unto for refreshment after study,
and other labors: It is full of honest profit and gain, and brings and
administers all necessaries: here a man enjoyes pleasant quietness and
tranquillity of mind, which is seldom attained by those that follow State
Employments: This is worthy the exercise of wise men, of good men, of learned
men, of Kings and Emperors: they have taken great delight in the study and
practice of these things: This course of life is far off from covetousness,
and even tied and married to all Offices of love and friendship: This is a
quiet and pleasant life, worthy to be preferred before all honors and
dignities: This culture of the ground, and planting and ordering of
Fruit Trees, Occasions search and enquiry into many secrets profitable to men,
which bring unto them ample satisfaction: yea the excellency and worthiness of
Husbandry is surpassing, it excells all other Arts, and appears as the Lady or
Mistress, they as Servants attending her. Many of the Ancients have largely
declared unto us the nature and use of Plants and Trees before all other living
creatures. The profit of a Garden of Fruit Trees is wonderful, and cannot well
be declared. And if Antiquity can add any nobleness, and worth to a thing,
what employment then before this? what more ancient then the labor of the
Husbandman. Husbandmen are called Honest and good men, because of their
innocent and just life. Cicero esteemde it best of all other labors, nothing
more rich and profitable, nothing more delightful, nothing more worthy a
generous spirit then it. In former times those that were honored and carried
in triumph, they were not honored with Gold, Pearls, and other such precious
things, but with the Boughs and Branches of Trees: And in their Games and
exercises, who so got the Prize were crowned with the branches of certain
Trees, as the Oliv^, Palm, etc. Such as got the Conquest and Victory of their
enemies were crowned with the Laurel which was to them a sign of Victory. And
in their feasts they gave Crowns and Garlands of Leaves, and Branches of Trees,
in token of mirth and pleasure. Besides, if this labor receive honor from the
persons that have been conversant in it, then it is a Kingly Art, and chiefest
of all other; See the worthy Acts of Cyrus king of Persia. Ezra 1.1, 2, 3. etc.
Cyrus King of Persia (who had all the Kindomes of the earth given to him) was
diligent, and most exact in the handling of it: He planted Orchards and Gardens
of Fruit-tree. with his own hand, which when Lysander saw, he admired to see
the excellen^ and singular order and disposition of them, saying, O Cyrus,
right blessed shall all men call thee, because to thy dignity and Crown thou
have joined this care, and course of life.

Telephanes tilled the ground and planted Trees among his subjects. Elizeus
Spartanus planted spacious and large Orchards, and used therein to Feast and
Banquet with his children and friends, Kings, Emperors, and highest powers
were not ashamed to perform the works belonging to an Orchard with their own
hands: Diverse Emperors of Rome had Gardens of Fruit Trees, Of this See, Sir
Rich Barkley of the felicity of man page 162.
and performed the works therein with delight: Dioclesian Emperor of Rome
after he had reigned twenty years, betook himself to a private life, and
Planted Orchards and Gardens with his own hand, wherein he took such delight,
that he could not be entreated to take upon him again the Government of the
Empire: Solomon (the wisest of all Kings) had Orchards and Gardens of
Fruit Trees, took pleasure in them, and spoke of all Trees from the Cedar even
to the Shrub.

Mascali sets out this Art with admirable praises, he says, among all
sciences, and goodly exercises for men, there is none do more refresh the
spirits, nor cause more admiration in the effects of Nature, or is more
profitable for man's life then is the skill of Planting and Grafting. Many great
Lords and Noble Personages have left their Theaters and goodly exercises, and
have given themselves to Plan^ing and Grafting, and such like employments, and
have commended nothing more then this employment. The Senators, Dictators, and
Consuls of the Romans have commended Planting and Grafting to be one of the
flourishing labors in the world for the Commonwealth. Yea they did so much
esteem it, that they did hang Tables there* of in diverse places, never
thinking the time more aptly spent, then in Planting and Grafting. Many worthy
and learned men, both ancient and of late days, have written for their Country
and Commonwealth of the fruitful Art of Grafting and Planting.

M. Bolton says, Vineyards, Orchards, Gardens, and such enclosed Plats, are
(as it were) the Flowers, Stars, and Paradises of the Earth.

And the Lord Bacon (in his Essaies, page 266.) says, Gardens are the purest
of humane pleasures, the greatest refreshments of the spirits of man, without
which Buildings and Palaces are but gross handy works.

THus have I showed (briefly) what some of the Ancients, and some late Writers
have said, and esteemed of Fruit Trees, and of the Husbandm^ns course of life,
and employments about them.

I will now say something more of the dignity and value of Fruit Trees, and of
the Art of Planting from Divine and Humane Arguments and Testimonies, and after
that I shall enter upon the work it self.

Though it be absurd for a man to commend himself, yet he may commend his
Calling and profession: Paul would not boast of himselfe' yet faith he, Romans
11.13. I magnify mine Office. Suffer me therefore (for Encouragement to all in
the work,) to say something in praise of Fruit Trees, and of the employment
about them, it being a work so full of Profit and Pleasure in the life of man:
The works of God are laudable, and have a dignity upon them, and ought to be
taken notice of, praised, and admired, not for themselves, but for the Author,
that he through, and by them, may have the more praise Psalm. 111.3. His work
is worthy to be praised, and had in honor.

Arguments of the dignity of Fruit Trees, and Art of Planting.
1 Argument.
ONE Divine Argument of the dignity, and value of Plants, Fruit Trees, and the
Art of Planting may be this.

It was Adams employment in his innocence to keep and order the Garden of
Fruit Trees, Genesis 2.15. And the Lord God put him into the Garden of Eden to
dress it, and to keep it.

God, who, is wisdom it self, saw that a Garden of Fruit Trees was the
meetest place upon all the Earth, for Adam to dwell in, even in his state of
perfection: And therein assigned him an employment for his greater delight, and
pleasure: so that this employment, as it is ancient, so it is honorable.

De Genesis ad Lit: Li. 8,
Augustine is of opinion, that this dressing of the Garden, was as well an
exercise of the hand, as of the mind, not with toyle-somenesse and trouble, but
with delight, and pleasure, Non erat laboris afflictio, sed exhileratio
voluntatis, quum ea quae Deus creaverat, humani operis adjutorio, laetius,
feraciusque provenirent, Creator ipse uberius laudaretur. That things created
in the Garden, by his labor, might be made more fruitful, and God thereby
have the more glory. 2 Argument.


The second Divine Argument is this.

Plants were the first animate bodies that God created: And fruits of Trees was
the first food that was given to man, his food appointed by God, even in his
perfect Condition.

And God said* behold I have given you every herb bearing seed, which is upon
the face of all the Earth, and every Tree in which is the fruit of a Tree
yielding seed, to you it shall be for meat, Genesis 1.29.

Another Divine Argument is from examples in Scripture of Planting Fruit Trees,
and of the use of Orchards and Gardens.

First. 3 Argument.
God (blessed for ever) planted an Orchard, Example.
or Garden of Fruit Trees, Diodat. exp Sir W. Rawley Hist. part. 1. Chapter 3.
Genesis 2.8. And the Lord God planted a Garden Eastward in Eden, and there he put
the man whom he had formed.

Au de Civit Dei lib. 13. c. 24.
God planted a Fruit-garden; That is, He caused a parcel of ground to bring
forth Plants and Trees most exquisite and useful for man, and enriched that
place with more fruit-fulnesse and beauty, then any other part of the Earth,
and called it EDEN, that is, a place of Pleasures.

Sir W Rawly 1. Book, 1. part, Chap. 9.
And at this day, this Region of Eden (afterward called Mesopotamia) is
exceeding fruitful, being in the best Climate 35 degrees from the
Equinoctial, and 55. from the North Pole, in which Climate the most excellent
fruits, Oils. Grains, etc. are found. 2 Example.


Secondly, we have for our example herein that good, and holy man, who found
grace in the sight of God, when all the world (save a few with him) perish^,
Genesis 9.20. And Noah began to be an husbandman, and he planted a Vineyard. Or
as some conceive, he began to prune and dress the plants that were set before
the Flood, and to order them that they might yield their fruits.

3 Example.
Thirdly, We have for our example herein the friend of God, faithful Abraham,
Genesis 21.33. And Abraham planted a Grove in Beersheba, and called there on the
name of the Lord, the everlasting God.

Of the fitness of these shades by Arbours, Seats, and close walks in Orchards
for contemplation, and private exercises, I shall speak hereafter.

Fourthly, 4 Example.
King Vzziah delighted in this employment, 2 Chro. 26.10. Vzziah had husbandmen
and dressers of Vines in the Mountains and in Carmell, for he loved husbandry.

This King reigned a long time in Jerusalem over Judah, fifty and two years. 5
Example.


Fifthly, King Solomon, a great and wise King, Eccl 2.4. took pleasure herein,
(and though we may not follow him in any immoderation, and excess, yet the^e
^s a lawful, and warrantable use of these delights) Verse. 4.5. I made me great
works, I builded me houses, I planted me Vineyards, I made me gardens, and
Orchards, and I planted in them Trees of all kind of fruits. 6 Example.


Sixthly, For the use of an Orchard and Garden, we have the example of the
Mirror of Chastity, Virtuous Susanna. It was her custom to walk in a garden,
as we see in the History verse. 7*8. Susanna went into her husbands garden to
walk, the ^wo Elders saw her going in every day, and walking.

Seventhly, 7 Example.
The people of Israel (by a ^peciall command from God) made use of Arbours and
shady places, in their great Feasts: Nehem. 8.14.15. It was publishe^ and
proclaimed in all their cities, and i^ Jerusalem, saying, Go forth unto the
Moun^ and fetch Olive Branches, and Pine Branches and Myrtle Branches, and
Branches of thick Trees, to make Boothes: So they mad^ these Boothes upon the
Roofs of their houses and in their Courts, and in the court of the house of
God, and in the streets; and the^ sat under these Boothes, and there was ver^
great gladness. 8 Example.


Eighthly, For the use of an Orchard, ^ Garden, we have the example of our
bles^sed Savior whose custom it was to wa^^ in a Garden, Io^. 18.1. when
Jesus ha^ spoken these words he went over the Broo^ Cedron, where was a Garden,
into which ^^ entered with his Disciples: We see he often came to this Garden,
for Judas observed i^ was his custom to go to it. v. 2. Judas knew the place,
for Jesus often times resorted thi^ther with his Disciples.

4 Argument.
Another Divine Argument of the Dig^nity and value of Fruit Trees, and art (...)
Planting, Hos. 12.10. I have used Similitudes by the Ministry of the Prophets.
is from the frequent use of Sim^litudes between the Church of God an^
Fruit Trees, and between our Savior and Fruit Trees.

Fruit Trees bear the figure and resemblance of many high and great Mysteries
held forth to us in Parables, Tropes, and Allegories, which represent Moral,
and Spiritual things, under the shape and figure of these Corporeal things.

One Similitude is between the Church and a Vineyard: 1 Similitude
Esaias. 5.1, 2, My beloved had a Vineyard in a very fruitful Hill verse: 2. And
he fenced it, and gathered out the stones thereof, and planted it with the
choice Vine, etc: And he looked that it should bring forth grapes etc.

Secondly, 2 Similitude
the Prophet David uses the Similitude of a fruitful tree to express the
Condition of a Godly man. Psalm: 1.3. He shall be like a Tree planted by the
Rivers of Waters, that brings forth his fruit in due season, his Leaf also
shall not wither, and look whatsoever he does it shall prosper. So again,
Ier. 17.8. He shall be as a Tree planted by the waters, and that spreads out
her Roots by the River, and shall not see when Heat comes, but her Leaf
shall be green, and shall not be careful in the year of Drought, neither
shall cease from yielding fruit.

Another Similitude our Savior uses to express the Condition of his Church
drawn from the Vine. 3 Similitude
Io. 15.1. I am the true Vine and my Father is the husbandman: every branch in
me that bears not fruit he takes away, and every branch that bears fruit
he purges it, that it may bring forth more fruit. As the Branch cannot bear
fruit of it self, except it abide in the Vine, no more can ye except ye
abide in me. Verse. 4.

4 Similitude
Another Similitude is between Natural and Mystical Grafting, Rom: 11.17.
Concerning the calling of the Gentiles, and rejection of the Jews for a time.
If some of the Branches be broken off, and thou being a wild Olive tree were
grafted in amongst them, and with them partakest of the root and fatness of
the Olive tree, Ver. 23. And they also if they abide not still in unbelief
shall be grafted in, for God is able to graft them in again, Verse. 24. For if
thou were cut out of the Olive tree, which is wild by nature, and were grafted
(contrary to nature) into a good Olive tree, how much more shall these, which
be the natural branches, be grafted into their own Olive tree? 5 Similitude


Fifthly, The condition of the Church is figuratively, and by Allegories
described by Solomon in his Songs, Chap. 4.12, 13. And amongst other figures
and resemblances there used, one is taken from an Orchard or Garden of
Fruit Trees. A garden enclosed is my sister, my spouse. Thy Plants are an
orchard of Pomegranates, with pleasant fruits. Likewise Cant: 2:3: like the
Apple Tree among the trees of the wood, so is my beloved among the sons; I
Sat down under his shadow with great delight, and his fruit was sweet to my
taste.

Sixthly, 6 Similitude
A Fruit-tree bears the figure and resemb^ance of our Savior Christ in the
description of Spiritual Paradise Revel. 22.2. In the midst of the street of
it, and of either side of the River was there the tree of life, which bore
twelve manner of fruits, and yielded her fruits every month and the Leaves of
the Tree were for the healing of the Nations. And again Chap. 2.7. To him that
overcommeth I will give to eat of the tree of life, which is in the midst of
the Paradise of God.

Concerning Similitudes between Material and Mystical Fruit Trees, see the
Observations following in the second part. 5 Aagumen^.
Another Divine Argument may be this.

God has threatened to withhold his blessing in these things, if we do not obey
him, and has in displeasure often deprived men of the same for their
disobedience, which proves them to be of value and worth: For when God is
displeased with a people, or particular persons, and will show it by some
correction, that he may bring them to repentance, he does it not by
withholding, or taking from them some small matters, that they can easily spare
without grief or trouble, for that would work no effect, but by withholding
or depriving them of something that is precious, and dear to them, the want or
loss of which, will sad the heart: which course God has observed with people,
concerning these particular blessings. As appears. 1. This was part of two of
the ten Plagues, wherewith Egypt was punished, Exodus 9.55. The hail brake
every tree of the field. And as the Prophet David has it, Psalm. 78.48 He
destroyed their Vines with hail, and their Mulbery trees with frost: and
Psalm: 105.33. He smote their Vines also, and Fig Trees: and Ex. 10.5. Locusts
did eat all the trees which the hail had left.

2. Secondly, among the signs of Gods displeasure against Israel: this is
one. Amo^ 4.9. I have smitten your Fruit Trees, etc. yet have you not returned
unto me, says the Lord.

3. Thirdly: the Prophet calls to mourning, Joel. 1.12. For, The Vine is dried
up, the Fig Tree languisheth, the Pomegranate tree, the Palm tree also, and
the Apple tree, even all the trees of the field are withered, because joy is
withered from among the sons of men.

4. Fourthly: God in displeasure for sin ^ells them, Deuteronomy. 28.39.40. Thou shall
plant Vineyards and dress them, but shall neither drink of the wine, nor
gather the grapes, for the worms shall eat them. Thou ^halt have Olive trees
throughout all thy ^oasts, but shall not anoint thy self with Oil: For thine
Olive shall cast her fruits. And God ^ids Moses tell the people, if they would
not obey, their land should not yield their increase, neither should the trees
of the land ^eild their fruits. The like again, Zeph. 1.13. Amos 5.11. Esaias,
17, 10. Hosea ^.12.

Another Divine Argument may be this: 6 Argument*


God has promised these things as blessings to such as obey him, and from time
to time performed it: Not to be looked upon as things of light, and trivial
consequence, ^ut to be considered as strong engagements to obedience. When God
has been well pleased with a Nation, or particular persons he has often
showed it (among other tokens of his love) by mul^iplying the fruits of their
trees, encouraging them to plant Fruit-gardens, and promising his blessing
thereon. As we see.

1. God (by his Prophet) encourages his people in Babylon to build, and to
plant, ^er. 29.5. Build ye houses* and dwell in them, and plant gardens and eat
fruits of them.

2. And in the promise of their returne^ this was one of the blessings God
would bestow on them, Amos. 9.14. And I will bring again the captivity of my
people Israel, and they shall build the wast cities and inhabit them, and
they shall plant Vineyards, and drink the wine thereof, they shall also make
gardens and eat the fruit of them.

3. Thirdly, When they came into Canaan that pleasant land, this is mentioned
as one of the blessings, Neh. 9.25. They possessed houses full of all goods,
wells dug, Vineyards and Oliveyards, and fruit trees in abundance.

4. And among the showers of blessing^ (as the Prophet calls them) this is one,
Ezekiel: 34.27. The tree of the field shall yeel^ her fruit. And Ezekiel: 36.29. I
will multiply the fruit of the Tree. The like of many other places, Mal.
3.10.11. Joel. 2.21.22. Levit: 26.3, 4. Esaias 65.21, 22. Levit. 19.23. etc.

And thus much of the sixth Divine Argument from the promises of God, and
performance of them, in these things to his people.

7 Argument.
Another Divine Argument of the Dignity and value of Fruit Trees, and the art
of planting, is from two general commands given by the Apostle Pavl, which
though they mention not these things in explicit and plain terms, yet they
are commended to us by plain and clear implication, and deduction* for as out
of general promises we may draw, and deduct perticulars, and make applications
from them; so also from general commands and directions.

The first Command is that of Paul in his Epistle to Titus Chap. 3. v. 14. Let
ours also learn to maintain good works for necessary uses, that they be not
unfruitful: here is a general Command, out of which one particular may be
derived for the present purpose. The Apostle here, by Good works, meane^ good
works as they are toward the maintenance of the Commonwealth, or a particular
Family with necessary commodities and useful things, as Honest Trades, and
Employments, as the Margint renders it.

Now it is clear, this work and employment of Planting Fruit Trees, is a good
work for necessary uses, seeing the life of man may by it be maintained with
so many necessa^ies belonging to it: See Profits of an Orchard, ^.

This being so, the Apostle (the^) bids us learn to do it, as if he should
say, get some skill in it, and be doing then uphold and maintain it.

The second general Command is that which the Apostle writes to the
Philippians, Chap. 4.8. Whatsoever things are True: whatsoever things are
Honest: whatsoever things are Just: whatsoever things are Pure: whatsoever
things are Lovely: whatsoever things are of Good Report: if there be any
Virtue, if there be any Praise, think on these things.

Now it is easy for a man to speak of many particular Employments, which have
upon them the Characters and Marks here mentioned: but of them all, I know not
one (except Divine Employments) that has these Marks so clearly stamped upon
it, as this Employment of the husbandman in Planting Fruit Trees. This
Employment answers exactly to the Apostles Rule, as it were face answering face
in the glass: for what particular labor is more honest, more just more pure,
more lovely, of better report? what h^th mo^e Virtue? what has more Praise
then it? ^ee what has been said in the Praise and good report of it, and the
rest of the ^r^perties, at large already mentioned, page 11, 12, 13, 14 etc.

Now this being so, then we ought to follow the Apostles Command: If there be
any Virtue, if the^e be any Praise (says he) think on these things. The words
are very Em^ha^icall: whatsoever, and if there be any praise. His meaning is,
whatsoever the work be, though mean in the eye of the world, yet, if there be
but any one of these Characters and Marks upon it, it is worthy to be followed,
then how much more when it has them All, and that so eminently, as that every
eye sees them. Think on these things, says he, first to search out what works
and employments are marked with these Characters: and then, think on such to
like, choose them, to set about them, to follow them, and make such things our
professions for the praise of God, and profit of men.

And so much for the seventh Divine Argument. 8 Argum:


Another Divine Argument, is from Gods command for the preservation of
fruit trees: He lays a special charge upon men for their safety and
preservation, as we see, Deuteronomy. 20.19.20. When thou shall besiege a city a long
time in making war against it. to take it, thou shall not destroy the trees
thereof, by forcing an Axe against them, for thou may eat of them, and thou
shall not cut them down, to further thee in the siege, for the tree of the
field is man's life, Verse: 20. Only the trees which thou know that they be
^ot trees for meat, thou shall destroy, and cut them down, and thou shall
build Bulwarks against the city that makes war with thee until it be subdued.
Although this Scripture may be taken in an Allegorical sense, as signifying to
us Gods care of Mystical Fruit Trees, his people: being Trees of
righteousness of the Lords planting: yet the same may also be taken in a
litterall sense, and as some Godly men conceive, is a positive binding Law even
at this day.

We see God ingeminates, and repeats his charge to preserve the Fruit Trees,
being trees for food, and nourishment of man's life, they must not be destroyed,
though it were on so great an occasion as to further the siege against their
enemies. He leaves other trees, such as are not trees for meat, such as bear
no fruits, to be cut down and destroyed, as they have use for them in the war,
but they must not spoil, nor meddle with the Fruit trees.

I have discovered these Divine Arguments of the dignity and value of
Fruit Trees and the art of Planting, to stir up and encourage men to so good a
work, to ^ work of so great and many advantages to the Commonweal

1. Humane Argument.
And because Humane Arguments, ar^ likewise prevalent which men, observ^ them
also for further encouragement.

The first Humane Argument of the dign^^ty and value of Fruittrees, and the
ar^^ Planting is from Presidents, or Examples of wise and learned men, of great
and good men in former ages, who have practiced this Art.

Examples either in V^rtue or Vice, are powerful with men, (especially
Examples of great ones)

Brevius iter per exempla, quam per praecepta Its much easier to prevail with
people by Examples, then by Precepts or Rules. And if Examples of great ones,
even in things evil, are so powerful, as they are with most men, how much
more then should they be prevalent in honest, and virtuous things: so that
herein is a double inducement, the Example, and the Virtue: here is a twofold
Argument concurrent and met in this employment of planting fruit trees:
Presidents, and those of the highest; Philosophers, Kings, and Emperors.
Secondly, Virtue, and that of the chiefest Nature that secular Employments have
in them.

So then observe some Examples recorded by ancient A^thors in this employment
of planting Fruit Trees.

Plures excellentis doctrine viri, Pog. Floren
and
Philosophandi studio, etc.
Many famous and learned men (says he) studious in Philosophy, have delighted
in this course of life, and found therein abundance of pleasure, and
contentment.

Si dignitas Agriculturae accedit ex iis qui eam tractaverint, Regalis Ars and
dignissima erit. If the dignity and esteem of this Art may be drawn from
those who have been conversant in it, then it is a Kingly Art, and chiefest of
all others.

Reges and Imperatores summosque
Magistratus. etc.
Cyrus King of Persia. Philometrus King of Asia. Heronus King of Asia.
Archelaus King of Asia. Attalus King of Asia. Evax and Avicen: Kings of Arabia.
Solomon King of Israel Telaphanus. Antonius Pius. Elizeus. Numa. Sportanus.
Alcinous, Mithridates the great. Alexander the great. Dioclesian, Emperor of
Rome, And many others.
Kings, Princes, Roman Emperors and the highest powers on earth, have not
disdained to perform the works of an Orchard with their own hands, and taken
delight therein.

Mascall says: Many great Lords and Noble personages, have left their
Theaters, goodly exercises, and have given themselves to Planting and Grafting,
and have accounted nothing of higher commendation. The second humane Argument
of the dignity and val^e of Fruit Trees, and the art of planting, 2. Humane
Argument.
is from the praises of ancient and late Writers, and the suffrage, or general
consent of all people.

Works and employments that have the praise but of some persons only, we cannot
conclude the worth and dignity thereof from such praises, because self and
sinister ends may sway in the minds of such* but those employments that have
the praise of all, and where there is a concur^en^e, and consent of minds in
all people in the praise thereof, (of the Good, as well as the bad* of the
Learned as well as the unlearned of the Wise, as well as the unwise) these
probably are good and virtuous.

Now this art and employment of planting Fruit Trees, has the joint and
unanimous consent, not only of greatest persons of the world, but likewise of
all persons in the world, there is none has ill will toward it, none has any
thing to say against it, but all without exception, give it their good word and
speak in the praise of it.

If men do but s^eake of it, they will commend it, and say, its a goodly
employment, its both a pleasant and profitable work, its good for a
Commonwealth, it enriches whole Countries, to this purpose men of us^ally
speak of it what ancient and late writers have said in the praise of it, may
be seen, page 14, 15, 16. etc.

And for the second Humane Argument thus much,

The third Humane Argument of the dignity and value of Fruit Trees and the art
of planting is, 3. Humane Argument.
Argumentum ab utili, from the Profits that are received thereby.

Let us see then what Profits may be had from an Orchard or Garden of Fruit
trees.

Profits arise from an Orchard many ways: one way is to man's Estate: and that
in two respects: first, in respect of house keeping, and provision for his
family all the year.

In house Keeping.
Secondly in respect of sale.

Such as have good Orchards know by experience that they are very profitable
for meat, and drink, all the year long, many good dishes they make of Fruits,
and many wholesome and pleasant drinks, Sider, perry, Cherry Wines, etc. Which
are not barely nourishing but have other special properties, they moderately
cool and refresh the spirits in heat of Summer; and besides they keep the
body from gross and superfluous humors, and carry down the seed of diseases,
which else would lodge and grow in the body, and at length spring out to the
prejudice of health.

Of the healthfullnesse of thee Liquors, See the use of Fruits. page 100, etc.

Secondly, For Sale.
Fruit trees are profitable to the Husbandman in respect of sale of the fruits,
when a man has more then he can spend in his house; especially to such as live
near some great Town or City, where they have ^ent at pleasure. The poet saw
the profits of an Orchard, when he said.

Non illi deerat, quod pauperis exigit usus,
Interdum locuples a paup^re multa petebat.
The Orchard does with fruit the poor supply
With which he does the wealthy gratify,
The Profits of an Orchard once come to good perfection (does exceed the
profits of Corn (upon like quantity of ground) many times over. As has been
computed and set down by those that (I suppose) well knew the value of both.
And touching Profits to the Estate thus much.

Secondly, Profitable to the body.
An Orchard or garden of Fruit Trees (and Employments about the same) is
profitable to the body, first in respect of health: secondly in respect of long
life.

What is a greater earthly blessing then perfect health of body? In respect of
Health.
some have said valetudo est summum bonum: Health is the chiefest earthly good
thing: what will not me^ do for health they will set body and mind and all on
work for health: they will part with friends, house and lands, silver and gold,
and all for health.

Now health is pre^erved: first, by moderate and seasonable exercise, in the
Orchard, the labor that preserves health must not be too violent, it must be
but ad ruborem, non ad sudorem, as some advise: to bring the body to a
temperate and gentle heat, not to immoderate sweating.

Hist. Life and Death. p. 412. and 169.
The Lord Bacon advises to exercise causing rather perspiration then sweating,
and says further, that an idle life does manifestly make the flesh soft and
dis^ipable, but robust exercise, (so it be without overmuch sweating, and
weariness) makes it hard and compact, which advances health.

Secondly, Health is preserved by fresh and wholesome Airs, which in heat of
summer is found in Arbours, Seats, and Walks in the garden of Fruit Trees. The
aforesaid Author tells us the air in summer is predatory and hurtful through
the heat of the sun, and therefore ought (as much as may be) to be excluded
from the body. Now there is no fresh wholesome airs, and cool shades to be
found any where in summer season, better then these in the Orchard, or garden
of Fruit Trees so the Poet.

Opaca prebent arbores umbracula,
Prohibentque densis fervidum solemn comis.
Green Canopies the shady trees us lend Against scorching sun, boughs thick,
whilst they extend.

Thirdly, Health is preserved, by pleasant and wholesome Odours, and perfumes
found in the Garden of Fruit Trees, all the spring and summer, by digging the
Earth, and from the Leaves and blossoms of Trees:

Lo: Ba: tells us, Hist. Life and Death p. 207. and 208.
the vapors of fresh earth by digging, condense and refresh the spirits.

And that Leaves of trees falling toward the middle of Autumn, yield a good
refreshing to the spirits

But the most pleasant and wholesome Odours, are from the blossoms of all the
Fruit Trees, which having in them a condensing and cooling property are
therefor, not simply Healthful, but are accun^ted Cordial; chearing and
refreshing the Heart and vital spirits.

Now the spirits (as this Author obser^es) are the Masterworkmen in the body,
and as the uppermost Wheel which turns about the other wheels in the body;
and therefore whatsoever is Healthful and re^freshing to the spirits, works
(powerfully^ good effects in the body: And that speed^ly and suddenly: as the
Author says, Vapor and Affections work compendiously upon the spirits.

Hist. Life, and Death, p, 236.
Of the Healthfulness of Odours see more at Large, in the tide Pleasure of the
senses smelling in a Garden:

Fourthly: Health is preserved by who^^ some meats and drinks all the year
from the Garden of Fruit Trees.

The spirits of the body in summer stan^ in need of cooling and condensing, an^
what meats and drinks more proper for that purpose then dishes and drinks of
the fruits an Orchard. They are both Al^mentall and Physical: they cure
diseases and preserve health: discharging the bod^ of the beginning, and seeds
of many diseases.

In respect of long life.
Secondly: A Garden of Fruit-tree ^ profitable to the body in respect of Long
life.

How much have men valued long life in all ages of the world, what strange
courses have some taken to extend their life to a great length: some have lived
is Caves and Rocks, and sequestered themselves from society with men, and
be^^ken themselves to a strict Monastical course, that they might stretch out
their life, and be said to live.

Yea amongst Christians who though they desire to be dissolved and to be with
Christ. Yet in some respects long life is to be accounted a blessing, and is
set before us as an encouragement to obedience: as we see Deuteronomy. 32.47. The
fear of the Lord is your life, Deu. 32.47 Prove. 10.27 Prove. 9.11. Ps. 91.16.
and through this ye shall prolong your days. And Prove. 3.1, 2. My son keep
my Commandments for length of days, and long life shall they add to thee: the
like in many other places. Now I say: An Orchard or Garden of Fruit Trees is
profitable to the body for Long life: and that in several respects.

All these four last mentioned means for Health, the same likewise condu^e and
are profitable to long life: wherein lies another part of their excellency and
worth: Hist L D, page 179, and 180.
for as the Lord Bacon observes: some things are profitable for an healthful,
but are not good for long life, but all these conduce as well to long life, as
to health: so that Moderate exercise. 2. Fresh Airs. 3. Pleasant Odours. 4.
Wholesome meats and drinks, (which are all had in an Orchard or Garden of
Fruit Trees, are (also) all profitable to long life.

Hist. L. D. page 183. and 414.
The foresaid Author says: The spirit are the master workmen of all the effects
in the body, and therefore in the intention of long life ought to be first
placed.

So then: whatsoever works upon the spirits for their refreshing and vigor.
Is profitable to long life.

Hist. L. D. page 235.
The operation upon the spirits, and their waxing fresh and vigorous, is the
most ready and compendious way to Long life. Now an Orchard or Garden of
Fruit Trees, and employments therein, work upon the spirits for their
refreshing two ways.

First by the Organs of the Body.

Secondly by the Affections of the mind. Touching the first, viz. The operation
upon the spirits through the Organs of the body, see at large in the pleasure
of the five senses. page 48, 49, etc.

Concerning the operation upon the spirits by the Affections of the mind, I
shall here speak and mention only three Affections of the mind which work
powerfully upon the spirits, conducing to long life.

Affection Hope.
One Affection of the Mind which works effectually upon the spirits for Long
life is Hope.

Hist. L. D. page 224.
The Lord Bacon says, Hope is most beneficial of all the Affections and does
much to the prolongation of life, if it be not too often frustrated, but
entertaineth the fancy with an expectation of good: therefore (says he) they
which fix and propound to themselves something as the mark and scope of their
life, and continually, and by degrees go forward in the same, are for the most
part long lived; and Hope is as a Leaf-joy which may be beaten out to a great
extension, like gold.

Now the diligent Husbandman in this art of Planting Fruit Trees, has good and
sure grounds for Hope, not only from many Promises in the word, but likewise
subordinate grounds from Reason and Experience. This Hope is sown with the
seeds of his fruits, and springs up with them, and so from year to year his
Hope grows and increases with his Fruit Trees. He lays before him, and
considers what great Profits and Pleasures are coming toward him, he sees by
experience what a plentiful harvest of Profits and pleasures others receive
from Orchards or Gardens of Fruit Trees, which are as fuel, or food to nourish
and feed Hope, and hold it in strength and vigor; and when he begins to
receive Profits and Pleasures from his Fruit Trees, these refresh Hope, and
make it grow from strength to strength with his Fruit Trees: and thus from
year to year Hope is continued and increased, and all this while the spirits
are refreshed, and Hope is refreshed and are ke^t thereby vigorous and strong,
and in a pleased temper and condition, and being the Master-workmen in the
body, or first wheel (a^ the Author says) they work upon all the parts of the
body, for Prolongation of life.

And so much concerning the operation upon the spirits by Hope.

Affection, Joy.
Another Affection of the mind which in this employment works upon the spirits
for long-life, is joy.

Hist. L. D. page 221.
The foresaid Author says: That this Affection of Joy works so powerfully on
the spirits, that some great Joys coming suddenly, and unexpectedly, do
overmuch attenuate, and diffuse the spirits. But now there is no danger of the
suddenness of Joy in these things, whereby to raise and over much diffuse the
spirits; for such things at cause Joy in the employment of planting
Fruit Trees, are expected, and waited for, and Hope prepares the way for Joy.
Joy is a clear, shining, beautiful affection, and rises some degrees higher
then Hope: Joy in the use of earthly things is lawful in its season; there is a
time to rejoice, as well as a time to mourn: And there is a lawful joy in
harvest in gathering in the fruits of the Earth, Esaias 9.3. It is commanded and
allowed of God, Deuteronomy. 12.16. Thou shall rejoice before the Lord thy God in all
that thou put thine hand unto. And again, Deuteronomy. 16.15. Because the Lord
thy God shall bless thee in all thy increase, and in all the works of thine
hands therefore thou shall surely rejoice. A Christian may rejoice in the Lord
in the use of earthly blessings. And in this employment of Planting Fruit Trees
there are many grounds and occasions of rejoicing: The joy of the Husbandman is
not a flash and so away, but it is a settled and habitual joy, and is renewed
from time to time: which is the very thing the aforesaid Author speaks of in
giving instructions concerning Long life. This life (says he) (as much as may
be) is so to be ordered that it may have many renovations, Hist. L. D. p. 228.
p. 232. p. 164.
and the spirit by continual conversing in the same actions may not wax dull.
And again One thing above all is grateful to the spirits, that there be a
continual progress to the more benign: and no doubt (says he) it furthereth
Long life, to have all things from our youth to our elder age mend, and grow to
the better.

Now this employment of Planting Fruit Trees is above all humane arts, most
suitable to these Rules whereby this Affection of joy is kept fresh and
vigorous, which also keeps the spirits cheerful and lively: for herein are
many renovations, and a continual progress to the more benign, and things
mending and growing to the better. Joy is continually renewed from year to
year, yea, in diverse seasons of the year there are fresh and new joys.

In the spring of the year joy springs a fresh in beholding the seeds and young
grafts and plants spring forth vigorously and strongly. And the buds and
blossoms breathing forth precious and pleasant Odours rejoice and delight the
inward and outward senses, promising a plentiful Harvest of fruits in Autumn;
and all the Summer long joy is cherished, with cool fresh airs, singing of
Birds, sight of abundance of Fruits, burd'ning all the the Trees, delighting
the Eye with their beautiful forms and colors; and in Autumn joy is renewed
again with a rich and plentiful Harvest of Fruits; and all the Winter long
joy is nourished and fed with a free use of all the Fruits, and Wines, and
Delicates made of them. So here is a succession of joys, one following on the
neck of another, whereby the spirits are still kept in a cheerful temper and
condition, and work powerfully on the grosser parts of the body, conducing to
Long-life.

Concerning the lawfulness of rejoicing in earthly blessings, with a Caution:
See afterward.

Another Affection of the Mind which (in this employment) works powerfully upon
the spirits for Long life, Affection, Admiration. Hist. L. D. page 225.
is Admiration.

The Lord Bacon says: Admiration and light Contemplation, are very powerful
to the Prolongation of lefe. This affection ascends a step higher then the
other two, for as joy rises higher then Hope, so Admiration higher then Joy.

It is our duty to Admire God in his works, which is a step higher then simply
to praise him. When we look upon the works of a skillful Artificer, and commend
it, it is for his credit; but when we admire and wonder at it, this is a higher
commendation. The Holy Prophet would have us search out and wonder at the the
works of God, Ps. 111, 2. The works of the Lord are great, sought out of all
them that have pleasure therein. Verse. 3. His work is honorable and glorious:
and he calls us to this duty of Admiration, O come hither and behold the works
of God how wonderful he is in his doings! Ps. 111.4. He has so done his
Marveilous works, that they ought to be had in remembrance.

Now in this Employment of planting Fruit Trees, are many things to be seen,
and understood to cause admiration, which works effectually upon the spirits
for long-life.

Baptist: Port: speaking of the wonderful effects of Grafting, Lib. de Cult.
and Insitione. Chapter 17.
says, it is an admirable Art, and the chiefest part of the husbandman work.

Artem insitionis admirabilem esse ac totius Agriculturae nobilissimam partem,
volup^tuosam, utilem, etc. When he considers tha^ strange effects of Grafting,
he falls a wondering, O mira insitionis potestas! etc. And Mizaldus speaking of
grafting, says, Insitionis open artificiosa, multa ad stuporem usqu^ miranda
fi^ri, many things may be done even to admiration.

Austin wonders at these things. Qui majus mirabiliusque spectaculum est, quam
cu^ positis seminibus, plantatis surculis, etc? (...) exiguo grano mirabilior,
praestantior que vi^ est etc. What more strange things are to (...) seen in
Nature, then to be sowing seeds, setting and grafting young plants, and su^
like works? In a small seed there is a wo^^derful and admirable power and
virtue.

Many strange things may be found in this employment.

Will it not cause Admiration, to consider kernel or seed, that that seed
should contain in it ( vertually or potentially) a great Tree, with all the
properties of it, and retain its nature exactly in every particular?

Will it not cause Admiration, to see Buds, Blossoms, Skin and Substance of
the Fruits, with the Core, Stones, or Shells, and also with the leaves of the
Trees.

Will it not cause Admiration, to consider Bud, yea, in the Root of that least
Bud, (in some no bigger then a pins point) which Bud being set on a small plant
(according to Art) will grow to a Tree, in all respects like to that whence it
was taken?

Admiration to consider how many several substances are made of one simple
substance? for of the Sap of Trees is made the Bark, Wood, Pith, Leaves, Buds,
Blossoms, Stalks, Fruit and Seed.

Admiration to consider that Grafts and Buds set upon Wild stocks (such as
naturally bring forth sower, harsh and noughty fruits) that though the Grafts
and Buds be nourished by that harsh and different sap, and receive all their
substance and growth from it, that yet these Grafts, and Buds should retain
their own natures, and not be altered into the nature of the Stock whereon they
grow, but have power to digest, change, and assimilate this harsh and sower
sap, into their own sweet and pleasant natures, and bring forth fruits
accordingly?

Admiration to see little small Plants of but two years old (and some but of
one year, if grafted) to hang full of fruits and to be able to bear them forth
to their natural bigness and goodness, and notwithstanding to make a large
and sufficient growth the same year?

Admiration to see the busy and industrious bees to gather H^ny, evenfrom the
flowers, or blossoms of bitter Almond-trees, and other flower^ and Plants,
that to our sense are bitter and unpleasant?

Will it not cause Admiration to see very L. B. Hist. L. D. page 85.
and very great fruits hang upon only one small and slender twig? A great
Author notes it for a strange thing, that all the nourishment which produces
(sometime.) such great fruits, should be forced to pass through so narrow necks,
as the stalk of the Fruit.

But may it not be accounted a more strange thing, to see five or six, or more,
fair and large fruits, to hang upon a slender twig, little bigger then the
stalk of each particular fruit growing on it!

Will it not cause Admiration to see one different and several kinds of fruits,
as an Apple Tree with all, or ma^y kinds of Apples, or a Cherry-tree, with ^ll,
or many kinds of Cherries? So of other kinds of trees: to see one tree hang
full of fruits, different in their Forms, Colors, Leaves, and ^lossomes, which
may be done by Grafting, or Inoculating so many several kinds of Buds, or
Grafts upon one tree.

Will it not cause Admiration to stand upon a Mount in the midst of a fair
large Orchard in the spring time, and to behold round about a multitude of
several sorts of Fruit Trees, full of beautiful Blossoms, different in their
shapes and colors, ravishing the sense with their sweet Odours, and within a
while, turned into fair and goodly fruits of diverse Colors and Kinds; the
Fruit Trees gorgeously arrayed with green leaves, and various colored fruits,
as with so many precious Jewels and Pearls.

And thus much touching the operation upon the spirits in order to Long-life,
by these three affections, Hope, Joy, Admiration.

Profitable to the mind.
Thirdly, This* employment of planting Fruit Trees, is profitable to the mind.
First in respect of Knowledge. Secondly, in respect of Meditations.

In knowledge.
This work is profitable to the Mind, by storing it with variety of objects, and
profitable notions, both natural, moral, and spiritual

How variously does Nature discover it self in Planting, Grafting, Budding,
Blossoming, and bearing Fruits. So that such as are studious in the search of
the secrets of Nature, may observe the process and course thereof in manifold
respects about these things.

And multitudes of Experiments may be drawn out for use and profit. If men will
but join Contemplation and Action, Study and Practice together, they shall find
(even in this one Volumn or Book of the Orchard) many useful and fruitful
Lessons, for temporal and spiritual advantage.

And as the employment is profitable to the mind in respect of knowledge: In
Meditation.
so also in respect of Meditation, by occasion whereof the affections of the
soul may (with the help of the spirit) be raised, and turned into a spiritual
temper.

How fitly does the Garden of Fruit Trees offer unto us that most profitable
and fruitful Meditation of our first fall, and original sin, whereof we were
all guilty, in such a Place; even in an Orchard or Garden of Fruit Trees: in
which Meditation our affections should work to lay our selves low in our own
eyes, to abhor ourselves: and to exalt God, and abundantly to joy in the
infinite and boundless mercy of God in Christ, in that he took pity on poor Man
when he was fallen, and passed by the Angels when they were fallen, ( Creatures
by creation more exce'lent then Man) and left them in an irrecoverable state of
misery. But in the same place, even as soon as we had sinned, promised us a
Savior, and when the fullness of time was come, sent him into the world. In
consideration of these things, our Affection of Love to, joy in, and Admiration
of God, should be enlarged and boundless. O the height and depth of the Mercy
and Justice of God, toward the Angels Justice, but toward us Mercy. What can
we render unto the Lord for this his infinite mercy? Now seeing he looks for
nothing but Love and Praise, let us begin it here, that we may hold on to all
eternity.

Profitable to the name.
Fourthly, Planting Fruit Trees, is profitable to the name of the Planter.
Fruit Trees, are living, lasting monuments, and bear up, and perpetuate the
Name of him that Planted and Labored about them, both while he lives, and in
generations after. A late Author Lawson: a Planter of forty or fifty years
experience; in his Book, page 47.
says, that Apple Trees and Pear Trees (and some other kinds of Fruit Trees) on
good Land, and duly ordered, will last 800 or 900 years.

What earthly thing is better then a good Name? Solomon tells us, Eccl. 7.1. A
good name is better then precious ointment: And again, Prove. 22.1. A good name
is to be chosen before great riches, and loving favor is above silver, L. B.
Not. Hist. page 258.
and above gold. One says, The best temper of minds desire a good name, and the
lighter popularity and applause.

A good name is not only to be desired, but to be highly prized, and to be
reckoned the chief of earthly blessings, not only for the beauty of it, but for
the permanency of it, it abides when friends, riches, life and all is lost. Now
one way to gain and keep a good name, is by gifts and benefits: The worst
temper of minds are won, and held by gifts and good turns: it is natural to all
creatures, to love those that do them good; and who can so easily give so
great, so many, and so acceptable gifts, as the husbandman, that yearly nurseth
up multitudes of fruit trees, and has store of pleasant fruits, wines, and
delicates made of them? While he lives, he bestows young fruit trees, fruits,
and many acceptable gifts out of his Orchard, and being dead, his Orchards,
Gardens, and Fruit Trees, live and flourish, and occasion a remembrance of his
Name for many ages after him.

And secondly, as gifts and good turns, gain a good name, so also to be
conversant and employed about works for the Public and general profit of a
Commonweal: such works produce the same effect.

We know all labors and employments, that bring both Profit and Pleasure, are
approved and praised of all, though the advantage be but to a private family,
how much more when they are for a Commonweal?

And besides this Moral consideration, God has promised the great blessing of
a good name to them that are conversant in good employments, Romans 13.3. Do that
which is good, and thou shall have praise of the same. Rom 2.10. Glory, honor,
and peace, to every one that works good, upon the Jew first, and also on the
Gentile.

So then, the work of Planting fruit trees is profitable to the name of the
Husbandman, both while he lives, and in Generations after him.

Profitable to others.
Fifthly, An Orchard or Garden of Fruit Trees, and the employment about them
inprofitable to others: First, in the present times; Secondly, in the time to
come.

This profit to others, is by bestowing our fruits on friends and neighbors,
and such as want. For though God require not to himself (as formerly) the first
of all the fruit of all trees, year by year, Nehem. 10.35. Yet God requires
year by year, when he bestows all upon us, that we should give^ part to
himself again; that is, to his poor members that want them.

This is the way to obtain a blessing upon all our labors. Deuteronomy. 15.10. Thou
shall surely give unto him (that is, unto thy poor Brother) and thine heart
shall not be grieved when thou give unto him, because that for this thing,
the Lord thy God shall bless thee in al^ thy works, and in all thou put thy
hand unto.

A Gift to the Poor is a gainful gift, for by it a man becomes Creditor to his
Creator, Prove. 19.17. He that gives to the poor, lends to the Lord, and the
Lord will recompense him. Eccles. 35.11. The Lord recompenceth, and will give
thee seven times as much.

Likewise, the fruits of an Orchard are profitable to others that buy them: the
Buyer having good and profitable Commodities for his money, has profit thereby
as well as the Seller.

Yea, this labor is profitable to others in time to come, Qui serunt Arbores,
alteri seculo prosunt. After ages receive much profit also: When our selves and
others have received our full portion of profit, then Fruit Trees are left to
children, and posterity to receive Profit many Generations after.

And thus much touching the Third humane Argument, from the Profits that are
received from a Garden of Fruit Trees.

The fourth humane Argument of the dignity and value of Fruit Trees and the Art
of Planting, Humane Argument.
is, Argumentum a voluptate, from the Pleasures that are received thereby.
Pleasure is called, sal and condimentum vitae. The salt that seasons all things
to us. In all that a man has pleasure in, it is that which makes it
acceptable. Pleasure (as one says) is the good of every thing, and a pattern of
Heaven.

Now, we find pleasure in an Orchard or Garden of Fruit Trees, suitable to all
the Senses of the body. And here is a mixture of pleasures with profits: for
diverse objects of the senses, are both pleasant and profitable: this employment
is richly furnished with both.

And as I have showed some particulars wherein profit consi^^s, so likewise I
will show some particulars wherein pleasure consists, in the use of a Garden of
Fruit Trees.

Each sense has its particular pleasure.

First for the sense of hearing.

Pleasure of the sense of hearing.
It is a pleasure to the Ear to hear the sweet notes and tunes of singing Birds,
whose company a man shall be sure to have in an Orchard, which is more pleasant
there, then elsewhere, because of other concurrent pleasures there: a Consort
of Music is more pleasant them upon a single Instrument. The Poet took notice
of this pleasure. Aves Canoros garrulae fundunt sonos,
Et semper Aures cantibus mulcent suis.
Melodious ditties, chirping Birds indite, Whose pleasant songs, our ravished
^ars invite

And besides, something more this sense may receive from an Orchard (though it
have least share of pleasure therein of any of the senses) by hearing the slow
motion of Boughs and Leaves, by soft and gentle Airs, sometimes (as it were)
with a kind of singing or whistling noise, which will easily induce a sweet and
pleasant sleep in summer time (if a man be disposed) in some close cool Arbor,
or shady seat.

Secondly, Pleasure of the sense of Touch.
the sense of Touch may have Pleasure in an Orchard from the cool fruits and
leaves of Trees, smoothing and brushing the face therewith, which is refreshing
and cooling in heat of Summer. But this sense receives Pleasure, chiefly by the
shade of trees in summer time. Cool refreshing Airs are found in close Walks,
Seats, and Arbours under and about the Trees, which keep off the burning heat
of the Sun.

Opaca prebent arbores umbracula, prohibentque densis fervidum, solemn comis,
Green Canopies the shady Trees us lend Against scorching sun, boughs thick
whilst they extend.
Yea, they do not simply keep off the heat of the Sun, but likewise much cool
the air by its contact of these cool bodies, Trees, Fruits, and Leaves; cool
fresh aires in heat of summer are sought for, and are not only pleasant, but
exceeding profitable, and healthful to the body. Here Profit and Pleasure mee^
and embrace each other. And hereto agrees the L. Bacon, who says, Exclusion of
air is profitable to long life; Hist. L. D. page 241.
for air is predatory to long-life through the heat of the sun* and ought (as
much as is possible) to be excluded from the body. Now, what better place is
there, to exclude the heat of the Sun from the body in summer season, the^
amongst the shady trees, Arbours and Walk in the Orchard?

L. B. Hist. L. D. p. Ca. 11. Page 425.
It Is laid for a ground, That condensing the spirits in their substance is
available t^ long-life, which (he tells us) is done most effectually by cool
aires. Refrigeration, or cooling of the body from without, is above al^ things
necessary to long-life.

So then, the pleasure this sense receive^ from a Garden of Fruit Trees, is to
be much esteemed.

Pleasure of the sight. Not. Hist. p. 225.
Thirdly, The sense of sight, partakes o^ Pleasure in an Orchard, in beholding
the exact Order in Planting of the Trees, their decent forms, the well composed
Allies, Walks, Seats, and Arbours therein: for Order and curious forms of
things, much delight the sight: of this, see L. Bacon at large.

Likewise, the sight is delighted with pleasant and delicate Colors of the
Leaves, Blossoms, and Fruits, that show themselves in great variety, curious
Colors, especially the Color green, is accounted helpful to the sight.

Fons, speculum, Gramen, Oculis sunt alleviamen:
Green grass, clear grass, and fountains pure
Refresh Eyesight, long to endure.
Here again Profit and Pleasure meet.
And as foul and odious objects presented to the sight, See L. B. Not. Hist.
page 199.
cause dislike in the spirits, that they retire and shun such objects, so e
contrario verum, the contrary holds in delightful and pleasant objects of the
sight, Not. Hist. p. 224.
the spirits thereby are delighted. He says, Objects of the sight, as coming
into a fair Garden, or into a fair Room richly furnished, and the like, do
delight and exhilerate the spirits much. The beautiful flowers of various
colors, amongst the lovely Blooms of Trees and Plants, what a glorious show
will they make.

Flores nitescunt, discolore gramine,
Pinguntque terras gemmeis honoribus.
Gay flowers woven with discolored grass,
With rich imbroidered Robes the earth compass.
Is it not a pleasant sight to behold a multitude of Trees round about: in
decent form and order, bespangled, and gorgeously apparelled with green Leaves,
Blooms, and goodly Fruits, as with a rich Robe of imbroidered work, or as
hanging with some precious and costly Jewels or Pearls; the Boughs laden and
burdened, bowing down to you, and freely offering their ripe fruits, as a large
satisfaction of all your labors?

Aspice curvatos pomorum pondere ramos,
Ovid.
Vt sua, quod peperit, vix ferat Arbor on^^
The laden boughs, with weight of Apples, crack;
And Trees to bear their burdens strength do lack.
Pleasure of the smell.
Fourthly, the sense of smell, may likewise have its share of pleasure in a
Garden of Fruit Trees. L. Bacon says, The sme^^ of new and pure earth, Hist. L.
D. p 207. p. 208.
excellently refreshet the spirits; he says, A certain great Lord who lived
long, had every morning, immediately after sleep, a clod of fresh earth lai^
under his nose, that he might take the smell thereof; Not. Hist. Cent. 9. p.
210.
and again, Good earth, newly* turned up, has a freshness and good sent. And
that the leaves and branches of some Trees, are odorous and sweet. He says
likewise, Not. hist. Cent. 6. p. 136.
That the leaves of Trees falling toward the middle of the Autumn, yield a
good refreshing to the spirits. And that the Moss of some Apple^trees has an
excellent sent, and is used of Perfumers.

But chiefly, The pleasure this sense meets with, is from the sweet smelling
blossoms of all the fruit trees, which from the time of their breaking sorth,
till their fall, breath out a most precious and pleasant odor; perfuming the
Air throughout all the Orchard.

The same Author observes, Not. hist. Cent. 4. p. 102.
That the most Delicate Smells, are from those Plants whose Leaves smell not,
and amongst other things, he mentions Blooms of Apple Trees.

And in another of his Experiments, Not. hist. Cent. 9. p. 210. Hist. L. D.
page 295.
he says, That generally those smells are most grateful and pleasant, where
the degree of heat is small: for those things do rather woe the sense then
satiate it. And prefers cool smells before hot, for comforting of the heart.

Now, The Blooms of Apple Trees, Pear Trees, Cherry-trees, and such like, have
small degrees of heat, and therefore the Odor is pleasant and wholesome.

And besides the pleasure of this perfumed Air, it is also very profitable,
and healthful to the body. Here again, Profit and Pleasure meet together and
embrace. An Odores nutriunt, is a question amongst Philosophers: some hold
sweet perfumes nourishing, doubtless they give a great refreshing to the
spirits, and whatsoever delights and cheers, the spirits is without
controversy very advantageous to the health of the body; for the spirits are
the chief workers in the body, from which proceed all, or most of the effects
wrought in the body, good or bad, according to the temper of the spirits.

Sweet Perfumes work immediately upon the spirits for their refreshing, but
meat and drink, by ambages and length of time: sweet and healthful Aires are
special preservatives to health, and therefore much to be prised.

Is the Curative part of Physic so worthy and excellent, as the preservative
part? Its better to stand fast, then to fall and rise again.

Now, a sweet perfumed, fresh* wholesome Air (which is chiefly found in Gardens
of Fruit Trees) is greatly available to that purpose, as well as pleasant to
the sense.

Fifthly, Pleasure of the Taste.
The Sense of Taste has its pleasure in an Orchard. This sense meets with
pleasure at all times of the year, from the fruits of an Orchard. The pleasure
of the other senses are to be had but at some seasons of the year only. This
sense has pleasure from all sorts of ripe, and raw fruits, besides meats and
drinks, and many dainties made of them. The ordinary food they afford all the
year, and the more delicate for Banque^s, are also good and healthful to the
body, as well as pleasant to the taste. Here again, pleasure and profit meet
and embrace, so the Poet: Hortus salubres praebet corpori cibos,
Oblecitat Hortus, avocat, pascit, tenet.
The garden to the body, gives sound and healthful meats,
The garden pleases most, draws, holds, and feeds with delicates.


In the heat of Summer, what place is fitter for the table, then some sweet,
shady, cool Arbor in the Garden? And what meats better befitting that time of
the year, then some dainty dishes made of the cool fruits of the Orchard? At
which time cooling and refreshing the spirits from within and with out by cool
Aires, and cool meats, is most advantageous for health and long life: for these
are the chief means (at that season) to keep the spirits in a fine, pleasant,
equal temper; yea some fruits have higher virtues ascribed to them then barely
to nourish, some Apples are accounted Cordials: Avicen says, That both the
tart and pleasant Apples, Lib. 6. cap. 569.
strengthen the heart, and to such as are troubled with hot infirmities, they
are a singular help. Confortant Cor, proprie odorifera, dulcia, and acetosa,
etc.

Hist. L. D. page 298.
L. Bacon, reckons Pear-mains among cool Cordials.

So then, when fruits are not only healthful, but also pleasant to the taste,
there is a double worth in them.

Consider now what has been said for the Pleasure of the Senses; And if it be
so acceptable to have the pleasure, though but of one Sense, what will it be
when there is a concurrence, and meeting of all together, which may be had in a
Garden of Fruit Trees? so the Poet.

Non desit Hortis, and voluptas maxima,
Multisque commixta modis jucunditas:
Tribuit colenti multiforme gaudium.
There wants not in Gardens great pleasure to the mind,
And outward senses many mixed pleasures find,
They yield unto the Artist joys of diverse kind.
We see what a plentiful and joyful Harvest of Profits and Pleasures may be
yearly reaped from an Orchard or Garden of Fruit Trees. Profits.


Here Is Profit of diverse kinds.

First to a man's Estate: and that in two respects. First, in respect of
housekeeping,

Secondly, in respect of Sale, either the fruits in their kinds, or Cider,
Perry, and Wines, made of them.

Secondly, Here Is Profit to the body, and that in two respects. First, in
respect of Health, by moderate exercise, fresh-Aires, pleasant Odours, and
wholesome meats and drinks.

Secondly, in respect of Long-life, by operation Taste, and through the
Affections of the mind, Hope, Joy, Admiration.

profit to the Mind. And that in two respects; First, in respect of knowledge,
Natural, Moral, Spiritual; Secondly, in respect of Affections.

profit to the Name, and that in two respects; First, in this life, by Gifts
and Benefits; Secondly, after death, by Fruit Trees as living Monuments.

Profit to others, and that in two respects, First, to the Poor, and the Rich
Friends, or Enemies, in the present times; Secondly, to posterity or future
ages.

Pleasures.
Here Is likewise Pleasures of diverse kinds.

and that in two respects; First, by sweet tunes of Singing-birds; Secondly, by
gentle motion of Bo^ghes, and Leaves.

Pleasure to the Touch, and that in two respects; First, by cool fruits, boughs
and leaves, Secondly, by cool fresh Aires.

Pleasure to the Eye, and that in two respects; First, by exact and decent
forms of Trees, Alleys, Walks, Seats, and Arbours; Secondly, by curious colors
of the blossoms, leaves, and fruits.

Pleasure to the smell, and that in two respects; First, from fresh Earth
dug up; Secondly, from the leaves and bl^ssomes.

Fifthly, Here Is Pleasure to the Taste, and in two respects; First, from ripe
and raw fruits: Secondly, from dishes and drinks made of them.

Some employments, as they are profitable in one respect, yet they are
unprofitable in another: yea, perhaps are full of hazard and danger, either to
the state, body, mind, or name; but this employment preserves, and is
profitable to all these. Some employments are pleasant to one sense, but not to
another, perhaps unpleasant, and hurtful: but in this there is an Agreement and
consent of Pleasures to all the senses.

And as there is a mutual consent and concurrence of all the profits among
themselves, and of all the pleasures among themselves, so likewise there is a
mutual consent and conca^enation of the Profits, with the Pleasures, one
embracing another, one supporting and upholding each other.

Five ways of Profit, each of them in two respects,
And five ways of Pleasure, each of them in two respects!
Here Is Profit and Pleasure running along hand in hand, meetly matched
together, being the most rich and beautiful King and Queen in all the world.

Thus having showed the great Praises that are given to this Art of Planting
Fruit Trees, and some Divine and Humane Arguments of the dignity and value
thereof, and likewise the profits and pleasures that are received from an
Orchard or Garden of Fruit Trees, I think it meet to give a caution concerning
temporal profits and pleasures.

It Is true; We have liberty to seek earthly Profits and Pleasures in our
Callings, and to rejoice in them, A Caution in the use of Earthly things.
but yet with care and circumspection, and with due regard to circumstances.

There is a Rejoicing in Earthly blessings which God allows to us, Deuteronomy. 26.11.
Thou shall rejoice in every good thing which the Lord thy God has given thee.
And Deuteronomy. 12.16. Thou shall rejoice before the Lord thy God in all that thou
put thine hand unto: And again, Deuteronomy. 16.15. Because the Lord thy God shall
bless thee in all thy increase, and in all the works of thy hands, therefore
thou shall surely rejoice* And when our ways please God, he says, Go, eat thy
bread with joy, and drink thy win^ with a merry heart. Eccles. 9.7. Solomon
says, Eccles. 5.18. Behold, that which I have seen, it is good and comely for
one to eat and to drink, and to enjoy the good of all his labor he takes under
the sun, all the days of his life, which God gives him, for it is his
portion: And Chap. 2.24. This I saw, That it was from the hand of God.

No doubt we may use these and other earthly blessings with Rejoicing: but all
the danger is, lest we take too much liberty herein, and break beyond our
bounds.

These Profits and Pleasures being multiplied in the Garden of Fruit Trees, we
had best beware of reaching after them too earnestly. Latet Anguis in Herba, A
subtle Serpent lies hid among these pleasant flowers, and seeks to bite us by
his temptations, who has as much (or more) malice and policy now, as formerly
against our first Parents, whom he deceived in a Garden of Fruit Trees.

Men may become Idolaters ere they be aware, and so are many, even among
Christians: in worshipping profit and pleasure; letting up these two for their
household Gods. The Prophet tells us, Ezekiel. 14.3. Men set up their Idols in
their hearts, and give that to them, which is due only to God.

The difference between using and enjoying a thing.
We may easily mistake between the use of earthly blessings, and the enjoyment
o^ them.

De Doctrina Christi. l. 1.
Austin tells us, no earthly blessings are properly to be Enjoyed, but used
only: Res aliae sunt, quibus fruendum est, aliae quibus utendum; illae quibus
fruendum est, beat^nos faciunt, istis quibus utendum est, tendentes ad be
atitudinem adjuvamur, and quasi adminiculamur, ut ad illas, quae nos beatos
faciunt, proveniamus. There are some thing (says he) which are to be enjoyed,
others t^ b^ used; those which we ought to enjoy, make us happy, such as we
ought to use only, are those whereby we are furthered, and are (...) succors,
aids, and helps, to bring us to those things which may be enjoyed, and make us
hapy.

He tells us, whom, and what we may enjoy, Fruendum est Patre, and Filio, and
Spiritu Sancto. Beatum est ad tale bonum provenisse, quo amplius non potest.
The Father* the Son, and blessed Spirit, are to be enjoyed* And its true
blessedness to attain to that good which is the highest.

So then, God only is to be enjoyed, and the good things of this life only to
be used, as helps and furtherances unto God* We had need therefore take heed of
falling in love with earthly things: The foresaid Author tells us the danger of
it. De Doct. Christ. l. 1.
Si eis quibus utendum est frui voluerimus, impeditur cursunoster, and
aliquando etiam defiec^itur, ut ab his rebus quibus fruendum est, obtinendis
vel retardemur, vel etiam revocemur inferiore amore praepedir^: Et si
amoenitutes itineris, and ipsa gestatio vehiculorum nos delectarent, conversi^
ad fruendum his quibus uti debuimus: nollemus cito viam finire, and perversa
suavitate implicati alien^remur a P^tria, cujus suavitas faceret beatos. That
is, if we fall to enjoying of such things as we ought but only to use, we are
thereby hindered in our course, and many times even turned out of it. And as to
the obtaining of those things which we ought to enjoy (by the love of earthly
things) we are called back from them, and much retarded, and stopped in our way
to them. And if the Pleasures and Contentments of the journey and the carriage,
by which we are conveyed, overmuch please and delight us, then we turn to
enjoying of those things which we ought but only to use, and therefore are
unwilling to come to our journys end, and are entangled in corrupt delights,
and brought thereby to be estranged from the Country, the sweetness and
pleasure whereof, makes blessed.

We see then, when God gives us blessings largely, and gives us leave to use
them freely, we are in danger to forget him: We had need therefore to set a
watch, o^ guard upon our hearts, lest profit and pleasure steal it, and keep it
to themselves. But what a shame is it we should have fewes^ thoughts of God,
when he is most mindful of us. And that we should fall so much in love with the
Token, that we forget him that sent it.

And now, having answered the doubts and discouragements that have hindered
some from entering upon this part of the Husbandmans work, The Art of Planting
Fruit Trees; and showed the great esteem that all men have of it, and the value
and dignity thereof from Divine and Humane Arguments, what a rich confluence of
profits and pleasures, are (from time to time) brought unto us by it, with a
Caution in the use of these things.

What remains, but that I also discover how we may obtain our desires herein by
what means the work may be done, with most speed, and best effect? Which I
shall now endeavor to do.

Of the Nursery.
I shall first speak of a Nursery of young Plants, and show the manner of sowing
of Kernels, or Seeds of Fruits, and their preparation and ordering (by Grafting
and Inoculating) for transplanting into Orchards, Gardens, or Fields: (although
some may plant an Orchard a more speedy way, to buy young trees ready grafted,
or to plant stocks of diverse years growth, and after they have grown a year or
two, to graft them.)

I shall set down all these things as briefly as I can, so that withal, I make
them plain to the intelligent Reader, laying down the most material, and
essential things concerning this Art: For long and tedious discourses (about
things that may be comprehended in few words, (as many use) they do often
mislead men, so as it is not easy to see the most material things concerning
their subject, or what they drive at; whereas, a brief and plain discovery of
them may better be comprehended and remembered.

1. First then: Let there be a plot of ground (more or less) dug up about
the time when Fruits are ripe, and let all the Grass, Weeds, Roots, Stones,
etc. be clean picked out, and the ground cast into Beds about a yard broad, and
spaces between, about a foot in breadth, to pass between them, to Sow, Set,
Weed, etc. And then procure Kernels of Apples, Pears, Crabs, Cherry stones, But
as for Aprecott- stones it is best to keep them (in sand) till October, before
we set them; because if they be set early, when the fruit is ripe, they
commonly spring up before Winter, and then being very tender, the frost kills
them: some Peach-stones, and other Plum-stones, will lie in the ground, until
the spring come Twelvemonth, and then come up: therefore conclude not they will
never spring up, though not the first year.
Plum-stones, and the seeds of diverse kinds of Fruits, and these may be set,
and sowed, from the time that the Fruits are ripe, until the spring (except in
frost) in this manner.

Having made the Beds level with a Rake, sprinkle the seeds upon them all over,
each kind by themselves, and set, or sow the stones by themselves, then take a
spade, and turn in the seeds and stones about a handful deep or less, and
after rake them all over, and (that none may be left uncovered) sift some small
mould with a Sive, or besprinkle it with a spade all over them, and so let them
rest all Winter.

Preserve seeds from Mice.
And carefully observe that Mice devour not the seeds in Winter, if you perceive
it, set Traps, and lay Rats-bane to destroy them. Though you cannot see the
Mice, yet if they have been there (as commonly they are) it may be perceived by
diverse small holes up and down the seed-beeds, where they have devoured the
seeds, and some husks will lie above ground.

In the Spring and Summer, let them be weeded, from time to time, clean, and if
the weather be dry, let them be watered now and then, and they will make a
growth the same year, according to the strength and goodness of the ground
wherein they grow. Plants coming of seeds or stones, are far better then
Suckers from Roots of Trees, although such are good and useful for stocks also
if they have good Roots.

In weeding the young Seed-plants, some will come up with the weeds; set them
again almost to the top, then water them, and all the rest.

In Autumn, when they have done growing, let them be transplanted into other
Beds of ground prepared for that purpose, thus: Let the ground be dug, and
cast into square Plots, or long Plots, as you will, and laid level with a Rake,
then set the young Seed-plants therein in this manner. Having cast up the
Borders handsomely on each side, stretch a Line from one side to the other,
then take a Setting-stick (that is, a hard piece of wood about a yard long,
with a handle at the top, and made sharp at the end, or pointed with Iron) and
thrust it into the ground half a foot deep, (or according to the length of the
Roots) close to the line and make holes all along, from one end of the line to
the other, about half a foot or more, as you will in distance: And having
prepared the Seed-plants, by cutting of all the side Twigs, and the ends or
bottom of the Roots, set them in order in the holes to the top of their Roots,
and close the mould about them: Draw the biggest first, and set them by
themselves, and the least by themselves. Then take up the line, and stretch it
again about a foot from the other Plants, and make holes, and prune more
Seed-plants, and set them as before.

Let not the Roots be too long; about a handful in length (or less) is
sufficient; for if their Roots be long, and set deep, the Trees afterward are
taken up with more difficulty.

Then take up the line, and stretch it again, a foot and half from the Plants
last set, that there may be a convenient space of ground to pass between to
weed the Plants, and to Graft and Inoculate them (being grown fit) And having
made holes, and pruned the Plants, set them as before.

And thus set the Nursery throughout, and many of these will be ready after one
year to Inoculate, and after two years, or three, to Graft. Yea, many may be
fit to Graft after the first year, and some fit to inoculate the first summer.

Be sure to transplant all young Seed-plants, Remove all Seed-plants
for by that means they get good Roots, which of themselves, thrust down one
single Root, for the most part. And being grown two or three years after
Inoculating or Grafting, they are fit to transplant, to make Orchards, or into
Fields and Hedges, at a competent distance, as shall be showed when I speak of
setting Trees.

Thus men may in a few years, prepare multitudes of Young Trees for themselves
and others, to give or sell as they please.

Some procure Crab-stocks from the woods, and set them to graft on, having
grown a year or two; but these stocks are not so good as those that come of
seed. We see by continual experience, many are deceived by them, though some
may do well.

And further observe, Remove seed Plants after the Summer.
not only to remove all Seed-plants, as before, but let it be done the next
Autumn or Winter, let them have but one summers growth from the seed, before
they be removed to be prepared in the Nursery, unless they be very small; for
there is advantage in it, above those that grow where they are sown two or
three years before removing: for these small Seed-plants are not only easily
drawn up, and easily set again, (with a small Setting-Instrument) but also
(their Roots being but short) they taking Root, and spreading their Roots near
the top of the ground they are easily taken up, and removed (after Grafting)
having grown three or four, Besides, the top of the earth is the best soil,
as having the Sun and Rain all the year.
or more years, whereas such as grow two or three years upon the Seed bed
before removing, they thrust their Roots very deep in the earth, and are not
only hard to be drawn up, but likewise their Roots when set again, must of
necessity (though a great part be cut off,) be thrust down very deep into the
earth, and then such spread their Roots deep, for they thrust their young Roots
from the lowest part, where the Root was cut off, and so they neither have so
good nourishment from the earth (as spreading below the best soil) nor are
they so easily to be transplanted when they are ready, as those other which are
drawn the first year, and set very small as before.

This is very considerable, and therefore observe it: I underwent great
inconveniences when I came to Remove some, before I found out this observation.

NOw for the manner of Inoculating and Grafting these Plants, being thus
prepared, and grown fit.

First, concerning Grafting: The time of Grafting.
wherein we must consider the time: February and March (usually with most) are
the two chief Months for Grafting, but we may begin sooner, and its best so to
do, especially with Cherry and Plum grafts: If the weather be open, without
Frost in the beginning of January, or in December. Yea, I have grafted some
(with good success) in November, and sooner, but in the beginning of January we
may begin, if Frost hinder not. And such as have multitudes to engraft must
needs begin early, else they will want time

Grafts of Cherry and Plum-trees, must be grafted soonest, because they bud
soone^^. And begin with them, ere they begin to Bud forth, and then with
Pear Trees and Apple Trees.

Grafts of any kind may be gotten and kept many days, How to keep Graf^s.
or many weeks, the one half in length, being covered with mould; bind not many
together, for if so, those in the middle will dry, and be spoiled, in certain
days: but lay them thin in the mould; or they may be grafted immediately, so
soon as they are gotten Graft none but those of one years growth, only the
last years sprout, the fairest and thickest are best: They may be carried many
miles, being bound up close (from end to end) in a hay-band, or better in a Box
of Mould, or their ends stuck in clay, and wrapped about that they bruis^ not.

Instruments for grafting
That this work may the more effectually be done, we must have fit Tools, and
Instruments for that purpose: First, a good sharp knif, and strong, to cut off
the top of stocks. A neat sharp saw, to cut off the head of some stocks which
are grown too big for the knife: also a little Mallet and Wedg, to cleave the
big stocks, a small Penknife, to cut the Grafts, (as I shall show you anon)
and keep it very sharp for this purpose only: There must be likewise Clay
prepared with horse-dung, well mixed together, as Mortar, about two parts Clay.
And Rushes, What flags are best.
or strong, soft Flags, to bind together the Graft, and the Stock. With a small
hand-basket to carry the Grafts in, with all the Instruments for the work.

Manner of the Work.
Having these things in a readiness, the time being come, go to the Stocks that
are ready (small or great) And those that are small (about the bigness of ones
little finger (which are of a competent bigness, and we loose no time in
making use of them) Graft them in this manner.

If they be Cherry-stocks, or Plum-stocks, to make Wall-trees of, graft them
low, within half a foot (or less) of the ground, but if they be for Standards,
then Graft them an ell, or yard and half high: if the stocks are of a
convenient bigness of that height, else graft them lower, where they are of a
competent bigness.

1. Cut off the top of the stock in some smooth, The first way of grafting,
called, slicsing or backing on.
straight place, that may be answerable to the straightness of the Graft, when
set on: Then prepare the Graft thus: observe which side is straightest at the
bottom, or biggest end, that so it may fit the straight part of the stock when
set on: Then cut one side only of the Graft, down aslope, about an inch long,
or little more; either from the knot or seam, Which is a circle round about the
graft distinguishing the last summers growth from the former.
(if the part below it be smooth, and straight) or else from a Bud or from any
part: and cut through the Bark, at the top of the cut place, and make it like
a shouldier, that it may rest just upon the top of the Stock, but cut not this
shoulder too deep, (only through the Bark or little more) but cut the graft
thin at the bottom of the cut place, yet leave on all the Bark on the opposite
side, make this cut smooth and even, from the top of it to the bottom, without
dints or ridges, (which is of special concernment) that so it may be sure to
join close to the Stock.

The Graft, being thus prepared, then go on to prepare the Stick further, lay
the cut part of the Graft upon the straight side of the Stock: and measure just
the length of the cut part of the Graft. And (with a knife) take away so much
of the bark of the Stock, If it may be upon the West, or South-west side of the
stock; because if so, these winds (which are most dangerous cannot so soon
break off the grafts, as on the other side.

I have lost many before I observed this course.


but cut not any of the wood of the Stock, then lay the cut side of the Graft,
upon the cut part of the Stock, and let the shoulder of the Graft, re^t
directly upon the top of the Stock, so that the cut parts of both may join
even and smooth all along, and so bind them together close, with some strong
Rushes or Flaggs: then Clay them, lay on every side, and an inch above, and as
much below, some of the Clay prepared as before, close it above, and below, and
on every side, that no rain get in: and that is all needs to be done for that
time.

This I account the best way of Grafting for diverse Reasons:

1. First, because in this way of Grafting we may make use of the Stocks diverse
years before they will be ready to graft in the Cleft: by this way of Grafting,
the trees will be ready to bear, before they will be ready to graft the other
way.

2. Secondly, This kind of grafting is less hurt, both to the stock and graft;
for cleaving the stock is danger, and hurt to it, being cloven (as it must) in
the middle to the very heart: whereas in this way of grafting, it remains whole
and entire, save only a small part of the Bark taken off.

And as for the Graft, in Cleft-grafting, it must be cut on both sides, to the
heart, and made thin, but in slicing or packing on, it must be cut only on one
side, and so less hurtf^l to the Graft.

3. Thirdly, When stocks are cloven, if they be somewhat great, commonly the
Rain and Air gets into the cleft, and rots the middle of the stock, before the
Graft can grow over to cover the head of it, which is not incident in this way
of Grafting.

4. Fourthly, This way of Grafting is much more easy to do, and more sure to
take and grow, then grafting in the cleft, for the graft and stock join more
close and exactly, then can be in cleaving the stock.

5. As this way is easily done, and more sure, so also is it more speedily
done, then any other kind of Grafting.

Second way of grafting, called whip-Grafting.
Secondly, There is another way of Grafting small stocks, such as are but just
as big as the Grafts you mean to set on. And those Stocks are prepared thus:
The top being cut off over against a smooth straight place, as before; the Bark
of it must not only be cut, but also the Wood, quite through to the back side
of it at the top, directly like as the Graft is cut (as was said) in length as
much as the cut part of the Graft; the manner of cutting the Graft for this, is
the same with the former^ then lay the cut part of the Graft, upon the cut part
of the Stock, and let the top of the Stock (even the very bark of the outside)
be directly under the shoulder of the Graft, that so the cut parts both of
Graft and Stock, may join, and answer one another from the top to the bottom,
and so bind and clay them as before

Thirdly, There is another way of Grafting generally practiced, Third way of
Grafting
though not so sure away as the two former, and yet a better way for great
stocks, for none but small stocks are capable of the two former ways, it is
thus: Those stocks that are large (three or four inches in compass) must be
cloven, the tops being cut off in a straight smooth place, cut the roughness of
the top smooth with a sharp knife, then knock in a strong knife or chissel, a
very little beside the pith, and if it be capable but of one graft, then be
sure to cleave it on that side that is smooth and straight, if it be fit for
two as it is, if it be about an Ell high, and a strong stock, then he careful
to choose both sides smooth, being cloven with the knife, and a wedg of Box, or
other hard wood knocked in to keep it open, then prepare the Graft or Grafts you
mean to put in, cut both sides of the Graft aslope down from the knot or seam,
if it be straight, or else from a Bud, about an inch or little more, shoulder
both sides of the Graft, as was said of one side, for the other sort of
grafting, and make it thin at the bottom. Let the outside of the Graft be
somewhat thicker then the inner-side, unless the stock be very big, if it be so
great to pinch the Graft much, then make the inner-side of the Graft thicker, a
very little, that so it may preserve the outside from being pinched too much.

And in setting in all Grafts into the cleft, A special Rule.
observe this for a most special Rule, to join the inner-side of the bark of
the Graft, to the inner-side of the bark of the stock, that the sap may more
easily come out of the Stock into the Graft to feed it, for the main current of
the sap, is between the bark and the wood.

Some take care to set the outsides even and smooth, but that is an error in
practice; for we know the Bark of a big stock is much thicker then the Bark of
a slender graft, and if the outsides be smooth and even, the insides must needs
be uneven.

But I say, to join the inner sides of both barks together, all along the
cleft, is the principal thing in grafting of such big stocks

The Grafts being thus placed in the Stocks, and the wedg pulled out, then Clay
them close on every side, an inch above the top of the stock, to the bottom of
the Cleft.

Choice of Grafts.
In choosing Grafts, choose not those that are very small, and slender, they
commonly fail; but take the fairest upon the tree, and especially those that
are fullest of Buds.

Cut off the tops of Grafts.
The tops of long Grafts, are to be cut, that they may spread the better: and of
such as are but short; if there be blossom buds on the top, as it is commonly
seen in Pearmains, and many other good bearing kinds.

Ioyn right kinds together in Grafting.
Graft every Cyence into its own kind, as all kind of Apples together, and also
on Crabstocks, (which is the wild Apple) Pear-grafts on wild Pear-stocks, and
the like of other kinds: join not contrary or different kinds, they never come
to perfection: as Cherry-grafts, or Plum-grafts, or the like: Experience makes
it manifest to be but lost labor, they will grow (it may be) a year, or two, and
then die.

And in choice of Grafts, Observe the best bearing trees.
be sure to consider what Trees (of all kinds) are the best bearers, some kinds
seldom miss, and some other kinds (though good fruits) seldom hit, and
therefore take information from those persons, that know (by experience) the
nature of the trees in this regard, and accordingly choose, or refuse grafts
from them. Observe the like in choice of Vines.

Such Grafts as are bound (as is said of the two first ways of Grafting) must
be unbound after a certain time, Unbind Grafts.
when they have well closed with the Stock: about Midsommer they will be fast
enough upon the Stock, so that they may without danger be unbound: but if they
be not unbound, the band sometimes girds and dints in too much, unless of some,
where the band rots or breaks: and besides the winds (when the grafts are grown
big and bushy) will endanger the breaking of diverse of them, unless they be
unbound, and also by some means supported, and strengthened in the grafted
place, which may be done, by tying a small stick to them a little above, and as
much below the place where it is engrafted; but before you thus bind the stick
to strengthen the Graft, put a little clay round about the engrafted place
(being unbound) it will cause the sap sooner to cover the head of the stock.

But if the Grafts be Grafted near unto the ground, or not above half a yard
high, they will not be so much in danger of breaking by the winds especially
such whose growth is most into one single shoot or two; and such as grow but
upon small, or weak stocks: as to such, this labor (in tying the Graft, to
strengthen it in the grafted place) may be spared: Those that are high stocks,
and of strong growth, and shoot forth their Grafts vigorously, and into a great
head of many branches, are most endanger of winds, especially the Westwinds,
(which are commonly strongest) for the first year, and more, a week or
fortnight before and after Midsommer; being they are yet tender, and not well
closed with the stock; so that these especially must be taken care of in this
regard, only for the first year, after there is no danger at all of breaking by
the winds. Some kinds of Flags (wherewith we bind Grafts are so tough and
strong, that they will not yield a jot, nor break with the growth and swelling
of the Stock and Graft (as some other Bands do) and therefore there is the more
need to look to such, to cut them, or unbind them, as before is said, else they
cause dints or circles in the place where they bind, the bark swelling on both
sides of the binding, and this makes the Graft more in danger of breaking,
unless unbound, and strengthened in that part, as before.

After Grafts have had their full growth the first year, Prune some young grafts
they must be Pruned, such as need Pruning: as for wall Plants, it is no matter
of how many Branches they spread, more the better: but for those that are
Grafted low, and yet must be made standards, leave only one shoot, the
strongest and biggest shoot, and cut off all the rest, and let not that
straight shoot begin to spread, till it be an Ell long at least, rather more,
and then let the Branches spread, and enlarge themselves.

But herein observe, that unless these young Grafts put forth a strong and
lusty shoot, do not prune off the side Branches, left the body of the plant be
too small, and limber to bear his head; as is often seen in a Nursery where
plants grow close, and near together: if the body be very slender, then suffer
some of the side twigs to grow until the body be of a sufficient strength to
bear the top.

And from year to year, prune off those shoots and branches as are superfluous,
and grow too near one another, and preserve only such as are fit to make the
Tree of a comely form. And if any spice up, and shoot too strongly upwards in
the middle of the Tree only, and spread not sufficiently (as is often seen in
Pear trees, and some other trees) cut off from time to time those strong
shoots in the middle, and still preserve the outmost branches, for all
Fruit Trees, ought to spread as much as may be, so that the branches hang not
too near the ground.

And so much concerning Grafting, and also pruning while they are young Plants.

I shall now speak of the other work whereby Fruit Trees are increased.
Inoculating, or putting a small Bud into a Stock, which (as to the effects of
it) is the same with Grafting, but differs much in the season, and in the
manner of the work.

Inoculating Buds.
The time for Inoculating Buds is about Midsommer, a fortnight before, and a
fortnight after is the chief season, though some Plants (full of Sap) may be
done afterward with good success upon young frim stocks, even so long as the
bark will rise. And take heed of beginning too soon with any Buds; before they
have attained a sufficient strength and growth; some will not be fit to
Inoculate until August, and so all* that Month upon some frim sappy stocks.

That this business may be done to good purpose, it must be considered whether
the Buds we mean to get, are sufficiently grown or not, they must not be too
young and tender: and we shall find that some kinds of Trees have buds ready
sooner then others. As the Aprecott especially, and those that shoot strongly.
Let then the biggest and strongest shoots be cut from the Tree, that have grown
since the spring to that time, and cut off the top of the shoot (all those Buds
that are too small and tender) and also cut off the leaves of the other, about
a quarter of an inch from the Bud, and by that part left, we hold the Bud,
being taken off the branch: but leave not on the whole leaf and stalk, as some
do, for the air (by means of the leaf) extracts and draws out the sap of the
Bud in a short time, and so spoils it.

Then go to the Plants you intend to Inoculate, Observe the kinds.
which must be like (as to the general kinds) with the Buds that you intend to
set on: as Aprecott-buds, and other Plum-buds, on Plum-stocks that are wild
stocks: the white Pearl-plum-stock is accounted the best to Inoculate
Aprecott-buds on, or other choice Plums, it being a Plant full of sap: and in
choosing Buds, or Grafts, be sure always to cut them from those kinds that
(experience shows) are good bearing Trees, as well as good fruits.

Now in setting on the Bud, first make a cross cut upon some smooth place of
the stock, (if it be for a wall-tree, then half a foot or a foot, or
thereabouts from the ground) and from the middle of the cross cut, make another
straight down, about an Inch long, only through the Bark, and with the end of a
Penknife, raise up the Bark on both sides, as much as to let in the small Bud,
then make have to prepare the bud (for a man must be quick at this work, else
the Air, by sudden drying the Bud, and the cut-part of the stock will much
hurt:) Cut the bark on both side the Bud, and about a quarter of an inch above,
and as much below the Bud, let that end which is to be downwards, be a little
sharp, that it may more easily go down, between the Bark, and wood of the
stock* and throw away the Bark on the opposite side of the Bud, then with a
Quill, the one half cut away, or a Pen of steel (made this for the purpose,
like the one half of ^ Goose-quil) take off the Bud and Bark, by putting it
between the Bark and wood: and be sure there be the root of the Bud in it, if
there be a little hole in the middle of the Bud within, then the root is not
there, throw away that bud, such will not grow, but the Bud being well taken
off, then hold it by the stalk of the leaf, as before was said, and put it
carefully between the bark and the wood of the small Plant prepared as before,
and let the top of the bud join close to the cross cut, in the upper end: then
bind the bud with a soft Rush, or Flag that is strong, bind it close to the
stock, especially in the middle where the Root of the bud lies, but not just
upon the Bud.

After a certain time, Unbind buds in due time.
the Buds must be unbound, and some sooner then others; some stocks grow more
in a week, then some others in a month.

Now, if this work be done early in the year, before Midsommer, upon young
stocks very full of sap, these may be unbound about twenty days after, or a
General Rule may be this, when a stock is so grown, as that the band about the
Bud does much straighten the Bud, which may be seen by the swelling of the
Plant above and below the Buds, then the band must be cut and taken off. But
those that are near the end of July or after, will not need unbinding so soon.
But take heed of making too much have to unbind buds; there is less danger in
suffering them to be long bound, then the contrary.

Now after unbinding, you may se^ which Buds take hold of the stock* and which
do not; those that are good, are fast upon the stock, and appear in their
natural colors as when they were set on* those that do not hold, will have
lost their color, and (it may be) be withered and dried.

Cut off stocks above the Buds.
Such as are good, meddle no more till the Spring, then cut off the stocks an
inch or two above the Buds, so the Buds will spring out and grow according to
the strength of the stocks. And in Autumn after they may be transplanted, or
if you please, such Buds may be transplanted the next Autumn after
Inoculating, which is the surer way for growing. And when these Buds have grown
one year or two, then cut off the stock close to the Buds, and they w^ll cover
the head as Grafts.

How to carry Buds.
If Buds be not ready at hand, but must be fetched many Miles in that hot time,
then s^ec^al care must be taken in the carriage of them. Thus, being cut from
the Tree, cut off the tops of the Branches, and the leaves near the Buds as
before, then bind them together, and wrap them in fresh leaves or grass to keep
them cool, and they will keep good two or three days, but yet make all the
have that may be to Inoculate them. Buds of App^^ trees, Pear, Cherry, or Plum*
may be Inoculated as Aprecots, and Peaches, if the shoots be strong and large.


Having Grafted or Inoculated stocks, make one Letter or two, or write the name
of the Fruit at length upon the stock below the Graft or Bud (whereby to know
the kind of the Fruit) and if any be sto^len, they may thereby be known, Mark
the Stocks.
being found again. It Is done with the point of a Penknife, cutting through
the Bark, the form of a Letter, or any other Figure or Character, whereby to
know the kinds of fruits. And so much for Inoculating Buds of Fruit trees.

THe choice of right kinds of Grafts, Directions in the cho^ce of Grafts and
Stocks.
and Stocks, and the joining of them together according to their natures, is so
necessary, and some observations about them are so essential to the work of
profitable planting, that except they be known, and practiced, men loose much
of the profit they might have, if rightly observed.

A few special directions in any Art, though consisting but of few lines,
containing ^he Principles, and essential parts, are better, and more to the
advancement of the Art, then great Volumes upon the same Subject, when men (as
many do) rove about upon unnecessary things, and strange fancies, without any
solid grounds, beside the life of the business. If men miss the Principles, and
essentials of an Art, they discourse of it to little purpose.

So also in the practice: and therefore it has many times fallen out, that some
men having labored much, and spent much time and cost in Planting Fruit Trees,
yet their labors have not succeeded well, because there has been mistakes in
some principal, and very material things; either the Trees have not grown well,
or if prospered, and come to a large growth, yet they have not born Fruit well,
or if grown; and born fruit, and store of fruit, yet if the fruit has not
been right good, and of the best, it has been a great discouragement, not
only to themselves, but to others who have seen it.

Now, among all Observations about this Art of Planting Fruit Trees, I know
none of greater moment, or more essential to the profitable proceeding in it,
then the choice of right kinds, and the joining of Grafts, Buds, and Stocks fit
for each other. I shall therefore mention some particulars of the Twelve kinds
of Fruit Trees, which I have made choice to speak of, and show which I account
most profitable, and best to propagate and increase, and how they fit several
stocks when the Cyences are to be Engrafted, or buds Inoculated.

First, Of Apples Choose the best bearing kinds.
concerning Apples: In the choice of Apple-Grafts, we must consider not only
the goodness of the Fruit, but also, whether the Trees be good bearing Trees
naturally: whether such as have known them diverse years, can say by experience,
they bear well, but many look not after this so much, as what kind of fruit it
is, in respect of goodness. And thence it comes to pass, that some men having
store of fair, large Fruit Trees, they have but little fruit from them.
Therefore let the generality of Fruit Trees (both in the Orchards and in the
Fields) be of right kinds in respect of bearing, as well as in respect of
goodness of the fruit; and then for variety, there may be some of other kinds
of good and choice fruits, though they bear but few and seldom.

And for particular kinds of Apples, I commend the Summer Pearmain, and the
Winter Pearmain, not only for special fruits, but also for good bearing kinds.
So likewise the small spice Pippin, a good Apple, and great bearer; The Harvey
Apple is a very choice fruit, and the Trees bear well. The Queen Apple is a
great bearing fruit, and good, so the Gilloflour. The Golden Pippin, a very
special Apple, and great ba^er, great Russeting, Kerton Pippin, Holland Pippin,
as some call it.
Many other kinds might be named, that are special good fruits, and great
bearing kinds, and some prefer one kind, and some another. But the great and
general Rule in this, and all other kinds of fruits, is, to take Grafts from
those Trees which are known by experience to bear store of fruits, and good,
and to multiply these as much as may be.

As for Stocks fit for Apple Grafts, I account Crab-trees better then sweeter
Apple Trees to graft on, because they are usually free from the Canker, and
will become very large Trees, and will last longer then Stocks of sweeter
Apple Trees, and will make fruits more strong, and hardy to endure Frosts, and
cold weather in the spring: yet it is good to choose stocks of some pleasant
Apples, to graft some choice fruit upon; Because that the stock has some small
influence upon the fruits, to make them more delicate, if grafted upon a choice
stock. Although notwithstanding the graft may be said to Govern, as is showed
at large.

Of Pears.
As for Pears, there are multitudes of kinds, as well as of Apples, some
preferring one kind and some another, and one and the same fruit is called by
several names, in several places. A late Author says, he is persuaded there
are 400. or 500. several kinds of Pears. Now therefore, it is a point of wisdom
to choose Grafts from the best bearing kinds, although (it may be) not so
delicate to eat as some others. I know none but they are very useful and
profitable.

The Windsor Pear is accounted one of the best with us, some kinds bear not
well, but some others do, therefore observe the former Rule. The Summer
Burgamet is a choice fruit, and the Trees bear well; so also the Winter
Burgamet.

But for a constant bearing kind. The Winter Boncriten is an excellent fruit,
so the summer, but bears not so well as the winter kind.
I know none better then the Catherine Pear, both the Russet and the Red; but
they must be quickly spent, for they are no lasting fruits.

The Greenfield Pear, is an excellent Pear, and a great bearer. There is a Pear
they call a Choke-Pear, which is accounted a special kind for Perry, although
the Pear to eat, is stark naught, and therefore men may adventure to plant the
Trees in the fields and hedges, and need not fear stealing of the fruits. I
advise (for that reason) to plant many of the Trees, on purpose to grind the
fruits for Perry. Mr. Parkinson says, the Perry of these Pears, is scarce
discerned from Wine, neither by taste nor color, after it has been kept
certain months.

The best kind of stocks to graft Pear-grafts upon, are such as come of the
Seeds or Kernels of Pears. I know no difference among these, but all good to
graft upon* And I utterly dislike grafting these Fruits upon White-thorne, or
upon any kind of stocks beside Pear-stocks. The fruits are naught (having a
hard and stony core) if grafted upon a Thorne-tree.

Of Cherries
There are many kind of Cherries. The Flanders-cherry is most generally planted
here in England, and is a great bearing fruit. Some of them (if planted against
a south-wall) are almost as soon as the May-Cherry, they follow close after:
The May-Cherries are tender, the Trees must be set in a warm place, upon some
smooth south-wall, or morning sun, but the Flanders hear well in Orchards, and
Fields at large.

The black Hart-Cherry, is a very special fruit, and a great bearing-fruit; and
doubtless exceeding proper to press for Wine, either to drink of it self, or to
mix the juice with Cider to give it a color, as Clarret-wine. It being of a
deep red, and a small quantity of it, will color a gallon of Cider or
white wind. There is a Cherry we call the great bearing cherry, of Mr. Millen.
It may very well be called the great bearer, for the Trees seldom fail of
great store of fruits, although in a cold, and sharp spring. It is something a
tart fruit, of a very deep red, almost blackish, when full ripe. The juice is
very proper to color Cider, Perry, White Wind, or the like.

These kinds are not ripe so soon as they are red, as the Flanders are, but
should grow 10 days, or a fortnight after, until they become a very deep red:
These (being somewhat late ere they be ripe) will hang upon the Trees until
October, or after, especially if the Trees grow in the shade, and then they are
rarities as much, or more then those in May: the White-cherry (the right kind)
is a delicate fruit, there are many more kinds, I have above twenty several
kinds of Cherries in my Garden.

The great bearing Cherry aforementioned, is most fit for cold Countries in the
North-parts, and although it be not altogether so pleasant as some other
Cherries, by reason of the tartness of the juice, yet let men know, that sharp
Cherries are more wholesome then the sweet. And such as plant Trees of this
kind, may have good store of Fruits, when others (it may be) want, who have
none of these Trees.

Concerning Stocks fit for Cherry-trees, ^ account the Black-Cherry-stock the
best to graft any kind of Cherry upon. Yet some hold the Red-Cherry-stock is
best for May-Cherries. But the Black-Cherry-stocks are goodly straight Plants
and full of Sap, and become greater Trees then the Red-Cherry-trees.

Of Plums.
There are very many kinds of Plums, many more then of Cherries. I esteem the
Mustle-Plum one of the best, being a fair large Purple-plush, and of an
excellent relish, and the Trees bear abundantly. The Damazeene also is an
excellent fruit. The Violet, and Premorden Plum-trees, are very great bearing
Trees, and the fruits pleasant and good. The Damasco-Plum, is a good Fruit, and
the Trees bear well.

Many other kinds might be named, very good Plums; some approve of one kind,
and some of another, but the driest plums which part from the stones, are
accounted best.

Plum-Grafts must be grafted upon Plum-stocks, not upon Cherry-stocks, or any
other kind of stocks, that I know. The White Pear-plum-stocks are accounted the
best and the Damson-stocks the worst, being dry stocks: so that Grafts cannot
so well take, nor thrive upon them. Those stocks of Plums which have large
leaves and full shoots, I account the best, as being fullest of sap.

Graft not Plum-grafts upon Cherry stocks, nor Cherries upon Plums, as some
prescribe: different kinds will not agree together. Theyl grow (it may be) a
year, or two, and then die.

Though Aprecocks are (in the general) accounted Plums, Of Aprecocks.
yet because of the excellency of the fruit, they may be spoken of by
themselves. I know but few kinds of them, but some I know to be far better
bearers, some are larger then others, and some sooner ripe then others; all
good fruits. There Is one kind that is a very great bearer and a fair large
fruit, observe then those Trees that usually bear well, and get Buds from them
at the season to Inoculate, as is showed page 50. for these must be propagated
only by the bud, not by grafting. I account the White-pear-plum-stocks the best
to Inoculate Aprecock buds upon, although they may be done upon other
Plum-stocks with good success, if they be good juicy stocks, able to give a
large nourishment, for Aprecock-trees require much nourishment. I shall join
the Nectrine with the Aprecock, although another kind of fruit. The best kind
that I know is the Roman red Nectrine. But it is very hard to be propagated: as
for Grafting, none take that way, and but few with Inoculating, which I
conceive is the reason it is the dearest of all Plants with us. The Yellow and
Green Nectrines, are much short of it in goodness.

The White Pear-Plum-stock (though accounted the best for any plum, yet I
find) is scarce good enough, for this fruit to be Inoculated upon it, though
some do indifferent well.

But I hold it best to Inoculate the Roman red Nectrine upon the Branch of an
Aprecock, which before has been Inoculated upon a good Plum-stock, that it may
give not only a larger, but a finer nourishment then ordinary Plum-stocks can
do: upon these stocks they take and hold exceeding well, and also upon
Peach-stocks.

Of Peaches
Of Peaches there are diverse kinds: I know by experience, the Nutmeg, and
Newington Peaches, to be excellent tasted fruits, and very good bearers,
especially the Nutmeg-Peach, which makes amends for the smallness of the fruit:
but the Newington-Peach, is a very large and gallant fruit.

These require choice Plum-stocks to be Inoculated upon, as the White
Pear-plum-stock, or else stocks coming of Peach-stones.

I know but one kind of Figs that come to ripeness with us in England. Of Figs.
The great Blew fig, as large as a Catherine-Pear.

The Trees grow in diverse Gardens in Oxford, and bear their fruits to perfect
ripeness: The trees must be set against a South-wall, and be spread up with
nails, and Leathers; or if Planted upon warm land, and in a warm place, they
will bear well on Standards.

These Trees are increased from the Root of the old Tree; draw up the small
suckers, and plant them; These need neither Inoculating, nor Grafting: also
bend the boughs (that are lowest) down into the earth, and they will take root, as
Vines, which may be cut off, and transplanted.

Some Authors affirm that there have been Vine-yards in England in former
times, Of Grapes.
though they be all destroyed long since. Diverse places retain the name of
Vine-yards still. At Bromwel-Abby in Norfolk, and at Elie in Cambridg-shire,
which afforded wine: what else is the meaning of these old Rimes?

Quatuor sunt Eliae; Lanterna, Capella, Mariae
Et Molendinum, nec non dans Vinea vinum.
Englished thus: Four things of Elie Town much spoken are,
The Leaden Lantern, Mary's Chapel rare.
The mighty Mil-hill in the Minster field,
And fruitful Vineyards which sweet wine do yield.


And doubtless men might Plant Vines with good success, to make good wine even
with us. There are many kinds of Vines, See more at large in the Table.
but I know none so good, and fit for our Climate as the Parsley Vine, with the
white and red muskcadine, we see by experience yearly these bear abundance of
fruits unto perfection. Or Canada Grape.
And whosoever will plant Vines in England, I think he cannot meet with better
kinds than these, both for bearing and goodness.

The Frantiniack Grape is of great Account with many, and is a special fruit,
where it comes to perfect ripeness, which it hardly does, except the Vine be
set upon the South-wall, where it may have much sun.

The Red, and white Muskcadine Grape are special fruits, and bear very well,
and come to perfect ripeness, if the Vines grow upon the South-wall, or upon
the East-wall, which is best next.

There is the Curran Grape, Cluster Grape, and many other kinds of good Grapes;
and the fruits are better or worse, according to the place they grow in; If
they have much sun, and be well ordered, the fruit will be better and sooner
ripe.

Vines are increased by laying down branches into the earth, in the winter, or
spring, letting them grow still upon the Tree, until removing time the year
after; and then they may be cut off, and the Roots taken up, and planted
elsewhere: Also the Cuttings will grown laid in the ground in the winter, or
spring, though they grow but weakly and slowly for a year, or two.

We have in these parts the English, Quinces:
and the Portugal Quinces; the Portugal I esteem as the better, both for
bearing, and use; These are increased by suckers from the Roots of the trees;
and the boughs also cut off, and cut in pieces a yard long, or more, or less,
and laid in the ground, will grow (as Vines and Mulberry cuttings) and bear the
same fruits; These kind of trees are commonly long ere they bear fruits.

It is observed that Qince-trees bear much better in fat moist ground^, than in
dryer grounds, as is seen upon some Ditch sides, and rank soyles about London

Of Mulberries.
There are two kinds of Mulberry-trees with us in England, the Black, and the
White. As for the White I never saw any of its fruit, they very seldom bear
well with us. But the Black Mulberry-tree never fails of fruit after it is
grown up. These trees are not increased by Grafting or Inoculating, but by
Cuttings from the Branches, or sides of the trees: Cut a bow off as big as a
man's arm, and after cut it in small Truncheons, or pieces a yard long or less,
lay these small and great, in the ground a foot deep, only the one end out of
the ground a hands breadth or two, or there abouts in good fat ground somewhat
moist, and after a year, or two, didivers young springs may be drawn from the
Roots, and Planted at a fit distance, and the old Roots will yearly send out
more, also the branches may be bowed down and laid in the earth, on one, or
several sides, which will take root and multiply abudantly, and be fit to be
transplanted.

Of Medlers.
Medlers may be grafted, (and they take well upon a White thorn, but I much
rather approve the Grafting or Inoculating of them upon Pear-stocks: and the
fruit will be much better, and the trees much larger then upon White-thorne.

Walnut-trees are propagated from the Nuts, Of Walnuts.
which may be set from the time of ripeness, until the spring, an inch deep or
little more, and afterward transplanted, and set at a very great distance, 24.
or 30. yards asunder, for they are very large spreading trees.

But if they are planted on the North or East-sides for shelter, then set them
nearer.

Be sure to choose of the best Nuts to set, the fairest Nuts, and thinnest
shells, and good bearers.

Thus much (briefly) concerning the best bearing Trees, and how they are
propagated.

As for those Fruit Trees which bear but little or no fruits, Graft old trees,
if bad bearers.
by reason that Grafts and Buds were not chosen from good bearing kinds,
wherewith they were engrafted, I advise (by all means) to Graft or Inoculate
such again, though great, and old Trees, such whose boughs are as big as a man's
hand wrist, or smaller, may be cut off, and grafted in the Cleft with a couple
of good Grafts, of good bearing kinds; but such Branches as are very great, I
should rather cut off a convenient height from the ground, slope-wise, that no
wet may rest on the top, and then after a year or two, to graft the small
shoots or branches that are put forth, or some of them; this is a better course
then to graft such great Branches, for that moisture will get into the top, and
rot the Branches, and perhaps the Body too, ere the grafts can cover such great
heads.

Make Arbours of fruit trees.
As concerning Arbors, Seats, etc. in Orchards and Gardens, I advise men to make
them of Fruit Trees rather then of Privet, or other rambling stuff, which
yields no profit, but only for shade. If you make them of Cherry-trees,
Plum-trees, or the like, there will be the same advantage for shade, and all
the Fruits superadded.

All that can be objected, is, that Fruit Trees are longer in growing up, then
Privet, Virgin-Bower, or the like, whereof Arbors are commonly made. It is
answered, Though Fruit trees are something longer* in covering an Arbor, then
some other things, yet they make sufficient amends in their lasting and bearing
fruits:

And besides, such Cherry-trees, and other kinds, may be set about the Arbors,
as will reach and cover even the first year.

I Shall now give some Rules concerning Transplanting young plants, Of
Transplanting Trees.
after a years growth, or more, whether Inoculated or Grafted.

The time for this work (in general) is in Autumn, when Trees have done
growing, and that is diverse weeks before the Leaves fall. Stay not (as the
custom is) till November or after, before you Transplant, for the best time is
about the latter end of September to begin; and so on, all the Winter.

It Is a great advantage to remove plants betime, Early removing best.
for such grow a while after in their Roots before Winter, and thereby not only
preserve themselves in Winter, but also make some preparation against the
Spring; which those removed in Winter cannot do. Stay not therefore till the
Leaves fall ere you remove, although they may be removed then with good
success, but it is not so good at that time as before.

The ancient proverb is, If a growing Tree would have, Let him carry his green
Leaves to his grave.

Yet notwithstanding, Trees may be transplanted all the Winter.
those that have many to Transplant, and cannot finish (or have no leisure) in
this season which is best, they may go on, and be doing even all Winter, until
the very Spring, unless Frost shut up the ground: And notwithstanding Frost or
Snow all the while, if we can get into the ground, and find the mould mellow,
so as that it will fall well between and about the Roots, it is then good
removing Trees, although the best time is to be preferred.

The time of removing being come, and the place prepared for setting them
again, then be careful in taking up the Plants, dig round about them, and take
off the mould from their Roots, if it be a small plant, it may be drawn up
easily, the mould being taken away; if it be great, and the Roots spread much,
then they may be cut about half a yard from the body of the Plant, and the
greater it is, the further off cut the Roots, and so draw it up: and break off
all the leaves the first thing you do, if they be not then fallen off, for the
Sun and Air (by means of them) extract the sap of the branches.

The largest Plants not best.
And here observe; That the Great Plants are not always best to transplant out
of Nurseries into Orchards, though most men are for the greatest, when they may
choose, and they think the bigger they are, the sooner they will make an
Orchard: but herein they are much mistaken, for in removing great trees, there
is great hazard, and many of them fail and die, and others grow very poorly,
putting out only leaves the first year, or little more, though some few, in
special good soil) may do well.

I account young grafted Trees fit to remove, Of what bigness to remove young
Trees.
when they are about two inches in compass in the body, and about a yard and
half, or two yards high; those about this bigness, I judge to be better then
such as are five or six inches (or more) in compass, with a proportionable
height; because these cannot possibly be transplanted, but their Roots must be
cut very much in the taking up, and then how can those Roots (so much cut) be
able to nourish so great a body, with so many branches: whereas young trees, of
a smaller size, (as before is mentioned) these may be removed even with all
their Roots, (which are young and small) and may be spread in the earth every
way, when set again, save only the ends of the roots, must be a little cut,
and these young and tender roots will sooner shoot forth in the earth then the
greater sort, especially (also) because the body and branches are young and
^ender; the bark being thin, does more easily extend and enlarg by the rising
of the sap, then the bark of Elder Trees. For which causes, young trees (when
removed) do not only grow surer, but they also make a larger growth at first
planting, then the greater and elder Trees can do; and are thereore best.

Prune the Branches and Roots.
But if it be so that such large trees must be set, then some of the Branches
must be cut, and say not as many do, here is a fair tree already, why should we
cut away any part of it? But they must be content to loose some of the
branches, else they are in danger to loose all: for removing of great plants,
is a great check to nature, and if a few roots cut short (as they must be when
removed) be put to feed many and large branches, they will have but slender and
poor nourishment, not sufficient many times to preserve life, much less to make
a large growth.

But if plants be of the lesser size, you need not cut the branches, except
such as cross one another, or grow too nigh together, or run up two high
without spreading: but cut off the ends of the roots of all, because if cut,
many small fibra's or strings shoot out at the cut place, which draw
nourishment for the plant, which without cutting would not.

Set not Plants too deep.
Plants being thus prepared, the next thing is to set them again in the ground:
take heed of setting below the good soil.

The hole for the Plant being dug, set in the root prepared as before, and
cast in the smallest and best mould next to the roots, and see that the small
mould run between all the roots; to that end, stir and shake the Plant, that
there may not be any hollow place where the mould falls not, and with your hand
draw up the uppermost roots and part them, that they may spread in the mould
every way, and so fill it up.

The young trees being thus set into the ground, Lay rotten dung, horselitter,
or the like, about Trees newly set.
and the holes filled up, it will be very advantageous to them to lay a
Barrowfull of Rotten Muck, round about each of them, close to the body of the
Plant, the fatness whereof will soke in among the roots, and make the soil
special good, whereby the Trees will thrive the better: Or else to lay (instead
thereof) store of Weeds, Litter, Fern, or the like, two or three handfulls
thick, this will keep the roots warm all Winter, and moist and cool in the
Summer following, and makes the soil fatter, and also preserves the Trees from
weeds growing about them.

Trees thus ordered (by laying stuff about their roots) may be set very
shallow, and thereby will be much advantaged, and prove better then such as are
set deep, because in the top of the earth is the best mould, and also every
shower of rain reaches the Roots and feeds them.

If the Plants are fair large Plants, in danger to be shaken by the winds,
then knock down a stake close to every one, and tie the Plant to it with a
hay^band, or some other soft band.

How to prepare trees for carriage
If young Trees are to be carried many Miles to be Planted, then (being taken up
carefully) lay the Roots all one way, the smallest and tenderest in the middle
of the bundle, and bind them close from the roots to their tops, with a soft
band, and then stuff the roots round about with straw, ^ay, moss, or the like,
afterward bind the bundle all over, from the roots to the very top, with hay,
or straw bands, or something else, to preserve them from brusing; and withal,
wrap something about the Roots, a thin Mat, or a piece of an old sackcloth, or
any thing that will preserve the Roots from the Wind, and Sun, and from
brusing: And they may be carried many hundred Miles (if need be) in Winter,
without hurt.

Distance of setting.
As concerning distance in setting young Trees, I conceive 8. or 10. yards is
little enough between Apple Trees and Pear Trees, in ordinary soil, yet
Pear Trees need not be planted so far asunder, as Apple Trees. And if men have
ground enough to plant, and good soil, I should rather prescribe to Plant them
14 or 16 yards asunder; for both Trees and Fruits have many great advantages,
if planted a good distance one from another.

Such are freed from frettings and gallings, The 1 Advantage.
that happens to Trees that thrust, and crowd one another, whereby not only the
Buds, Blossoms, and Fruits, are rubbed and broken off, but also sometimes the
Canker thereby breeds and destroys boughs, and branches. The 2 Advantage.


Secondly, (when Trees are planted a fair distance asunder) the Sun refreshes
every Tree, the Roots, Body, and Branches, with the Blossoms and Fruits,
whereby Trees bring forth more fruits, and those fairer and better. The 3
Advantage.


Thirdly, If Apple Trees and Pear Trees are planted at a large distance, much
profit may be made of the ground, under and about the Trees. Ye may plant
Gooseberries, Rasberries, Currants, Strawberries, Roses, Flowers, and all sorts
of Gardenstuffe, commodious as well for sale, as houskeeping, which cannot be
if Trees be planted near together, as the custom is in most places, the ground
being cold and shady by the Trees. Besides the Trees would have advantage by
frequent digging and stirring the earth about their Roots from time to time in
setting these things.

The 4 Advantage.
Fourthly, When Trees have room to spread as before, they will grow very large
and great, and the consequences of that will be, not only multitudes of Fruits,
but also long lasting; and these two are no small advantages, besides all the
former. And men are mistaken, when they say, The more Trees in an Orchard, the
more Fruits; for one or two fair large Trees, which have room to spread, will
bear more fruits then six or ten (it may be) of those that grow near together,
and crow'd one another.

Let men but observe, and take notice of some Apple Trees that grow a great
distance from other Trees, (and have room enough to spread both in the Roots
and Branches) and they shall see that one of those Trees (being come to full
growth) has a larger head, and more boughs and branches, then (it may be) 4 or
6 or more of those which grow near together, although of the same age.

Yea, I advise if men have ground enough, to Plant Apple Trees 20 yards
asunder: Now Trees so planted, will not reach of a long time, if ever,
therefore much profit may be made of Trees Planted between, for many years,
which may (when they begin to reach one another) be taken away, and disposed of
for the best advantage to Plant abroad in the Fields.

It is a very great, and almost a general Error, the Planting of Fruit Trees
too near together, especially as to Apple Trees and Pear Trees, as for standard
Cherry-trees, Plum-trees, and the like, they need not be planted half the
distance I speak off, 5 or 6 yards in distance is usually enough, and 7 or 8
yards, if the ground be special good: for all Trees grow much larger in some
soyles, then in other.

As concerning the distance of Wall trees, Distance of Wal-trees.
they may be planted, 2, 3, 4, 6, or more yards asunder; More or less,
according to the nature of the Trees and soil.

For Aprecots, and some other kinds of Plums, grow much larger then some other
Trees: some Aprecot-trees in good soil will spread 7 or 8 yards wide, or more;
whereas the May Cherry-tree, is but small, at biggest; (it may be) 2 yards
wide, or scarce above 3.

It is the custom (of late); Cherry-hedges, and of Quodlings, Vines, etc.
to make Cherry-hedges in Gardens and Orchards; and hedges of Quodlings,
Nurs-gardens, Plums, Vines, and such like Trees, that may be kept (by cutting
and plaishing one branch within another) from growing very large: These are
usually made along the side of walks, or round about a Garden-plot* and such a
hedge is a very great Ornament to a Garden, being ordered and kept handsomely:
Now Trees set to this purpose, need the least distance of any other, Distance
of Trees in a Cherryhedg
a yard asunder, or an Ell, or more or less according to the bigness, and
spreading of the young trees; for these should meet (or near it) the first
year; which should be ordered thus.

How to set and order a Cherryhedg or of Quodlings, etc.
Stretch a line from one end to the other, where the hedge is to be made, and
set the Trees straight at the distance aforesaid:

Afterward, knock down a stake between each Tree, Or its (in some respects)
best to let the staking, and Poling of it alone until the spring. The stakes
and Rods (if done then) will be fresh all Summer.
then having straight, long Rods, or Poles of Ash, or the like: tie a row of
them along from one end to the other, (about a foot from the ground) fast to
the stakes with Osiers, or such like; or else nail them, which is better; and
another row of Rods a foot above them, and so a third (if need be) according to
the height of the young Plants; having thus done, spread and tie the branches,
and twigs of the Trees (in order) to the Poles, but not too hard, and draw, and
fasten some of them down close to the ground, that so there may be blossoms
and fruit from the bottom to the top, which will be a most beautiful sight to
behold in Spring and Summer: then after a few years, the Stakes and Poles may
be taken away, and the branches platted and woven one within another, from year
to year, and the superfluous ones cut off.

Yet, notwithstanding what has been said for a more then ordinary distance
between Apple Trees, Nearness best in some respects.
and Pear Trees; this may be said for neerness of setting; That it is best for
present profit; for if Apple Trees, Pear Trees, etc. be set 4 or 5 yards
asunder, there will be room enough for them for diverse years, perhaps it may be
a dozen, 16 or 20 yea^s ere they meet, and all that time a man have the fruits
of them, and then when they meet, he may (and it will be best to) cut down each
other: or (if they be not too great) to remove them to some other place. These
Trees are the best to be set at large in Pastures and other Field lands: taken
up with large Roots and disbranched; and set with 3 or 4 stakes about them,
that Cattle rub not upon them. And although they be for nothing but the fire,
yet for that they will be more worth then they cost at first, and all the
fruits they have born to that time, are superadded; as for standard
Cherry-trees, 4 or 5 yards distance is convenient.

As for those who have but small quantities of ground to plant, it will be most
profitable to plant near together, as may conveniently be, not only for the
advantage of the quantity of fruit of each other tree, which may afterward be
taken away; but also, that they may have variety of fruits, even in a small
compass of ground. But those that have room enough, I say (as before) let the
Trees be Planted at a large distance one from another, for the Reasons
alleged, page 65.

Order in setting trees
Concerning Order in setting Trees, though it be not essential to a good
Orchard, yet if men stand upon it, they may measure out a square plot of ground
(more or less) by a line, and then measure the distance that must be between
every tree; according to the kinds that are to be planted, and according to the
goodness, or nature of the soil as has been said. And having measured exactly
the square plot, and the distance of the Trees, set a stake or pole in the
place where every tree must stand, and dig the soil round about it, a foot
deep, and three foot broad, then set the four corners first, then fill up the
square plot; on all the four sides with plants, ordered as before, and so go on
to fill up all the other places in the Plot, exactly by the line, or by the
eye, if there be four or five persons to assist in the work. And by this means
the Trees will stand in Rows every way. This square once planted, though but
small at first, may be enlarged every way as the ground permits, or else the
Orchard may be drawn out in length, and yet the Trees stand in a right line
every way by this means; and if the Trees are set at a great distance, one may
be planted in the midst, at equal distance from each one in the Qnincunx.

In setting all sorts of Trees, A special Rule in transplanting.
consider what soil they come out of, whether a fat and forced soil, (as
diverse of the Nurseries about London) or some ordinary natural soil. If they
come out of very good ground, then procure as good or better, if it may be had,
(though but a little) to lay next to their roots when they are set again.

Weeds, Dung, and such like, laid on a heap, will become good mould in a short
time, but such heaps lying together diverse years, are then special mould for
the roots of young Trees at their first setting.

This should always be observed, To plant Trees in as good or better soil,
being removed, as that out of which they were taken. For every thing in nature,
advanced to the better, it is grateful and beneficial to it, but if it be
carried to the worse, it is a check and repulse to nature; and such a one as
that, if it be in any great degree, it either much weakens it, or quite
destroys it. Therefore choose Trees out of poor soiles, but if they must be had
out of rich soiles, then be sure to procure some (more or less) of as good, or
better then that out of which they are removed, to lay to their Roots, when set
again.

For want of observing this course, many hundreds of good plants have been lost
from time to time. The ordering of young Plants, the first and second year of
planting, has an influence upon them many years, which if neglected then, the
labor and diligence of many years after, cannot countervaile it; the ordering
of Cattle while they are young, either makes or marrs them; so of Trees, and
other things in some proportion; but after they have well taken Root the first
and second year, they will then grow in ordinary soiles, the great danger is at
first planting.

Wall-trees.
Concerning Wall-trees: the Aprecot, Peach, Nectarine, Vine-tree, etc. these and
such choice fruits, must be planted upon a South-wal, if it may be: The best
next that, I account the East-wall, and the West not so good, on the
North-wall, fruits will be late ripe; thence they may be got when others are
gone. So that its best to plant the North-wall, not only to have fruits thence
late ripe, but also for the beauty, and comeliness of the Garden, all the walls
being covered with fruit trees.

These trees being set, (as before is said) they must be plaisht, or spread
upon the Wall, being young, (and so from year to year as they grow greater)
with Nails and Leathers. And as they grow larger, cut not the utmost sides or
top branches, until they be spread as large as they should spread; and be sure
to lead the main and biggest branches along the sides of the wall both ways,
and suffer them not to rise straight up, as naturally they will, but correct
nature by art; be sure to furnish the bottom of the wall first.

Wall-trees must be pruned from year to year, Prune Wall-trees.
first in Summer, secondly in Winter. About the end of June, or middle of July,
the Aprecot-trees (especially) will have put out many large shoots, some of
which must be cut off, and others spread up to the wall, where there is room
for them. Tie up as many as you can conveniently with Leathers and Nails, and
cut the rest off, which will not so well spread to the Wall; and spread the
branches as that the fruits (which by that time will be grown toward their
bigness) may have the Sun to refresh and ripen them, In Summer.
but yet pluck not off the leaves as some do, for if a hot time come after, the
Sun may even spoil the Fruits.

In Winter.
Secondly, So soon as the leaves are fallen off, the branches that cross one
another, or are not well placed, must be rectified; or any of the great boughs
which are grown old, and have but few small branches upon them, may be cut
off, which must not be cut off in Summer time, lest that too great and sudden
obstruction of Sap, kill the whole Tree. But the cutting of the small branches
in Summer, is some small check and stop to the Sap, and hinders the excessive
rising of it at that time, which else would spend it self in large superfluous
branches, and so rob the fruits.

This Winter Pruning, is chiefly for the well-ordering of the branches that
could not be well placed (by reason of the fruits and leaves) in Sommer-time,
and for the cutting off of great branches, when need is.

It is a great error amongst some, who suffer all the young and large shoots
to grow as much as they will, all Summer without cutting, Error in Pruning.
and then in Winter they usually cut all, or most of them quite off from the
trees, and preserve only the old stumps, or biggest branches of the Trees, and
by this means in the middle part of the Tree, and near the Root, there are few,
or no young branches to be seen: Whereas they should preserve all the young
branches to spread up against the Wall, until it be full of small boughs. And
then some young shoots every year, may be cut off as before.

And in cutting away branches, Observation in Pruning.
be sure to take those away that grow the straightest out, and will not so
easily be bowed to the wall as the other: And preserve branches as low, and as
near the ground as may be, and cause them to bend, and grow strait along the
sides of the wall both ways; and suffer not the biggest branches to rise
straight upward, (as commonly most do) but nail them downwards, to furnish the
bottom of the Wall.

As for great Trees in the Orchards, Pruning old standard-trees.
Fields, Hedges, etc. they must be Pruned from year to year, as need is, in
October, November, or afterward observe to cut off the superfluous branches,
such as cross one another, and such as grow too close, so as the Sun cannot
well come about the bearing branches: Leave no dead Twigs or Branches, and
scrape off the Moss that is upon the Body and great Branches.

Ordering the Roots of old Trees.
Opening the Roots once in two or three years is profitable to some Trees,
especially such as grow upon dry and barren grounds. In November (or there
abouts) take away the Earth round about the Roots, a yard broad or more, and so
leave the Roots bare and open all Winter; that the Rain, Snow, beams of the
Sun, etc. may refresh the bottom Roots, and make the ground be^ter: At Spring
fill up the holes again with some good fresh mould, or rotten muck, to feed and
refresh the Trees. In blossoming and knitting time water the Trees, (especially
those on dry ground) this makes them hold their Fruit the better.

So also of Lees of Wine, the washing of strong Bear-barrels, Blood of Cattle,
dead Dogs, Carrion, or the like, laid, or put to the Roots of Trees, when
opened (as before) is found very profitable unto fruit-bearing, and exceedingly
revives old decaying Trees.

And it is very necessary (in order to the thriving, and well bearing of
Fruit Trees) that they have some good fresh mould or soil laid to their Roots
once in three or four years, except they grow in special good ground: for great
and large Trees, do suck and draw the fertility of the ground exceedingly: such
great and vast bodies cannot be nourished to thrive well, with a little;
therefore help them as they have need: it may be perceived when they have need
by the poorness of their shoots and fruits.

As opening them, and putting in soil is good; so also take a Bar of Iron (in
Winter time) and make many holes among their Roots, and pour in Beasts blood,
washings of Beer vessels, Fat-water, or the like: These very much refresh the
Trees.

But in case the soil about the Roots be over fat and fertile, Abate the
over-fatness of soil.
this may hinder bearing, for it will cause Trees to shoot forth great large
shoots, and to send forth broad leaves, and but little fruit: if so, then take
away some of the fertile soil, and put in instead, sand or cole-ashes, or any
stuff that is barren, that it may dry up, and abate some of the too full
feeding that the Trees had, and so cause fruitfulness. Though meat and drink be
never so good and wholesome, yet excess hurts, the body.

And further observe: That Mowing of grounds yearly, Pasturing Orchards, better
then Mowing.
where Fruit Trees grow, is exceeding prejudicial to Trees (unless the soil be
very fertile). But pasturing of Orchards and Grounds where Fruit Trees grow, is
observed to be of great advantage to their prospering, and bearing fruits. When
Cattle are suffered to lie and Pasture under and about the Trees, they much
benefit the Roots by their warmth in sitting, and by their soil, which soaks
down among the Roots, and is a great refreshing to them, as has been found by
clear Experience.

Therefore permit Cattle (if it may be convenient) to lie and Pasture, under
and among Fruit Trees, (after they are grown strong, and out of their reach)
save only at those seasons when Fruits are ripe, because rubbing against the
Tre^s, would shake down the Fruits, and spoil them. And it were better they
did not rub against the Trees at any time, for in that respect they may do
hurt, therefore set stakes or posts about the Trees for the Cattle to rub
against, whereby the Trees may be preserved.

Concerning Transplanting, Pruning, and ordering the Roots of Trees, thus much.
See further, Errors in Practice.

Diseases Incident to Fruit Trees.
Fruit Trees are subject to diverse Diseases Baptist. Port. says, De cultu and
insit. l c. 35.
Affliguntur Plantae omnes, veluti Animalia, diversis morbis. All Trees or
Plants are afflicted with diverse Diseases as sensible creatures. And therefore
we should apply our selves to cure them, not for pity to the Trees (as the
indulgent compassionate Manichees) but for our own profit.

I shall (at present) mention only four diseases that sometimes happen to
Fruit Trees. Mossiness, Bark-bound, Canker, and Worms.

Concerning Mossiness of Fruit Trees, the way to cure that (and other diseases)
is to take away the Cause, Mossiness.
sublata causa, tollitur effectus. if the Spring be stopped, the streams cannot
run. Some to cure this, only scrape off the Moss, not endeavoring to take
away the Cause, so that in few years they are as bad again; that is but like
endeavors for cure of the Toothach, or Gout, or the like, with some outward
applications, which, although they may give some ease for a while, yet they
strike not at the Root, they remove not the Cause, and therefore they return
again. So that it must be considered what the Cause of Mossiness is, sometimes
it is caused by over coldness of the ground, as in waterish and clay grounds,
likewise by Barrenness of the soil.

If it be Coldness through moisture, then use all means to lay it dryer, by
trenching the ground: or if it be clay ground, then bring in some warmer soyles
to mix with it, as Sand, Ashes, Sheeps-dung, Pigeons, or Hens-dung, or the
like: If the soil be too barren, then help it by mixture of good soyles round
about the Roots.

But withal, take away the Moss that is already upon the Trees, in this manner;
after Rain, rub it off with a Hair-cloth; else scrape it off with a piece of
hard wood in the form of a knife.

Bark-bound
Another is the Bark-bound disease: This exceedingly hinders the growth of
Trees: it makes them live lingringly and poorly: This happens, when there is
but a dull, and slow passage up of sap, and in small quantity, either by reason
of barrenness of soil, or want of due culture to the Branches, therefore if
the soil be barren, it must be mended, and likewise some of the branches cut
off, and the rest scored down all along to the Root, through the ^ark, on each
side, with some cross cuts and ^icks in the bark: let this be done in the
^pring time, and the Sap will arise more ^lentifully.

Another disease is the Canker, Canker.
natural ^o some, but accidentally hapening to others by bruises, etc. This
hurts many, and spoils some. To cure it, cut it out, if (...) be upon the body,
or great boughs of ^rees, and wash the place with Cow Dung and Urine mixed; and
then cover the place with clay mixed with Horse-dung, and ^ut off the small
branches that are dead, out withal, endeavor to stop the foun^aine, and cause
of it, (being a sharp and vi^ulent sap) by laying Cole ashes, or ashes of
^urnt-wood, Nettles, Fern, and such like vegetables, to the roots; but if the
Trees grow upon gravel ground, they will hardly be cured without altering the
soil in a great measure.

Some Trees are hurt with small worms that breed between the bark and the wood;
Worms.
which cause the Bark (in that part) to rise and swell sometimes: this being
perceived, the worms must be cut out, and the place washed with Urin and
Cow Dung.

Secondly, Mischiefs incident to fruits.
concerning Mischiefs incident to Fruits: by Caterpillars, Ants, Earwigs,
Snails, Wasps, Birds, and cold, and ^trong Winds.

Caterpillars
In the Springtime, Caterpillars breed (and devour many buds, blossoms, and
young fruits, especially in a dry season:) of the Dew and Leaves (as one says)
when the East Wind blow's much, L. Bac. not. hist. p. 148.
which causes that moist and slimy matter to vivifie. They breed also (as is
observed) of the Spawn of Butterflies. Now, how to destroy them. I know no
better way then to pluck off those leaves which have the Cobwebs made upon
them, (in which they breed) and tread them under foot, for one of them contains
multitudes.

And for those that escape, being upon the Trees, some smoke them with straw
or such like, which makes them fall off. They may be destroyed also by
squirting water up into the Trees among the boughs, which washes them off.

Ants.
Secondly, Ants and Pismires hurt fruits, multitudes creep up into some Trees,
and eat the fruits. Therefore seek out their hills where they breed and lie, and
pour in scalding water among them till they be destroyed.

Yea, sometimes they be under, or near the roots of Trees, and do very great
hurt, and almost kill some Trees, these must be dig'd out, and destroyed by hot
water, or some other way.

Also, anoint the bottom of the Trees near the Root with Tar round about, that
so these little Thieves may be taken Prisoners by sticking in it.

Thirdly, Earwigs.
Fruits (growing ripe) are sometimes eaten with Ear-wigs. One way to destroy
them, is by setting Oxe-hoofs, Canes, or any hollow thing near the Roots of the
Trees, and among the Boughs, upon the ends of sticks, and they will creep in, and
lie there, then take off these hoofs quickly, and shake them into a boule of
water, or crush them with your foot upon the ground.

These Creatures do most mischief to Wall-trees, Snailes.
especially upon old walls. Pick them off betime in the morning, and destroy
them. But if you keep the wall well pointed with lime, that they have no
harbor there, and the Roots clean from weeds you will not be much troubled with
them.

To keep them from some choice Trees and Fruits, strew ashes round about.

Another mischief incident to fruit, is by Wasps and Hornets sometimes; Wasps.
some find out their nests, and are so bold as to destroy them there by
scalding water, or some other way. Another way to destroy them, is by hanging
Earthen Pots half full of water in Trees, dawbed in the innerside with honey,
and they will leave the fruits, and fall to the honey, and having sucked of it,
they fall into the water and perish. This way destroys multitudes.

Birds.
Birds also spoil buds and fruits: the Bulfinch and Lennet, in the Winter time
and Spring, eat up multitudes of buds of Cherry-trees, Aprecot-trees, and
Plum-trees, which are prepared for blossoms and fruits, and being ripe, they
peck and eat many: you may destroy them, by setting Lime-twigs (with baits) in
the Trees, and kill some with a Cross-bow, and hang them in the Trees. And
Clack-Mills may be set in diverse places in the Orchard, which will affright
them: also bruise Ratsba^ very small, and mix it with Oatmeal, and lay it in
small percells in diverse places, and the birds eating of it will die. This is a
sure way to kill many.

Winds.
But the greatest mischief incident to fruits, is by cold winds: and Frosts in
the Spring time, and by strong winds in Summer and Autumn: which shake off the
fruits: against the hurt of cold winds, and frost Wall-trees may be covered for
a certain time while they are knitting (being exceeding tender) and great
standard Trees may be smoaked in knitting time, setting on fire some moist
straw, (or any thing that will make a smoke) under and among the Trees.

Likewise, Plant such Trees as will grow high upon the North or East, that may
be a good shelter continually against these cold winds, which is the best
course: the Orchard must be defended (if it be possible) with some high Trees
on the North, East, and West sides, or so planted, that they may have houses,
hills, or something or other, to break off these winds from the Fruit Trees.

So much concerning Diseases and Mischiefs, incident to Fruit Trees, and
Fruits: with their Cures and Remedies.

The Alimental and Physical use of Fruits.
Fruit Trees being Planted, and duly ordered to Fruit-bearing, then comes the
joyful Harvest, the End of all our labors; then we make use of Fruits as may
be most for our profit: I shall speak of the use of Fruits, in respect both of
their Alimental and Physical use.

First concerning the use of Apples.
Of Apples.
When Apples are ready, they may be disposed of diverse ways, some for Cider,
others for sale, others for daily dishes to the Table, ordered many ways.

Apples best for Cider.
Some prefer one sort, as best for Cider, and some another: In Herefordshire,
and some other parts, the Redstreak is generally preferred for Cider, before
Pippins, Pearmains, or any other kinds: yet some others, prefer Pippins,
Pearmains, Gilli-flower-Apples, as best for Cider, as having in them a more
Cordial juice then other Apples: And some differ from these, and say the Apples
known by the name of Elliots, make the best Cider, and call it the Sack of
Cider: Others cry up the Stoken Apple, as best of all for Cider.

I shall not stand to dispute which is best for Cider; Increase the best kinds
for Cider.
but seeing they are all so good, as that an Argument is raised, which are best
for Cider? My advice therefore is, that men propagate, and increase great store
of Trees of all these kinds, and other sorts of Fruits, which (by experience)
are found to be good for Cider: And then every man may take where he likes, and
please his Palate, with that that suits best with it.

But without doubt, the Red^treak (which is a kind of Wilding, and somewhat
hard and brisk) and generally all hard Apples and Wildings, which have a
lively, pert, brisk juice, (so that they come not too near the degree of stark
Crabs) All these kinds, I say, make excellent Cider, which experience shows,
and confirms from year to year.

Cider made of hard, Some Cider sooner ready then other kinds,
harsh fruits, is not so soon ready for drinking, as that of summer fruits, and
those more pleasant: That made a Table-fruit, being earliest ripe, is ready to
drink, even so soon as its well settled and cleared; but that of hard Apples,
not till Summer following, and will continue good for two or three years, or
longer: and if well kept in good vessels, well stopped, and in a good cool
Celler, will somewhat improve in keeping.

How to make Cider and Perry.
Now, for the making of these Liquors of Cider and Perry, I shall only mention
it briefly, for their sakes that know it not; Some have Cider-Mills on purpose,
wherein they grind the Apples, as Tanners do their Bark, and then bring them to
the Press; others Pownd them in Troughs, till they be small; it comes all to
one: The Liquor being strained out, carry it to the Vessels prepared for that
purpose, and tun it up: The Vessel being full, let it rest certain days, till
the Barme begin to fall, then put in a handful of Bay Salt (this makes it draw
fresh, even to the bottom) so stop it up very close with a Cork, yet leave a
little Venthole in the top near the Tunhole, with a peg in it, and once in a
day or two, give vent there, while it ferments, and works strongly, lest it
break the Vessel: afterward stop up the Venhole very close also.

Or else lay ^ravel upon and round about the Tunhole.
Then mix Clay and Bay Salt together, and lay it upon, and round about the
Tunhole, that so no Air may get in, nor Spirits of the Liquor get out; make
the Clay hollow in the midst, and lay on it some Bay Salt, this keeps it moist
all Summer, otherwise it may chap, and let in Air, to the prejudice of the
Liquor; the close stopping of Vessels, is of great advantage to the Cider.

When Cider is well cleared, Of botling of Cider.
toward the Spring, (and so afterward) some may be Botled, if we would
improve it to the utmost: Stone-bottles, or Glas-bottles, both are good, into
each bottle, put a quantity, (more or less, as each one pleases) of white lump
sugar, which I prefer before Lofe-sugar, it being sophisticated with Lime,
Allome, and other things) then fill the bottle with the Liquor, yet not
altogether full, but let be the space of an inch or two between the Liquor and
the Cork: then Cork it well; let not the Cork be too little, so as to go in
easily; but take a full Cork, that must be knocked in about half way: for the
well Corking of Bottles, (though the direction may seem trivial) is of great
concernment to the goodness of the Liquor.

The liquor being thus well Botled, How to keep bottels of Cider.
may be kept in several places, either in Gravel or Sand, in a Celler up to the
neck, and some may be sunk down into water, in some secure, convenient place;
or otherwise wise to keep them cool, and exclude the Air, especially in the
heat of Summer. And in this season, let the Corks be bound down close with a
Packthred, else some of them will be thrown out by the liquor, especially if
they be carried abroad, or laid in a Chamber where the Air is warm.

Many things more might be said concerning the ordering of Cider, according to
several men's opinions and experiences: these things (briefly mentioned) are
plain and practical, and comprehend many other particulars.

Of the healthfulness of Cider.
Cider that is made of good Fruits, and well ordered, is the most wholesome
drink, and so it is accounted by Learned and Judicious Physicians, they do much
magnify Syrupum de Pomis, the juice of Apples. See London Dispensatory:
composed by a whole College of Physicians, page 38.

Julius Palmarius lib. de morbis. page 248.
A Famous Physician in his time, gives it this Commendation; Pomaceum e succo
Malorum dulci. m^ quae maturitatatem consequuta sunt, satis defaecatum,
maturum, tenue, subflavum melancholicis adeo salubre el^, and omne Potionis
genus bonitate vincat: That is, Cider of pleasant Apples, which are full Ripe,
being well settled, cleared, and fermented, is the most wholesome drink for
melancholic persons; and excels all other Liquors in goodness.

And the Cider of Pippins, and Pearmains is most commended by some, as
containing in them more of the Balsamum of nature, then other Apples; Et
humidum radicale oleosum, spiritus vitalis vigore impregnatum: preserving the
radical moisture, and vital spirits of the body, which does singularly preserve
health, Ad extremum usque senium, to very old Age.

Secondly, As Learned Physicians do approve of it, for the most wholesome
drink; so also experience speaks, and proves the same, not only of many
persons, but even of many Generations, in Hereford shire, Worcestershire, and
other Fruit Countries, where it has been, and is of continual use.

Thirdly, And besides the Opinion and Judgment of Physicians herein, and
continual experience in the use of it for many years; this also is a convincing
Argument thereof.

God has been pleased in his Wisdom, Bounty, and Goodness to mankind, to
create, and give such Commodities in every Country and Nation as are most
useful, and best for the Inhabitants of each particular Clymate: for instance,
in Spain, Italy, and those hot Countries, they have Oringes Lemmons, and
Pome-Citrons, which have in them the most cool refreshing juice, and liquor of
any Fruits, which are most necessary, for the cooling and refreshing the Blood,
Spirits, and Bodies of the Inhabibitants.

And in the Northern cold Countries, God has given them great store of Coals
and Wood, for Fuel, which is not in so great plenty in hotter Countries: So
also for Fruit Trees; some parts of Worcestershire, Gloucester-shire, etc. The
ground does naturally bring forth Fruit Trees; (besides the labor and
diligence of men in Planting) the soil is naturally fit to receive, cherish,
and increase all sorts of Apple Trees, Pear Trees, etc. which bring forth
abundance of Fruits, whereof to make this wholesome and best drink, Cider and
Perry. And England affords the greatest store of Apples, and the best of any
other Country; which is an Argument (I say) of the profitableness, and
healthfulness of this Liquor, for the Inhabitants of these Climates.

So then, if health and long life, be in esteem with men, they must needs also
value this means thereof; the seasonable and moderate use of Cider; and
consequently Fruit Trees, and the works and labors about them, as conducing to
those great and desirable ends.

Before you gather Apples to keep, How to keep Apples.
let them be ripe, which may be known by the color, and by the seed; cut some
of them, and if the seed be turned brown, or somewhat black, such may be
gathered; gather them in a dry day, pull them one by one, and put them into
Baskets lined with Woollen cloth, that they br^ise not. Carry them into a
loft, or upper Chamber, and lay them on Mats or Boards, not on Plaster or Clay
floors, they will be moist. Lay them thin, not on heaps as some do; let the
windows and holes be open, especially upon the North-side, in dry days, that
the Air and Winds may dry up their superfluous moisture. Lay every kind by
themselves, and pick out all the leaves, and such as rot, from time to time.
Turn them sometimes, and in Frost, cover them with Mats, Straw, or the like.

If Apples offend any through wind, Hist. stirp. l. 3. p. 777.
eat with them Ginger, or other hot Spices, or Carroway-seeds, Fennel-seeds, or
the like. So Dodonaeus: Quorum malignitas vel aromatis, vel aliis corrigi
potest.

Apples are prepared for the Table, all the year long, many ways, (I shall not
need to speak of particulars) and are pleasant and healthful to the body*

Dodon. hist. l. 3. page ibid.
Dulcia poma minus frigida sunt ac humida, alimentum conferunt amplius quam
caetera poma. He says, pleasant Apples are less cold and moist, and afford
more nourishment then others.

Concerning their Physical Use.
Dealiment. facul l. 2. p. 20*
Galen ascribes heat to some kind of Apples, he speaks of their Physical
property, in relaxing the belly, and says, the acid and acrid perform this:
but with some difference. Haec cum calefactione, Illa autem cum refrigeratione.
The Acrid do it with heat, the other with cold. Sweet Apples relax the belly
more then other kinds. A good Author says, every sweet thing detergeth and
relaxeth; and therefore Pears (which are generally more sweet then Apples)
loosen the body more then Apples.

D. Alim facult. l. 2. L. 2. c. 569.
Apples also help Concoction. So Galen, Post cibum, statim, dare ipsa, etc.
taken after meat. Nonnunquam autem cum pane, ad ventriculum and stomachum
roborandum, eaten with bread, they strengthen the stomach. So Avicen:
confortant debilitatem stomachi.

Galen says, pleasant Apples are profitable in hot diseases. In Com. pr. l.
Dioscor.
Saepe in morbis afferunt praesidium: So Matthew: Pomum coctivum non solum sanis
competit, sed etiam agris: He says they are Cordial to persons in hot diseases:
Calidis cordis affectibus succurrunt. Being roasted, and eaten with ^osewater
and Sugar: and that the pleasanter kinds are helpful against Melancholy, and
are good against the Plurisie, if roasted and eaten Glycyrrhizae succo, and
saccharo, ^irifice juvant. With juice of Liquorice and Sugar, morning and
evening, two hours before meat, they wonderfully help.

Observe one special Physical property more of Apples, set down by a Learned
and Experienced Author. These be his words.

The pulp of roasted Apples, Ger. Herh. page 1270.
four or five (if Pomewaters) mixed in a wine quart of fair water, labored
together, and drunk at night last, within an hour, does in one night cure those
that piss by drops, with great anguish and dolor; the Strangury, and all other
diseases, proceeding of the difficulty of making water, but in twice taking, it
never fails in any: also the running of the Reins: which I have often
proved, and gained thereby both Crowns and Credit. So the Author.

Of Pears.
Concerning Pears: Lib. 2. de aliment. ^a p. 20.
Gallen says* they have like properties with Apples and what is said of
Apples, if we attribute the same to Pears, there needs nothing anew to be said
of them. Quae de Mali^ diximus, si ad Pira transtuleris, nihil erit quod nos de
ipsis novum dicere oportet.

Lib. 2. chapter 548.
Avicen says, Sedant Choleram, they mitigate Choler. Hist. stirp. 3.
Dodonaeus commends them above Apples, for their nourishing property: Alimenta
Pira omnia, amplius and copiosius, quam Mala conferunt.

So Lib. 2. Chapter 548.
Avicen; Humor eorum plurimus, and laudabilior est humore pomorum.

Pears make an excellent Wine, being well ordered. A late Author says, we
might have Wine of Pears, and other of our Fruits, not inferior to French
Wines. And another tells us, Ma. Rust.
that a famous Physician of his time was not content to equal them with Wine of
Grapes, but preferred them before it in every thing. Crabs, or Wildings, mixed
with Pears, make an excellent Liquor, better then Pears alone.

I need not tell Herefordshire, and Worcestershire men, the good properties of
Perry and Cider; they know by experience it is both Alimental and Physical;
that it is not only for health, but also for long-life; and that Wines made of
the best kind of Apples and Pears, is a special Cordial, hearing and reviving
the spirits, making ^he heart glad, as Wine of Grapes.

And it has been observed, that those who drink Cider and Perry daily, or
frequently, as their common drink, are generally healthy persons, and
long-lived.

And that it will beggar a Physician, to live where Cider and Perry are of
general use.

Quinces are special fruits, Of Quinces.
and of manifold uses, not only for daily nourishment, but also for Physical
respects, either of themselves, or mixed with other Fruits. Matthiolus commends
them both for meat and medicine, boiled with honey. Com. in lib. Dioscor p. 201.
Ex melle tantum and Cotoneorum carne confecta, tam ad cibi quam medicamenti
commodum.

So Rovilius: And that many dainties for Banquets are prepared of them: Hist.
plant. lib 3. page 290.
Multa ex Cydoniis malis parata ex iis sectis and and diutius in aqua elixis
donec tabescant, etc.

There are diverse ways of making Marmalade of Quinces, which is known to be a
good Cordial, strengthening the Stomach and Heart, both of the sick and sound.

Gallen says, being made with honey, it will last seven years, De^liment. sacul.
lib. 2. page 20.
and loose none of its properties, diu duret, si quis ipsum c^melle cocium
asservare velit, post annos se^tem invenimus nihil in qualitate imm^tatum.

Hist. stirp. lib. 3. page 784.
Dodonaeus says, they bind strongly o^ their own nature, and stay Vomiting
Valde astringunt, ventriculum roborant, vimitum sedant.

Quinces may be kept good a year, or (as some have said) two years, thus, put
them in a Barrel, cover them with penny Ale, and once in 10 or 12 days draw it
off, but stir not the Quinces, then put in fresh Ale again from time to time,
this is accounted far better then usual Pickle. Others keep them thus, boil
the Parings and Cores of Quinces, with Salt and Ginger, and in this Pickle they
will keep diverse Months. A late Author says, there is no Fruit in this Land of
so manifold use as Quinces.

Of Cherries De Not. stirp. c. 64. lib. 1.
Cherries are a healthful and pleasant Fruit: Ruelius says, Cerasa bonum succum
creant, they breed good humors in the body; so another, Bonum sanguinem
generant.

Dodonaeus, accounts the tart and sharp Cherries best; Inter Cerasa optima sunt
acidula.

There is a pleasant and refreshing Wine, made of Cherries, in Countries where
they have great store, I have heard it from a Gentleman of very good credit,
that he drank Cherry Wine of above a Twelvemonth old, which was very good
Wine; whereas it was thought it would not have lasted half so long: The Morello
Cherry, and other deep colored pleasant Cherries, will make a special good
Wine; the Liquor of it self, or mixed with Cider.
both in their Liquor only, and the same mixed with Grapes. Wis maturis
admiscentur, and deinde vinum ex his paratur gustatu gratissimum: Doubtless
Cherry-wine in Summer, is a pleasant and healthful Liquor, more proper for that
Season then hot Wines.

Cherries boiled in brothes and drinks, give a pleasant relish, and are good
for hot and feverish bodies. And in Countries where there is great store, their
custom is (as is credibly reported) to eat their Breakfasts of Bread, Butter,
and Cherries.

The School or University of Salern, gives them great commendations, and tells
us, diverse commodities they afford: Cerasa si comedas tibi consert grandia dona,
Expurgant Stomachum, nucleus lapidem tibi tollit,
Et de carne sua sanguis eritque bonus.
By eating Cherries great good does arise,
To such as use them, for the Learned wise,
Say, that they purge the stomach, and beside
The broken stones and kernels have, been tried
To break the bladder-stone, breed wholesom^ blood,
To fat and feed the body they be good.


Another says, they increase and comfort the Liver, and that the tart and sharp
close the mouth of the stomach, and make the better and speedier digestion.

Com. in l. 1. Dioscor p. 198.
Matthiolus says, Omnia refrigerant, rob^rant, and tibi appetentiam exitant,
ideoqu^ febricitantibus, ac sitientibus, facile conce^ duntur a medicis
Germanis.

All Cherries do cool, strengthen, and stir up appetite to meat, and therefore
they are (as is Recorded) readily allowed by the Germane Physicians, to such as
have feverish, hot, and thirsty diseases; other Authors say the like, which
for brevities sake I omit.

Of Plums. Com in l. 1. Dios. p. 216
Matthiolus says, Prunabilem dejiciunt, preinde ea utiliter medici ad febres,
aliosque biliosos affectus reddant. Plums cast out Choleric humors, and are
good in fevers, and other Choleric and hot Diseases.

A late Author says, out of Damsons, and other sweet Plums, may be made a
drink not inferior to some good Wines, and abundance of Aquavitae.

Schol. Sal. says: Infrigidant, laxant, multum prosunt tibi Prunae.
Plums cool, and loose the belly very kindly:
No way offensive, but to health are friendly.


Many good dishes for the Table, and delicates for Banquets, are made of Plums
with honey and sugar, to use all the year, and profitable both for the sick and
healthful.

Gallen accounts Aprecocks, Of Aprecocks. De Facult. Alimen. l. 2. p. 20.
better then Peaches; Non in ventriculo, ut illa, corrumpuntur: because they
are not so soon corrupted in the stomach. Avicen says, Infusio siccorum
confert fo^bribus acutis. The infusion of dried Aprecocks, is profitable in
sharp fevers. Can. l. 2. c. 146.
Matt. tells us, that the Oil of the stones, is very profitable to anoint the
heat, and swelling of Ulcers and Sores, and pains in the Ears. And that the
Oil mixed with Wine, and drunk, drives stones and gravel out of the bladder
and kidneys: and helps the Colic.

They are ordered many ways, and all pleasant to the body, Of Peaches. L. p.
80.etc.
and healthful.

Dioscor says, Persica mala stomacho utilia sunt, alvum quoque bonum
praestant. Peaches are good for the Stomach, L. 2. 571. Not. Hist. p. 15.
and keep the belly soluble: so Avicen, Matura sunt bona stomacho.

L. 15. ^. 12. and l. 23. c. 7.
Lonicerus says, Persica mala in ardentibus faebribus sumi possunt. Peaches
may be eaten in barning fevers.

Pliny commends Peaches as much as any fruit, even for the sick, with Wine or
Vinegar; Poma Persica innocua expeti aegris, utilioraque, cum vino aut aceto,
etc.

Peaches eaten moderately, (for so we are to use all Fruits) are no doubt
profitable to cool and loosen the belly, especially for hot constitutions; but
withal take the advice of Schol. Sal. Persica cum musto, vobis datur ordine
justo; Take a cup of Wine, or strong drink with them.

Of Mulberries.
Some make a drink of Wine of Mulberries, as Albert. Magnus tells us* De moris
fit potus, De veget, and Plant.
qui More^tum vocetur. A spoonful or two of this, will color a quart of White
Wine or Cider. Ruel says, Succus siccato pomo expressus, multum obsoniorum
sapori confert, and miram gratiam commendat: the juice of Mulberries, De not.
stirp. c. 102. p. 265.
pressed out and dried, and put into meats, gives them a very pleasant taste and
relish. The Juice of Mulberries is known by experience to be a good remedy for
a sore mouth or throat, such as are perfectly ripe, relax the belly, but the
unripe (especially dried) are said to bind exeedingly, and therefore are given
to such as have Lasks and Fluxes. Dodoneus says, they stir up a languishing
appetite, especially in hot bodies, appetentiam calore languentem excitant.

So Avicen: Cant. l. 2. c. 498.
Appetitum cibi faciunt. They are used by Apothecaries ^or many other purposes.

Figs are said to nourish much, Of Figs. Not. Hist. l. 3. p. 800. Com in l. pr.
Dios. p. 230.
and to breed store of blood. Dodonaeus prefers them above other Fruits, in
res^ect they nourish very much: Alimentum amplius quam caeteri praebent: So
Mat. Ficus and ^uae inter fructus autumnales principatum obtinent.

We have a sort of blew Figs that come to perfect ripeness in England, which
are eaten (being newly gathered) with Pepper, Salt, and Bread, and may be dried
to last all the year. And (doubtless) nourish exceedingly: Some make excellent
Tarts of them.

Lonicerus says: Na^^ram confortant. Dioscor, commends them as profitable to
those who have lost their color by long sickness.

Li. 23. c 7.
Figs, according to Pliny, are restorative, and the best thing that they can
eat, who are brought low by languishing sickness, and on the mending hand: they
help (as another says) an old continual Cough, (being boiled with Hysop, and
drunk) also Obstructions, and other faults of the Lungs. Schol. Salern*
commends them for diverse things: Scrofa, tumor, Glandes, Ficus cataplasmata
sedet.
Iunge papaver ei, confracta foris tene^ ossa.
Swines* Evil, Swellings, Kernels,
Figs by a Plaster cure:
Add Poppie to it,
Then broken bones it sets them sure.


Of Medlers. Hist. stirp. l. 3. p. 789.
Condiuntur hi cum saccharo; aut mello (as Dodonaeus) quo modo apparati ori ac
palato grati sunt. Ordered with honey or sugar, they are acceptable and pleasant
to the taste, they fortify digestion, and preserve the humors from
putrefaction. They stay vomitings and looseness of the stomach or bel^^
Valentius astringunt, De l. facul. l. 2. p. 21.
proinde ventri fluenti cibus est utilissimus: as Gallen: Another says,
Mespilorum ossicula in pulverem contrita calculos e renibus valenter pellunt.
The kernels bruised to dust, and drunk in liquor (especially where Parsley roots
have been steeped) do mightily drive out stones and gravel from the Kidneys.

A late Author says, Medlers are singular good for Women with Child, seeing
they strengthen the stomach and stay the looseness thereof.

Another says, They are very effectual for Women with Child against abortion.

A late Author says, Of Walnuts.
the profit of Wallnuts is infinite: They are usually eaten after meals to
close up the stomach, and help digestion. And according to Avicen, Recentes
sunt meliores stomacho. Can. l. 2. c. 501.
Bread or Biscuit may be m^de of the meal being dried. The young Nuts pealed,
are preserved, and Candied for Banqueting-stuff; and being ripe, the Kernels
may be crusted over with Sugar, and kept long.

Avicen says, Can. l. 2. c. 501.
Iuglans ficubus, and Ruta medicina omnibus venenis: Wallnuts, with Figs and
Rue, is a preservative against all Poison.

Schol. Sal. Reckons Wallnuts for one of the six things that resist poison.

Allia; Nux, Ruta, Pyra, Raphanus cum Theriaca:
Haec sunt Antidotum contra mortale venenum.
Garlic, Rue, Pears, Radish, Treacle, and Nuts:
Take these, and then no deadly poison hurts.
Plin. not. hist. l. 23. c. 18.
Mithridates the great: his preservative was (as is recorded) Two Wallnuts, two
Figs, Twenty leaves of Rue, and a grain of Salt stamped together: which taken
no poison that day could hurt him.

Green Wallnuts about Midsommer, distilled and drunk with Vinegar, are
accounted a certain preservative against the Pestilence.

The milk of the Kernels (as Almond-milk) does cool and refresh the Appetite of
the languishing sick body.

So much for the Alimental, and Physical use of Fruits.

Errors Discovered.
HAving showed some profitable Instructions in this Art of Planting
Fruit Trees, I think it convenient likewise to discover some Errors that I find
both in the Theory and Practice of it, that men may take heed of them.

Let not men think that Ancient and Learned Authors have discovered all Truths:
or that all they have said is Truth: they are but men and have their Errors:
August de civ. Dei. l. 19.
Humanum est errare; quandoque bonus dormitat Homerus, as one says, Non est pro
magno habendum quid homines senserint, sed quae sit rei veritas. It Is not any
great matter what men have thought, but what is the Truth of the matter. Quid
ad nos, qui potius de rebus ipsis judicare debemus? What is it to us what men
say, who ought rather to judge of the things that are spoken? Oporvet edoctum
judicare: as L. Bacon says. Adv. of Learn l. 1. p. 45.
Men that are taught, must not resign up their Reason to their Teachers, but
judge of what is said.

Some great and Learned Authors have asserted very weak things, and altogether
untrue. L. Bacon says concerning them, That the Writings of speculative men
upon active matter, seems to be men of experience, but as dreams and dotage.
Indeed they go about to build Castles in the Air, (as the Proverb is) for as a
building cannot be set up without a foundation, so neither can effests be
produced without causes: Nullus effectus datur sine causa. They tell us of many
great and desirable things, but when they come to discover the causes and
means, whereby they must be effected, these are (many of them) weak and
childish, and which (I suppose) proceeded from them upon their first
apprehensions, without washing them in the scale of Reason, Adv. Learn. l. 1.
p. 145.
or trying of them by the Touchstone of Experience. And as the L. Bac. says,
Those high and vaporous Imaginations, instead of a laborious and sober enquiry
of truth, do beget hopes and beliefs in themselves, of strange and impossible
shapes.

Not. Hist. p. 165.
And elsewhere he says, The Causes and Axioms of some ancient and modern
writers, are so full of imagination, and so infected with old received
Theories, as they are mear Inquinatious, (or defilements) of experience.

Advan. Lear. l. 1. p. 32.
And these he ranks amongst the discredits of Learning, he says, Many things
have been rashly (or with little choice or judgment) received, and registered,
as appears in the writings of diverse Authors, which are every where fraught
with forged and fabulous reports, and those not only uncertain, and untried,
but notoriously untrue, to the great derogation of Natural Philosophy, with
grave and sober men.

I shall therefore discover some of these Errors, as they concern this Art of
Planting Fruit Trees, that inexperienced persons may not be deceived by them.

And afterward show some Errors in the practice of this Art, that they may be
avoided.

I shall divide the Errors in the Theorie (or contemplative part) of this Art,
into three sorts.

The first sort are, Instructions hurtful and

The second are, Instructions for effecting

The third sort are, Assigning wrong causes

For the first.

A late Author, giving Instructions for Graft the next Spring after remove.

This, I say, is a dangerous Instruction, because Stocks removed, have so great
a wound and repulse by removing only, that they cannot so well bear another so
soon after so great, as Grafting would be, if in, the cleft: Therefore let
stocks removed, grow a year or two before Grafting; Reason and Experience is
clear enough in this.

Theophrastus giving instructions for Planting, says, Nulla radiculorum part
detracta, stultum est enim amittere radices quas habemus, ut acquiramus novas.
Take away none of the Roots, for it is a foolish thing to loose those Roots we
have, that we may get new.

This is a hurtful and dangerous Instruction, for except some of the small
strings, and roots be cut away, if there be many, and all the ends of the great
ones, they will not put forth new Roots, as they will if cut: and multitude of
Roots hinder the mould from closing on every side of every Root, as it ought to
do, therefore some must be cut away, and the ends of all that are left;
Experience proves this sufficiently.

Columella giving instructions for choice of Grafts, Columel. lib. de
Arbotibus. cap. 29.
this is one, surculi sint bisulci. Let Grafts be double or forked. So Ruelius.

This is a dangerous and hurtful instruction, because forked, or double or
treble Grafts, most of them die, and those that live, grow poorly, not a fifth
or sixth part (it may be) so much as single and short grafts.

Fourthly, Bapt. Port. giving Instructions says, we must take surculos
pregnantes and turgentes: Grafts full and swelling with Sap. This is a bad
instrution: for Grafts should be taken before they swell with Sap, for it is a
repulse to Nature to cut them after sap stirs in them: neither will such take
hold on the stock so soon as those which are indigent, and needy of sap:
therefore let Grafts be cut from the Tree, before sap stir in them.

Another says When Grafts put forth, take

This is a hurtful Instruction; for sap will not cover the head of the stock,
nor close up the clefts on both sides so soon without Clay, as with it: Clay is
as a salve to a wound, which heals it up, and it rather keeps out moisture,
then otherwise, if well closed; and also preserves from dry Winds, Sun, and
other annoyances; therefore keep on the Clay a year or two, till the head of
the Stock be covered, and the Cleft healed up.

Another says, When the Grafts have well one within another, and tie them with
wood amongst, for fear winds break them.

This is a very hurtful and dangerous instruction, for all these ways do fret,
and gall the bark, and (it may be) breed the Canker: And besides, it hinders
the young grafts that they cannot spread into an handsome form: this course
brings a certain mischief to prevent an uncertain: winds hurt but few, except
they be very top-heavy; if so, then cut some of the branches till they be grown
stronger below, able to bear the Top.

glue into the place of Grafting, to glue together the two substances, or
sprinkle Sugar, Cinnamon, or sweet liquor, that the fruits may retain the taste.
This is a hurtful instruction, because liquor (or any other substance) put
between the stock and the graft, do hinder (if not spoil) the joining of stock
and graft, but if this might be done without hurt, either to stock or graft,
yet would it be no way effectual for the End proposed. Of this further, see
page 84. etc.

Plant not against a wall, because a Tree cannot be so long lived, nor grow to
the bigness it else would do.

This is a hurtful Instruction, because many kinds of Fruit Trees, as the
Aprecock, Peach, Nectarine, and diverse other Trees, will bear little or no
fruit, except they be planted against a wall: And though it be granted, that
Trees planted against a Wall, will not be so large as if planted from the Wall:
Yet I suppose it is better to have a few small trees, that bear store of great
fruits; then store of great Trees, that bear but a few small fruits.

Columella, giving Instructions for removing L. 1. de Ar. p. 490
says, Mala aestiva, Cydonia, sorbe pruna, post mediam hyemem usque in Idus
Febr. serito: Pyros Autumno, ante bruman^ serito: Plant the Summer Apple,
Quince, service-tree, and Plum-tree, after Winter, in February, but Pear Trees
before Winter.

This is a hurtful instruction, as to the first part: for Trees should be
planted in Autumn, as has been said, and there is the same Reason why the
Summer Apple Tree, and the rest, should be planted before Winter, as is for
Pear Trees. See at large, page 60, etc.

One advises thus: Let the Orchard be seated on some Hill-top, rather then on
plain

This is no good Instruction: for Orchards on low and plain grounds, have many
advantages of those on high grounds, for the soil of plain and low grounds,
is commonly more fertile then hill tops. Secondly, low grounds are more safe
from Winds then hills, by reason of other Trees planted to secure the Orchard,
and by hills, houses or other shelters; hill tops can have no defense. As for
prospects on hill tops, men do not plant Orchards for Prospects, but for Fruits.

And as for good Air, I suppose there is better Air (especially at some
seasons) in the Orchard on plain grounds, then on hills; for in Blooming time,
winds would deprive us of the sweet Air on hill tops, but on plain grounds the
Air is more calm, and the perfume of the blossoms stays within the Walls, as
within a perfumed Chamber.

Set the stones of the Pear-plum a foot deep in cold ground.

This is a hurtful and dangerous Instruction. For stones of any Fruits in any
ground, put a foot deep, are rather buried then set, for a man shall never see
more of them. But set stones of any Fruits, not above two inches deep, rather
something less.

Instructions for Inoculating: says, Take off the bark just upon some bud
knob, and set the other bark thereon.

This is a hurtful Instruction; for if the Bud to be Inoculated be set upon
another Bud of the Stock, then the Inoculated bud cannot possibly close, unless
the Root of it be out, and if the root be out, it is spoiled that way: The
Author that talks thus, had never any experience in the Art of Inoculating. For
buds must be set upon the smoothest part of the Stock; that they may be sure to
close.

Another says, Set Apple Trees Twenty

This is a very hurtful and dangerous Instruction, and the practice of it
hinders men of Multitudes of Fruits: We see that in many Orchards, Trees are
planted too near together, it may be 4 or 5 or but 6 yards asunder, which is
too near together: I conceive 8 or 10 yards, or there abouts little enough for
the distance of Apple Trees in ordinary soil: but if very good ground, 14 or
16 yards or more, if men have room enough; for we see by experience that upon
good ground, and well-ordered, they will touch one another at a greater
distance: And that a few Apple Trees having room to spread, will bear more
Fruits then 5 times so many, being crowded one upon another, where they have no
room to spread. And besides, those fruits they bear cannot come to perfection,
neither in bigness nor ripeness, for want of the Sun, which cannot come about
them, when the Trees are planted so near together, as the Author speaks of. Of
this, see more largely; with diverse Resons, page 65.

Cut away all the idle shoots of the last year, in your Aprecot and
Cherry-trees to make your fruit the fairer.

This is a very hurtful Instruction; for the last years shoots are not idle
shoots, for many of them bear the next year after or the second year without
fail: some ignorantly practice according to this instruction, which is a great
hurt to Trees.

Thus much for the first sort of Errors; Instructions hurtful and dangerous.

The second sort are, Instructions for effecting of things impossible to be
done by the means prescribed; and others impossible to be done by any means
There is a Book, called The Country man's Recreation, or, the Art of Planting;
which is full of these samoies. Printed in the year 1640.
.

Didymus tells us how we may mix diverse kinds of Fruits, and therefore make one
new kind: Accipienda sunt duo diversi generis sarmenta, eaque scindenda per
medium etc. The instruction is too large to show it verbatim; this is the
sum. Two grafts of diverse kinds must be cut through the midst, and the two
halves bound together, which must be set in the earth, and watered till they
bud forth.

Another to the like purpose. Bind the Grafts of a Peach-tree and of a Nut-tree
together, and the Fruit will be half Peaches, and half Nuts; and again he says,
Bind the Grafts of a white Fig Tree and a black together, and plant them, and
the Figs thereof will have the flesh on the one side white, the other black.

Rera avis in terris, nigroque similima Cygno. If men can but make the Swan and
the Raven breed together, they may have a strange kind of Fowl; a black Swan it
may be, which may as soon be done, as to make these Fruits mix.

These and the like instructions, are ridiculous, fit to be passed over with a
Jest, but if men require a serious answer, it is given (truly) by Sir Fr.
Bacon, in his Not. Hist. besides clear experience confirms it. He says, Cent.
5. p. 119, 120.
Such grafts will put forth their several Fruits without any commixture in the
fruit. Cent. 5. p. 119, 120.
No doubt they will, if it be possible for two half grafts (so used) to grow.
We see by continual experience, a small Bud of a Graft (no bigger then a grain
of Wheat) will keep it is own nature against a fair large stock of another kind,
being* inoculated upon it.

Lib. cept* veget. c. 1.
Secondly, Another of this kind is laid down by Albert. Mag. he says, Laetamen
est unum eorum quae praecipue Plantam mutatur a sylvestritate in
domesticationem. Manure (or good soil) is one of those things which changes
wild plants, into a mild and pleasant nature. This cannot be done by any means.
Different kinds of Fruits, as they will not mix one with another, by the means
newly mentioned: so neither will they change into another kind. Lord Bacon
tells us, It is the seed (of any kind of creature) and the nature of it, that
locketh and boundeth in the creature, that it does not expatiate, or change
from one kind to another. The seed of every Fruit retains strictly, the
nature of the Fruit of which it came, which will not be changed by any means.

Another of the second sort of Errors is this.
De Natura and viribus Ar. Fol. 7.
Lonicerus gives an Instruction for procuring fruits with an excellent
Aromatique and spicy taste: it is this, Arborem ad medullam usque scindito, and
ligni part execta, aromata quae volueris inserito, etc. he says, Cut a Tree to
the pith, and part of the wood being cut out, put in such sweet spices as you
think good, then dawb the whole with clay, after lay the branches of the young
plant in the earth, that by its moisture and fatness, the branches may unite,
then bind together the young twigs that spring from them, so that there may be
made one fruit or branch of diverse, and the fruits coming thereof, retain the
taste of the spices.

Another, whose Book (he says) is published by Authority, gives this
Instruction.

To have colored Apples, with what color you shall think good: Ye shall bore
a slope with an Auger in the biggest part of the body of the Tree unto the
midst thereof, and then look what color ye will have them of, first ye shall
take water, and mingle your color therewith, then stop it up again with a Pin:
and wax it round about.

Ye may mingle with the said color what spice ye list to make them taste
thereafter: Thus ye may change the taste or color of any Apples.

Another says, To have Peaches of savor like Musk; In grafting, put into the
Cleft a grain of Musk: and to have the taste like Roses, put into the Cleft
dried leaves of sweet Roses.

Another late Author, says With a Chisel cut up the bark of a Tree round about,
and anoint the bark within with Powder of Cloves, or Nutmegs, then set it on
again, and stop it close with wax round about, and within thrice bearing, it
shall bring a fair Muscadel Fruit which ye may Graft, and they shall be all
after Muscadel fruits.

This Author says further, To have all stone fruits taste as ye shall think
good, lay the stones to soak in such liquor as ye would have them taste of.

Diverse Amongst many other Authors who speak of these things; See the Country
Farm, page 360, 361, 392, 363, 364, etc. where there are very many odd
conceits; about changing the nature of fruits in shape color, taste, etc. To
mix Nuts, Plums, and Almonds, Peaches and Q^inces: And to have fruits without
stones See page 365. of the Country-Farme.
others speak to the like purpose.

These are strange fancies, merely imaginary things; neither Reason nor
Experience, dictate any such. They are not only invalid, or of no power at all
to effect what they propose, but are also hurtful and dangerous to the Trees
and Grafts; but if they might be done without danger, yet are they not able to
work any such effects as are promised; For it is not possible such small
proportions as they speak of, should communicate and transfer their virtues,
through all the parts of the huge and vast bodies of Trees, and to multitudes
of Fruits, much less that they should do this for many years, and least of all,
that the Grafts (cut from these Trees) should retain these virtues, being set
on other stocks.

May it reasonably be said, That a Mess of sweet and pleasant meat, nay, only
a b^t of such meat given to a Child of tender years, the same will retain the
virtues, and strength of such meat all his life time; yea, will transfer the
virtues of it to his children after him; when every one knows the strength and
virtue of the best meat and drink (though taken in great quantity) is soon over
and spent, and that it is a continued daily supply, that does uphold and
maintain the body in good state and condition.

We have no reason to believe that the virtues and strength of any dainty dish
will contiue so long with us, as Eliah's Morsel of Meat did with him, which yet
was but forty days, and that was a Mirac^^ too: how much less reason have we to
think it will last many years.

Is there not I say, as much reason for this as the other. Admit it were
possible that a small quantity of sweet spices should transfuse, and
communicate its properties to all the parts of a Tree, yet it would not
continue long in it, but it must be a continued, and daily supply of such sweet
things as must work that effect, if possibly such a thing may be by any means.
Creatures retain those properties that are fixed, and radicated in them by
nature, according to their innate and intrinsical form, but easily and quickly
cast off such as are adventitious and accidental, as these things are.

Another of the second sort of Errors, is this.
Not. Hist. fol. 6.
Lonicerus gives an Instruction to procure colored fruits: Ramo Cerasi (sive
alterius Arboris) scisso ad medullam, Lazurium aliumve colorem inserito, sic
eundem fructus resert; that is, Put into the bough of a Cherry tree (or any
other Tree) cut to the pith, the Azure-stone, (which is partly green, and
partly blew) or any other color, which are means to color the fruits of such
trees.

P^uelius says, Non desunt qui sub Arbores Rosas serunt, sic rubra Poma dari
promittunt. Some set Roses under fruit trees, and say by that means the Trees
will bring forth Red fruits. So Democritus, Si voles rubrum habere, obtinebis,
Rosis purpureis sub abore See also the Country farm, p. 365 that we may have
Red fruits, we must set red Rose trees under other Trees, or near them.
consitis.

The same instruction is given by a late English Author.

Another says, to have colored Peaches, we should color the kernels within
the stones, and the fruits will be of the same color.

The same Author says, To have Red Apples, put the Grafs into Pikes-blood.

We see their prescriptions for rare colored fruits; which are as far off from
Truth or Reason, as the former concerning fruits of an aromatique or spicy
taste, for the things are not only dangerous (some of them if tried, but if it
were not so, yet are weak, and invalid toward the working of any such effects.
Because color is an accident, cleaving to some substance, and as the substance
is dissolved, and converted into another body, it loses its accidents which
it had before, as color, shape, etc. as a piece of cloth, wood, or the like,
being burned, rotten, or otherwise dissolved, does loose its color, or other
accidents that it had before its change. And colored Meats, eaten and turned
into flesh, blood, and spirits, loose their colors, taste, etc. We well know,
that if we drink Red Wine, or liquor of any other color, or what colored
meats soever we eat, the (...), and the substance changed, the tastes and
colors, are also changed, even to contraries. So the juice of the earth, if it
be white, black, brown, or any other color, yet when it is drawn by Roots, for
instance, Carrots, then it is turned into a Yellow, or Reddish color, or if
drawn by Turnips, it is then converted into a white color, though it were
quite contrary before.

So also of Liquors, (or other things of delicate colors) being converted into
the substance of Trees, Fruits, and Leaves, they loose their former colors,
though never so glorious and beautiful. And if great quantities of colored
liquors, or other substances, cannot produce colored fruits, how much more
impossible is it that a drop or two, of any colored thing, should do it, or
only coloring kernels (as he speaks of) which could not become Trees of many
years after. It Is clear, that Fruits convert the substances they draw into
their own natures, and receive thereby little or no alteration, unless by a
constant and continual supply from year to year; and then so small and
inconsiderable (as to these things of taste and color) that it is not to be
regarded. Indeed, when a Tree grows continually in a wet foggy place (or the
like continued cause) the fruits may be tainted therewith; but a small quantity
thereof, a few drops or spoonfuls, (the virtue whereof is suddenly gone) cannot
do it.

Concerning ^etting Rose-trees under other Trees, to produce colored fruits,
it is one of the most ridiculous conceits that I have read, what is it that
should work the effect: may it be imagined that the Trees can see the Red
Roses, Genesis 30.20.
as Jacobs sheep did the Rods in the water, and so bring forth fruits according
to the same color; can any man apprehend so much as a color, or shadow of a
Reason for it?

Another of the second sort of Errors is this.
Affricanus gives an instruction to procure Walnuts without husks: So the
Countrey-farm, p. 362
Nuces nudas and sine putaminibus edent Iuglandes, etc. Walnut-trees (he says)
do bring sorth ba^e Nuts without husks, if the husk and shell be broken, and
the kernel taken out without hurt, and wrapped in wool, or fresh Vine-leaves,
that the kernels may be preserved from Ants, or other things, and then set in
the earth again.

Florentine affirms the like of Almonds, if ashes be sprinkled in the holes
where they are set. So another late Author, not only of Walnuts and Almonds,
but of all other shell fruits.

Were it not a wonderful sight, to see Walnuts, and all Nuts, to grow without
husks, we know the Nuts of themselves have no stalk, and how then should they
grow upon the Tree without husks to enclose them. What is it that should work
this strange effect? Is it because the kernels are put into the ground without
shells, and for that the Tree springs from the kernels only? Do not all Trees
spring from the kernels only, though set with their shells? the husk and shell
contribute nothing at all toward the Tree, they open for the kernel to spring
out, and then rot themselves.

Another of this second sort is this.
If you graft a late fruit upon an early Stock, the fruit will be early; and if
you graft an early fruit upon a late stock, the fruit will be late. As if
(says he) you graft Apples on Mulberry trees, See Country farm, p. 363
you shall have fruit all summer, even till November. And that if you graft a
Plumtree on the Nut-tree, the husk will be like the Nut-husk, but within it
will be a Plum. Or if you graft a Plum (or any other fruit) on the Fig Tree,
the fruit will grow without Blossoming.

These things cannot be; for first, contrary kinds will not grow together, as
the Plum-tree, and Fig Tree, or Plum-tree, and Nut-tree; but if different sorts
would agree, and grow together, yet these effects would not be, because Grafts
do always rule, and keep their own natures, or alter very little. L. B. in his
Not. Hist. says painly; Page 100.
these are imaginations and untrue, because (says he) the Cions overrule the
stock quite. So again, page 97. which experience confirms.

Another of the second sort of Errors is this.
Democritus (as one affirms) gives an Instruction for procuring fruits with
Inscriptions, and ingravings upon them, in any figure or shape.

To this purpose: Open the shell of an Almond, and write upon the kernel what
you will, and wrap it in paper, and set it in Clay mingled with Swines dung.

A late Author says, Steep the stones of Peaches two or three days, and then
open them, and with a brass Pen write on the rind of the kernels, after put
them again into the stones, and wrap them about with paper, or parchment, and
plant them, and the fruit will be written and engraven.

Is not this an odd conceit, that writing upon the The Authors of the Country
farm, affirm that write what you will on the eylet of the Fig Tree which you
mean to Graft, and the Figs growing thereof, will contain the said writing p.
363. of the third Book.
kernel, should produce fruits written or engraven? A man (no doubt) with as
good success may ingrave, or write upon the shell or husk of an Almond, or
other fruit, as upon the kernel; or if he will upon the paper or parchment, in
which it is inwrapt: for the Rind of the Kernel contributes nothing to the Tree
or Fruit, but opens (as the Husk or shell) to let out the inner part of the
kernel, the vegetative virtue, or internal form.

But if a man desires to have fruits with Inscriptions and Engravings, he must
take another course, prescribed by a Learned L. Bacon Not. Hist. p. 128.
Author (upon better grounds) which is, by writing upon the fruits with a
needle or bodkin, when the fruits are young, and as they grow bigger, so the
Letters will grow more large and graphical.

Concerning the second sort of Errors thus much.
It were easy to mention many more as idle as these, but I shall not trouble
my self, nor the Reader with them at present: only I say in the general, let
men take ^eed of such things asserted by Authors, ^^ have neither Reason nor
Experience to uphold them, lest they spend their money, labor, and time about
them, and instead of profits and pleasures, find discouragements and trouble,

The third sort of Errors are, Assigning wrong causes to effects.
One of these Errors is this, some have conceived, Lib. 5. c. 8. de veget, and
Plant.
that Grafting is the cause of early bearing of fruits, and does much better
all fruit. Albert. Mag. says, it is better, Propter digestionem Succi in nodo
factam: because of the digestion of the sap in the knot.

So also Cressentius: De Not. Plant. Li. 2. page 87.
and adds, Et iste nodus facit diversitatem omnem, quae est in Malis, and
Pyris, and caeteris fructibus: The knot (which is between the Graft and the
Stock) makes all the difference which is found in Pears, Apples, and other
fruits: Bapt. Port. likewi^e ascribes all to grafting: Li. de Cult. and Insit.
Not. Hist. p. 97.
He says, Trees coming of seed, Longa est expectatio ad fructuum productionem:
Insitio vero in aliquibus eodem Anno producit. Trees coming of seed, are long
ere they bear fruit, but being Grafted, some kind bear in a year or two. So
also Columell Lib. de Arbor. page 490. Lo. Bac. wanted some experience in this
point, who says There is no doubt, but that Grafting (for the most part) does
meliorate fruit: and again, Grafting does generally advance, and meliorate
fruits above that which they would be, if they were set of kernels or stones.
The cause (says he) is manifest, for that the nourishment is better prepared
in the stock then in the crude earth.

I say herein these Authors assign a wrong Cause to an effest; for simply
grafting contributes nothing at all to the early bearing of Fruit, nor to its
goodness. But the Cause is in the Nature of the Grafts: if they be Grafts cut
from bearing Trees, and of good kinds, they bear good fruits in a year or two;
but if they be Grafts from young unbearing Trees, coming of seed, such Grafts
will not bear the sooner for Grafting; it is not simply Grafting, I say, nor
the knot (as the Authors speak of) that makes Trees bear one year, one day the
sooner: for if so, then grafts from young unbearing trees, coming of seed,
grafted in the same manner, and upon as good stocks as other grafts from old
bearing Trees, they would bear Fruits the one sort as soon as the other, but it
is otherwise: so that the Cause lies not simply in Grafting, but in the Nature
of the Grafts.

Neither does Grafting make Fruits (at ^ll) the better, otherwise then as you
chose grafts of a good kind, for we know Grafts rule, and keep their own
Natures: only with some small advantage from the stock, ^f special stocks, or
prejudice if a very bad stock. And the Cause is not well assigned by the
Author, who says, It is for that the nourishment is better prepared in the
stock, then in the crude earth: for we know the branches of an ungrafted tree,
receive sap not immediately from the crude Earth, but from a stock or body, as
well as the branches of the Grafted-tree: the stock of the Grafted-tree, is a
wild stock, and of the same Nature, as is the stock or body of the
ungrafted-tree: they are both alike, and the concoction and nourishment in
both, is alike, and the Cause being a like, why is not the effect alike. It Is
plain, this is not the Cause; but the Cause is in the Graft, Not. Hist. p.
109. and p. 115.
not in the stock, though the nourishment be never so well concocted in the
stock: and the Fruit is not made better or worse, simply by Grafting: The
Author asserts this Truth plainly elsewhere: The Graft (says he) overruleth
the Stock: and again, the graft will govern; that is, they keep the Nature and
properties of the Trees from which they were gotten.

Another of the third sort of Errors, is this.
Of this, see also Mason Rustique, or the Country Farm, where the same is
asserted, page 362.
A late Author says: the Cause why Trees bear not fruit in a few years after
Grafting, is, because they were grafted in the old of the Moon: for (says he)
so many days as the Moou is old when you Graft, so many years will the graft
be ere it bear fruit.

The Cause is here mistaken; for the Moon has no such influence upon
fruit trees, as to withhold their fruits in this manner: Men (we see by
experience) graft in all seasons of the Moon, and find no such difference in
the bearing of the Trees: The chief Causes of unfruitfulness of Trees, are,
when they are not fit for the Country where they are planted.

Secondly, When the Grafts are chosen from young, wild, unbearing Trees; or
such as naturally bear little or seldom.

Thirdly, Repletion, or overmuch nourishment.

Fourthly, Coldness or overmoistness of the ground.

Fifthly, Frosts or cold winds in the spring.

Thirdly. Another of the third sort of Errors, is this.
Many conceive that Sap in Trees does descend from the Branches, to the Roots,
which causes several effects; as falling of the leaves, goodness of the Roots
of diverse Plants for use, etc. but the Cause of these Effects is mistaken, for
Sap in Trees never descends, but always ascends: And leaves of Trees fall in
Autumn, not because Sap descends from them* but because Sap ascends not to
them, sufficient to nourish, or feed them any longer.

And if Roots are best in Autumn, that is not Caused by descent of Sap, but
for that the Body and Branches of a Tree in Autumn, draw but a small quantity
of Sap from the Roots, and the Roots even then, draw sap from the Earth, and
increase upon it, and are well stored with sap after the branches have done
increasing: and there the sap rests chiefly at that season.

Some who hold descending of Sap, may (perhaps) confirm their Opinion from
small springs of the Roots of Plants when they are removed in Autumn. It Is
true, The Roots of Plants set in the beginning of September (or about that
time) do spring forth a little at the cut ends of the Roots, before Winter, not
because Sap descend^ from the Branches to them, for though all the Branches are
cut off before setting, (as sometimes they are) yet the Roots will spring then,
because some degree of heat, (proportionable to that purpose) is, at that
season, in the top of the earth, by reason of the immediate foregoing Summer,
so that Plants set while this heat lasts, they will germinate, and spring
forth in their roots before Winter: (the husbandman knows in this season it is
best to sow his Wheat and Rye:) And also because the Sun (as yet) has an
influence sufficient to make seeds, and Plants to spring forth, which toward
December it has not, being then too remote from us, so that it is not
descending of Sap that causes these effects.

Not. hist. p. 111. and 94.
The learned Lord Bacon did not well consider this point, who supposed a
descention of Sap in Autumn, speaking concerning setting a Bough in the ground
prepared by disbarking for that purpose, says, The Cause why it will soon
after be a fair Tree, may be this, the baring of the Bark keeps the Sap
from descending toward Winter: here is a wrong Cause assigned to an effect, for
it is not the supposed keeping up of the Sap (by that means he speaks of) that
Causes such a Bough to grow the better, but the cause is, for that such a
bough by disbarking, has got some small Roots or strings, (or at least, some
roughness or knobs capable of Roots) in the passage up of the Sap, whereby
(being set) it will become a Tree in certain years.

This Opinion of descention of Sap in Trees, Woodmen and others are generally
of this opinion, as having received it from their fore fathers for an
unquestionable thing.
is an old Error of many years standing, and is radicated in the minds of most
men: yea, many using it as a similitude to illustrate some spiritual matter, as
if it were a real and undoubted truth, whereas it is but a weak and groundless
conceit, and contrary both to reason and experience, taken up by men from hand
to hand, without consideration, or weighing of it with reason and judgment. I
will therefore lay it open more plainly, and demonstrate and prove the Truth
concerning the motion of Sap in Trees.

The first Argument against descention of Sap.
Sap in Trees always moves upwards, and it is contrary to the Law and course of
Nature for sap to descend: Natura nil agit frustra, Nature does nothing in
vain. Now it were a vain work in Nature to cause sap to ascend up in the
branches, to descend again to the Roots; the Roots send Sap to the Branches,
and not the Branches to the Roots. When it once comes into the Branches, it is
converted into Wood, Bark, Leaves, Fruits, etc. Whence is all that great Bulk
and Body which we see a Tree arise to in a few years; if Sap should descend one
while, as it ascends another, it would follow, that as a Tree increases by
ascension of Sap, so it would descrease by its descension.

This may be more clear if we consider the cause why Sap in trees stirs and
ascends, and also why it rises not after such a time to make any growth. When
the Sun in the Spring of the year by degrees draws nearer to us, then Sap in
Trees begins (by its heat and influence) to move, to swell, and open the Buds,
and to cause the branches to shoot forth, which increase by it all the Summer:
and as the Sun (by degrees) draws nearer, and grows hotter, so the Sap (by
degrees) increases, and rises more plentifully, and when the Sun is nearest,
then Trees are fullest of Sap.

Now observe, as by the vicinity and nearness of the Sun (which is by degrees)
the sap is increased by degrees, so likewise by the Suns remoteness and
absence, (which is also by degrees) in his going back again; the Sap is also
diminished by degrees, that is, ascending less and less in quantity, until the
Sun be gone so far from us, and the heat and influence of it be so weak, that
it works not to cause sap to rise up, whereby the branches may increase any
longer, and then the Branches and Buds of Trees are all at a stand, and grow no
more until the next Spring. And at that time the leaves loose their beauty, and
fall off, because Sap rises not up sufficient to feed them any longer, but
only so much as to preserve life in the Tree.

The second Argument. There is no cause to produce such an effect.
I would fain know (of those who hold descention of Sap) what should cause it
to descend, for, Nullus effectus datur sine causa: there can be no effect
without a cause; they cannot say that as heat causes it to ascend, so cold
causes it to descend: Cold never causes sap to stir, but to stand or move
slowly. Cold is of a condensing nature, and does constipate, and fix rare and
fluid bodies; if cold should cause sap to descend, then as the cold increases,
sap would descend more and more in quantity; as on the contrary, as heat
increases in the Spring and Summer, the sap in Trees also increases in
quantity; and if so, what would become of the Trees? But if sap of its own
nature would descend, yet there is none in the Branches at that season of the
year, that they can spare, but all that has ascended in the Summer, is
converted into the substance of the Tree, its Leaves, and Fruits.

Concerning that Objection that is made against this, and brought as an
Argument that sap descends, viz. That if we disbarke a bough or branch when sap
is up, an inch round about, and lay, and keep up mould about the disbarked
place, there will be small Roots in the upper part of the place so disbarked,
which (say they) are caused by the descension of Sap out of the bough to that
part.

To this I Answer, That such Roots are not made by any descension of Sap, but
by the ascension of Sap; for sap ascends up into such a bough, notwithstanding
the disbarked part, through the pith and pores of the wood, though in smaller
quantity then it would do if the bark were on. This is plain, because such a
bough does grow and shoot forth, and bear fruit after disbarking, which could
not be, but by the rising up of Sap. Now I say, sap in its rising up, some part
of it is pendulous about that place, and does somewhat hang or rest at the
upper part of the disbarked place, in the very edge of the bark; having
recourse to this Sap has recourse to this part especially, because it is
wounded: as blood and humors in the body, fly to the part that is cut or
hurt, to succor it, and so do abound there. This is so by the Law of Nature,
as well in Trees, as other Creatures.
wounded part, in greater quantity then to any other part, and so by reason of
the Earth, and moisture about it, breaks forth into some small Roots in some
kinds of Trees, or into some roughness, and small knubs like Roots, but this
cannot be caused by descension of Sap, if any were: for such as hold descension
of Sap, pretend not to it until Autu^^e, or about the end of September; Now
these Roots are made long before that time, in Upon Midsommer day I have taken
off the earth, and looked upon the place disbarked, and Roots were come out
well nigh an inch long.
Summer, by the rising up of Sap, as was said, (especially if the bough be
disbarked in May.) Can the effect be before the Cause? can Roots be made in
Summer, by Sap that descends in Autumn? if any such thing were; so that this
Argument for descension of Sap, is of no weight, but is weak and childish.

The third Argument against descension, and also Circulation of Sap: It is
contrary to its Nature.
As concerning Circulation of sap in Summer, which some also hold; I apprehend
no more ground for that, then for descension in Autumn? For as there is no
cause to work such an effect, so neither is it natural to sap to have such a
motion of it self. For, sap rises in Plants ^n some sort like a thin airy
vapor from some moist substance partly caused by the heat of the Sun: Deuteronomy.
33.14. Precious fruits brought forth by the Sun.
the Sun is the efficient cause of the rising up of Sap, though also (and
principally) the vegetative spirit (excited by the ^un) carries it up, and
disperseth it to all the parts for nourishment and growth:) Now, we know there
is no descending of Vapors, in the same manner as they ascended. Vapors come
not down again to the Earth, until they be condensed, and thickened into Rain,
Snow, Hail, etc. When they are become a ponderous and weighty substance, then
they naturally tend downwards, not whilst they are a leight airy substance: so
is it concerning Sap in Trees, it ascends (partly by attraction of the Sun, and
partly by the Native spirit) as a thin airy substance, subtle, light
spirituous, as well through the pores of the wood, as between the bark and the
wood, where it rises more plentifully, and is more condensed. Now, while it is
thus light and vaporous, it can neither descend nor Circulate, for every leight
body, (as flame, air, smoke, vapors, etc. ascends upwards, ( omne leve sursum)
and cannot descend or fall downwards, no more then an heavy thing (as such) can
rise or ascend upwards by its own natural motion. Indeed when sap is turned
into wood, leaves, buds, blossoms and fruits, these things have some
ponderosity or we^ght in them, and so naturally descend, Omne grave deorsum, As
air and vapors, being condensed, and become water in the Clouds, do naturally
fall downwards; but whatsoever is a thin, aerious, light body, ascends upwards,
and cannot (as such) neither descend nor See Mr. Grbr. Plats hidden treasure,
p. 78. where he asserts, That all Trees, Plants, and Fruits, are made of Vapors
condensed.
circulate, and such a substance is Sap in Trees.

Fourthly, The Appetite of the Spirit in all Vegetables is upwards.
There is an innate spirit in Trees and all Vegetables, 4 Argument against
descention and Ci^culation of Sap.
(which some call the Soul of Plants) yea, in all bodies animate and inanimate;
this Sir Fran. Bacon has abundantly set forth: This Spirit (as he shows) is
(as it were) a compound of flame and air, is of a flammeous and aerious
Nature. Now, this being the Vehicle or means of conveyance of the Sap unto all
the parts of the Tree, (every Twig and bud of it) its appetite is upwards,
because it is a light body, and all light things naturally ascend upwards, Not.
Hist. p. 26.1 6. and Hist. of L. and d. p. 387.
as was said, and not downwards, unless it be to observe a Law in Nature in
avoiding a Vacuum at any time. The greater quantity of Spirit there is in any
creature, the leighter it is, either animate, or inanimate, especially if it be
the lively spirit. If it be said this spirit in Trees exerts it self downwards
in the Roots, as well as upwards, it is true, so much* and so far as is
necessary to make a foundation to support the body and branches, and to draw
nourishment for feeding and increase thereof, which it does but only in a
subserviency to the body and branches, and though the Roots spread wide, yet
depth is but little to the height of a Tree; the Roots spread, and run as near
the superficies and top of the Earth, as may be, as having still an appetite
upwards, as near the Sun as may be; and all the sap and moisture which this
spirit carries upwards, (which is by far the greatest part) it never carries
down again; being against its nature to descend, as it is a leight body.

The Fifth Argument.
And further as another Argument from Experience, and that which is obvious to
our very sense; we see, and know, that when we bend down a bough of a Tree upon
a wall, toward the ground, to cause it to grow and spread as near the bottom
of the wall as may be, we find (I say) how poorly such boughs do grow, shooting
forth but a very little, and sometimes a part dies, and sometimes all; and this
shows its against the Nature of Sap to descend or circulate; for otherwise why
are not such boughs (so bended downwards) as plentifully fed with sap as those
that grow straight up, or straight out, and not so much bowed as the other: so
it is in plasht hedges, if boughs be laid too low, they die, or grow poorly;
but we see the Sap presses upwards, with vigor and violence; the boughs and
branches that grow upwards, shoot forth strongly, and are full fed, but such as
bow down low, are almost starved: so that its plain, its as much against the
nature of Sap to descend, or to circulate, as it is for water to ascend; which
yet we know by Art, may be made to ascend in Pipes, from below, as high as the
fountain or spring, but no higher; for its natural motion is to descend; so
sap, though its natural motion be upwards, yet by Art, (being ascended up into
a branch) it may be somewhat forced downwards, and yet very hardly, slowly, and
weakly, although to the nourishment and keeping life in any of its parts, or
branches so bowed down, which plainly shows how much against its nature this
motion of descension, or that of Circulation is.

The Sixth Argument against descention of Sap.
And lastly, to prove this more fully and clearly by a plain undeniable
Argument. If there be a continual ascension of Sap in Trees, then there is no
descention, but there is a continual ascension, therefore no descension.

To prove the Minor Proposition: That there is a continual ascension of sap in
Trees*

The Sun and Air continually draw sap and moisture out of Trees and other
Vegetables, Not. Hist. and Hist. of L. and D.
as the Lord Bacon and others conclude, and as may be made appear by reason and
experience: We know, if Branches and Twigs of Trees, being cut off, and laid
aside in the Sun and Air but a few days, they will be contracted and
wrinckled; the air draws out the Sap and moisture, and such having no supply
of sap from the Root, they quickly wither. Now, know also, that the sun and
air have the same operation upon the li^ing Branches and Twigs; drawing sap
and moisture continually out of them likewise, but they are not contracted and
wrinkled as the other, because there is a continual supply of Sap from the
Root, as well in Winter as in Summer, which keeps them in their full dimensions
without wrinkling or contracting.

Further observe, to prove this. If we remove Plants in September, or about
that time, (the pretended season of descention of Sap) and let them lie out of
the earth a day or two, we shall find, that the Sun and Air will (in that
short time) have rockt and drawn out sap and moisture from the branches, so
that they will be apparently shrunk and contracted. (I have seen some branches
so much wrinkled, that I questioned whether they were dead or alive.) But after
the Plants have been set certain days, so much sap will be ascended, ^u will
again have filled up the wrinkled or contracted bark, so that it is evident and
apparent hereby, that some small quantity of sap has (even then) ascended into
the branches since their setting; and if so, th^^ it is clear there is no
decension of sap: for c^^ any thing move contrary ways at one lime. And if we
graft in November and December as I have done with good success (the very dead
time of Winter) the grafts have some small supply of sap even then, else the
Sun and Air would spoil them, by daily sucking out their moisture, were there
not supply of Sap from the Root, sufficient t^ keep them alive until the
spring. It Is manifest then from what has been said, that s^^ in Trees ascends
as well in Autumn and Winter, as in Summer, so much as to preserve life in
Trees, by supplying what is extract^^ by the Sun and Air: so that upon this
also it may be concluded there is no descention of sap; unless men will hold
that a thin^ may move several ways, upwards and downwards, at one and the same
time, which i^ a contradiction, and impossible in nature.

Thus much concerning the three sorts of Errors in the Theory of this Art.

First, Instructions hurtful and dangerous.

Secondly, Instructions for effecting somethings impossible to be effected by
the mean prescribed, and others impossible to be effected by any means.

Thirdly, Assigning wrong Causes to effects will now discover some Errors that
I find in the practice of this Art of Planting Fruit Trees, that they may be
avoided.

One Error in Practice, is this.
Planting Trees too near together: Planting Trees too near together.
This is a great and general Error, many think the more Trees they have, the
more fruit: but a few having room enough to spread, will bear more fruits then
many crowded ^^e upon another, as the custom is, and fruits will also be
better when the Sun may come round about the Trees. I account 8 or 10 yards a
competent distance for Apple Trees and Pear Trees upon ordinary soil, but if
the ground be special good, then give them the more room; for standard Cherry
trees, Plum-trees, and such like, 5 or 6 yards is a convenient distance.

Another Error is this.
Many Plant Fruit trees unfit for the Country where they Plant them: Planting
Trees unfit for the Country.
Their care is chiefly to choose grafts of the best kinds, and fair Plants to
look upon, not considering so much, whether such kinds will prosper, and bear
fruits well in those Clymates, and places where they plant them. And hence it
is often, that many who have fair and goodly fruit trees, have very little
fruit from them. It is an excellent rule to choose those kinds of fruits, which
we (or others) find by many years experience, to be good bearing Trees in those
parts nearest to us^ although the fruits be not altogether so good as some
others.

This is another Error.
Choosing the greatest Trees.
Many men when they procure Fruit Trees to plant an Orchard, they (most
commonly) desire the greatest and fairest Plants, hoping such will be Trees the
soonest; whereas great Trees many of them die, and others live very poorly, but
small Plants removed, live generally, and thrive more in two or three years,
then great ones in six or seven; for removing great Trees is a very great check
to nature, such as many times its not able to recover.

Another Error in practice is this.
Setting trees without disbran^ing.
Men generally leave too many branches on the Trees they Plant, and will by no
means have Branches cut off, whereas for want of disbranching Trees, they loose
branches, body, roots, and all. If they will Plant great Trees, they must
disbranch them, small ones need not, or very little.

Another is this.
For the most part men neglect to Plant their young Trees in as good or better
soil, Planting Trees in worse mould.
then that from which they are removed. They fetch them from Nurseries about
London, (which are generally of very (fertile soil) and plant them (it may be)
in ordinary or poor soil, and thence it is that many of them die, or grow
weakly: Whereas they ought to lay special soil (the best they can get) next to
the Roots, which having taken hold, and being well rooted in the ground, they
will by degrees, thrust their roots, and grow well in that which is worse.

Another is this.
Some in Grafting, Setting Grafts and stock smoth on the outside.
take care to set the Graft and Stock even and smooth on the outside, not
considering that the bark of the stocks are (for the most part) thicker then
the bark of the grafts. Whereas they ought to take special care to set the
innersides of the Barks together, (which is the chiefest Rule in Grafting)
because there is the chief current of the Sap.

Another Error is this.
Grafting long, or forked Grafts.
Grafting long or forked Grafts: commonly, the longer grafts are, the less they
grow; and the shorter they are cut, the longer they grow in a year. As for
forked Grafts, either they take not, or else grow but poorly.

Another is this.
Suffering Fruit Trees to grow like Timber trees.
Many let their Fruit Trees grow straight up very high, before they spread into
boughs, and they are rather like Timber Trees for building, then Fruit Trees
for bearing Fruits.

Whereas they ought to cut off the Top while the Plant is young, about an Ell,
or a yard and half from the ground, that so the Plant may spread and enlarge it
self: and one Tree well ordered in this respect for spreading, will have as
many small boughs (and consequently will bear as much fruit) as three or four
(it may be) of such Trees as run spiring up a great height without spreading.

Another Error is this.
Some give too much nourishment to some Fruit Trees, Giving too much
nourishment to fruit trees.
Letting some fat water (it may be) run to the Roots, or lie too near them, or
else by pouring, or laying some fertile substance to their Roots, when there is
(sometimes) more need to deprive them of their too fat feeding, which causes
them to luxuriate, and spend their strength in great and large shoots, and
broad leaves and blossoms, and leave off bearing fruits: Nourishment to
Fruit Trees ought to be moderate, as to other creatures.

Another Error in practice, is this.
Many in pruning Aprecot-trees, Pruning off too many shoots from Wal-trees.
and other Wall-trees, they prune off most of the fresh young branches of the
last years shoot, and preserve the old and big branches, suffering them to run
up a great part of the wall without, or with very few small twigs or branches.
Whereas they should still from year to year, preserve the small shoots, nailing
them up to the wall yearly, (all or most) from the lowest part of the Tree to
the top, and leave no part of the wall void of branches; and cause the branches
to spread along the sides of the wall both ways, and not suffer them to run
upwards too much.

Another Error amongst some, is this.
Grafting seed Plants before removing.
They Graft young Plants that came of seed, in the place where they were sowed,
(before they have been removed, whereby they would get good Roots.) And hence
it follows, That such thrust down a single Root, or two (commonly) into Clay,
Gravel or moist ground, etc. which root or roots, draw bad nourishment below
the good soil, and thereby hurt the Trees and Fruits, and in case any of them
be removed afterward (being grafted) they want good Roots, for that they were
never removed, being young, to get good Roots. See how to order them, page 83.

Another is this.
Not Pruning the Roots of Plants.
Some also when they Transplant young Trees, they usual set them with all their
Roots, whereas the Roots of all Trees Transplanted, ought to be pruned. See how
page 83.

Another Error is this.
Many break off all the Buds upon the stocks that are engrafted, Breaking off
Buds before Grafts grow.
before the grafts put forth, which endangers both Stock and Graft. For Buds
upon the stocks should be let alone, all or most, until the Grafts have put
forth, and be able to draw up sap, and then break off all the buds below the
Grafts, that they may have all the sap.

Another Error in practice is this.
Many when they Graft great Trees (which are unfruitful, Grafting great bodies
of Trees.
or bear bad fruits) they graft upon their bodies round about, between the bark
and the wood. Now Trees thus grafted, will not of many years, (and some never)
cover the head in the grafted place, but water gets in and rots the Tree,
whereas its much better to graft the small branches, or if those be too high,
then to cut off the body two yards high slopewise, and to cut it smooth, that
no rain or wet may rest on the head, and the next year after to graft the small
shoots, which will in a few years be a large head again.

Situation of an Orchard.
HAving before spoken of sowing, setting, Grafting, and ordering of
fruit trees; I think good now to speak somewhat of the site, soil, shelters,
and some other advantages of an Orchard and Garden, and also of planting
Fruit Trees in the fields, and in the hedges and mounds about the fields;
whereby double, treble, or manifold profit may be made of Lands to what is
usually (in most places) made, especially by ^ider and Perry, to the great
advantage of the owners, and of the Commonwealth, with planting of wood for
build^ng, f^ed and other uses. And also of diverse other things (promiscuously)
in reference to Fruit Trees and Fruits. And al^hough some of the ensuing
particulars are touch^ upon already, yet I thought good to mention them again,
with some addi^ion, seeing they are very material; yet all very briefly.

What Situation is best for an Orchard.
Concerning the Site, or Situation of an Orchard, or Garden of Fruit Trees; the
best and fittest situation is upon a ground somewhat shelving or declining upon
the South-East Sun; for as the South Side is the warmest and hottest, so also
it is observed by Experience, that the Morning or East Sun, is better then the
West Sun: it does cherish and ripen fruits sooner then the Afternoon Sun,
though that be good also: And if the ground somewhat shelve, or hang toward
the South-East, it has an advantage of level or plain ground (though that be
good too:) for the Sunbeams are more direct, and so more strong upon such a
ground, then upon a level: such a ground is fitted to the Aspect of the Sun:
which is, Coelum cum terra maritare, vel societatem perquirere coeli and terre
ad arbores: Bapt. Port. Li. 1. p. 16.
To Marry Heaven and Earth together, or to obtain a mutual Society of Heaven
and Earth for the benefit of Fruit Trees.

What Soil is best for an Orchard.
As for the soil of an Orchard, the best is a deep sound land, either a black,
or brown mould, if with a mixture of sand so much the better: In such ground,
so lying as before, Fruit Trees will attain to a very great bigness, and
consequently will last much longer then the same kinds of Trees, upon a shallow
gravelly ground; or upon a clay, cold, or wet ground. Fruit Trees where they
grow upon a warm ground, and upon the South-East Sun, as the Trees grow
great, and live-long, so also the fruit is greater and better, and much more in
quantity, then upon poor, gravel, wet, cold, or clay grounds.

Howsoever, men that have not the best, must be content to Plant upon what they
have, and endeavor to amend it as they can:

Cold and moist ground.
Grounds that are overmoist and cold, must be not only trenched in several
places, to draw the water into the Trenches from the Roots of the Trees; but
also it will be convenient to mix sand, ashes, or such like hot and dry soyls
with such ground: if these or some such means be not used, the Roots of the
Trees (upon this kind of ground) will be chil'd, and lie cold, and cause the
Trees to be Mossy, and the fruit to be more spongy and waterish; not so good
tasted Fruit, as if the Trees grew upon warmer and dryer ground.

Hot and dry grounds.
Fruit Trees upon hot, dry, sandy, shallow grounds, have need of some current
of water now and then, to run over such grounds, if it be possible to have it
so; or else pains must be taken to bring water some other way: water out of
Pools, or Ponds, that runs from dunghills, is special good for this purpose,
which does not only moisten, but makes the ground fertile also.

Cold Clay grounds.
If the Land whereon Fruit Trees are, or shall be planted, be Clay grounds, a
shallow crust of indifferent good soil (it may be) on the top, and Clay,
barren soil underneath (as is often seen) then there is need of some Composts
of contrary natures to be mixed among, with this stiff, cold, barren ground; as
Sand, Ashes of all kinds, a convenient quantity of Lime, Cbalk, or any thing
that is of an hot and opening nature: Yea, and let men do what they can to mend
this kind of land, yet the Trees will still be mossy, and but small Trees, in
comparison of the same kind of Trees, upon good, sound, deep, fertile soil.

Stony gravel ground.
As for gravel grounds, they are as bad as any, in some respects; for a tree
cannot root to any great bigness in such grounds; and if muck, and other
soyles, be laid to the Trees, the Gravel will eat it up, and turn it into its
own nature in certain years. But if the ground be but somewhat stony, with a
mixture of Mould between and among the stones, the fruit trees will root
indifferent well in such grounds; all that can well be done, is to dig up, and
loosen the stones as much as may be, and to pick out some of the biggest, and
cast in some good soyles in their sted.

Low bottom grounds.
Land that lies below, toward the bottom of the Hill, or near a River, which
sometimes over-flowes; This generally is exceeding good for fruit trees; it
has many advantages of some other grounds; for it not only keeps and retains
what rain and moisture falls upon it from the Clouds, but also moisture
descends from the higher grounds to these, and withal, if the River overflow,
it adds much to the fatness of the ground: But yet this is to be considered,
That land may have overmuch moisture (as before is observed) That is, when it
stands, and rests all the year long in, and upon the ground, as some wall
springs, and boggy low grounds, where the superfluity of water cannot descend
from it to any other place, but where much water comes, and rests for a
certain time only; and then the superfluity runs off, and leaves only the
strength and fatness of the water behind, there the land is good and fertile:
and fruit trees will grow large there, and the fruit great.

And so much for the ground fit for fruit trees.
Concerning shelters or defenses for Orchards and Gardens.
ALthough it be not absolutely necessary that fruit trees be sheltred, or
defended from the cold North, East and West winds, yet it will be very
convenient and profitable so to do, as much as may be; for we know, and see by
yearly experience, how dangerous the East, or North^east winds (especially) are
in the spring time, as in blighting and spoiling of blossoms, fruits, and
sometimes the very boughs, branches, and the Trees themselves.

And the West winds are commonly strong toward Autumn, and throw down
abundance of Fruits, when ripe, or near ripe, wherein is loss: so that if the
Orchard be planted where it may have Hills, Houses, or such like, to burrow, or
shelter it from the North, East, and West-winds, it will be a special advantage
to it.

Walnut-trees good shelters for Orchards.
But if there be no such shelters, it will be very profitable to Plant
Walnut-trees, (or some other kinds of Trees that naturally grow great and high
(upon these three sides of the Orchard. The Walnut-tree is profitable very many
ways, not only as to shade and shelter, but also the wood is of manifold use,
and much dearer then Oak, Ash, Elm, or such like: the Fruit The fruit is
accounted a special remedy against Poison and Pestilence: Avicen says, Lib. 2.
Can. C. 501. Iuglans ficubus and R^ta Medicina omnibus venenis. Walnuts with
Figs and R^e, is a medicine against all poison.
is useful and profitable, both green and ripe; so the leaves, bark, juice,
etc. in many Physical respects. Mr. Parkinson says, the profit of Walnut-trees
is infinite.

It is a good encouragement to Plant these trees also, because (as they are so
many ways proprofitable, so also) they endure exceeding long, and will prosper
well almost in any kind of soil, or in any Country: this was observed long
since, Bap. Port. says, in former times, it was accounted an excellent, and
singular Fruit-tree: Iuglandes egregiam existimarent. L. 2. de Arb. Not. Page
248.
And Cressentius gives a good encouragement to Plant this tree: H^c arbor
nullum recusat aerem, neque genus terr^^; (he says) This Tree refuses no kind
of air nor earth.

Now, seeing it prospers well in all places, and is so many ways profitable
above many other kinds of Trees, and so fit and proper for the sheltring of the
Orchard, in regard of the exceeding great height and bigness that these Trees
attain, and the long time that they last, let there be (therefore) many of them
planted without the Orchard to shelter it, as before is said, so many as may be
convenient for that purpose.

Set many of the best thin-sheld Nuts in the Nursery, when they are fully ripe,
and preserve them there three or four years, until they be a competent bigness
to remove for this purpose: if they be set with the green husk on, it is so
much the better to preserve them from worms, etc.

Quantity of grounds for an Orchard.
Having considered of, and found out fit place for an Orchard, in respect of
the lying of the ground, soil, and shelters for it the next thing is to
design the Quantity And herein let not men be niggards to themselves* their
posterity, and the Common^ weal, in allotting a small quantity, When they may
take much: For the Fruit trees will yield (after certain years) many time^ more
profit, then the Corn or Grass of so much land: Especially if converted into
Cider and Perry. Of the Profits of Fruit Trees; see Mr. Blithe, his Improver
Improved, page 262, 263, etc. Where he shows Land may be improved, by Planting
8 or 10 times the value, and more.

Such as begin soonest will have most profit.
And they that begin, and first set on this work of planting large Orchards,
and fruit trees in the fields and hedges, will have not only the speediest,
but the greatest profit: because now, as yet, there are but few, or no great
Orchards in some Countries; and while so great a commodity is in the hands of a
few men, it will be exceeding advantageous (...) them; but when it is more
common, ^e advantage will be less. Therefore, if ^^en be but willing to make 20
l. worth ^0 l. or 50 l; or to make 100 l. a year, ^orth 2, or 3, or more, this
is the way, ^ith little labor and charge.

Great Profits, with little Cost or Pains.
What work is of so much profit, with so ^^tle cost and pains? Corn and Cattle
must have renewed charges and labors every ^ear: But as for planting
Fruit Trees, there ^he charge is at the first, and little or nothing ever
after, and the profit still increas^ng more and more for many years.

Fruit Trees have an advantage, and excellency above other Commodities, which
(for the most part) are best at first, and worse and worse, till nothing worth:
(As Meat, Drink, Apparel, etc.) but Fruit trees increase in worth and goodness;
are least and worst at first, and of the mending and increasing hand for many
Years or Ages.

Orchard and Garden on the South Side.
In Planting the Orchard let it be on the South Side the house, rather then on
any other side; the house will be a shelter to it from the North; and beside,
into the South is the sweetest and most pleasan^ prospect, and much the better
for the Or^chard: And if it may be (as in some places it may) plant Fruit Trees
round about the house.

Build the House in the midst of the Orchard.
Men that are to build the house, as wel^ as to plant the Orchard, were best to
build the house in the midst of the Orchard* and so they may live in a sweet,
perfumed, wholesome Air, all their days, which will not be a little conducing
to health and long life; besides all the pleasure and delight superadded.

Sweet fresh Air, conduces to health and long life, more then diet, as an
Author of great esteem affirms. How healthful it is to live in a sweet fresh
Air; not only learned and judicious men tell us, but also Experience. Of
this, see Lord Bac. Hist. L. D. page 207.208. Not. hist. Cent. 6. page 210.
Cent. 6. page 136. Not. hist. Cent. 4. page 102. and diverse other places: so
also a whole College of Physicians: See Scho. Sal. page 51.

Many stocks of Bees may be kept in a great Orchard.
Now, besides all the profit and pleasure that may be made of an Orchard in an
ordinary way, by Cider, Perry, sale of the fruits, and use of them all the year
in the house: there may be another profit made of them, by the labor of the
industrious Bees, which may be kept in or about the Orchard, which will gather
store of Honey all the blossoming time from the fruit trees, and the more, and
sooner, because they (In such a place) need not labor far for Honey, as having
it near hand: I have read of an eminent Bee-master, who yearly, set many stocks
of Bees by, or in a great Field of Pease and Beans in blooming-time, out of
which the Bees did store, and fill their Hives with Honey in a very short time,
as having it so near at hand; the like they will do in an Orchard, or Garden of
Fruit Trees, having great store of provision ready at hand in an Orchard. Also,
unto all this provision for Bees, Ciccamore-trees may be planted, on the North,
East, and West of the Orchard; and Sallies, Withies, etc. which bear Palms
early: all these yield abundance of provision for Bees: Now, the nearer they
have their honey and wax, the earlier and oftener they will swarm.

Plant Fruit Trees in the Fields and Hedges.
As much profit may be made of Fruit Trees in Orchards and Gardens, so also by
planting Fruit Trees in the f^elds and hedges of enclosed grounds: multitudes
of Fruit Trees may be planted abroad in the fields and hedges, whereof great
profit may be made, and yet without any considerable hindrance in any other
respect, either of Corn, Hay, or Pasture; so that men may have a double or
treble profit (or more) by this means, to what otherwise they have; after one
Harvest is over, they may have a second, and that as great, or greater then the
first; perhaps twice or thrice as good: That this may be, it is to be
considered what Trees are fittest to be planted there, and in what manner.

Observe right kinds.
As to the kinds of Trees fit for flelds and hedges; it will be best,
especially now at first (until there be more store of fruits) to plant the
courser and harder kinds of fruits, that so people may not be eager of them to
steal them.

The courser fruits very profitable.
There are many kinds of Fruits very course and hard at first gathering, which
yet are exceeding useful and profitable, especially for Cider and Perry; some
wild hard Pears, (as Mr. Parkinson observes) though no one will touch them to
eat, yet they will make exceeding good Perry, scarce to be discerned from Wine,
when it has lien diverse years, and is thoroughly ripened; and so of diverse
kinds of wild hard Apples.

Let such therefore be planted in the hedges, on purpose for Cider and Perry.

Plant high Trees in Fields.
And as the kinds are to be thus observed, so also the substance and bigness of
them: such Trees should be larger then ordinary, two yards high, or more at
first planting, that so they may spread high, out of the reach of Cattle, and
may not be troublesome to workmen about Hay and Corn in summer time.

Defend them from spoil.
Such being Planted, must have two or three stakes set about each of them; to
preserve them from the rubbing of the Cattle, and other annoyances; or else
must have a small hedge of Thorns round about them, for some years at the first
planting.

Manner of Planting in the Fields.
Fruit Trees in the fields, should be Planted a large distance asunder, not
only because this course will take up multitudes; but also (and chiefly) in
regard they may not overmuch shade the Land whereon they are Planted, so as to
prejudice Hay and Corn, Pasture, or other profits to be made thereof; so that
these Trees should be planted 30 or 40 yards in distance, especially those in
the middle of the fields, and also in Roes or Ranks throughout, that so the
Plough may continue a straight furrow all along, from one end to the other; as
we see in Herefordshire, Kent, and other Fruit^Countries; and Trees so planted
(as we see by experience) will grow exceeding large, as great as three or four,
or more of those that grow near together in Orchards.

Shade and droppings, no considerable prejudice.
If it be objected; That Fruit Trees so planted, will spoil much Corn and
Grass under and about them, by their droppings and shade: It is answered, that
it has been observed, that good Corn has grown very near the roots of such
Trees, almost as good as any where in the field, where no Trees are: and grass
as much, or more under Trees, as where none are, although (perhaps) not
altogether so sweet. Mr. Blithe does affirm it plainly, that fruit trees
regularly planted, do advantage the ground, even in respect of grass: See page
262. of the Improver Improved. And although it were granted, that neither Grass
nor Corn would (at all) grow under fruit trees; yet how weak an objection is
this, when the profits by the Trees may be an hundred, or perhaps two hundred
fold, to what can be expected (rationally) upon such a quantity of Land (as
they shade) in Corn or Grass.

Profit of Fruit Trees by Cider and Perry.
Multitudes of Fruit Trees planted in Orchards and Gardens, and in the Fields,
and bringing forth much fruit, the next thing is to make use of them to the
best advantage; which is by Cider and Perry; especially by Cider. Men may not
only store themselves for their own use in their Families, all the year, but
also much for sale: they may sell the fruits to those who convert them into
Cider for advantage.

Cider more healthy then other Liquors.
Cider is more conducing to health and long-life, then Beer and Ale, (though
these are also good Liquors, especially for some persons) for Cider is a clear
Liquor without dregs, and does not only not leave any dregs in the body of its
own substance, but it has a property to cleanse the body, and open
obstructions carry down superfluities and hurtful humors in the body, which
other Liquors and Meats have engendered and left in the body, which are as the
Seeds of many distempers and diseases.

Long Experience, proves the healthfulness of Cider.
That it is very much conducing to health and long-life, (besides the Judgment
of learned Physicians) Experience does fully prove it in those places where it
is much used: The story of a Rich Landlord, who would never let leases for
lives to any that were Cider drinkers, is somewhat to the purpose: he concluded
such were like to live too long, so was not willing to meddle with them upon
such terms.

Mason Rust. says, that a famous Physician in his time, was not content to
equal Cider and Perry, with Wine of Grapes, but preferred them before it in
every things.

In Normandy, Legacy of Husbandry page 19.
there is abundance of Cider and Perry, where they esteem of it equal to Wine.

Windiness of Cider, only at first*
As to the windiness that some find in drinking this Liquor, that is found to
be only at first, until the body be used to it, after a time that cease* An
Author of good credit says, that Beer and Ale have the like operation to
those who have not been accustomed to them, which afterward cease: we know
Tobacco will make a man dizze, and somewhat distempered at the first taking, to
one who has not been used to it, but afterward no such thing: so also in
respect of Cider.

Cider of some Apples is Cordial.
But especially it will be less windy, and much more pleasant, healthful, and
cordial, if it be made of the best kinds of Fruits: Physicians ascribe some
degree of heat to some Apples, Galen. de Aliment. facul. l. 2. page 20. In Com
pr. Li. Dioscor.
as Pearmains, and some kinds of Pippins. Matthew. says, they are Cordial to
persons in hot diseases: Calidis cordis affectibus succurrunt.

Pearmains, Pippins, Moyles, Redstreaks, best for Cider.
Therefore, let the greatest number of Fruit Trees, not only in the Orchards,
but also in the Fields, be of Pearmains, Pippins, Gennet-moyles, Redstreaks,
and such kinds as are known by much experience, to be s^ecial good for Cider,
and then the hedges and outmost bounds, may be of some courser and harder
kinds, which also will make good Cider. Cider of the best Fruits, is not only
healthful, but very cordial, is found to refresh the heart, and exhilerate and
cheer the spirits, is special good against Melancholy distempers, against the
stone, and straight passage of the water, carrying down gravel, and clearing
obstructions in the body: it cleanses the stomach, and procures a good appetite
to meat, and makes a good digestion; which is fundamental to health and
long-life.

Apprehensions of Good, makes men seek after it.
Were men but acquainted with the benefits and advantages of this Liquor, they
would labor more for it: But we know, bonum non desideratur, nisi cognitum:
Men can never desire a thing, unless first they know it, or have some
apprehensions of the good of it.

Health and long-life.
Health, and long-life, are two of the greatest earthly blessings that all the
world looks after; and what will they not do, or give, for the attaining of
them?

As Naaman^ servant said to his Master, so it may be said here, if they should
be required to do some great matter, for the attainment of health and
long-life, would they not do it? Yea certainly, me thinks then they should not
neglect such easy terms as are here proposed, when once they know them. Now
it is concluded, That exercise in the work of planting fruit trees, with
moderate use of Cider and Perry, are the most effectual Natural means for these
ends. See at large page 40, 41, etc.

Riches and Profits.
But besides, many other profits and advantages come by this labor in Planting
fruit-tree, in sale of the fruit-^rees, cider, Perry, and other commodities in
the Orchard all the year long; so that why may not this Art be called the
Philosophers-stone, which, though it turn not common Metals into Gold, The
Philosophers stone
yet it turns Trees and Fruits, yea, earth and dung into gold and silver in a
certain time? Many men have labored many years, and spent much gold and
silver in seeking the Philosophers-stone, that so they might have gold enough,
but all to little purpose. I think they were best to make use of this, till
they find out a better; this will help to bear charges in the seeking of it.

But though this Art be not the Philosophers-stone, yet it has the properties
of it, or some like it, if not above it; for is it not more to turn wood,
earth, (and the like) into gold, than to turn Brass, Tin, and such metals into
gold, which have some likeness to it already?

Let Landlords and Tennants agree to Plant.
So then, Let men that have Lands, or any considerable Estate in them, be
persuaded to improve them for their own and others advantage; and herein
Landlords might greatly benefit themselves, their heirs, and successors, if
they would encourage their If Landlords Covenant with their Tenants in their
Leases, to plant Trees, their livings will thereby be much improved in certain
years.
Tenants to plant fruit Trees and other Trees upon their Lands, by assuring
them, that so doing, they should enjoy the same so long, or have such other
recompense, as might be a sufficient encouragement to them to labor there
about; but when Tenants fear, and suspect that the more they labor herein, and
improve their Livings by such means, the sooner they shall remove out of it,
they have little reason to stir a foot toward such a work.

An increase manifold.
Hereby men's Estates might be increased manifold, by many and great profits to
them and theirs, for many Generations. Sir Rich. Weston, in his Legacy, says,
It is a thing much celebrated by Antiquity, and thought the noblest way to
gather wealth, for to employ ones wit and money upon his Land, and by that means
to Augment his Estate.

Husbandry the end of men's other endeavors.
One says, If you observe the common course of things, you will find, that
Husbandry is the end, which men of all estates in the world do point at: for to
what end do Soldiers, Scholars, Lawyers, Merchants, and Men of all
Occupations and Trades, toil and labor with great affection, but to get money,
and with that money, to purchase Land; and to what end do they buy Land, but to
receiv^ the fruits to live upon? Now, this being the most profitable, and
pleasant piece of Husbandry, does especially challenge our labors in it, not
only that we may live, but (as a means) that we may live in health, and live
long, to the praise of God, and service of our generation.

Nations subsist by Husbandry.
Though Husbandry (in all the parts of it) is but a mean employment, in the
account of many, yet we know by Husbandry, a Land or Country is maintained,
even the greatest and highest persons in a Nation, generally; Lesser and
smaller matters, facilitate and help forward the greatest: so that if the
higher powers would please to enjoyne, or encourage the people to Planting
Fruit Trees, and all sorts of wood, they would be better able to bear all
burdens and taxes (whatsoever) that are imposed from time to time by
Authority: and the greatest, and most important affairs of the Nation, will be
much furthered thereby.

Cider and Perry are of great use in long voyages at Sea; and store of Timber
might in certain years be raised for building of Ships of the best kinds of
Oak, Beach, Chesnut-tree, and other kinds of Trees, whereby there might be a
continual supply thereof, to this, and succeeding generations.

Plant Oak, Ash, Elm, and all sorts of Wood.
ANd now I shall make some small digression, and step a little aside out of the
Orchard and Garden, to give a word of encouragement, and direction, for the
planting of several sorts of Wood and Timber, especially Oak, Ash, Elm, and
other useful wood for building, fire, and other purposes; (I have planted and
ordered these kinds of Trees as well as Fruit Trees) Hereby men may (by the
blessing of God) exceedingly advantage themselves, their posterity, and the
whole Nation: Besides the usefulness of the Wood and Timber, store of Hogs
might be kept with the Mast (which makes their flesh very sweet, fat, and good)
and some say Sheep and Poultry, will feed upon the Mast.

Land not worth 28. an Acre, made worth 4 or 5 l. in few years.
The charge and labor is but small, but the profit in time, (yea, in few
years) will be exceeding great. Mr. Blithe in his Improver, Improved, affirms,
that even boggy land, not worth above two shillings an Acre, by planting it
with Willow, Sallow, and such like Wood, and draining of it deep, may be worth
near five pounds an Acre, and that in 7 or 8 years. See page 160. of his Book.

Wood on good Land, worth 60 l. an Acre.
But upon better land, the advance and profit would be much more: Upon some
warm good land, wood being planted, may be worth threescore pounds an Acre; and
that in 11 or 12 years, and as much in fewer years afterward: see the proof
and experiment hereof, heretofore made by Mr. Cartwright at Billing in
Northamptonshire, Improver Improved, page 157, 158, etc.

An 100 Ashes sold for 500 l.
See the experiment of a Gentleman that planted an hundred Ashes, and lived to
see them grow to that bigness, that he sold them for five hundred pounds, at
fifty years growth: Improver Improved, page 163.

Fifty thousand pounds worth of Wood in an Age, by one man.
It is Recorded, that another Gentleman (together with his workmen) planted so
much Wood in his life time, that he would not take fifty thousand pounds for
it. See Improver Improved, page 163.

A necessity of Planting Wood.
Many more particular instances of Experiments might be brought of the great
profits of Planting Wood, and but few men but see, and hear of advantages this
way, so that we have encouragements enough to this work, especially if we
consider the great necessity there is of planting all sorts of Wood in this
Nation; Wood and Timber being destroyed and wasted every where, and grows very
scarce and dear, and so will be more and more every year, unless men set in
good earnest to this work.

It is desired the higher Powers would enjoin this work.
And because men generally have been, and will be negligent in this great and
important business, (through misapprehensions of it, and carnal selfish
Principles, for that they cannot reap all the benefit themselves) it is much to
be desired that the Higher Powers would by a Law, or Injunction, set men to
this work, which would be of exceeding advantage, to the present and future
Generations.

Reasons for it.
1. First, because Timber, and all sorts of Wood, has been of late times very
much wasted and destroyed: and unless men set to this work, succeeding Ages
will very much want timber for building ships, houses, and other necessary
uses.

2. Secondly, by reason of the great waste of Wood, and no care to Plant more,
fuel is grown scarce and dear, especially in many places, so that the poorer
sort of people make lamentable moan for want of fire in cold long Winters,
whereas by diligent planting, there would be fuel enough for all people.

3. Thirdly, except there be more planting, the Tanners trade (so necessary in
the Commonweal) is like to fail very much: Bark is at a very great rate
already, and grows yearly dearer, because scarce.

4. Fourthly, By planting Trees in the Mounds, the fields would be much warmer
in Winter, and cooler in Summer; and consequently Cattle, and all commodities
there, would prosper and come on the better.

Other Nations look more after Planting.
It is Recorded, That the Romans did in Ancient time, (and Venice at this day)
appoint Officers on purpose to take care of the Woods, that there be Planting
as there is cutting down, and so a supply continually for all purposes.

There is a Law in Spain, that he that ^uts down own Tree, shall plant three
for it.

How to have great store of young Oaks, Ashes, etc.
Now, that men may have great store of young Sets and Plants to make Woods and
Groves, or to plant in the fields and mounds, They must (in Autumn, when the
Seed is ripe) gather abundance of Mast or Acorns, from the best and straightest
Oak Trees: And also great store of Ash keys, Cycamore, and Mast of the
Beach-tree, and other seeds, See how, page 79, 80, etc.
and sow these in ground Plowed, or dug up for that purpose, and keep them with
weeding; and some may be drawn the first year, (others as they grow fit) to
transplant abroad, and by this means, a world of goodly young Trees may be
raised: Most Ash-keys will lie in the ground until the second Spring, and then
come up abundantly.

Elm Plants.
As for young sets of the Elm, many come up from the roots of Trees of
themselves: But that we may have abundance, this must be done, Bare the Roots
of some Elme-trees, and cut some of the roots (about a foot, or half a yard
from the body) quite asunder, and the same will shoot forth multitudes of young
Plants (having small Roots) which may be cut off with a Chisel or Knife, and
planted in a piece of ground, as a Nursery, until they be grown big enough to
Transplant abroad into the Fields.

Cut not the Tops.
Cut none of the tops of any young Tree that you intend for Timber; for cutting
the top, will make it spread too much: and besides, Ashes, Cycamores, and some
other kinds, have wide great piths, and wet getting in, rots some part of the
Tree, and hinders its growth.

Draw many, and leave the rest.
Out of a piece of ground sowed with Mast and other Seeds, abundance of young
Plants may be drawn, and enough left, which need not at all be removed, but are
to be pruned up for Timber, or other purposes.

Willow, Osier, Withy, Sally, etc.
As for Willowes, Osiers, Sallies, etc. and such like, they will grow of
cuttings, long or short: Set in the Spring of the year.
The Willow (especially) is a very profitable Wood, and is of as speedy a
growth as any whatsoever, it is profitable for firing, and diverse other
purposes. This must be planted on moist land: The worst boggy land (especially
if Treched) will become very profitable by this means. Sallies, and such as
bear Palms early in the year, are not only profitable in the Wood, but also for
Bees, in honey and wax; from which they have their first provision in the Spring.

Soil best for a Plantation.
Concerning the Soil, or ground for a Plantation of Oak, Elm, Beach, Ash, etc.
We see by experience they will grow and thrive, upon almost any Land, but a
loose warm soil is accounted best, if it be shelving upon the Sun; upon such a
ground they will thrive much faster, and the profits will be greater than on
cold clay moist ground. Howsoever, plant any ground that may be planted, the
profits will be great and many, to the present Age, and to Posterity.

And now I return again into the Orchard and Garden, and shall also speak
somewhat further concerning Vine-yards, which (some are very confident) may be
made here in England, with very good success and advantage.
IT is Recorded, that many Vineyards have been formerly in England, Of
Vineyards in England.
and that Tithes have been paid (in some part of Gloucester-shire) of Wine,
made of the Vineyards there. See Mr. Hartlibs Legacy of Husbandry, page 23, and
24. And that a Gentleman in the Wild of Kent, makes six or eight Hogsheds
yearly of his own Vines: that he has one old Vine upon the sides and tiles of
his House, that yields nigh an Hogshed of Wine in a year, p. 26.

Camdens Testimony of Vineyards in England.
Camden in his Britannia, page 357. says, That William of Malmesbery writes,
That there is no Country in all England, so thick set with Vineyards, as
Gloucester-shire, nor so plentiful in increase; the Wines thereof made affect
not their mouths that drink them, with any unpleasant tartness, as being little
inferior in sweetness and odor, to the French Wines. And Mr. Camden adds, That
this is the Reason why many places in that Country, and elsewhere in England,
are called Vineyards; And that it may seem to be the sloathfulness of the
People, rather then any indisposition of the Air, that this Nation yields
not Wine at this day.

Mr. Parkinsons Judgment of Vineyards in England.
Howsoever, Mr. Parkinson in his Paradisus Terrestris, page 553. tells us, he
thinks it would be a fruitless labor to strive in these days, to make a good
Vineyard in England, for that years are not now so hot as formerly; And he
brings experience into witness the thing: That diverse, both Nobles and
Gentlemen, of late times, have endeavored to plant Vineyards, and brought over
Frenchmen to do it, but could never make any Wine that was worth the drinking,
being so small and heartless, that they soon gave over their practice.

And also, One says in Camdens Brit. page 269. That we have had Vines in Britan
since Probus the Emperors time, rather for shade than fruit.

Now men have heard the Judgment of Writers, and what is Recorded concerning
Vineyards in England, they may do as they see cause.

A Vineyard must have all advantages with us
It is very probable, that if some special Vines, that ripens their Fruits
early (as some do with us) were planted with all the advantages that may be (as
upon the side of an hill, upon the South-East Sun, upon on a hot sandy soil,
the Vines kept short and low, within a yard of the ground, and the ground kept
bare without weeds or grass; it is likely, I say, (thus planted and ordered)
they would afford good Wines, even with us in England. Or if Vines (some early
kinds) be planted upon the South-sides of houses, or Morning Sun, and spread
upon the Tiles, no doubt the Grapes will make good Wine: but I verily believe,
that Vines upon level ground, without the advantages before mentioned, will not
bring forth Grapes to perfection; it is likely such would make very good Vinegar
or Verjuice, better then that of Crabs.

An experienced way for good Wines.
But seeing we have such a known Experienced way, to make good wine in England
of Pearmains, Pippins, Moyles, Redstreaks, and other Fruits, we need care the
less for Wine of Grapes: the best that is said of the Wine that has been made
in England of Grapes, is, That is has been little inferior in sweetness and
odor to the French Wines: but the commendation of Wine made of the best Apples,
is far higher; viz. That it has been esteemed by good pallates, not inferior
to the best Wine of Grapes, ^all things considered) yea, has been preferred
before it. See page 145.

Hereafter follow diverse Experiments and Observations (promiscuously) without
dependence one upon another.
Make some Wall-trees, Dwarftrees
IT is good to Plant some Aprecot-trees, Peach-trees, Fig Trees, and other kinds
of Trees (which we use to Plant against a wall) upon Standards, to grow
somewhat low, as Dwarf-trees, if it may be upon the side of a South-hill,
Experience shows the Fruit will come to ripeness, but be somewhat later and
smaller: however, this saves abundance of labor and time, and some cost in
pruning, and nailing the branches to the wall yearly. The Fig Tree bears an
excellent cordial fruit, it does sensibly refresh the Spirits after eating, but
eat moderately, lest they make the blood to abound overmuch.

If the ground be kept bare with diging, Keep the gro^nd bare under and about
them.
or paring often, the fruit will be the fairer and sooner ripe, the reflection
of the Sun from the bare earth, will be almost as strong as from a wall,
especially if beaten down hard after digging.

Moist, Wet ground bad for Trees.
waterish grounds, are bad for Fruit Trees, they chill the Roots, and cause
Moss upon the Trees, and make the Fruits more cold, and on a worse taste, then
the same kinds on drier grounds: but if Trees must be planted on such grounds,
lay them as dry as may be, by ditches and trenches, in several places.

It will advantage Trees in bearing (old Trees especially) to put Pigeons dung,
Helps in Fruit Trees in bearing.
Lees of Wine, with some Ashes, Brimstone, or the like, to kill worms about the
Roots; or to put some blood, or pieces of flesh, to their Roots: also state
Urin mixed, is very good for them, but yet beware of using too great a quantity
of these hot things at one time, some Trees have been quite spoiled with blood,
and such like, in not observing therein a meet quantity and season: Wine and
hot waters refresh our bodies used moderately, but otherwise are hurtful: a man
may be killed with Cordials, if immoderately taken, so of all other Creatures.
Also to water Trees in blossoming and knitting time, makes them hold their
fruit better.

Take heed that Pismires, Efts, and such like, be not about the Roots.
If Trees thrive not, nor bear well, one cause (among many others, and not so
much observed) may be, for that some hurtful creatures may breed, and lie about
their Roots; as Pismires, Toads, Efts, and such like. One digging about the
Roots of a Tree that did not thrive well, found a very great multitude of Efts,
a great neast of them lying at the Roots, which undoubtedly was the cause of
the poorness of the Tree: so of other such like creatures, therefore once in 3
or 4 years, it is good to dig and turn up the earth about the Roots, especially
of old Trees; and withal, to put in some dung thoroughly rotten, or fresh earth.

Fruit Trees advantage Grass some ways.
Fruit Trees planted in the fields, make Grass to spring earlier in the year, by
reason they cause warmth, and in a hot summer they shade the grass, when it is
burnt up in some other places: also, they cause much grass under and about the
Trees, which benefits and advantages, do more then recompense for the sowerness
of such grass, as some suppose it to be.

Fruit Trees profitable many ways.
The profits of Fruit Trees, are in many respects, not only by the fruits, to be
eaten all the year long, with Cider, Perry, etc. but much fuel for the fire may
be had from them in the Prunings, and by old trees past bearing; besides, the
wood may be sold at a great rate to Ioyners and other workmen, to make Chairs,
Tables, and many other Commodities.

Some Vines shoot forth exceeding large branches yearly, Helps for barren Vines.
but bear little: in such a case, bare the Roots, and cut off a Mr. Root or two
from the Tree, then lay some Sand, Ashes, or any hot barren soil to the Roots,
this will abate the redundancy of the Sap, and conduce to bearing Fruits.

Grapes may be kept many weeks after the usual time of lasting, How to keep
Grapes.
if a Branch of a Vine be drawn into the house (especially where a fire is kept
usually) and nailed up with the Bunches of Grapes upon it; or if Bunches (when
ripe) be cut off with some of the wood, and hanged up in a warm room where a
fire is kept, with papers about them, to keep them from dust.

If School boys and others, Much profit by Planting in one Age.
while they are young, set upon planting Oaks, Ashes, Elms, and other Trees,
they may probably (as others have done) make use of them for building, sale,
etc. even themselves in their own persons, unto exceeding great profit. See the
Experiment of a Gentleman that planted a certain number of Ashes, and at 50
years growth sold them for 5 l. a Tree, page 126.

Remedies against Conies, Mice, etc.
If young set Trees are in danger to be bark't, or hurt by Conies, then stick
round about the bottom of the Plants, some Furz, (three or four branches) as
high as a Cony can reach, and they can never touch those Trees: And if Mice
anoy, or hurt any Seed-beds, or the like, then stick, or lay down Branches of
Furz round about the Bed, as close as can be to the ground, and the seed will
be safe; else lay Ratsbane for them, mixed with bread and butter.

To have Cherries and fruits late.
Cherries, Plums, and other fruits, may be had after their ordinary times many
weeks, when others of the same kind are gone, if means be used to keep them
back; as covering a Dwarf-tree, with a piece of rough Canvas, or other Cloth in
Summer, and wetting of it, to keep the Tree and fruits cool in a hot day.

Or Secondly, to Plant a Fruit-tree, (that naturally bears fruit late, as the
great bearing Cherry, and some others) upon the North-wall, where the Sun beams
come not: Trees thus ordered, will bring forth their fruits very late, when all
others are gone; and such will be as rare, and acceptable, as those that were
extraordinary early: I have known Cherries on a Tree, Cherries in November,
about the middle of October, and some in the next Month, about the middle of
November: Also compass a small Tree, or bough full of Cherries, with a Net;
this preserves them from Birds and from Snails, which otherwise can hardly be
kept long.

Snails do much mischief to Trees and Fruits, Destroy Snails in Gardens.
in the Spring and Summer, so that as a remedy, care must be taken (besides
picking up, and killing many of them) to keep the Garden clean, as may be from
weeds, under and about which they harbor, and also all the holes and chinks in
the walls must be stopped, and poynted with Lime, that they cannot get in to lie
in the day time: And withal, (to save some special Trees or Flowers from
Snails) strew round about some sifted Ashes, the snails cannot creep over it,
especially when the Ashes have been lately strawed.

We may have Fruits grow within the house, To have fruit grow within doors.
if a branch of a Vine, Cherry, Aprecot-tree, etc. be drawn in at a window, and
nailed up upon the seeling of the house, or other place, where it may be
preserved from breaking.

Or to set a small Cherry-tree, or other kind of Fruit Trees in an Earthen Pot
or Box (with a hole or two in the bottom, that overmuch Rain or moisture may
not rest in the mould about the roots) this may be set in any place of the
Garden, and taken into the house at pleasure, with blossoms, or fruits upon
the young Tree.

Apples that have lain a certain time make the most pleasant Cider.
If Apples be suffered to lie a certain time after gathering (being full ripe)
before we make them into Cider, the liquor will be more pleasant and delicate,
then if the Cider were made immediately after the fruit is gathered (though
that be a good way too) because in lying, (and somewhat heating together) the
more waterish part flies out, and that which remains, is better concocted, and
so more pleasant.

Tun up Cider as soon as may be.
After the Liquor is pressed out into Vessels, let it not stand, but tun it up
with all speed, for the Air in a little time, draws out much of the spirits of
the Liquor, and dulls the rest. We know Wine, or Beer, or any Liquor, if it
stand open in a Cup, or Glass, though but half an hour, (or a short space) they
loose their best spirits, and become deadish or flat; and so of any other
Liquor according to the time it is exposed to the open Air, though not so much
while it is new, as afterward.

What flags are best to bind withal
Those Flags are best to use for binding of Grafts and Buds inoculated, which
are three-square, of a brown color, of a middle size: the bigest are too
hollow and spungy, and the least are somewhat too small and weak: They are to
be had at the Matmakers at all times of the year, or else they may be cut out
of the ditches, and dried in Summer, and laid up to use as occasion is: In hot
and dry weather in grafting time, cut them a convenient length, and tie many of
them close together, so moisten them, and thus they will keep moist, and bind
well in grafting.

It is very succesful that we proportion Grafts and Stocks in Grafting: Fit
Grafts and stocks in bigness.
That is, to graft the bigest Grafts upon the bigest Stocks; and the lower we
Graft-stocks, (if they be for Standard-trees, as Apple Trees, etc.) the shorter
the Grafts need to be, because all must be cut off, except only one shoot to
grow up, to make the body of the Tree, so that a short Graft, of 2, 3, or 4
buds for such low stocks is sufficient, unless we intend those low Trees for
the Wall, or for a Fruit-hedge, as is showed before: if so, it is better to
graft upon such low stocks, longer grafts, of 6 or 8 buds, that so it may have
many shoots and branches to spread.

Such as have many to graft, Cut Grafts in due season.
and cannot do all the work in the best Season, may cut as many as they will,
and keep them in the ground, laid half way or more in the mould, (in a shady
place is best) and so we may be grafting till the end of April; and afterward,
when it is too late to cut Grafts.

Seed-stocks better then Wood-stocks
Many get Crab-stocks out of the Woods to graft upon for an Orchard, but those
kind of stocks are not (by far) so good, as such as come of seed or kernels,
for many Reasons that might be showed: they for the most part, grow poorly, if
they grow at all (for very many die out right) whereas Plants coming of Seed
(and ordered as is showed, page 83.) grow vigorously, and seldom fail, as
having better and more Roots then the other; and besides, they have an innate
Spirit (from the Seed whereof they came) which makes them grow better then
slip-plants, from Woods or Roots of Trees.

And also they are worse then Seed-plants, because they being commonly great
ones, must be grafted in the Cleft, which often occasions rotting of the heart
by wet getting in before the Graft can cover the head of the stock: whereas
Seed-plants being young, may be grafted by packing on, as is showed page ^6.
and so are sound Trees, without any rotting at all: Also Seed plants are
commonly more frim, straight and handsome, then Wood-stocks, and to be
preferred before them in these and other respects.

In the Spring and Summer, Weed the Nursery.
keep the Nursery (of young grafted Trees and stocks) clean from weeds; rake up
all the weeds on diverse heaps, (being plucked up) and let them lie till they be
dead and withered, and then scatter them about again; for as it will be much
labor to carry them off the ground, so also it will much impoverish it, seeing
it must be weeded often in Summer.

Young Trees that are grafted low, Cut not off side branches too soon
and yet are to make Standard-trees, these must be pruned up, all the side
branches, a yard or an Ell high, or as high as men please, according to the
place they are to be afterward set in; but in pruning, take heed of cutting
off the side twigs or branches too soon, before the body be grown somewhat
stiff and strong, able to bear a fair head: for otherwise it will be too top
heavy: if the side branches be cut off too soon, the body will be weak and
slender, and the head bushie, and too heavy for the body, and so cause the Tree
to grow crooked.

Boughs of 2, How to get Boughs with Roots from Trees.
3, 4, or more years growth, may be taken from some Trees with Roots, to be
planted in other places, as Dwarf-trees, or in a Fruit-hedge: Thus, sometime in
May or June, take off the bark of a bough, about an inch in breadth round
about, cut it above and below, and take off all the bark between the two cuts,
then take an old hat, or some old rag or cloth (or any thing that will hold
mould) and tie it a handful, or more, below the disbarked place, then fill it
up with some good earth or Or otherwise it may be done thus: About Midsommer
take away the bark, as before, then put round about the bare place, some Earth,
wherewith some Hay or Grass is mixed, to hold it together, then wrap it round
about with a Hayband all over, and in removing time, cut off the bough below,
and set it with all the mould and bands, take away nothing of it.
mould, as much above the disbarked place, as below, and let the mould be as
much on one side of the branch as the other; afterward water the mould, and
keep it moist all Summer, by pouring in some water now and then: And in
Transplanting time, this bough may be cut off below the disbarked place, and
set elsewhere in good mould, which will bear in a year or two, it may be in the
next Summer after, if it Root well: Now observe, this cannot be done upon every
Tree, no kind of Stone-fruit, neither Aprecots nor Peaches, Plums nor Cherries;
nor so well upon many kinds of Apples or Pears, which are of the harder sort of
Fruit trees, but it may be effected upon all kinds of Quodlings, Nurs-gardens,
Quinces, Gennet - moyles, and some other kind of Apple Trees that are of more
soft and porous barks, which more easily put forth or some knobs or roughness
which turn to Roots afterward.

And although there be Fruits upon boughs when they are so disbarked, yet the
fruits come to good perfection, and the branches make a convenient growth the
same year, for the sap passes up through the pith and pores of the wood.

Those Beds that are sowed with Seeds, Look that seeds lie not above ground.
of any kind, ( Apple-kernels, Pear-kernels, Plum-stones, Cherry stones, etc.)
must be looked unto, not only that Mice devour them not (as has been said)
but also that they lie not above ground; for though they be all covered when
they are first sowed or set; yet we shall find after a certain time, the Rain
that falls, will have washed off the mould from some of them, which will lie on
the top bare; therefore take a stick, or something else, and thrust those seeds
or stones, (that so lie bare above ground) into the mould, Lay dung upon the
Roots of new set Plants.
an inch or half an inch, otherwise they are in danger to be lost.

In setting young Trees (of any kind) take heed of setting the Roots too deep,
there is advantage in setting shallow, if this course be taken; That is, after
the Roots are well placed, and spread every way, and covered with mould, then
lay round upon the Roots, (close to the body of the Plant) a barrowful of
rotten dung, or any fat soil, or (for want thereof) some Litter, Straw, Hay,
Weeds, or any such like stuff, upon, and round about the Roots; if it be half a
foot thick, or more it is better: This, as it keeps the roots warm in Winter,
and cool and moist in Summer following; so also it adds fatness to the soil
where the Trees are set, and preserves them from weeds; or if any weeds grow,
pluck them up, and lay them upon and about the Roots of the new set Plants,
more the better. This course we see by experience, is exceedingly conducing to
the growing and thriving of Trees newly Planted, many die for want hereof, or
grow very poorly.

Leave a Bud on the outside.
In cutting of Grafts, it is good to leave a bud or two on the outside of the
cut place, that in case any of the Grafts happen to be broken off, such Bud or
Buds on the outside, will spring out, and supply the defect, notwithstanding
the Graft be broken off, even to the top of the Stock, as I have often
observed; but some Grafts broken for want of such a Bud, have been utterly
spoiled.

Seeing it is certain (from experience) that many Fruits coming of Seed,
Preserv^ some (...) ungrafted Trees for Cider.
and were never Grafted, do make excellent Cider, and as many judge, the best
Cider, (the famous Red^^reak being such a one, even but a Wilding;) It is good
therefore to sow some principal good Seed of Apples, and to Nurse up the Trees
to bearing Fruits; whereof we may have several sorts of special Cider-fruits:
And if any happen to be too near the degree of Crabs, then graft such with
other good fruits.

By setting or sowing of Acorns or Mast, Sow Acorns Ash keys, and other Seeds.
Ash-keys, Cycamore-keys, Chestnuts, Seeds of Maple, Beech, Thorn, and such
like, men may (if they will be diligent herein) by the blessing of God,
exceedingly advantage themselves, their posterity, and the whole Commonweal:
Hereby there would be (in certain years) Wood and Timber enough for building
of Ships, Houses, and also for Fuel and all other purposes: That poor people
(as well as others) might have enough in cold long Winters, and not cry out, as
being almost starved for want of Fire.

Hereby would be sufficient Bark for Tanners at a cheap rate, and consequently
all sorts of Leather (which is now exceeding dear) would become much cheaper.

Hereby would be young Trees, sufficient to Plant the Fields round about, not
only to make good Mounds, but also the same would make the Fields much warmer
in Winter, and cooler in Summer, whereby all sorts of Cattle would prosper, and
come on the better, and all other Commodities growing therein, to the great
advantage of the Owners, and the Commonweal.

So then, the Profits by Planting Fruit Trees, and these other Trees
aforementioned, would be many and manifold, more then I am able to declare.

OBSERVATIONS Upon some part of Sr. FRANCIS BACONS NATURAL HISTORY, As it
concerns Fruit Trees, Fruits, and Flowers: Especially the FIFTH, SIXTH, and
SEVENTH CENTURIES, Improving the Experiments mentioned, to the best Advantage.

By RA. AUSTEN, Practiser in the Art of Planting.

Genesis 2.8. And the Lord God planted a Garden Eastward in Eden, and there he put
the man whom he had formed.

And out of the ground made the Lord God to grow every Tree that is pleasant to
the sight, and good for food.

Genesis 1 29. And God said, behold, I have given you every herb bearing seed,
which is upon the face of all the Earth: and every Tree, in which is the fruit
of a Tree bearing seed, to you it shall be for meat.

OXFORD, Printed by W. H. for Amos Curteyne, 1665.

Good Reader,
THE Author of this piece has always thought sit (I disclaim any worth in me
that may deserve it) to give me leave some time before every Impression to make
a judgment of what in this Nature he has published.

But now bearing Reverence to the Greatness and Honor of the Person (without
Controversy for that Constellation of Learning and Nobility in him, none of
the least credits of our Nation) with whom he is now seen, was desirous, that I
should not only tell him, (which at other times served the turn,) but the
Reader also, my thoughts concerning this his adventure. Which are, that no man's
ought to judge him presumptuous in this particular; I take him to be such, who
has more mind to communicate to the World (for public profit) what he has
found by trial certain, than to make a book; and indeed am Witness my self to
the Truth of most of his Experiments; the subjects of which no man dares call
too low for the Pen, that remembers the Author whose Writing first gave
occasion to these Animadversions.

The Nature of things, Causes of their Generation, and of all appearing effects
in them, is confessed to be a dark Theme, and for ought I know, many questions
there abouts are not likely to be concluded, especially to the conviction of
Gainsayers, till Anaxagoras, Epicurus, Aristotle rise again: A little time by
Gods Providence I have been continued in the world, some small pittance of
which has been laid out in that search: I dare not say that I have been
ascertained of the adequate, and true causes, with their manner in Causation of
any of those Vulgar appearances which are in all men's Fyes, after the best
state that I can make in this subject. Fortasse non, if opposed, may put me to
a blanck; nor am I confident of any man's Wisdom that concludes affirmatively
more than this, That such an effect may proceed in such a manner from such a
Cause: Sometimes in many Opinions we have no probable causes assigned, but when
many probable, than it is hardest of all to prove which is true: This I speak to
take off the exceptions of such who are otherwise persuaded than our Author
declares himself, when the question is concerning causes, as in the 481.
Experiment: My Lord Bacon seems to maintain Anaxagoras his opinion concerning
the way of generation and augmentation, per (...), Mr. Austen Aristotle's, He
not be bound that in a severe judgment the Master of our Schools shall have the
sentence on his side: Yet we find few better Instances (then Mr. Austen brings)
to explain how out of one nature (if indeed there be but one) in the juice
drawn through the Roots to serve several Grafts upon the same Stock several
natures may be made. Others may likely be offended at his refusal to attribute
many effects to the descention of Sap; which whoever does, I give him leave to
blame me too; for I have long believed the opinion of descention of Sap in
Trees, a vulgar Error, and have always encouraged him to publish his arguments
to the contrary. There may be others ready to stumble at other things, but if
it be in matters wherein we are so much in the dark, by my consent for all
mistakes we will enterchangably beg, and give pardon: his arguments to me are
all especially commendable in this, that they smell more of the Garden, than
Library, see p. 100, 101, etc. of his Treatise of Fruit Trees.

If therefore my judgment must be made, I cannot but commend him heartily, and
his example to all, exercised in any like ways, and doubt not but that it would
be mightily to the advantage of knowledge in Natural Philosophy, if even all to
the lowest of Mechaniques would communicate the mysteries of their Arts.
Interest indeed hinders most, and so it is like to do, from making any thing
valuable common. But it is Heroical and Noble Charity, when there is nothing but
Self-interest hindering, to deny that for the Public good: I believe the
Author expects to himself no Attributes of so high Qualities. I wish he may
always have his due, at least from

(Good Reader) His and Thine, to serve thee, R. SHARROCK. L. B. novi Col. Soc.

TO THE READER.
COncerning my undertaking this ensuing work, I give this Account: It may
(perhaps) by some be thought too bold an attempt in me, to examine the
Writings, and to Recede (in any thing) from the Judgment of so Eminent and
worthy an Author: To which I Answer, For what I have here done, I doubt not,
but if the Author himself were nor living, he would approve of it: But more
particularly, let it be considered, that those things which I have to do with
herein, are directly within the compass of my Calling and course of life, about
which I am daily conversant: And the Author has given to my self and others,
sufficient encouragment in this: Having said (in his Advancement of Learning)
That the Writings of speculative men upon active matter, seems to men of
experience, to be but as dreams and dotage: And that it were to be wished, (as
that which would make Learning indeed solid and fruitful) that active men would
or could become writers: Men that have experience in things, are like to see
into the Mysteries and secrets of them, more and further, then such as have
notions and apprehensions of them without action and practice, It is concluded,
and laid for a ground, That peritis credendum in sua Art: Men are to give
credit to Artists in their own faculty. And further observe, that many of the
ensuing particulars, are but only Queries set down by the Author, wherein not
having experience, he desired further light from it: which I have endeavored
herein to resolve; and wherein I have perceived a manifest mistake, I have (for
the Truths sake, and profit of men) discovered it. I hope, without any
reflection upon the Worthy and Learned Author, who I verily believe, would have
encouraged any Experienced man, in the like undertaking: not seeking himself,
(as he In his Epistle to his Natural History.
professes, but the truth in these things, for the good of future Generations.

Let it be observed also, That the Experiments set down by the Author in his
Natural History, are of two sorts, as himself says: Experimenta Fructifera,
and Experimenta Lucifera: Experiments of Light and Discovery, (such as serve
for the illumination of the understanding, for the finding out, and discovering
of Natural things in their Causes and Effects, that so Axioms may be framed
more soundly and solidly) And also Experiments of use and profit in the lives
of men.

Now, the Observations upon these Experiments, tend also to the same ends. I
have endeavored to improve them for most advantage, and therefore have so much
enlarged, especially upon many of them, and where I have been more brief; and
the thing required further discovery, I have referred to it in my Treatise of
Fruit Trees, where it is spoken too more fully.

And that there may be a brief view of what is contained in the ensuing
Experiments and Observations, I have set down the chief particulars in the
Table following, all which I recommend to thy Use, for thy Profit,

R A. AUSTEN.

OBSERVATIONS Upon some part of Sr. FRAN. BACONS NATURAL HISTORY. The V.
CENTVRY.
WE will now enquire of Plants or Vegetables, And we shall do it with
diligence. They are the principal part of the third days work: They are the
first Producat, which is the word of Animation; for the other words are but the
words of Essence: And they are of excellent and general use for Food, Medicine,
and a number of Mechanical Arts.

Experiments in Consort touching the Acceleration of Germination.
Experiment 401.
THere were sown in a Bed, Turnip-seed, Wheat, Cowcumber-seed, and Pease: The
Bed we call a Hot-bed: Horse dung (such as will heat when laid together) laid a
foot high, supported on the sides, and mould laid thereon two or three fingers
deep. The Turnip see and Wheat, came up half an inch above ground, within two
days after, the rest the third day: This is a noble Experiment, for without
this, they would have been four times as long in coming up. It may be tried
also with Cherries, Strawberries, and other Fruits, which are dearest when they
come early.

Observation.
Though a Hot bed conduce much to the speedy springing up of Seeds, Stones,
Roots, etc. yet the end cannot be attained hereby: (they will not come to
ripeness earlier the others for profit) unless there be a continuance, and
concurrence of Causes from first to last, all along, without intermission: For
the hasty and sudden springing up of seed upon a Hot-bed, is but a forcing of
Nature for a little while, and serves to excite for the present, while the heat
continues in it; but what shall carry on the springing and growth of these
things to perfection, when the heat of the Hot bed is over: surely as the Cause
of springing and growth becomes weaker and weaker, until it cease altogether,
so also will the effect of that heat, that is, The growth of the Plants.

Steeping of Wheat in fat Waters and other Liquors, Experiment 402.
is a rich Experiment for profit, if the goodness of the Crop answer the
earliness of the coming up, etc.

Steeping of Seeds, Observation.
Kernels, Stones, etc. is chiefly to excite the spirit of the kernels or seed,
and to make them the sooner and more easily to open, and spring up out of the
Earth, which some kinds have much need of; as Aprecots, Almonds, and other
thick hard stones.

As for Wheat, and such like seeds, steeping will excite the spirits, and o^en^
the grosser parts, and hasten their spinging up; But I conceive the vigor and
virtue (gotten by such steeping) will be soon gone, it will not be lasting, as
the natural properties of the seed; Whatsoever is natural, in Seeds, Plants,
etc. does continue, and cannot fall off, or be lost; but that which is
accidental and from Art, is but of short continuance, and soon over; (like the
virtue of a Cup of Wine, or a meals Meat to our bodies) so that the end will
not be attained, unless the same help be renewed, and often repeated, by
watering of such steeped seeds, with the same Liquors, from time to time till
they come to perfection.

Experiment. 403.
Strawberries watered now and then (as once in three days) with water, wherein
has been steeped Sheeps-dung, or Pigeon^-dung, will prevent, and come early.

Observation.
This is a good Experiment, and profitable to make the Berries earlier and
fairer, so it be seasonably and moderately done. I conceive the morning is
best, before the Sun be hot; but water them not too often, nor too much, lest
it make the ground too rank and fat, which is not good for Strawberries; it
makes them commonly run into great leaves and strings, and to bear Fruits less.

Experiment. 404.
Dung, or Chalk, or Blood, applied in substance, (seasonably) to the Roots of
Trees, does set them forwards, etc.

Observation.
Too great a quantity of these things, will hurt, especially young Trees; as the
best meats and drinks, immoderately and unseasonably taken, hurt men: Blood, or
Flesh, or the like, applied to the Roots of old Vines, or other Fruit trees,
being decayed or old, will refresh them greatly: Let this be done before
Winter, or in Winter time, that the virtue thereof may soke into the Roots, and
the Earth about them before the spring: And also that it may not be noisome or
offensive in Spring, or Summer after: Dig up the earth, and bare the Roots as
much as may be, and pour in the Blood, or lay the Dung, Flesh, or any fat
substance to the Roots, afterward cover it with the mould all over: Otherwise
take a Bar of Iron, and make many holes among and about the Roots of old
Trees (especially where the ground is bad) and pour in blood of Beasts, fat
water or such like; this will much refresh the Trees.

Fruit Trees upon a South, Experiment. 405.
or South-east wall, will bring forth their fruits early.

It is true, Observation.
that the South wall is best, and the South east next, to Plant choice Trees
upon to come early; the Reason why the West-wall is not so good as the East,
for early budding, and ripening of fruits, I conceive is mainly, because there
is usually more rain and moisture, and greater and more winds out of the West,
in Spring and Summer, then out of the East, which do much cool the Trees and
Fruits, and so retard. Also May-Cherries, or other kinds, which naturally bud,
and bring fruits early, being planted (as is here said) against the back of a
Chimny where fire is much kept, the same will bud, and bear very early in the
year, especially if the wall be of brick, and but a thin wall.

Experiment. 406.
Digging, and loosening the earth about the Roots of Trees, accelerate
Germination.

Observation.
This culture is undoubtedly a benefit to Trees, as to their increase and
growth: they will thrive the faster hereby; but I conceive not as to accelerate
Germination, to hasten early budding; for all Trees bad forth before they draw
one jot of Sap out of the earth in the Spring: there is Sap existing in the
buds and branches all the Winter, which is excited by the Suns drawing near
in the Spring time, and breaks forth into blossom and leaf, and by degrees
Sap rises to carry on springing and growth.

Experiment. 407.
A Damask-Rose-tree in water, budded in the space of ten days in a Chamber.

Obeservation.
I conceive this Acceleration was not for that is was set in water, but because
the air was somewhat warmer in the house, then out of doors at that season, it
being in October; it would have done as much if it had been set in earth: And
as for the difference betwixt this, and that with the Horse-dung mixed; it may
be that Rose-tree in water only, had the better and more Roots, which would
certainly cause budding sooner.

A Dutch Flower that had a bulbous Root, Experiment. 408.
was put under water, and within seven days sprouted, etc.

I have tried several Flowers with Bulbous Roots, Observation.
and other kinds of Roots in water in the house in Autumn, which kept fresh,
and seemed to come on somewhat for a while, but afterward flag'd and faded; I
know no advantage that may be had hereby at that season, for the Air (in a
while) grows chil and cool, even within doors, and so puts a stop to growth in
all vegetables.

If Roots, Experiment. 409.
or Pease, etc. may be accelerated in their coming, a double profit may be
made; in some strong grounds you shall have Radish, etc. in a Month.

Pease, Observation.
Radish, etc. are hastened in the Spring and Summer, and their returns quick,
chiefly because they are sowed, and set in a warm place, upon ground sloping
upon the South-East Sun; with some special shelters from the North, and cold
Winds.

For Nourishment, Experiment. 411.
water is almost all in all, therefore it is a comfortable Experiment for good
drinkers.

Observation.
Simply water affords but a feeble and weak nourishment, crude and cold; and
therefore we see, that in low watrish grounds, fruit trees come on poorly,
being full of Moss by reason of the cold nourishment: and that in dryer, deep,
fat soyls, Fruit Trees are three or four times bigger, and consequently longer
lived then those in waterish grounds: Neither is this a comfortable experiment
for good drinkers, but the quite contrary; for Experience shows us, such as
live most upon good Liquors (eating but little) are more unsound, unhealthy
people, and short lived, then those who drink less, and feed upon solid meats.

Experiment. 412.
Housing of Plants will accelerate Germination.

Observation.
Certainly it will, if the Plants be ordered with discretion, to be seasonably
set out in the Sun and Rain in the warmest seasons, and time of the day,
(removing the Box of earth in and out, as occasion is) or otherwise Housing may
spoil them, and cause the branches and twigs to contract, and become dry; for
as the Air within doors, is warmer then that without, so also it is drier, and
does exhaust and dry the Plants more, therefore they have need sometimes, of
the moist Air without.

Experiments touching the putting back, or Retardation of Germination.
TO make Roses come late. Experiment. 413.
First, cut them after bearing.

This may be a means as to some Rose-trees, Observation.
that is, such as are old: I have known some of long standing, perhaps a dozen,
sixteen, or twenty years of age, and some of seven or eight years, (cut newly
after bearing) have born Roses again a second time, late in the year, being cut
the next full Moon after they have done bearing; but there is a kind I have
(amongst many other kinds) which naturally bears a second time, although the
tree be but small and young; besides the Rose called the Monthly Rose.

Secondly, Experiment. 414.
Pulling off the buds of the Roses that first spring forth.

I have tried this second way, Observation.
which succeeded not, it may be, because the Trees were young; but one
affirmed, he plucked off some buds in the spring, and the Tree bore Roses in
November.

Thirdly, Experiment. 415.
Cutting top Boughs in the Spring.

This has been tried also, Observation.
but was ineffectual; but the Trial was upon young Trees: as for the Report
that follows in this Experiment of Sions perishing if the old top boughs be
cut off, it is otherwise, for it is a common Experiment to cut off all the
boughs of a Tree, and to graft them, and the grafts will not only not perish,
but grow the better therefore, as having all the Sap to themselves, which
naturally rises (the Sun also drawing it up) without the help of any top bough
lef^, as continual Experience shows.

Experiment. 416.
Fourthly, Laying the Roots bare about the end of December.

Observation.
Many hundreds of Trees are thus bared, yet I find no difference at all in the
late budding or bearing of such trees from others

Experiment. 417.
Fifthly, Removing the Tree some Months before it buddeth.

Observation.
It is true indeed, removing of Trees (especially so late in the year) must
needs retard Germination, if they bud at all, commonly such fail, or grow very
poorly.

Experiment. 418.
Sixthly, Crafting Roses in May.

I know one that tried this Experiment: Inoculating (not Grafting) Buds in the
Spring, Observation.
which badded for Roses at the same time that others (of the same kind) did;
which buds being cut off they bore Roses afterward, the same year, when others
of the same kind were gone.

Seventhly, Experiment. 419.
Girding the body of the Tree with some Packthread.

This will not do it neither; Observation.
we see commonly, that Grafts tied strait, with strong flags, and some branches
of Wall-trees nailed straight to the Wall, so that I have seen the back dinted
in with the straitness of the Leather and bands, yet for all that, Sap rises
plentifully through the place (so girded) up into the branch, and buds are as
forward on that branch, as on any other.

Eighthly, Experiment. 420.
Planting them in the shade.

I have known Rose-trees in a shady place, which have not bore at all;
Observation.
it is a tree that loves the Sun. So this Experiment will not hold, I have tried
it, and it succeeds not.

Experiments touching the Melioration of Fruits, Trees, and Plants.
AN heap of Flint, Experiment. 421.
or Stone, laid about the bottom of a Tree, upon the first Planting, makes it
prosper much.

Stones laid to the Roots of Fruit Trees, Observation.
when newly set, is a good Experiment in some grounds, but not in all: it is
true, stones so laid, keep the Root of the Tree somewhat more moist, and warm,
and stedy, that winds shake it not, and so are profitable, but there is danger
(in some grounds) lest they harbor Ants, or Pismires, about the Tree Root,
under the stones, which I have seen, to the hurt and destruction of diverse
young Trees. But it is a safer and better way to lay a good quantity of rotten
dung, or Litter straw, etc. round about the Roots of new set Trees, upon the
top of the mould, this keeps them warm in Winter, and cool and moist in Summer,
and stedy, and the moisture, and fatness of the mock, sokes down to the Roots,
and refreshes the Tree very much: or for want thereof, lay a heap of weeds
round about the new set Tree Roots, and so all the next Summer after; these
things are special advantages to new set Trees.

Experiment. 423.
A Tree at first setting should not be shaken, but after a years rooting then
shaking is good.

Observation.
When young Trees are first planted, it is very convenient to set a stake to each
of them, and tie them together with a hayband, or some soft band, that winds
shake them not: and this not for a year only, but diverse years, until the
young Tree be well rooted in the earth, and also be grown strong, that the
winds bow not their bodies, and cause them to grow crooked, which fault I have
seen in very many Trees.

Cutting away suckers, Experiment. 424.
and side boughs, make Trees grow high.

All suckers must be cut away from the Roots of Trees; Observation.
and as for side branches, those may be cut as men are minded to have their
Trees to spread, nearer, or higher from the ground: but cut not the side
branches too soon, before the body be grown strong enough to bear the head,
else it will be top heavy, and grow crooked.

To have many new Roots of Fruit Trees, Experiment. 426.
lay the branches in the ground, etc.

The branches of all kinds of Trees will not take Root thus; Observation.
This way of Propagation is only for some kinds, as Mulberries, Figs, Vines,
Quadlings, Nurs-gardens, and some other kinds of Trees, whose branches are soft
and porous. As for Aprecots, Peaches, and such like, they will not take Root
thus: I have tried, but not one Root could be got, neither will they take with
grafting, I have tried many. The way to propagate these kinds, is by
Inoculating buds upon young stocks full of sap.

Experiment. 427.
From May to July, you may take off the bark of any bough, etc. and set it, and
it will grow to be a fair Tree in one year, the cause may be for that the
baring from the bark keeps the Sap from descending toward Winter.

Observation.
It is true, that the Boughs of some kinds of Trees will take Root in this
manner as is here expressed; that is, such kinds as will take root with laying
down in the ground, mentioned in the last experiment; which being cut off and
set, may grow to be a fair Tree in certain years, not in one year (as is said)
for the Roots (got in this manner) are but small, and very disproportionable to
the bough, so that it can come on but very poorly, and slowly, for diverse
years: As for the baring from the bark, which is supposed to keep Sap from
descending toward Winter; I say, the Sap is as far from descending when the
bark is on, as when it is off; there is no such thing in nature as descention of
Sap in any Trees whatsoever.

This worthy Author took this upon trust, according to the general opinion of
men, for had he but stayed a little to consider it, he would have found it
groundless, and a mere conceit; For all the Sap that ascends into the body and
branches of Tree, is changed into wood, bark, buds, ^lossomes, leaves and
fruits, it is turned in^o that body and substance which we see ^bove ground,
and none at all descends at any time; for there is no Cause, and therefore no
such effect: sap is continually ascending all the year long, more or less,
either for the growth of the Tree in Summer, or for the conservation of it in
life, and in all its dimensions in Winter; for there is a continual extrastion
of Sap out of the body, boughs, and branches, by the Sun and Air, as this
Author elsewhere asserts and which Experience proves. Now, if there were at any
time a descention also, what then would become of the Tree, it would quickly
wither, be contracted, and shrink apparently: whosoever is unsatisfied with
what is here said against descention of Sap in Trees, may see (hereof) more
largly many Arguments against it in my Treatise of Fruit Trees, page 191, 192,
etc.

If Trees bear not, Experiment. 428.
bore a hole through the heart of the Tree, and it will bear.

Perhaps this course may do some good in letting out some superflous sap,
Observation.
if too much repletion be the cause: But there are diverse other causes of
barrenness of Fruit Trees: As too deep setting, the root running down into
Gravel, Clay, Water etc. which must have answerable reme^dies. And sometimes it
is in the nature of the Trees: that all the culture in the world used to the
Roots and body, will not help, without engrafting the branche^ with Grafts of
some good bearing kinds* which is the best way I know to have store of good
fruits, (and speedily too) from barren Trees.

Experiment. 429.
To make Trees bear, cleave the chief roots, and put in a small pebble.

Observation.
This may be profitable, not only for that the Root may be bark^bound as well
as the body and branches, (which must be scored down, and cut to the wood) but
also it will cause the Roots to shoot forth many small Roots at the place
opened, which will afford more vigor* life, and sap to the branches, and so
make the Tree stronger and more in heart, and able to bring forth more, and
fairer fruits.

Experiment. 430.
Trees against a South-wall have more of the heat of the Sun, then when they
grow round.

Observation.
Aprecots, Peaches, and such like ^old fruits, will scarce ripen but against a
(...) they have need both of the (...), and reflex beams of the Sun: (...) it
were more practiced to set some other choice kinds of fruits upon a South-wall,
(as the great Burgamet, Summer Boncriten, Green-fleld Pear, and other special
kinds) this would advantage them greatly, not only in bigness, but also in
their early ripning and goodness of taste; thus, one or a few, would be worth
many ordinary ones.

Some pull off the leaves from Wall trees, Experiment. 431.
that the Sun may come the better upon the boughs and fruit.

This may hasten ripening, Observation.
but it hinders the bigness of the Fruits, the Sun ripening them before they
have attained their natural greatness: in case it prove then very hot weather;
so that if leaves be pulled off, it should not be till fruits are at bigest;
and then, but where they overmuch shade the fruits; some convenient shade by
the leaves is as necessary for the Fruits, (in order to bigness and goodness)
as the Sun.

The lowness of the bough, Experiment. 432.
makes the fruit greater, and to ripen better, etc. Graft a tree low, and
maintain only the lower boughs.

Low Trees, Observation.
and the lower boughs of high Trees, have their fruit ripe somewhat sooner then
the higher, because they have some benefit by the reflection of the Sun from
the earth, as well as from the wall; (if they grow against a wall) but that the
fruits are greater on lower, then on higher boughs, I perceive not; I am sure I
have seen sometimes fair fruit on the higher boughs, and b^t small on the
lower, in case the branches of a wall tree have been permitted to grow stright
upwards, without bowing down along the wall, as most commonly they be, and the
reason is plain, because the most, and greatest quantity of Sap presse^h
upwards, and leaves the side branches indigent of Sap, whereby they grow
poorly, and some die for want of Sap: now according to the quantity of Sap in
branches, so are the fruits smaller or greater. It is true indeed, many little
and low Trees, if they be vigorous, and shoot well, bear very large fruits, it
may be, larger then high Trees of the same kinds: but this is, not because low,
but because they are more lively and vigorous then the other. And if we should
graft a Tree low, and maintain only the lower branches, by continually cutting
off the higher; this would much enseeble the Tree by degrees, by obstracting of
the Sap, and the fruit would be accordingly. But the best way to order a Wall
tree that shoots upwards strongly, is to bow those strong branches along the
wall both ways, and then there will be as large fruits on the lower, as on the
higher boughs, and sooner ripe.

To have Fruit in greater plenty, Experiment. 433.
the way is, to graft not only upon young stocks, but upon diverse boughs of an
old Tree, etc.

It is an excellent Experiment to graft the boughs of an old Tree, Observation.
(that is a bad bearer, or bears bad fruits) with Grafts of some special good
bearing kinds, for this will have large branches, and bear fruits, even in a
year or two: so that it is a very unwise course of many who (when some of their
Trees bear not as they would have them) cut them down, and set young ones in
their Room, which cannot possibly attain the bigness of the former in many
years.

Digging yearly about the Roots of Trees, Experiment. 434.
is a great means, both to the acceleration and melioration of fruits, etc.

Old Trees, Observation.
that grow in stiff, cold, clay grounds, have most need to be dug about yearly,
that thereby the ground may be more open and mellow; but for young Trees of few
years standing, (especial if in sandy, mellow grounds) these have little or no
need at all of digging about: To dig about Roses, and such like, which grow
near the top of the ground, I conceive it is needless, for this work is chiefly
to open the earth about old Fruit Trees, (whose Roots are grown great and deep)
that the Rain, Snow, and Sun in Winter, may reach the bottom Roots.

Experiment. 435.
A Fruit-tree almost blown up by the roots, and set up again, the next year
bore exceedingly: loosening the earth, comfort any Tree.

Observation.
Trees blown down, and raised up again, and well molded, may root again if they
be not very old: and though digging about the Roots, sometimes be good, yet
overmuch digging, and loosening the earth about the Roots of Trees, will cause
many to be blown down by great winds, which will not fasten again to abide a
strong Wind in many years, if ever.

Experiment. ^^6.
To revive an old Tree, the digging of it about the Roots, and applying new
mould to the Roots, is the way, and change of mould to the better is
profitable.

Observation.
Digging, (as has been said) with caution, is very good; and change of mould,
if to the better, is also very advantageous to Fruit Trees, in case the soil be
barren, but if it be very fat, as some is, (especially some particular places
by accident) then mould that is more steril and hungry, will do better; for
overmuch repletion and fertility, may hinder fruitfulness, and cause the sap to
run most into long shoots, and broad leaves

The shifting of ground, Experiment. 439*
is a means to better the Tree and Fruit: and all things do prosper best, when
they are advanced to the better. And a Nursery ought to be in a more barren
ground then the places whither they are Transplanted.

It is true, Observation.
change of soyls sometimes is very good, if to the better: but is true also,
that if Trees grow in over ran^ soil, then worse, will be better: that is,
will help more toward fruitfulness: as a co^rse and mean fare is better for a
^at man, th^n the more delicious. Without contro^versie, young Trees out of
barren Nurseries, come on faster when Transplanted, then out of fat soyls; but
in case the Nursery be fat soil, then some other as good must be laid to their
Roots when set again.

Hacking of Trees, Experiment. 44^.
does great good to Trees.

After eight or ten years growth, Observation.
cutting, or scoring, or hacking the bark of Trees with a knife, is profitable;
but while they are young, the Bark is but thin and tender, and enlarges well
enough without this cutting, unless some that through barrenness of soil (or
other cause) are bark-bound, and to such, hacking and scoring is profitable.

Experiment. 441.
Shade to some Plants, conduces to make them large and prosperous, more then
Sun, as in Strawberries and Bays, etc.

Observation.
It is true, Iays and Laurel prospers better in the Shade then in the Sun,
being hot Plants, but Strawberries do better partly in the S^ade, and partly in
the Sun, then in Shade ^nly; as among Bushes and other Plants: I have observed
those in the Shade, to bea^ little or nothing, when others of the same kind and
growth, somewhat in the sun, bore very much.

Experiment. 447.
^ulling off many blossoms from a Fruit-tree, does make the Fruit fairer; and
if some blossoms be not pulled off the first time a Tree bloometh, it will
blossom it self to death.

Observation.
Commonly the fewer blossoms upon a tree the fairer will the fruit be, because
(as the Author says) of the plenty of sap: And indeed, in case a Tree newly
planted, blossom very much, and the Root be but weak, (which may be perceived
by the weakness of the buds) then its best to pull off most, if not all the
blossoms: but many I have known (the first years planting) take Root so
strongly (being in good mould) as that they blossom and shoot forth, and bear
fair fruits the same year.

Experiment. 450.
It were good to try what would be the effect if all the blossoms were pulled
from a Fruit-tree, for two years together.

Fruit Trees that bea^ but every other year, Observation.
they (for the most part) bear that year very plentifully; and the excessive
expense of Sap that year (its l^^e) makes the Tree the more feeble the nex^;
but if blossoms be pulled off a year or tw^ together, I suppose the Sap would
go mo^e into the shoots, and make them larger t^en if it bore fruits; and the
issue as to ^earing more or better fruits, would be nothing worth

There is no doubt but that Grafting (for the most part) does meliorate fruit;
Experiment. 452.
The cause is manifest, for that the nourishment is better prepared in the
stock, then in the crud^ earth.

Grafting does not at all meliorate the fruit simply in its self; Observation.
for a Tree will not be the better for grafting, unless the grafts be taken
from a good Tree. If the Tree from which grafts are cut, be no better then the
Tree which is grafted, then grafting will not a jot mend the fruit; which it
would, if grafting were any thing toward the bettering of the fruit. The cause
why grafted Trees bear better fruits, then wild ungrafted trees, is not because
they are grafted, but because the grafts are good, the tree from which the
grafts are cut, is of a good kind and nature, and every twig, graft and bud,
has the nature of the Tree in it perfectly; the p^operties of the Tree are in
all, and every part, as the Soul in the body, which i^ tota in toto, and tota
in qualibet part; ^^d the grafts retain the nature and p^operties being
grafted upon wild stocks and bring forth ^uits accordingly: and that is the
cause that grafting does me^orate the fruit, and not because the nourishment is
better prepared in the stock, then ^n the crude earth, for the branches of an
ingrafted Tree, do no more receive nourishment from the crude earth, then the
branches of a grafted Tree: but the sap and nourishment, passes up a body or
stock to the branches, in the one, as well as in the other.

And as it is true, that the Peach and Molocotone (as the Author says) do bear
good fruits coming up of stones, (which is not always so neither, only here
and there one) so it is true also that they bear as good fruits of the bud
being Inoculated.

Experiment. 453.
It has been received, that a smaller Pear grafted upon a stock that bears a
greater Pear, will become great, etc.

Observation.
It is true (as the Author thinks) that this will not succeed, because the
Grafts do govern, they always bring forth fruit answerab^e to their own natures
and kinds, else it were to little purpose to get grafts from such, or such a
good Tree, to have more of the kind. Yet it is true also, that the stock has
some influence upon the graft, so as to make the fruit better or worse,
according to the nature of the stock, in some small degree: As if we graft upon
a stock that naturally bears a sower, harsh fruit; the fruit of the graft will
not be altogether so pleasant as if it were grafted upon a stock that bears
naturally a sweet and pleasant fruit: and hence it is that Pears grafted upon
Quince-stocks, will be more delicate then upon Pear-stocks: The Quince-stock
gives an excellent taste to it, but these Trees upon Quinces, will never attain
to any great bigness, for all Quince-trees are but small in comparison of
Pear Trees, and where the stock can be but small* the graft cannot be great:
yet (as I have seen it) somewhat bigger then the stock: As for a Pear upon a
Thorn, (which this Author speaks of) it cannot be good, it makes it a harsh,
hard Pear at the core, if it thrive and bear, but most commonly they die in two
or three years: we know its natural fruit ( Hawes) have stones in them: But for
the Apple upon the Crab, that is natural, the Crab being a wild apple, and very
proper to graft all sorts of Apples upon, in regard of the soundness of the
stock, its long lasting, and aptness to take with grafts, and also to grow when
set in the ground; although it is true, it makes the fruit somewhat more tart,
then the same fruit upon sweet Apple-stocks.

It is true, that the seeds of some Apples and Pears, brings forth very good
fruit: the cause of this (I suppose) is, for that the stocks whereon these
fruits were grafted or Inoculated, were good kinds of themselves, kinds that
came good of seed formerly; and if so, no marvel though the seeds bring forth
good fruits without Grafting or Inoculating: and upon the Experience,
Peach-stones have brought forth a paltry, naughty fruit many of them, though
some good: As concerning the Grafting of an Apple Cions upon a Sallow, Poplar,
Alder, Elm, or Horse-plum; it is in vain to try, for trial has been made upon
stocks nearer in kind then these, and it would not come to perfection; they
will grow a year or two, (it may be) and then decay and die.

Experiment. 452.
Flowers removed, wax greater, because the nourishment is more easily come by
in the loose earth: It may be that often regrafting of the same Cions, may
likewise make fruit greater.

Observation.
To remove Flowers (small young Roots) into good fresh earth, will improve them
in growth and bigness; especially if withal some of the side-slips, (and also
of the buds which the Root shoots up for flowers) be cut off, and some half a
dozen, or half a score of the buds or shoots, be left to grow upon the Roots;
the Root then will be able to give plentiful nourishment to them, whereby they
will become much larger, then if all the spindle buds were suffered to grow.

But as for often regrafting the same graft in order to make a large fruit,
this will not do it, for we see it is constantly done from year to year; for
what else is the cutting of Grafts from young Trees, (it may be of two or
three, or but of one years growth) and grafting them again upon stocks, and
repeating this for many years together, and yet we know the grafts hold their
own natural properties from one year to another. And though there be (as has
been said) some small alteration according to the kind of the stock, while it
grows upon it, yet that alteration is lost, and falls off, when the Graft is
engrafted upon another stock, and the Graft retains its own natural properties
only: with some small addition of the nature of the stock on which it (at
present) grows.

Experiment. 455.
It makes Figs better, if a Fig Tree when it begins to put forth leaves,
have his top cut off.

Observation.
If the Fig Tree be very old, cutting off the top may be profitable; for that
such cutting (as in all other Trees) makes the Sap shoot forth into branches
more vigorously then otherwise it would; by which lively rising of Sap, the
whole Tree, and the Fruit upon it, fares the better: but if the tops of young
Trees be cut off, ( Fig Trees or other) there will shoot forth (in the room
thereof) such huge strong shoots, that the main stream of Sap will run that
way, which great shoots will be for a year or two (it may be) unfruitful.

Experiment. 456.
It is reported, that Mulberries will be fairer, and the Trees more fruitful,
if you bore the Trunk of the Tree through in several places, and put in wedges
of hot Trees, as Mastick, Juniper, etc.

Observation.
As for the black Mulberry-tree, it needs not these things to make it fruitful,
for I never knew any of them fail of store of fruits every year; but white
Mulberry-trees (with us) have need enough of all helps that may be.

Experiment. 457.
It is reported that Trees will grow greater, and bear better fruit, if you put
Salt or Lees of Wine, or Blood, to the Root.

Concerning Lees of Wine, Observating.
washings of ^trong Beer, or Ale-vessels, Blood, Flesh, or ^he like; it is
certain these are healpful to ^ruit-trees, both as to their growth and bearing,
if seasonably and moderately u^ed, especially to old Trees. I account it best
to be applied to the Roots of Trees in the beginning of Winter, that the virtue
^ay soak into the Roots and earth about them before the Spring.

Terebration of trees, Experiment. 463.
as it makes them prosper better, so also it is found, that it makes ^ruit
sweeter and better, by causing the cour^st juice to sweat out, and the rest is
better digested.

Terebration (or boring holes in the bodies and great Roots) of Fruit trees
with a Wimble or Awger, Observation.
is most needful, as I judge for great Trees which grow upon fat Land, and have
too rank nourishment, and may be unfruitful, and bear over watrish fruit for
that cause; that may help to let out some of the raw, superfluous sap and
juice, as an Issue in a man's body: but scoring or cutting the Bark of young
Trees under Twenty years may be better for them, and this to be done chiefly in
the spring time.

As Terebration does meliorate Fruit, Experiment. 464.
so does letting of Plants blood, as pricking Vines or other Trees, after they
be of some growth. It is reported, that by this Artific^ bitter Almonds have
been turned into sweet.

Observation.
This must needs have the like effec^ (in some proportion) as those particular
before mentioned of boring with Wimbles (or the like) and scoring the bark,
with ^ knife in the spring time.

Experiment. 426.
The Ancients for Dulcorating of Fruit do commend Swines dung above all other
dung; which may be for the moisture of tha^ Beast.

Observation.
I have seen diverse fair Fruit Trees, quit^ spoiled and deaded by overmuch Swine
dung, the Swine lying amongst them, and continually leaving their Excrements,
by degrees the Trees withered and died but I doubt not but that a moderate
quantity of Swines dung, mixed with mould and laid to the Roots of Trees, will
be good for them, and it may be in order to the sweetning of the Fruit.

Experiment. 467.
As Grafting does generally advance, and meliorate fruits, so (no doubt) even
in grafting, the choice of the stock does much: they commend much the grafting
of Pears, or Apples upon a Quince.

Observation.
Grafting, (simply as grafting) does not advance or meliorate fruits, as is
showed elsewhere at large; But grafted trees bear^ ^etter fruits, and sooner,
then ungrafted trees, See page 18: Treatise of Fruit-tree* page 98.
because grafts are usually taken from ^ood bearing Trees, and of the best
kinds, ^d Grafts (retaining the Nature of the ^rees from which they are cut) do
bring ^ith the same Fruits; so also do Buds, (though they be much smaller then
grafts) when Inoculated upon wild stocks.

As concerning the choice of Stocks in grafting, in order to the advancement of
^ruits; it is certain, the goodness of the ^tock in respect of nature and
kind, is very considerable: The sweeter and better the stock is, the better
will the fruit be that is engrafted thereon: Though it be true, that grafts
govern, and bring forth the same fruits, according to their own kinds, yet the
stock has some considerable influence upon the fruit of the graft, and thence
it is, that Pears upon a Quince (as the Author speaks of) are better then the
same kind upon a wild Pear-stock: (as experience shows) because a Quince is a
more excellent fruit, then a wild Pear, so the nourishment of the stock is
answerable.

It is set down as tried, Experiment. 468.
that a mixture of Bran and Swines dung, or Chaff and Swines dung rotten, is a
great nourisher and comforter to a Fruit-tree.

There is no doubt but Swines dung, Observation.
or any other dung, with other Composts laid together till they be rotten, will
nourish and comfort Fruit Trees, and better when they are thoroughly rotten, and
turned to mould, then before, because new dung may be too hot.

Experiment. 470.
It is delivered by some, that if one take the bow of a low Tree, newly budded,
and draw it gently into an earthen Pot, perforated at the bottom to let in the
Plant, and then cover the Pot with Earth, it will yield a very large fruit
within ground; the like will be effected by an empty pot, with some few
pertusions made in the Pot, hanged in the Tree.

Observation.
Concerning the first of these ways, I suppose the Fruit growing upon the bough
so bowed down into a Pot, will not be so large as the Fruit upon the other
boughs; because we see by experience it is against the nature of Sap to run
vigorously, (or in any great plenty) into bows bended downwards so near the
earth, as this must needs be, for sap presses upwards in greatest plenty; and
consequently those fruits will be greatest, which have most sap, I mean such as
are of one kind, upon one Tree.

And concerning the second means by the perforated Pot, hanged in the Tree,
that is more likely to work the effect, as to the greatness of fruit, not so
much (I suppose) because of the pertusions or holes in the Pot, as by the shade
that the fruit has by the Pot: for although fruit that grows in the Sun, be
much better, and more pleasant then that which grows in the shade, (as being
better concocted) yet that in the shade (of the same kind) is commonly the
greater, but more flat, dull, and inconcoct: as we see in Aprecots, Cherries,
etc. under the leaves.

All Trees in high and sandy grounds, Experiment. 471.
are to be set deep, and in watery grounds more shallow: And all Trees when they
be removed (especially Fruit Trees) care ought to be taken that the sides of
the Trees be coasted (North and South) as they stood before.

It is true, Observation.
that Trees on higher grounds are to be set somewhat deeper then in moist
grounds; yet beware of setting below the good soil in any ground. See hereof
Treatise of Fruit Trees
As for coasting of Trees, that is, (setting the same side to the South, when
Transplanted, as was before) the Rule is good, but not necessary: for many
thousands are transplanted with good success, not observing which side grew
North or South: howsoever, some reasons might be showed why it is best to
observe it, if it may conveniently be done.

Fruit Trees, Experiment. 472.
set upon a wall against the Sun, between Elbowes or Butteresses of stone,
ripen more then upon a plain wall.

Observation.
Fruit Trees so set, have their fruits ripe sooner then those upon a plain wall,
not so much because they are defended better from winds, but chiefly, because
they have a double or treble degree of heat to what those upon a plain Wall
have, the heat being pent in by the Elbowes or Butteresses of the wall, and so
reflects the stronger upon the Fruits and Trees; there is a double reflection
of heat upon such.

Experiment. 475.
Grafting Elms, (or other unfruitful trees) will make their leaves larger: as
in Fruit Trees the Graft makes the greater fruit.

Observation.
Grafting, barely considered as grafting, will not do this, it will neither
make leaves nor fruits fairer, but as stocks are chosen for the purpose: for
though it be true (as has been elsewhere said) that Grafts govern, and
overrule the stocks, bringing forth the same leaves and fruits when grafted, as
before, according to their own Natures; yet it is true also, that the stocks
have some small influence upon them, in making the fruits better or worse in
taste and bigness: and so of the leaves in fairness, according to the goodness
or badness of the stocks: yet notwithstanding Grafts and Buds inoculated, may
be said to Rule, and ^ring forth the same fruits, else it were in vain to graft.

Barrenness of Trees comes of their overgrowing with Moss, Experiment. 476.
or their being Hidebound, or planting too deep, or by issuing of the sap too
much into the leaves.

There are several causes of the barrenness of Trees. Observation.
I conceive Mossiness, as Mossiness, is not the cause of barrenness, but the
causes of Mossiness are the causes of barrenness, which are coldness,
overmoistness, and barrenness of the soil where the Trees grow: Therefore such
soyles must be amended. See how, Treatise of Fruit trees, page 213, 214, etc.

Also barrenness is often, by reason of the excessive sap and moisture of
Trees, which is manifest by their strong and vigorous shoots, branches, and
broad green leaves, as in many young full-fed Trees; for while nature is
vigorous, and active, spending it self that way, in the excessive growth of the
Trees; it is then weak and feeble in bearing of fruits. Now as to some kinds of
Trees, it is not best (for some time) to go about to remove the Cause, that is,
as to standard Apple Trees, Pear Trees, and other kinds, which grow in the
Orchards and Fields: but let them alone, let them go on in their large and
vigorous growths for certain years, though they bear but little* (provided
that we know they are naturally of good bearing kinds, otherwise it is in vain
to wait for store of fruits from such Trees) After that such Trees have grown
exceedingly some years, and attained a fair large growth, they will then by
degrees, grow less in the branches, and fall to bearing of fruits: But in case
the Trees are Wall-trees, and shoot excessively, and bear not, then it will be
best to take away the cause as much as we can; that is,

First, abate their overful and rank nourishment, by putting in Sand, Gravel,
Buckashes, or any thing that is barren, instead of the fat soil.

Secondly, Also cut off, and part one or two of the biggest Roots from the
body, that so it may have less nourishment, and that left will turn to fruits.

Thirdly, Bend downwards the branches, and fasten them to the wall with their
tops as low as may be, this obstructs, and restrains the excessive rising of
sap, which rising moderately, turns to fruits: But if the Trees are naturally
bad bearers (if barren upon that account) then there is no remedy for such, but
grafting them again, with grafts taken from some good bearing kinds, which are
known by yearly experience to bear fruits well.

It has been set down by one of the Ancients, Experiment 477, 478, 479.
that two twigs of several Fruit Trees, flatted on the sides, and bound
together, and set, they will come up in one stock. And that Vines of red and
white Grapes, Compounding of Fruits.
flatted and bound together, will bear Grapes of several colors upon one
branch: Also the shoots of diverse seeds, will incorporate: And that young Trees
of several kinds, set contiguous, will incorporate.

These, and such like, are prescribed in order to the compounding of Fruits.

Concerning compounding, Observation.
or mixing of diverse kinds of fruits, whereof to make one new kind, these
things before mentioned, (and many such like) have been prescribed by Ancient
Authors, which are of the number of those things Not. Hist. page 165.
Sir Francis Bacon accounts mere imaginations and conceits, without any ground
or light from Experience.

He says Advanc: Lear. l. 1. page 32.
(elsewhere) That many things have been rashly, (and with little choice or
judgment) received and registered, as appears in the writings of diverse Authors,
which are every where fraught and forged with fabulous reports, and those not
only uncertain and untried, but notoriously untrue, to the great derogation of
Natural Philosophy with grave and sober men.

As for those things before mentioned, they can never effect what is promised,
to produce compound fruits. For we see by continual experience, that grafts and
buds, (though never so small) set upon stocks of different kinds, do hold their
own, and keep their kinds; and so it would be if two long shoots were united,
or three, or many: if it were possible to make them incorporate, and become one
body, yet they would retain every one their own nature, and bring forth each
its own kind of fruit, without commixture.

If any man desire to be set on work about these things, he may have
prescriptions enough out of a certain Book, Entitled, The Country Farm, page
360, 361, 362, 363, 364, 365, etc. For more full satisfaction about which, and
all of that nature, see my Treatise of Fruit Trees, p. 174, 176, etc. where
these things are spoken to largly.

But if the thing be possible in nature, to mix and compound fruits, the
likeliest way that I apprehend is this, (which I have upon trial, but is not
yet come to an issue) viz. To graft one fruit upon another many times over,
every year a different kind, (so that we keep still to those kinds that will
grow together.) As first to graft a Crab-tree near the ground, with some good
kind of Apple-graft, and the next year to graft that again a handful or two
above where the first was grafted, and the next year to graft that second
graft, and the fourth year to graft that third graft, a handful or two above
where it was grafted, and thus every year to set graft upon graft for diverse
years together; this (probably) may make some alteration and commixture in the
top branch and its fruit, although it be true, that every graft keeps its own
nature, yet so as that it receives some small alteration from the stock (as
has been said) Now the Sap arising, and passing through so many kinds of
stocks (as before) up into the top branches, this (if any thing) I conceive
will have an influence into the fruit of the last graft, to cause some
commixture (more or less) in the fruit; the sap passing through so many kinds
of stocks.

Thus, as of many kinds of Apples together, so also of Pears among themselves,
and of Cherries and Plums among themselves, but as for mixing contrary kinds,
Apples, Pears, Cherries, Plums, etc. all together, as some prescribe, there is
no hope nor possibility of any advantage thereby.

Experiment. 480, 81, etc. Sympathy and Antipathy of Plants.
All Plants that draw much nourishment from the earth, and exhaust it, hurt all
things that grow by them, as Ash-trees, Coleworts, etc. And where Plants of
several natures (which draw several juices) are set together, there the
nearness does good; As Rue by a Fig Tree, Garlic by a Rose-tree, etc.

Observation.
It is true indeed, That all Trees and Plants, that draw much nourishment from
the Earth, are no good Neighbors to any thing that grows near them, because
such make the Earth barren, in which Plants must needs grow poorly: But that
several kinds of Plants, draw several kinds of juices, out of one and the same
soil, I much question: as that bitter Plants, ( P^ue, Wormwood, and the like)
draw the bitter juice of the earth, and the sweeter kinds, as Roses, Flowers,
etc. draw the sweeter juice. For can it be imagined that there are so many
kinds of juices in the Earth, as there are several kinds of Trees and Plants;
so that every one should draw only its proper and peculiar nourishment? May it
not upon better grounds be said, that many Trees and Plants, growing near
together in a piece of ground, though they draw all of them one and the same
juice, yet they convert and assimilate the same, every one into its own
specifique nature. We see that in a little Garden, where there are (it may be)
diverse hundreds (or thousands) of distinct Plants, Trees, Flowers, Herbs, and
Simples, they growing all upon one and the same soil, do convert the juice and
fatness of it into their several natures: by the same Law in Nature, as several
kinds of Grafts upon one Tree, drawing one and the same Sap, do turn that one
kind of nourishment into their several natures, whereby they bring forth (as we
see by experience) distinct, and several kinds of fruits, made of the same
single juice, or sap of the Tree, whereon they all grow: this they would do, if
there were all or many kinds of Apples, grafted upon one great Crab-tree, and
so of Pear Trees, Cherry-trees, and the like, upon their own kinds: though
multitudes of distinct kinds of grafts, draw one and the same sap, yet every
one changes it into its own nature; and why should it not be so also with
several Plants, drawing one and the same juice out of the earth?

So that I cannot conceive that those things mentioned, (or the like) if tried,
would succeed to the purpose: viz. That Rue set by a Fig Tree, will make Figs
taste sweeter; or Garlic set by Rose-trees, will make the Roses smell sweeter;
or Sorrel set by Rasps, will make the Rasps sweeter, and the like: because
several, or contrary kinds of Plants, meet not with several kinds of juices in
the same soil, (shall we think there are hundreds, or thousands of several
juices in one Garden) though they draw the same juice, they convert it, and
assimilate it into their several natures, according to the Innate and
Intrinsecal form that every one has, as was said before of several kinds of
grafts upon one Tree.

Experiment. 499.
The altering of the Sent, Color, or Taste of Fruit, by infusing, mixing, or
letting into the Bark or Roots of the Tree, Herb, or Flower, any Colored,
Making Herbs and Fruits Medicinable.
Aromatical, or Medicinal substance; are but Fancies: All alteration of
Vegetables in those qualities, must be by somewhat that is apt to go into the
nourishment of the Plant.

Observation.
Diverse Authors (in their Books of Planting Fruit Trees) have given several
directions for the altering of the Sent, Color, and Taste of Fruits; but none
of them from any well grounded Experience. Many particulars are mentioned, and
set down at large, (with Reasons and Experience against them; that men may not
be deceived by them, and loose their time, cost, and labor, about such
fancies) See page 176, 177, etc. of the Treatise of Fruit Trees.

But as this Author says well, The likeliest way to make herbs and fruits
Medicinal, and to give them a good relish, is the often watering of the Tree or
Plant with that substance, which we desire they should partake of; for this is
certain, (and we see it by manifest experience) that Plants, and fruits of
Trees, do somewhat taste, and partake of the nature and virtues of that kind of
nourishment which they continually draw. As if Trees grow upon a low, moist,
watrish ground, the fruits will be more spongy and waterish, then the same
kinds of fruits, where the Trees grow upon a dry, sandy soil: So if Cabbages,
Turnips, Carrots, and such like, grow in a rank Soil, full of filth and dung,
they have a virtue and relish accordingly, not half so sweet and pleasant, as
the same kinds growing upon pure mould, or sweet sandy soil: so here, if men
think it worth the while, if they judge it will answer their labor, cost, and
time, to water fruit trees, herbs, plants and flowers, with Aromatical, and
Medicinal substances: Infusions of Cinnamon, Ginger, Cloves, Mace, and such like
spices, to give a pleasant relish, or (for Physical respects) with Hellebore,
Opium, Scammony, etc. If they can afford to give them enough from time to time
of these things, (watring their Roots abundantly therewith) then its probable
such Plants, will somewhat partake of their virtues: but as for slitting of
their Roots, or perforating the body of the Tree, and infusing the medicine, or
steeping the seed or kernel in some Liquor wherein the Medicine is infused;
these I account as good as nothing, not only for that the virtues cannot be
communicated, or transfused by this means, but also because, though they were
carried to all the parts of Trees and Plants, yet such small quantities would
be indiscernable, the effect would be as nothing at all.

The VI. CENTURY.
Experiment. 401, etc. Curiosities about fruits and plants.
IT is a Curiosity to have several fruits upon one Tree, some early, and some
late, ripe fruits all Summer. This is done by Grafting several fruits upon one
Tree: But I conceive the diversity of fruits must be such as will graft upon
the same stock, not contrary kinds.

Observation.
It is true, (as the Author says) that several fruits may be grafted or
Inoculated upon one Tree, some early, and some late; but yet (as he also
observes) they must be of such as will take, and grow together, as many kinds
of Apples upon one Tree; so of Pears, and of Cherries among themselves, and the
like: And it is not true which some Authors have written, that Cherries, and
Plums, Figs, Nuts, Peaches, and such like, will grow together upon one Tree.

Yet a Book, Entitled the Country farm (composed by some Doctors of Physic,
and other inexperienced men) is full of such odd conceits, page 360, 361, etc.

It is a Curiosity to have fruits of diverse shapes and figures; Experiment. 502.
This is easily performed by moulding them when the fruit is young, with moulds
of earth or wood, of several shapes in the innerside, as it is in mould works
of Liquid things: let the moulds be made partible in the middle, that they may
be opened.

Also Trees or fruits, Experiment. 503.
may be with inscriptions and engravings upon them, by writing with a Needle,
or Bodkin, or Knife, when the Trees and fruits are young; and as they grow
greater, so the letters or figures will be more plain.

If men be not content with the natural form of fruits, Observation.
they may (if they have so much leisure to spare) put them into moulds, as is
said, to make them of an Artificial form: As for inscriptions, figures, and
shapes upon fruit trees; that is, (as the Author says) performed by scoring
through the Bark with the point of a knife, in the Spring or Summer, what
letters, or words, or figures, a man pleases; which as the Tree grows, will
become more plain and discernable, and that for many years after: I use to make
a Letter, or two, or three, or more, upon all young Trees that I grant, whereby
to know the several kinds of fruits; and sometimes (if the stock be grafted
high) I engrave the Name of the fruit at length, which is a satisfaction to
others also, when removed and sent abroad: or if any be stolen and found again,
they may thereby be known; And I have perceived the Letters plainly, nine or
ten years after, or more.

But as for the prescriptions of some Authors, about these things, they are
vain and ridiculous: who direct to write upon the kernels of seeds, that we sow
and set, and upon the Buds that we Inoculate, what letters or shape we please,
and the fruits coming thereof, will have the same upon them; See hereof
Treatise of fruit trees, page 185.

Experiment. 504.
You may have Trees apparelled with flowers or herbs, by boring holes in the
bodies of them, and putting into them good mould, and setting slips, or sowing
seeds therein, those Roots of a more Ligneous nature, will perhaps incorporate
with the Tree it self.

This is a Curiosity indeed, Observation.
which may be done, (as the Author says) by making holes in Trees, and
putting in good mould; care must be taken to make them slopeways downwards;
that so both mould and moisture may keep in them, about the roots of things
that are set. But yet I should be loath to spoil a good Tree thus, for it must
needs make it rot and perish in a certain time: howsoever, for one or two of
indifferent kinds, it may rather be admitted for satisfaction in this Curiosity.

Beauty in flowers, Experiment. 506.
is their pre-eminence: It is observed, that Gilly flowers, Violets, etc. that
are colored, if they be neglected, and not watered, nor new molded, nor
transplanted, will turn white: And it is probable that the white, with much
culture, may turn colored.

I doubt not but that the flowers aforementioned, Observation.
and diverse other kinds, will not only loose the beauty of their colors, if
they be not sometimes removed into new and better mould, but also, that they
will in time, change from double to single; or else be much smaller, then they
will be in fresh, strong mould. Therefore, every other year at least, let the
mould be changed more or less: lay about all their Roots, some good, fresh,
black mould: And that we may have every year new, young Roots, and that the
best kinds may be increased, the slips must be laid in Summer, as I shall here
show how, though it be a common thing, and well known amongst many, yet for the
sake of those that know it not, and desire it, I shall briefly speak of it.

About the beginning of July, (and for six or seven weaks afterward) slips may
be laid thus. Observe the fairest and biggest slips upon the Roots, and with a
sharp Knife, cut half way through the slip on the outside, near to the
bottom, just from a joint, and cut the slip upwards through the middle of it,
about half an inch, (or little more) in length; then with a small hook stick
fasten the cut part down into the mould, yet so as that the slip be not broken,
or parted from the Root wherein it grows: so do to the rest of the slips upon
the same Root, or to as many as you please: having so done, then mould them all
up with fresh mould, that is, cover all the cut parts on every side with mould,
then water them, and press the mould close about them, and so let them rest.

Afterward, in a month, or five weeks, these slips (so laid) will have taken
Root, (especially if their mould have been watered now and then) then they may
be cut off from the old Root, and taken up, and so set again in fresh, good
mould, prepared in the Garden plat for that purpose: Or else they may be let
alone until the Spring after, and then set: These young vigorous Roots, set in
good mould, and watered (now, and then) with fat water, will have large flowers:
especially if in June we break off most of their buds, and suffer only some
few, six, or eight, or ten flowers upon a Root, these the Root will easily
maintain, and each of them will have the more nourishment, then when they are
suffered to spindle up as many as nature will; such must needs be smaller
flowers, the root being overburdened.

The Clove-gllly-flower, is of all other, the best for use; it is well known
how useful they are to make Syrups, which are very Cordial: they are good for
Sallets prepared with Sugar, to use all the year long, and have the best smell
of any other; therefore increase these as much as may be, not only of slips
(for slips of these will grow without laying, better then of other kind of
flowers) but lay many of them also for more certainty, as is showed before.

And among these, prefer those which are largest, and of the deepest color,
and those that are without Horns (as they call them) they also are increased of
seed, as other kinds.

I have been the larger upon this particular, (and somewhat digressed from the
Experiment, which chiefly concerned color) because hereupon mainly depends the
goodness and flourishing of a Garden, as to these kinds of flowers; for if we
know, not the best way to propagate flowers, nor to plant and order them, being
prepared, the Garden will be but poor.

Experiment. 570.
Whites are more inodorate (for the most part) then Flowers of the same kind
Colored: we find also that blossoms of Trees that are white, are commonly
inodorate, as Cherries, Pears, Plums. Whereas those of Apples, Crabs, Almonds,
and Peaches, are blushy and smell sweet.

Observation.
I conceive this Experiment was not thoroughly weighed and tried; for to my
Observation, white Flowers have (generally) as much smell as those colored: to
instance in the white Rose, the ordinary kind, and the white Musk Rose, I
suppose they have as much smell (especially the Musk Rose) as Red Roses, or
Provosts, or Velvet, or Marble, and some other colored kinds, yea, and more
too: And as for some white flowers, as the white Lilly, and some other kinds,
their smell is more full and rank then many red, or other colored flowers:
And for blossoms of Trees, some that are white, smell as much as some that are
red or colored; for what smell has the double blossom Peach flower, or the
Nectrine, or any kind of Peach blossoms, which are all colored excellently,
more then the blossoms of Pear Tree, Cherry, or Plum-tree, which are said to
be inodorate: So that there must be some other cause found out, why some
flowers and blossoms smell not, (or smell not so much as some others) then
that which is assigned; viz. the thinness or scantness of that substance which
makes the Flower. The cause why some flowers and blossoms smell not so much
as others, the same is the cause why some flowers and fruits are bigger then
others, and of a better taste then others; which proceeds (undoubtedly) from
the specifique or distinct intrinsecal Form of each particular Plant, which the
God of nature has fixed in it as a Law, which nature never violates, but keeps
in all kinds of Creatures.

Contrariwise in Berries, Experiments. 508 and 509.
the white is commonly more delicate and sweet in taste, then the colored; as
we see in the white Grapes, white Rasps, white Strawberries, Currants, etc. the
Cause is, for that the colored are more juiced, and courser juiced, and
therefore not so well and equally concocted.

But in fruits, the white commonly is meaner, as in Plums, the white harvest
Plum is a base Plum, the Musle, Damazeen, and other black Plums, are of the
best, etc.

Observation.
This proves what was last said to be true, viz. that it is the specifical. Form
of every Plant, that causes the difference of tastes in fruits, and smell in
flowers. For we see by experience, that some white kinds of flowers, fruits,
berries, etc. are sweeter and better in smell and taste, then others of colored
kinds: and likewise other colored kinds of flowers, fruits, and berries, are
sweeter and better then some white kinds: so that it is a hard matter to find
out the particular cause, and give a distinct reason of the differences of
particulars, though men may venture at it.

Experiment. 510.
Gilly-flower seed of one kind, being sown, will come up of several colors:
The cause is (no doubt) that in earth, though it be contiguous, and in one bed,
there are several juices; and as the seed does casually meet with them, so it
comes forth.

Observation.
It is true, that Gillyflower-seed of one kind sown, will bring up several
kinds, some double and some single: but I much doubt whether it be, for that
the seed meet, with several juices in one bed-of earth: for can it be imagined,
that two or three very small seeds, that lie as close together as can be, in
the earth, should draw several juices from the very self same mould, so as to
cause them to vary in the color of the flowers? May it not rather be said, it
is from a Law in Nature, which God of his general bounty to us, has put into
it; though we stand not in absolute necessity of them, yet in that he gives us
such variety and choice? But for men to find out, and show a particular Cause
in Nature, of this variety, will be as hard to do, as to show a cause why
several kinds of grafts upon one Tree, See (...) 481.
drawing one and the self same sap, do yet bring forth different fruits; other
then to say, they keep their several Natures, and so convert the same sap into
several kinds of fruits, according to the distinct specifique intrinsecal form
of each particular kind of fruit. And why may not the same be said of several
Seeds and Roots in one Bed, drawing the same juice of the Earth?

Concerning sowing of Gillyflower seed, I advise those that sow it, first to
gather it from the fairest and best Clove-gilly flower, and that it be full
ripe, ere it be gathered, which is, when it is turned black: Also seed may be
gathered from other double flowers; some commend especially the London white,
others, a flower called the old man's head, and say, the greatest varieties come
from these: some are for one, and some for another; but so it is, that most
will be single flowers from the best seed; but doubtless there is much in the
ground in which the seed is sown; if it be poor soil they are more like to be
more single, then if the ground be special rich mould; for (as was said) barren
ground, as it makes flowers small, so sometimes in it, they turn from double to
single, so it may be said as to the seed when sown.

Experiment. 513.
It is a Curiosity to have flowers double, which is effected by often removing
them into new earth, or on the contrary part double flowers, by neglecting, and
not removing, prove single. And the way to do it speedily, is to sow, or set
seeds, or slips of flowers, and us soon as they come up, to remove them into
new ground that is good. Enquire also whether Inoculating of Flowers, (as Stock
gilly-flowers, Roses, Musk-Roses, etc. does not make them double.

Observation.
For the first part of this Experiment, to make Flowers double or f^irer, it is
a good Rule as the Author has set down, especially if (withal) we observe the
directions given in the Observation to the 506 Experiment, in breaking off some
of the buds and stems, and letting some few grow to be flowers.

There are three ways sufficient for the propagation of flowers, which are by
Seed, by Slips, and by Layers, but by Laying is by far the best, as is showed
at large in the Observation to the 506 Experiment. But as for Inoculating
Roses, ( Musk-Rose, and all other kinds) that is very common and sure; yet as
to the intent of the Author, viz. (to make them do^ble) it succeeds not: and
he himself has given the Reason, truly, upon another occasion: Tha^ is, all
Buds and Grafts, rule and keep their own Natures, and so change not, neither as
to the making Roses more double or better then they were before, nor as to the
bettering of any Fruit: as has been showed heretofore, Experiment 452.

The making of Fruits without Core or Stone, Experiment. 541.
is likewise a Curiosity; If a Cions or shoot have the Pith finely taken forth,
(and not altogether, but some of it left, the better to save the life; it will
bear a fruit with little or no Core or Stone. The like is said to be of
dividing a quick Tree down to the ground, and taking out the Pith, and then
binding it up again.

These prescriptions for making Fruits Observation.
without Core or Stone, I cannot think are from this worthy Author, but they
are such as are set down by others, which I have seen: And they are as weak and
groundless conceits, as many other things asserted by them, about changing the
species of fruits, and making them of an aromatique and pleasant taste, and
altering the color of Fruits, and such like conceits: the vanity of which (I
suppose) has been sufficiently laid open in my Treatise of Fruit Trees; see
there Errors Discovered, page 165, 166, etc. For, let this thing be a little
considered, and it will appear to any man that has but half an eye, to be
vain. Suppose a shoot or graft, as is here said) be cloven, and all, or most of
the pith taken out; and admit such a one be grafted (or any way set in the
ground, so as to take root) and grow, yet we know all the bark and buds are as
they were before; and taking out the pith, makes no alteration at all, more or
less; we know in all the buds that are Inoculated, not only all the pith, but
also all the wood is cast away, and nothing made use of but only the buds and
bark of any young shoot; and yet we see, by continual experience, what the
effect is, that these buds bring forth the same fruits, as the Trees from which
they were taken.

And if a young Tree were divided, Some old Fruit Trees are hollow all along
their bodies, having no pith at all, which bring forth fruits with no less Core
or Stone for that.
and the pith taken out from the top to the Root, (as is said) there is less
Reason, (if less can be) that that should work this effect; because all the
side twigs, (if it have any) would have pith still; and if it have none, or if
the pith were taken out of all, yet we know the increase of the Tree must be
still from the Buds, which have the same nature in them as grafts, or buds
Inoculated.

It is very probable, that any sour fruit, grafted upon a stock that bears a
sweeter fruit, Experiment. 515.
may both make the fruit sweeter and more void of the harsh matter of the
kernells or seeds.

It is reported, Experiment. 516.
that not only taking out the Pith, but the stopping of the juice of the Pith
from rising in the midst, and turning it to rise on the outside, will make the
fruit without core or stone.

The Rule is General; Experiment. 517.
that whatsoever will make a wild Tree, a Garden Tree, will make a Garden Tree
to have less Core or Stone.

It is true, Observation.
that a sour fruit, grafted upon a stock of a sweeter kind, will make the
fruit somewhat sweeter, yet so as that the graft still governs (as this Author
elsewhere has said) and as experience proves; but the fruits will have kernels
and seeds as before.

Of this, see Expe. 514.
As for taking out the Pith, or stopping the juice of the Pith, it is all one as
to this intention.

Concerning the general Rule in the 517 Experiment, know nothing that will make
a Wild-tree, a Garden-tree, but grafting it with good kinds of grafts: And I am
sure grafting will not make any fruit to have less Core or Stone.

Experiment. 518.
Plants for want of Culture, degenerate to be baser in the same kind, and
sometimes to change into another kind.

Degenerating of Plants.
1. By standing long unremoved. 2. By drought and dryness of the Earth. 3. By
the barrenness of the earth, removing Plants into worse mould, or forbearing to
renew and help the ground with dung, or fresh mould.
Observation.
It has been Expe. 506.
said, That Violets and some other flowers, will change from double to single,
or change in color, when the mould wherein they grow, becomes barren and
heartless through neglect; which is the same in substance with all the three
particulars mentioned in the Experiment. Therefore there is need of some fresh
mould from year to year, for the preserving of flowers in their perfection. See
hereof at large, Experiment 506 and 510.

Whatsoever Fruit uses to be set upon a root or slip, Experiment. 519.
if it be sown, will degenerate: And most of those fruits that use to be
grafted, if they be set of kernels or stones, degenerate. It is true, that
Peaches do better upon stones set, then upon grafting: And the Rule of
exception should seem to be this; That whatsoever Plant requires much
moisture, prospers better upon the stone or kernel, then upon the graft; For
the stock, though it gives a finer nourishment, yet it gives a scanter than
the earth at large.

The reason why Fruits that come of seed or stones, Observation.
do degenerate, (for the most part) and become worse then the Fruits out of
which the seed was taken, I conceive to be this; Fruits that come of seed or
stones, do partake both of the graft, and of the stock of that Tree from which
they were taken; so that although the graft was of a special good, and choice
kind, yet the stock whereon it was engrafted, being a Crab-tree, or some other
wild kind of Fruit-tree, the seed participates of both graft and stock, and so
brings forth a mungrel fruit, between them both: For although grafts govern,
(as has been said) and may be said to bring forth the same kinds, yet so as
that the stock has some influence into the fruits, according to the goodness
or badness of the stock.

But now, In case the Tree, from which seeds or stones are taken, be an
ungrafted Tree, one that came of seed it self, then I doubt not, but that the
seed of that Tree, will bring forth the very same kinds again, without any
alteration.

As to that the Author says concerning Peaches, that they come better of
stones then grafting; I know by experience there is a mistake in this; for
although it be true, that some Peaches will come good of seed, yet doubtless
not better then by Inoculating, (they take not with grafting) for we see by
constant experience, that Peach-buds set upon good stocks, will bring forth the
very same, as the Trees from which they were cut, if the rest of their culture
and ordering be the same, or as good.

And as for some that have come of stones, I have observed they have been none
of the best; many that have come of stones have been stark naught, though some
have been good, and so it is with flower-seeds, and all other seeds of fruits.

And why Peaches, or any other kind of fruit, should be thought to come better
of stones or seeds, then by grafting or Inoculating, I apprehend not any
reason: as for that which is given, That the stock gives a scanter
nourishment, then the earth at large; let it be considered: The twigs and
branches of a Peach-tree, (or any other Tree that came of seed or stones) they
receive Sap and nourishment from a stem, or body, and root, as well as if the
Tree were engrafted: the twigs and branches of an engrafted Tree, have as free,
and full nourishment, (without any obstruction) as the branches of an ungrafted
Tree; the branches of a grafted tree, have no finer nourishment, nor scanter,
then the branches of an ungrafted Tree: for we know the Root and Body of a
grafted Tree, and of an ungrafted Tree, are alike: and the earth is as free to
the one, as to the other.

It is reported, Experiment. 534.
that a good strong Canvas spread over a Tree, grafted low, soon after it
puts forth, will dwarf it, and make it spread: The Cause is plain, for that
all things grow as they find room.

It is true, Observation.
(as is said) That Cloth sometimes spread over a Tree, grafted low, (and
suffered to lie on for a time) will cause it to spread much: And that this may
be improved for our use and benefit, this may be done: To plant some few
Cherry-trees, Plum-trees, or other kinds, grafted low, and caused to spread
much, and kept from rising up by this means; keep the earth bare, clean from
weeds, grass, or any thing growing under or about them: such Trees (if they be
good kinds) will bear much and fairer fruits, then high trees: the reflection
of heat from the earth, will be almost as strong as from a wall. And the fruits
may be keept long, growing upon the Tree, even till after September, or
October. For if a Cloth be sometimes, in hot weather, spread over them, and
moistened, it will keep the fruits from ripening too soon: (yet shade them not
too much, lest they come not to full ripeness) Afterward, the fruits being
ripe, some old Canvas, hair-cloth, or such like, may be spread over them, to
preserve the Fruits from Birds, and may be so kept long; (look that snails eat
them not) Or else a Net may be spread over such Trees, to preserve the fruits:
I have known fair Cherries upon Trees toward the middle of October. I
conceive the great bearing Cherry, or other late ripe, tart Cherries, to be the
best to keep long, in this manner: such are more hardy then other kinds;
Cherries very late, are as great Rarieties as those that are early.

Experiment. 535.
Trees are generally set of Roots or kernels; but if you set them of slips (as
the Mulberry, etc.) they will grow, and those (as is reported) will be dwarf
Trees; the cause is, for that the slip draws nourishment more weakly, then
either a Root or kernel.

Mulberry-tree slips, Observation.
and some other kinds of Trees that will grow of slips, may be made dwarf
Trees, if we will order them accordingly; that is, if we suffer all the side
branches to grow: or such slips (taking Root) may be made high Trees in time,
if we cut off all the side branches, and preserve only the middle strait shoot.
But indeed at first, for certain years, they must needs be dwarf Trees, until
they can rise higher, which in time they will do, if they take Root well, and
the ground be good.

In Clay grounds, Experiment. 544.
all Fruit Trees grow full of Moss, both upon body and boughs: which is caused
partly by the coldness of the ground, whereby the Plants nourish less, and
partly by the toughness of the earth, whereby the sap is shut in, etc.

We see by Experience, Observation.
that Trees growing upon cold and moist grounds, or Clay, Gravel, barren
Grounds, do generally breed Moss, which is caused (as the Author says) by the
coldness and scantness of the nourishment: And therefore there is need (besides
the scraping off of the Moss) to lay the Roots of Fruit Trees as dry as may be
in such moist grounds, by trenching or otherwise, and also to bring in some
soyles to make the ground better and warmer, as much as may be: see of this
more at large, Treatise of Fruit* trees.

Experiment. 578.
Is is to be noted, that (commonly) Trees that ripen their fruits latest, do
blossom soonest.

Observation.
Some Fruit Trees indeed which bring forth their fruits to perfection and
ripeness, late in the year, do blossom early; as having need of the sun to
ripen them, all the summer: But some other kinds blossom early, and ripen
their fruits also early; as May-Cherry-trees, the Premarden plum, also the
Mirabilon Plum-tree blossoms exceeding early, and the Tree brings forth his
Fruit early. I have got ripe plums from this Tree about the beginning of July,
which is early for Plums.

Experiment. 579.
There be fruits, (but rarely) that come twice a year, as some Pears,
Strawberries, etc. Roses bear twice, but it is not without cutting.

Observation.
The Windsor Pear Tree does blossom and bear fruits twice in the year some
years, but the second bearing I could never see worth the gathering, for they
are poor, small, hard fruits, not worth any thing.

I have seen Cherries twice in the year upon one and the same Tree; an early
Flanders, which I set upon a very warm South-wall, bore ripe Cherries about the
twentieth of May, and the same Tree bore ripe Cherries afterward, about the
sixth of October.

Strawberries ordinarily bear twice a year, though but few the second time. As
for Rose-trees, some Damask Roses, and some Provosts, bear a second time the
same year, though but few, if cut soon after the first bearing in the full
Moon. But besides, there is a Rose-tree called the Monthly Rose, which bears
Roses until the coldness of the Winter stop it, about November.

Nothing procures the lasting of Trees, Experiment. 586.
Bushes, and Herbs, so much as often cutting; For every cutting causes a
Renovation of the juice of the Plant, that it neither goes so far, nor rises
so faintly, as when the Plant is not cut.

This is to be considered in cutting of Trees, Observation.
else instead of making them last longer, we shorten their lives. That is, that
we so cut them, that the wet and moisture get not into their bodies* which in
certain years will rot and spoil them; as we see in many Pollard-trees, which
are hollow all along their bodies: And many Fruit Trees, having had their heads
cut off, when they were great Trees, and grafted again; we see the wet and
moisture gets in at the top, before the grafts can cover the head, and rots the
Tree, which can never grow great after, nor last long, but rots and decays in
few years. Whereas Trees that are sound, Fruit Trees, and all other kinds) must
needs last much longer: by cutting off side branches, and all superfluous
branches, (which are not great) that conduces to the lasting of Trees, as
giving the more plentiful and vigorous nourishment to those that are left, and
to the whole body.

The VII. CENTVRY.
Experiment. 624.
QVinces or Apples, if you will keep them long, drown them in Honey, but because
Honey (perhaps) will give them a taste overlushious, it were good to make trial
in powder of Sugar, or in surrup of Wine only boiled to height.

Observation.
As for keeping of Apples, keeping them in Honey or Sugar, would be too costly:
some Pippins and Iohn-Apples, will (of themselves) last till new come again:
it is good then to get such kinds, that we may have for use all the year long,
without charge in keeping.

And for keeping Quinces, they are kept long in pickle, made of the Parings and
Cores (of those that are used for Marmalade) well boiled in water, with Salt
and Ginger. Or a better way (as some account) is to keep them in small Ale a
penny a Gallon, and to draw it off once in ten or twelve days, and put in
fresh; thus its said they will last two years.

Take Grapes and hang them in an empty Vessel well stopped, Experiment. 627*
and set the Vessel not in a Celler, but in some dry place, and its said they
will last long.

Grapes will keep for some short time in this mrnner, Observation.
as has been said; but when cold moist Air toward Winter comes on, they will
begin to mould and ^ot: I have kept some in Glass, as close stopped with cork,
and wax, as I could, supposing the exclusion of Air had been best, but though
they were good certain week, yet afterward they began to perish: I account it
better to hang the bunches in a Kitchen, or some warm Room where fire is much
kept, that so some of their superfluous moisture may be a little dried up; I
have kept them thus many weeks. For though the Air be much shut out from them
in any Vessel, yet that Air that is shut in with them, and their own natural
moisture, will cause putrefaction; therefore there is need of some degree of
warmth with dryness: Cut off some of the wood with the bunches, and cover them
with paper from dust, and hang them up in the Kitchen, or where fire is kept.

Also a Vine branch full of ripe Grapes, may be drawn in at a window, and
nailed up upon the wall or seeling, letting the branch grow still to the Vine,
thus they will keep long.

Experiment. 633.
The juices of Fruits are either watery, or oily: I reckon amongst the watery,
all the fruits out of which drink is expressed, as the Grape, the Apple, the
Pear, the Cherry, the Pomegranate, etc. And there are some others, which though
they be not in use for drink, yet they appear to be of the same nature, as
Plums, Mulberries, Services, Rasps, etc. And for those juices that are so
fleshie, as they cannot make drink by expression, yet perhaps they may make
drink by mixture of water. And some of the watery juices, after they have
gathered spirit, will burn and inflame as Wine.

Observation.
Concerning the juices of Apples, Pears, and Cherries, these are well known, and
much in use and esteem; the two former with us in England, and all of them in
other parts: And we might have Wine of Cherries as plentifully in England, as
it is beyond Sea, if men would but plant store of Cherry-trees of the best
kinds, such as are fittest for this purpose, as the Morello Cherry, the
Charoon, the Black heart, and other kinds which have a pleasant taste, the juice
of which is of a deep red color: These would make a delicate Wine, especially
for Summer time, and which will last also all the year, as I have heard it
credibly spoken by a worthy Gentleman, who drank good Cherry Wine of a Twelve
month old.

As for Cider and Perry, these Liquors (especially Cider) begin to be better
known to us, in some parts where they have scarce been heretofore: And
doubtless when men are better acquainted with them, and know their good
properties and virtues, in reference to health and long-life, they will be more
diligent in planting Fruit Trees, such as are best and fittest for this
purpose, as the Pearmain, Pippin, Gennet-moyle, Redstreak, and such like, which
make Cider better then French-wine.

Concerning the manner of making Cider and Perry, with the keeping and ordering
of it, I have spoken at large in my Treatise of Fruit Trees: See the use of
Fruits, page 144, 145, etc.

See Master Hartlibs Legacy of Husbandry page 27.
As for Plums, it is affirmed, that there may be made an excellent Wine out of
them, and also Aquavitae, of those that are sweet fat Plums, as Musle-plums,
Damsons, etc. And though the juice be too thick of it self for that purpose,
yet Water, Cider, or some other liquor, may be mixed therewith, which being put
up into the Vessel, some Honey, Yest, (or the like) must be mixed, to cause it
to work.

Experiment. 634.
It has been noted, that most Trees (and specially those that bear Mast) are
fruitful but once in two years. The cause (no doubt) is the expense of sap; for
many Orchard Trees well cultured, will bear diverse years together.

Observation.
Some Fruit Trees bear store of fruits but once in two years, and I conceive it
to be as natural for some kinds so to do, as to bear such or such a kind of
fruit. And others are observed to bear store of Fruits every year constantly,
unless (perhaps) in some extreme blasting spring, which spoils (in a manner)
all: But for many years together every year, some are known to bear Fruits
exceeding full in the same ground, and with the same culture, as those that
bear but each other year: so that we see the expense of sap, in the bearing
year, is not the only cause that Trees bear not the next year after; for some
that expend as much sap, do yet bear the next year after as full as before: So
then, let care be taken, to choose grafts from those Trees that we see by
Experience are the best, and most constant bearers, and best fruits.

The greater part of Tre^s bear most, Experiment. 637.
and best on the lower boughs, but some bear best on the top boughs. Those that
bear best below, are such as shade does more good to then hurt; for generally
all fruits bear best lowest, because the sap tireth not, having but a short
way; and therefore in fruits spread upon walls, the lowest are the greatest.

To my observation, Observation.
Apple Trees, Pear Trees, Cherry-trees, etc. that are good bearers, they bear
all over alike. And gene^ally all Fruit Trees in these parts, have need enough
of the Sun, and bear better in the Sun then in the shade; but indeed as to Wall
trees, most commonly we see most fruit upon the lower boughs, and side
branches, Therefore observe the directions given in the Treatise of fruit
trees, p. 131, 132. etc. in causing the branches to spread along the wall both
ways, which causes fruitbearing.
and the Reason I apprehend to be this: Not the ^iring of the sap in its going
to the top branches; for the sap is too vigorous, and too plentiful, in the top
boughs, and thence it is we always see the fairest and greatest shoots toward
the top of all Wall-trees, and commonly of all other Trees. But the cause why
the lower boughs, and side branches, have usually more fruit then the top
branches, I conceive to be for that the sap naturally presses upwards in
greatest plenty, and runeth forth into shoots and branches: Now nature being so
intent, and vigorously active in one work ( viz. the increase of the Tree in
those branches) it does not put forth it self at the same time, in that other
effect of bearing fruit upon the same branches. But now, as to the lower
boughs, and side branches, there nature is at work, but in a remiss and weaker
degree as to the increase of the branches; such grow but little, because the
sap is somewhat obstructed, and curbed by bowing the branches downwards, and so
does attend to the other work also, viz. the bearing of Fruits.

And the truth of this is made more evident, if we consider the same thing in
all young Trees: We know young Apple Trees, Pear Trees, and the like, when and
while they grow, and increase exceedingly in all the parts, shooting forth
great, large, strong shoots and branches, they bear but little fruit, or none
at all: But after certain years, when they grow not so much, when they shoot
less, then they fall to bearing fruits more abundantly.

There be Trees that bear best when they begin to be old, as Almonds,
Experiment. 638.
Pears, Vines, and all Trees that give Mast. The Cause is, for that all Trees
that bear Mast, have an oily fruit; and young Trees have a more watery juice and
less concocted. But the most part of Trees, amongst which are Apples, Plums,
etc. bear best when they are young.

Pear trees, Observation.
Apple trees, Plum, and Cherry-trees, if they be good bearing kinds naturally,
after they are three or four years growth (and some sooner) do all bear store
of fruits, until they be extreme old, and in a decaying, dying condition: And
therefore in planting of Fruit Trees, be sure to procure those kinds that are
known by experience to be good bearers and good fruits; and such will bear
well, both when they are young, and when they are old, until extreme age.

Were I to Plant an Orchard, or Garden of Fruit Trees, and might have Trees at
hand freely for nothing, of indifferent common kinds, and but indifferent
bearers; I would rather choose to fetch those that are choice kinds, and special
bearers* one hundred or two hundred Miles, (if they could not be had nearer)
and there pay dear for them too, besides all other charges; then take those at
hand, for when men plant Fruit Trees, it is not for a ^ew years, but for
several Generations: therefore take special care to have the best kinds for
bearing, and for relish or taste: that is the foundation of the work, the
principal thing in planting.

Now, when Fruit Trees are grown to extreme old age, and therefore bear but
little, this may be done, which will make them (as it were) young again for
certain years, and to bear exceeding much fruit yearly: That is, Cut off their
heads, or big boughs, not strait over, but a slope, that so rain and moisture
may not rest upon the top to rot it: These great boughs will (the next Summer)
put forth many young shoots, which may be inoculated the same Summer, or
grafted the Spring after with special bearing kinds: And these old bodies,
having young heads, (which draw sap vigorously) will be much refreshed thereby;
and such Trees will bea^ store of fruits many years after.

Experiment. 653.
The Roots of Trees do (some of them) put downwards, deep into the ground; as
the Oak (...), Fur, etc. some spread more toward the surface of the earth;
as the Ash, Cyprels tree, Olive, etc. The cause of this later may be, for that
such Trees as love the Sun, do not willingly descend far into the Earth.

It is true, Observation.
The Roots of Oak-trees, and some other kinds, shoot down deeper into the earth
then Ash-trees, and some other Trees: May not the Reason be (why some put their
Roots deeper then others) because those Trees have greater and larger bodies
then others; and Nature lays the foundation answerable to what is to be set
upon it: Now Oaks being the greatest Trees, Nature is wise enough (according
to a Law God has put into into it) to make the Root or Foundation answerable;
Otherwise, I conceive the Roots of all Trees would be as near the top of the
ground as may be, as loving the Sun, as having an absolute need of it in order
to their growth: And I am persuaded, that the appetite of the spirit, in all
Trees whatsoever, (one as well as another) is upwards, and not downwards; and
never exerts it self downwards, but upon necessity; and in order, or in
subordination, to the growth of the body of the Tree above ground.

It has been observed, Experiment. 654.
that a branch of a Tree, being unbarked some space at the bottom, and so set
into the ground, even of such Trees as if the bark were set on, they would not
grow; yet contrariwise, we see that a Tree pared round in the body above
ground, will die: The cause may be for that the unbarke part draws the
nourishment best, but the bark continues it only.

Observation.
It is true, some branches that are unbarkt at the bottom, and set in the
ground, will grow, of some kinds of Apples, as the Quodling, Nursgarden, Moyle,
and some other kinds that have soft barks: Not because (not the sooner) for
that the branch is unbarkt, for such will grow of cuttings of slips, though
they be not at all unbarkt; And those that be unbarkt and grow, it is not the
unbarkt part that draws nourishment best, nor that draws it at all; but the
Roots put forth from the bark, even at the very adge of the cut part, and also
some break out of the bark where it is not cut; As we see in those branches of
Trees from which we get Roots while they grow upon the Tree, by disbarking of
them, an inch round, and tying mould about: See how at large, Treatise of
Fruit Trees, page 136.

Experiment. 668.
The grafting of Vines upon Vines (as I take it) is not now in use; the
Ancients had it, and that three ways, The first was insition, which is the
ordinary manner of grafting. The second was Terebration through the middle of
the stock, and putting in the Cions there. And the third was, paring of two
Vines that grow together to the marrow, and binding them close.

I have tried several ways to graft Vines, Observation.
by cleving or insition, (as the Author calls it) and also by paring two Vines,
the stock and graft on two sides, which is my usual and best way of grafting
other fruit trees, but neither took effect; so that I am persuaded those
Fruit Trees that are so easily propagated by other means, as by laying down the
branches into the earth, and by cuttings, that these will not take with
grafting or inoculating; as Vines, Mulberries, etc. I have tried many
exreriments about Mulberries, both for grafting and inoculating upon several
kinds of stocks, and yet none succeeded: but Mulberries are increased by laying
down the branches, and by cuttings, as Vines are: so that I conceive this
grafting, mentioned by some Ancient Authors, is but a conceit of theirs, (a
grafting in the brain) instead of a real Experiment, See the observation upon
the 477 Experiment.
like multitudes of other things, recorded by some who (its probable by what
they say) had no Experimental knowledge in the things they spoke.

As for Maturation of fruits, Experiment. 316.
it is effected by heat, motion, attraction; and by a rudiment of putrefaction,
for the inception of putrefaction, has in it a maturation.

Observation.
Concerning the maturation or speedy ripening or concocting of Fruits, all kinds
of heat ^as the Author says) hastneth it faster or slower, according to the
degree of heat; as we see by experience, Apples or Pears laid upon a heap
together (being newly gathered) they mellow, and ripen faster then if they lay
single at distance one from another. Also Apples covered in Lime, Hay, Straw,
etc. will be mellow in a short time: But the most speedy way to ripen hard
fruits, and to abate the gross tartness of them, is the common Experiment by a
gentle heat before the fire, or in an Oven after bread is drawn.

So we see (as the Author observes) if fruits are eat with Wasps, Hornets,
Birds, etc. some part of them, the rest sweeten and ripen sooner; putrefaction
beginning, and hastening by reason of solution of continuity in that part.

Experiment. 343.
We see that Beer or Wine in Bottles, close stopped, lasts long; and that
fruits closed in wax, keep fresh: And likewise bodies put in Honey and Flower,
keep more fresh.

Observation.
It is true, that Liquors when they are well settled in the Vessel, (after a
certain time) and after drawn out into bottles, and stopped very close with
Cork, and set in a Celler, or buried in sand, or in water, such will be much
more fresh and quick then the same Liquor in a great Vessel, especially if any
part of it be drawn off: And therefore this is a good way to keep Cider, Perry,
White Wind, or the like, and that for a long time together.

As for Fruits closed in wax, or put in honey, I find that even Cherries (which
are more subject to corruption ^hen many other kinds of fruits) will keep fresh
many weeks together thus, more then they will do of themselves in the open
(...)* exclusion of Air preserves them for a time, but yet putrefaction at
length will work within, because of the superfluous moisture, which had need of
drying up* I have tried fruits in honey ( Aprecots, Plums, Cherries) and they
held good two or three Months; afterward putrefaction began.

A Bottle of Beer buried four foot deep in the ground, Experiment. 378.
became more lively, better tasted, and clearer, then it was; and a Bottle of
Wine in like manner: A bottle of Vinegar so buried, came forth more lively, and
more odoriferous, smelling alm^^^ like a Violet after a Months burial, all
three they came forth, as fresh and lively, if not better then before.

Observation.
This is certain, That Beer, Ale, C^der, and Wine, when well settled, and cleared
in the Vessel, and drawn off into Bottles, and well stopped with Cork and Wax;
will continue fresh and good, much longer then in the Vessel, and will also
improve in goodness. If the bottles are buried in sand, (as was said before) or
buried a yard or more in the ground: The reason I conceive is, for that as no
Air can possible penetrate so deep, and through the bottle to the liquor, nor
can the spirits of the liquor (in the least) get out: so neither can the Liquor
suffer any prejudice by alteration of the Air from heat to cold, as it does in
Vessels above ground.

Experiment. 385.
Trial has been made with earthen Bottles well stopped, hanged in a Well of
twenty Fathom deep at the least; and some of the bottles have been let down
into the water, some others have hanged above, within a Fathom of the water:
Wine and Beer in these Bottles, have kept better then in a Celler, but those
above water were apparently the best.

Observation.
The Cause why Beer, Wine, Cider, or the like, will keep better thus, and in
Earth, Sand, etc. (as before) then in Vessels or Bottles above ground, I
apprehend (as was said) for that the Air is excluded, and the spirits shut in:
also the Air above ground is subject to variation, sometimes more hot, and
sometimes more cold: which somewhat stirs, and affects the spirits of the
Liquor in the Vessel, whereby they become weaker.

I have heard it Reported for a Truth, That Bottles of Wine, (or some other
Liquor) were found in a deep Draw well, which had been many years filled up,
and afterward opened, and cleansed again for use; and the Liquor was found to
be very fresh and good, notwithstanding it had lain there many years; whereby
it is manifest, that this way of keeping Liquors, will preserve it good along
time.

The IX. CENTVRY.
WE have partly touched before, Experiment. 85^.
the means of producing fruits without cores or stones: And this we add
further, that the cause must be abundance of moisture, for that the core and
stone are made of a dry sap; and we see that it is possible to make a Tree put
forth only in blossom without fruit, as in Cherries with double flowers, much
more in fruit without stone or cores.

This has been spoken too sufficiently before, Observation.
See Experiment 514. It is neither the taking out of the pith, as is there
prescribed; nor the abundance of moisture, as here, that will work this effect:
some Tree^ have too much moisture, and yet the fruit^ of such have nevertheless
cores or stones.

As for the Cherry-tree that puts forth double blossoms without Fruits, that
is not made to do so by any man's Art or Skill: but it is natural: I know the
kind well, it is as natural for it to bear double blossoms, without fruit, as
for any other tree to bear such or such a kind of fruit.

Experiment. 856.
Trees set upon the backs of Chimneys, do ripen Fruits sooner: Vines that have
been drawn in at the Window of a Kitchen, have sent forth Grapes ripe a month
before others.

Observation.
This is certain (as the Author says) such a kind of heat, as is upon the back
of Chimneys, where fire is continually, or most commonly kept, will much hasten
the ripning of fruits. I have seen a thin Brick wall where fire has been kept
on the one side, and fruit trees have been Planted on the other side, which
have brought forth ripe fruits very early, much sooner then the same kinds
without such artificial heat.

And Branches of Vines being drawn in at the window of a Kitchen, or room where
fire is kept: the fruits will be ripe sooner then those without doors: but let
it not be too near the fire, left in wither, or over much dry the branch.

FINIS.

