

Triumphus Hymenaeus.

LONDONS Solemn JUBILEE, For the most Auspicious NVPTIALLS of their Great
SOVEREIGN CHARLES the SECOND KING of Great Britain, France, and Ireland; Their
Public Joy, and Pompous kind receiving Him, UPON THE River of THAMES, COMING
WITH CATHERIN, INFANTA of PORTUGAL, His Royal SPOUSE and QUEEN, FROM
HAMPTON COURT TO WHITE HALL* AUGUST 23. 1662.

As it was Presented to Both Their MAJESTY'S.

By WILLIAM AUSTIN Esquire

Triumphus Hymenaeus.

A PANEGYRIC To the KING and QUEEN'S most Sacred MAJESTY, Upon their ever to
be remembered most glorious passing upon the River of THAMES, Coming from
HAMPTON COURT To WHITE HALL; August the 23d 1662.

Consurgunt geminae Quercus intonsaque coelo Attollunt capita, and sublimi
vertice nutant. Virg. Aeneid. l. 9.



London, Printed by R. Daniel, 1662.

Juvat ire per astra,
Nube vehi, validique humeris insistere
Atlantis. Ovid Met. l. 4. Nectar and Ambrosiam latices epulasque Deorum,
Det mihi formosa grata Juventa manu.
Ovid de Pont. l. 1. Aptari magnis inferiora licet.
Ovid Eleg. 17. Salve, festa dies, meliorque reverrere semper:
A populo rerum digna potente coli.
Ovid Fast. l. 1. Prospera lux oritur, linguis animisque favete.
Nunc dicenda bona sunt bona verba die.
East. l. 1. Gens hunc nostra diem numeret meliore lapillo,
Qui sibi labentes apponet candidus annos.
Pers. Sat. 2. Natali praeclara die mihi dulcior haec lux,
Qua festus promissa deis animalia cespes
Expectat.
Juven. Sat. 12. Salve vera Jovis proles, --
Et nos and tua dexer adi pede sacra secundo.
Vir. Eneid. l. 8. -- Vultu hoc excipe, Caesar,
Pacato and timidae dirige navis iter.
Pagina judicium docti subitura movetur
Principis, ut Clario missa legenda Deo.
Ovid Fast. l. 1. -- Regina o sis dignissima visa
Utiliter, populosque juves tua sacra colentes.
Ov. Met. l. 15. Tu, Dea, tu praesens nostro succurre labori.
Virg. Aen. l. 9. Cum Jove libertas nobis datur ecce loquendi.
Lucan. l. 9. Nil parvum aut humili modo,
Nil mortale loquar.
Hor. l. 3. ode 25. Sublimi feriam sidera vertice.
Hor. l. 1. ode 1. To the most August, Most Illustrious And most Christian
MONARCH CHARLES The SECOND, KING of Great Britanne, France and Ireland, etc.
-- Jovis esse nepotem
Contigit haud uni, conjux Dea contigit uni.
Ovid. Met. l. 14. Dic quibus in terris inscripti nomina Regum
Nascuntur flores, si non tenet Anglia terram?
Virg. Ecl. 3. State Palatinae laurus praetextaque quercu
Stet domus illa duos quae tenet una Deos.
Ovid. Fast. l. 4. Plausibus ex ipsis populi laetoque favore,
Ingenium quodvis incaluisse potest.
Ovid. de Pont. l. 3. Pandite nunc Helicona, Deae, cantusque movete.
Virg. Aeneid. l. 7. Exhilarant ipsos gaudia nostra Deos.
Mart. l. 8. Epig. 82. Par been compositum, Regum celeberrimus alter.
Altera tam celebri mutua cura viro.
Ovid. ad Liviam. Tam been rara suo miscentur cinnama nardo;
Massica Theseis tam been vina favis.
Mart. l. 14. Epig. 13. -- Quam tu urbem hanc cernes, quae surgere regna
Conjugio tali!
Virg. Aeneid. l. 4. -- Hanc sine tempora circum
Inter victrices ederam tibi serpere lauros.
Virg. Ecl. 8. Non quercus te sola decet, non laurea Phaebi.
Fiat and ex edera civica nostra tibi.
Mart. Epig. 82. Huc pater, o Lenaee, veni nudataque musto
Tinge novo mecum direptis crura cothurnis. Virg. Geor. l. 2.
Pars pede, pars etiam celeri decurrite cimba,
Nec pudeat potos inde redire domum;
Ferte coronatae juvenum convivia lintres,
Multaque per medias vina bibantur aquas.
Ovid. Fast. l. 6. To the KING.
Great Sovereign,
TO be present at the celebration of your most glorious Nuptials and then be
silent, were to be a Marigold in your Sun's presence (without life and natural
sense) closed up. No wonder then if from the dull plant You shine on, You have
these blossoms here. I must either pay such grateful tribute to your beams or
wither. I am (though so unworthy) a living part of Nature and your Vassal, and
therefore can and must do no less. I submissively tender them the person of
your sacred Majesty, from whence ( filled with the glory of your Marriage
Triumph and the contemplation of the bliss you diffuse from it through all
your Kingdoms) with a transported sense of joy I receive them. Your powerful
aspect vouchsafes to call them forth. Though the weakness, defect and poverty
of my own nature denying them both luster and fragrancy, will let them be no
better, I who am so great a sinner against heaven and live, having seen such
matchless and divine effects of your Royal goodness, despair not of your
Majesty's favor after this act of so high presumption I cannot remedy ( Qui
apud te dicere audent, o Caesar, magnitudinem tuam ignorant; Qui non audent,
humanitatem and clementiam.) with all humility and loyal devotion praying
always for your present and future happiness, as

Your Majesty's most dutiful and most loyal subject though unworthy Servant,
WILLIAM AUSTIN.

To the most excellent and most incomparable LADY, as famous for her
illustrious virtues, as fortunate in her Nuptial Choice, CATHERINE, QUEEN, The
Royal Consort and Spouse of the puissant and invincible MONARCH, our Great
SOVEREIGN CHARLES The SECOND.
Lassa, Himeneo, Parnaso e qui descendi,
Ove tra liete pomp il regal fiume
Col canto de' suoi Cigni a se to appella.
Rhyme del Tor. Tasso p. 33. Fiume, che a i lidi e sino al font
Cosi lieto risuoni, e lieto auampi,
Son questi piu bei tuoni, e piu bei lampi,
Di quei famosi, onde cadeo Fetonte.
Torq. Tasso. Ma in dir di voi, terrena unica stella,
Con insolito error se stessa atterra,
Che'l meglio, e'l piu in silentio involve e serra
Di vostri pregi, e'l men canta e fauella.
Angelo di Costanzo nelle rhyme scelt. part. 1. Himeneo scende, and una man la
face
Scuote accesa in quel fuoco onde ferventi
Son le superne menti,
Nell' altera e un laccio lucido e tenace,
Ch' inanzi agli elementi,
Il fabro eterno di mirabil tempre
Formo, perch egli stringa e piaccia sempre.
Rhyme del Tasso. p. 34. O Musa tu che di caduchi allori
Non circondi la front in Helicona,
Ma su nel cielo infra i beati chori
Hai di stelle immortali aurea corona,
Tu spira al mio petto celesti ardori.
Tor. Tasso. Gier. Cant. 1. Il nobil amo e di splendour non tacque
La uaga Fama e divolgollo in breue;
E di rumor n'empi sonando il corno
E Francia e Spagna e le provincie intorno.
Ariost. nel. c. 22. st. 93 O miracol del mondo.
Hauess' io almen eolor di perle, o d'ostro
E pario marmo col pennel d'Apelle,
Ond' ombreggiar potessi il nome nostro.
Bernado Tasso nelle Rhyme scelt. part 2. To the QUEEN.
May it please your Majesty,
WHere your Majesty's gracious influence united with our great Sovereigns,
becomes generally beneficial to the whole Country we live in (where Honor; if
it has not the selfsame worship now it had of old, we do as highly adore at
this very day as ever did heretofore the Holy City, of which your Sacred
Person, though Supreme here, are pleased to hold your Religion) we presume to
have the liberty according to our ancient customs (that your Majesty, we hope
with the permission of our Religion, will let us enjoy likewise) to make
addresses even to the very Throne of your Sacred Person, to homage you with
adoration. What can be objected here? It is your bright Sunny Majesty we
adore, and we can do no otherwise. If that glorious Planet bestows daylight
upon us as animating and amazing with its splendor the very Atoms (the
smallest and most inconsiderate part of Nature) attracts them up to its sublime
Orb, there as so many eyes to gaze on, and admire the power they move by; no
wonder if such worthless earth and so mere a dust as my self, be found now at
your feet. Where you so infinitely oblige all your Subjects, no particular
Person among them, will certainly be condemned by any for acknowledging your
worth. Since we are all bound to augure you the greatest happiness to be had
in this life and that hereafter, and give testimony of our transcendent joy for
the long wanted blessings you bring with you to us, I humbly beg your Majesty's
pardon, for this presumption to present you the devotion of my poor fancy in
these few lines. I am chiefly sorry I cannot make them worthy your Royal hands.
But since a free will offering to the Temple was accepted, though in wood, when
gold could not be had, Exodus 35.7.
to despair of favor from your superlative goodness, were to commit a sin far
greater than this can be, I do here as

Your Majesty's in all humility, and loyal obedience, most devoted, WILLIAM
AUSTIN.

A PANEGYRIC to both their Sacred MAJESTY'S, Upon their ever to be remembered
most glorious passing upon the River of Thames, coming from Hampton Court to
White Hall. August the 23. 1662.
NOw for some Jacobs scale, to help us tower
The altitude of our great Charles's power.
Some Heavens per spective-glasse to make us see
The sublime culme of our felicity.
What feet of Fancy can we find, but thus,
Like Fortunes Wheel, must all run under us?
Who drinks the 1 Acheron of the past Age, he
Drinks from that fatal lake Mortality.
Who's in our present joys flood, surely is
Tided on to his ravished heart's chief Bliss.
View here true Paradise, where while you see
The hight and worth of every golden tree,
VVonder and joy will make you lose your way,
As in the Forest of 2 Hercynia.
You Will there contemplate, till ye unawarrs,
Like 3 Hesperus on Atlas, turn to stars.
While the Muses in 4 Citheron convene,
And contest who shall best attire our Queen;
5 Musaeus, give, while you there umpire sit,
Colchis's spoil to her best merits it.
No hand move now but serve her Royal Spouse,
TO erect a Temple to him of Laurel boughs,
Fetched from the Tempe-fields, such, as it is said
The learned God in 2 Delphi's City had.
Make such a sacred work and store the same,
With the Aphetorian wealth of glorious Fame.
Apollo's 3 train, flower the earth they tread upon;
And, as just after 4 Englands conversion
To the Christian faith, gifts of land (that time
Might wast their memory least) were writ in rhyme;
Pen ye the offer and render of this land
From Rebels, to the Royal Owners hand;
And, as Heavens gift all Ages may rehearse,
Chronicle this famed Nuptials in a verse.
While ye invoke our 5 Jove to propagate,
And make eternal our auspicious state;
This Feast requires that for your prayers close,
Ye Amen often with loud 6 Talassio's.
Both their fames Trumpets sound, till the earths dull ear,
As by 7 Herodotus, with b trembling hear.
Great King, who after our flood, where you take
Your birth, the 8 Delos of your rise here make,
Our long night past and your Sun up, the Queen
Appears as your fair c splendor to be seen.
Not like 9 Aurore, who as she moves along,
Steals from her Sol our first devotion:
But coming with you to us, gives this to you,
As your right from your Subjects and Spouse too.
Our City none, asked to tell what it is,
Dares to call now but 10 d Heliopolis.
Now Portugal with your Queen tributes t'you,
We'll mend our Times-register. For e you be
Our first as well as last to wear the Crown,
And raze the greatness of 1 Canutus down,
Be his or others Fame what ere 't can be,
aYou're Supreme to his and their Soveraigntie.
VV' expect an Herc'les from your Nuptial bed,
To wound and sear Rebellions 2 Hydra's b head.
One whom all the poisonous brains among us,
May court as Vipers did 3 Exagonus.
One George and then an other, that may chase
Europes 4 Dragons, till they expunge the race.
One by whose hand they who 'de renew 5 Heavens wars,
May c tumble down, though fixed among the 6 stars.
In this fair Camp rendesvouze all your powers.
" d Jove has his 7 joy in Heaven. In e Her you have yours.
VVho'll join with us in f wonder of your g worth,
Great Queen, that Charles's Oracles speak forth,
For 8 Diana stamped in a wooden book,
See you move in the living Royal Oak.
From your blessed arrival here we can boast,
We are inspired as at the 9 Pentecost;
And look that h London for your sake, surpass
The languages famed 10 Dioscurias.
VVho'll now from the 11 Teutonicks say we are bred,
Whom their 12 Tuesco down from Babell led?
No after age will, sure, but reddilie
From Portugal derive our pedigree,
That after our last Babels fall, which had
Our land all under its vast cursed shade,
Divided first our tongue and laid alone,
Our destroyed Kingdoms new foundation.
If we from that great ruined Tower will say,
Our lineage first came out of 1 Asia:
After our ruins now, you prove it true,
We had in Europe our first life from you.
In our dependence upon Portugal,
We judge our selves more stably fixed all,
And deem our 2 Albion has more extent,
Than when 'twas joined to the main contenent.
This our head-City does you humbly greet,
As your 3 Anthybla, and salutes your feet.
Let that 4 hard substance, which Deucalion
And Pyrrha after the inundation,
Took to people Parnassus with, presage
The a stony fruits of a rebellious age:
VV' expect that Heaven your Paradise advance,
With such blessed peaceable inhabitance,
Its own kind hands did to the world dispense,
In The harmless age of happy innocence.
Pass where ye please in triumph to and fro,
You Will find no 5 barren fig trees as you go.
Your praises precious Amber among us,
Perfumes our Isle all over like 6 Abalus.
Our Flood being past, 7 Flaunders or Brabant show,
A fairer Plain than now we have made by you.
This, if they lie secure, your peace does fence,
Above cross Fates raging Seas insolence.
For those great artificial hills, it is said,
Were by the 8 Danes and Goths in Zealand made
To escape the waters, God and Nature too
Have made You our most safe b protection now.
Our courteous Stars over 1 Heraclitus, could
Turn all his heavy humors into blood.
Crush and destroy each 2 a Python, that may breed
Out of our late deludg'd Earths poisnous seed.
And those deny you your joint Powers and rights,
Metamorphize them to hermaphrodites.
Joy would, with 3 Chilo, all our souls dismiss
On your worths Embassy, to eternal bliss,
If our allegiance did not keep them now,
United to our bodies, as you two,
And make the value of our present breath,
Balance all can be looked for after death.
All such whom, with 4 Protagoras we see
Muze on the Gods, as doubting them to be,
VV' invite to observe what our 5 Pharsalia yields,
Now changed by you into the 6 b Elysian-fields.
Our 7 Lethe's made 8 Euphrates this bright c day,
And our 9 Lycopolis 10 Macarea.
Who to view our great Pallas, do appear
With high esteem of their own beauties here;
Like 11 Dirce, be for their pride and your glory,
Condemned to your waters purgatory.
who'd drive our 12 Sols swift glorious steeds, that none
Know how to govern but himself alone,
Those steeds of Sol, whose bright cheer, courteously
Smiles to us that illustrious day we see:
Whose power's 13 Natures triple aspect, whose praise
Attires glory all over with golden rays:
Whose merits, as benign 14 winds, from hence
Usher our prayers to heavens audience:
Whose worth and virtues put in 1 Blisse's hand,
Her horn of plenty and her winged wand:
Who with his waxt wings thus high does aspire,
Or brings his painted flame to this true fire,
Perish by the hand of raging Destiny,
And with his fall new name the 2 Icarian Sea.
Hurry, with tumbling 3 Phaeton, to hide
His burnt head in the Eridanus you ride.
Extinguish there his wild-fires; there alone
For penance draw your gliding Chariot on.
As 4 Marsyas to expiate his sin,
5 Atlas up there the Moving Isle you're in.
While we to meet you hurrie through the Thames,
Mantled all over with frothy sweat, he seems
To figure to us 6 Achelous, when he
And Hercules strove for the masterie.
Each a milky drop, while this and that way thrown,
Looks as if forced from the Galactis stone.
Three English Kingdoms with one heart and voice,
Unite together to applaud your choice.
The appear like the bodies of 7 Geryon,
Made all by the same single soul but one,
As the 8 Argonauts to Colchis bound: so now
We 7 banner our gay fleet to wait on you.
Your stately 9 Buccentore your Royal Dame
Rides, seated with you on the golden Ram,
Your fair 10 Helen sits safe and firmly on it,
Being with him commands the Helespont.
11 Daedalus with his wings flies to rehearse
Our solemn pomp, over all the Universe.
Tells it round the 1 Libyan coasts every where,
And hollowing through all the deserts there,
Like Nature at the worlds creation, cites
Their Savage host to come to attend our rites,
With such subjection, as when they came
To their first Sovereign to receive a name.
The Leopards, Lions, Dragons, a Tigres, they
That know no creature living but their prey;
Powerfully managed with a loyal fear,
Become domestic and do b homage here.
In stead of such an ugly hairy skin,
They Are wont to terrify our senses in,
The appear in c gold and colors, as if sent
For starry blessings from the firmament.
The while, for clouds, the waters move along
To make them their celestial Region.
The 2 Wilderness is fixed no longer now,
But as a moving pageant serves our show.
There see the order, grace and piety,
Cloistered up in a virtuous Nunnery,
And retired Holiness, clothed all in gray,
Come as a Pilgrim to keep Holy Day.
The d wood and water* Nymphs offer their votes,
VVarbling their most divine and sweetest notes.
You Have here 3 Dodonas grove, where if you please,
Hear masts and banners speak, in stead of trees.
You Have here a labyrinth, where Daedalus
Is lost himself in eravishments with us.
If by 4 Cynthia's motion, 5 Amphitrite
Boyles up with heat to that floods height we see:
At your approach Thames swelling, surely would,
Deluge all with an universal Flood,
Had not its fires free vent, that round about
We hear and see thunder and lighten out.
As you pass, troops of Merman- 1 a Tritons here,
Fixed in the b water all in arms appear:
Who, to show how ardently 2they rejoice,
Bid you thrice welcome with one fiery voice.
The sons of Thames, as well as the 3 Oceans, be
Worthy the esteem of divine race we see.
Heaven opens wide its vast ears, to receive
The sacred breath of those loud c shouts they give,
And d answers them without demurre or pause,
e Above a thousand 4 Meropi's applause.
Numberless female heads along the f shore,
Seem afar off 5 Nereides, veiled over
With Neptunes spumey puffework: or, we'll say,
They Are like the year called back to blossom May.
6They g flock to you, as when the flood was dried,
They did to the highest mountains they espied.
Your floating Throne they 'steem Noah's Ark, and wish
Your progeny as numerous as 7his.
Did any such Barks or Men hither bring,
As 8 Menelaus had from the Cyprus-King:
Such senseless earth as Mortals were, when they
Were hid in their first principles of clay;
Those needs must swim being here, where none can think
How any vessel should find room to sink.
These well might live and move, to serve you thus,
By the spirits you transport in joys from us.
The stateliest buildings by the way you view,
Ashamed as naked to appear to you,
Cloth themselves bravely, and present your eyes
With rich 1 Milesian a Embroyderies.
Thus covet they no dress but what may show,
Luster stolen from your presence as you go.
The 2 b Graces who for men's mad insolence,
Were c fled away for many years from hence,
And with the blessed inhabitants above,
Joined in the embraces of each others love:
Attendants on our Venus now, dispense
The d returned Luster of their influence:
This on the 3 trees, e fields and beasts they display,
To frid the curses of our g Mars away.
The 4 softly moving 5 fruitful 6 Hours, that be
With the Graces all but one 7 company,
With pleasing smiles join their consents and powers,
To ratify their Sisters blessings ours.
These, that the 8 sereene crystal Heaven may now,
Become the mirror of this beauteous show,
Furbish the Firmament, that it may n't shroud
One obscure, dull or melancholy h cloud.
Till each admiring eye most i clearly sees,
Sols k brightest beams vie with your l Majesty's.
To fix our eyes to those objects alone,
That they and all our hearts too hang upon,
To keep us with them lingering on that sight,
Which charms them too with ravishing delight;
Hang 9 Remoras on each bark, that it seem
mFixt fast in ground when in the deepest stream.
At last to period your Royal rites,
With change of novelties of all delights,
They bring you safe on shore, and there in state
1Heaven ayou in your Triumphal-palace b gate.
c Thames here with submisse murmurs, humbly falls
To beg to serve you at your Pallace-walls,
As the Oracle of Themis was, they say,
Served by 2 Cephissus in Baeotia.
While, like Deucalion and Pyrrha, ye
Consult to new-create our Monarchy.
And now, methinks, our City does appear
Planted with d Peaces Olives every where,
And palms to Pallao temple carried, say
We would renew the 3 Oscophoria.
Our devout joys no profane flames allow.
None fetch fires from their neighbors dwelling now,
But such as from 4 flamen Dialis, be
For service of this great e solemnity.
Your welcomes trump sounds loud in all our Courts,
And prologues to rich pomp and public f sports.
Thus in Rome, for Cibele's coming, they
Did celebrate the 5 Megalesia.
The whole Realm summoned to this feast employ,
Their best g wits, to be active to their h joy:
As when all the Athenians did pay
Pallas her rites, with the 6 Quinquatria.
Our alters with the royal Oak are dressed,
Which crowns the head of every Martyr-beast
That dies in sacrifice, as if this day
Were to return you 7the Ambarvalia.
If we may bring, in this our present age,
Such as out dated be to grace the stage,
Now our Babel's demolisht quite, and we,
Like 1 Pallene, famed for Heavens victory;
VVe'd to 2 Panchaia send our fleets and thence
Be stokt to burn to ye hills of a Frankincense;
And since your Temple all 3 Pangaeus stores
Find gold to scarce, make the 4 Pantheon yours.
5 Rhodes now or 6 Syracusa, boast and say
The Sun shines there once in the cloudiest day.
We glory our Sun shows his constant light
Spotless from clouds, and frees our day from night.
Why should not we from this time calculate,
From whence our matchless happiness bears date?
Why not make this our new years day, from whence
Both our new age and future hopes commence?
7 Saturn now renders up what before he,
Concealed in his vast paunches treasury.
He with his 8sickle cuts his 9 bonds away,
And seeks to harvest in our 10 Cecilia.
11 Bellona's priests now, if they think it good,
Sacrifice to her, as of old, their blood.
Our veins are closed now, our bloods current b ceast
And returned c Peace builds her 12 Halcyon-nest
In Charles's d Oak; where every spreading bough,
Curbs Destinies power and worst malice enough.
This is our Paradise's middle tree,
To give life and fruit to eternity.
Its branches spread over the Earth each the other meet*
As the 13 Angel wings over all f Heavens mercy seat.
Here Is our 1 Dodona's a grove, whence divine loves,
Are oracl'd t'us by two royal doves.
Two cherubs shining faces look upon,
Till ye are saved with admiration.
Who Will not conclude but Paradise here shall,
Be fenced by heaven round with a 2fiery wall?
But kind heaven, that has matched our great King here,
To rule so beauteous and divine a sphere,
Will him against all 3 Neptunes forces b shield,
As armlesse Herc'les in the stony field?
4 Coblentz extol their Mosel and their Rheen,
And tell how sweetly both in one convene.
Two crystal streams bring here nnited bliss,
To ravish all in Heavens 5 Theopolis.
Our Jubilee would to our souls dispense
Joys from above, to triumph over our senfe.
'Twould bandite labors hence, and force us all
T'esteem the whole year made sabbaticall;
That this in a rubric of gold might make
The 6 Embolismus in Times great Almanac.
Since you refuse 7 Tagus it self, that now
Languisheth with your Land for want of you:
What 8 Nuptial gifts, great Queen, can you prize,
But what from your own 9 genial bed shall rise.
May then your powerful numrous progeny,
The 10 Herculean node fast in your Zona tie.
Since we, your worth vanquishing all our powers;
Are bankrupt of our selves, and all is yours:
While you take gold tributes from 11 Pactolus,
You receive Myrrh and c Frankincense from us.
That your great self pleased, see, as you require,
The candid flames of each hearts loyal fire.
That you vouchsafe your grace supply our wants,
As Heaven does daily t*humble supplicants.
Hence ever shine, Sovereign Lord, hence display
Your Kingdoms a stars, as from 1 Eurybia,
The Victory over your Subjects you had given
bWithout their blood, comes as of old from heaven;
And while from thence she a commission brings
T'inhabit here for ever, 2 c drops her wings.
These may your Cupids take, to make their might
With equal double wings overtake their flight,
And while they rule all our hearts and desires,
Temper them with the heat of your chaste fires.
May they take bolts from Jove, darts from Phoebus,
Alcides club, Mars's helm, from Bacchus
3His rod, Diana's torch, from Mercury
4His winged shoes, and his Tridens awes the Sea;
Then after all these plundering imbroils,
Render heaven back all your heavens Hero's spoils,
Jupiter, who to earth's great Gods, that they
Might feast on wonders, gave 5 Eucarpia;
Make every village in your Realm this year,
Fruit equal wonders of mirth to you here.
Those holy successors of Moses, we
Account the praecos of Heavens Embassy,
Make your joined worths their 6 silver trumpets now,
To join us in devotion all to you.
May you light torches in deach others 7eyes,
Till th'inflam'd heart yield it self least it dies.
May every 1 missive kiss you drink, become,
Your sacred a mutual Loves vehiculum:
Hence may they quickly their wished prize obtain,
And with the philtre pass through every vein.
Your words charms of golden gives ever be,
To hold your b minds and persons c unity.
May every interchanged gift of yours,
Be as 2 Cydonion fruit from Venus bowers,
New magickt with your love so every day,
That all 3 Selemnis dne're may washed away,
May you live in your children and renown,
Till Dooms Trump call you to an heavenly Crown;
To your wise, great hearts and desires be known
No earthly e bliss greater then what is your own,
By Heavens charms bide your minds and bodies free
From the bold touch of grief and malady.
May you reign so that when you are throned above,
The world live by the blessing of your love.
May the 4two fatal Sisters while they sit
And linger on your lives thread, lengthen it
To miracle. And Atropos her hand
May she not dare to use till you command.
So do we wish you happy both, that we
Think and f presage all gthis shall h surely be.
Most i welcome, awefull Monarch, now you be:
Come first but t'us, now to our posterity.
We had you then but for life: now y'endeavour
To make your self ours and our heirs for ever.
Heaven makes our sacred k votes the happy sum
We wished them, answ'ring us Gods kingdome's come.
All ours being a yours before, w'offer all now
We shall have, keeping nothing ours but you.
Come, come and b welcome. What ere wants a voice,
Speaks by our hands and gives you welcome noise.
Welcome, that your great person cno hurt shows,
After so long dunheard of mart'ring ewoes,
And's so untoucht by flames, that now all is done,
They Have ripened it to its f perfection;
Should as well as your renowned virtues, be
Fames treasure and possess eternity,
We welcome too your virtuous young Consort,
The beauteous flower of great g Briganzas court.
From that deserted land, in this its want
Of its divinest and most glorious Saint,
What companies to bless our golden Age,
And worship here, will come in pilgrimage!
What troops will voyage hither every year,
To live in her presence your Subjects here,
Until that Nation, that your Sovereign powers
May both together rule, resolve to ours!
1The Norman race after the Conquest thus,
Turned all to English and changed names with us.
Your Sun before us while we view, our feet,
Like those strange 2 Scythians, whose borders meet
The Massageti's, who love to ransack
And search through dismal solitudes, turn back;
And while, do what we can, we cannot choose
But reflect on sad times past, your slain foes,
Like the thick flaggs and reeds, deep mud and moss
That lie about the bounds of 3 Abatos;
Keep your dominions safe, and thence divorce
The audacious rage of all insulting force.
Past griefs now be as each huge humane beast
Perished at 1 Hippodamia's marriage feast.
Afflictions leave now your long contest,
And have hence out of each victorious breast.
Who finds himself by the conduct of light,
Will turn, where he was lost before, to night?
What ere fights our hearts joys, by such strife
Imbitters, sure, the sweetest of our life.
But what? no, no, woes vanquished and won,
Interposed to our joys Meridian Sun,
Not darken but as small light clouds that fly,
Tender a pleasing brightness to our eye;
Which mittigating Sols fires, he displayes
More cheering influence by kinder rays.
At your arrival, great Sir, we did seem
As men awaked out of a tedious dream;
Opening our eyes before despaired to view,
The gladsome wanted light you bring with you.
Now your arrived Spouze in your glittering crown
Shines as the brightest gemme, we sit us down
And sport our thoughts through all the horrid throng,
Of those Egyptian shades scared us so long.
Time seems to stay for pastime, while we tell
Those miseries that plagued our Israel.
We sweat with a laughter to brecount and hear,
Those Pharoah's burdens we sweat blood to bear.
Thus by a double body with one light,
Phoebus illuminates both day and night.
Anagram
CATHERIN, A RICH NET.
1 Danaes a shower did long time since presage
The second coming of the golden b age.
Tagus here, from such April rain, does bring
The welcome May flowers, of that wealthy spring,
2 Fortune and Love happily in picture you
Have seen together, see in substance now.
VVho'll dare fly, or Rebel be to Venus,
Comes now both 3 armed and 4 victorious?
With Arich net we have here Love commands more,
Than with 5 fired torch or thunderbolts before.
Would not your tender heart and pitteous eye,
Melt at the c rigor of Loves d tyranny,
While you dismembered Lovers ruins hear,
And see their limbs lie quivering here and there?
ere a knee bent without an hand to have,
That mercies benefit it seems to crave.
There martyred arms without a body, do
Embrace the burning stake they are fixed too.
In the 6 souls crystal looking-glass, the eye,
The spirits in their 7 colored bravery,
All in flames tortured up and down do hurry,
In that dark cell 8 there seems their purgatory.
Here thumb and fingers are together bent,
Held Fates sad quill wrote their last Testament,
There ghastly looks; all bloody, without breath,
Screak out aloud Loves e cruelties in death.
Our stars, that no cross Destiny allow,
Make Loves Tragick-scenes, a Comick-changes now.
In A rich net takes us all, none need strive,
Being assured he shall be saved alive.
We feel no loss of ease here, where we lie
Contented captives, at more b liberty.
That c bright 1 celestial Venus, who does wing
Our souls to contemplate the eternal King,
And those separate Minds about him, resort
As starry Peers of his Imperial court,
d Descends t'accept our Realms dominion,
And sit, as 2 Morpho, shackled in her Throne.
Vulcan's net loosed the angry Deities.
Our Mars, and Venus, pleased here ever lies.
The 3 Captain caught in Pittacus's net,
His free soul easily escaped thorough it.
By this (though it be our Captains prize) his mind,
Person, eheart, will, desires are all confined.
This, as the 4 Apostles nets were wont to do,
Catches and keeps both souls and bodies too.
That net, with which 5 Timotheus was said
To ensnare Cities, was by Fortune laid.
f Pallas brings this; to compass round about
The g Ocean, and let no fish escape out.
This Net her all-commanding hands do stretch
Over Cities, his was too scant to reach.
She spreads it as Heavens glorious Canopie,
All over our great CHARLES' s Monarchy.
Here as at our great Altar while we kneel
To pay our votes, the Saints applaud our zeal,
For within A rich net spreads 1the aAlter, lies.
Nothing but Saints and sacred mysteries.
Blessed Providence, to give our King this Dame,
And couch the powers both give her in her name!
A divine Princely 2 name with sacred powers,
Harmony here to make Heavens Regent ours.
Saints, and all is sacred prove in her convene,
Protectresse of the Heavens and Englands Queen.
Hymen's band made before the Almighties hands
VVrapt infant Nature in her swaddling bands,
Loud Fame to all from pole to pole imparts,
What glory't has, what 3 force to marry hearts.
A rich net here gives luster to noonday,
Rays forth bright bands of Hymen every way;
And for its matchless wondrous virtue, holds
This Orb wedded to Heaven and both infolds.
Sic mel Aristaeo, sic Baccho vinaque, poma
Alcinoo, fruges Triptolemo que damus.
Ovid. de Ponto l.4. Eleg. 2.
-- Le Palestine
Piaggie son qui, qui del viaggio e' il fine.
Tor. Tasso. Gier. cant. 17.
FINIS.
Non semper feriet, quodcunque minabitur arcus.
The figured Words in every Page before here displayed, which (unless some
courteous peruser vouchsafe in favor to make them seem of use, by pretending
to be unacquainted with the Poets) appear in their black characters, to serve
only as shadows to the living Ideas of the same Poetical fancies in the mind
of each candid Reader.

Page 11.
1 ACheron ab a privati. partic. and (...) gaudeo; an infernal Lake without joy
or comfort, which the souls of the dead are feigned to pass. 2 An huge Forest
in Germany, where some are said to have travailed forty days together, without
finding its beginning or end. 3 He going to the top of the high mountain Atlas,
that he might the better observe the motion of the stars; was seen no more,
and so said to be turned into a star. 4 Citheron, or Cithaeron: a Mountain
dedicated to the Muses. 5 A famous Poet that accompanied Jason to Colchis to
ferch the golden Fleece.
Page 12.
1 Apollo. 2 One of Apollo's Temples at Delphi is said to have bin made of
Laurel boughs, fetched from the Tempe fields, which were very pleasant and
delightful places in Thessalie. Apollo's Temple was famous for the rich (...),
presents or gifts of most of the Princes and people of the world: hence
Aphetoriae opes (so called from (...), the name of Apollo who gave Oracles
there) is used as a proverb for abundance of wealth. 3 Poets. 4 Donations of
Land heretofore were writ in meeter; belike, to be kept the better in memory. 5
The Influence of Jupiter was esteemed to be of great force and efficacy for
generation. 6 As the Bride was carried into the house, all the company cried
out with a loud voice, Talassio, Talassio; a word they used in memory of one
Talassio, whose Marriage being very fortunate, they repeated his name often at
Marriage-Feasts; to signify their good wishes, and express their joy. 7 He
would sound two trumpets together so loud, that the noise of them seemed to
shake the the very Earth. 8 An Isle, where Apollo is said to be born. 9 The
Morning, that appears before we can see the Sun. 10 Solis Civitas, the City of
the Sun.
Page 13.
1 Canutus the Dane for having five Kingdoms, is said to be the greatest King
that ever England had. 2 A Serpent destroyed by Hercules, that had fifty heads,
and as fast as any one of them was cut off, two others came in the stead:
Hercules to prevent this, as soon as he cut off any, took fire and seared the
place. 3 He being put into a great Vessel full of Serpents, by the virtue of
some herbs he had about him, charmed them so, that instead of hurting him, they
all came about him and licked him. 4 Strabo gives Europe the form of a Dragon,
and makes the head Spain, the neck France, the body Germany, the right wing
Italy, the left Denmark. 5 The Titans are said to have waged War against
Jupiter, who overthrowing them, sent them to hell. 6 Who Will expect Earth 'ere
free from wars, That Is overpow'rd by ((...)) Dragon stars? 7 Jupiter and
the rest of the Planets are said to have their Joys, when they are in those
houses where they are most strong and powerful. 8 She had her Image erected in
a great Cedar, and was therefore called Cedreatis. 9 Acts 2. 3. 10 A City in
which were spoken three hundred several Languages. 11 i. e. Germans. 12 The
Pagan Germans great God, who as their Prince and chief Ruler, conducted them
down from the tower of Babel, of which they say we are descended.
Page 14.
1 Where Babel was built. 2 England, that many are of opinion was once
Continent with France. 3 A famous rich City in Egypt, that the King bestowed
upon his Queen to buy her shoes with. 4 -- Quo tempore primum Deucalion vacuum
lapides jactavis in orbem: Vnde homines nati durum genus -- In Deucalion's time
they say there was a general inundation, that drowned all but him and his wife
Pyrrha; they afterward consulting with Themis how to repair mankind, the Oracle
answered them that they should cast the bones of their great Mother behind
them: these they interpreting to be the stones of the Earth, cast them over
their heads; and so those he cast became men, those she cast, women. 5 Mark 11.
13. 6 An Island in the German Ocean, in which great store of Amber is said to
drop from the trees. 7 These countries adjoining upon the sea lie even without
hills, but of such an height, as no inundation of sea can now annoy them:
formerly they with all the Netherlands that are without hills, are supposed to
have bin sea. 8 Made by them in the Isle of the Walkers in the year 758.
Page 15.
1 One, whom the miseries of this life kept always weeping. 2 An huge Serpent,
that after Deucalion's flood was bred out of the corruption of the Earth. 3 A
Philosopher who dyed with joy. 4 A great Philosopher writ a book with this
Inscription, Dii sint, necne, incertus sum. 5 Diros Pharsalia campos Impleat:
in this Field fell the storms of two great civil Wars, the one between Caesar
and Pompey, the other between Augustus and those bloody Rebels, Brutus and
Cassius. 6 Vbi piorum animae habitant, a place of Bliss. 7 A River said to
come out of Hell. 8 A River comes out of Paradise, that has it is name from
(...) to rejoice and make glad, for the wonderful great abundance it produces
in those places it waters. 9 (...), i. e. Luporum civitas, a City of Wolves.
10 From (...), beatus; the Romans call it Beata the Blessed City. 11 She for
contending with Pallas for beauty, was turned into a Fish. 12 -- Volucres
Pyrois, Eous and Aethon Solis equi, quartusqae Phlegon hinnitibus auras
Flammiferis implent: Sol the Sun is said to be carried in a chariot drawn with
four horses. 13 Hecate Dea triforme, significante li tree aspetti della Luna e
la portenza lunare nelle cose elementari, sta sogetta al Sole ed e pigliata per
la Natura. Hecate vel Luna, (quam triformem putabant: quia nunc in cornua and
prope vacua surgit, nunc dimidia est, nunc orb pleno) Natura non raro
appellabatur. 14 -- Venti Divum referatis ad aures, Virgil. Dice venti non
fama, perch volevano li poet che i venti portassero le preci humane all'
orecchie de' Dei che lafama divolgasse i fatt^h mani all' orec^hie de gli
huomini. The Poets esteemed the winds conveyed their prayers to the gods.
Page 16.
1 Macaria o Dea Felicita fa fatta con il Caduceo ed il dcorno i divitia in
mano, quello significante la virtu, questo le ricchezze necessary e l' un' e
l' altro alla felicita humana. The goddess Macaria or Felicity had in one hand
the Caduceus, in the oath the Cornu-copia, signilying by that the virtue* by
this the Riches that are requisite to humane happiness. 2 The Icarian Sea was
so called from Icarus, who flying too high with his waxed wings, the Sun melted
them; and he fell down there. 3 He presuming to be able to rule the Horses of
the Sun, let the reins go, and so being like to fire all the world, Jupiter
struck him with a Thunderbolt, who presently tumbled down into the River
Eridanus. 4 A River made of the Tears of those Nymphs lamented the death of
Marsyas, whom Apollo destroyed for his impudence to contend with him. 5 Atlas
is said to bear the Heaven upon his shoulders. 6 He fought with Hercules for
Deianira, and being vanquished, turned himself into a River of his name; in
this River is found the stone Galactis, that looks and tastes like milk. 7 He
was King of three Spanish islands; from hence said to have three bodies, or
else from his three sons, the unity of whose minds was such, as if they had
but one soul among them all. 8 Jason, Typhis, Castor, Pollux and the rest that
went in the Ship Argo to fetch the Golden Fleece. 9 A stately vessel so called,
like a Galley, wherein the Duke of Venice goes to wed the Sea, to entertain
great Princes, or take his pleasure. 10 She with her Brother Phryxus riding
upon the golden Ram to pass the Pontus, fell off and was drowned; from whence
that Sea was afterward called Hellespont. 11 A very cunning Artificer, who made
a Labyrinth, an intricare work, with so many turnings and windings, that
whosoever was put in, could not find the way out again. To 'scape out of this
place, into which he and his Son was put by the King's command, with Feathers
and Wax that he obtained under pretense of making some present for the King, he
made himself and his Son Wings, and so escaped.
Page 17.
1 Lybia Africa, so called that abounds with wild beasts. 2 The Pageant that
attended the MerchantTaylors Company, was a Wilderness, and in it sitting an
Aged Man representing a Pilgrim in a Pilgrim's weed, and attended with Faith,
Hope and Charity. 3 Dodona's Grove was said to have Trees that spoke. 4 The
motion of the Moon; Dum Luna ascendit ab Oceano, donec ad medium coeli veniat,
effluunt aquae; refluuntque cum descendit. 5 The Moon.
Page 18.
1 Triton was son of the Ocean, and the Ocean's and Neptune's Trumpetter: he
was a Man to his Navel, from thence downwards a Dolphin. 2 Soldiers that lined
all the shore which by reason of the height of the flood was overflowed: so as
they seemed as so many Trees planted in the River, being environed with water.
3 Oceanus is said to have 3000. Sons: Dicti sunt Fluvii (...)* the Rivers
that proceed from the Sea are said to be a divine Off* spring. 4 Meropus, a
Mountain in Greece that answers the Voice with innumerable Eccho's. 5 Daughters
of Nereus god of the Sea. 6 The Off spring of Noah remained dwelling diverse
years after the Flood upon the Hills and Mountains, 'till Shem, Ham and Iaphet
adventured to descend and make their habitations in the lower ground, which
before through the conceived fear of drowning, they durst not attempt to do. 7
Philo writes that Noah had issue before he dyed 24000 men, besides women and
children. 8 Menelaus being promised by Cyniras King of Cyprus 50. ships well
manned with Soldiers* had only one true ship of him, and for the rest, ships
and men of clay.
Page 19.
1 Milesia stragula and vestes Milesiae, ob insignem mollitiem in matronarum
delitiis habitae: in Miletos was made very rich Ornaments and furniture of all
sorts. 2 Aglaia, Euphrosyne, Thalia, attendants of Venus: -- Terram deffugiunt
Charites. 3 Gratiae fertilitatem agrorum frugumque abundantiam significant.
Sunt illae tres conjunctae sorores creditae, quia triplex est utilitas
agriculturae, e cultu agrorum scilicet, arborum and animalium: the Graces that
signify the fruitfulness of the fields and great plenty of grain, are said to
be three Sisters, holding each other, in respect of the threefold benefit of
Husbandry; from the trees, beasts and fields, that they are said to bless. 4
Molles habent pedes, and omnium Deorum sunt tardissimae. 5 Fructiferae semper
crescunt, augentur and Horae. 6 Sunt triplices Charites tres Horae; -- Eunomia,
Dice, Irene. 7 Semper cum Gratiis conjunctae sunt. 8 They attribute to the
Hours, to make cloudy or fair weather as they please. 9 Fish that cleaving to
the keel of a ship, hinder it from going.
Page 20.
1 The Hours are said to keep the Gates of Heaven. 2 A River in Boe^tia where
the Temple of Themis stood, to which Deucalion and Pyrrha repaired to consult
how to repair Mankind. 3 In his Ol^ae ramum foribus appendebant civitatis. 4
One of Jupiter's Priests; no body might fetch fire out of his house, unless to
perform some Sacrifice with it. 5 Hanc praelata divitiarum pompa Praetores and
Magistratus purpurati, in toga and praetexta, atque in ornatu maximo
celebrabant, quare purpura Megarensis in vulgi proverbium venit: the Romans
celebrated this feast with wonderful great public pomp for the coming of
Cybele the Mother of the gods out of Asia. 6 Graecis (...), Panathenaea; a
great Feast in honor of Minerva, that all the Athenians unitedly celebrated. 7
Per ea unusquisque paterfamilias hostiam deligebat in Cereris sacrificia, quam
querna corona circum collum posita ornabat, eamque ter circa sata ducebat, quam
universa familia querneis ramis coronati Cererisque lauds canentes cum
tripudiis comitabantur.
Page 21.
1 A City formerly called Phlegra, that those Giants dwelt in, which Hercules
overcame. In the fight there being great Thunder and Lightening, heaven is said
to have vanquished them. 2 Totaque thuriferis Panchaia pinguis arenis: A
country of Arabia that abounds with Frankincense. 3 A Promontory of Thrace,
that has Gold and Silver mines. 4 A Temple that belonged to all the gods. 5
Nullus, ut Solinus ait, toto anno dies tam nubilus est, quo in hac insula Sol
non cernatur. 6 Syracusis nunquam tanta obducitur nebula, ut non aliqua hora
Solcernatur. 7 Tantum valet Tempus, vetustas vim hanc habet; ignota profert,
celat inde cognita. Omnia qui profers, consumis and omnia rursus. Saturnus
omnia destruit, and omnia producit. He is said to devour all his children,
because Time that is signified by him, consumes all it produces, and repairs
what is decayed as he vomited up the stone, and all things else he devoured. 8
Marmora discindit vis Temporis, ac neque ferro Parcit: inhumana cunctaque falce
secat. 9 Saturn is said to be bound by Jupiter; for the command that the
superior bodies have over the inferior. 10 Omnia sponte sua hic sine aratro
aut femine surgunt Hordea, frumentum, vites quae mollia vina Producunt,
augetque Iovis gratissimus imber. A very plentiful Island. 11 Quam prope
sanguineo sequitur Bellona flagello. The goddess of War and sister of Mars, her
Priests sacrificed their own blood to her. 12 The Halcyon or King's fisher is
said to build it is nest when the air is quiet and free from Storms. 13 Exodus
25. 20.
Page 22.
1 Two Doves are said to have given Oracles in Dodona's Grove. 2 Genesis 3. 24.
3 Albion and Bergion, sons of Neptune, hindering Hercules in his passing the
Rhodanus, wanting weapons to withstand them, Hercules implored Jupiter, and he
rained down stones upon them; from hence the place was called the Stony field.
4 The City Confluentia in Germany, where the two Rivers Rhene and Mosel meet. 5
i. e. Civitas Dei, the city of God. Psalm. 46. 4. 6 (...), augmentum,
intercalatio, quicquid immittitur; Leap year, it usually signifies the
intercalation of a day or month: here of a whole year. 7 A River in Portugal,
said to have golden sands. 8 (...), dona quae sponsus sponsae dabat, quum
primum eam videret: (...) quae pro virginitate adempta dantur: nuptialia dona,
those she received of her friends. 9 Genialis lectus, quasi genitalis; the
marriage bed. 10 The Bride had a Zona or Girdle, untied the Wedding night;
another there was left to be untied at the time of Child bearing: hence
Herculanus nodus, in allusion not so much to Hercules his strength, as if they
would have had it the faster or stronger tied; as to his happiness in making of
children, as if they would have had it the faster untied, as fast as ever it
was by Hercules, who had seventy children. 11 A River of Lydia that has golden
sands, as Tagus.
Page 23.
1 One who brought forth the stars. 2 Roma potens alis cur stat Victoria
lapsis? Vrbem ne valeat deseruisse tuam: the image of Victory erected in the
Capitol in Rome that fell from Heaven, breaking only it is wings off with the
fall, gave Pompey occasion to say, Victory should never more depart thence. 3
Thyrsum. 4 Talaria. 5 A place in Phrygia the less (where clusters of grapes are
said to grow to such a vast bigness, that sometimes a cart is broken in pieces
by the very weight of one of them) given Bacchus and Ceres by Jupiter. 6
Numbers 10. 2. 7 Oculi sunt in amore duces, (...), fores animae.
Page 24.
1 (...), missivum osculum. 2 Cydontum malum, a kind of love-fruit growing in
the garden of Venus. 3 A River (as Pansanias says) in Acha^a, of force to wash
away Love. 4 Three Sisters are said to spin the thread of our lives, Clotho
holds the distaff, Lachesis spins the thread, and Atropos cuts it off. Clotho
colum, Lachesis filum trahit, Atropos occat.
Page 25.
1 The children born in England of such Normans as with the Conqueror had
there seated themselves, rejected the name of Normans; were accounted and
called English, and used the English tongue. 2 Anthropophagi, Massagetis
finitimi: circa hos tristissima solitudo; sylvestres isti homines, aversis post
crura plantis, maximam habent velocitatem, passimque cum feris vagantur. 3 An
Island in the farthest parts of Egypt, said to be unaccessible for the mud,
rushes and such like encombrance that lie about it.
Page 26.
1 The very day that Hippodamia was married, Dictys with several other
Centaures endeavored to take her away by force, but were all slain by Hercules
and Theseus.
Page 27.
1 Jupiter to enjoy Danae rained himself in a Golden Shower into her lap. 2
Pausania ragionando dell' Achaia, dice che in Egira citta di quel Paese, era
certo piccolo Tempio, oue ei vide Cupido stare a lato alla Fortuna, volendo
mostrare che questa anchora nelle cose d' Amore puo assai, benche egli da se
tanto possa che uinca tutte le piu ostinate voglie, spezza ogni indurato cuore,
etc. 3 Ausonius makes Venus in arms, and Pallas discoursing with her. 4
Pausanias says in a certain part of the country of Corinth there was a Statue
of a very handsome woman in a long garment down to the ground that held Victory
in her hand. In the same manner the Romans engraved Venus victrix, as may be
seen in an ancient Medal or Stamp made in the time of Numerianus the Emperor.
5 Love is pictured sometimes with a burning Torch, sometimes with Thunderbolts
in his hand (conciosia che questo non solo arde le cose che facilmente
abbruciano, ma quelle anchora subito incende, all quali altro fuoco non si
tosto si attacarebbe, rompe e spezza cio che trova che se gli opponga, e sia
pure quanto si voglia saldo, e duro, e penetra con mirabile prestrezza in ogni
luoco) to signify his great power. 6 Il piu pretioso tesoro dell' occhio, il
ricco diamante che e di piu gran preggio di tutte le perle orientali, e il bell
cristallino. Questo e l'anima dell' occhio e lo specchio dell' anima. 7 In the
Wea a coat of the eye that is of diverse colors. 8 Wea interius atra quasi
fuli gine perfusa. The Wea is like the husk of a black grape, Opaco infecta
color, ut recepta in oculum visibilis imago, veluti circumfusis umbris
nigrescens flammula, magis elucesceret. It is black within, for the greater
benefit to the eye by the light, that shines best in a dark place.
Page 28.
1 Da Venere celeste nasce quel divino Amore che solleval* animo humano alla
contemplatione di dio, delle Menti separate, che noi chiamiamo Angeli, e delle
cose del cielo, and e tutto puro, mondo e sincerisimo, e percio fassi di corpo
giovine, tutto lucido e bello. 2 Apresso i Lacedemonii, sopra il Tempio di
Venere armata, era una capella oue Venere, chiamata Morpho, stava a sedere, con
certo velo in capo, e con lacci o ceppi che fossero a' piedi, basta che ella
gli haveva legati, per mostrare che hanno da essere le done di fermissima
feed, verso quelli alli quali di nodo Maritale si sono gialigate. Morpho is the
name of Venus in fetters, signifying the tie of Matrimony upon married weemen.
3 Phryno an Athenian Captain; the Philosopher Pittacus being to fight a Duel
with him, carried a net secretly and caught him in it. 4 Matthew. 4. 19* 5 To
signify how fortunate Timotheus was, they feign him sleeping, and Fortune
driving cities as fish into his* net: Ita Fortunae non Minervae, Felicitati,
non Virtuti res gestas and victorias ejus ascribebant. Thus attributing what he
did and won to Fortune, not Pallas; to the luckey success attended his
exploits, not to any Virtue he might have to bring them to effect.
Page 29.
1 Alluding to the custom of conserving Sainis and things sacred in a
repository before the Altar, which that they may be seen, they face and
beautify over with a rich vail of Net work. 2 Divine and Princely, being, we
know, formerly famed by Saints and Queens. 3 The Poets feign the Almighty
before the elements were created, made a band of wonderful great brightness,
and more admirable virtue to unite and keep together united hearts; this band
Hymen is said to have to join true Lovers together, and make them for ever most
happy in their Marriage.
REGALIA VATUM Regibus fortunam Et Felicitatem pollicentia. Coronae Poetarum
gemmiferae, Serta genialia, Flores Hyblaei, Vota sacra, Illorum Anglorumque
assensus and applausus.
A. B. C. D. Easdem literas in singulis poematis paginis designant.

Page 11.
a -- Quae in nemora, aut quos agor in specus,
Velox mente nova? quibus
Autris egregii Gaesaris audiar
Aeternum meditans decus,
Stellis inserere and consilio Jovis?
Hor. l. 3. Ode 25. b Accipite haec animis, laet asque advertite mentes.
Vir. l. 5. c c -- Hic aurea silva,
Divitiisque graves and fulvo germine rami.
Lucan. l. 9. Aen. Si nunc se nobis Ille aureus arbore ramus
Ostendat nemore in tanto.
Virg. Aeneid. l. 6.
Page 12.
a Carmina vestrarum peragunt praeconia laudum:
Neve sit actorum fama caduca cavent;
Carmine fit vivax virtus, expersque sepulcri
Notitiam serae posteritatis habet.
Dii quoque carminibus, si fas est dicere, fiunt:
Tantaque maiestas ore canentis eget.
Ov. de Pont. l. 4. b O Musa humil sol di pallor dipinta,
Che farai timidetta
Dinanti a quella eletta
Coppia reale, e bella insiem: auuinta?
Per riverenza alhor, che tu la vedi,
E per timor lascia caderle a i piedi.
Rhyme di Gas. paro Mu^tola p. 178. c Qual mattutina stella esce de l' onde
Rugiadosa estillante, o come fuore
Spunto, nascendo gia da le feconde
Spume dell' Ocean la dea d' Amore,
Tal apparve costei, tal le sue bionde
Chiome stillavan christallino humore.
Tor. Tasso Gier. cant. 15. d Urbs Hyperionis. Ovid Met. l. 15.
-- Haec tantum alias inter caput ex^ulit urbes,
Quantum leata solent inter viburna cupressi.
Virg. Ecl. 1. e -- Non fusior ulli
Terra fuit domino. --
Luc. l. 4.
Page 13.
a Quo nihil majus meliusve terris
Fata donavere bonique divi,
Nec dabunt, quamvis redeunt in aurum
Tempora priscum.
Hor. l. 4. Ode 2. Hoc tu per terras quod in aethere Jupiter alto
Nomen habes, hominum tu pater, ille Deum.
Ovid l. 2. Fast. b Vulneribus faecunda suis erat illa, nec ullum
De centum numero caput est impune recisum.
Ov. Me. l. 4. c -- Titania pubes
Fulmine dejecti fundo volvuntur in imo.
Virg. Aen. l. 6. Obruta mole sua cum corpora dira jacerent.
Ov. Me. l. 1. d Quid prius dicam solitis parentum
Laudibus?
-- Nil majus generatur ipso,
Nec viget quicquam simile aut secundum.
Proximos illi tamen occupavit
Pallas honores.
Hor. l. 1. Ode 12. e Coniuge eras felix, felix erat illa marito,
Mutua cura duos and amor socialis habebat.
Nec Jovis illa tuo thalamos praeferret amori,
Nec te quae caperet, non si Venus ipsa veniret,
Vlla erat, aequales urebant pectora flammae.
Ov. Met. l. 7. f Come all'hor che 'l rinato unico Angello
I suo' Ethiopi a visitar s' invia,
Vario e uago la pium e ricco e bello
Di monil, di corona aurea natia,
Stupisce il mondo. --
Cosi se n ua costei ma^anigliosa
D' habito di maniera e di sembiante.
Tar Tasso Can. 17. g Caesaris at coniux ore precanda tuo.
Quae praest at virtute sua ne prisca vetustas,
Laud pudicitiae secula nostra premat.
Quae Veneris formam, mores Juvonis habendo
Sola est coelesti digna reperta coro.
Qua nihil in terris ad finem solis ab ortu
Clarius, excepto Caesare, mundus habet.
Ov. Fast. l. 3. h Quae tanc seposita est quae gens tam barbara, Caesar,
Ex qua spectator non sit in urbe tua?
Mart. l. de sp. ep. 3
Page 14.
a Deucalion vacuum lapides jactavit in orbem,
Unde homines nati durum genus. --
Virg. Georg. l. 1. b -- Ego nec tumultum
Nec mori per vim metuam, teneute
Caesare terras
Hor. l. 3. Ode 14.
Page 15.
a -- Hinc maxima serpens
Descendit Python.
Luc. l. 6. b Gia sono queste l' Isole felici,
Equi gli Elisi campi e le famous
Stanze delle beat anime pose.
Tas. Gier. Cant. 15. c Hic dies vere mihi festus, atras
Eximet curas. --
Hor. l. 1. Ode 14.
Page 16.
a -- Adductis spumat versa unda lacertis.
Infindunt pariter sulcos.
Virg. Aen. l. 5. Turbantur fluctus, spumisque sonantibus albent.
Ov. M. l. 11
Page 17.
a Mill Lupi, mistique lupis ursique, leaeque,
Armeniae occurrunt tigres: sed nulla timenda,
Nullaque erat nostro factura in corpore vulnus.
Quin etiam blandas movere per era caudas,
Nostraque adulantes comitant vestigia lent.
Ov. Me. l. 14. b Ecce leo, supplex elephas te, Caesar, adorat.
Tigris ab Hircano gloria rara jugo.
Mart. l. de Spect. Epig. 18. c -- D' oro siammeggia l' onda.
Tasso Gier. Cant. 16. d -- Adsunt
Quaeque colunt amnes solaque rura Deae.
Ov. Fast. l. 1. e -- (...) fluctuque furoris
Compages humana labat. --
Luc. l. 5.
Page 18.
a Ultimaque excipiat quod tortilis inguina piscis,
Cruraque pennigero curvata novissima pisce.
Ov. Met. l. 13. b Sic tauriformis volvitur Aufidus,
Qui regia `Dauni perfluit Appuli,
Quum saevit, horrendamque cultis
Diluviem minitatur agris.
Hor. l. 4. Ode 14. c -- Resonant spectacula plausu.
Tumplausu fremituque virum, studiisque faventum
Consonat omne nemus: vocemque inclusa volutant
Littora, pulsati colles clamore resultant.
Virg. Aen. l. 5. d E ne suonan le valli i am e profonde,
Egli alti colli, e le spelonche loro,
Edaben mill parti Echo risponde,
Equasi par che boscareccio choro,
Fra quegli antri si celi, e in quelle sponde
Si chiaramente replicar s'udia
Di Carlo il gran nome e di Catarina.
Tasso Gier. Cant. 11. e -- Tunc aethera tendit
Vox populi, extremi convexa irrumpit Olympi.
Excepit resonis clamorem vallibus Aemus,
Peliacisque dedit rursus geminare cavernis.
Luc. l. 7. Sarmaticas etiam gentes, Istrumque, Getasque,
Laetitiae clamor terruit ipse novae.
Mart. l. 4. f -- Laeto complerant litora coetu,
Visuri reges.
Virg. Aen. l. 5. g -- Incedunt longo ordine gentes,
Quam variae linguis, habitu tam vestis and armis
Virg. Aeneid. l. 8.
Page 19.
a Strata micant: Tyrio quorum pars maxima succo
Cocta diu, virus non uno duxit aheno,
Pars auro plumata nitet, pars ignea cocco.
Luc. l. 10. b Gratia cum Nymphis geminisque sororibus audet
Du^ero nuda choros.
Hor. l. 4. Odc 7. Protinus accedunt Charites, nectunt qve coronas,
Sertaque coelestes implicitura comas.
Ovid. Fast. l. 5. c -- Fugere pudor, verumque, fidesque;
In qnorum subiere locum fraudesque dolique,
Insidiaeque, and vis, and amor sceleratus habendi.
Ov. Met. lib. 1. d Recta fides, hilaris clementia, cauta potestas,
Jam redeunt: longi terga dedere metus.
Mart. l. 12. c. 6. e Floret ager, spumat plenis vindemia labris.
Virg. Geor. l. 2. f -- Tua, Caesar, aetas
Fruges and agris rettulit uberes,
Et signa nostro restituit Jovi:
Janum Quirini clausit. Horat. l. 4. Ode ^5.
g Horrida per regnum totum nam bella fuere,
Tam multae scelerum facies, non ullus aratro
Dignus honos: squalent abductis tum arva colonis,
Et curvae rigidum falces conflantur in ensem.
Vir. Ge. l. 1. h -- Fugiunt vasto aethere nimbi.
Virg. Aen. l. 5. i Numine caelesti solemn fulsisse serenum,
Cum populi vultu conveniente die.
Ovid. de Pont. l. 2. k Sol medium caeli conscenderat igneus orbem.
Vir. Aen. l. 8. l Instar veris enim vultus ubi tuus
Affulsit, populo gratior it dies
Et soles melius nitent.
Hor. l. 4. Ode 5. m -- Refluens ita substitit unda,
Mitis ut in morem stagni placidae que paludis.
Virg. Aeneid. l. 8.
Page 20.
a -- Urbem sedesque revisit
Illa suas: ubi templum illi, centumque Sabaeo
Thure calent arae, sertisque recentibus halant.
Virg. Aen. lib. 1. Ipseque qualis ubi Lyciam, Xanthique fluenta
Deserit ac Delum maternam invisit Apollo.
Virgil. Aeneid. lib. 4. b Praesidio foribus coeli cum mitibus Horis.
Ovid. Fast. l. 1. c Pervenisse tuam Thamesis jam te scit in urbem:
Nam populi voces audit and ille tui.
Mart. l. 8. ep. 11. d Nunc ades aeterno complectens omnia nexu;
O rerum, mistique salus concordia mundi
Et sacer orbis amor --
Lucan. l. 4. e Cernis odoratis ut luceat ignibus ether?
Et sonet accensis spica Cilissa focis.
Ov. l. 1. Fast. f Laetitia, ludisque viae, plausuque fremebant. Vir. Aen. l. 8.

Pars pedibus plaudunt choreas and carmina ducunt. Virg. Aen. l. 6.

Pars epulis onerant mensas, and plena reponunt
Pocula, Panchaeis adolescunt ignibus arae.
Virg. Geor. l. 4. g Huc omnes populi passim, matrumque patrumque
Obvia turba ruit; laeto clamore salutant
Illustres Reges. Taedas Hymenaeus Amorque
Ovid. Met. l. 15. Praecipiunt: largis satiuntur odoribus ignes.
Sertaque dependent tectis: and ubique lyraeque
Tibiaque and cantus, animi felicia laeti
Argumenta sonant: reseratis aurea valvis
Atria tota patent, pulcroque instructa paratu.
Ovid. Met. l. 4. -- Nullus fertur celebratior illo
Illuxisse dies, agitant convivia patres,
Et medium vulgus; nec non and carmina vino
Ingenium faciente canunt. --
Ovid. Met. l7. h -- O Rex maxim, vota
Publica suscipimus: Bacchi tibi sumimus haustus.
Consonat assensu populi, precibusque faventum
Regia; nec tota tristis locus ullus in urbe est.
Ov. Met. lib. 7. Invenies illuc qui Nestoris ebibat annos.
Quae sit per calices facta Sybilla suos.
Protinus erratis laeti vescuntur in agris;
Et celebrant largo seque diemque mero.
Ovid. Fast. lib. 3. Pars manibus clypeos, galeas pars tundit inanes.
Index laetitiae fertur ad astra sonus.
Fast. l. 4.
Page 21.
a -- sit dives amomo,
Cinnamaque, costumque suam, sudataque ligno
Thura ferat, floresque alios Panchaica tellus.
Ov. Met. lib. 10. b -- satis jampridem sanguine nostro
-- Luimus perjuria gentis.
Virg. Geor. l. 1. c -- Concordiamitis
-- Araque Pacis erit.
Ov. Fast. l. 3. Venit Apollinea long as Concordia lauro
Nexa comas, placidi numen opusque Ducis.
Fast. l. 6. d -- Magna Iovis invicto robore Quercus
Ingentes tendit ramos.
Virg. Geor. l. 3. e Aspice ventura letentur ut omnia seclo.
Virg. Ecl. 4. f O dilecta Deis, O magna Caesaris arbor!
Ipsa virens ramis sidera celsa petis.
Mat. l. 9.
Page 22.
a Stabat in his ingens invicto robore quercus,
Una nemus, vittae mediam, memoresque tabellae,
Sertaque cingebant, voti argumenta potentis.
Ov. M. l. 8. -- Geminaeque columbae
-- Coelo venire volantes.
Virg. Aen. l. 6. b At te protexit superum pater, and tibi, Caesar,
Projaculo and parma fulmen and Aegis erit.
Mart. l. 9. c Pinguis ad astra affert Eoos fumus odores.
Luc. l. 8.
Page 23.
a Nasca, nasca di voi chi le sue fide
Citta frenie corriga, all' hor che al cielo
Ritornate sarete alme indivise.
Tor. Tas. rim. p. 22. b -- Nullo constat tibi sanguine bellum.
Luc. l. 4. c Custode rerum Caesare, non furor
Civilis aut vis eximet otium.
Non ira quae procudit enses,
Etmiser as inimicat urbes.
Hor. l. 4. Ode 15. d Non equidem hoc dubites amborum foedere certo
Consentire dies, and ab uno sidere duci.
Vestra vel aequali suspendit tempora Libra
Parca tenax very, seu nata fidelibus Hora
Dividit in geminos concordia fata duorum.
Pers. sat. 5.
Page 24.
a Intonsos dum ageret Apollinis aura capillos,
Fore hunc amorem mutuum.
Hor. Epod. 15. b E confirmi tra voila feed il Cielo
I sacri Patti, eregga un sol affetto,
Et un consiglio sol quest almae quella.
Vnpensiero, un desire, un puro zclo
Rischiari, come sole, l'uno el'altro aspetto.
Rhyme del Tor. Tasso p. 48. c -- Ita D'ijubeatis; and istum
Nulla dies a te, nec te diducat ab isto.
Ov. Met. l. 4. d Scenda a temprar sin da' superni giri,
Aura diva celeste e puro ardore,
Di Carlo e Catarina insieme il cuore,
Ed ambe l'alme eternamente inspiri.
Tor. Tasso rhyme p. 3. e Di tibi dent and tu, Caesar, quaecunque mereris.
Mar. l. 6. c. 87 f Pro meritis coelum tantis, Auguste, dederunt,
Alcidae cito Di, sed tibi sero dabunt.
Mart. l. 5. -- Te cum statione peracta
Astrapetes serus, praelati regia coeli
Excipiet gaudente polo --
-- Pars aetheris illa sereni
Tota vacet, nullaeque obstent a Caesare nubes.
Tunc genus humanum positis sibi consulat armis,
Inque vicem gens omnis amet: pax missa per orbem
Ferrea belligeri compescat limina Jani.
Luc. l. 1. -- Rex Carolus Anglus,
Pace data terris, animum ad civilia vertet
Jura suum, legesque feret justissimus auctor,
Exemploque suo mores reget; inque futuri
Temporis aetatem venturorumque repotum
Prospiciens, prolem augusta de Virgin natam,
Far simul nomenque suum curasque jubebit*
Nec nisi cum multos senior numeraverit annos,
Aetherias seeds cognataque sidera tanget.
Haec anima interea sacro de corpore rapta
Sit Jubar, ut semper Capitolia nostra forumque,
Divus ab excelsa prospectet Carolus aede.
Tarda sit illa dies, and nostro serior aevo,
Qua caput augustum, quem temperat, orb relicto,
Accedat coelo* faveat que precantibus absens.
Tarda erit illa dies, seclum and fama ipse per omne
(Si quid habent very vatum praesagia) vivet.
Ov. Me. l. 15. g Dum juga montis aper, fluvios dum piscis amabit,
Dum thymo pascentur apes, dum rore cicadae,
Semper honos, nomenque tuum, laudesque manebunt.
Vir. Ec. 5. h Irrita votorum non sunt praesagia vatum.
Ov. de Pon. l. 3. i Tu venias, nostrosque sinus gratissimus intres.
Ov. Met. l. 7. k Jupiter augeat imperium vestrum, augeat annos;
Protegat, and nostras querna corona fores.
Ov. Fast. l. 1.
Page 25.
a Quodcunque est alto sub Jove Caesar habet.
Fast. l. 2. b Sicque sopor fessis in gramine, sicque per aestum,
Dulcis aquae saliente sitim restingere rivo.
Vir. Ec. 5. c Ille velut rupes vastum quae prodit in aequor,
Obvia ventorum furiis, expostaque ponto,
Vim cunctam atque minas perfert coelique marisque
Ipsa immota manet*
Virg. Aeneid. l. 10. d Herculeum tantis numen non sufficit actis.
Mart. l. 10. Ep. 103* e Insidiae hostiles quantae, casusque tuorum
Erroresque tui: nam te vigesima portat
Omnibus errantem terris and fluctibus aestas.
Vir. Aen. l. 1. f Si titulos annosque tuos numerare velimus,
Facta premunt annos.
Ovid. Met. l. 7. g O digno conjuncta viro!
Virg. Ec. 8.
Page 26.
a -- Adductis sudans audiret amicis.
Pers. Sat. 3. Et salsos rident revomentem pectore fluctus.
Virg. Aen. l. 5. b Extrahit insomnes bellorum fabula noctes.
Luc. l. 4.
Page 27.
a -- Pluvio Danae conceperat auro.
Ov. Met. l. 4. b Errantes hederas passim cum baccare tellus,
Mistaque ridenti collocasia fundet a^antho:
Molli paulatim flavescet campus arista,
Incultisque rubens pendebit sentibus uva.
Vir. Ecl. 4. Flumina jam lactis, jam flumina nectaris ibunt,
Flavaque de viridi stillabunt ilice mella.
Ov. Met. l. 1. Est alter jam Tiphys, and altera quae vehit Argo,
Delectos Heroas --
Virg. Ecl. 4. c Tu quoque non paucos (si te been novimus) ures,
Tunc quoque praeteriens vulnera multa dabis.
Non possunt (licet ipse velis) cessare sagittae;
Fervida vicino flamma vapore nocet.
Ov. l. 1. Eleg. 2. d -- Acrior igni,
Asperior tribulis, faeta truculentior ursa,
Surdior aequoribus, calcato mitior hydro.
Ov. Met. l. 13. e -- Vidit lacerum crudeliter ora,
Ora manus que ambas, populataque tempora raptis
Auribus, and truncas inhonesto vulnere nares.
Vir. Aen. l. 6. Voluitur ille vomens calidum de pectore flumen
Frigidus, and longis singultibus ilia pulsat.
Virg. Aen. l. 9.
Page 28.
a Scena joci morem liberioris habet.
Ovid. Fast. l. 4. b Aureus hanc vitam in terris Saturnus agebat.
Georg. l. 3. c Di man del tuo fattor, anima eletta,
A gloria eterna uscisti, e di celesti
Tempre fu'l seem, onde l'humane vesti
Formando, poscia fusti in lor ristretta.
Tor. Tasso rhyme p. 22. d Iam redit and virgo, redeunt Saturnia regna;
Iam nova progenies coelo demittitur alto.
Vir. Ec. 4. e Faemina tu princeps: tu filia Caesaris illi.
Nec minor es magni conjuge visa Iovis.
Ov. ad Live. f -- Sors and virtus miscentur in unum.
Vir. Aen. l. 12. g -- Funda jam verberat amnem
Alta potens, vasto and pelago trahit humida lina.
Geor. l. 1.
Page 29.
a -- Procul o procul este profani. Virg. Aen. l. 6.

Hic locus est, quem si verbis audacia detur,
Haud timeam magni dixisse palatia coeli.
Ov. Met. l. 1. Haec domus, haec seeds, haec sunt penetralia magni
Numinis --
Ovid. Met. l. 1.
By WILL. AUSTIN, Esquire
To the READER.
THis thatcht tugurium of Poesy, is by the glory of the theme, the royal
subject of it, beautified, you see, as in the Suns presence, with the
noon-light of Heaven. By this means, as you discern its rudeness and defects
the more perspicuously: so from Phoebus (who with the luster of his golden
beams, as liberally and as richly, gilds over a mean cottage as a magnificent
palace) you have (to procure your benign aspect and favorable opinion here)
a rule to perfect and sublime the most refined wits, and most elevated fancies:
You have, from so illustrious and great a* Monarch, a pattern to be imitated by
the most ingenious and generous spirits, by the loyallest of Subjects and best
of Readers; a president as allcommanding as noble, of an Heroic disposition
and Princely genius, whose free courtesy obliges others, without invitation
of their merit.

Faults escaped in the Printing.
For Page Line Read reverrere 2 5 revertere Mart. l. 14. 4 10 Mart. l. 4. Fav
ur 6 4 favor. Parnasso 7 11 Parnaso Il nome nostro 8 21 il nome vostro Power
11 1 apower view 11 11 bview golden 11 13 c golden deludgd 15 4 deluged yields
15 15 yields 7banner 16 24 the 7 is superfluous paunches 21 18 panches Angel 21
30 Angels blessing 24 18 blessings ere 26 9 eve^r Danae 27 1 1Danae ere 27 17
Here th'alter 29 1 1the aalter name 29 5 2name force 29 12 3force e'il fine 29
21 e il fine

For Fol. Page Fig. Line Read arcus 30 0 0 1 arcus. Hor. art. Poet. (...) 30 12
2 7 (...) portenza 31 15 13 2 potenza che la fama 31 15 14 4 e che la Fama
dcorno i divitia 31 16 1 2 corno di divitia The Moon 32 17 5 1 The Sea femine
32 21 10 1 femine 30 31 Pages want Figures.

FINIS.

