THE AULNAGE CASE, OR REASONS Offered for taking away the Office of Aulnage,
and changing the Subsidy of Aulnage into a Custom.
THERE is a Duty payable to the Crown for almost all the Woollen Manufacture
now made in England, which is called the Subsidy of Aulnage, which is to be
paid by the Cloathiers, etc.

There is a Duty also payable to the Crown for the same Manufacture when it is
Exported, which is called the Subsidy of Tunnage and Poundage, and is to be
paid by the Merchants at the Custom-house; both these are charged upon the
Manufacture.

The former of these is granted by Patent to the Duchess of Richmond, and by
her let to Farm to Sir John Eyles, and others.

The manner of Collecting which is extremely chargeable to the Crown, and very
grievous to the Subject, and has along time been complained of; for every
Shilling the Farmers pay to the Crown or Duchess of Richmond, they collect
above two of the Cloathiers, etc. besides the charge and trouble they are put
to in attending several Offices to get their Goods Sealed, which in many places
is greater than the payment of the Duty.

The Design therefore is, that this Subsidy of Aulnage might be taken away, and
in lieu thereof, an Equivolent Duty might be added to the Subsidy of Tunnage
and Poundage, to be received at the same time, and in the same manner, and by
the same Officer, which now receives the present Customs.

And if a Duty not exceeding what was paid to the Aulnagers, upon a Cloth, etc.
before the late exactions be made payable at the Custom-houses, it will bring
in more Money to the Crown, then is now, or can be paid if the Aulnage Office
should be continued, as is ready to be made appear, by Accounts taken out of
the Custom-house Books.

The Advantages by this change will be many: For,

I. It will wholly take away the Grievance of Collecting, freeing the
Cloathiers from the trouble of attending to get their Goods sealed (which Seals
are of no other use then to Signify that the Duty if paid.)

II. It will raise a sufficient Sum of Money to pay the Duchess as much or
more than she now receives yearly, or can if the Aulnage Office should be
continued.

III. It will save the People of England three or four thousand Pound per
annum, which they now pay to maintain an Office and Officers, which are a great
burden to them.

IV. It will exempt part of the Woollen Manufacture (all that is used in
England) from the payment of any Duty, and yet a greater will not be laid upon
tha which will still be liable to pay;

V. It will free all the Merchants, Retailers, and others from the damage and
trouble of having their Shops and Warehouses searched, their Goods riffel'd,
their Pieces and Remnants carried away for want of Seals, which often times drop
off, and cannot be prevented, and from the payment of unreasonable Sums to have
them again.

VI. It will discharge all those that are under yearly Contribution (to be free
from search) from the payment of any more Rent, (of which there is no near two
hundred in one County.)

VII. It will put an end to a great many vexatious and chargeable Lawsuits,
which are now depending about the right of the said Duty, and prevent a great
many that are like to arise: (In short) it will be no ways prejudicial to the
Revenue of the Crown, nor to the Interest of the Duchess, nor create any new
or greater trouble upon the Merchant, or charge upon the Merchandise, but will
be of great advantage to all the Cloathiers, and all other Woollen
Manufacturers in England. All which is ready more fully to be demonstrated.


