ENGLANDS COMMONWEALTH, Showing The Liberties of the People. The Privileges
of Parliament, and The Rights of the Soldiery.
WITH Epistles to the Persons mentioned, concluding the several parts hereof.

Written by John Audley a Preacher of the Gospel, and a well wisher to them
that embrace it.

Prove. 29. 2. When the righteous are in authority the people rejoice, but when
the wicked are advanced, the people mourn.

Hebr. 13. 17. Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves
that they may do it with joy, and not with grief,

Illud belli genus quod pro salute publica and religionis incolumitate
suscipitur, ita Christo acceptum esse, ut etiam presenti ipsius numine
Administretur.

Christi religio exercitationem militarem non impedit: sed eam mirandum in
modum confirmat: Cum omnem formidinem firmissima spe immortalitatis cripiat,
and ad veram gloriam incredibiliter inflammat.

Soli qui ad Christum adspirant and verum finem recipient, fortes and
magnanimi sunt existimandi. Osorius de Nobilitate Christiana. lib^ter.

LONDON Printed by R. I. and are to be sold by Livewell Chapman at the Crown in
Pope's Head Alley, 1652.

Eve's sin, man's snare; man's help's the woman's seed,
No man lost by her, Christ did help at need.
Good out of evil came, escape out of snare,
Love has found out the way to man most rare.
All men may now see, how that the wise God
New ways does take, to comfort with a rod.
Did man's first healing by Christ's bruises come?
So peace by war becomes Englands Doom.
Come people, see what wonders God has wrought,
Out of death life, he well to light has brought:
Mind well his works, who curse to bliss did turn.
Man of all creatures, has no cause to mourn.
Own God with us, ye Nations over the world,
No God like ours in mercy so extolled.
Well may the Kingdoms fear, and stand in awe,
Eaters give meat, from strong we sweetness draw,
All laud to God, who has our tunes thus turned;
Lord! who can tell, how long thy people mourned?
Till thou did change their sighs into a song
High in thy praise this Commonwealth among.
J. A.

To his Excellency the Lord General CROMWELL.
My Lord:
YOur just dealing with your Adversaries, is matter of real Honor to your
Person, your enemies themselves being Judges; your instructing the ignorant,
your rebuking the obstinate; your remitting the Penitent, your protecting the
Innocent, your keeping Covenant, and conditions of Articles with all men, have
manifested your proceedings both of War and Peace, to be truly Honorable to
them, but especially to us, who have heard how Judah-like you have ruled with
God, and have been faithful with the Saints, Hos. 11. last. Your silence
before the Lord (when a cloud was upon the Camp) had great confidence, when
the Lord went before you like a Pillar of Fire by night, shining upon your
ways, and telling you, that you should be to your enemies, as Threshing
instruments with teeth, Isa. 41. 15. and this your confidence in God, what
boldness wrought it before the Battle? and what humbleness of mind after the
Victory? refusing honor of men, when God had put glory upon you, in sight of
all the world. It has been said, Before honor goes humility, Prove. 15. 22.
That may be an humbleness, as of necessity; but that humbleness which
follows honor, is ever matter of lasting praise; for, Honor upholdeth the
humble in spirit, Prove. 29. 23. and victory over a man's self is the greatest
conquest: Fortior est qui se, quam qui fortissima vincit Maenia. Yea, this your
confidence uttered did put life into your Counsels, courage into your
Resolutions, and made your Forces more forcible and active, so, as they did the
work of the Lord effective, both against the Presbyterian interest, at Dunbar,
and the Royal interest at Worcester, For there fell down many slain, because
the war was of God, 1 Chro. 5. 22. God is the judge himself, to whom both
parties at Dunbar made their appeals, God has pleaded the cause of his
people, and since these appeals has given sentence for you now twice, By this
I know thou favourest me, because mine enemies do not triumph over me, Psa.
41. 11. The issue must no longer pass under the vain titles of mere events
and chances of war: The Kingdom is the Lords, and he is the governor among the
people, all the ends of the earth shall come and declare righteousness unto a
people that shall be borne, that he has done this. All men shall hear and
fear, and declare the work of God, for they shall wisely consider that it is
his doing. The righteous shall be glad in the Lord, and shall trust in him, and
all the upright in heart shall glory, Psalm. 64. 9, 10.

It has been the wonder of all lands, to hear of England, how the meek of the
earth here, have formerly borne all manner of yoaks and oppressions under Royal
and Episcopal Rulers, and how they have lately risen like Giants and men of
might, for recovering their liberties, to defend their just rights and to bring
wrong doers to condign punishment. As if the judgment (against Moab) written,
had been sealed upon their hearts, Cursed is he that does the work of the Lord
negligently, and cursed is he that withholds his sword from blood, Jer. 48.
10. Neither regarding Nature, nor Nations, that they might execute Gods
judgments against an Idolatrous people. And it is observable, God had said
distress not Moab, Deuteronomy. 2. 9. til Moab had thus sinned. But after Moab had
committed Idolatry (a sin against the Nation of Israel,) he shall bear his
curse, that spares Moab: any former command of God to the contrary
notwithstanding. Sinful men's changes justify God and good men, in these great
changes of times.

Now England is delivered from her enemies, and the people dwell safely through
the mercy of God under your hand, I humbly desire this, that after all public
expeditions against open enemies, you may (now) keep your selves from foes of
your own household, from friends of your own Council; for Christ himself was
betrayed with a kiss, wounded in the house of his friend; Gallant Judas was
treacherously slain by Demetrius: And good Jonathan captivated by Triphon
pretending kindness to him. Maccab, 9. 18. and chap. 12, 13. Cura teipsum,
cautus esto, ne fidas. Set the Lord God always before you, wait for his
counsel; let impartial justice be your greatest design, and go on in this
thy might, be not perverted by envy or flattery of men, So run that you may
obtain, in due time you shall reap, if you faint not. You (now) choose
affliction with the people of God, and hereafter you shall with them partake in
the recompense of reward, when the dead in Christ shall rest from their
labors, and their works follow them.

For my self, that which made me write, was, that others might not be
burdened, and I eased, for Nullum genus crudelitatis majus quam in communi
periclo esse negligens. That which caused these my humble addresses to your
honor, was, to answer the querulousnesse of some persons, who have bid
defiance to the Armies of the living God, fixing their challenge upon my self,
with whom after conference had, I appeared thus publicly, as a Soldier in the
field, that waits his enemies motion. Yet being little as David, to encounter
with the great Goliah's of the adverse part, I herein crave your Lordships
wonted patronage, and hence forth I shall hold on triumphing In Gods praises,
who has safeguarded your person, succeeded your Armies, and recovered our
Liberties, and in my constant prayers shall ever remain,

Your Excellencies most obliged, though most unworthy Servant in the patience
of the Saints, and in the hope of the Gospel. JOHN AUDLEY.

To the Reader.
Friendly Reader:
IN this Treatise I have refused digressions, save only to follow the objectors
wanderings: I have neglected invectives, (name and thing) to prevent thy
prejudice; I have also laid aside wisdom of words, not affecting vainly to
glory in men, Simplex nudaque veritas, and perfect men will look to the matter.
Likewise I have avoided forms of words, and of things made ready to the hand,
not willing to boast of another man's line. I have not made it my business to
intermeddle in transactions past, viz. about the late King's execution, the
House of Lords removing, the purging of the House of Commons; for thy
satisfaction in these, I refer thee to the Parliaments Declaration, for no
more Address to be made to the King, to the Lord Presidents speech, before the
Kings Sentence, to Mr. Cooks appeal upon his Trial, to Eleutherus Philodemus
his Vindication of the Parliament, and the Soldiery; to Mr. Potters
Vindication of the Army; to the Army's Declaration on their last March into
Scotland, and to my Lord General Cromwells Letters to the Ministers, and to
the Governor of Edinburgh Castle.

My Engagement herein is mainely for the Commonwealth of England, and the
present Government thereof, as it now stands, willing to give thee some
grounds, of the peoples Freedom, in stating of it, and of the justice of the
Parliament, and the Army, in acting by the present Authority, for the
information of all such persons, as do not wilfully close their eyes against
right Reason, Truth, and Equity, yea, against the Scripture also, the rule of
right. And how is it? that of your own selves ye judge not, what is right,
Luke 12. 57. Have not the faults of Kings made the people blameless, when they
deposed and put some Kings to death? see E. Philodemus giving thee instances
for this in seven Nations. Be not partial in your selves, but by their example
learn ye to shun Idolatry, Blasphemy, Pride, Extortion, Rapine, wilful
Murder, and all other sins, for which things sake God has threatened with death
evil Rulers, as he has done other men. God will chasten with the rods of men,
even Kings, if they commit iniquity, 2 Samuel 7. 14, 15. Be thou thankful for
the present Government, and thy mercies thou have under the same; at least be
not grieved, that there is a man (yea, many men) come, that seek the welfare
of Englands Commonwealth.

The Contents.
PART. 1. The Liberties of the people
Section. 1 THe rise of man's Freedom, Page 1 2. The Laws of man's Freedom,
ibid. 3 The properties of man's Freedom, p. 2 4 The Consequents of man's
Freedom, p. 3 5 The helps of man's Freedom, p. 4 6 The principles of man's
Freedom, p. 5 7 The causes of man's Freedom, p. 6 8 The forfeit of man's
Freedom, p. 8 9 The Lawless have no Freedom, p. 9 10 The intent of the Law,
is the maine of the Law, p. 10 11 Diverse kinds of Freedom, p. 11 12 Diverse
forms of good Government, p. 13 13 The Peoples Freedom to choose their Rulers,
p. 14 14 No Freedom to choose Rulers without just cause, ibid. 15 The occasion
of choosing Rulers, p. 15 16 Just Governors chosen, to be upheld by the people,
in Epist. ad populum, p. 16
PART. 2. The Privileges of Parliament.
Position. 1 CHristian Rulers are not by Succession, but by Election, p. 18 2
The claiming a Kingdom, or Commonwealth, without the Peoples consent, is
Treason, p. 19 3 Second-Treasons not pardoned, ibid. 4 Wilful Murder is death,
ibid. 5 No pardon to a Murderer, p. 20 6 No Treason to be tolerated without
any manner of punishment, p. 21 7 Malefactors silent upon their charge, to be
taken for guilty, ib. 8 Good Governors to protect good people against
evill-doers, in Epist. ad magnates, p. 21, 22
PART. 3. The Rights of the Soldiery answering objections.
1 NO blood to be shed but in case of necessity, p. 24 2 Evil doers, the only
cause of bloud-shedding, p. 26 3 Justice in punishing evildoers, is
thanke-worthy to God, ib. 4 There is a Law, Church, and State, without King,
Lords, Bishops, and their Laws, p. 27 5 No man can justly call any Kingdom,
or Commonwealth, his own inheritance, since Christ the Heir of the world was
unjustly killed, p. 33 6 Kingly Government may be changed, when the power is
abused, p. 34 7 In what case enemies are to be prayed for, or punished, p. 35 8
For what cause this State put the King to death, p. 36 9 Touch not mine
anointed, brings reproof to Kings sinning against the People, no impunity, p.
37 10 Gods Judgments are written against Apostate Kings, as well as against
Heathen Kings, p. 38 11 Christians may war against evildoers, if case so
require, in Epist. ad milites, p. 38, 39
PART. I.
The Liberties of the People.
The Rise of Man's Freedom. Sect. 1.

MAN is considerable in a threefold Capacity; of Nature, of Nation, and of
Religion; And he has a threefold Liberty, according to his diverse Capacity. In
Nature a Liberty to preserve himself, as by the law of Nature: In the Nation,
a Liberty to preserve himself and the people, as by the Law of his Nation: In
Religion, a Liberty to preserve himself and the People of his profession, as
by the Law of God, of Christ, and of the Gospel. Every Englishman born has
the freedom of his Nature, and of his Nation; but the Religious Englishman,
has a right to be every way free, by all Laws whatsoever.

The Laws of Man's Freedom. Sect. 2.

The Law of Nature is, That man should love himself; for, no man ever yet hated
himself, but nourishes and cherishes himself, Ephesians. 5. 29.

The Law of Nations is, That a man keep himself against the disorder of
Creatures, not containing themselves within the bounds of Nature, As ye would
that men should do unto you, do ye also to them likewise, Luke 6. 31. All our
National Laws are grounded on this, and relate to this.

The Law of God is, To love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, soul,
strength and mind; and thy Neighbor as thy self, Luke 10. 27. Where the love
of God, must be with the denial of a man's self, and of his neighbor also.
The love of God knows no relations, where men love not God; that God in all
things may be glorified through Jesus Christ. Religion, rebukes all manner of
transgressions, August.
in all sorts of men. A man's neighbor, is as himself; and he loves his
neighbor as himself. Diligit in proximo, quod in se ipso diligit, and diligit
proximum candem ob causam, propter quam diligit scipsum. He (properly) loves
his neighbor as himself, who in his neighbor loves God and Christ, whom he
loves in himself, and who loves his neighbor for Christ's sake, for whose
cause he loves himself: God and Christ, in himself, and in his neighbor, is
the rule of his love to both. Where the image of Christ shines more in his
neighbor, he loves him more then himself; but Christ he loves most. And
seeing the image of Christ defaced in his neighbor, or by him, he loves him
less, for the greater love that he bears to God. Like Levi's son, who said to
his Father and to his Mother, I have not seen him; neither did he acknowledge
his brethren, nor know his own children, for they have observed thy word and
kept thy Covenant, Deuteronomy. 33. 8, 9. For that respect they bare to God and
Christ, above themselves; They mortified all inordinate Affections, they had to
their own kindred hating their own life, to follow Christ Luke 14. 26. And thus
David did, who loved perfectly, hated Gods enemies with perfect hatred, Psalm.
139. 22. and punished those who hated God, whom they ought to have loved. A
Slanderer, an high-looker, a proud hearted man I will not suffer: he that
works deceit, shall not dwell in my house; he that tells lies, shall not
tarry in my sight: Psalm. 101. 5, 6, 7.

The Properties of Freedom. Sect. 3.

The first sort of these Freedoms is Natural; and in perfect Nature, it was
perfect Freedom. Then man loved God, for that man saw in the perfect nature of
God, and had man persevered in that perfect state, man had been perfectly free
to this day.

The second sort of Freedom, is Con-naturall, For though men be freeborn,
yet are they borne under the Laws of their Nation; Destroy.
and the laws of our Nation do not annihilate, but only determine our natural
freedom.

The third sort of Freedom is ad-naturall; because Religion adds some thing
to Nature, to regulate, and to order man's Freedom, The Law of God gives
directions to perfect the freedom of Nature, and of the Nation; and sometimes
gives reproves to correct the imperfectnesse of them both. As men failed
touching the law of Nature, so they fell under the Law of Nations; and as men
failed of the law of their Nation, so they fell under the law of God, and as
their sin was greater, so they fell under the sorer rebuke and punishment; and
greater offenders, the rather stood in need of the blood of Christ, ad
redemptionem, to make a Purgation: Of the spirit of Christ, ad resipiscentiam,
to make them know their sin and to repent of it: Of the Rod, In correctionem,
for a reproof among men for their scandalous offenses against themselves,
against the people, and against God: And when the sword of the spirit did not
cut men off from their transgressions, but they brake all bands; then Nature
took the help of Laws, and men appealed for justice to them that bare the
sword, to defend their natural Liberties; and (for recovering their National
Freedom) did with the sword of the Magistrate punish offenders against God and
the People; and the rather, when transgressors continued impenitent, implacable
and irreconcilable.

The consequences of Freedom. Sect. 4.

The Laws of Nature, Nation, and of God, are subordinate one to another: God
is above the people, and the people above a man's self. Personal and private
interest, must give place to the Public Interest of the People, and of the
Commonwealth: And in the Cause of God, Who is above all: thy interest, and the
Peoples interest also, must give way to the glory of God: Wherefore in the
punishment of evil doers, private-pitty must give way to publike-safety of the
people fearing God. Pereat unus potius, quam unitas. It is expedient for us,
that one man should die for the People, that the whole Nation perish not, John
11. 15. What (here) Caiaphas said in his policy, Christian Magistrates must do
in piety. For thus God himself took part with Nature, punishing Caine for
shedding Abels blood, Genesis 4. Burning Sodom and Gomorrah, for injury don to
righteous Lot by that wicked people, Genesis 19. Bringing in the stood upon the
world of the ungodly, and saving Noah A Preacher of righteousness, 2 Pet. 2. 5.

Helps of Freedom. Sect. 5.

First, God himself has prescribed to all people Laws to keep up Nature in
Freedom, and to rebuke the unnatural, Genesis 9. 6. who so sheds man's blood, by
man shall his blood be shed; not by force and violence, but by course of Law.
It is a Law of God, that respects not the persons of man: his blood must be
shed, for the blood shed by him, who ever he be, Numb. 35. 30. No satisfaction
may be taken for him. After this, Nature began to help it self among the
people; as in case of Adultery, it is said, It is an iniquity to be punished by
the Judges, Job 31. 9. 11. Then men made Covenants with one another, and bound
them each to other with Oaths and Protestations. As between Laban and Jacob,
Genesis 31. 48. and between Abraham and the families of Escol, Aner and Mamre,
Genesis 14. 13. and this, in order to preserve the peace of their families, and to
recover their rights from that people, that should infringe them. Hereupon when
Lot was taken captive by Chederlaomer, Abraham and his confederates made war
upon, and recovered Lot out of their hands verse. 12, 14, 16. Also, Jonathan
made a Covenant with David, because he loved him as his own soul, 1 Samuel 18.
3. and secured him against Saul his father, chap. 20. 4. entered a Covenant of
the Lord, that whatsoever David's soul desired he would do it for him. verse.
12, 13, 16, 17. David swear him v. 23. The Lord is between me and thee for
ever, 41. Afterward it became a matter of Religion in all sorts of Men and
Nations, to keep their Covenants, Leagues, and Oaths between them made, and in
case of breach, they did right themselves by punishing the offenders; even as
Israel did justice on his brother Benjamin, and the men of Gibeah, for the
rapine and murder committed upon the Levites wife, against that brotherhood
that was between them, Judges 20. or else if they could not right themselves,
and recover their liberties: they did appeal to God to do them justice, as
Jer. 15. 15. Oh Lord thou know, remember me, visit me, and revenge me of my
persecutors: And David to Saul, The Lord judge between me and thee, and the
Lord avenge me of thee 1 Samuel 24. 12. Thus Jephtah, when he and the children of
Israel stood for their Rights against the King of Ammon, Jephtah said, What
have thou to do with me? I have not sinned against thee, but thou do me
wrong to war against me, the Lord the Judge, be judge this day between the
children of Israel, and the children of Ammon, Judge. 11. 12. 13 -- 27.

Also the Laws of Nations, were still helped by the grace of God; In things
not declared, God gave Laws a new; for stoning the blasphemer, Levit. 24. 14,
15, 16 -- 23. and the Presumptuous Breaker of the Sabbath, Numb. 15. 32, 34,
35, 36. which both were kept in ward, until a Law was given for them to suffer
by.

The Principles of Freedom. Sect. 6.

God the great judge of heaven and earth has into Nature put such principles
of Reason and common Equity; as might conform Men and Nations in their dealings
each with other, and punish such men as do become unruly, and that after a
religious sort; for, although Religion be (in many things) above Reason, yet
being not contrary to Reason; Religious men may be wise enough to judge between
their brethren, 1 Cor. 6. 5.

Withal, God has threatened Truce Breakers, and said, he will fire Tyrus for
captivating Edom his natural brother; for that he remembered not the brotherly
covenant, Amos 1. 9. Yea, and punished such men as brake their Covenants and
Leagues; sometimes by wicked persons, the Philistims wounded Saul, and Saul
killed himself. 1 Samuel 31. 4. After he had broken his Oath made, Not to harm
David. Sometimes by godly men, Jacob shall be a fire, and Joseph a flame, and
Esau stubble, and they shall kindle, and devour; there shall not be any of the
house of Esau remaining, because he looked on the day of his brother, and
stood up against him in the cross way, Obadiah 12 -- 18. And sometimes God
has (by himself) punished this sin of Trust-breaking, when the sufferers
had no power in nature, or nation to right themselves. Pharaoh promised Moses
fair at their departure; Go, and bless me also, Exodus 12. 31, 32. But if
Egypt pursue Israel, not regarding his promise, their Armies shall be
overthrown in the sea, notwithstanding their great power, Exodus 14. 9 -- 28.
there was not one of them left. A Caveat for the Scots, who brake Covenant with
England, vide part. 2. Position 5.

The Causes of Freedom. Sect. 7.

Liberty is next to life. Ames. Cas. li. 5. cap. 22.
Libertas (in naturali estimatione) proxime accedit ad vitam ipsam, and men
have this liberty, by a diverse right, viz. of Birth, of Purchase, and of Gift;
and again men often make forfeiture of their liberties, viz. by gift, by sale,
by force, by tyranny, by stealth, and by idleness.

1 There is a Liberty by Birth, which was Paul's freedom, I was free borne,
Act. 22. 28. Where a man is born to live, there he has right to eat and to
drink, that he may live: and he has a right to work, that he may eat and
drink; yea, and a liberty to buy and to sell for his living, where he is born.

2 Some have their Liberty by Purchase, this was the Centurions case, with a
great sum of money obtained I this Freedom, Acts 22. 28. And having purchased
their Liberty, they are in all things enabled to do for their livings, as men
freeborn, may do.

3 Some have their Liberty by Gift, as when Abraham had rescued Lot, and the
Sodomites that were carried captive; the King of Sodom said, Give me the
persons, and take thou the goods, Genesis 14. 21.

Now look, as men (thus) obtain the freedom of their persons, so their goods
are their own proper right; to wit, the goods they possess by inheritance, by
purchase, by gift, or by their labor procured; no man may take them away to
his own use, without consent of the owner thereof. For God has said, Thou
shall not steal, Exodus 20. 15. The Prince shall not take of the peoples
inheritance by oppression, to thrust them out of their possession, he shall
give his sons inheritance out of his own possession, that my people be not
scattered, Ezekiel. 48. 18. Liberty does not entrench upon Liberty; Royalty, may
not destroy the peoples Liberty; the Princes Prerogative, cannot abolish the
peoples Propriety. Naboths Vineyard was his own inheritance, and he might
choose whether he would part with it or no, wherefore King Ahab desired not to
take it by force from him, but offered to buy his consent, and to give Naboth a
better vineyard in exchange for his. And indeed, none but a Jezabell would
wrest out of a man's hands, that possession, which God and Nature had made
properly his own: whether it be a possession of his wife, his children, or his
estate, which is of less value, vide 1 King. 21. 1 -- 5. Contra jus Divinum
and Natural nihil licet magistratui, P. Martyr. The Magistrate may do nothing
to dispossess a man of any thing which is the man's right from God or Nature.

Distinctio dominorum and proprietas possessionum est juris divini, juxta
mandatum, non furtum facies, sicut, non licet ulli regi postulare alterius
conjugem. Bucan. loc. de Magist. q. 75, 76, 77. The distinction of rights, and
the Propriety of possession is of divine right, According to that commandment
Thou shall not steal. And it is no more lawful for a King or any other
Magistrate, at his pleasure, or, and for his own use to take away a man's goods
(whereof he stands lawfully possessed) no more then it is lawful for a King
to require another man's wife.

4 There is also a liberty by Gods Grace, Which puts the right of all things
under the dominion of believing persons. All things are yours, Vrsin.
and you are Christ's, 1 Cor. 3. 22, 23. they have jus ad rem, non jus in re;
they are, as having nothing, yet possessing all things, 2 Cor. 6. 10. they are
full and abound, who enjoy Christ.

But however believers in Christ, have right to all, yet this right gives them
no liberty to steal, or to take to themselves that which is another man's, nor
to possess themselves of any thing, more then becomes theirs by birth, gift,
purchase, labor, or by conquest, Deuteronomy. 20. 14. And in well-doing, the Laws of
God, Nature, and of Men are their protection in their just possessions,
brethren, you are called to liberty, use it not as an occasion to the flesh,
but by love serve one another, Gal. 5. 17.

Again, Men's Liberties are lost many ways; 1. Some give away their right in a
Christian community, as they did their goods, Acts 4. 34. 2. Some sell away
their Birthright, as Esau did profanely, Heb. 12. 17. 3. Some idle away their
time and estate too, Houses and lands are the inheritance of fathers, but an
idle soul shall suffer hunger, Proverbs 19. 14, 15. 4. Some loose their
liberties being conquered in war, Deuteronomy. 20. 10, 11, 14. 5. Some by tyranny of
Princes in peace, as when Saul took to his own proper use (not for the peoples
advantage) Their daughters, their goodliest young men, their fields, their
vineyards, their seeds, their Servants, their sheep, after his pleasure, 1 Samuel
8. 11, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. which shows what Tyrants will do, not what good
Rulers ought to do: How many other ways, a man may be put out of possession
of his goods, as by stealth, robbery, etc. I now forbear. Only let me
admonish, that having liberty of our persons, and estates, and religion (which
is the greatest) use it not as a cloak of maliciousness, but as the Servants
of God, 1 Pet. 2. 16. For who is he that will harm you, if ye be followers of
that which is good? 1 Pet. 3. 17.

Obstinate Offenders forfeit their Liberty. Sect. 8.

Obstinate offenders make themselves Bondmen; Such as will not be reclaimed,
do forfeit their Liberty. Some men there be, like the unjust Judge; they
neither fear God, nor care for men: These neither choose Rulers, nor obey them,
being unruly and disorderly; the law is to try them, and Rulers that rule by
Law are a terror to evill-doers; as they are Ministers of God, for the praise
of them that do well, Romans 13. 3, 4, 6. Rulers are by the law of the Land to
judge rotten members, in order to the peace of sound members, who did choose or
approve them; For they are Gods Ministers, attending continually on this very
thing, and for this cause pay ye Tribute, to do them Honor, and the
Magistrate accepting their place and power, do thereby engage to do the
people justice: Provided always, that ye continue to do well. Such persons
then, as will not honor the Magistrate, by keeping order, and observing Law,
must bear the punishment of their disorder against the Law, the Magistrate
bears not the sword in vain.

Although unjust men know no shame, Zeph. 3. 5. yet just governors (cannot
but) countenance them that do well, even for very respect of Nature, and to
safeguard mankind against persons unnatural, for the judgment is the Lords,
and they judge for the Lord, with whom is no respect of persons, 2 Chronicles. 19.
8. The Emperor Trajan is said to give a Sword to the President of the
Pretorium with these mandates; Hoc ense utaris pro me just faciente, contra me
utaris, si injusta fecero. i. e. in defensione proprii Corporis, and Nationis;
If the Emperor himself should do unjust things, he allowed the Judge to do
justice, if it were against himself, when he should do evil.

No Liberty to the Lawless.
Freedom is to them that do well, Sect. 9.
the Law is a defense to them that keep the Law, and it is given to punish them
that break the Law; the Law is for the Lawless, neither Nature, Nation, nor
Religion, allows man any Freedom to do evil, Praise is to them that do
well, not to the evil doer. Christians in Rome living as a conquered people,
under persons in power, who were unchristian, were directed by Paul to pay
their tribute to them, Romans 13. 6. and well, if so doing they might live in
peace. It is the goodness of any Government to protect the good, and such as
are quiet in the land, but evill-doers shall be rooted out, Prove. 2. 22. Ye
that will (yet) know no Law, nor be in subjection, where is there a Land, or
Nation which has Laws, and yet evil men may live as they lust, without
rebuke? Pay your tribute (here) then, as did the conquered Christians in Rome,
and the captive Israelites in Babylon of old, who were bid to submit to the
yoke of their Government, and to pray for the peace of that City, for in the
peace thereof ye shall have peace, Jerem. 29. 7. There is no way to Liberty in
England but in well doing; Do that is good, and thou shall have praise of the
same, Romans 13. 3. never strive to recover to your selves a Freedom to do
evil here, If thou do evil be afraid, Romans 13. 4. but be true, and
faithful to the Commonwealth of England, and the Government thereof, and the
Powers (here) shall be ministers of God to thee for good; in common humanity we
are to love all men, in National community, to love the Brotherhood, and in
Religion we are to fear God, which three Laws laid the foundation to that
which follows, Honor the King, for Kings themselves were to use their power
for the good of all men of the Brotherhood, and of them that feared God,
punishing evil doers, and praising them that did well; and good people were
not to malice their Kings, under pretense of a liberty to do well without
them; provided their Governors rule well, reproving Malefactors for the sake
of well-affected persons; men may do well with out Rulers over them, yet
well-doers need Rulers over them, both to encourage men in well doing, and to
safeguard them that do well, against evil doers, who have evil will at the
good of Sion, wherefore, use ye your liberty, as the servants of God, 1 Pet.
2. 16, 17.

Where no Law is, the intent of the Law is to be followed. Sect. 10.

The Law of Nations is Lex non scripta, as Mr. Coulse out of Hollinshed, citing
the Lord Hungerford executed for Buggery, when yet there was no positive Law to
punish it; where the written Law comes short, what wants, must be supplied
out of the Law of God, and Nature, out of the Laws of rightreason, and common
equity, for a terror of them that do evil, and in defense of them that do
well; New sins require new laws, as for the Ranters, Laws have been lately
made by this State. I grant, we are much bound to our Ancestors for Magna
Charta, and other Laws of common right and Justice, but we need more laws
still, to be made as occasion serves: necessity made David eat the Show Bread
to preserve his life, otherwise not lawful for any man to eat, but for the
Priests alone. Here David transgressed the letter of the Law, yet following the
intent of the Law, he was blameless, Matthew. 12. 3, 4, 5. See from the
beginning the grounds hereof; the Gentiles had not the Law, i. e. the written
Law, but they were a Law unto themselves, for they had (...) the work of the
Law in their hearts; their consciences, or their thoughts accusing, or excusing
one another, as they did well or ill, Romans 2. 14, 15. for God had showed them
his power, and Godhead, in things that are made, Chap. 1. 20. so that they are
without excuse, who vanish away in their imaginations from that they know of
God, and from that light of God, which shows men, what is suitable to the
nature of God.

But seeing, that where no Law is, there is no transgression, Romans 5. 13. That
is, men are slow to impute transgression to themselves, where there is no Law;
therefore the Law entered, that sin might abound, and that sin might become
exceeding sinful, Romans 7. 13. howbeit, when men were instructed out of the
Law, and knew the directive power of the Law, they came short of the practick
part of the Law; Thou that teach the Law, through breaking the Law
dishonourest thou God? Romans 2. 21, 22, 23. And men being lovers of themselves,
reproved not themselves, when they transgressed the Law, God therefore stirred
up other men, and creatures, to avenge the quarrel of his Covenant upon the
Lawless. Thus it is said, God made the wicked for the day of wrath, Prove. 16.
4. That is, to execute wrath upon them, that do evil. For instance, when men
worshipped the Creature, more then the Creator; and in the place of God set up
a Golden Calfe to worship it, Then Moses cried out, Who is on my side? let him
come to me, put every man his sword on his side, and slay every man his
brother, and every man his companion, and every man his neighbor, and the
children of Levi did so, and there fell of the people that day three thousand
men, Exodus 32. 26, 27, 28. All this was for the peoples sin against the Law
of Nature, and of God, and this was done, when yet the state of the Israelites
had not formerly enacted a Law to punish that fact; thus Laws of Nations are
by occasion supplied out of the Law of Nature, and of God, according to the
wisdom of that State, under which men live, as it is said; By men of
understanding and knowledge, a Land is preserved, Prove. 28. 2.

Diverse kinds of Freedom, of Nature, of Grace, and of Glory.
1. In the Creation, Sect. 11.
it was the Liberty of all Creatures, to serve God, and man, made after the
similitude of God, for God set man over the works of his own hands, Genesis 1.
27, 28. Psalm. 8. 6. This freedom of perfect Nature man soon lost by sin,
and there-through became a Bondman to God, till Christ came to deliver him; in
this bondage of man, Omnes affines sceleris, yea, all Creatures partooke, and
are made subject to vanity, not willingly, but by reason of him, who has
subjected the same in hope, Romans 8. 20.

2. Again, in the restitution of all things, there will be a glorious Liberty
of the Sons of God, when the Creature it self shall be delivered from the
bondage of corruption into that Liberty, and the expectation of the Creature
waits for the manifestation of the Sons of God in that glorious liberty, Romans
8. 19 -- 23. and if this be not the day, there will come a time, when the Sons
of God shall be gloriously made known, and then all Creatures shall freely
serve them, they shall not groan to do it; and, That Nation and Kingdom
which will not serve them, shall perish, and be utterly wasted, Esa. 60. 12.

3. Also, man has a Freedom by Grace, and this begins in Christ; for Christ
having redeemed us to himself of Bondmen, and made us Freemen in Christ; we
(here) live to recover our selves, to become Freemen through Christ, free
indeed; which Freedom all they obtain, who by the Spirit are joined to Christ
by faith, and repentance. See 1 Cor. 6. 17. John 8. 36. This freedom of Grace
is to repair the ruins of nature, and to perfect nature into a glorious
liberty, which shall be outwardly manifest in the Sons of God. The Kings
daughter is all glorious within, (even here) Psalm. 45. 13. but for outward
glory; It does not yet appear what we shall be, 1 John 3. 2. And as for
outward liberty in this work, Our Kingdom is not from hence, as Christ said
of his, Joh. 18. 36. we affect not Lordship over one another; that government
Christ forbad his Disciples, to use, Matthew. 20. 25. howbeit we look for a
liberty to serve God, and to lead quiet and peaceable lives, in all godliness
and honesty, 1 Timothy 2. 1. for this liberty, we pray God, and do provide
against such persons, as kill the Prophets, and chase Christian men and women,
(...) who please themselves, and are contrary to all men, 1 These. 2. 15. that
none may harm us for well doing, and that they, that do well, may have praise
of the same; that well-doers may not suffer wrongfully, and that by Law; that
men may not condemn innocent blood, Psalm. 94. 20. This is all the Liberty we
contend for now, till we be delivered into the glorious Liberty hereafter.
Indeed, holy men must follow peace with all men; but, if we can have peace, yet
we must prefer holiness to peace, for, without holiness no man shall see
the Lord, Heb. 12. 14. Holiness is our Birthright; It is holiness that gives
us hope toward God, and being borne of God, we may not profanely sell our
holiness with God, for peace with men; if Abraham will have in his house an
holy peace, he must cast out the Bondwoman and her son both, though it
seemed grievous in his eyes, Genesis 21. 11. our sufferings here for Christ shall
end in the glorious liberty of the Sons of God; wherefore, take forth the
precious from the vile, O holy men, let them return to thee, but return not
thou to them, Jer. 15. 19. men, that will not bow to the golden Scepter of Gods
mercy, to do well, shall be bruised with the Iron rod of Gods Justice, for
their ill doing, Psalm. 2.

Diverse forms of good Government.
There were Kings of Nations, Sect. 12.
Genesis 14. 1. but there were in Israel diverse other Rulers, before any King was
among them; Moses a deliverer of Israel out of Egypt, after that, seventy
Elders, to bear part of the Burden with him, and they judged the people; then
Joshua, their Captain-Generall, who sought their Battles for them; after him,
Elders, who were raised up of God, but accepted of the people, to rule in
Israel, to guide their Counsels, and to fight their Battles; as Joshua had
done, until the times of Saul, and David; and these two persons God did choose,
and the people did approve them their Kings; after David, the well-affected
Israelites chose Solomon their King; all these Governments, Aristocraticall,
Democraticall, and Monarchical, were allowed of God for the peace of them that
do well, and the people lived orderly under them all, and enjoyed much peace;
and if people lived under other Rulers peaceably (while they did well) before
Kings were in Israel, why should not men in well doing live quietly in England,
now governed without a King? where trusty men in Parliament have resolved the
government of this Commonwealth into another form; a Government of States
formerly, blessed be God, a mixed Government, equally maintaining the peoples
Liberties, and the Rulers safety, their Rulers doing the people Justice, and
the people doing their Rulers honor.

Power in the People to choose their Governors.
The power to choose, Sect. 13.
or approve their own Governors, lies in the people fundamentally, and after
the peoples choice made, the power of ruling lies supreamely, and formally in
the Governors themselves. People well-affected to God, and well doing, have
the liberty of making this choice primarily; and secondarily, all the people of
that Commonwealth; at first Samuel chose Saul King, then the people, and
Benaiah Nathan; and Zadok first chose Solomon King, the generality of the
people freely suffering the choice; afterward the rest of the people came in,
approved the choice, and renewed the Kingdom, 1 Samuel 11, 12. But the people of
Israel gave not their approbation of their Kings, chosen by the better sort,
until the persons chosen had given them some singular proof of their valor,
as Saul did; or of their wisdom, as Solomon did, when Nahash the Ammonite was
destroyed, and the City of Jabesh Gilead delivered by the hand of Saul; then
the people cried, Who is he that said, Saul shall not reign over us? bring the
men, that we may slay them; and all the people went with Samuel to Gilgal, and
there they made Saul King, 1 Samuel 11. 14, 15. Likewise, when Solomon had given
Judgment between the two women, both claiming the living child, they feared
the King, for they saw the wisdom of God was in him, to do Justice. So
Solomon was King over all Israel, 1 King. 3. 28. and 4. 1. Thus (here in
England) when the Peoples Trustees, by Counsels in Parliament, had often
delivered this Commonwealth from their enemies hand, and had from among their
Brethren (of the same Nation and Religion) set up Keepers of the Liberties of
the people by Authority of Parliament, approving the choice made, have
liberally laid out their persons and estates for the safety of their Rulers,
and of themselves.

People may not choose new Governors without a cause.
Governors being chosen, Sect. 14.
the power lies in them effectually, provided they rule well, and their people
may not choose new Governors without the consent, or death of the old, or
without the Male administration of Justice in the old Rulers; for in case the
old Governors chosen, continue to rule well, the people may not force their
consent; but it must be a Free Act of the good Rulers, to desire the people to
choose a New, else if the people causelessly reject well ruling Governors, they
reject the Lord, that he should not rule over them, 1 Samuel 8. 6, 7, 8. The
people may not (without imputation of Treason) cry, What portion have we in
David, while David lives, and rules well; nor have they (at such a time) any
cause to follow a rebellious and flattering Absalom to do them Justice;
Indeed, on just reason declared, Governors may remit their power to the people
that chose them, and people thus re-impowred may (with the same Liberty) set up
other Governors over themselves; as Nathan, Zadok, and Benaiah made choice of
Solomon for King* when David grew old, sick, Bedridden, unserviceable, and bad
them make Solomon King, 1 King. 1. 33, 34, 35. otherwise, the people may not
change without a cause, and the Governor, or Governors are to use his, or
their power for the Common good, that they give no just occasion to dis-engage
the people, and to make them change.

The occasion of choosing Governors.
The occasion of people's choosing Governors was the Countries danger, Sect. 15.
and the end of that choice was the peoples safety; which Samuel employed, when
he faulted the Israelites for desiring a King so unseasonably; at a time when
they dwelled safely, and were delivered from their enemies on every side, 1 Samuel 12. 11. Indeed, Israel were without Rulers sometimes, when all things were
in peace, and every man went to his own inheritance, Judge. 21. 25. but when
Famine appeared, or when War approached, then they chose them Governors to
feed them, Esa. 3. 5. 8. or to judge them, and to fight their Battles, 1 Samuel
8. 20. when Judges ruled, Ruth 1. 1. Elders, Kings, or Captains, and the
Governors chosen performing the peoples trust, did thereby oblige the people
to stand by their Trustees, and some by the Word, preached for them, some by
the Sword, fought for them, some by their Pen, wrote for them, and some with
heart and tongue, prayed for them accordingly. Again, when Kings and Rulers
did fail their trust reposed in them, they dissolved the bands of the peoples
Allegiance toward them; and the people failing of performing their fealty to
such Trust-breakers, were spared by Gods appointment; Thus when the ten Tribes
fell from King Rehoboam for his roughness toward them, and the people set up
Jeroboam for their King, Judah was from God by the Prophet forbid to fight
against them, for the thing was of the Lord, 1 King. 12. 16. 20. 24. Thus the
old Romans cast off Tarquin, and all Kingly Government, for the pride and
cruelty of that King, and for the unchastity of his lecherous Sons, and chose
them Consuls, who might better consult and provide for the Countries good. Also
it is said of Brutus, who was one of their Consuls, That he scourged and
beheaded his own Sons, for attempting to bring in Kings again, Florus, lib.
1. cap. 9.

Just Governors to be upheld by the people.
To the Free People of England.
Epist.

Dear Fellow Commoners, it has been declared already, that the best way to
settle the Commonwealth in a firm and lasting peace, is to look back to
rules of equity and justice, to principles of Nature, and right-Reason; to Gods
Law, and good Conscience; and every one of you must contribute your utmost
hereunto, That power lies in you, and there is now recovered your right to use
it. Your Liberties have been redeemed to you at a dear rate, and with great
expense of Blood, and of Treasure; maintain it then, as Freemen, and use your
Liberty, not against your selves, but for your selves; Cease mourning for Saul,
the King and his Trains, the Body is not destroyed by removing bad humors;
let your hearts be toward the Governors of England, who have willingly
offered themselves among the people; and to their Servants, who have jeoparded
their lives for your sakes; I mean, to the Commons in Parliament, the Council
of State, and their Armies, who have not designed upon you for their own
worldly advantage, but have scoped at your welfare, who by no sensible fears
have suffered themselves to be perverted from impartial Justice, but have
bound up your safety and theirs in one. With what reason should they receive
the benefits of Law, who deny obedience to the Law? What privilege can a
proprietary possess by Law of the Land, who denies to do that, which even the
Law of Nature calls for of him? The non-engaging does not strip him of his
privilege of the Law, but the standing by himself without Law, who engages
not, brings him into danger; and certainly, he deserves no advantage by a
Garrison, who refuses to help in time of a Siedge; And having performed their
trust, they have declared themselves willing to lay down their power, not
Lording it over you, but leaving the power free to you, for choosing a new
Representative, and being set free, choose for your selves, for ye need
Counselors; but Nunquam consilium suit in populo, nunquam certa and constans
vitae ratio: and where no counsel is, the people fall, but in the multitude of
Counselors there is safety, Prove. 11. 14. only take heed to your choice, for
a wrong choice brings a plague, as when Israel chose them a Captain to go
back into Egypt, it was said, They shall not see the Land of Canaan, Numb. 14.
4. 23. And a right choice brings safety; as when Jephtah was chosen an Elder in
Israel, God honored him with victory over his enemies, and the people with
safe dwellings under his hand, Judge. 11. 23. As Freemen, choose men into place
of Government, who will preserve your Liberties, men of a public spirit, and
men zealous for the welfare of the people. When Pharaoh had heard the wisdom
of Joseph, in providing to save the Land from perishing through famine, he said
to his Servants, Can we find such a man as this is, a man in whom the Spirit
of God is? and be made him Ruler over all the Land of Egypt, Genesis 41: 38. 43.
thus Daniel in Babylon was preferred before the Presidents and Princes, because
an excellent spirit was in him, Dan. 6. 3. And the Israelites, to better their
condition, chose them Saviors; wise Moses, valiant Joshua, godly Gideon,
gallant Jephtah, etc. Do ye also in your choice of Sheriffs, Burges,
Lieutenants of Shires, etc. provide able men, scaring God, men of truth, hating
covetousness, that they may judge the people at all times, Exodus 18. 21, 22.
He that is greatest among you, let him be as the younger, and he that is
chief, as he that does serve, Matthew. 20. 25, Luke 22. 25. 26. Choose you out
from among your brethren, Governors, who will secure you in well doing freely,
and whom ye may freely stand by in punishing evill-doers; let such rule over
you, as obey God, and do not lift up themselves above their brethren, that
turn not aside from the commandment, to the right hand or to the left, Deuteronomy.
17. 15, 18, 19, 20.

PART. II.
The Privileges of Parliament.
RVlers among Christians are not by succession, as the Turks Governors are;
successio, victoria, etc. Tantum Idoneos reddit; Succession only makes way for
Rulers to come in. It is the Peoples election, that makes Christian-Rulers, in
certain place, non addit jus ad regnum electio populi, sed facultatem juris
exercendi confert: In which words he plainly acknowledges, that his right of
ruling (ad hic and nunc) over this very people, comes from the election of the
people: for all Christian Rulers have their power, either immediately, from the
appointment of God, as David was anointed King; or else from the election of
men well-affected to God, thus the Kingdom was Salomons from the Lord, 1 King.
2. 15. And the Kingdom was his, because the Lords people chose him King, even
Nathan, Zadok, Benajah and Bathsheba. Not the greater number but the better
people, for their affection to God and to goodness; Not for eldership, for
Adonijah was David's Son too, and elder then he, yet he laid aside his claim,
when it was known to him that Solomon reigned in Israel. And David's Vote given
for Solomon (while yet David was living) plainly showed, that the ruling of the
Kingdom was not by inheritance, but by choice; not by succession, but by
election of the people: For that election at first made by a few, was afterward
confirmed by all Israel, when they saw the wisdom of Solomon, to do justice
and judgment. As was fully declared in the 13. Sect. heretofore.

claiming of a void Kingdom or Commonwealth, in the case of succession, is
Treason against the free Commoners thereof; yet it may be pardoned on
submission of the party claiming, with condition of his keeping Good-behaviour
afterward. This was Adonijah's case, who succeeded David the King; and
hereupon made claim to the Kingdom, rid in triumph, made a feast to his
adherents, whom he called to Council; yet he doing obeisance to Solomon, whom
the people chose King, the King said unto him, by way of pardon, Go to thy
house in peace: and by way of warning, he said, show thy self a worthy man, 1
King. 1. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 -- 51, 52, 53. It may be it was an error, occasioned
from the people freely suffering successors to rule them.

Adonijah had acknowledged King Salomons authority, and found mercy upon his
first offense: As for him then, unworthily to desire Abishag, to be his wife,
who had lain in King David's bosom. When Bathsheba represented to Solomon,
Adonijah's desire, he bad her ask for him the Kingdom also, for he is mine
elder brother: taking his ambition herein, to be a design for the Kingdom.
And the King commanded Benajah to slay Adonijah forthwith, w^^^^ut any
reprivall, 1 Kings 2. 13, 17, 20, 22, 24, 25.

Wilful murder in a time of peace, is to be punished with death first or last.
Who so kills any person, the murderer shall be put to death, by the mouth of
witnesses, Numb. 35. 30. Joab, shed the blood of war in peace; he slew Abner,
and Amasa, men more righteous then he, 1 Kings 2. 5. Indeed, David spared him,
because the sons of Zerviah were stronger then be, 2 Samuel 3. 39. But
afterward, David put King Solomon in mind that he knew it, and that he should
punish him for it. Wherefore King Solomon finding Joab one of the
evill-counsellours of Adonijah, resolved he should have summum jus; and though
he spared the rest of that confederacy, yet he gave sentence against him: And
at the Kings commandment Benaiah did justice on Joab, though he was the
General at that time, and slew him, without any respect of persons.

No plea or excuse, can serve to clear a murderer. Ye shall take no
satisfaction for the life of a murderer that is guilty of death, but he shall
surely be put to death, Numb. 35. 31. Joab going after Adonijah, might not
longer be spared from death, which, for murder he had deserved, though he had
not gone after Absalom, though he had formerly (in David's wars) done the King
good service; Yea, and though he fled to the horns of the Altar at last,
pretending repentance. At the Kings commandment, Benaiah went forth and slew
him there, for his murder in King David's days, and for his Treason in King
Salomons time, 1 Kings 2. 28 -- 34. And this is Gods rule, If a man forsake his
righteousness and commit iniquity, shall he live? all his righteousness that
he has done shall be forgotten; and in his sin that he has committed, he
shall surely dye, Ezekiel. 18. 34. Which is the case of the revolted Scots, their
former joining with England in Covenant making, and keeping, for the good of
both Commonwealths, cannot excuse them, breaking the Brotherly Covenant,
proclaiming King over England, a man whom (for his dis-service to this people)
this State had declaratively disclaimed; and by their promising to enthrone him
in England, against the will of this free people, who had already accepted of
another Government. (For in Christian Commonwealths, the right of Rulers lies
in the vote of the peo^^^ ^husing them (as before Sect. 13.) according to
Husha^'s speech, Whom the Lord and this people, and all the people of Israel
choose, his will I be, 2 Samuel 16. 17.)

There was a Covenant between Benjamin and the rest of the Tribes of Israel,
and that as strong a Covenant, as ever was between England and Scotland, for
they were brethren; but when Benjamin brake the bonds (in the matter of Levi's
wife, her death, and banishment) they dissolved the bands of brotherhood, and
Israel (being then set free) brought the malefactors unto condign punishment,
and the men of Gi^^^^ also, who (after Isreal's demand to them made) kept back
the offenders from the trial of justice, as accessaries to Benjamins fact,
Judge. 20. 13, 14. Which also, was the very case, and the first breach between
this Parliament and the late King C.

No Treason is to be tolerated, without all punishment, though less punishment
be laid on men for the first offense. Abiathar the Priest was an evil
Counselor of Adonijah's, and helped him forward, 1 Kings 1. 6, 7, 8. Yet King
Solomon would not (for that fault) put him to death; because he bare the Arc
before David his father, and because of his sufferings with David. Howbeit
Solomon did sequester Abiathar from his place, and the profits thereof, saying
to him, Get thee to thy fields at Anathoth, verse. 27, and put in his place good
Zadok, who chose and anointed Solomon King, verse. 35. Neither did Zadok scruple
to accept of the place, because it was a sequestration, but he ministered to
King Solomon in the room of Abiathar. Which example is a justification of our
State in their censures of that sort, and of Ministers, by them put into
sequestrations, who in their places do serve the souls of the people faithfully.

Judgment on Malefactors, and sentence may be given upon silence of the party
charged, where the fault is palpable. Slanderous Shimei, was reprived by David,
in die coronationis, 1 Samuel 19. 22, 23. And confined by King Solomon three
years. But for treasonous breach of his Oath and Articles, King Solomon on his
silence to the charge, judged him to death without further confession or
conviction, and Benaiah slew him at Salomons command. This was King Charles his
case, who also was condemned to (...) on his silence to his Charge read to him,
the things char^^^ (...) him, being palpable, proveable, and deserving death,
in the eye of the Judges.

justice on evil doers, is the peace of them that do well. For hereupon it is
said, The Kingdom was established in the hands of Solomon. There would not
have been any stable, firm, and lasting peace in his Kingdom, had he not
executed impartial justice on the breakers thereof, See 1 Kings 3. ult. A fit
president for the States of England.

To the Supreme Authority of the Parliament, Council of State, and High Court
of Justice.
Epist.

MOst honored Commons of England, Civil Governments are ordered by the Lord,
The most high rules in the Kingdoms of men, and gives them to whomsoever he
will: The translation of the Rule of this Nation from Kings to your Honors,
has received large testimony from heaven, giving you the hearts of this
people, and giving them hearts to jeopard their lives to serve you, and giving
you so great salvations by the peoples means. Oh! that all the Lords people
might consent in one, to render unto your Authority (which God has so signally
blessed to this people) all cheerful and faithful obedience in the Lord for
conscience sake, and that in thankfulness to God, who has so blessed your
Counsels for our welfare; That although, for the transgressions of this land
many have been the Princes thereof; yet by your wisdom and prudence, the
people may be preserved, henceforward. I know ye are not given to change
unnecessarily, and what necessity has lain upon you (the peoples Judges) for
the change past, ye know. My humble request is, Now Supreme power is by the
people entrusted with your Honors, Magistatus officium est, ut defendat
innocents, and puniat petulantes. P. Martyr. It is the Magistrates office, to
defend the innocent, and to punish the wrong doer. Let good people (who shall
have praise of God) in their well-doing, have praise of you. Let evil doers
know your justice without partiality, quit your selves like men; be strong,
love them, that love the Lord. That as good men (...) ^ell-doing suffered
wrongfully, and formerly were made to (...), now evil doers may fly before
your justice, and you may render to them, as they have served us. For God
sets the poor on high from affliction, the righteous shall see it and
rejoice; and all iniquity shall stop her mouth. Thus, the Almighty shall be
with you to settle this Commonwealth in peace: As sometimes Isreal's Kingdom
was established in the hand of Solomon. And knowing the same power lies in
you, I thought it my duty to present your honors with Salomons proceedings, in
following whose steps, The ear that hears you shall bless you, and the eye
that sees sees; you shall bear witness to you; when ye deliver the poor
that cry, the fatherless, and him that has no helper, the blessing of him
that was ready to perish shall come upon you, and so ye shall make the widows
heart to leap for joy; ye shall put on righteousness as a robe to cloth you,
and judgment as a diadem; while ye are eyes to the blind, and feet to the
lame; while ye shall be fathers to the poor, and shall search out the cause
that came unto you, while ye shall break the jaws of the wicked, and take the
spoil out of their teeth, Job. 29. The powers that be here are your selves, the
enacting and the executing Laws for the Commonwealth lies in your power; the
Taxes lately raised have not bin for the private use of your selves, or of your
Children, that is forbidden of God, Ezekiel. 46. 18. but they have been
indifferently levied upon your selves, and upon the people, in defense of the
whole Commonwealth, and that but for the present necessity; in which case,
King Saul took of the peoples goods, for the peoples good, and was blameless,
1 Samuel 12. 6, 7. Leagues with Idolaters may ye not make, Judge. 2. 2. Deuteronomy. 7.
2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. But if any such among you have made their peace with you,
they living peaceably by you, and paying their tribute to you; keep faith with
them, as Joshua did with the Gibeonites, Josh. 9. for if you purposely make
Covenant with Idolaters, and the people join therein, ye and they make your
selves, and them, liable to Judgment upon the Nation from the Lord, Judge. 2.
11. On the other side, if the people join not with you in such Covenants, your
Covenant-making with them, will make continual strife among your selves,
until ye all be utterly consumed. When King Amaziah fell from (...), the
people slew him, 2 Chronicles. 25. 27, 28. according to that is written, 1 Samuel 12.
last. But do ye forbear League-entring with those that hate the Lord, and
ye shall strengthen the bands of love among your selves, that love the Lord,
and against the Common enemy. Do ye judge the fatherless, and the widow,
releeve the oppressed, and ye shall engage God on your side, against the
Armies of the Aliens; wherefore, if the Land of their possession be unclean,
let them return to you; Do not ye pass for their peace, but trust ye God
for settling peace in your borders; And ye shall dwell on high, your place of
defense shall be the munitions of rocks, your bread shall be given you, and
your waters shall be sure. Which is the confidence of your daily Orator, who
writes these things.

PART. III.
The Rights of the Soldiery.
A Conference delivered.
WHat, Mr. A?

Who desires it? Answ.
saving that the necessity of the Cause calls for it. For God takes no
pleasure in the death of the wicked, Ezekiel. 33. 11. yet does he order blood and
death to the wicked; I will require the blood of man, at the band of every
beast, and at the hand of every man, Genesis 9. 5. If any man hate his neighbor,
and lie in wait for him, and rise up and kill him, and smite him mortally that
he dye, the Elders of his City shall send and fetch him thence, and deliver him
into the hand of the avenger of blood, that he may dye. Thine eye shall not
pity him, but thou shall put away the guilt of innocent blood from Israel,
that it may go well with thee, Deuteronomy. 19. 11, 12, 13. To this purpose it is
said, The sword of the Lord, and Gideon, Judge. 7. 20. when God had punished the
world of the ungodly by the Flood, God smelt a sweet savor of rest, Genesis 8.
21. showing, that when Judgment was done on the ungodly, the anger of God was
then appeased (...) ^aine, it was said, Then stood up Phineas and prayed, says
(...) ^xecuted judgment, says another; showing, that judgment should be
executed with prayer, not with sensual pleasure. So, Judgment being executed,
the plague ceased, Psalm. 106. 30. Phineas was a Priests Son, no ordinary
Magistrate; his office was to pray, to strike beseemed not his place: yet when
he saw the abominations of Zimri and Cozbi, done in the face of the mourning
Congregation, he executed judgment, not judicially, but suddenly, and with a
Javelnt thrust them both through, that they dyed. This he did on them, though
Princes, without any respect of their persons, or of the peoples ill will for
his so doing. And God approved the fact done, for the plague ceased from the
people; and God gave unto Phineas (for this his zeal) the covenant of an
everlasting Priesthood, Numb. 25. 6, 7, 8 -- 11, 12, 13. Thus Matthias, and
his Son (when Commissioners came from King Antiochus to the City of Modin, to
compel the Israelites to forsake God, and to sacrifice to his Idols) refused
to hearken to the Kings Commandment, to transgress their religion, protested
against that wickedness, slew one of the Jews that did sacrifice on the
Altar, killed the Kings Commissioner, who compelled him to do sacrifice, and
destroyed the Kings Altar, 1 Maccab. 2. 15 -- 18. 19 -- 22, 23, 24, 25, 26.
Thus bare he a zeal to the Law of God, doing as Phineas did to Zimri the son
of Salem; whereupon he invited all that were zealous of the Law, and would
stand to the Covenant, to follow him; then many set themselves in Battle
against them, ver. 32. but there followed Matthias all that fled for
persecution, and they smote the wicked in their wrath, and the ungodly in their
anger, ver. 42, 43, 44. 48. so they recovered the Law out of the hands of the
Gentiles, and out of the hands of Kings, and gave not place to the wicked. Thus
did (after him) Judas, Chap. 3. 44. and then, chapter 9. 73. Jonathan, who governed
the people, and destroyed the ungodly out of Israel. Nextly, Simon, chap. 13.
1. and likewise John, son of Simon, ver. 54. and chap. 16. Lastly, Judas
Maccabeus, and his brethren, Simon, Joseph, Jonathan, 2 Maccab. 8. 1 -- 22.
Fighting with their hands,
and praying with their hearts to God, slew three hundred and fifty thousand
men, ch^^ 15. 27 -- 32, 33. cutting off Nicanor's head and hand, and* his
tongue into many pieces, for his blasphemy against God, whereof you may read
more, chap. 15. 3, 4, 5. In like manner the English Soldiers have punished
evildoers, who being the Magistrates Servants, have been by them required, (as
the Posse comitatus wont to be called by the Sheriff of a County) when
Malefactors were too numerous, and too strong for their Rulers, yet have they
neither sacked, siedged, nor spoiled any City, nor waged war against any
place; but where (on summons first given them) the party's concerned did refuse
peace proffered to them; in which case they have warrant to smite, and spoil
too, Deuteronomy. 20. 10, 11 -- 17.

Why,

The occasion is the punishment of evildoers, Ans.
and the praise of them that do well, 1 Pet. 2. 13. chiefly, to preserve the
life of innocent persons. Watchful shepherds, do not desire the death of the
Foxes, simply in their kind; but in order to the safety of the innocent Lambs.
And thus it is said, Cant. 2. 5. Take us the Foxes, the little Foxes that
spoil the vines. Christ's own Vines must not be neglected, in pity to the
Foxes of the Wood, but the Vines must be preserved by the punishment of the
Foxes. And who are these Foxes, but such people as do spoil the tender Vines?
then such persons as would have these Foxes spared, are well-worthy to have
their Vines spoiled, and their Lambs killed too; for so did not Solomon, who
executed Justice on ill-affected persons in their evil doing, in order to the
peace and welfare of them that do well, 1 King. 2. Who then shall blame our
State? who Shepherd-like, do take us the Foxes to safeguard the Lambs, or
persons simple concerning evil.

2. Whereas you cry out of the effusion of blood, Ans. 2.
to spare the guilty; I perceive you never lament the blood of the innocent,
who are well-affected to God and the Parliament; when that has been spilt like
water on the ground, and there has been none to gather it. But, Thou love
thine enemies, and hate thy friends, who have saved thy life; Thou regardest
neither Princes, nor Servants, for if Absalom had lived, and all we had dyed
this day, it had pleased thee well. If Parliament and people, fearing God, and
honoring them, had dyed, instead of the Earl of Darby's company, it had
pleased thee well, see 2 Samuel 19. 5, 6.

But you, on days of Thankes-giving, read (in triumph) The Horse, and the
Rider, is thrown down in the midst of the sea.

If Moses did well to sing Gods praises, Ans.
when Israel was delivered from their Egyptian Bondage, and to write so, as no
doubt he did; we may also read what he has written, having the like occasion,
so it be with the same affection. Christ bids his Disciples, look what spirit
they were of, Luke 11. 53, 54, 55. when these produced their warrant for their
praying, as Elias did; so when we praise God in Moses words, we are to see it
be done in Moses his spirit, and we may do it; for whatsoever things were
written afore-time, were written for our learning, Romans 15. 4. And in the Holy
Scriptures we learn to give thanks, (not for blood of men shedding, (as some
slanderously affirm that we do, whose damnation is just) But, we rejoice for
the punishment of wicked men, for the reward of the righteous men, and for the
Justice of God in both. The righteous shall rejoice when he sees the
vengeance, he shall wash his feet in the blood of the wicked, so that men shall
say, Verily, there is a reward for the righteous, verily there is a God that
judges the earth, Psalm. 58. 10, 11.

Lord,

Yes, Ans.
here is Law, to punish the lawless; here is a Church to instruct the
ignorant, and to correct them, that live in error; and a State, that is a
terror to them that do evil, and a minister of God for good, to them that
do good, Romans 13. 4, 5.

Here is a Law, that bids, Submit your selves to every ordinance of man for the
Lords sake, whether unto the King as supreme, or unto Governors, as to those
that are sent by him, for the punishment of evildoers, and for the praise of
them that do well, 1 Pet. 2. 13. In which words is a justification of our
Laws, being for the punishment of evildoers, and for the praise of them that
do well; and a justification of our State too, to be as much an Ordinance as
the King, they both were ordained of men, they both were chosen by the people,
to assemble together for enacting good Laws; and the Commons of England
assembled in Parliament, have had further confirmation from the people, since
they were without a King, in their unanimous Banding, and warring against the
Scots at Worcester; and the people do well to submit, for the Commons (in the
first constitution of this Parliament) were by the people equally entrusted
with the power of Government, as the King was, they were Powers, as well as he,
and it became not them (sitting for the Commonwealth's good) to fail their
trust, or to dis-use the power given them in trust, although the (then) King
brake his trust, and used his power, not for edification, but for destruction
of the Weale-publick, he withholding evill-doers from the trial of Justice,
as by the Parliaments Declaration, of no Addresses to be made to the King does
appear. He gave Passes, and Warrants to convey away diverse Persons questioned
by the Parliament for their Crimes.

Suppose a Father, and his Son, made joint Feoffees in trust, for
conservation of a Minors estate, the Son is (in order of Nature) inferior to
the Father, but consider him in a Politic capacity as a Trustee, and the Son
has power equal with his Father; neither may the Son waste the estate
entrusted with them both, though the Father does so; yea, the Son must preserve
the estate according to his trust, although his own Father wastes the estate
contrary to their trust; yea, it were but right, and duty in him that keeps
his trust, to bring the Defaulter to the trial of Justice, for failing his
trust; He that loves father or mother more then me, is not worthy of me,
Matthew. 10. 37. yea, and he that hates not his own life also, to follow Christ,
cannot be my Disciple, Luke 14. 26. Men of Public trust must hate their own
lives for Christ, and must lay aside all private interests, (of loss and
gain) for the Public good. Thus the late King, and the Parliament, were as
the Father and Son, both alike entrusted with Englands Commonwealth, and as
Trustees, they had equal power to defend, and safeguard the people; and the
Parliament performed their trust, even against the King, who failed his trust
committed by the people to him, and to them. Again* A Father and a Mother are
equally empowered, to bring up, nourish, and cherish children given to them
both: now, imagine the Father should endeavor the destruction of the Child,
as Saul attempted Jonathan's death, yet may not the Mother see, nor allow the
same, but preserve her children rather, as the Midwives in Egypt did, not
fearing the Kings commandment. Even the Hen provides to save her Chickens from
devouring vermin. It was said, Kings shall be their nursing-Fathers, and
Queens their nursing Mothers, Esa. 49. 23. And Commons in Parliament are set
for such, and if Kings have been (as Nimrod) mighty hunters before the Lord, it
became the Commons to be harborers of the people, against the strife of Kings:
In cases personal, flee; in cases National, Fight; Leges naturae, non
abolentur in evangelio etiam subditis adversus dominos Grassatores, concessa
est defensio proprii corporis, conjugis, etc. contra injustam crudelitatem,
Bucanon de Magistrate. q. 77. 27.

The Laws of Nature are not abolished in the Gospel, even to Subjects is
granted the defense of themselves, their wives and their children, against the
unjust cruelty of oppressing Princes.

Thus we have seen here, who be our Governors, what is their power, and what
be their Laws; how they are entrusted, to rule well; and that the people must
submit to them in so doing, and to their Laws made by them for the peoples
welfare. So here in England, even now is Law, the same that Christians in
primitive times were commanded by.

2. Here is a Church in England, though without Bishops; for in our Savior
Christ's time, before Bishops were, there was a Church, Upon the rock of Peter's
faith confessed, Matthew. 16. 15, 16. And this was before there was yet any
superiority of disciples or of Ministers. For what pre-eminence had the twelve
Disciples over one another? who were alike called by Christ, alike sent forth
into the world, and had the same success to have the spirits subjected to
them, In Christ their masters days; and the same parity was among the seventy
Disciples, as among the twelve. Peter (as the mouth of the rest) had the honor
to confess Christ, the son of God, that rock, on which the Church is built.
But Christ forbids his Disciples to exercise Lordship over one another, as the
Gentiles did, saying, He that will be greatest among you, let him be as him
that serves, Matthew. 10. 42, 43. Let them be more zealous, active, and more
exceed in their service, who have received from God more excellent parts.

Again, there was no Bishops, nor Bishops over Bishops, when it was said, The
Lord added to the Church, such as should be saved, Acts 2. 41, 47. Where the
Church consisted of them that believed, having heard the word, and were to be
saved. No mention of Bishops nor of Officers under them. Then afterward we
read of Deacons, Acts 6. And of Elders, Act. 14. and of a Church at Corinth, 1
Cor. 1. 1. yea, seven times mentioned in 1 Cor. chap. 14. when in the Church
every one spoke according to his gift, as any thing was revealed to him that
sat by, ver. 30. The Saints made a Church at Corinth, though ye read not of
any Bishops there then.

Indeed Paul 1 Timothy 3. 5. does speak of Bishops, Ruling their own house, and
taking care of the Church of God, and 1 Timothy 5. 17. counts them worthy of
double honor, who labor in the word and doctrine, and Tit. 3. 9. he commands
that they be able by sound doctrine, to exhort, and convince the gainsayers.
But Peter bids them, Feed the flock of God, as much as in you is, and be not
Lords over (or over rule not) that heritage, 1 Pet. 5. 2, 3. (...). Where note,
that there ought to be no Lords Bishops over the flock of God; And that the
people, called the flock of God (because purchased with the blood of Christ,)
are Gods Clergy, as much as Bishops. That Elders are to feed the flock of God,
and by feeding them to exercise rule over them. And the highest person in the
Church, that has highest place among the people, has but the power, (...)
which signifies to feed, and Matthew. 2. 7. to rule, and express a kind of
simple rule, and authority, such as by feeding the sheep, shepherds have over
them. Here it appears, that when the Church of God had Elders to feed them, no
men might be Lords therein, nor overruled them, but feed them rather: And ye
may observe, that when Paul, 1 Cor. 12. 28. mentions helps in Government, he
names Apostles, Prophets, Teachers, Workers of Miracles; But he names not
either Bishops, Elders, or Deacons: Showing, that they are not (that unum
necessarium,) mainly necessary in the Church. And however they are (by some)
numbered among helps in Church Government; yet if they be not mainly necessary,
they are not greatly to be contended for: for helps in Government, are (but) of
the been esse, not of the esse of the Church; for there was a Church, and a
Church governed, before Bishops were in being, or once so much as named in the
Church of God. And although these pretended helps in Government, be taken away
from amongst us, yet here is a Church in England still without Bishops: For
generally, the Bishops did (but) pretend to help in the Government of the
Church, the most of them found occasion against both Ministers and People,
concerning the law of our God, Dan. 6. 5. who (proving a snare instead of an
help) were justly taken away, the Church of England still abiding a Church
without Bishops.

And if your meaning be, That we have no Church, i. e. No calling to the
Ministry in the Church, because there be no Bishops to give ordination.

I Answer, we must soberly distinguish (as before, between the Essentialls and
the Circumstantialls of a Church, so here) between the Essentialls and the
Circumstantialls of a Ministers Call.

The Essentialls of a man's Call to the Ministry consists in Christ's gifting men
for the office; or in Christ's putting into men's hearts the word of
reconciliation, to minister thereof to men, 2 Cor. 5. 20. 2. In his giving such
men willing hearts to preach it 1 Cor. 9. 16. Ordination it self, is but an act
of convenience in respect of order, not of necessity to give men power to
preach the Gospel. And for ordination by Bishops, that is a circumstance less
necessary to the Ministers Call. It had its time, to become expedient for such
as would enter in by the door (which is Christ;) but ordination by Bishops was
never absolutely necessary to a Ministers Call.

The Circumstances convenient to the Call of a Minister, be diverse, 1. Some be
primo necessariae, and precedaneous to ordination in this Call. As 1.
Nomination from among believers, such as have gone in and out with us, this
Justus and Matthias also had, Act. 1. 2. Imposition of hands with prayer, which
came instead of casting of lots. 3. Examination of men unknown, 1 Timothy 3. 9,
10. 4. Separation to the work of the Ministry which Barnabas and Saul had,
Act. 13. Which also, is called (of some) by the name of Ordination; and indeed,
has been in use (as here we see) before there were Bishops to use the same.

2. Some Circumstances, be succedaneous to this Ordination of Ministers. As 1.
Recommendation from known Ministers, which Titus had, 1 Cor. 16. 10. 2.
Election to some place, which Paul had to Macedonia, Act. 16. 4. 3. Approbation
of the people, in that place, Who gave up themselves first to God, and then
also to us by the will of God, 2 Cor. 8. 5. All these Circumstances, do
respect the Been esse, or the good constitution of the calling to the Ministry;
but the esse of their Call, requires them not, ordination is no part of the
Ministers Call from God; for Christ is the door, Christ's gifting men for it,
and his inclining gifted men to minister of that they have received, is that
unum necessarium to a Ministers Call. Such an one glorifies not himself, to be
called a Minister of Christ, but, he that is called of God Heb. 5. 5. For this
cause, the Bishops (at the ordination of Ministers) had in use to move this
Question, Are you persuaded, ye are truly called to this Ministration? Vide,
Book of making Bishops, Priests and Deacons. Other men have sent forth
Ministers to the work, as well as Bishops, and other people have called
Ministers to the places of their ministration; As has been already proved.
From all which premises, it is plain that the people of England have a Church,
and have Ministers lawfully called, even now, though there be no ordination of
Bishops to make them such.

3. Here is a State, though without a King, as Israel of old had, before there
was any King in Israel. And when that Commonwealth (after Joshua) ruled by
Elders for three hundred seventy nine years together. See the book of Judges:
and those Elders obtained a good report through faith, Heb. 11. All this was don
before (yet) God gave them a King in his wrath, and before King Saul played the
Tyrant over that people, as an executioner of Gods wrath, which was spoken of
him, 1 Samuel 8. 11 -- 18.

True Kings, Bishops and their Laws were set up by men for helps in Government
of this State, Church, and Commonwealth; but the people lacking help of them,
and being snared by them, they have been rooted out by the Trustees of this
Commonwealth; yet in want of a King, here is a State still: In the want of
Bishops, here is a Church still; And in the want of (the Statutes of Omri) the
Bishops Laws, I mean, their lacks not Laws to Rule and Govern the people by,
even now; though lawless persons grudge, and acknowledge them not, for even
the Soldiers, or some of them have (by law) suffered for their own evil doing.

Wherefore if men do only that is right in their own eyes, it is not for want
of Rulers, nor with the toleration of the Magistrate, let not our State bear
blame for that.

But why may not he (meaning the King of Scots) desire his own,

No man can be right Heir to any earthly Kingdom, Answ.
since Christ the Heir of all things was deprived, and Crucified; Duke William
got his power over this Kingdom, not by inheritance, but by Conquest, and the
Heir was (in this Family) put besides the Crown, and many more since that, as
Eleutherus Philodemus largely shows; Now the King of Scots (for whom you
plead) must either plead Conquest from the Conqueror, or succession from his
Father (because you say this Commonwealth is his own) whereas indeed, neither
Victory, nor Succession gives any man right to reign over a people, only
Reddit idoneos, it makes men fit, Vti Rex Jac. Moreover, the Kings of England,
were formerly such as the people did choose, as Mr. Cook in his Appeal has
observed, from the form of their Oath; for when King of England were Crowned,
they bound themselves by Oath to rule the people according to the Laws of this
Nation; also, the people either chose, or accepted them for their Kings,
hereupon engaging their Allegiance to them. The old King Charles, by his
Hostile Breaches of his Oath, dissolved the people from their Bond, and from
their Obedience too; he forfeited his Kingdom, and ceased to be King. As for
the King of Scots, he had neither election, nor approbation from this
Commonwealth, nor from the Representative thereof, the Commons in Parliament;
and his claim without the peoples consent, gives him no more title to reign
here, then Absalom had to rule Israel, who designed to be King, while David was
King there, and ruled well also; for so the People of England have chosen, or
accepted other Governors, according to their Liberty; their Liberty being, as
theirs was in the Commonwealth of Israel, who desired Elders, Judge. 8. 22.
Chap. 11. 6 -- 11.

Ah,

If his life be taken away, it was not for his virtue, nor for his Divinity
neither. Where were his virtues seen, in his latest governing? he proclaimed,
and waged war against his best Subjects, the Parliament, and his good People;
was this a virtue in a King, set up to fight for the People? for this, the
Commons of England in Parliament have declared him a Tyrant: now Tyranny is no
virtue; and when (in the face of Death) he used a form of Prayer taken out of
Sir Philip Sidny's Arcadia, he proved himself neither Virtuous, nor Divine;
and if his Son walking in his Fathers steps, be also cast off from reigning
in England, it is according to Gods Law. If he beget a Son that is a shedder
of blood -- shall he then live? he shall not live, he has done all these
abominations, he shall surely dye, his blood shall be upon him, Ezekiel. 18. 9 --
13. by which Law, he is cast out of this Kingdom, and out of the Land of the
living too. Thus Jehu rooted out murderous Ahab, and all his race; so Jehu slew
all that remained of the house of Ahab in Iezreel, and all his great men, and
his Kins-folke, and his Priests, until he left none remaining, 2 King. 10. 11.

True it is, Kings were of old Divine, being promised of God to Abraham, Kings
shall come out of thee, Genesis 17. 6. And some were by Gods appointment anointed
Kings, as Saul, and David; but of all Kings since Christ's death, it may be
questioned, Whose are all these? For after the Scepter departed from Shiloh,
what man, after Christ's death, was ever Anointed King by Gods Command? After
the Jews had killed the Heir, they said, So the inheritance shall be ours,
Mat. 21. 38. It became (indeed) theirs by force of violence, because they
seized on it, not by course of Nature, nor by inheritance, nor gift, but
Conquest made Kings; Kings indeed were supreme, Vt caeteris hominibus
praeirent and praelucerent, To use King James his phrase, that they may excel
others in doing service to the people, as well as being in place above the
people, not to magnify their Name, but to mind Kings of their duty; But even
Kings, with all their supremacy, were all (but) Kings of this World (after
Christ) their Kingdoms, Kingdoms of men, Dan. 4. 17. being chosen by men, as
the Kings of the Nations at first, Kings of the earth, 2 Chronicles. 9. 22, 23 --
26. Kingdoms of this world, Revel. 11. 15. They were (...) an Ordinance of
man, 1. Pet. 2. 13. So, changeable they are, as the people see just reason and
cause for it, E. Philodem. p. 56. altering the form of Government for the
substance sake, and preferring the greater before the less; even Religion
toward God, and the Liberties of the people, before the Person of the King,
therein not breaking, but keeping the Covenant, according to the equity
thereof; Vide, the Declaration of the Army marching into Scotland, wherefore,
The Kingdoms of this world are become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his
Christ; and if the Powers that be, do not (...), feed the people, by ruling
over them, their power shall be (likewise) broken, as this of England has
been, be the Nations never so angry, Revel. 11. 15 -- 17, 18. then no marvel
if his servants serve him.

The Brazen Serpent in the Wilderness was ordained by God, but Hezekiah seeing
it abused to Idolatry, beat it to powder, threw it into the river, and called it
Nehushtan, 2 King. 18. 4. and if this State have for his pride and tyrany
brought this man down into the dust of death, and rooted out all Kingship
after him; Righteous art thou O Lord, and upright are thy Judgments, Psalm.
119. 137. when King Amaziah turned from following the Lord, they conspired
against him, pursued him to Lachish, and slew him there, 2 Chronicles. 25. 27. 28.
no man ever was questioned for it. Thus that English King lived like Rehoboam,
following the young men's counsel, spoke roughly, and armed himself against
his own people, 2 Chronicles. 10. 13, 14. 11. 1. and he dyed like Jehoram, who
reigned wickedly, and dyed without being desired of the people, 2 Chro. 21. 19,
20. But he has received that recompense of his error which was meet; and
loath should I have been to have raked up the dead-mans bones again, but in
defense of the living, and of our just State.

It has been said, Pray for your enemies.

Yea, Ans.
we pray for our enemies, in pity to them, yet not to prosper them, but that
they may be kept from evil-doing. Again, we must discern between our enemies
and Christ's enemies, for we may not bid God speed to Christ's enemies, who bring
not his Doctrine, Joh. 10. 11. Jehosaphat had this warning, Thou should not
love them that hate the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 19. 2. yea, David hated them, that hate
God, rightfore, as though they were his enemies, Psalm. 139. 21, 22. and he
often prayed against them; Be not merciful, O Lord, to wicked transgressors,
Psalm. 59. 5. or, to such as offend of malicious wickedness. Also we must
discern between our own private enemies, and the Common enemies of our
Country, Omnes omnium Charitates patria complectitur, Cicer. 3 Offic. Private
interests are all comprehended in the Public, he deserves no pity, who
pitties not the Commonwealth, although there be a pretense of pity to the
enemies of our Country. A public spirit loves Christ before his Country, and
his Country above himself; and if above himself, then above the enemies of
Christ, and of his Country much more; always preferring his Country, and the
welfare of them that love Christ therein, above the enemies of his Country (who
ever they be) both in our Prayers and Praises, in our Counsels, and in all our
services of Peace, and War: for the King, and the Parliament are Majores
singulis, yet they are Minores Vniversis, see vox militaris; and as totum
universum est majus suis partibus. A rotten member must not be spared, in pity
to the whole; Ense recidendum est, ne pars sincera trahatur. True it is, in
common infirmities the rule is, Forgive, and it shall be forgiven you, Luke 6.
37. for, Love covers a multitude of sins, 1 Pet. 4. 8. In crying sins, and in
criminal cases, the Law is, Thou shall smite them, thou shall utterly destroy
them, and shall show them no favor, Deuteronomy. 7. 2. In case of ignorance, we pray
for our enemies; Father, forgive them, they know not what they do, Luke 23.
34. But in case they offend of malice, we pray against our enemies, Let death
seize upon them: let them go down quick into hell, for wickedness is in
their dwellings, and amongst them, Psalm. 55. 15.

You have power on your side,

I never received reward from the State, Ans.
to speak for them, yet I have cause in duty, and thankfulness, to speak for
them, in as much as I have received from them; and if I speak for them, yet I
speak the truth of them. They put the late King to death, 1. Not privily, as
Zimri slew his Master, but they brought him forth to his Trial publicly, and
legally; had he had any thing to say in his own defense, for clearing himself
of the Crimes charged against him. 2. Nor did they this, as Zimri slew his
Master, in his drunkenness, a personal sin against God, and himself, 1
King. 16. 9, 10. but they did it for his sins against the Nation, and this
English people; even as King Joash, who was slain on his Bed, for cruelty and
ingratitude against the Sons of Jehoiada the Priest, who had anointed him King,
2 Chronicles. 24, 25. And as King Amon, who was slain on his Bed by his Servants,
for his open Idolatry, 2 Chronicles. 33. 21, 22, 23, 24. 3. They put him not to
death pretending a jealousy without cause, as Saul would have slain his Son
Jonathan, for pleading for David, and would have killed David, for that as long
as David lives, nor Jonathan, nor his Kingdom should be established, 1 Samuel
20. 30. 33. 4. Not for small matters, as the Corinthians went to Law, 1 Cor. 6,
1, 2. 5. Not for a seeming cause, as Saul for his rash vows sake, would have
put Jonathan his Son to death, had not the people rescued him, 1 Samuel 14. 24.
27 -- 43, 44, 45. but it was for a cause real, great, open, and manifest; a
breach of Trust, and of his Covenant with his people; for setting up his
Standard, and warring against the Parliament, who desired, and endeavored to
punish evildoers, whom he favored. A public, National Offense; True, I do
honor this State, and if mine enemy should write a Book against me for so
doing, I should bind it to my shoulder; for God has honored them, with many
succesfull Victories over their enemies, and with much love of persons
well-affected to God, and Christ, who also do return their honor to God, and
to the People that did choose them, making the welfare and common good of the
People their supreme Law, being true Keepers of the Liberties and peace of the
People; and needs must I speak, write, and pray for their peace, Let them all
prosper that love them.

Touch not mine Anointed, Psalm. 105. 14, 15. and how then dare any man touch,
or harm a King?

This question has been (...) moved, and as often answered; but I say, it were
rather (...) asked, How dare any man touch, or harm his Prophets, and his
People? which both are his anointed there, not to be touched or harmed, no not
by Kings themselves; for God reprooveth Kings for their sakes, ver. 14. For
Kings are not therefore the Lords anointed, because outwardly anointed by men.
Oleum, est tantum signum and judicium Ja: Rex. But the Lords prophets and
people were inwardly anointed and sanctified to be the Lords, vide Geneva notes
in margin; for the Saints in Christ have this honor, to execute the judgment
written against wicked Rulers, with a two edged sword in their hands, to bind
their Kings in chains; and their Nobles in fetters of iron, Psalm. 149. 6, 7, 8.

Yea, as it is said, To execute vengeance on the Heathen, and corrections upon
the people, verse. 7.

What difference between heathens by National profession, Ans.
and heathens by un-christian conversation? for what do heathens more then
they? In their works they deny him, Tit. 1. 16. They eat up my people, as men
eat bread, Psa. 53. 5. and so do these Kings who cease to be Christian in
their deeds: Yea, and judgments are written against unchristian Kings, as
against heathen Kings and other sinful men; if ye shall do wickedly, ye
shall be consumed, both ye and your King, 1 Samuel 12. ult. For, their thus
sining, is the case of those circumcised, who became uncircumcised; forsook the
holy Covenant, joined themselves to the Heathen, and were sold to do
mischeife, In the days of Antiochus, 1 Macchab. 1. 16. Christian Kings in
name, turn Heathens, when they break asunder all bonds of Nature, Nation, and
Religion too. And they become punished as heathen Princes be. When
Nebuchadnezzar, in his pride became a beast, his own people turned him out
among the beasts, until he should acknowledge the God of heaven; that rules in
the Kingdom of men, and gives it to whomsoever he pleases, Dan. 4. 17, 18,
20, 34.

To the Valiant Commanders, and Watchful Soldiers.
Epist.

GEntle, and contentfull Soldiers, It was an old Question of one Hetruscus,
Whether a Christian may in any case go to war? Its answered, he may; for to do
justice and judgment, is more acceptable then sacrifice, Prove. 2^. 3. And its
answered by Osorius de Nobilit. Christian. lib. 3. Respublica non possit
stabiliri, nisi armorum praesidio, qui militem ^ollit, Rempublicam funditus
evertit. Christus poli^eias non eripuit, sed in melius instruit. The
Commonwealth cannot be stablished, unless it be guarded with Arms. Take away
the Soldier, and ye overturne the Commonwealth. Christ would not abolish
Civil Governments, but form them for the better: he neither took the axe from
the Judges; nor did Paul deny the sword to the Magistrates; nor did John
Baptist disarme the Soldiers, but prescribed them laws of innocence and
moderation, Do violence to no man, and be content with your wages, Lu. 3. 13.
yea, Paul calls the Magistrate, a Minister of God to thee for good, thou doing
well; and says, he bears the sword to execute wrath upon them that do evil,
Romans 13. 4, 5.

Indeed, it were much to be wished by every Christian, that a^l men may contain
themselves from doing evil, that there were not this occasion given for
punishment, and for war; for, thy people shall be all righteous, then thy
officers shall be peace, and thine exactors righteousness, the Lord will
hasten it in his time, Isa. 16. 17, 21. But since that time is not yet, and
this cannot (yet) be, ye must remember, That Nation and Kingdom that will not
serve thee (God and his people) shall be wasted, v. 12. impetus hostium, est
armis depellendus and civium audacia, est ferro reprimenda. The boldness of
vice, must be reprooved with the couragiousnesse of virtue. Our fathers of old
were led by the spirit for the rebuking malefactors; and we know that vengeance
in a private matter becomes valor in the case of a Commonwealth. Patience in
personal injuryes, does in National wrongs assume a magnanimity invincible,
as Joshua did; and it was a fruit of their peace with God, When our fathers
undertook Sanctissima Bella contra sceleratos, most holy wars against notorious
offenders; for what peace? so long as Jezabels whoredoms, and her witchcrafts
are so many? 2 King. 9. 22. The end of war upon the wicked, should be the
quietness and peace of those that are godly and honest. Humbly acquaint your
selves with God, and be at peace among your selves. Courageously follow the
Captain of your salvation, patiently carry his cross after him, faithfully
commit the safe-keeping of your souls in weldoing to him, and let us pray also
for the peace of Englands Commonwealth. Amen.

FINIS.

