An Account of what has passed in the Treaty between the Old and New East India
Companies, toward an Agreement.
UPon the Motion of Mr. Papillon a Treaty was set on foot, and several Messages
passed between both Companies.

The Old Company Resolved, That they are willing to Join in a Coalition with
the Subscribers to the Two Millions, Provided it can be done of Safe, Just, and
Reasonable Terms.

The New Company Resolved, That they incline to an Agreement with the Governor
and Company of Merchants of London Trading into the East Indies, upon Safe,
Just, and Reasonable Terms.

Each Company chose a Committee of Seven to Manage the Treaty; and whilst it
was depending, the Old Company thought fit to Petition the Honorable House of
Commons; Which for that time broke off the Treaty.

Upon their Petition a Bill was brought in, and upon the first Reading
Rejected. School. Mar. 9. Ditto 10.


However, the New Company the next day sent a Message to the Old Company, to
acquaint them with the Names of their Committee of Seven, and that they were
Empowered, and would be ready to Treat with the like Number of the Members of
their Company, as soon as they pleased to appoint, in order to an Agreement.

To which the Old Company returned Answer, That they would the beginning of
next week call their Grand Committee, and lay before them the said Message.

The Old Company sent a Message to the New Company, Ditto 21.
to acquaint them with the Names of their Committee of Seven, and that they
were Authorized and Empowered, and would be ready to Treat with the like Number
of their Company; and, that the said Seven Persons would meet them at
Skinners-Hall on Thursday morning next, at 9 a Clock, to enter upon the said
Treaty; if they shall think fit.

The Two Committees of Seven met according to the said Appointment, Ditto 23.
and the Powers from each Company being Exchanged, they mutually agreed, That
all the Transactions upon the Treaty be Exchanged in Writing.

And the Two following Heads were agreed to be Treated on, viz.

1. How, and upon what Terms the 315000 l. subscribed by Mr. John Du Boys,
shall be joined and admitted into the Joint Stock of The English Company
Trading to the East Indies. 2. What Valuation shall be set upon the Dead Stock
of the Governor and Company of Merchants of London Trading into the East
Indies, and how the Value thereof shall be satisfied.
The Two Committes met again, Apr. ^
and the Committee of the New Company delivered Two Resolutions of their Grand
Committee upon the Two, Heads agreed to be Treated on, which were as follows,
viz.

Resolved, (on the First Head) That the 315000 l. subscribed by Mr. John Du
Boys, may be joined and admitted into the Joint Stock of The English Company
Trading to the East Indies, as Effectually to all Intents and Purposes, as if
it had been Originally subscribed into the same.

Resolved, (on the Second Head) That this Company is willing to come to an
Agreement for the Old Companies Dead Stock, and rather to exceed then lessen
the true Value, in order, to which they desire to have such a Particular as may
enable them to make a Judgment thereof, and being settled, they will pay and
satisfy for the same as shall be agreed.

At the same time the Committee of the Old Company delivered 3 Papers viz.

1. One Paper containing Two Proposals of their Grand Committee on the first
Head, as follows, viz. First Proposal. That a Sum of Money be agreed on and
adjusted by both Companies, which shall be the General United Joint Stock for
carrying on the Trade to India, and by what Purts and in what Method the same
shall be paid and advanced. Second Proposal. That the Share and Proportion of
the Old Company in such United Joint Stock be as 315000 l. shall bear in
proportion to the Sum to be ascertained and agreed on as an annual Necessary
Export to India.


2. A Second Paper, containing a Proposal on the 2d Head, as follows, viz. That
the dead Stock of this Company in India, and elsewhere beyond the Seas,
consisting of several Possessions, Privileges, and Revenues, be Valued at
Three hundred and Fifty thousand Pounds, and to be paid for the said dead Stock
to content.

3. A Third Paper importing, That the dead Stock of the East India Company in
India, and elsewhere beyond the Seas, consists principally in the 3 following
particulars. First, Possessions, as Forts, Factories, Buildings, and Lands of
Inheritance. Secondly, Diverse Privileges, Grants, and Immunities, in the
several Places of their Residence and Settlements. Thirdly, Several Revenues.


Under the first Head are enumerated the Islands of St. Helena and Bombay,
Bombay Castle, and several Factories under that Presidency. On the Coast of
Mallabar, Carwarr, Tellicherry and Anjengo Forts, and Callicut Factory; In
Persia three Factories, under the Presidency of Fort St. George; Fort St.
George, Fort St. David's and Vizagapatam Forts, and several Factories; On the
Island of Sumatra; Bencoolen, a Fort with Two Factories; In Cochinchina One
Factory, under the Agency of Bengall; Chuttanuttee, a strong Fortification,
Three Factories, which some Houses and Warehouses.

Under the Second Head, they say that the Company have by Grants, Phirmands,
and mutual Stipulations, obtained very great Privileges and Immunities in most
parts of India, not only beyond any other Nations Trading thither, but even
beyond the Natives themselves.

On all the Coasts of Coromandell, Chingee, Orixa, Sumatra, Mallabar, and in
Persia they are Custom-free.

In Bengall they pay only 3000 Rupees yearly, instead of 5 per Cent. paid by
others.

Under the Third Head is mentioned Revenues, which are said to arise from
Customs, Rents, Quit-rents and Ground-rents, Farms and other Incomes in Persia;
Fort St. George, Bombay, Fort St. David's, St. Helena, York Fort at Bencoolen,
and other places, amounting unto upwards of Forty thousand Pounds a year,
without any part thereof raised on the Trade of the Company.

The Two Committees met, April.
and the Committee of the New Company delivered the answer, of their Grand
Committee to the Old Companies Proposals, received the 3d of April.

Answer to the First Proposal in the first Paper.

It is not possible to determine what Sum of Money the Trade may take up, the
same being capable of Enlargement to a great degree, and therefore no certain
Stock can be adjusted.

Answer to the Second Proposal in the said First Paper.

The Trade having by Act of Parliament been settled upon the Loan of Two
Millions, whoever came in at first, or shall hereafter be admitted into the
Joint Stock, ought not to expect any greater Share of the Trade than their
Proportion in the said Two Millions.

But if the Old Company desire a greater Proportion in the Two Millions than
the Original Subscription of Mr. Duboys, in order to Gratify them therein:
This Committee will do their utmost to procure for them such an addition to the
315000 l. upon the terms of the Act of Parliament, as will Entitle them to such
a part of the Trade as they shall reasonably desire.

Answer to the Proposal in the second Paper, and to the third Paper, concerning
their Dead Stock.

This Committee desired to be informed 1. What they value each Fort and Factory
at. 2. What their particular Privileges, Grants and Immunities are, and what
value they put upon them. 3. Where particularly and from what the Revenues do
arise.


And having received such an Account, this Committee will be enabled to give a
direct Answer to the said Proposal.

The two Committees of Seven met at the old East-India-House, Apr. 28.
and the Committee of Seven of the old Company delivered the Answer of their
Grand Committee, to the last Paper delivered by the New Company, as follows,
viz.

On the first Head

1. That it is not impossible to determine what shall be the Joint Stock to
carry on the Trade to India, for that if the Trade be capable of being
hereafter enlarged, the Joint Stock may also at any time be enlarged for
carrying on the Trade to the full.

And they are of Opinion, and do insist upon it, that such Joint Stock ought in
the first place to be adjusted, for that in the very nature and constant
practice of Joint Stocks, a certain Sum ought to be, and always has been
declared, of how much that Joint Stock shall consist.

2. They do admit, that by the Act, every Subscriber may Trade yearly to the
Amount of his Subscription, and therefore this Company may Trade for 315000 l.
per Ann. by virtue of the Subscription of Mr. Duboys, and the other Subscribers
may also yearly Trade (if they think fit) for the remaining 1685000 l.

But this Committee cannot apprehend, how the Committee of the new Company
could infer from their Paper dated the 27th of March last, That this Company
did thereby desire to Trade for more yearly, than by Law they are empowred to
do.

Answer on the Second Head.

That Considering the Particulars already given in of their Forts, Castles,
Settlements, Privileges, Immunities and Revenues, and the Reasonable Value put
upon them, the better to incline the New Company cheerfully to come to an
Agreement with this Company; They cannot but be of Opinion the same are
sufficient to induce the New Company to come up to the Terms of their said
Proposition; But if an Agreement in the other Particulars shall succeed, this
Committee do not doubt to give such further Satisfaction herein as may be
reasonable.

The Two Committees of Seven met, May 18.
and the Committee of Seven of the New Company delivered the following Answer
of their Grand Committee to the last Paper received from the Old Company, viz.

On the First Head.

The Old Company seem not rightly to distinguish and apply the Terms of their
Proposals, viz. A General united Joint Stock, and An Annual Necessary Export to
India; Wherefore this Committee for Explanation say, That a General united
Joint Stock is one thing, and The Annual necessary Export to India is another;
and tho it is possible to adjust and agree a General united Joint Stock, yet it
is not possible to determine how much of that Stock will of necessity be
annually employed in Trade.

The General united Stock of this Company at present is 1663000 l. being the
Sum which the several Members of this Corporation are entitled to Trade for:
and if the 315000 l. subscribed by Mr. Du Boys be admitted into the Joint
Stock, the same will be increased to the Sum of 1978000 l. to be called in at
such Times, and in such Proportions, as the Oceasions of the Trade shall
require.

Answer on the Second Head.

The Paper which the Old Company have delivered in as Particulars of their Dead
Stock, containining only

The Names of the Islands of which they say they are absolute Lords Proprietors.

The Names of several Forts, Castles, and Factories, with the Places where they
are situated.

Privileges and grants in gross, without mentioning what they are

Revenues, without expressing where and from whence they do arise.

This Committee are not thereby enabled to Judge of their Value, for such
Generals cannot be thought sufficient, on which to Purchase any Estate, much
less an Estate at such a distance, and for which so great a Sum as 350000 l. is
demanded.

The New Company receiving no Answer to their last Paper in near Two months,
July 14.
they sent a Message to the Old Company to put them in mind of the said Paper,
and to desire their Answer thereunto.

The Old Company sent the following Paper (agreed by their Grand Committee) to
the New Company. Ditto, 20.


This Committee having weighed the several Proposals received from the
Committee of the New Company, they judged it necessary to lay the same before a
General Court for their further Direction; who upon Consideration had of the
whole Proceedings between the Committees of both Companies, were of Opinion,
That the Proposals and Replies made by the Committee of the New Company, did
not show a disposition to unite the Interest of both Companies for Carrying on
the Trade to India upon Just and Reasonable Terms, but that the same did rather
tend to Deprive this Company of that Legal Right they have in the said Trade.

Yet, nevertheless, To manifest their Inclination to unite both Companies for
the better Carrying on the Trade, and Preserving the same to this Kingdom, they
did Empower this Committee, as also the Committee of Seven, to continue to
Treat with the New Company, pursuant to the Resolution of a General Court of
this Company of the 13th of January last, viz.

That this Company is willing to join in a coalition with the Subscribers to
the Two Millions, provided it can be done, on safe, just, and reasonable Terms.

Pursuant to which Powers of the General Court aforementioned, the Committee of
Seven will be ready to meet the Committee of Seven of the new Company, when and
where they please to appoint,

The two Committees met, Ditto, 28.
and the Committee of the new Company delivered the Answer of their Grand
Committee, to the old Company's last Paper as follows, viz.

THis Committee expecting to receive an Answer to their Paper, dated the 11th
of May last, are surprised to find by the abovesaid Paper, That the old Company
are of Opinion, that the Proposals and Replies made by this Company, do not
show a Disposition to unite the Interest of both Companies upon just and
reasonable Terms, but rather tend to deprive the old Company, of the legal
Right they have in the said Trade.

Whereas this Committee, have by their Proposal in their Paper dated the 24th
of March last, offered; That the 315000 l. subscribed by Mr. Duboys, may be
joined and admitted into this Companies Joint Stock, as effectually to all
Intents and Purposes, as if it had been originally subscribed into the same.
And moreover to the end the old Company might (if they pleased) have a larger
Share in the Trade, this Committee did in their Paper of the 6th of April,
offer to do their utmost to procure for them such an Addition to the said
315000 l. (upon the Terms of the Act of Parliament) as might entitle them to
such a further part of the Trade, as they should reasonably desire.

And this Committee did also by their said Paper of the 24th of March, and
other Papers, manifest their Inclination to make a reasonable offer for their
dead Stock, so soon as they should receive such a particular thereof, as might
enable them to judge of their value, but the old Company by their Paper of the
26th of April did decline to treat further upon that Head, until an Agreement
should succeed on the other Head, relating to their proportion in the Trade.

All which considered, this Committee cannot but be of opinion that they have
shown themselves ready to treat and agree on Terms both just and reasonable,
and they are still very willing to Unite on such Terms, which they judge will
equally preserve the legal Rights of both Companies.

The Two Committees of Seven met, Dec. 22.
but the Committee of the Old Company delivered no answer to the New Company's
last Paper.

The New Company have heard nothing further from the Old Company till their
Petition came into the House of Commons.


