AN EPITOMY.

SHOWING When the Protestant Religion began, why so called, the parts thereof.

The Three Creeds, and wherefore People stand up when one is said.

How and when Infant Baptism came to be used; and when and wherefore
Godfathers and Godmothers (so called) came to be ordained, and the Sign of
the Cross to be used; and when and how Sprinkling came to be used instead of
Baptism.

ALSO, The Presbyterians, and what they hold, and what Scriptures they produce.
And the Independents, and the Baptists, what Scriptures they produce. The
Quakers, somewhat of their Principles, and what Scriptures they produce


By John Axford.

London, Printed for the Author, 1700.

The Protestant Religion, how it came to be called so, and when, and what it is.
IN the Year 1517. Martin Luther Published against the Pope, and Popish
Religion; those Princes and People that joined with Luther, were called
Lutherans. 1529. The Name of Protestants began, upon the Protesting of the
Elector and Landtgrave of Hessen, against a Popish Edict; it is composed of the
Book of Common Prayer, and five Homilies, for Ministers that could not Preach,
to be Read by them at certain times, for the People, when assembled at their
Parish Churches. In the Reign of King James the First, there were added 39
Articles, in which are reckoned the Errors of the Popish Religion, and many
others; which are all Protested against by the Protestants.

And in the Book of Common Prayer are Three Creeds, the Athanasian, the
Apostle's, and the Nicene; when the Apostle's Creed is said, the People stand
up, not knowing the reason; for I have in my time asked of many, but never any
of them could tell me. It is Recorded in History, That when the Apostles were
assembled at Jerusalem, after the Ascension of our Savior, Matthias being
chosen in the room of Judas, every one made his Article, being Twelve; Peter
made the first, I Believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and
Earth; so when every one had made his Article, they all stood up, and agreed,
They could suffer Death, or any Punishment, rather than deny it. So it is said,
the Church did ordain, When it was said or read to the Congregation, they
should all stand up. It Is reported, That in Poland, when it is said to the
Congregation, they all stand up, as the Protestants do; and the Gentry draw
their Swords, and hold them up, while the Creed is said.

Pope Hyginus ordained Infant Baptism above Twelve Hundred Years past; that was
the cause that Fonts are in all Parish Churches, so called; for they being
filled with Water, the Infants were put under the Water, all over; and this way
so continued above 900 Years. There being a general Council of Bishops in
Germany, the Northern Bishops complained, That many Children did die presently,
or in a little time after, so desired that Sprinkling might serve instead of
Dipping; which was granted, to the Cold Countries; but to the Hot, Dipping to
continue: For the Papists believe, That if Infants die before their
Christendom, they go to a place called, Limbus Infantum, where they remain
without Joy or Sorrow, until the Day of Judgment; so when a Child was like to
die, they made what haste they could to Baptize it; for Sprinkling was granted
by Popish Bishops, and confirmed by the Pope. And when Sprinkling was ordained,
to be used here in England, in the place of Dipping, there were about Forty
Thousand Cornish Men raised, to oppose Sprinkling; so the Bishop of London, and
some others, and the Bishop of Exeter, pacified them, that they agreed for the
Sprinkling to be used in the place of Baptizing.

How the Sign of the Cross came to be used.
An Emperor of Rome, called Constantine the Great, born at York, his Father was
a Heathen, his Mother a Christian, who educated him to be a Christian; there
were two Copartners with him in the Empire, who were Heathens; and as
Constantine marched with his Army, in the Night, against them, he saw in the
Element a Cross of Stars, and on the left side, Hoc; on the right side, Vinces;
which signified to him, By this thou shall overcome. So he caused the Sign of
the Cross, and the Words, to be put in all his Banners; so he overcame both the
others, and was only Emperor himself. So it was ordained, When any were
Baptized, they should be signed with the Sign of the Cross; which was not long
after the Constitution of Infant Baptism.

How them they call Godfathers and Godmothers came in Use.
Constantine having overcome the Heathen, being then Emperor of the known
World: He did not cause any of the Heathen to become Christians by force, they
had Liberty; but did ordain their Children to be Baptized; so they were to have
two Men and two Woman to be Pledges or Sureties, to see and take Care, they
should be Educated in the Christian Religion, and be kept at the Christian
Schools; and when they were fit for Trades, to place them with Christians. They
had Power to take them from their Heathen Parents; if they were Rich, to make
them pay, if Poor; to be paid out of the public Fund or Stock; (but if their
Parents suffered them to go to Christian Schools, they bred them up.) As its
made use of, and has been many Years, it is superfluous; for they Promise that
they never mean to Perform, for Themselves and Child: And the Priest says, He
does Baptize, when he does but Sprinkle Water on the Child's Face, and says,
The Child is Regenerated: They say several Words one to another, that is not
true, as may be seen or read in the Order of Baptism, in the Book of
Common Prayer; so in their Catechism, the Child is asked, Who gave him his
Name? He Answers, My Godfathers, and Godmothers, in my Baptism, wherein I was
made a Member of Christ, a Child of god, and an Inheritor of the Kingdom of
Heaven. Whether this be true, let People judge. Also the Priest says, to the
Congregation, I pray and beseech you, as many as be here present, to accompany
me with a pure Heart, and humble Voice, saying, after me, Almighty and most
merciful Father, we have erred and strayed from thy Ways like lost Sheep, and
there is no Health in us. Where is the pure Heart? Many others may be seen,
besides vain Repetitions, which People are Ignorant of.

The Presbytery is alleged from the Pattern or Eldership and Presbytery of the
Apostles and Elders, of the first Churches of the Gospel, and Primitive Times;
which they endeavor to prove from these Scriptures, Acts 15.4, 6, 17, 20. 1
Cor. 3.5. Ephesians. 3.7. Colos. 1.25. 1 Timothy 1.3, 18. and 4.6. and 5.1, 17. and
6.13, 14, Titus 1.5. 1 Pet. 5.1.

Their Churches are Parochial, or Parishes, as they were divided at first by
the Romish Prelates, or Statute Laws, of the State or Kingdom; and are made
Christians by Baptizing or Sprinkling Infants, and are of a strict Reforming
Government, as to the outward Man, where they have a Power. The Parishes or
Congregations, that are under them, are Classical, where the Offender or
Scandalous, is first to appear, where so many as are of the Classis does
appoint, in some Town, most for convenience, where they meet once a Month, next
to the Provincial Synod once a Quarter, and to the National Synod once a Year;
so if there be not a Reformation, or manifest Repentance, they are cited from
one to the next; the last Determines, or Judges according to the Offense.

It Is reported, that in Geneva, a strong City, where they are Calvinists, that
is, Presbyteries, there is neither Drunkard, Curser or Swearer, known in any
Parish. They exercise a Church Power, which they call, The Power of the Keys.

Before the Toleration, they had some private Meetings, but went also to the
Public: They have since great Meetings, and Houses to meet in; they Sprinkle
Infants of those they account Members of their Church; the stricter sort have
no Witnesses, as some have: They break Bread at sometimes appointed, to those
accounted Members.

There is a great difference between the Primitive Presbytery, and that which
has been since, and is in this Age. They did not force nor Persecute others,
as they have where they have had Power; nor Dip or Sprinkle their Infants: They
differ much from the Primitive; they are more Authoritative, and seek to the
Magistrate, Acts 14.23. and 15.22, 29. 2 Cor. 1.24. 1 Timothy 6.3, 4. Matthew.
20.25, 26, 27. Luke 22.25, 26, 27. John 16.13. Gal. 1.12. 1 Pet. 5.3.

The Independants count themselves a Church, or People of God, when called, by
the Word, or Spirit, into a Consent or Covenant, and so Saints by Profession,
not to Force or Compel any to be of their Way or Opinion: But they have a free
Government among themselves. They are made Christians at first by being
Baptized, or Sprinkled, when Infants, with Water, and after by the Word, and
Covenant Holiness; and then they may enjoy or partake of the Ordinances, of
breaking Bread, and to drink Wine: They allege these Scriptures, Acts 2.41,
42. 1 Cor. 1.2, 9. 2 Cor. 6.16, 17. Colos. 1.2. 1 Pet. 2.5. Ephesians. 1.1. Romans
11.16.

They have no such Power, as the Apostles, to make or gather Churches; Churches
did not gather them: The Apostles had a Power to act; the Members of their
Churches were Baptized, or Sprinkled, under Prelacy, are no right Baptized
Members of true Churches; that of Covenant Holiness, in 1 Cor. 7.14. is, to
answer a scruple; consequences drawn from Circumcision are of no force; the
Baptizing of Infants cannot have such a Church as were the Believers in the
Apostles Days: These Scriptures are against the Independants, Acts 2.39, 42.
and 14.21, 22, 23. 1 Cor. 14.22. 1 Timothy 3.15. and 4.14. Matthew. 3.6, 9. 1 John
3. Romans 4.16. Gal. 3.16. 1 Cor. 10.1. Acts 2.41, 42. Matthew. 28.20.

Anabaptism, what it is, and what they hold.
That they are a Church of Christ, being a Company of Baptized Believers,
Assembled together in his Name, to hear the Gospel, or Word Preached; and any
one of them, that is so able or gifted, may Teach, Preach or Baptize. That none
are to be Baptized, but such as are Believers, and are able to give a Reason of
their Faith. That none are to be called Brethren or Sisters, but such as are
Baptized Believers. Those commonly called Pastors, Ministers, Church Officers,
are such as the Baptized Believers has no need of, or may be without. That
none ought to Communicate or Partake of the Ordinances of Christ (till they are
Baptized) as the Supper, Bread and Wine; so their Government and Discipline is
amongst themselves. The Scriptures which they bring for Proof, are, Matthew. 3.6,
16. and 28.19. Mark. 16.16. John 4.1, 8, 31. and 15.10. Acts 2.41. and 9.18.
and 10.48. Isaiah 1.16. and 8.16. Heb. 12.22. Romans 6.3, 4. Acts 8.38. and
16.33. and 19.4.5. and 20.7. Romans 6.3, 4. John 15.14. In some of these
Scriptures there is no mention, the Apostles used in the Name of the Father, Son
and Holy Ghost, nor Water: There is a Baptism of Gifts, of Suffering, and for
the Dead, Miracles, and of the Spirit.

The People called Quakers, what they hold.
A Freedom from Sin, and a perfect state to be witnessed in this Life, or on
this side the Grave, and that the Light within is sufficient to Save; for that
which reproved Adam and Eve, after they had eaten the Forbidden Fruit, is the
same that has reproved Sinners ever since; and that which has guided or lead
Adam and Eve out of the Fall, or Transgression, into the happy and blessed
State, is the same that has guided or lead all ever since, that has been
truly convinced, and repented, and yielded true obedience to the Light within,
the holy Spirit of Truth, as their Guide, Leader and Conductor; they have all
witnessed the Restoration out of the Fall and Transgression, into the happy
and blessed Estate, before they departed out of this Temporal Life; so all the
Saints mentioned in the holy Scriptures, never committed the same Sin more than
once, as Adam and Eve witnessed so Abel, Seth, Enoch, Noah, his Wife and his
Sons, Shem, Ham, and Japhet, and their Wives; and Ham, though his Father cursed
him; so all the Fathers of the Line of Christ, before the Flood, and after to
Abram, his Wife and Family, Isaac, and his Wife, Genesis 20. Abimelech said, Lord
will thou slay a Righteous Nation? Jacob his Family, Moses, Aaron, Eleazer,
Joshua, Caleb, and the seven Thousand that did not Bow their Knees to Baal, 1
Kings 18. And all the holy Prophets and righteous People: Isaiah 65.1. I was
found of them that sought me not; and have been made manifest to them that
asked not after me: Jer. 31.31, 32, 33, 34. Rom, 11.26, 27. Heb. 11. Where a
part is put for the whole, where their Faith is mentioned, by which the Elders
obtained a good Report: Thus I have proved how the Restoration was witnessed
before the Coming of Christ in the Flesh. Luke 1.6. Zacharias and his Wife
Elizabeth were just before God, and walked in all the Commandments and
Ordinances of the Lord, blameless: Luke 2.25. There was a Man in Jerusalem,
whose name was Simeon, this Man was Just, and feared God, and waited for the
Consolation of Israel; and the holy Spirit was upon him, and a Revelation was
given him of the holy Spirit. John 1.1. In the beginning was the Word, and the
Word was with God, and that Word was God. Verse. 2. The same was in the
beginning with God. Verse. 3. All things were made by it; and without it was
nothing made that was made. Verse. 4. In it was Life, and the Life was the Light
of Men. Verse. 5. And the Light shines in the Darkness, and the Darkness
comprehended it not. Verse. 6. There was a Man sent from God, whose Name was
John. Verse. 7. The same came for a Witness, to bear Witness of the Light, that
all Men through him might believe. Verse. 8. He was not that Light, but was sent
to bear witness of the Light. Verse. 9. That was the true Light, which lights
every Man that comes into the World. Unto which Light, whosoever shall give
diligent heed and obedience, this Light is sufficient to Lead or Guide out of
all Sin, to a perfect State in this Life, or on this side the Grave; even to
such a State as was in the World before Sin was in the World, and not mutable
or changeable, as that was: Luke 2.17, to 31. It was revealed to Simeon, by the
holy Spirit, he should not see Death before he had seen the Lord's Christ. And
in the Temple he took him in his Arms, and said, Lord, now let thou thy
Servant depart in Peace, according to thy Word: For mine Eyes have seen thy
Salvation: Which thou have prepared before the Face of all People: A Light to
enlighten the Gentiles, and the Glory of thy People Israel: This Light is
within: Romans 1.19. For that which may be known of God, is manifest in Man, etc.
1 John 1.5. God is Light: Romans 2.15. Which show the effect of the Law written
in their Hearts; their Conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts
accusing, or excusing one another. Heb. 8.10. to the end, the Lord's Promise
is, to put his Law in their Minds, and write them in their Hearts, and he will
be their God, and they shall be his People. 1 Timothy 1.5. Now the end of the
Commandment, is Charity, out of a pure Heart, good Conscience, and unfeigned
Faith. 2 Cor. 14.5. Search, try, examine your selves, know ye not your own
selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except you be Reprobates? Here Is
Searching, Trying, Examining; where should this be, but within, by the true
Light, Christ Jesus? For though He be ascended far above all Heavens, yet he has
given Gifts to Men, Ephesians. 4.10. That he might fill all things, verse. 11, 12.
Gal. 2.19, 20. I am crucified with Christ; thus I live, yet not I now, but
Christ lives in me: And the life that I now live in the Flesh, I live by the
Faith of the Son of God, who has loved me, and given himself for me. Romans 8.9,
10. Now ye are not in the Flesh, but in the Spirit, because the Spirit of God
dwells in you: But if any Man has not the Spirit of Christ, the same is not
his: And if Christ be in you, the Body is dead, because of sin; but the Spirit
is Life, for Righteousness sake. For, as Ephesians. 5.8. ye were once Darkness, but
are now Light in the Lord, walk as Children of the Light. Col. 1.16, to the
end, Which Riches is Christ in you the Hope of Glory. The Apostle did preach
and admonish, That he might present every Man perfect in Christ: Here was the
Work of a true Minister of Christ, to preach Perfection! For the Light, Christ
within, does convince of all Sins any one has committed. John 4.29. Come see a
Man which told me all things that ever I did: Is not he the Christ? Verse. 39.
to 42. Ephesians. 5.12, 13. For it is a shame, even to speak of those things which
are done of some in secret. But all things, when they are reproved of the
Light, are manifest: Concerning Light, read John 3.19. and 8.12. and 9.5. and
12.46. 1 John 4.16. God is Love; he that dwells in love, dwells in God, and
God in him. 1 Cor. 3.16. for Christ Jesus is the Author of Eternal Salvation to
all that obey him. Acts 4.12. Neither is there Salvation in any other: For
among Men there is given none other Name under Heaven, whereby we must he
saved. Now to those that believe, this is precious: See what high Titles the
Apostle Peter gives them, 1 Pet. 2.9.10. A Chosen Generation, a Royal
Priesthood, an Holy Nation, a peculiar People; that ye should show forth the
Praises of him, in well doing, who has called you out of Darkness, into his
mavelous Light: Which were not a People, yet are now the People of God, which
in time past were not under Mercy, but now have obtained Mercy. Surely these
People did witness a Freedom from Sin, and a Perfect State; for they were
Elect, Royal, Holy Peculiar, and the People of God, and had obtained Mercy, yet
Strangers, scattered through diverse Countries, as in 1 Pet. 1. Acts 26.18. Paul,
a true Minister of Jesus Christ, was to turn People from Darkness to Light,
from the Power of Satan unto God; that they might receive forgiveness of Sins,
and an Inheritance among them that are sanctified by Faith in me: What he
witnessed himself, he preached to others: Romans 1.7. To all you that be at Rome,
beloved of God, called to be Saints. 1 Cor. 1.2. Unto the Church of God which
is at Corinth, to them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, Saints by calling.
Ephesians. 1.1. Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ, by the Will of God, to the Saints
which are at Ephesus, and to the Faithful in Christ Jesus. Phil. 1.1. To all
the Saints in Christ Jesus, which are at Philippi, with the Bishops and
Deacons. Colos. 1.1, 2. Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ, by the Will of God,
and Timotheus our Brother, To them which are at Colosse, Saints and Faithful
Brethren in Christ. Verse. 4. Since we heard of your Faith in Christ Jesus, and
of your Love toward all Saints. 1 These. 1.1. Paul, and Silvanus, and
Timotheus, unto the Church of the Thessalonians, which is in God, the Father,
and in the Lord Jesus Christ; Paul, a Prisoner of Jesus Christ, and Timotheus
our Brother, unto Philemon our dear Friend and Fellow-helper, and to our dear
Sister Apphia, and to Archippus our fellow-Soldier, and to the Church which is
in thy House. Verse. 5. When I hear of thy Love and Faith, which thou have
toward the Lord Jesus, and toward all Saints. All aforementioned witnessed
the Restoration, and a freedom from Sin: So the Twelve Apostles assembled.
Acts 2.41. And the Three Thousand Converted by Peter; so diverse named in Romans
16. 1 Cor. 16.19. Col. 4. 2 Timothy 7.8. Paul said, He had fought a good Fight,
had finished his Course, and kept the Faith.

Concerning Perfection, Matthew. 5.48. 1 Cor. 1.10. Col. 1.28. Heb. 6.8. 2 Cor.
13.11. Brethren, fare ye well, be Perfect, be of good Courage, be of good
Comfort, he of one Mind, live in Peace, and the God of Love and Peace shall be
with you, Romans 15.9. to 12 Heb. 13.21. 1 John 5.20.

They use no Water Baptism, Sprinkling Infants, or the Supper, Col. 2.20, 21,
22. They use no Swearing, Matthew. 5.34, to 37. James 5.12. Nor give Flattering
Titles, nor respect Persons, as Majesty, Worship, Excellency, Job 32.21, 22.
James 2.3, 9. Also they use the True Language, according to the holy
Scriptures, as Thee and Thou, speaking to one Person; Ye and You speaking to
many, or more than one; and not You to one, which is false.

Their True Belief.
There is One only Almighty, true God, Creator, Genesis 1. John 4.24. and 17.3.
Mark 12.29. 1 Cor. 8.6. Ephesians. 4.6. and 5.1, 2. Acts 17.28. Romans 1.19.

Three Persons is not mentioned in the holy Scriptures, nor Trinity therein;
our Lord Jesus Christ, he was the Eternal Son of God, glorified with the Father
before the World began: And he was the promised Seed, Genesis 3.15. and 12.3. The
Seed of Abraham, Genesis 22.18. and of Jacob, Genesis 28.18. To be Born of a Virgin,
Isaiah 7.14. and 9.6. For unto us a Child is born, and unto us a Son is given:
And the Government is upon his Shoulder: And he shall call his Name, Wonderful
Counselor, The mighty God, The Everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace. Isa.
39.8. Christ's Sufferings and Death, Isa. 52.13, 14. and 53. and 61.1. Matthew.
1.25. He was born of the Virg^n Mary, His Preaching, Miracles, Suffering,
Death, Burial, Resurrection, His Ascending into Heaven, all which are fully
expressed, or declared, from Matthew. 1. to 12. Acts 1. Romans 10.9. For if thou
shall confess with thy Mouth, the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thine Heart,
that God raised him up from the dead, thou shall be saved.

Concerning the Resurrection of the Body, Job 19.25, 26, 27. Exodus 3.16. 2
Kings 2.11. Isa. 26.19. Ezekiel. 3.7. Dan. 3.25. and 12.2, 3, Jonah 2.2. John
5.28, 29. and 11.24, 25, 26. Acts 24.15, 22. Romans 6.5. 1 Cor. 15. Phil. 3.21. 1 Thessalonians. 3.13. to the end. I suppose that no honest hearted People, that are
called, or profess themselves Quakers, but will, or does assent to what is
aforementioned of them, and of the Saints, in Words, and Quotations, if any
will examine them, or any other honest hearted Protestant: Yet something more
of Cleansing, and Freedom from Sin, in this Life, etc. Matthew. 3.10, 11, 12.
Where John told them, One was to come after him, who would thoroughly purge his
Floor, and gather his Wheat into his Garner, but will burn up the Chaff with
unquenchable Fire, Matthew. 7.18, 19. Luke 3.17. John 15. Except there be a full
Cleansing from all Sin, such a Branch is broken off, and does not partake of
the Vine, Christ. John. 8.34. Whosoever commits Sin, is the Servant of Sin:
Verse. 36. If the Son make you free, ye shall be free indeed. Romans 6.16, 18, 20.
For when ye were the Servants of Sin, ye were freed from Righteousness. Verse.
22. But now being freed from Sin, and made Servants unto God, ye have your
fruit in Holiness, and the end Everlasting Life. Romans 8. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10, 11.
And such were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified but ye are
justified, in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and in the Spirit of our God. Verse.
14.19, 20. Ephesians. 2. and 4.22, to the end, Tit. 3.3, to 7. Gal. 5.20, to 23.
where the Works of the Flesh, and Fruit of the Spirit are described. Verse. 24.
For they that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh, with the Lusts and
Affections. 1 John 1.9. and 3.8. James 2.1^. He that commits Sin, is of the
Devil, for the Devil Sins from the beginning; for this purpose appeared the
Son of God, to destroy the works of the Devil. Verse. 9. Whosoever is born of
God, Sins not. Consider what is Written, and examine the Quotations, which
is set down, in what Chapter and Verse, for proof. And the Lord God, in the
Riches of his Mercy, give you understanding in all things that is fit for you.

The honest hearted People called Quakers, denies, or are against, the use of
the Carnal Weapon, either Offensive, or Defensive, Matthew. 26.52. Then said
Jesus unto him, Put up thy Sword into his Place: For all that take the Sword,
shall perish with the Sword. John 18.36. Jesus answered, My Kingdom is not of
this World: If my Kingdom were of this Word, my Servants would surely fight,
that I should not be delivered to the Jews: But now is my Kingdom not from
hence. James 4.1. From whence are Wars and Contentions among you? Are they not
hence, Even of your Lusts, that fight in your Members?

FINIS.

