A DIALOGV^ (OR FAMILIAR DISCOURS^ and conference between the HVSBANDMAN and
FRVIT-TREES; in his Nurseries, Orchards, and Gardens. Wherein are discovered
many useful, and profitable* Observations, and Experriments in Nature, in the
Ordering of FRVIT-TREES, for temporal profitt; Improving also the same to
higher ends, and uses, in Spiritual things, for the Good, and profitt of all;
both in the Church, and of the World. Whereby the Wisdom, Power, Bounty, and
goodness of God to his Glory* are clearly seen* and read, in this Volume of
the Creatures; And all men instructed by them, in their Duty toward God, in
order to their Comfort, Edification, and Salvation*

By RA: AUSTEN; Practiser (50 years) in the Art of Planting FRVIT-TREES.

Cant. 2.3. As the Appletree among the Trees of the wood, so is my beloved
among the Sons.

I sat down under his shadow with great delight; And his Fruit was sweet to
my taste.

Hose. 12.10. I have used similitudes by the Ministry of the Prophets.

Aquin. Tunc homo creaturas interrogat; quando ^s dilgenter considerat: sed
tunc interrogatae respondent, cum ^mo perspicit quod tanta ordinatio esse non
possit, nisi ab ^qua superiore sapientia dispensante:

OXFORD, Printed by Hen: Hall. for Thomas Bowman 167^

THE EPISTLE to the READER.
GOD has given to man two great Books, to read and study; viz: His works, and
his word; whereby we may come to know God, and learn our Duty to him. The
Creatures of God do all of them speak out the Praises of God; and are not only
Examples to us of Obedience, but also do call aloude unto Man, and instruct,
and teach him, what he ought to do; And that as plainly and convincingly to the
mind, and conscience, as words do to the ear: The Prophet says: Ps: 19.1, 2.
etc. The heavens declare the glory of God, and the Firmament shows his handy
work: ver: 2. Day unto Day utters speech; and night unto night shows
knowledge: ver: 3. There is no speech, nor Language, Where their voice is not
heard. ver. 4. Their line is gone out through all the Earth, and their words to
the Ends of the world. The Apostle Paul recites words to the same purpose; Rom:
10:18: showing that all men have instructions to know God, even by his works.
Have they not heard (says he) Yes verily, their sound went into all the Earth,
and their words to the Ends of the world.

We see here, inanimate creatures can speak to the praise of God, and
instruction of man: The excellencies, and infinite perfections of God, are
plainly seen, and read perspeculum creaturarum; even in the Creatures which he
has made; And men that are illiterate, and cannot read a line in any printed
Book, may yet read distinctly, and plainly in this Book of the Creatures if
they will but set their Reason and understanding on work, and learn their
Language, and the manner of Discourse with them, Inanimate creatures, such as
are but bare. And naked substances without life, or sense, as the heavens, the
Sun, Moon, and Stars, yet even these do declare knowledge, and wisdom; to
Man: they have a speech, a voice; their words go the ends of the world; to
every Nation, and Language; And men who have not the Scriptures, nor any other
Books, or writings of men, they shall not be excused in their ignorance of God,
and of their duty to him; if they learn not from his creatures; if they
understand not their speech, and Language, and learn not from them; And this is
plain from Rom: 1, 20. St Paul speaking of the heathen, reproving them for
their ignorance, and disobedience; he tells them, much of God may be seen, and
known, in and by the Creatures: The invisible things of God, from the Creation
of the world, are clearly seen being understood by the things that are made,
even his Eternal Power, and Godhead; so that they are left without excuse.

The Attributes of God; (his wisdom, Power, goodness, love, and bounty,
toward mankind) are clearly seen, read, and understood, by the things that he
has made. And let not men think, that because they are not Learned, in any
School Learning, therefore they shall be excused. Though they are ignorant of
God, and of their duty to him: for the Prophet tells such what they shall find,
if they are of the number of those sottish children, that have no
understanding: he that made them will not have Mercy on them; and he that
formed them will show them no Favor: Isay 27:11: So that it highly concerns
every one to learn the Language of the Creatures; and how to confer, and
discourse with them for their profitt, and edification: And among the Creatures
with Fruit Trees. the subject of the Ensuing Dialogue.

Shall men plant Orchards, and Gardens of Fruit Trees, and only take their
Pleasures, and Profits from them, from year to year: This is no more than the
Beasts, and the Birds do; They sit under their shade in the heat of Summer,
and eat of their Fruits: The Swine gathers, and eats the Fruits that fall
under the Trees, and goes his way, but understands not whence they are; but men
that are endued with Reason, and understanding (especially if a Principle of
supernatural grace, and the Spirit of God, be dwelling, and ruling in them)
must look higher, and make another use of Fruit Trees, than merely for
temporal Profit, and Pleasures: Men must discourse with Fruit Trees, having
learned to understand their Language which though it be nor Articulate, and
distinct to the outward sense of hearing, in the sound of words, yet they
speak plainly, and distinctly to the inward sense, the understanding: The soul
has its senses, as well as the body; the soul does really hear, see etc. as
well as the body: so that we may learn from Fruit Trees many good lessons, and
useful instructions; they being Creatures, that are always speaking, and
always speak the truth, both for the glory of God, and the good of men;

Every Creature speaks this aloude to every man, qui fecit me, propter te,
fecit te, propter se: he that made me, for thee, made thee for himself: Mr
Caryl in his exposition upon Job, Chap. 12. speaks much to this purpose: All
Creatures, (as he there says) have a teaching voice; they read us divinity
Lectures of Divine Providence. Seculum, est Speculum: The world below is a
Glass, wherein we may see the world above, they who cannot read other Books,
may yet run, and read this Book of the Creatures, written in great, and plain
Letters, and Characters. Non est ullum animalculum tam exiguum in quo non plus
discere possimus, quam in omnibus sculptis, pictis, aut simulachris, Lauac.

The idle, slothful man is sent to the Pismire, to learn and be instructed,
Pro: 6.6. Go to the Ant thou sluggard, consider her ways, and be wise, she
gets her meat in the Summer etc: such as provide not in summer, for Winter,
in youth for old age, in this life for the next, are condemned by this little
Creature; Deus maximus in minimis: God is seen in the least of his Creatures:
yea, go to the Ox, and the Ass, thou brutish, sensual man, or woman,
consider, and learn of them: They know, and own, serve, and obey, their Master,
him that feeds them; Isay: 1.3. The Ox knows his owner and the Ass his
Masters Crib; but Israel has not known Me, says the Lord.
but thou (as thou want grace, so also thou want the good Nature, that
these poor Creatures have, and show forth to him that keeps them; Thou art fed,
and clothed daily, and have all things convenient for life from the hand of
God, and yet thou ownest him not, but servest thy self, and rebellest against
God: therefore these dull Beasts shall condemn thee.

Let not men make light of these things (of learning from Fruit Trees, and
other Creatures) they shall find one day, (and that shortly too) they shall be
called to an Account; and be judged by the Creatures, as well as by the word:
Therefore it concerns every one to learn their speech, and language, and to be
instructed thereby, in order to their own Duty, and the glory of God.

O the loud cry, and voice of Nature from these very Creatures, (of ^he
infinite wisdom, Power, and bounty ^f God toward Man,) how is it heard,
plainly, and distinctly, not only in the infinite number, and kinds of
Fruit Trees, Flowers, and vegetables in Orchards, and Gardens, but also in
every individual, and particular Tree: Consider only, but one large Apple^ree;
some of them bearing many Bushels of Fruits in one year; Every ^articular Fruit
has several seeds, or ^ernels in it; and every seed (though ^any thousands
from one Tree) has ^e Nature of the whole Tree in it ^lf, and that exacty:
Potentially, the whole tree; in that small substance; (many of them less then
a grain of Wheat) it has in it the innate, intrinsicall form, and virtue of
the Whole Tree, that huge, and vast body that we see above ground, and will
(if sown) produce the same in kind: And not only so, but likewise every small
Twigg of the Tree, yea, the least bud of the least twigg has also (virtually)
the whole tree in it self, and produces the same, if inoculated, according to
Art.

St Austen takes notice of these things and admires God in them; Gen: ad lit:
ch 15.
and exhorts all men to study them, and learn from them; Ex ipsis operibus dei
indagare conemur; consideremus ergo, cujuslibet Arboris pulcritudinem, in
robore, ramis, frondibus, Pomis; etc. illud germen ex semine; in semine ergo
illa omnia fuerunt primitus; non mole corporeae magnitudinis, sed vipotentiaque
causaliter: in exiguo grano mirabilior prostantior que vis est, quia valuit
adiacens humor commixtus terrae, quid enim ex arbore illa, surgit, aut pendet,
quod non ex quodam occulto Thesauro seminis illius extractum atque depromptum
est.

Job exhorts us to learn from these, and all Creatures; Chap. 12.7, 8.9. etc.
Ask now the Beasts, and they shall teach thee, and the Fowls of the Air and
they shall tell thee: Or speak to the earth, and it shall teach thee; or (as
it is translated) speak to every Twigg, or Tree that grows upon the Earth,
and it shall teach thee; And the Fishes of the Sea, shall declare unto thee.
Here we see, are many Masters, and Teachers, for the instruction of Man, in his
duty to God; Christians that have not only Reason, but grace, may learn from
Creatures that have neither Reason, nor sense; Grace in the heart of a
Christian, improves common, earthly Objects, to spiritual uses, and holy Ends:
it is (spiritually) the Philosophers stone; that turns Earth, into Heaven;
Natural Objects, into Spiritual, As faith sees him that is invisible, and
things that are not seen, so sense shows us him that is inisible, i. e. God in
his works. Being as a prospective Glass through which we may see the lively
species of infinite excellencies in God.

First, All Creatures yield ready Obedience to God; for they obey the Law of
their Creation: Fire, and Hail, Snow, and vapors, Stormy winds and Tempests,
fulfilling his word. Ps. 148.8.

Secondly, And as Creatures teach us Obedience to God, in observing the Law of
their Creation; so also they teach us dependence upon God: as we see Hose 2.21.
God having betrothed Israel his people, in righteousness, in judgment, in
loving kindness, in mercies, in Faithfulness, and that for ever; from that
time all the Creatures do strive to do them good; but yet in a Chain of
dependence; Every one confessing their inability, without help from God: Israel
had need of the Creatures to nourish them, They cry to God for Corn, Wine,
and Oil; These are ready, and willing to nourish Israel, but then the Earth
must bring them forth, therefore these cry to the Earth, to give them rooting,
and nourishment, the Earth would do this willingly, for Isreal's sake, but
cannot, except the Heavens do water it, with Rain, and Dewes; therefore the
Earth cries to the Heavens, but the Heavens (though willing) can give no Rain,
nor refreshing, until God command them to do it; therefore the Heavens cry unto
God, that he would give them Commission to water the Earth: As we see: Hose:
2.2. I will hear (says the Lord) I will hear the heavens, and they shall hear
the Earth, and the Earth shall hear the Corn, and the Wine, and the Oil, and
they shall hear Israel: So God commanding the heavens, the heavens feed the
Earth, and the Earth feeds the Corn, Wine, and Oil, and these feed Israel.

The eyes of all Creatures wait upon God, and he gives them their meat in
due season: Ps. 145.15. he feeds the young Ravens that call upon Him: Ps.
147.9. The Lions roaring after their Prey, do seek their Meat of God: So they
all teach us the same Lesson of dependence upon God for all necessaries.

The Apostle Paul shows us, That there is somewhat even in inanimate
Creatures, that puts forth an Act of Expectation, yea, of Earnest Expectation;
for delivera^ce from the bondage that the sin of man has brought them under;
Romans 8.19. The earnest expectation of the Creature, waits for the
manifestation of the sons of God: and ver. 22. The whole Creation growneth, and
travelleth in pain together until now.

Thirdly: We may also learn this Lesson from the Creatures (even from
irrational, and lifelesse Creatures) not only (as was said 1: Obedience to
God, and 2: dependence upon him; but likewise 3ly. to desire, and long, for a
full freedom, and deliverance from the bondage of Corruption, and to attain
the Glorious liberty of the sons of God; for shall inanimate Creatures do this;
and shall not Rational, and Spiritual Christians do it, much more.

Now if any one ask this Question; how may we speak to Fruit Trees, or any
other Creatures that are without Reason or sense, that we may receive
Instructions from them.

This Question (long since) is answered by St Austen; 10: Book of his
confessions.
I put the Question (says he) to the Earth, and to the Sea; and to the rest of
the Creatures; and they give me an Answer; Now if you would know what my
Question was; It was the deep intention, and consideration, I had in my heart,
about the Creatures; And would you know what their Answer was; their Answer was
that which I collected in my Meditations, from their several Natures,
qualities, and properties.

So that to confer, and discourse with Fruit Trees (as in the ensuing
Dialougue) and to receive insturctions from them, not only as to temporal
Profits, but Spiritual also, it is, in a Rational, serious, and Spiritual
manner, to consider them, and dive, and search into their Natures, and
Properties; as we may observe, and gather by Experience, from year, to year,
concerning them; which every Rational man may do, more, or less; But yet the
more knowledge, and Experience any man has, the better it is don; And then the
making of right conclusions, upon such Considerations, those are the Answers,
Teachings, or instructions of the Fruit Trees; so of all other Creatures, (as
was said;) Job: 12.7. ask the Beasts, and they shall teach thee; docebit te,
unaquaque ex Bestiis docebit te.

The Excellencies, Virtues, beauties and perfections that are in the Creatures
do plainly show forth, and manifest, the infinite Excellencies and perfections
of God; his Wisdom, Power, Goodness, Beauty, Bounty etc. Now, when we
diligently consider, and search out their Natures and Virtues, Beauties, and
Properties, which God has Stamped upon them, and put into them, and make right
Conclusions, then we confer and discourse with them; The Creatures discover the
Attributes of God to the Eye, as his word does to the Ear, and both to the
Mind. And this produces (or should do) in every one, Praise, and Glory to God,
wonder, and admiration of him; for that he is the Creator, and contriver of all
these excellent things: who being the Original and first Cause of all these
wonderful, and excellent Creatures, so many, so good, so beautiful, so
useful, profitable, and pleasant, in the lives of men, it must needs be
concluded, that he himself is much more so, in himself; yea, infinitely above,
better, and exceeding them all, and consequently to be desired, and loved above
them all.

Aquin:
Hujusmodi interrogatio est mentis operatio, qua creaturarum perfectiones
intuemur: Tunc homo Creaturas interrogat, quando eas diligenter considerat; sed
tunc interrogate respondent, cum homo prospicit quod tanta ordinatio esse non
possit, nisi ab aliqua superiore sapientia dispensante. That is: When we
seriously consider, the nature, and properties of inanimate creatures; then we
ask Questions of them; and they being thus Questioned, they return an answer
unto men, when we clearly perceive that their wonderful Natures, virtues, and
properties, cannot be, but from the Power, and VVisdome of a superior Cause.

Every created being, instructs us concerning our Creator, of his wisdom, and
goodness, and of our duty, and thankfulness we owe unto him; so that as many
Creatures as are in the world, so many Teachers there are in the world:
Therefore none shall be excused at the last day, for their ignorance of God;
seeing we have not only the word of God, but all the Creatures of God to
instruct us; concerning God and our duty to him. So then; with these breife
instructions concerning discourse with Fruit Trees, I commit the Ensuing
Dialogue to thy use, for thy profitt. Who am thy Friend to serve thee in love.

RA: AUSTEN.

The Contents.
Trees Speak to men. page 1. The Language of Fruit Trees. p 2 The Age of
Fruit Trees. ibid. Man's fall, Restoring, and Establishing. p. 3
Section 2. Sympathy, and Antipathy in Vegetables. p. 4 Sympathy, and Antipathy
of Plants, truly stated. p ib. Liken^ss of Natures accord best among men. p. 6
No attaining Communion with God, without a new Nature ib. No cordial
fellowship between Regenerate, and Unregenerate persons. p. 7. Perception in
Fruit Trees, in fled of sense. ib. Four distinct Ranks of Creatures, each
Genus including many speties. p. 8 All Creatures are subservient one to
another. p. 9
Section 3. The benefit of due Ordering of Fruit Trees. p. 16 God chastneth
all his people; some more, some less, for their profit. p. 11.
Section 4. Fruittrees beautiful objects. p. 13 Immoderate love to Creatures,
dangerous ibid. Too much love to Creatures abates love to God. p. 14 Communion
with Creatures calls for Communion with God. p. 15.
Section 5. Profits, and Pleasures, by Fruit Trees. p. 16 Fruits of Trees, man's
Food. ibid. Planting Fruit Trees commended by Ancient, and late writers. p. 18
Section 6. Two things, (seeming) discouragements in Planting. p. 22. Vain
minds take up with present satisfactions. p. 23 Examples of the greatest
persons in Planting. p. 23 Many Profits, and Pleasures in planting Fruit Trees.
p. 27
Section 7. Great Trees in too fat soil, bear not well. p. 29 Moderation is
best. p. 29 A just Reprooff of the carnal, careless Gentry. p. 30 Skillful
ordering of Fruit Trees produces Fruitfulness. p. 31 Remove the Cause, and
the effect cease. p 32 A due commendation of the Pious, and Religious Gentry.
ibid.
Section 8. The voice of all Creatures to man. Fruit Trees, receive, and loose
their beauty once a year. p. 35 The state of all things here below changeable.
p. 36 Fruit Trees are pincht, and endure difficulties in winter. p. 37
Fruit Trees in the Spring revive. ibid. Some Christians go through great
tribulations. p. 38 The light of Gods Countenance refreshes the soul after
darkness. p. 41
Section 9. The Opinion about descention of Sap, examined. p. 41 No descention
of Sap in Trees. p. 43 The Spirit, and nature of true Christians, tends
upwards. p. 34
Section 10. Fruit Trees are prepared in Nurseries, to be transplanted. p. 45
Elder trees transplanted make room for the younger. p. 46 Some of the best
kinds are to grow still in the Nursery p. 47 Nurseries of Material Fruit Trees
are apt similitudes of Mystical Fruit Trees in Universities. ibid. The Spirit,
and grace of God, is to be prefered before all Natural, and acquired abilities
p. 48
Section 11. Some Fruits seem good to the Eye, but are bad to the taste. p. 50
Fruit Trees improved by ingrafting. p. 50 No works pleasing to God without
sincerity. p. 51
Section 12. Mulberytrees called Sapientissima Arborum. p. 52 Mulberry-trees
bud late, because of a tender nature. ibid. Some Christians are more valiant
for Christ then others. p. 53
Section 13. Fruits ripen successively upon the same tree; others altogether.
p. 54 The wisdom, and bounty of God in the ripening of Fruiis. p. 55
Section 14. South-Country trees prosper not in England. p. 56 Plant
Fruit Trees fit for the Country. ibid.
Section 15. Redstreake trees formerly of little account. p. 57 Redstreake
Apples best for Cider. p. 58 Comfort after trouble: joy after sorrow. ibid.
Section 16. More planting of late years, then formerly p. 59 Reasons for much
Planting of Fruit Trees. p. 60 Cider the most wholesome drink, especially of the
bect Fruits. p. 60
Section 17. Fruit Trees show forth the glory of God. p. 61 Fruit Trees are
engagements to obedience. p. 62 All men act according to their Natures. p. 63
Fruit Trees change not their Natures. ibid. All mankind have changed their
Natures once; and some have a double change. p. 64
Section 18. Heat of the Sun needful for Fruits. p. 65 Fruit Trees have a
preception of the heat of the Sunn and are refreshed by it. ibid. Believers
that walk closest with God, bring forth the best fruits. p. 66
Section 19. The Scripture says Fruit Trees were from the beginning, and shall
be to the End of the world. p. 67 The excellencies of all Creatures are united
in God, and infinitely more then all. p. 67 The Excellencies, and virtues of
the Creatures should lead us unto God, and there to rest. p. 68
Section 20. Young, small Trees: full of good Fruits. p. 68 God calls some of
his people in childhood, and youth, others afterward. p. 69
Section 21. Gross ignorance reproved. p. 73 Most people are ignorant both of
Gods word, and works. p. 74 Unlearned men may read in the Book of the
Creatures.
Section 22. An invitation, and encouragement to a conference with Fruit Trees.
p. 76 Many things in Fruit Trees occasion admiration. p. 77. 1. Tender Fruits,
come forth with covers upon them: the more hardy, without: p. 77
Section 23. 2. Different substances made of one substance. p 79 Different
Gifts, and Graces wrought by the same Spirit. ibid. Every gift ought to be
improved for the profit of all. p. 80
Section 24. 3. Grafts and Buds, assimilate the Sap of the Stocks. p. 81
Section: 25. 4 Every small Bud contains the Nature of the whole Tree in it
self. p. 83 5. The properties of a tree, are in every seed. p. 84 The same
flower seed brings forth variety p. 85 6. Many kinds of Fruits upon one tree.
p. 86

A DIALOGVE, (OR FAMILIAR DISCOURSE and conference) between the Husbandman, and
Fruittrees; in his Nurseries, Orchards, and Gardens.
Trees speak to Men.
HVSBANDMAN: I have read in Learned and Godly men's works and the Scriptures
also declare as much; that ye Fruittrees can speak, and discourse with men,
(though not with an articulate distinct voice, and sound of words, to the
outward sense of hearing, for that is proper only to rational Creatvres) Yet
it is known ye can speak very intelligibly, and convincingly, to the minds,
and consciences of men, And can Answer their Questions; and speak many things
to their profit and edification; And that ye always speak the very truth;
and to the glory, and praise of God: What Language is it that ye speak, is it
English, or Latin, Greek, or Hebrew, or what other Language else, wherein ye
discourse with men.


The Language of Fruittrees.
FRVIT-TREES: We can speak all Languages; We can discourse with any People, or
Nation, in any Language whatsoever; according as people please to discourse
with us, so we Answer them; every man in his own Language.


HVSBANDMAN: We in this Country, are Natives of England; we will therefore
speak together in our English Tongue, for that we best understand; Tell me
then first of all; Of what age are ye? of what duration? (I speak not of
these individual Trees here Planted, but of Fruittrees in general.) How Long
have ye been in the world?


The Age of Fruittrees.
FRVITTREES: We are of a very Great Age; even from the beginning of the
Creation: which is now (according to common computation) 5676. years or
thereabouts: This thou may understand by a Token that much concerns the; For
we were present and stood by, when thou, and thy wife, did both of you,
transgress the Command of our Creator, in the Garden of Eden, in that ye did
eat of the Forbidden Fruit: Thou had liberty enough given thee, which was
to Eat of all our Fruits, throughout the whole Garden; (Except only of one
Tree, to try thy Obedience) and that as freely as thou would; why then did
thou break the command of God; which we never yet did, nor ever shall; though
we are much inferior to mankind.


Man's fall, Restoring, and Establishing.
HVSBANDMAN: Herein ye speak the truth, and convincingly indeed; for so it
was; which we must acknowledge to God, and be humbled for it; for it was a very
great transgression, we lost our glory, and our Happiness by it; but blessed be
God for ever, for his free Grace, he has showed us a means, and way of
recovery, to our former state of happiness, which he did not to the Angels
that sinned, but a little while before us; (God never spoke one kind word to
them since, nor ever will) O the justice, and mercy of God: toward them
justice: but toward us Mercy, and free Grace; in our restoring even all that
he has chosen: Yea, God has not only restored, and recovered us out of our
fallen state, but also has so confirmed us in it; as that now we can never
fall from it any more; as we then did, But this is a Gloriouse mystery,
discovered to us in the word of the Gospel of Christ; wherein ye have no
skill, neither can ye speak, as to that matter.


Section 2.
Sympathy and Antipathy in Vegetables.
HVSBANDMAN: It has been asserted by Learned men, That there is a sympathy,
and Antipathy in Plants, Trees, and all Vegetables; some kinds will not thrive
together, which they impute to Antipathy; and some other kinds flourish, and
prosper vigorously, growing together, which they call Sympathy: or a good
agreement one with another: What say ye of your selves, as to this matter.


Sympathy, and Antipathy of Plants duly stated.
We own the Notion, if it be but rightly understood and applied; for there is
such a contrariety, and heterogeneous quality in some trees, and other
Vegetables; as men speak of, And also, a likeness, and agreement in Nature,
in some others, But it has been much mistaken by some writers, who have said,
That there is an Antipathy between some Plants (as the Vine, and the Colewort)
because they will not thrive together; but that is not an Antipathy; but rather
a Sympathy: Lord Baron's Not: Hist: pa: 101. Exp: 480.
Because we Vines love the same fatt, and fertile soil, as the Colewort does;
and thence it is that we turn our Roots from it, because it has exhausted
the soil and made it barren; But there is a real Antipathy in Nature, between
some trees, which are of Different species: and therefore they will never
thrive together when joined in Grafting. As the Apple Tree grafted upon a
Peerestock; and so on the contrary; Also the Plum on the Cherry; and the Cherry
on the Plum; They may grow 2. or 3. years but will never thrive to perfection;
there is an Antipathy in Nature, and they reject each other; And therefore let
men in grafting observe right species, and kinds in joining us together; else
no profit will accrue to the Husbandman.


Likeness of Natures accord best among Men.
HVSBANDMAN: We see the same thing amongst men, and Women: There is a very
great Antipathy, and contrariety in their Natures one against another; an utter
enmity in their Natures; Therefore it is necessary (in order to Communion,
fellowship, and agreement of persons, and societies that they be of one, or
alike Nature? But the highest, and greatest Antipathy, in the world, is that
between the Holy Nature of God, and the corrupt nature of Man; No attayning
Communion with God, without a New Nature.
There is no possibility of attaining Communion and Fellowship with God, or to
have any enjoyment of God, here in this world, or hereafter in the life to
come, without a change of Nature, The corrupt Nature of Man, is quite contrary
to the Holy Nature of God; Therefore there must of necessity be a renewing in
the spirit of our minds: a new Nature, by ingrafting into Christ, that so there
may be apertaking of the Image or Nature of the second Adam, in righteousness
and true holiness, as there is of the first Adam in sin, and corruption.


No fellowship between Regenerate and unregenerate Persons.
So neither can there be any cordial fellowship, complacency or delight,
between Regenerate, and unregenerate persons; because of this Antipathy, and
contrariety in Nature, what fellowship has Christ with Beliall, or he that
believes with an infidel: Therefore persons in their Marriage choice, had
best consider, and make sure of this, in the first place: and make other
considerations subservient, and subordinate thereunto.

Quest: But how is this among Fruittrees, seeing ye are not sensible
Creatures; but are in a rank, and degree below them.


Perception in Fruittrees instead of sense.
FRVITTREES: It is true, we are not sensible Creatures; But yet we are living
Creatures; And we have a Nature in us some what analogous to sense; we have
Perception, which is to us instead of sense, whereby we know what is good for
us, and what is hurtful to us; and thereby we choose the one, and reject the
other, in some warm fertile soyles we thrive much better than we do in some
cold, wett, barren grounds; And so in respect of situation, either toward the
Sun, or from it; in shady places.


Four Distinct rancks of Creatures each Genus including many species.
HVSBANDMAN: I perceive then hereby, That there is a vast difference among the
Visible Creatures here upon earth; in their distinct and specisick Natures; which
may be distinguished into four ranks, or degrees; every Genus, including
diverse particular, and distinct species; The first and lowest of all are those
which are but only bare, and simple substances, without life; as Earth, water,
Stones, Mineralls,, and such like, the second sort are a degree above these,
not only substances, but they have life also; as Trees, Flowers, Herbs: and all
Vegetables; the third sort are a degree above them, which have not only life,
but have also sense; as Beasts, Fowls, Fishes, The fourth rank, and degree of
Creatures, are above all these, which are not only substances, and have life,
and sense, but also Reason, as Mankind in all Nations.


All Creatures are subservient one to another.
And now as these Creatures are thus distinct in their degrees, one Genus
higher then another; so by the Wisdom, providence, and appointment of God,
they are useful, and subservient, one to another, each kind in their distinct
degrees the first, to the second; the second to the third, and the third to the
fourth: The simple substances, Earth, water, etc. feed and nourish the flowers,
herbs, and all Vegetables, and these nourish the Beasts, Fowls, Fishes etc.
And these feed, and nourish the highest Rank of visibles Creatures; all
Mankind, that so he may serve, and glorify God in, and by all these.


Section 3.
Culture of Fruittrees necessary.
HVSBANDMAN: Here are some Fruit Trees, which I have bestowed much labor and
cost upon, in ordering of them, by diging about your Roots, in manuring of
them with good soil: and the Branches by Pruning off the one half of them
(being too close, and too many; And also I have cut off the one half of your
high^; for ye were grown and aspired up, so high into the Air, that the
winds and Frosts (in the spring time especially) had more power upon you then
upon low, spread trees; so that I hope my labor, has not been in vain: How
do ye find your selves, do ye perceive your selves any whit better, for all
this labor, and time bestowed upon you.


The benefit of due ordering Fruittrees.
FRVIT-TREES: We have a preception* that we grow more vigorously, and strongly,
then we did formerly; for we were back bound, before; (a thick hard bark^
incompassing us) did very much obstruct* and hinder the assention of our sap)
which now by thy ordering of us, is loosed; and we receive a more plentiful
nourishmen^ by sap from the Earth, which feeds all ou^ branches; which before
cutting aspired up into the Air, but now spread round in a comely form, and
are full of good fruitts* as thou see, And so we are every way much the
better for all thy labors.


God chastneth all his People, some more, some less for their Profitt.
HVSBANDMAN: I see it is as ye say; And as these things are to be observed for
our temporal profitt among fruittrees, so also they serve as a very apposite
similitude to shadow out a spiritual truth by way of analogy, and
resemblance of Gods dealing with his people, his Mystical Fruittrees who, as a
most wise, and careful Husbandman, seeing his Fruittrees bear good fruitts,
he Prunes and orders them (some perticulars more especially, and that in some
extraordinary manner) that they may bring forth more fruitts, and better then
before.

For some Christians after that they have attained some good measures of Gifts,
and Graces of the Spirit, through the want of the exercise and improvement of
them, and Christian watchfulness, they grow negligent, and Proud and abate of
that vigor of spirit, zeal and love, that formerly they had; And therefore
the Husbandman takes them in hand, and deals with them according as the case
requires; He cuts off many of their branches, There exuberant Vain, carnal
imaginations, thoughts, desires, intentions, and contrivances) which rise up,
and extend beyond due bounds, and brings them low, and humbles them greatly;
Not only by many afflictions, troubles, and Distresses of Body, and spirit,
but also sometimes by withdrawing his, spirit, and permitting them to fall into
some sins; so as to shame, and dishonor them; which works more effectually
for the cure of Pride and self-love, then any other means can do: St. Austen
has a faying to this purpose: I dare affirm it (says he) that it is
profitable for a proud man to fall in to some scandalous sin, that by the shame
of ^ he may be humbled: his meaning is not* that it should be any man's choice
to sin* that he may be humbled; but that it is sometimes Gods way of cure to
permit it as t^ some men.

A wise Physician can so temper poison* as to make it (with other ingredients
^procure, or preserve health: so that in a^ these things God is seen, and to
be pra^sed, and admired, in his dispensations toward his people; and they to
learn obedience by the things that they suffer, an^ to be more thankful and
firutfull, in the^ hearts, and lives afterward.


Section 4.
Fruittrees Beautiful Objects.
HVSBANDMAN: It is a great pleasure, and delight to walk among you, so many
beautiful Fruittrees; seeing ye grow so handsomely, and uniforme; ye grow in
order, in straight lines, every way; (look which way a man will) decent forms
and order of things are pleasant to the Eye; as a Consort of Music is to the
Ear: And besides; ye are more beautiful and delightsome in your various
colored blossoms, leaves, and fruits, these even ravish the ^ences, with
their delicate colors. smells, and tastes; all exceeding grateful to the
senses; and delightsome to the mind.


Immoderate love to Creatures dangerous.
FRVITTREES: We own what thou say to be true; We are indeed fine beautiful
Objects; and desirable good things, useful, and profitable in the lives of
men: But thou, and others had best take heed, and beware least ye love us too
much; that ye set not your hearts upon us; for Lalet anguis in herba, a
serpent may be hid even amongst pleasant, and beautiful flowers; the old
Serpent is still alive; that bitt, and stung thy first Parents; in the Garden
of Eden they setting their minds too much upon the beauty, and excellency o^
the Fruits that they saw: They saw that the Fruits were beautiful to the Eye,
and good for food, and they took, and Eat o^ it: being seduced also by the
subtilty o^ the Serpent; And thou may be sure h^ has not lost any of his
Malice, Power, ^ Policy; but is watchful day, and night* to do thee; and
others mischeife.


Too much love to Creatures, abates love to God
HVSBANDMAN: This is a good caution and to be heeded, and observed daily* For
the Pleasures, and Profitts of the Creatures do often stale away the minds, an^
affections even of good men; which abat^ the stream of their love to God:
which occasions (more, or less, sooner, or late^* ^hastnings, and afflictions,
from the hand ^ God; who cannot bear, that the hear^ of his people should be
alienated from hi^ by any of his Creatures; Yet neverthele^ here is a lawful
use of these, and other Creatures, with Pleasure and delight, so it be within
due bounds; But this delight in Fruit Trees in Orchards and Gardens (in a kind
of Communion, and complacency with them) it shaddows out unto us a great, and
singular mystery, and a privilege of believers; the greatest on this side
heaven; that is; Communion, and Fellowship with God, the enjoyment of him for
ever. Communion with Creatures calls for Communion with God.
Sincere, and humble Christians know by experience, what it is to walk with
God; in Fellowship with him; God does graciously condescend to have Communion,
and Fellowship with Man; with such as he has Chosen to himself, and changed,
sanctified and prepared, as Vessels of mercy, for his own use.

And herein we need not restrain or lymitt our love, and affections, as we
ought to do toward the Creatures; all we have, or can let out, is too little,
and small ^or this infinitely best Object of Love: Communion with, and delight
in all other Ob^ects, must be subordinate unto this; for all the good, and
desireablenesse of the Creatures, are but so many Drops derived from ^his
infinite Ocean, in his presence is the ^ulnesse of joy; at his right hand there
are pleasures for ever more.


Section the 5.
Many Profitts and pleasures by Fruittrees.
HVSBANDMAN: There has been very much spoken by Ancient and late writers,
about the Profitts, and Pleasures that are found in Orchards, and Gardens; And
all people (generally) do much commend The work of Planting Fruittrees,
because of the Profitts, and Advantages that yearly do arise from Fruittrees,
Besides all the delight, and Pleasures super-added wherein do these Profitts,
and Pleasures consist, tell us some particulars briefly.


Fruits of Trees Men's food.
FRVITTREES: Thou know ov^ Fruits are useful, and Profitable many waie^ in
the lives of men: They are for food al^ the year long both for meat, and
drink; i^ was the first Food given to man; and tha^ in his best state, and
condition; even i^ Paradise, the most pleasant place upon the Earth; our Fruits
were his appointe^ food, he might eat of all our Fruits; (on^ Tree only
excepted:) And Fruits of Trees have been man's food ever since, and so shall be
to the end of the world.


HVSBANDMAN: It is true: the Fruits of Trees are good food, both for Man and
Beast; which being well ripened, they may be used for wholesome food many
ways; Especially made into Cider; the most wholesome drink known in the Vinetum
Britannicum by J. W: Gent: p. 18.
world; and so accounted by Learned, and skillful Physicians; and found so to
be by long Experience, not of particular Persons only; but by several
Generations successively: in several Countries, where it is temperately, and
moderately used; as their common drink; which has been (of late time more
especially much see; Silva and Pomona, by Mr. Euelin. of the Royal Society.
celebrated, and commended, by many worthy, and eminent persons; upon good
grounds, both of Reason, and Experience. As conducing (more then any other
Liquors) to health, and long life; which are much in esteem among all people.


Planting of Fruit Trees commended by Ancient and late writers.
Now because the Profitts, and advantages by Planting Fruit Trees are so many,
and great, I think it not amiss to acquaint my friends here present, with the
Praises, and Commendations that some Authors have given to this work and
employment of Planting Fruittrees, that they may be more in love with it, and
more diligent in it, for their own Profitt, and for Posterity also.

Varro: Li. 1. Cap. 4. de re Rustica: hinc profecto Agricolae ad duas metas
dirigere debent; ad utilitatem and voluptatem. Menander.
Agricolarum vita voluptatem capit. Dum tristia spe futurorum solatur, est
profecto virtutis and vitae Magister Ingenuae omnibus hominibus ager,
Agricultura quid sit.
Mihi videtur nihil aliud esse Agriculturam quam inspecta Plantae Natura, and
Caeli, and Terrae ei idoneum cultum tribuere, and (ut ita dicam) Caelum cum
Terra maritare, vel societatem perquirere Caeli, and Terrae ad Arbores. O quam
dulcissimum est fructus ex arboribus quas sevisti, inseruisti, and coluisti,
propriis manibus colligere, and Amicis, agnatisque jactabundus largiri etc.
Virgil in Georg:
O fortunatos nimium, bona si sua norint.
Agricolas; quibus ipsa procul civilibus Armis,
Fundit humo facilem victum justissima tellus.
Aves canoros garrulae funduni sonos:
Et semper Aures cantibus mulcent suis.
Mira est, and in explicabilis horti commoditas: nam si necessitatem considero,
agricultura tanto est humano generi emolumento; ut ea carere nullo modo possis;
si utilitatem, inter primas, non postrema. Nec quaenam illi poterit comparari:
si voluptatem dignitati commistam, ea est excellentia etc. August: Quid enim
hoc opere innocentius vacantibus; and quid before magna consideratione
prudentibus; quid majus mirabiliusque spectaculum est, qnam cum positis
seminibus, Plantatis surculis, translatis Arbusculis, insitis malleolis,
tanquam interrogatur quaeque (vis Radicis and germinis) quid possit, quidve non
possit, unde possit, vnde non possit; cum rerum natura humana ratio quodammodo
loqui potest, quid in ea valeat numerorum invisibilis interiorque potentia;
quid extrinsecus adhibita diligentia, and in ipsa consideratione perspicere:
quia neque qui plantat est aliquid, neque qui rigat, sed Deus qui dat
incrementum. Ancient Authors define the chief part of Husbandry to be this:
The Husbandman ought to consider the Nature of the Trees which he is to Plant,
and so to dispose of them as they may have fit soil, and situation, that
they may have the influence of the Sun; as much as may be; And there will
arise great Profitts, and advantages: with Pleasure attending them; O how sweet
(says he) and pleasant is the Fruit that thou have Planted with thine own
hand; to eat thereof, and to distribute of the same to thy Friends, and
acquaintance.

They say the Profitts of Fruit Trees are wonderful; and cannot be reckned up,
there is no end of the Account;

St. Austin accounts this an excellent employment; and worthy the esteem of the
best men; having many deep mysteries, and secrets of Nature, in it, to
exercise, and employ the understanding of the most eminent persons; in
considering the Nature of seeds sown, in Grafting young Twiggs; transplanting
Trees, and many other works about them, to consider and find out the Nature of
these things; and to apply our selves accordingly: but in all, to know, and
conclude, That it is not he that Planteth, nor he that waters, but God that
gives the increase.

Mr Boulton (an eminent, godly Divine in his time) says that Vinyards,
Gardens, Orchards, and such enclosed Plotts, are the Stars, and Paradices of
the Earth.

And Sr. Fran: Ba: Essays pa. 226.
says; Gardens are the purest of humane Pleasures, the greatest refreshments
of the spirits of man; without which Buildings, and Palaces, are but gross
handi-workes.


Section 6.
HVSBANDMAN: Seeing it is manifest, and concluded by all men, that this work of
Planting Fruit Trees, is very Profitable, and Pleasant, how comes it to pass,
that so many men are yet negligent, and slothful in the work; Many young
Gentlemen who have good estates in Lands, and might very much improve their
Estates by Planting; yet are negligent, and all that can be said to encourage
them to it will not prevail to set them on work; what may be the reason of
this gross neglect; is their any fault, or matter of discouragement arising
from you that does hinder them.


Too things seeming discouragements in Planting.
FRVIT-TREES: There are indeed two things (especially) that may perhaps arise
from us, (seemingly) as matters of discouragement to some men; The one is, We
cannot bring forth Fruits speedily, to any considerable profit; men must be
content to stay, and wait certain years, ere they can have any great profits
from us, And sensual men that are all for present Profitts, Pleasures, and
satisfaction of their appetites with present things, will not stay our time;
which is necessary for our growth, and increase that we may bring forth store
of good Fruits; for their Profitt.

And likewise; The work, and labor about us seems to be but a mean work,
Young proud Gentlemen think it a work, and employment much below them, to digg
in the ground to set Trees; they account it too mechanical, and therefore have
a kind of disdain of such an employment, which too things often hinder some
men from propagating of us; notwithstanding we are known to be so profitable.


Vain minds take up with present satisfaction.
HVSBANDMAN: It is true indeed some wild, lightheaded young Gentlemen that have
good Estates, run altogether after the satisfaction of their sensual
appetites, and desires, which they may have at present, and are impatient of
delay; and so neglect, and undervalue, these profitts by the Planting of
Fruit Trees; in regard (as ye have said) there must be a time of waiting
patiently for Profitts by Planting; but yet the more wise; and sober Persons of
the Gentry, who hearken to Reason more then Sense; are considerate, and are
fully convinced of what has been said, concerning the great Profitts by
Planting Fruit Trees, and other kinds of Trees; and accordingly are very
diligent about the work.


Examples of the greatest persons in Planting.
But as for that proud conceit of this work being below them, and too
Mechanical; let them but consider what was the work of the first Man, and
that in his state of happiness. The work appointed him by God himself, was
to dress the Garden and to keep it; And let them consider also what Examples
there are recorded of great persons who imployd themselves, with great delight,
in this work of Planting Fruit Trees: Kings, Emperors, and the greatest
Powers, were not ashamed of it: but performed it with their own hands;
Dioclesian Emperor of Room, left his Empire, and betook himself to this
impl^yment, in the later part of his life. Elizeus sportanus planted spatiouse,
and large Orchards; and used therein to feast, and banquet with his children,
and Friend^: Ezra 1.2. etc.
Cyrus King of Persia, (who had all the Kingdoms of the Earth given to him)
was diligent, and most exact in this work of Planting Fruit Trees; with his
own hand; as he himself acknowledged; to Lysander, when he came to visit him.
See his own words; as they are Recorded.

Epistola alberti Lol^ ad herculem: Libid^ re Rustica: page 30.
Cyrus minor Persarum Rex, vir ingenii excelsi, and rerum gestarum gloria
celeberrimus, cum ad eum venisset Lysander Lacedaemonius, and ipse summis
virtutibus p^stans, eique dona nonnulla attulisse^, and ceteris rebus comis,
and humanus erga ipsum fuerit; quodam vero die recreationis, caussa in quendam
hortum magna ipsius industria undique conseptum, and singulari artificio
consitum eum adduxit; Tum Lysander admiratus egregium omnium rerum ordinem,
atque proceritates Arborum, illarumque in quincuncem directam seriem, and
fructuum pulchritudinem, ac odorum, qui e floribus spirabant, suavitatem,
dixisse fertur; Atqui Lysander, meo ingenio ista sunt elaborata; mei sunt
ordines, Arboresque, and Plantae, aliaque quae ita miraris, mea manu sunt sara.
Tum vicissim Lysandrum, ipsius comtemplantem purpu^am, corporisque elegantiam,
and ornatum persicum auro gemmisque praetiosissimis splendentem; respondisse; O
Cyre, quam meri^o beatus ab omnibus perhiberis, cum excellenti fortunatua
singularis ranta conjuncta copulataque sit industria. So that such men as are
so highly conceited of themselves, to think this work, and employment about
Fruit Trees, to be below them, are much mistaken, they need not be ashamed of
it, more then their betters; Neither has it been the choice of some few
Eminent persons only, but of very many as we find by Records in several
Authors; see further.

Epistola alberti Lolii, ad herculem Li: de re Rust:
Solemus autem circa Agriculturae tractationem; duos potissimum fines
considerare, utilitatem nimirum, quam continuo inde percipere possumus, and
venustate florum, germinatione stirpium; proventu fructuum capere solemus. Et
in qua ubique magna copia bonarum, and fructuosarum Arborum sese offerat.
Nonnullos alios in medium adducere qui amore rei Rusticae ita capti fuerunt, ut
post habitis omnibus dignitatibus, Magistratibus, Regnis, Victoriis, and
triumphis, ad Agriculturam se totos applicuerunt. Caelum nitescere, Arbores
frondescere,
Vites laetificas pampinis pubescere,
Ramos Baccarum ubertate incurvescere,
Segetes largiri fruges, florere omnia.
Subsequitur postea aestas non solum floribus, ut in primis sunt Lilia, Rosae,
Violae hyacinthi, Caryophilli, and infiniti alii ornatur; sed etiam frugibus,
fructibus, vuis, animalibus, omnibusque rebus Caeteris ad vitam nostram
necessariis sustinendam abundat. Certe si recte, and diligenter inquisiveris
videbis profecto omnes studiosos, and literatos homines, Ruris cesessu
vehementer ses oblectasse, illudque semper expecisse plurimum. Nam praeter
aerem liberum, and jucundam viriditatem, quae plurimum ingenium excitant,
spiritus quoque inde recreari, and intelligentiam mirifice acui, certum est. O
beata, and fincera vita: o suave, atque honestum ocium, and quasi omni negotio
melius. Agricultura sola est, cui ingenui, and excellentes viri admoveri
debent; Quid datur a divis melius mortalibus aegris,
Quam bona, quae pariunt passim letissima Rura,
Hic hominum primi vitam incoluere beatam,
Cum placidam nondum turbarent praelia pacem,
Cum variis tellus redimitur floribus; and cum
Arboribus viride redeunt per brachia frondes,
Atque avium dulces cantus nemora avia complent,
Tunc mecum, aut felix nusquam vitae genus ullum,
Quo se mortales factant, aut hoc erit unum.

Many Profitts and Pleasures in Planting Fruit Trees.
Thus we see what the Ancient, and more recent writers (and those of Learning
and Eminency in the world) have said, and esteemed of this work of Planting
Fruit Trees; both as to Profitts, and Pleasures in the lives of men; and how
they have preferred it before other employments; Therefore there is reason all
men should have a good esteem of Fruit Trees, and of the works about them:
especially seeing they are profitable not only as to Temporal Profitts in the
lives of men, from the Cradle to the Grave, from the beginning of the world, to
the end of it. But the same also ministering so many occasions, and helps in
order to spiritual advantages; as has been showed; being Examples to us of
Obedience to God, in that they keep the Laws of their Creator inviolable;
after their kinds; in observing the Course of Nature; from the beginning of the
world, to the end of it, And continually speaking to us to do the same; Many
advantages we have by them; with all Pleasures, and Delights superadded. So
that such a work, carries away the vote, and suffrage of all People, according
to the Poet. Omne tulit punctum, qui misciuit utile dulci.


Here are two of the most cogent Arguments that prevail with all men,
Argumentum ab utili. Et Argumentum a voluptate. Arguments from Profitts, and
Arguments from Pleasures.

Pleasure is called sal and condimentum vitae: the Salt that seasons all things
to us: the Profitts are more because of the Pleasures, and the Pleasures are
more because of the Profitts. They being united together do commend, and set
off each other; more then they would be single, and alone.


Section 7.
Great Trees in too fatt soil Bear not well.
HVSBANDMAN: Here are a sort of Trees that grow in a very rich soil, deep,
and fatt; and are fair, handsome, large, lovely Trees, as any I can see, but
yet they do not answer these things in their Fruits: I expect they should bring
me some Fruit, and profit better, and more then other Trees, that grow in a
poor, lean soil, and are but small Trees to these which are grown to a vast
bigness, and largnesse of body, and branches: I cannot be satisfied with such
poor, and small returns, from such great Trees, in such a rich and fertile
soil as they here grow in.


Moderation is best.
FRVIT-TREES: There is good reason we should bring forth good Fruits, and more
then those Trees that grow in poor ground, but consider thou whether our
unfruitfulnesse be not occasioned by our too fatt, and Plentiful feeding; for
thou know that Repletion is an enemy to Generation, in all Creatures,
according to their kinds, Men and Women that are too full fed, and grow gross,
and fatt, they seldom are fruitful; as others who are more moderate, and
temperate; and this is our case; by reason of our too full, fatt feeding in
this deep, and fertile soil, we grow great, and run out yearly, in large
shootes and broad leaves, but shall bear little Fruit while it is so with us.


A just Reproof of the Carnal Careless Gentry.
HVSBANDMAN: These things are true, and are useful in their place, as to
temporal Profitts, in the ordering of Fruit Trees; But we may learn hence a
Lesson of higher concernment; it plainly shadows out unto us, that it is, too
manifestly seen amongst some great persons, the Gentry of this Nation; who
being Trees planted (by Gods providence) in a rich, and fertile soil; they
grow very great in power, and dignity* swelled with high titles of honor,
abundance of riches, and the best things the world affords* But as for
Fruitfullnesse toward God, spiritual Fruits, they are very few, and small,
amongst many of them, who live a most carnal, sensual life, as if there were
no life after this; feeding, pampering, and cherishing their bodies, while the
poor soul is neglected, lean, and starven; And so ware out a few days in
promp, and pride; and in a moment go down from the stage of the world, into
eternal woe, and destruction; O miserable life, that some of them live, even
whilst they live most at ease, and in their pleasures: Is not he worthy to be
accounted a fool, that will choose and prefer, a painted bauble not worth 2d,
before a rich Treasure, worth many Millians: Much more foolish are they who
prefer a short momentany life of sensual pleasures, before the pleasures and
glory of Eternal life; Consider this ye that forgett God, least if ye
neglect this day of grace, ye shortly prove these things to be true, by
woofull experience, in remediles Miseries.


^kilfull ordering of Fruittrees produces Fruitfulness:
HVSBANDMAN: But yet I see some few of these great Trees, even in this rich
soil; who by some skill, and extraordinary industry of the Husbandman; do
bring forth very good- Fruits, and plentifully too; from year to year; how
glad should I be, were ye all so Fruitful; I should then have a greater
revenue of Profitts yearly then I have.


Remove the Cause and the Effect cease.
FRVITTREES: Thou know by Experience, that immoderation and excess in any
thing is hurtful, and dangerouse; so when thou know the Cause of a
mischief, or inconvenience, thou have best remove it, if thou can; that so
the effect also may cease; as this in Nature, so also in Moral, or Spiritual
things sublata Causa tollitur effectvs.


HVSBANDMAN: This also is of higher, and further use in reference to the great
on's in the world;


A due Commendation of the Pious, and Religious Gentry.
Although great Revenues, high Titles Dignities, Honors, Riches and Pleasures
of the world, are great snares, and Temptations unto those who have them; yet
through the mighty, and powerful operations of the spirit of God, in the
careful, and diligent use of the means of grace, which some of the great
Persons do exercise themselves in; their minds and hearts are enlightened, and
changed from a state of Nature, to a state of Grace; who are famous Examples
unto others in their generations: and have a great influence upon all round
about them; being Patterns of Piety, great Charity, and Virtue; And so are
truly Noble, as being Borne from above; Sons and Daughters, to the Lord God
Almighty. Though according both to 1 Cor. 1.26. Not many wise men after the
flesh; not many mighty, not many Noble, are called.
Scripture, Experience, and Observation of enlightened, spiritual minds, the
greatest part of such walk in the broad way, and enter into the wide gate that
leads to destruction, the eyes of their minds being blinded, not only by
Corruption, and Satan (as all sorts by Nature are,) but also dazelled by the
glittering show, and splendour of these Pompous; gaudy, Vanities, Profitts, and
Pleasures, of this world; and so their state is thereby the more dangerous:
Then what infinite grace is showed forth in choosing, and calling some of them;
Notwithstanding these impediments; and plucking them as Brands out of the
Burning; making them as rich Diamonds, and Pearls, among Pebbles and common
stones, These persons then lie under the greatest Bonds, and Obligations that
can be to return answerable Obedience, Duty, and Thankfulness unto God, for
his rich* and free Grace to them in Jesus Christ* Not only in saving them from
the wrath to come; but also estating them in an inheritance, immortal,
invisible, and that fadet^ not away, reserved in Heaven for them.


Section 8.
HVSBANDMAN: Omnia f^orebunt* prospiciente Deo.
Methinks ye swagger, and are very brave, this May-morning; i^ your beautiful
blossoms, and green^ leaves; whence had ye all this Gallantrie^*


The Voice of all Creatures to Man.
FRVIT-TREES: It pleased our bountiful Creator to bestow it upon us; but i^ is
for thee, and for the sake of mankind* which ingageth thee, and all men to
acknowledge it; And to serve him, and prais^ him with more chearefullnesse:
This is ou^ Language, and Lesson to all Men; which every particular tree among
us, does dail^ speak aloud: qui fecit me, propter te, fecit te, propter se: He
that made me, for thee, made thee for himself.


HVSBANDMAN: But I have seen you meanly clothed, sometimes in the year: I
perceive ye change your Garments, now and then; have ye several suits of
Apparel.


Fruit Trees, receive, and loose their beauty once a year.
FRVIT-TREES: Yea; we are diversely clothed we wear out a new shuite every
year; Our bountiful Lord, and Master puts upon us a fresh, new Garment every
spring of the year; and we are very beautiful to look upon; all the spring,
and Summer; with various colored blossoms, leaves, and Fruits; but toward
Autumn this brave clothing loses its fresh color, because the Sun (the
efficient Cause of our Springing, growth, and flourishing) withdraws from us,
and is gone toward the South parts: And as cold weather coms on, these our
beautiful Garments of Leaves, and Fruits, fade, and fall from us, by little,
and little, till we are quite Naked; and ^hen (for a season) we are in a
melancholy posture.


The state of all things here below changeable.
HVSBANDMAN: Vicissitude and change, is the state of all visible Creatures:
from Riches, to Poverty; from Poverty, to Riches; sometimes prosperity,
sometimes adversity; sometimes health, sometimes sickness, sometimes honor,
sometimes disgrace; good Report and evil Report: turns and changes of
providence; which we ought to be fitted for, (that in every state we may be
therewith content) by getting a well grounded confidence, and assurance of the
love of God in Christ; which never changes (as all created things do;) but is
the same for ever; without variableness, or shadow of change.

There is evidently, a very great change, and alteration concerning you;
between Summer, and Winter; (as has been said) but how is it with you in the
cold, sharp Winter, in frost, and snow, storms of Hail, Rain, strong, and
boisterouse Wind, and sometimes blasting, killing Winds; and Aires; have ye^
any relief or nourishment then to feed^ upon; how do ye to live, and hold out
i^ the time of all these difficulties; ye show forth no effects of life,
either by growthbuds, blossoms or leaves; how do ye find your selves to be,
during that sharp time.


Fruit Trees are pincht, and endure difficulties in Winter.
Fruit Trees in the spring revive.
FRVIT-TREES: It Is true indeed: There is a very great alteration in us,
between Summer, and Winter; our beauty, and ornaments being taken from us; and
we are left naked, and bare, and seem (during all that time) as if we were
quite dead; so that some unskilful persons judge us so to be indeed; yet we
have a conserving sap, existing in us all that time, which keeps us alive;
though we cannot exert it then, because the Sun (which is the efficient Cause
of our growth) is at that time, far remote from us: But when it returns again
in the spring time, and daily draws nearer to us, then by its warmth and
influence, we begin to be a little refreshed: for though we have not sense, yet
we have perception: which is to us instead of sense: and we show it by the
effects; for thou see we then begin to plump our buds, which by little, and
little do open, and brake forth into Blossoms, Leaves, and shootes: And by
degrees (as the Sun draws nearer, and nearer, and it is hear, and influence
is stronger, and stronger upon us, we are more, and more refreshed by it, our
blossom Buds turn into Fruits; and we shoot forth uigorously, and strongly,
and bring forth Fruits, and flourish in our beauties all the Summer.


Some Christians go through great tribulations.
HVSBANDMAN: These things we find to be so according to Nature; And it is a
very proper, and apposite similitude of the state and condition of deseried
souls; all along in Each particular: its one of those similitudes that runs
equatuor pedibus: it holds in all respects; for so it is with Christians: (but
more especially with some particular persons) one time or other in their life;
they endure, and undergo hard, and difficult things; great affliction^,
Temptations, and Tribulations, which befall them, according to the good
pleasure of God, who orders, and overruleth all for their good, and profit:
thereby purging out Corruptions, and trying their graces, to increase
holiness; Ps: 84.11.
for god himself, (who is a Sunn, and a shield to his people) does not only
withdraw from their spiritts and hides his face, and so leaves them in
darkness, and they walk in darkness: Children of Light walk in darkness
(some a shorter, some a longer time;) But also he permitts many outward
troubles, afflictions and crosses to come upon them upon their Bodies, Names,
Estates, Relations: Soul, and Body, all that concerns them; are overwhelmed,
overturned, broken, and destroyed; as to sense, and appearance; both to
themselves, and others, that behold them Job. 1, 2, 3. etc. And during this
long night of darkness; this hard, and sharp Winter season, there is (as it
were) a Death upon all they have, for he that is the life of the Soul, (as the
Soul is of the Body) is gone, their beloved is gone; and hides himself: They
seek him, but they cannot find him: Cant. 3 2. The Poor, and needy, seek
water and there is none: ( Isay 41.17.) and their Tongue fails for thirst,
they cry after him, but he hears not, and makes as though he would never
hear; nor regard them any more.

The absence of this Sun makes all (within, and without) dark; yea, more
bitter then Death it self: And more then all this, the sense of the absence of
God, and also the apprehensions of the loss of God, the irrecoverable loss of
God, is the same (in some degree) with the Torments of Hell, Yea the worst, and
greatest of the torments of the Damned. Paena damni; the pain of loss, is
agreed by all Divines to be the greatest torment in Hell, worse then the pain
of sense, that torments the Body (though that be intolerable too) Reve. 7.14.
Hose. 14.7.
All these Temptations, and great Tribulations some deserted souls go through
and endure, in this sharp, Winter season; But when this Sunn returns, and
draws near again, the Fruit Trees begin to revive, and spring, They revive as
the Corn, and grow as the Vine, and shoot forth their Roots as Lebanon: Then
the Fig Tree puts forth her green Figgs, and the Vine with the tender
Grapes, give a good smell: Cant. 2.13: When this Sunn of Righteousness arises
upon the Soul, he refreshes* and restores comforts to those distressed weary
Souls; Isay. 57.18.
which they are exceeding sensible of, and are (as it were) overjoyed: As
mariners at Sea when they are delivered from some Terrible Tempests, and
Storms, from which they were almost in despair to have escaped; yet with much
a do coming saffe to Land, how are they transported with joy, and gladness,
for their safe arivall at their desired Haven. The light of Gods Countenance
refreshes the Soul after darkness.
This deliverance from these spiritual storms, and Tempests; (in this sharp,
Winter season) is much more; Yea, more then can be expressed in words; or
shaddowed out by any similitude: it is Joy unspeakable, and full of glory: Heb.
12.11.
Then follows the peaceable Fruits of Righteousness, all the rest of the
Summer of their life: with more light and Joy, then if they had never been in
darkness; Even as Fruit Trees after a long, cold sharp Winter, when the warm
spring comes on, and the heat of Summer follows, all flourish in their
beauties, and ornaments of Blossoms, Leaves, and Fruits.


Section 9.
The opinion about descension of Sap Examined.
HVSBANDMAN: Some learned men have thought, and asserted, that Sap in
Fruit Trees does descend (in Autumn) from the Branches to the Roots; which
going down of the Sap, causes the Leaves and Fruits to fall off, and the
Branches to cease growing: And Wood-men, and many others, receive it, and hold
it (as their common opinion) for an undoubted truth; What say ye of your
selves, as to this matter.


FRVITTREES: If Learned men, and others, are of that opinion, they had best
consider it again; and look better into the grounds of their opinion;
secundae cogitationes meliores; for we deny the thing; There Is no going down of
any of our Sap: Nature is wiser then so, to part with any Sap that it has
gotten: our Sap is our Life; it is our food upon which we live, and increase
yearly, and by which we are enabled to bring forth Blossoms, Leaves, and
Fruits, in Summer yearly; how come we to be of this bulk, and bigness (as
thou see) but by the assention of Sap, and the digesting, and assimulating of
it; into our substance, of Wood, Bark, Leaves, Blossoms, and Fruits* we
should be glad of mo^e Sap, if we could get it; but we will part with none
down again; to our Roots; for our Roots are better stored with Sap (all the
year long) then we the branches.

And besides this necessity of keeping it and impossibility of parting with it,
the Natural, and innate property of our Sap is always to ascend; there is an
active, vegetative spirit in us, the Nature of which is always to ascend, and
according to the Law of our Nature, can do no otherwise; it being a tenuous,
light Body, or substance, of a flammeous, and aerious Nature, whose appetite is
always upwards; according to the known Axiom, omne leve sursum; Nay more;
should we part with any of our Sap down again, we should then fade, and
decay; our substance would be thereby, diminished; (that as we increase one
part of the year by ascension of Sap, so we should also decrease another part
of the year, by descension of Sap; and what then would become of us; Therefore
there is no such thing in Nature as descension of Sap in Trees.


No descension of Sap in Fruit Trees.
HVSBANDMAN: I am persuaded as ye have said; That there is no such thing in
Nature, as descension of Sap in Fruit Trees, and have several Reasons against
it, besides what has been said: For no Effect can be produced without a Cause;
Now there is no Cause can be (so much as colorably) assigned, for such an
Effect in Nature; Therefore we conclude, there is no such thing; for Sap when
it moves, always ascends, never descends; If any man be yet unsatisfied
concerning this, touching the descension of Sap in Trees, (it being deeply
radicated in their minds, and an opinion of long standing,) he may receive
further satisfaction concerning it, from six particular Arguments against it;
grounded upon Reason, and Experience; set forth at large, in a little Book
entitled; a Treatise of Fruit Trees; by a Practiser in the Art of Planting
Fruit Trees; page 191. 192. etc. As for Leaves of Trees falling in Autumn, and
Roots being better then (at that time) which some attribute to the descending
of Sap) the Cause is grosely mistaked; other Causes for those Effects, are
easily assigned: Leaves fall off because Sap (at that time) has done
ascending; and Roots are best then, because no sap ascends from them, they are
then fed; and will first be served: The Poet thought it an Excellent thing to
find out the true Causes of things, when he said, felix qui potuit, rerum
cognoscere Causas:

The spirit and Nature of true Christians tend upwards.
But besides the Temporal Profitts, and advantages that may arise from the
knowledge of these things; we learn some lessons, and instructions for
spiritual advantages: If the innate spirit, and Sap in Fruit Trees is still
aspiring, and ascending upwards, and never downwards unless forced contrary to
its Natural propensity, This teaches us, That so it should be with all
Christians: Nay; so it is with such as are (not nominally only, but) Christians
indeed; and in truth: Their spiritual Nature aspires, and ascends upwards: the
Divine Nature, (whereof all believers are pertakers more, or less) does as
Naturally ascend, and raise, and draw the soul (in it is desires, affections,
and operations) upwards Heavenwards, toward Christ, the life strength, and
Treasure of true believers; as corrupt Nature tends downwards; Earthwards, and
toward the Creatures: so that by this, Professors may try themselves, and come
to know what Nature, or Principle dwells, and prevails in them: The Tree is
known hy it is Fruits: Causes are known by their Effects: so also in this Case.


Section 10.
Fruit Trees prepared in Nurseries to be transplanted.
HVSBANDMAN: Here is a very large Nursery of Fruit Trees; some very young,
lately sping up; some of a middle size; and others very large fair Trees; and
of all these, some are grafted, and some ungrafted; Methinks these that are of
the biggest, and eldest sort, (being now prepared and grown large Trees) should
be transplanted, and removed, out of the Nursery, somewhere abroad into
several Countries, in Orchards, Gardens, and Fields; that so they might have
room to spread, and enlarge themselves, and bear store of good Fruits, for
the profit of many.


Elder Trees transplanted make room for the Younger.
FRVIT-TREES: I^s true: These that are fair, large, goodly Trees* should be
removed from the rest, of the younger sort; else we that are young, and coming
up, are like to be oppressed by them, for we shall not have room to grow, and
enlarge; And besides; these great, large Trees, will reach, and in tangle one
with another, and cross, fret, and gall one another; And therefore it is very
fit, and necessary, that they should be removed hence, for to that end they
were planted here: And then others will come up in their rooms and increase as
they have done; and so successively) be removed where they may grow, and
enlarge; and be profitable in their Fruits for many years.


Some of the best kinds, are to grow still in the Nursery.
HVSBANDMAN: I know that the end of Planting a Nursery of Fruit Trees is to
prepare them for transplanting elsewhere; But yet it is very convenient, and
necessary too; that some of the best Trees (such as have the best properties in
all respects) should remain still in the Nursery whereof to gather Grafts, and
bring forth Fruits, in order to the preparation of the young, ungrafted Trees,
that they also may be fitted for transplantation in due time.

Nurseries of Material Fruit Trees are apt similitudes of Mystical
Fruit Trees in Universities
And this (if it be well considered) is a very apposite Similitude of
Universities, and societies of Learning; being Nurseries of Mystical
Fruit Trees; designed on purpose for instruction, and preparation of youth;
that they may be Fruitful Trees of the Lords Planting, and Grafting; to bring
forth much good Fruit to the Husbandman, that he may be glorified; Isay. 61.3.
And to this great end, every one concerned should labor earnestly, to be
fitted, and prepared with Gifts, and Graces, Learning, and all endowments, and
qualifications of the Mind: And having received Talents, then to improve, and
employ them, for their Masters use, that so they may receive a reward. It is
necessary (as was said) there should some of the chief, and Principal
Fruit Trees, remain in the Nursery for Governors and Tutors, in every society,
to prepare the younger sort for transplantation, into several parts for
public employment, in the Church, and Commonwealth.

The spirit, and Grace of God, is to be preferred, before all Natural, and
acquired abilities.
Now the maine, and chief thing to be labored for, and most necessary to be
obtained, is the Spirit, and Grace ^f God; humane Learning, and Natural parts,
and Abilities; improved by Study, and industry, are of singular use, and
advantage; and all endeavors are diligently to be used for attainment thereof;
but these alone, are to^ short to aim at, or attain the highest end* the
glory of God; For Man by Nature, ca^ have no higher End then himself: his ow^
intrests: As water, in its current, can rise no higher (of it self) then the
spring head: every thing acts according to its Nature, and can do no otherwise;
Therefore a Principle of grace is absolutely necessary, This is (spiritually)
the Philosophers Stone, that turns all Natural seize* into Gold; it
uses, and improves all to spiritual Ends, and uses: in order to the glory of
God* so that we must get this, or we get Si Christum discis, satis est, si
caetera nescis. Si Christum nescis nihil est, si caetera discis.
nothing: Every one should be of such a spirit as Luther, who protested
Earnestly that God should not put him off with worldly things, or Natural
Gifts, herein we should be earnest with God, and take no nay; no denial;
Though we should ask temporal things conditionally; (if it be the will of God
to give them) yet we may, and ought, to ask spiritual things (which are
^olutely necessary) without condition: The Kingd^me of heaven suffers
violence, and the violent take it by force: Mat. 11.12.


Section 11.
Some Fruits seem good to the Eye; but are bad to the Taste.
HVSBANDMAN: I observe many Trees in this Garden, which are fair large Trees
to look upon; they flourish yearly with broad green Leaves, and beautiful
blossoms, and spring up with large shootes; but they bring forth no good
Fruits: some Fruits they bring forth, which are large in bulk, and substance,
and have a fair, and beautiful color, but their taste, and relish is naught;
the Husbandman likes not their Taste; they are of a sower, sharp, bitter
relish: very unpleasant: If ye bring forth no better Fruit hereafter, ye
shall be cut down and mad^ fuel for the fire: (...) should ye cumbe^ the
ground.


Fruit Trees improved by ingrafting.
FRVIT-TREES: We grow in a goo^ and fresh soil, and are large in bulk, an^
substance, as other Trees, and we bea^ Fruits according to our Natures; but w^
were never ingrafted, as some other Tree^ are, which grow by us; so that we
growing still upon our own natural, wild stock, and Root, we bring forth
Fruit accordingly. And so are like to do, until we have an alteration by
ingrafting.


No works pleasing to God without sincerity.
HVSBANDMAN: Herein ye bear the likeness, and resemblance of hypocrites in
the Visible Church; who live amongst true believers; and make a fair show,
with an outward form, and Profession of Religion, in all external Duties; but
because they are not sincere, and upright, have not the truth of grace, nor
were ever really ingrafted into Christ, but grow still upon the old stock of
corrupt Nature; thence it is, that their Fruits are naught, and unpleasant to
God, the Husbandman; though they are never so fair, and beautiful on the
outside, yet wanting a good Taste; that is they have no good Ends in any thing
they do; they make not the glory of God the chief, and maine End of that they
do; for all men by Nature make themselves their End; and not the glory of God;
and therefore they are not accepted of God: such had need to consider their
state (whilst it is called to day) and see that they rest not on this side an
interest in Christ.


Section 12.
Mulberry-trees called Sapientissima Arborum.
HVSBANDMAN: Here are a certain Number of Mulberri-trees in a row by
themselves; which are a kind of Trees in great esteem among men: in several
respects: your Leaves are the best food for Silkewormes; And your Fruits are
exceeding good to make Syrups, for diverse uses which Apothecaries, and others
do make yearly; And ye are called by some ancient Authors (who write of
Fruit Trees) Sapientissima Arborum; How come ye to be wiser then other Trees;
How are any Trees said to be wise, what say ye of your selves.


FRVIT-TREES: We own no such Epithet as wise: we are no wiser then other
Trees; but some men are pleased so to say of us, because we keep in, and show
not our Buds, nor spring till late in the year; about the beginning of May;
when all the cold frosty weather is gone, and past; But this is according to
the course of Nature, (the Law of our Creation) which we, and all other Trees
do constantly observe; And in this is seehe the wisdom of our Creator, (who
does all things wisely) and has made us so to do; Mulberry-trees bud late,
because of a tender Nature.
For we are of a more weak, and tender Nature, then many other Fruit Trees
are; which bud, and spring (it may be) 6 weeks, or two Months before us; as
Cherrytrees, Plumtrees, and other Trees do; But if we should dare to peep out,
and appear so soon, we should not be able to bear it.


HVSBANDMAN: It is very certain that there are diversities of Natures and
properties among Fruit Trees (as all other Creatures) and therefore they must
be planted, and ordered accordingly; some are so tender that they will not
thrive; nor bear Fruits, but against a wall, and that upon the South-Sun too;
and carefully, and tenderly ordered: others will grow, and bear well in the
open Fields; notwithstanding all cold, frosts, storms, and winds, that they
meet with.

some Christians are more valiant for Christ, then others.
But this may be transferred to a higher use; And gives us to understand; That
this is even so among spiritual Fruit Trees; Professing Christians; some are
more hardy Soldiers, and more valiant then others; And can stand out against,
and encounter with, more, and greater difficulties, then others; (though true
believers) can do: some have a great and strong faith: Mat. 15.28.
O Woman great is thy faith: others have but a weak faith, O ye of little
faith; Mat. 6 30. Some have great measures of the Spirit of God, light,
wisdom, and knowledge; others are but Babes, and Children in understanding,
and grace; some Christians have much love to Christ, and zeal for him; (as
having the manifestations of his love more clear, and evident to them, then
some others have) some others Love but little, and all is weak in them, and so
they can do but little, nor suffer for Christ; the moving Cause being but weak
in them, the Effects are Answerable.


Section 13.
Fruits ripen successively upon the same Tree; others altogether.
HVSBANDMAN: I observe That some kinds of these Fruit Trees do bring forth
their ripe fruits gradually, and successively; upon the same Tree, some of the
Fruits are ripe, and ready to be gathered several weeks before the rest; as
amongst Aprecotts, Peaches, Cherrys, and Plums, and such like Summer Fruits; we
find some Fruits ripe, whilst others on the same Tree, and same Bough, are yet
hard, and green: But some other kinds of Trees bring forth their Fruits ripe,
and ready together all at one time, upon the same Tree; as Pippins, Peremains,
and all Winter Fruits; What is the Reason of this variation in the ripening of
the Fruits of Trees.


The Wisdom and bounty of God in ripening of Fruits.
FRVITTREES: Thou may herein see, and observe the Wisdom, bounty, and
goodness of our Creator; For if we that are Cherrytrees* Plumtrees, and such
like summer Fruits, should bring forth our Fruits all at once, there would be a
glutt, of Fruits; And we should do more hurt, then good amongst People; for we
are no lasting Fruits; we cannot keep (as thou know;) but should in a few
days rott upon thy hand; Therefore God gives our Fruits to thee successively;
some one day, and some another, as thou, and others may make use of them; for
health, and Profitt; And as for hard, Winter Fruits, they are ripe all of them
together on the same Trees, that so they (...) gathered altogether, and laid up
in ^ore, for use all the year long; And is the not the like Wisdom, bounty,
and goodness, from God showed to all people in this* as in the former* though
each of them in different respects, as has been said.


Section 14.
HVSBANDMAN: Here are a sort of Trees that do not thrive, nor prosper, as other
Trees do; what is the reason? seeing ye are as well planted, and preserved, as
other Trees which grow near unto you.


FRVIT-TREES: South Country trees, p^per not in England.
We are forreners; this is not our Native Country we were brought from beyond
the Seas, from a warm Clymate; where we had a strong heat, and influence of
the Sun; but we are here in a cold Country, and it agrees not with us, we shall
never grow, nor prosper, nor bring forth Fruits to please thee, or for thy
Profit.


Plant Fruit Trees fit for the Country.
HVSBANDMAN: I believe what ye say to be true; Many Gentlemen of great estates,
to please their minds, have sent for, and bought many rare Plants, and Trees,
from foreign parts, out of the South-Countries, of France, Spain, Italy, and
other Southern Clymates and planted them here in England, several degrees
Northward; which though it will bear many kinds of good fruits to perfection,
and ripeness (such as are fit for the Countries) yet it will not bear good
Orringes, Lemons, Pomegranates, and such like Fruits of the South Countries;
Therefore they had better bestow their cost, and pains about Fruit Trees that
are known by long Experience to be profitable unto all that plant them.


Section 15.
Redstraketrees formerly of little Account.
HVSBANDMAN: Here are Redstraketrees full of lovely apples: are these the true
Redstrakes that makes the rare Cider in Herefordshire, so much in esteem
amongst all men, How come they to be so much in request now; its not long since
they went by the name of Skidmores Crabs; was not that a disparagement to the
Trees, and Fruits; how come they now to be in so much request and esteem every
where.


Redstrake apples best for Cider.
FRVIT-TREES: It Is true; we grew, and bore Fruits for many years; and our
Fruits were called Skidmores Crabs, and were very much undervalued; and in
disparagement for many years; but when our Natures were considered, and tried;
and men had Experience of us, our Fruitt was found to be better then any other
sort of Fruit for Cider; and now we are everywhere cried up, and in great
esteem amongst all men.


Comfort after trouble Joy after sorrow.
HVSBANDMAN: I am very glad to hear it: for the knowledge hereof is Profitable
many ways; the consideration of this may be of an higher use, and shadows
out unto us, a truth evident to Experience, the so it often happens to the
people of God through his providence for their good* They may, and often fall
under disgrace and reproach among many because of their Sin, temptations, and
afflictions, that God, for good Ends, permitts them to fall into; but yet upon
their return, and restoring, God in his own good time, brings them out of all
their troubles; and disparagements; and makes them in esteem more then others;
which fell not as they did: The Prodigal is an instance herein; For when their
Natures, and Fruits are known, and made manifest, he will get them praise, and
fame, in every place, where they have been put to shame. Zeph. 3.19.


Section 16.
More Planting of late years, then formerly.
HVSBANDMAN: It is observed by many people, that there has been much Planting
of Fruit Trees of late years, more then formerly; Men have Planted more
Fruit Trees within 30 or 40. years last past, then in several hundreds of
years in former ages; as is manifest by Orchards that are planted: What is the
reason that Fruit Trees are so much in esteem now, and of late time, more than
in former times.


Reasons for much Planting of Fruit Trees
FRVITTREES: The Reason is evident; Because men of late time have inquired, and
made search into the Nature of our Fruits: And have found out the particular
Profitts, and advantages that come by us, in many respects; not only as to the
sale ^f the Fruits to those that buy them; but also as to pleasant, and
wholesome Food, all the year long in the family; And particulerly for Cider,
which is of late time concluded generally, to be the most wholesome liquor in
the world; being found so to be by Experience: Not only preventing diseases,
which other drinks do breed in the Body; but also cures many already
contracted: And therefore no marvel Fruit Trees are in esteem now, more then
formerly.


Cider; the most wholesome drink: especially of the best fruits.
HVSB: It is undoubtedly true; That Cider in general, is the most wholesome
drink, in refference both to health, and Long life; though made of ordinary,
and common Fruits. But there are certain peculiar Fruits (now or late time,)
found out, and known, which make^ Cider far beyond, (and better, then) the
common Cider: As the Redstrake, the double Red-redstrake; Gennet Moyles; and
some other kinds that might be named: And so long as health and long life is in
esteem with men, so long will Cider be in esteem also; as the chief means to
attain these Ends; Learned, and judicious Physicians do also concur therein,
and commend syrupum de Pomis; vinum Pomaceum; vinum Britanicum etc: see London
dispensatory; composed by a College of Physicians pa: 38: And a famous
Physician in his time gives it this commendation: Julius Palmarius Lib: de
Morois: p. 248.
Pomaceum e succo Malorum dulcium, quae maturitatem consequta sunt; satis de
fae^atum, maturum, tenue, Subflavum, melancholicis adeo salubre est; and omne
potionis gemus bonitate vincat.


Section: 17.
Fruit Trees show forth the glory of God.
HVSBANDMAN: I unde^stand that ye Fruit Trees are Creatures that God has made
to manifest, and show forth his glory; And that ye do it continually,
according to the Law of your Creation, The wisdom, Power, goodness, bounty,
care, and love of God, toward man, is seen, and clearly manifest in you;
evident to the Reason, and understanding of men: And therefore ye are worthy
to be esteemed, and commended; and to be set before us as Examples, and
incentives to the like Obedience: And there is reason we should exceed you in
setting forth the glory of God, as much as we do in our Natures, we being
created a higher rank of Creatures then ye; and for whose sake, and use, ye
were created.


FRVIT-TREES: Fruit Trees are engagements to Obedience.
Thou have said the truth: and therefore see thou do, and perform accordingly:
And that in a due proportion too; answerable to thy degree, as to thy created
Nature above us; else we shall (one day,) be witnesses against thee, for god,
our Creator, as sure as we are now Examples, Motives, and Engagements, to thee,
of obedience to God; see that thou make the glory of God, the chief End of thy
life; in all the actions of thy life, as we do.


All men act according to their Natures.
HVSBANDMAN: This is indeed, the End of man's Creation; but men generally by
reason of the corruption of Nature in all mankind do make themselves the End of
their living in the world: and all their thoughts words, motions and ways, in
the world, is for self; that Idol self is set up, and worshipped, by every
man, and woman Naturally; until God work another Nature, and Principle; even
a divine, and spiritual Nature; his own Nature: And then we do as naturally
work and act for the glory of God, and his interests in the world, as before
we did for our selves.


Fruit Trees change not their Natures.
FRVIT-TREES. Thou tellest us now of a Mystery, we perceive not any such thing
in our selves; as a change in our Natures; what meanest thou by a change of
Nature; we never changed our Natures, from the beginning of the world to this
day; but have kept, and observed the Laws of our Creation, without the least
violation; and so we shall do to the end of the World.


All mankind have changed their Natures once and some have a double change.
HVSBANDMAN: Its true; ye never changed your Natures, wherein ye were first
created; but all mankind have changed their Natures; and the natures of some
have been twice changed; since their first Creation: first in Paradise, even
whilst ye stood by, and were witnesses, of that sad change; from a state of
holiness to a state of sin, and Corruption by that act of disobedience, in
eating the forbidden Fruit, of one of the Trees in the same Garden, wherein ye
were planted; but the second change of our Nature, ye know nothing of; this is
from that woeful state of corruption, and sin, to the state of grace, and
Holiness; This second change of our Nature is peculiar only to, some
particular persons who are called, and sanctified in due time (in their
generations;) and at last Eternally saved;


Section 18.
Heat of the Sun needful for Fruits.
HVSBANDMAN: These Trees that grow most in the Sun, I see bear the best
Fruits; those that grow much in the shade and have little Sunn, their Fruits
are not half so good as the other, what say ye, is the Cause of such
difference in the Fruits.


Fruit Trees have a preception of the heat of the Sunn and are refreshed by it.
FRVIT-TREES: The Cause is plain, and evident: We that grow in the Sun are
exceedingly refreshed by it is heat, and influence, it is the efficient Cause
of our life, and growth: For in the spring of the year we have a preception of
its drawing nearer, and nearer, every day toward us, which we are very glad
of; and express the same in our budding, blossoming, and Fruitfulness; And
our Fruits are also better ripened, and concocted by the heat of the Sun then
those are which grow in the shade.


Believers that walk closest with God, bring forth the best Fruits.
HVSBANDMAN: This is plainly so; And it is true also in us; we that are
Christians, and walk in the light of Gods Countenance, such have the
refreshing influence thereof, God is a Sun and shield to his people: Ps: 84.11.
And the nearer, and closer any believers walk with him, the more fruitful
they are; And the more sweet are all their Fruits.


Section 19.
HVSBANDMAN: Here are multitudes of goodly Fruit Trees, And we Experience that
ye do yearly bring forth store of beautiful, and wholesome Fruits; for our
profitt; how long are ye to continue with us, in your beauties, virtues, and
profitts.


FRVIT-TREES. As we were from the Creation of the world; and served the first
man; so shall we continue to the end of the world; for the use, and service of
the last man,


The Scripture says Fruit trees were from the beginning; and shall be to the
End of the world.
HVSBANDMAN: I remember it is written: God having created Adam, he put him into
the Garden; after he had caused every Tree, bringing Fruit after his kind to
spring up out of the Earth, he gave the Fruit to Adam for food; And the
Scripture also tells us, men shall be planting Fruit Trees, when Christ comes
to Judgment: As is was in the days of Noah: they Planted they Builded: Even so
shall it be in the coming of the Son of Man: Luke. 17.28.


HVSBANDMAM: But whence are all your virtues; your good, and useful Properties
in the lives of Men; What is the Primum mobile, the original, and first Cause,
of all excellencies, in you.


The excellencies of all Creatures are united in God: and infinitely more then
all:
FRVIT-TREES: These were given us by our wise and bountiful Lord, and Creator,
who as he made all his Creatures, so also he gave to every individual, their
various, distinct specificall properties, and Natures, as it pleased him.


The good, and virtues of the Creatures should lead us unto God, and there to
rest.
HVSBANDMAN: It is manifest then hereby that he is the Original and fountain
of all the good things in the world, in and upon all the Creatures, in the
Heavens, Earth, and waters; and all the Excellencies, and rare properties, of
Beauty, sweetness, and goodness in any respect whatsoever, that is in any,
or in all the Creatures, they are united in God the chief good: And with an
infiniteness above them all: And therefore from the sight of you, his
Creatures, and in our desiring, and using of you, with your virtues, and
properties, we should be drawn to God, and desire, and choose him above any, or
all his Creatures, as being the chief good.


Section 20.
Young, small Trees: full of good Fruits.
HVSBANDMAN: Here are a number of Young, small Trees that I see are full of
fair beautiful, and lovely Fruits; which is a very rare sight to behold,
though they are not above 3 or 4 years old, from their engrafting, yet they
bear more Fruits then others here (not far from them,) that are three or
fourscore years old, what is the reason hereof.


FRVIT-TREES: We were all of us ingrafted whilst we were but young, and small
Trees, with choice, and special Grafts, and therefore it is natural to us to
bear good Fruits early.


HVSBANDMAN: That is indeed according to the will, and pleasure of the
Husbandman, if it seem good unto him to graft some whilst young, others when
grown up to a stronger body, and to let others alone without grafting; who
shall find fault with him, for using this his freedom, and liberty. And it is
also manifest that it is even so amongst Christians: so God deals with them:
God calls some of his people, in childhood, and youth: others afterward.
some he calls, and converts early; even in their childhood, and youth, others
in their middle age; some he calls the first hour of the day; some the
Eleventh: and some the last hour, in elder age: But they who come to God in
Childhood, and youth, have great, and many advantages of those who come
afterward. It is Gods command that we should come to him, early, betime and
soon as may be in Childhood, and youth: Vdum and mollelutum es; nunc, nunc
properundus and acri; fiagendus sine fine ro^a Pers: sat. 3.
Eccl: 12.1. Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, while the evil
days come not; such as choose rather to serve the devil, and their own lusts,
in Childhood, and youth, and think to come to God afterward, in old age; let
them hearken to what God has said concerning such, Pro. 1.24. Because I have
called, and ye refused; I have stretched out my Hand, and no man regarded,
etc. I will laugh at your calamity, and mock when your fear comes.

But such as begin to follow God betimes, early, in their childhood and youth,
and to bring sorth good Fruit whilst they are young and of tender years, and
give unto God* their spring time, their virgin years, they usually know more
of the mind of God, and of the love of God, then others: And have greater
evidences, and manifestations of the love, and favor of God then others have;
they are usually, special, and remarkable persons, above others; and receive
more favors from God then others of his people do, who come not in to God so
soon: We see instances of this in Scripture: in Samuel the Prophet: who was
called of a child: 1. Sam. 3. so the Prophet Jer: Ch 1.6. who was sanctified
from the womb: Joseph: who (for bringing forth good Fruit, when he was but 17.
years of age) was sold into Egypt by his brethren: what remarkable favors did
he receive from God, all his days. Genesis 37.2. Obadiah, feared God from his
youth: 1. Kings 18.12. a singular person in his time. The Prophet Daniell:
began to fear God in his youth Dan. 1. And God showed him miracles of his
care, and Love: he had Learning, and wisdom, in all Visions, and dreams Dan.
1 17. besides the immediate comforts of the spirit of God, an Angel was sent
with a spetiall message to him, to tell him he was greatly beloved of God, And
God wrought a Miracle in preserving him from the Lions: The Prophet David, of a
Young Twigg was ingrafted into Christ, Psalm. 71.5. Taught of God from his youth
ver. 17. And who ever had a greater testimony from God, then he: a Man after
Gods own Heart. And who ever had clearer evidences of the love of God; (and
consequently communion with God) than he.

How great a Prophet was John the Baptist, who was filled with the Holy Ghost,
and sanctified in the womb: Luke. 1.15. The Apostle John, (called the beloved
disciple,) began to follow Christ in his youth, and had intimations of Christ's
love, more then the rest of the Disciples; he leaned on his breast, and lay in
his bosom: he had full assurance of the love of God to him: 1 Jo: 4.13.14. and
Ch: 5.19.20. 1. Jo: 3.14.24. We know we are of God: We know we are in him: We
know we are translated from Death to Life etc. And besides all this: such as
are Engrafted into Christ whilst they are young, and tender twiggs, they
attain unto large growths, and measures of grace; If one have but a small
measure of grace, (but as a grain of Mursterdseed) if he begin with it betime,
in his childhood, and youth; it will improve, and grow, in many years, to a
large measure, and degree: their Brook will become a River, and their River
will become a Sea: Every Act of Grace, will add to the habit of grace: They
shall proceed from strength, to strength, from Glory, to Glory, by the Spirit
of the Lord: 2 Cor. 3.18.


Section 21.
HVSBANDMAN: Ye have many Visitors, frequently; have you this familiar
discourse with every one, as we have at present, and as often as we are
disposed.


Gross ignorance reproved.
FRVIT-TREES: Many people (of all sorts) come from time, to time, and walk
among us, and look upon us, and commend us, for brave handsome Trees, lovely,
and beautiful, especially when we are in our Gallantrie; full of beautiful
blossoms and pleasant, wholesome Fruits; and some greedily pluck us, and tear
us, and sometimes break off some of our Branches, to get our Fruits; and so go
their ways; But speak never a word to us; neither do they understand what we
say to them, though we are continually speaking to men, and are never weary, of
instructing, and teaching man his Duty toward God, our Creator; and also
praising, and setting forth his glory; according to the Law of our Creation; as
thou know, and have often witnessed the same on our behalf.


Most people are ignorant, both of Gods word, and Works.
HVSBANDMAN: I believe what ye say to be true; People (for the greatest part
of the world) are ignorant of God, of themselves, and of all his Creatures; as
well as ignorant of the Scriptures; Though God has given us two great Volumes
or Books to read, and study; his word, and his Works: yet people (generally)
are ignorant of both; sottish children (as the Prophet calls them) who have no
understanding: wherefore he that made them, will not have mercy on them, and he
that formed them will show them no favor: Isay 27.11.

Tremble at this word, ye ignorant sottish people; there is not any mercy for
you, whilst ye remain ignorant of God, of your selves, of his word, and of his
works. Therefore learn, and be instructed, else ye shall surely Perish: the
very Trees of the Garden, and all the Creatures of God, will witness against
you.

Unlearned men may read in the Book of the Creatures.
The illitterate man that knows not a word, or a letter in the Book, and
thinks to be excused, because he is not learned; yet he shall find it
otherwise, one day; For this Book, of the Creatures is open, and legible by all
men; As St Paul said of the ignorant heathen Romans 1. They shall be left without
excuse, Because the invisible things of God (his Attributes, his Wisdom, Power,
and Goodness, his Love, Bounty, and Kindness to all) are clearly seen in the
things that he has made: Therefore it concerns men to learn the voice, and
Language of the Creatures of God, (and among them the voice, and language of
Fruit Trees) as well as of his Word, and to observe their Lessons and
instructions; for the mind, and things of God are seen clearly in them, though
not so clearly as in his word; But being joined, and considered together, we
may learn our Duty to God; And in the doing thereof, We shall be blessed of him.


Section 22.
An invitation, and encouragement to a conference with Fruit Trees.
HVSBANDMAN: Come my Friends let us walk into this pleasant Garden, and have
some further Discourse with those innocent, harmless Companions, the
Fruit Trees; they will bid us welcome, and are still ready, and at leisure to
confer with us, and will be sure to teach us one good Lesson or other, But We
must not forget what has been often said concerning the way, and manner of
their Discourse with Men; That it is not audible to the outward sense of
hearing, in the sound of words: but always to the inward sense, the mind, and
understanding And thus they will Discourse with us as long as we please, And
they always speak Rationally, and Religiously; in every thing taking Gods
part, speaking to his praise, and glory; and for the instruction of all men;
both for our Temporal, and Spiritual Profitt.

Here is a very large Garden, full of Fair, and beautiful Fruit Trees,
whereby we have both Profitt, and Pleasure: but I have heard also there are
many things amongst you occasioning admiration in men; what things are they
that may occasion admiration, what say ye of your selves.


Many things in Fruit Trees occasion admiration.
FRVIT-TREES: Thou may see many things in the course of our Natures that may
occasion admiration of the Wisdom, Power, and goodness of God; 1: if thou do
but take Notice of our Original: and first springing up, we then lying wrapped
up in small seeds, each one no biger then a grain of Wheat, yet out of those
came these huge, and vast bodies that thou see here above Ground; each one
according to its own Nature; every seed keeping (exactly) its own kind, and
Nature: though many sorts are sown in one bed of Earth, and drawing the same
juice of the earth yet each seed retains its own Nature.

Tender Fruits come forth with Covers upon them: the more hardy without.
And secondly: If thou consider the manner of bringing forth our Fruits,
(especially we Aprecotts, Cherries, Plumbs, and such as are of the most tender
kinds) our Fruits come forth with Coats and Garments upon their backs; being
so tender, that (without the same, they could not endure the common Air: If
thou observe thou may see (in our knitting time) our infant Fruit within the
Blossom, no bigger then a Pinns head; which increasing, by little, and little
tears this Coat, or Garment, and throws it off; being then hardy enough to
endure the Air: and so we grow on to ripeness.

But we that are more strong, and hardy Fruits; ( Apples, Pears etc:) have no
such Coats, or Garments upon Us, when we are born, we are naked when we come
first into the world; our Blossoms fall off from us, when first we begin to
knit, and appear, and so we grow on to perfection.


HVSBANDMAN: I perceve then hereby, That that which some Learned Philosophers
call the Wisdom of Nature, in taking Care of it self in these things, is but
the Course, and law of Nature: but is indeed the Wisdom of the God of Nature:
who as he has made all Creatures, so he knows perfectly their several
Natures; and accordingly provideth for them.


Section 23.
HVSBANDMAN: Well: This is considerable in order to our admiration; But what
other particulers can ye tell us of to the same purpose.


Different substances made of one Substance.
FRVIT-TREES: Take notice of, and consider these particulers also; Will it not
cause Admiration to see, and consider how many several Substances are made of
one Simple substance: For of the Sap of Trees is made the Bark, Wood, Pith,
Leaves, Buds, Blossoms, Stalks, Fruit, and Seed: drawn from the same juice of
the Earth.


Defferent Gifts and Graces, wrought by the same Spirit.
This illustrates to us; that so it is in Spiritual things: the parallel holds
good, the Variety of Gifts, and Graces in belevers, proceed from one and the
self same Spirit; as we see 1 Cor. 12.4. There are diversities of Gifts, but
the same Spirit: And diversities of Administrations, but the same Lord, and
ver. 6 diversities of Operations, but it is the same God that works all in
all. To one is given the word of wisdom, to another the word of knowledge; to
another the Gifts of healing, to another the working of Miracles; to another
Prophecy; to another discerning of Spirits; to another diverse kinds of
Tongues; to another the interpretation of Tongues.

Every Gift ought to be improved for the profitt of all.
But all these works that one, and the self same spirit; dividing to every
man severally as he will: 1 Cor. 12.12.

By all which we should learn to own, and love one another; and to be
useful, and serviceable one to another; every one according to the Gifts, and
Talents which God has given unto them; Let nor the Rich despise the Poor, nor
the Poor envy the Rich; let not the wise, and Learned, despise the meaner
sort, who want what they themselves have, such may have one Gift, or other,
which the wise, and Learned have not, which may be useful to the body; let not
the Eye say unto the Hand, I have no need of thee; Nor the Head to the Feet, I
have no need of you: for those Members of the body which seem more feeble are
necessary; 1 Cor. 12.22.

The variety of Gifts, Graces, and endowments, that men have, are wrought by
the same spirit; and for whose Glory they are to be used, and improved, and for
the Profitt of all.


Section 24.
HVSBANDMAN: Proceed further, and tell us some other perticulars that may
occasion our admiration, in the knowledge of them; for we know the works of God
are marvelous, and wonderful, and many of them past finding out; and therefore
God is to be admired in them.


Grafts, and Buds, assimilate the Sap of the Stocks.
FRVIT-TREES: Consider this further, That Grafts, and Buds, set upon stocks,
that are of wild kinds, of bitter, harsh, and sower kinds, these Grafts, and
Buds, being of a sweet, and pleasant nature, and drawing, and feeding upon the
sower Sap, of those wild stocks yet they do change, and alter this sower, and
bitter Sap, (that they draw, and feed upon) into their own sweet, and
pleasant Nature, and bring forth Fruits according to their own Natures; And
the badnesse of the stocks cannot alter the goodness of the Grafts; but
according to the Law, and Course of Nature, (which all Vegetables do keep from
their first Creation they do convert all their Sap, and nourishment which they
draw, into their own properties, and bring forth Fruits accordingly.

And is not this a Marvelous thing, that a great and large stock (it may be 40.
times and more, bigger then the Graft that is set upon it) should not be able to
change the little Graft, (or the Bud, that is much smaller) into it is own
kind, and Nature. This then must be concluded: That it is the innate,
intrinsecall form of the Graft, and Bud that maintains, and keeps,
inviolable that Law of Nature, that the God of Nature at first Creation fixed
in every individual. Who alone is to be Praised, and Admired in these, and all
his works.


Section: 25.
HVSBANDMAN: What other perticulars do ye discover in the process of Nature,
wherein God is seen, and discovers his Wisdom, and infinite excellencies,
that may occasion his Praise, and Admiration; when known and observed.


Every small Bud contains the Nature of the whole Tree in it self.
FRVIT-TREES: Know, and consider this further, That every small Branch or
Twigg, upon the Trees, yea, the least Bud upon the least Graft, or Twigg; does
contain in it the Nature and property of the whole Tree; Though one Tree have
many Thousands of Buds upon it; yet every particular has virtually, or
potentially, the whole Tree in it self: though the Bud he never so small, and
the Tree never so great; This is evident by Inoculating the Buds of any Tree,
continual Experience proves they are the same, and bring forth the same
Fruits, as the Tree from which they were taken.


HVSBANDMAN: I grant this is a truth, and apparent to continual Experience
from year to year, and is a thing to be much Admired, that all the Properties
of a vast, huge Tree, should be united into so narrow a compass; as a small
Bud, smaller then a Grain of Wheat; Nay more: The Nature, and property of a
great Tree (though as bigg as 2. or 3. men can fathom, with their hands
joynd'd,) does lie in the Root of that small Bud; some of which are as small
as a Pinns point; this is proved: by Experience; Because when that small Root
happens to be left upon the wood, in taking off the Bud to inocculate (as
sometimes it is) such a Bud does not grow, nor spring in the least: the
Principal part being left behind; which is analogous with the Root of a Tree
in Planting: without which it cannot grow; And therefore such as undertake this
work of Inoculating, look well to this, that this small Root of the Bud, be
in it when it is set on the stock.

The Properties of a Tree, are in every seed.
And further: This is also true: and a thing to be considered, and admired,
That as the Properties, and Virtues of the whole Tree are in every Bud, so also
they are in every seed, or kernel, that is in every one of the Fruits; that
grow upon the Tree; But herein a Caution is to be observed; (which is not so in
Buds, and Grafts, which always bring forth the same in kind;) That is, The
seeds, or kernells of any Tree sown, will produce the same in kind, in this
sense, that is; if we sow the seed of an Appletree, it will be of the same
speties; it will bring forth Appletrees; so of the seed of Peretrees, or any
other kind; But then these young Trees produced by the same seed, will yet
bring forth variety; several sorts of Apples, some better, some worse; yet all
of them Apples, of one sort or other; And in that particular also it is the
more Admirable, That the seed, or kernells being alike; from one, and the same
Tree, should ye bring forth different sorts of Fruits; yet all of them Apples
too; but different in kinds.

The same flower seed brings forth variety.
So also it is in the seeds of flowers when sown: ^e self same seed, brings
forth different sorts of flowers; some double, some single, some one color,
some another: which is to be Admired, if considered: God in his infinite
Bounty, and goodness gives us variety of his good Creatures, as well for
Pleasure, and delight, as for Necessity. And this should occasion his Praise,
and Admiration; and more cheerful Service, from us, who reap the benifitt,
and comfort thereof.


Section 25.
HVSBANDMAN: What other wonders in Nature are there, that we should take notice
of, in your continual course, and process from year, to year, whereby you
set forth the glory of the Creator; that we may understand it, and Admire God
in his works: for the works of the Lord are great sought out of all them,
that have pleasure therein Ps. 111.2, 3. His work is honorable, and
gloriouse: and Ver. 4. O come hither, and behold the works of God, How
wonderful he is in his doings: He has so done his Marvelous works that they
ought to be had in remembrance.


FRVIT-TREES: We discover many things to be taken notice of, and Admired by all
men; for the Eternal Power, and Wisdom, goodness, and bounty of God is seen
in us, besides what has been, or may be said, take notice of this further.

Many kinds of Fruits upon one Tree.
Upon one great Appletree, (or any other kind) may be grafted many kinds; great
variety; according to the number of the boughs, and Branches, so many several
sorts may be grafted, Perhaps 20. 30. 40. or more, several sorts of Apples;
may be Engrafted upon the same Tree, if men desire it, for a curiosity: some
early kinds, some later: some of one shape and bigness, some of another, the
Grafts being variouse, (though they grow all upon one Tree, and feed upon one,
and the self same Sap,) yet they will bring forth variety of Fruits, every
Graft, after his own kind.


HVSBANDMAN: I have seen variety of Fruits upon one Tree, and many more kinds
might have been Grafted upon it, if men would, these several sorts of Grafts
brought forth variety of Fruits, every Graft after his kind: And this proves
that to be true which a Learned Sr: Fran: Bacon: Not: Hist: page 100.
Philosopher has asserted; That Grafts Govern; all Grafts Rule, although they
are Engrafted upon a different stock, yet they convert that different Sap,
which they feed upon, into their own Natures, and bring forth Fruits
accordingly.

And this observation may be useful, both for Profitt, and Pleasure; A man
that has but a small piece of ground for his Orchard, yet he may have variety
of Fruits upon a few Trees; according to the bigness, and largeness of the
Trees; so he may multiply his Grafts, of what kinds he thinks best.

Si quid novisti restius istis;
Candidus imperti: si non, his utere mecum.

FINIS.

