Epiloimia epe. OR, THE ANATOMY OF THE Pestilence.

A POEM, In three Parts. Describing The deplorable Condition of the City of
London under its merciless dominion, 1665. What the PLAGVE is, together with
the Causes of it. As also, The Prognostics and most Effectual Means of Safety,
both Preservative and Curative.

By William Austin, of Grayes-Inne, Esquire

London, Printed for Nath. Brook, at the Angel in Cornhill, 1666.

The Printer to the Reader.
I Have no suspicion or thought at all, that after a considerate and thorough
perusal of this little Book you will repent of your pains, or remain
unsatisfied: and therefore forbear to court your approbation. All I have to say
might well have been put in the Title, were it not for giving it an
unfashionable length. I shall only tell you, that this Poem was written at the
earnest request of some very worthy persons into the Country, at that time of
the Sickness, when the Mortality in London was so great, that ( waving what was
generally believed, that they, not to scare the City from its self, were afraid
to own and publish half the number of the dead) according to the account of the
usual Bills, there dyed seven or eight thousand a Week, with some hundreds over
and above.

An Affliction never to be forgotten, and a Subject worthy to be dedicated to
eternal Posterity.

Errata.
Those most material that the Reader before perusal is desired to correct, are
these.

PAge 8 l.19 for stool-ball read stoball. p. 14 l. 16. ^. (...) good r. make us
good. p 27 l. 10 f j^^k ^. sack. p. 40 l. 6 put for *. l. 19 for put *. l 22.
^or ^ pu^. p. 45. l. 10 f. all ^ call. p. 55 l. 1. for ason ^. cau^^^.

Those less considerable are these.

Pag^ 3. (...) 24 for music hill read music bill. p 4. (...) d^es then, r.
dies, then p 8 l 3 for war^^^^^ ^. wa^fare p. 10. l. 17 ^or sm^ling r.
^imp^ing. p 11 l. 26 for common r. common p. 12. l 6 ^o^ to have r ^ h^ve. p 18.
l 5. for were r. are l. 18. for crumb ^. ^rumm^. p 32 l. 17 after arms put a
comma

Add his and siqua sint similia.

THE ANATOMY OF THE Pestilence, In the Year of our Lord, 1665.
Part 1.
DRawing a Map of this sad place, my quill
Seems in the frightful hand that writes a Will.
We cannot abscond or show our Tyrant-fears;
But in black robe of mourning characters.:
If you agrade such, fitly, then, the while
You Will with your tears, to grace them, mix a smile;
And no less justly look they should be made
To have, like day or emblem, light and shade.
Others to whom the thoughts of Death seem dull,
Like bits crammed down the throat, when belly's full,
May know they spirit, or clear eyesight lack,
Or eyes have none, who cannot look on black.
And he who now dares not be cheerful, has
Great scruple, doubtless, but small heart or faith.
Then, whilst I write Life's hasty post, grim Death,
Hold not my pen, nor come to stop my breath.
One fully resolute no where to ramble,
Now life so doubtful is, needs no preamble.
Fancy --
But stay, lest this offense may give,
We should ask leave to write, as well as live.
Some Politicians silence charge, when grief
Backed with our healths chief foes, has played the thief;
(From Physic prove their rule, that those fare best,
Who very sick lie still, and speak the least)
Wisely, sure, treat on roast meat, when they find
Butcher and Cook have blandished their mind:
If faring ill differs from well, their skill,
Judging of other flesh, will thwart their will.
That Royal Sir, who had for happy lot
Gods heart, and King of politics begot;
When his great breast within was orb of fire,
The breath his silence kept in, flamed it Psalm. 3^.2.
higher:
And he who by afflictions did commence
The Oracle of ^acite patience,
Saw his contrasted victory over death,
Lay in the vocal virtue of his breath:
His tyrannous malignant dolours gave
No other choice to him, but speech or Job 13 19.
grave.
When nothing else will do, complaint prevails,
While pain with vapor from the mouth exhales
John 1.9.
Confession often saves life; when we endure
The smartest sores, our crying turns the cure:
Deep (...), occultarc morbum^ fu^^slum.
wound to hide and lock up closely, will
Such safety be, as to preserve it still.
In dangerous sickness then to hold ones peace,
Is like mute sleep to nourish the disease.
Your S^^^ of fancy.
septum lucidum a while yet keep
Locked to our woe, do'nt grudge us time to weep.
Who think our setting sun most fitly seems
So painted, as to cast his longest beams:
That Plague with Cause and Cure most modey goes,
When in a large grave cloak of mourning prose:
Such on the subject will refuse to hear
Meter, Apollo twitches by the ear.
He, who with smiling cheer on musicks hill
Plays to the sick his therapeutick Skill,
Invigors flaccid body, drooping soul
With his illustrious rays and chants them whole.
He license gives, who Poet and Musician
The pleasant is all-curing God Physician.
(...).
Inventum medicina suum est, opisexque per orbem
Dicitur: herbarum and subjecta potentia vati.
-- Ex illo didicerunt funera primum,
Differ and gelidae vitare pericula mortis.
Fancy when blub-cheek't Boreas does strain
To make a dreadful tempest on the Main;
When the Sea Arms in mutiny require
Oceans to quench their element of fire:
Waters on waters horridly are laid,
As first they lay before the World was made.
Pretending never to be sufficed with men,
They gape, as if they would gorge the world again
Their gulfey mouths rocks open and provoke,
Opposing Rocks with dea^'ning noise and smoke:
Wave murders wave, then suddenly does bur^
With briny thirst to be its neighbors urne.
This drinks that is blood, dies then, anew does rowl^*
As if it had imbibed the others soul.
Jupiter, Neptune, Mercury together
Join, as of old, to wander God ^nows whither.
Neptune with all his forces does arise,
To take Auxiliaries from the Skies:
The bottom of the Sea confusely thrown
Upward, contemns the mountains in the Moon.
Deep answers deep; the waters there and here,
Above and under heaven compose one sphere:
When rabid winds, like Furies wak't from sleep,
Design the ruin of poor floating ship.
Over Hell the billows boiling, how the wrack
Inebriates the mates with toil and tack!
Some torn from mast, a while with sails proud top
They fly, and then like Icarus they drop
Others reel from the bark on either hand,
And sink where faithless Peter could not stand.
Here one with fear freely resigns his breath,
Another there, tired out, is forced to death:
Ralph hastily following Clem's call and beck,
Justles against Sam, and thumps him over deck
Like the known sport on Venice bridge or boat,
A Two F^ctions in Venice, that at a set time in the year contend for the
mastery upon a bridge; whence they tumble one another into the water.
Castellane against a Nicholote:
Or in a formal combat, as if he
Killing before he died should victor be.
Some past all hopes of life, grown desperate,
Quickly to b' out of pain, conspire with Fate;
The ship falls as she rides, and faintly speaks
Her inward bleeding wounds by sundry leaks:
The sail first tears, and then the stately mast,
Like some great tumbling house, exclaims its last.
Now vessel cast at Boreas his foot,
Bursts, as a fired. Granado, all about;
One then on the other takes fast hold, and neither
Scapes, but like oak and Ivy, dye together.
To bouy them up a while, each broken piece
They fasten on, and stick like Solon Geese;
Sporting there with their limbs at stake, they are soon
Lost to some Shark, that tears them one from one:
If no such greedy couzening gamester come,
They drop into the mare mortuum.
Like blossoms in the spring, that some sharp cold
Has sorely nipt, they quickly loose their hold.
Thus it is with us, our dearest darling breath,
The air we take, is not our life but death;
That by which we should nimbly kick up heel^,
Spread sails to post along, inverts our keels:
In every moment of swift time, we have
Surges and ravening fishes for our grave.
Destiny has the learned Physicians trick,
And by consent of most, lives by the sick;
Lies as an infant swadled up in bands,
Who for her help uses her parents hands;
Thousands kills daily: yet, as if her powers
Were too too weak alone, makes use of ours,
Such are luxurient clustered grapes; and such
Fruit hoarded up, rots others by the touch:
As readily as flint and steel, we make
Fire: are as spark and tinder, touch and take
As did of old those 1 Samuel 14.10. Judge. 7.^ 22*
fought with heaven, so we;
Each is his fellows murdering enemy.
See when in fight Mars ragingly does ride
Through armed ranks to triumph on each side;
When every noise being voic'^ with fire and smoke,
Sounds dismally, as when (...) heart is broke:
Soldier on soldier in distracted ire
Tumbles, like unbound faggots on the fire.
One deeply wounded, dead friend does bemoan,
Till he fall on him for his burying stone.
Like Partridge chicken-tail'd, that you retrive,
Here and there drop those can no longer live.
Here stands a stradling Hector, that has lost
As many collops as old pissing post;
At last with others he is compelled to yield
His body to be pavement to the field.
Some nimbly rifle others; then as those
Who took the golden treasure at Talouse:
Another wounds them; so they fall down where
They spoil, as under load too big to bear.
They see their friends expire, but must no^ have
Life so long to be witness to their grave.
Who glory most in valor or in strength,
Cannot inch time out longer the^ their length.
One's sent to eternal silence, while his jaws
Stretch wide in his victorious friends applause,
Another heartning of his neighbor, feels
His own faint wounded soul run down his heels.
Thus we ( God help us) our sick warfare find,
Being fruit that hang but till the first brisk wind.
We Are standing-corn to day, then by and by
With sickle cut; we do but live to dye.
Where the judicious make but a retreat,
Timorous vulgar crowds have their defeat:
One seeing how they tremble as they stand,
Would think they were on Plin
Gabians quaking land.
They goods imprison in each chest and hutch,
As if they were made guilty by their touch:
As tim'rously they talk, look pale and stare,
As if they had been frighted by the air.
E're they do firmly stablish their intents,
First shittle-cock and stool-ball arguments:
They Are bid to slye, and then they are bid to stay,
And so are hailed and tortured every way.
Some strive to change, at least, their vote Prorogue;
But the far greater number bears the vogue:
Should pelf, say they, so far with us prevail,
As to outweigh our lives in the other scale*
Linger we here like Archimede, till we
Circle our selves out of all Geometry?
No, Balak bids, where God shows angry face,
To build him altar in another place.
Let Us therefore lock up all, and hasten out,
And so they turn the sail, and ta^k about:
Both of them and their goods we are bereft,
While their fear seems concomitant to theft.
They run to hide their heads in every hole,
As if their bag and baggage they had stole.
Have y' ever seen a routed army, how
They mount up head and tail like cap'ring cow;
Bound as Tre-ding-te-do, or as when shot
Falls in the rear, and rouzes lazy Wat?
Leap hedge, then fall in ditch, escape ditch, and then
Flounce into bog: then out, and in again?
Think us as light of heel, as wild and mad.
As new hatched Partridge of the Tribe of Gad.
But as unlucky birds, it is our lot,
That scarce one of a flock escapes the shot.
Happily we are safe the first day of our flight,
But go into our winding sheet at night:
So have I seen poor panting hunted deer,
Wounded by fatal arrows here and there,
Sigh, fly, wind, turn; but does as vainly fret,
As rambling Coney struggles in a net,
Heightens her dole, and after all her course,
The life she would save is torn from her by force:
From her own self she posts away apace,
And makes the greater speed to lose the race.
By those infectious fires that she flies,
Like squib i'^h' air quickly consumes, she dies.
Physick's suspended now, you will soon see why,
As herbs, their season come, hung up to dry:
No man that sells his wisdom here will be,
Where Patient dies e're he can come for fee.
You must allow that they who Judges sit
On life and death, should go the circuit.
What would a man chides the Physician have?
What should he do where he wants skill to save*
It cannot be honest or wise man's part,
To meddle with a thing beyond his art.
The Plague being out of humane power, does prove,
That there is infallibly a God above.
To see men die, and never make complaint,
More then by Purge or Pill, would fright a Saint.
Pity with fear would move an heathens sense,
And bring his frailty to his conscience:
'T would make him as a Christian Physician,
Try well the Simples of his Composition.
Smpling's a part of Physic; and you know,
Solomon said, take simples where they grow:
Doctors must needs be wanted where they are gone,
For all the Countrey's strangely liver-grown.
The sorrow that to us does intervene,
Makes us extremely troubled with the Spleen:
Much honesty and kindness they do show;
Telling us all their mind before they go.
They say mox, long, tarde, and thus put,
As wise men should, their Iliads in a nut:
Who is not satisfied with this, may fret,
Till Passion prove his antidote by Sweat.
A medicine that is taken e're it is given,
Good to drive out their ^ld ^and druggy) leaven.
If any with their Lord have mercy's ble^t,
He may get Parish Priest to do the rest.
Physicians so into Divins will run,
And then exhale as Spirits in the Sun.
They Would reprehended be to go away;
Like those who would not heal on Sabbath day:
Withdraw from the disease their helpful skill,
When it has got the greatest force to kill:
Claim so great same of us, and when they come
To merit, leave their titles in their room.
Like distant spreading trees, some sinking wretch
Reaching out to, does only shadow catch:
But none can be dishonored, shamed, or shent,
For wanting his full power they represent.
They never were intended such renown,
To have with Doctors style great Natures crown.
They Are still but Mortals, who our crazy harms
Are not to help by miracles or charms:
Their absence intimates they do endure
^ardship with detriment for Patients cure;
And for the good of Nature are designed
To help her work Hipp. sect. 1. ^pho 21.
that way she is most inclined.
Their Patients their copartners they make;
The prescripts they give them, themselves they take.
What though the air common as water be,
Jordan could serve to cure the Leprosy.
Those that have care of souls, have bodies
And these must be provided for, you know.
Therefore that honest neighbor do'nt esteem
One next himself the farther off from him:
They tell him, what no Heathen is so strict,
Learned or wise to have wit to contradict:
That virtuous man can never offend or sin,
Who makes his Charity at home begin.
So having pleasur'd those that would complain
As with thick cloak against a shower of rain;
That blessing want not, which the sick require,
Make us as happy as we can desire.
E're they depart, bid us adieu, and thus
Leave God, the best Physician, with us:
They leave us; and we well do know the matter,
That shepherds, when the sheep are smitten, scatter.
Who to Aaron now or Moses make address,
As of old, seek them in the Wilderness:
Wh^re no more Grove-Idolatry we will fear,
Since Levites, who Gods judgments dread, are there.
We wonder not they leave us thus alone,
That Prophets fail us, since the Law is gone.
We would reprove them well to leave us here,
Like Priest and Levite v^lned passenger;
If they, should people ^each, could not abide
I^ town or life to have the ^ext applied:
If where they cannot save, they should employ
Their brea^h and lucubrations to destroy:
If they with fear should have so little grace,
To think themselves* less sinners for their place:
Were not the bodies of the Saints as dear
In life, as are their Relics any where.
Did Pastor not for Sheep in such mishaps,
To show them way of safety, break the gaps;
And was that Patriark conquered God, so brave
TO overcome Death, and not halt into his grave.
The Law dispersed sundry ways, invites,
As did the Infant Gospel, Proselytes.
Each Inns of Court, shut fast up, seems to you
Mysterious as Synagogue of Jew.
Conveighancer is at Surveighers hand;
As both in field designed to measure land.
If any quarrels betwixt neigbours breed,
Lawyer no more then Conjurer he will need:
For in a short time he may lay his life,
One or both parties die, so end the strife.
We'd blame these Do^s to leave us in a State,
O're-power'd by the uncivil laws of Fate:
To back the bench and bar, relax and thaw
This bitter biting weather, from the Law.
Many would shrewdly chide them for their pains,
Conditioned they would but left them so much brains.
Who served the Tabernacle did not fail,
They say, to keep it with vail over vail.
The Court disbands, as if the rule of state
Were like some long worn fashion, out of date.
Each Officer, like a Diagoras,
Studies the difference 'twixt place and place:
How he with safety farthest may recule.
From those relate the nearest to his rule.
They fly, as if our judgment were the same
With Sodom and Gomorrah's sulphur flame:
These fain we'd blame, I know not why, unless
We thought our Plague on them would make it less.
(As if by our ill husbandry w' had found,
That their deep channels well might drain our ground.)
Like such would all things with one measure meet,
Stand on our head, or have our hands our ^eet:
When finding we are exceeding ill, we would
Find fault with those could never do us good.
After we have rebelled, we angry are,
That in our punishment they take no share:
When for our stubborness we are scourged thus,
We'd cry, Our Rulers will not be ruled by us.
But we see Nature kindly takes our part.
To keep untainted liver, brain, and heart.
When Haracans blow us away, heaven s^rowds
The heads of lofty mountains in the clouds.
We see in gloomy rempests each fair light
Adorns those Orbs above, withdraws from sight*
And when to Earth Heavens Parliament did vote
Plague-grave of rain, the Ark did safely float.
Bacchus and Ceres worthies, such who shine
By the agile, jovial rays of Ale and Wine;
Haunt Tipling-booths, and serve, as many think,
To talk up vap'ring spirits in the drink:
Or, as most modern authors phrase it, stand
To gage the Liquor-casks with sword in hand:
Till in their file they fall, as not being fickle
Till in their foyl they fall, as not being fickle
To quit their service, though they sleep in pickle.
Of these (whom one listing, affirmed it truly,
They were as numerous as Flies in July)
Some few are left, but most are gone, we see,
To teach rurigine Bumkins Cocks can neigh:
He Is but a Craven-cock who cannot brave,
Unless he may his own known Dunghill have.
So great a tempest beating on our Shore,
No wonder if the fields and meadows roar.
What place can you suppose fitter to yield
Such fruit as Wildings be, then hedge or field?
Transplant them, or if you do them inest,
Much sweetness they acquire, and prove the best:
None can courageous spirit qualify,
Better then with the Country honesty.
Aug^as Stable still had been unclean,
Had Hercules never from his City been.
These should be blamed; for now when Night is dressed,
They ^ail to tell the spangles in her vest:
Leave us the sad reversion of their wars,
(And in their stead) to combat with the stars.
They should be blamed, for being now so scared;
As to leave City without welt or guard:
Did not their flight their ramage prowess meet
Friendly, and by their care prove it discreet:
Show by their retrospection that they have sense
Of after world, as men of Conscience;
And to our charity commend their fear,
As such have not courage enough to hear.
They Would be in fault, if with their souls they do
Trust God, and do not with their bodies too:
Did not they signify each of them strives
For future justice to preserve their lives.
The Tr^des are in their Hieroglyphics now,
Their Shops, Halls, Signs, lest only for a show.
Their progress they are gone to sundry parts,
TO instruct rude country towns, and sow their arts.
They swarm in great ones, and are fixed there
As if our sad, foul weather made their fair.
The only thriving trade that one can tell here
Lives by the dead, (as Hangman) Coffin-seller;
You judging of this mystery, must know,
That sturdy Smith, who lives by thump and blow,
Shoemaker, Chandler, Glover, Baker, Grocer,
And she makes shirts, and lives by Yes and No Sir*
All these, with almost eve'ry money-taker,
Are summed and tomb'd up in a Coffin-maker.
As each Disease when the Plague rages, is
Turned to the Plague; so all trades turn to this.
At every door stand marshalled in array
Biers, as greenboughs are planted there in May.
Trades would be blamed; for going out of town,
They take our Cities glorious Standard down.
That Standard Fame for news shows foreign Kings
Each new day, and relyes upon for wings;
Enchants Erinnyes Snakes with rage to greet
Each other till their Cadmus teeth do meet.
Can e're they Londons interest repay,
Though they should work on every Holy Day?
Do they want tools, or make they tail of bricks.
That to the woods they go to pick up sticks?
Do they now for the want of Prentises,
To Country go to be supplied with these?
To their new streets inhabitants to win,
Fly they as Coy-ducks to bring others in?
As tired and heartless must they take their ease*
And like poor land lie fallow to increase?
Or should the grass in every street be seen
Florid and verdent as in Bedlam-green?
With vacive houses do they lay a wile
For wandering Jews usurp them may the while?
Or says some Prophet that great Turkish rac^
They may beget by changing of their place*
No, no; who will neither pity nor excuse
Others great loss, deserves himself to lose.
You Would scarce count such an Artisan discreet,
Knows how to use his hands, and not his feet*
When every one into the Country flies,
Trades here are wheels without their axel-tree^
The imbellick and meticulous they were
By the ancient laws exempted from the war.
It is not always fear makes men retire,
Nor always cold that drives them to the fire.
Muff upon glove, and gate with door to house
Speak pleasure, mode, convenience, grace and use
Who has good words, will spare some to his neigbour*
And bless as well those rest, as those that labor
Who by h^s birth and calling too is free,
Has double right to lawful liberty.
Well baked bread has good crust as well as crumb
And he writes best that has his elbow rome.
They get by their departure no disgrace:
The place did not make them, they made the plac^
Men honor have not places, unless those
Where we bare head, or pull off hose and shoes.
His place must out of measure him bewitch,
Makes altar that does daily kiss his breech.
When any at deaths point their dear lives crave
What power has that idol then to save?
City should such preserve who give it fame,
Which from those 't would destroy it cannon claim.
If they be rich, long service ushers gain,
That bows low to their hand, and thanks their brain.
If they have honor, it is not their renown,
More then their labors crops and virtues crown.
When calm bright day with beauty to express,
The most resplendent robe in glory's dress,
Varying her look and tire, with lightning, thunder,
Hail, wind and clouds, changes admirers wonder,
What fault have those, whose luckless dwellings lie
For quarter to such plundring enemy?
Yet all for sake not home, but thousands stay,
Who never go out of Parish bounds to pray.
Happily (as who'd not wish?) when plague is over,
May most be blessed to multiply a score.
London's not in Cimmerian darkness then,
But robbed of light to be returned again.
Its richly furnished buildings seem to the eye,
Like ships that in safe port at anchor lie.
Principle 'bides secure from all abuse,
Only a while it wants a little use.
Who with malignant sickness is at strife,
Has hardest task can be in humane life.
None learns to tutour Fate; nor can be said
Lord of his life with master of his trade.
Who needs will cavil, when the sea a pace
Po^ts over the bank he sits, should keep h^s place.
Or when he sees some fire-drake does assail
His face, neither hide that nor turn his tail.
Abroad we see huge Pindus's of men, spite
As if the deluge were to fall again.
While ( praised be God) he from Fates rage and
Tenderly keeps ( unquencht) our Isreal's light,
We Are l^ke that people, when the vulgar throng
Took the dim^nsions of Deuteronomy. 12 8.
right and wrong.
We'd clamor at those mounts, but that we know
The vales would loudly echo bac^ our woe.
And e're we can with words our envious pride
Advance, our stolid vanity deride.
They should be blamed, did not our reasons seem
To call them back in a sophistick dream.
Can aught within arts verge be found or made
To wh^t our wit or judgment to persuade?
We should be blamed, and we our selves should blame,
Did not confession aggravate our shame:
And make our own insimulating breath,
Sub'tly ally us to a double death.
It Is not our stay, but our disordered pranks,
Betray our lives, like troops have broke their ranks.
Such are our frantic fits, they cry to have
For whip and scourge no Bedlam but the grave.
We who remain, seeing each attinent
Deaf to our kindest words, remove his tent:
Friends were as dear as flesh can be to bone,
Or heart to bosom, leave us all alone:
That when we have the greatest need to use
Their friendship, then the love-knot should unloose:
In bitter winds, when it hails and rains and snows,
Then to be robbed and stripped of all our clothes:
That men and money tempered are alike,
As cold to help as hard to move or strike:
That we should find our richest heaps so scant,
That they but serve to mind us of our want.
As one to Westminster some stranger brings,
To view the wealthy Sepulcher of Kings.
The beauteous bulk and countenance of weal^h,
Personless and without the soul of health:
That our bags, when most heavy, should be found
Only of weight to weigh our hearts to ground:
Since the eye assures us now we must not think
'Twill look on us unless in paint or ink;
And the ear no other words from us will hear,
But such as may be current with its fear:
Takes from our mouths only such gales as may
Carry its rocking vessel forth our bay:
TO expect succor from son, as well one might
Days sun expect at deadest time of n^ght.
Who seeks one for his blessing, as his son,
For blessing comes to Church when Church is done.
No mothers tender hand nor pitteous smile
Over her own dear bowels while they broil.
No wife to comfort. With the body heart
First dies, as senseles^: then head dies apart.
Sister, brother, husband not more disclaim
Their kindred, then the hearing of their name.
In their assistance all no better are,
Then the empty echo answers from afar.
In neigh^ours house we think to give our moan
That ^ase and scope it finds not it our own.
With open mouth we run forth; but the door
Answers our mouth as it was shut before
Then haste we to acquaintance, who the worst
Fearing, had took the alarm to be horst.
To send them gifts, would seem such flattery
As theirs, who court old men with gifts to die*
Carriers too are in like cross reslive mood,
Neither with words nor presents to be wooed.
As if they should be pressed here, did they come,
To carry biers to grave, they stay at home.
Finding our selves each one as left pe^du,
In la^yrinth without Ariadne's clue;
And having for our bitter sole relief,
Musings, suspicions, malady and grief:
All things without and in us full of woe,
We'd succor beg, but from whom do not know.
Then like such totally subjected are
To the effrene, maniack manage of despair,
With every rule we are at mortal strife
Would draw us from the anomaly of life:
Orders confound, and morals send to beg
In fields and woods, with neither arm nor leg.
As if reason were stupid sloth to feel
Aculeate spur, we place it at our heel.
Justice and dignity we only put
Before, to take the first place of our foot.
In harming others, that we harm not less
Our selves, we murder our own consciences.
Then when our souls tell-clocks are hushed, that we
Without remorse, may sleep in villainy;
We dream of nothing but such freaks as they
Usually act who with the Fairies play.
What may unriddled folly be* else what
On others name or body leaves a spot.
To escape the Plague we see lascivious Dame,
Who gives it us, but by another name.
We surfeit and luxuriate till the Pest,
Though not invited, boldly shares the feast.
This pledges us our healths that freely spare
Liquor of life to the infected air.
We give our selves to each enormity,
Will let us have the least ado to die:
Our valor, since we'd try what would come on it,
So favour^ as to place us in the front.
We list under such vices seldom fail,
But speedily do with the Plague prevail.
They such be nothing have to do with it,
As we suppose, no more then flies with meat.
Such as no more will let us feel our bane,
Then did Vitellius his bouzing vain.
No more with plague confederates are then Cloiste^
With Market, Sword with Quaker, Lark with Oyster.
The Captain Zophyrus his project has
Like President to school our cheated faith.
As he, so they lead us with friendly word;
But yet at last consign us to their Lord.
By Searchers we are governed, such as feel
Whether a man be made of wood or steel.
They Are pilgrim- weemen-seers, who can tell,
Not whether one be bound for heaven or hell,
But what is of more importance, many think,
To know the ill and welfare of his chink.
They prate not much of health, as others, but
Are of the Gentle-craft to fit his foot.
Speedily they prepare him for the grave,
And then take measure of what e're he have.
Confess and then absolve him all alone,
With power as much as ever had Pope Joan.
Better that you may know with theirs our state,
They may be termed the middle magistrate.
Not for their sex but ways: for they will be sure
To come betwe^n heir and executour:
Just in the center fall, where is understood
What ever can be valued as good.
They fear no rebel forces may them brave;
For none will strive with them for what they have
They Are Captains of the Amazonian shades,
Whose dismal territories none invad^s.
For all their age, they are left us for a breed,
Serving us always at our greatest need:
Serve dying man to multiply his store,
Increasing with what he can use no more.
Engender with the dead: as on a tomb
The Spaniard did with the Popes A marble Figure upon a tomb in St. Peter's
Church of a very beau^iful Lady, wi^h which a Spaniard wa^ so enamoured, that
^e expiated his lust upon it, as if it had b^^^ alive.
niece in Rome.
Whom shall we spend our breath more to commend,
Then one is left our last and only friend?
They are our friends beyond what can be said;
For they do not forsake us when we are dead:
Our spirits awe and keep our ghosts in fear:
As you may see by the small wand they bear.
With Searcher, Nurse and Quack too rule our state,
To make completely a Triumvirate.
Her Politics are not from Aristotle,
But from the grave, the purse, the bag and bottle.
Her task is hard: therefore one must allow
Her food as much as if he were her plough.
Her danger being great, he cannot think,
Her analeptick worse then Spanish drink.
Though she take many a preservative,
Quick silver's that which keeps her best alive.
Her daily pay as commonly is known,
As hers that lover serves for half a crown.
Her hands, to take, are nu^ hooks, and her feet,
As ready are to run for winding sheet.
She keeps the sick from want, which she doe^ ward
Off so, it cannot touch her who is his guard.
Narcoticks are the best things he can keep
By him: for she thrives best when he is asleep.
He never chides her: nor indeed is it reason
He should; for well he knows it is out of season.
Pas^ion uncurb'd by fear is mast^ve dog,
To raging fury left and freed from clog.
The Pestilence like Frigo^ then will ride,
Hard goaded in the poop with ^inde and tide.
And soon his life's dear longing he may loose,
Who for his Nurse is nice to pick and choose.
Suppose such are as scarce as may be ^are
In corn that is weeded well: one here, one there.
Discarded nurse may do him as much harm,
As Devil sent away without a charm.
For want of Nurses think as many sholes
Of sick have died, as hops without their poles.
For her neglect or absence his content
Is patience, as best fitting patient.
He Will never give out she killed him: for it is said,
He Is to be always silent when he is dead.
And while he lives, Nurses he will never curse,
Knowing few good, most bad, and many worse.
Quietly h^'l conclude she is such a thing
About his person, as is plague sore ring.
You now to know the mystery of Quack.
May jumble walnuts in a musty Jack.
As many knick-knacks, many will avouch it,
Lurk in his brain, as in a Tinkers budget.
Now be'nt in wrath to see Quack hindmost here.
Greatness and office put him in the rear.
Knowing not to lead, he is not first nor middle;
Having no soul of harmony to fiddle.
Therefore, as best of all to please your taste,
Like sugar after physic, comes at last.
He or some for him, setting out a throat,
The patches speak in Tom of Bedlams coat.
As variously his pedigree he brings,
As flies from sorts of reptils take their wings.
He never broke his brains to know or bear
A Doctors trouble, who runs here and there;
But his first principles: that you may think
He Is knowing man to deal with pen and ink.
He was bred up to keep accounts, or know
The subtlety of weavers art or so.
But since counts fail, and ends are broke, he lays
A new design, and falls to vary phrase.
By Physic he thinks best he may prevail;
So What do you lack, he turns to What do you a^^
Finding his Hate sink, and almost past hope,
His spirits like brave soldier, musters up:
Resolves to save himself, or by some limb
Catch others, and so make them fall with hi^^
Then without farther thought, or needlessly
Hackny'ng his breech to the University,
As rebel Cobblers in the Pulpit where,
He from the shop steps into Doctors chair.
So when some course old Holland napkin ro^^,
It Is dish^lout turned, and serves to scowre the po^^*
What hurt do many medicines, well is known,
Therefore to mend this fault, he has but one*
Somewhat that on diseases foul will fall,
And like the fire consum^ and conquer all.
Some water, pill or powder can give birth
To wonders: bring out all things like the earth:
Somewhat can mollify the hardest corn,
And straight the windings of a crumpl'd horn.
With his rule he can take Paul's height, or use
To lay found^tion to a winking house.
The guts that do but learn his skill in part,
Are thought the close Meanders of his art.
The bodies eve'ry limb and bowel greet
With as much prid^ his worth, as gouty feet.
His instrument's a saw, nail, scowrer, rammer,
Wedge, chissel, plane, cord, bellows, forge and hammer
Often it is but one: but has as many joints,
As merchant's shop with rattles, pins and points.
Expect his ware not new and in the fashion,
But what as old is as dissimulation.
Under a new name vampt, as strange appears,
As when the Farrier cuts off h^rses ears.
As when for your convenience you do
Turn heel down, and make slipper of a s^ooe.
To every form and thing change this he can;
As Jesuit, they say, is every man.
Like ^erpent with its old skin off, it is
Just as some newborn issue, christened his.
Lest barren he by others be reviled,
For heir of arts, fathers another ch^lde.
He Is very humble, you must under^and,
Taking his fees by others underhand.
Whether his calling lawful be'nt or be,
H' has luck to find a lawful deputy.
Some Bookseller or Pothecary, these
Till he fare better, find him bread and cheese.
These two, while he at tick-tack, p^ssage, ^u^^,
Is diligent, make money of his stuff,
While he consults to make his golden calves,
As Iero^oam did, they go his halves.
You Have seen an highway gelding turn to jade,
So does his doctors science turn to trade.
Of these he learns to set himself out bigger,
And bind his phrase in form, if not in figure.
They for his credit will not let him lack
Hard words would break a pl^wmans teeth to crack.
To trim him up they are his looking-glass;
Or serv^ as scowring sand to bright his brass.
If he outlive the times, he will never blush
In meaner habit then of rival plush.
A Doctors fellow he for wealth will be,
In judgment only of a low degree.
Mean while his prescript and his physic form,
As 2 Timothy 2.17.
Hymeneus speech, proves canker-worm:
Mangies our purse, eludes our life, and has
Authority to stigmatize our faith.
And he himself, as his great acts may tell;
Like E^od. 7.11, 2 Timothy ^ 8.
Iambres is monky of miracle.
These are the times in which he must commence,
Being to the Plague a very pestilence.
This is our tottering three-leg'd stool we have found
For fine device to tumble on the ground.
Upon these three we lean our painful heads,
As in a ^esuites chamber with three beds.
Here young and handsome maids fearles^ to fall,
Keepin the street great distance from the wall*
Walk in the midst the way alone, as though
They might conceive if any near them go:
As if they in great danger were to get
For plague, great belly by the men they met.
A long streets length blind man may walk in dream,
And not a louse give any touches him.
Each Change, now changed, fast barricado'd is,
As Ianus Temple in the times of peace.
Their flanting gallantrie^ hide all their heads,
As when gay flowers ^ink into their bed^.
As when an old man's feet in frosty weather,
To make nest warm, lie crumpled up together.
Where we had Pater noster in our way,
We sighing now, Ora pro nobis say.
Many not broke by trade, but breaking that
For change of life in far more honored state;
Knowing the great advantage by it, before
They die, desire their Will hang out at door:
Gift door with prophecy, how it may teach
Others the dying discipline they preach.
Persuade more after them, that they may find^
They Have little reason long to stay behind:
Invite them there to dwell, and so become
The first door to their sempiternal ^ome.
When one dies in an house, the rest they get
Abroad, and then the grave is to be let.
None count it strange that money should be given
For p^ss^ge makes the nearest way to heaven.
Those well have lived, and so are si^ to die,
Atropus there can teach her mystery.
They help and do her service in the place.
For many hands make work go ^n apa^e.
But patch and paint do'nt always join, nor are
All faces in disgrace for mark of scar.
House neither goods nor master wants: for he
Secures his venture by a policy:
Rules it by poliza, scrip^, twine or clue,
Can easily his labyrinth undo.
It only serves as ticket to the master,
To go to raise his faith in change of pasture:
Entreats house may not be by any thought
Upon account of chance or time in fault.
It Is ornamental-frize that by its place,
Insinuates the praye^'s turned to grace:
Imboldens fear. And none the Tenant will
Blame, house secur^s to himself by bond or bill.
It Is to be let, as I^abella is,
When wife to Tristram, by antiphrasis.
It Is to be let, i.e. be let alone
To tenant, has ear-markt it for his own.
A Soldier stands at many doors with spear,
As if black Pluto had his palace there.
Or that the soldier must his weapons carry,
Being deaths lifeguard and stipendiary.
As though wi^h our profession we would vaunt
We members are of the Church militant.
Halberts and spears stand watching there alone,
While guard as feared with their own arms are gone.
They seem Dodona's grove, to speak a law,
L^ke Oracle to force one to withdraw.
Not that any designed with him to fight;
But as if master of those arms were spright.
Think of the watchmans service, and he shows
But as a man of clouts to fright the crows.
Like gazing person in the market, who
Sits kicking heels, and nothing has to do.
What cares he if his porch and fort you take,
When plaguey victor champion's at his back?
But he, say we suppose him strong and stous,
Keeps not the sick within, though others out.
As i^ sick persons swelled to a mig^ty state,
To let them out, he is porter at the gate:
Thinks it hard nature to withhold those, who
Would of the world but take leave e're they go.
So up and down among the rest they crowd,
Now in then out, as sun that is under cloud:
To earth persuade us with touch, sigh and groan,
As if it were mortal sin to die alone.
Swarming like bee^ on every h^rb they fall,
Not to get honey, but disperse their gall:
Est^em it light where ever they resort,
If they revive Ioab and Abners sport.
As in a dance where many go the round,
One falling pulls down others to the ground.
Coa^hes and Carts (our plague in health) we are
Free from, as if the stones they must not wear.
And these as clean from use are kept, as though
Every d^y were to be the Lord Major^ ^how.
The coaches left, scare us to see them come
In mourning toward us like gaping tomb.
So sorrowful a spectacle to one
They seem, as body when the soul is gone.
They look as if they penitently mourned,
Because they had their m^sters overturned:
For sake of business, pastime, friend or wife*
Carried him quite beyond the stage of life.
As if not ghost as is the common talk)
But, when a man is dead, his house must walk.
So sadly do they look and mope about,
As if pleasure were turned the inside out.
Those open shops sell any ware or stuff
In Cheapsi^e, now do make it dear enoug^.
They Are very few; and that there may be mad^
Good bargain, you will scarce find two of a trad^
Most nailed and locked up are, and seem to you
Like picture buildings cannot be looked into:
Presents sealed up and ready to be sent
Where e're their Landlords are to take th^^^ ren^
One gazing on them easily b^lieves,
Whose e're they be, they are very fit for thiev^^
Stranger might think all the week long we kee^
Some solemn feast, as Holy Day of sleep.
That all the day we lo^kt up night, and lackt
Nothing to know 'twas noon but to be wake^
Did Caesar now enter our City gate,
His prize would make him think h' had fou^^ a che^^
Doubtles^ he would loose it all, and in derision
Go out again for want of opposition.
Our C^sh-bank's dry, so little is there in 't,
That parts abr^^d bring money to our mint.
Our treasury and glutted souls delight
Devoured such wealth, now craves the Widows mite.
As if like Genesis 42 35.
corn sacks of the fathers: so we
Had fast when dead, in our mouth^ all our money.
As if to appease the manes, wi^h the dead
All his whole substance too were buried:
Or for the last abuse of worldly store,
As if the rich did die to starve the poor.
So ^ast we die, so poor live, that what is sent
To feed us, on our burials is spent.
Our gaudy robes can make no better brag^,
Then from each shire to be supplied with rags.
Nature's inverted. For this place, the heart
Should feed, is fed by every other part.
Unless you will say the waters from the Main
To rivers run, do but refund again.
But so our Ocean does the rivers need,
That most of us seem of tru^ beggars breed.
Strangers for alms we thankfully do greet
Abroad, and here beg of the next we meet.
Beggar hunts benefactor: yet no worse
He Would handle him then merely take h^s purse.
I have been sick these thirteen days, says one,
And now, like bird from nest am newly flown.
Good Sir, another cries, have pity on me:
For I, God wot, have five plague-sores upon me
Thus benefactor feared dares make no stay,
So Charity with Justice flies away.
Two days and nights fires in our stree^ did bur^*
To light the infectious spirits to their urn.
Three days by order they should have bee^ ther^.
But to be out of pain of life and fear,
Like niggards who to their last end arrive,
We would not be at so much charge to live.
The fires were after president of such
Old grandsires, knew what fire was by the touc^
But the Plague being in our flagitious lives,
And as the creature that in fire survives;
God with our sacrifice would not be pleased
The physi^k e're should touch the part diseas'^
By night and day the dead walk ev^^^ where
As if the day of doom drew very near.
Di^s shows us his black princes in the dead,
Being more tall then others by the h^^d,
As they are softly carried on their way,
Death seems to make triumphant ^oly-day.
Many attend them to the graves, are taught
How to come there next day; so then ar^ brough^
As if sins punishment with sin did meet,
To be alike infectious and sweet.
Thus, as such in their duty are well read,
We do but let the Non ^st vivere ^ed vale^^ vita.
dead bury the dead.
The doleful Parish-bell all night and day
Beating, as pulse, its sickness does betray.
Mortality all sermon^ does contain.
As every silver ^ountain courts the Main.
All divine rays are centered in this text;
As amply round us ^preads as heavens unequal.
TO illustrate holy Scripture well, his breath
Best does it to the life, best sets forth death.
The Gospels full sum and epitomy,
To prove life's warfare is Prepare to di^.
In this the graves great ^ubile, we choose
No place but Churchyard for our rendesvouze.
We need not, when our li^e begin^ to fail,
Fall straight to dig our graves with tooth and nail;
Nor stay till we are by some long disease
Consumed: we may in grave walk when we please.
Who goes from street to street in City, roam^,
^ike the possessed man among the tombs.
No subtle wit the ^^fernal God betrays,
Whose palace gate lies open nights and days.
His meskites porch opens to all that come;
To s^ay and be prepared to hear their doom,
There we receive the vapor and the st^am
Of those we lost before; so follow them.
Graves mouths gape wide along our way, to force
At least, invite us to our lives last course.
And that a lonely place may not displease,
They Have room to welcome many families.
Though we before our exit from the womb
Lay there alone, we are crowded in the tomb:
Wisely they leave graves open to the dead,
'Cause some too early there are brought t^ b^^
Those there we thought bid us their last adi^^
Before they can repent, are born anew.
They wa-king speak, thinking they may be bold
Wanting their clothes, to say they are a cold.
One out of trance returned, after much stri^e
Among a troup of dead, exclaims for life.
One finding himself as some m^id, hard lace't
Or as ^ Watch for pocket, straightly case't,
Equally terrified with pain and fear,
Complains to those can neither speak nor hea^
One having broke his elbows, heels and toe^
Continues on the alarm with his nose.
Another he instead of lice and fleas,
Feeling himself worse pincht in little ease,
Dejected with arms hanging, whines a ditty,
Like prisoner goes to suffer, Psalm of pity:
Having with cold and speaking lost his throat,
Makes noise as bird that sings his rural note.
One too too weak to raise his aching head,
Throws of the sheet when friends have sold his bed.
Another not being used to silent life,
Calls daughter Doll, maid Sue, and Kate his wife.
At last they come and gape to what is said:
Like unlearned clowns that hear a letter read.
They cry for help, as if they had disgrace
By lying there, or did not like their place.
They seem as favors to the world again
Sent, to convert their Luke 16.28.
sinful brethren.
We fear no grave (if we may, dying) for though
Buried to day, we may arise to morrow.
The day of judgment can be no surpriz^.
For graves gape wide, and the sepulchred rise.
By grinning heads that are before us hurled
From thence, we are scorned and ^louted from the world.
Death shows us not h^s teeth to scare, but kill;
As morglayes bare'd to execute his Will.
These when our plotting heads would work our pride
To great designs, our policy deride.
When we laugh much, our fellow sceleton
Shows us our sides we hold, from bone to bone.
When the world makes us sigh, lament and cry,
Memento mori's always in our eye.
The Stygian lake receives again new birth,
And makes pro^ound eruptions from the earth.
Brimstone V^suvius and AE^na have
Vaste Gae^ta, a great g^ping mount^in betw^^n Rom^ an^ Napl^s, supposed to be
cl^ft assund^r by an ^arthquak^
Gaetan^an channels in each grave.
Heaven rains down scorpions, while the eart^ presumes
To stifle us with deletery fumes.
We cannot quench or cool that flaming breath
The air swells up our lungs with, but by death.
In our choice drink we do the Lethe taste,
And our dear bread is made of arsnick paste.
The flesh we eat gives us with strength bu^ power
To feed those greedy wolves our hearts devour.
We Are as AEgystus sons; or such cross guest
Found in the wilderness a dying feast.
We stew, ^ake, boil, with such success to follo^
To those that eat, as when there is 2 Kings 4.40.
mors in olls.
Warm vest, like robe of Hercules was wet
In Nessus blood, procures deaths icie sweat.
Each thing Paul said was 1 Cor. 10.23.
law^ul, though no^ fi^
Now Is so forbid, we dye by touching it.
Letter of friend long life and perfect health
Gives us in wish, takes both away by stealth.
Though It bring us gold as Palamede's, each groat
Is for the carriage paid to Charo^s boat.
It treason shows, and pays us our last meed,
While sadly we our condemnation read.
We find by this exitial surpr^ze,
The whole Creation's turned our enemies.
And to speak our condition at the best,
Our City's merely but great house of Pest.
To seem, though foes to all, to our selves good friends,
( Holding all day our noses by the ends)
Some mixed drugs or herbs together bound
We smell: as if we stank above the ground.
Our rooms with sulphur fumes are smoke't and air'd,
As if for Purga^ory we prepared.
Our life, of which we can be sure of no where,
So passive is, we do not act but suffer.
We who are not permitted yet to die,
Seem left as dregs m^erly to put^esi^.
As broken hose one by misfortune rends,
At every touch ready to run to e^ds.
As tainted eggs the parent birds will not
Brood longer on: so addle we and rot.
We who of late praised heaven for victories,
Now beg our lives to conquer that with cries,
After our joy, tears, sighs, and prayers, these
Make us concerned to write upon our knees.
Forelorn and wretched we who now remain,
Suddenly are as exuls, caught and slain.
Our lethal curse making our friends afear'd;
Like wounded deer we are horned off from the heard.
God leaves us too. Hell falls from heaven, while thus
The Devil rains his kingdom upon us.
Sad case, could any fitly make appear,
No humane judge were great enough to hear.
And ten to one who thus employ their breath,
Like swans they do but sing before their death.
Tali spiramine Nesis
Emittit stygium nebulosis era saxis
Antraque letiferi rabiem Typhonis anhelant.
Lucan. l. 6.
(...). OR, THE ANATOMY OF THE Pestilence,
Part 2.
THat flame Prometheus image did inspire.
Upward, from whence it came, still sends its spire:
To heaven, where the Intellect feasting its wish.
Finds at the board uncovered every dish.
No aporetick qualm nor taper light
Sconvolge its taste nor tantalize its sight.
But to the eye each thing more lucid seems,
Then if the sun lent it his feasting beams.
The hungry palate finds its full content,
Not more by pleasure than by nutriment.
Man's noble soul can never be confined
To any lower region than his mind.
Judgment his other faculties would call
Together for due tribute from them all:
In every object of his sense and eye
View with meridian light the what and why.
Till then, if he be melancholy, shows
Like one wears legasie of mourning clothes;
And if disposed to mirth* appears to be
Like one with others laughs for company.
He Is as unsatisfi'd as when dry bone
Is brought to whetted teeth to nabble on.
As if were set a vaulting horse or style,
To carry tra^eller two hundred mile.
Here, then, disease we will meddle with as much
As that permits, so dangerous to touch.
What Plague is we will search in every nook,
As far as one can into millstone look.
And when w' have seen whence Natures sovereign laws
Finds this rebellious, lay down the Cause.
Some think a mustled hand may well restrain
Plague's power, though it does like tyrant bramble reign.
And if in haste, to make a graceless feast,
It greedily feed, upon man and beast:
Yet since it is under heavens cope consigned
To mortals; therefore look it be desin'd.
One ventering at it once, like wit^h about
He searches for each poisonous herb and root.
Whatever of venesick force may seem
To make him call it Feverish extreme.
Which said, he sees a number go to p^t,
Felt but lukewarm: so neither cold nor hot.
No thirst there, no heat symptoms, naught to call
Feverish pulse, unless their sudden fall.
In others plague-struck finds strong drink and meat
Befriend their spirits, and his judgment cheat.
Then he concludes he best may ^et it out,
As to go home, the farthest way about:
And since plague is so perilous to touch,
That he should keep off from it very much:
Or like one sitting leveret has found;
He ought for fear to keep a compass round.
So he as one at noon had lost the sight
Of Hecate, points at her in the night.
As who a punctum could not see, or hair
With arrow hit, at rovers shoots in the air.
He says it is bodies wrack, hearts v^lture pain,
Bane to the blood, confusion to the brain.
Not leprosy, nor scurvy, itch nor pox,
But such a thing escaped from Pandora's box
Such is his sense. (For some hold it is dispraise
And wrong to Author to purl^in his phrase)
It Is Edens cursed fruit, we may believe,
Such as we cannot thoroughly know and live.
So that one who the judgment will not bribe
With doubts and scruples, only must describe.
Plague banished is out of predicament;
Substance subjected to the accident.
Acciden^ that no substance eye can see,
Gives any kind of hospitality.
A seed its first rise takes from naught, and when
Without ingress it is entered into men,
Lays field of blood; and from one common root
Of death, a thousand deaths makes quickly sprout.
It Is fury's i^p, who left to yell and rave
Without a nurse in black Tartarean cave,
M^dusa newly brought to bed, oppressed
With pain, applied to draw her ulcer'd breast.
It Is brat from cruel Libitines cursed womb,
And fed for milk with Cerberus's spume.
It Is monster which as well to kill as scare*
Has eye of Basilisk and Gorgons hair,
Forehead of Tigre, and its Bats cheek shows
For b^auty, gods-mark, botch, and burning rose.
Suppose Clotho takes mud from Flegeton
And Cocitus, live-locks from Tisiphon,
And when Hells three-head mastive opes ^is chops,
To vent his fury, saves the yesty drops,
Distills all these; then lets the spirits fly,
To act at will their magic in the sky.
Hi^ba^dm^n say that many noxious weeds
Have different gro^nds, and several sorts of seeds.
For those of Plague, we ought, where you would refuse,
To give you ch^ice, that you may pick and choose.
So for their lot none grudge they should us thank,
Steeming the prize to be the veriest blank.
Those who unseasonably will repose,
Or else too long, may sleep without their clothes.
They offer but fit sacrifice to move
Great God of rest, dire death't enjoy their love.
Who contrary to rule of reason watch,
Watch not for good but harm, so harm they catch.
Nature forsakes those that her laws forsook,
Whom time they would not obey, blots out his book.
Some cold or other grievance they dispense,
Holds correspondence with the Pestilence.
Vnrul'd rage, as link lighted, is presumed
Never to bequencht till all the week's consumed.
Revenge, spite, hatred, malice, these are fed
With vital blood of heart in which they are bred
Greedy desires, chiefly within contest,
And are as vulture to the parent breast*
Whatever by pretenses they would have,
They truly scrape for nothing but a grave.
Fear joins with every spy that would betray,
And as the bribe of mischief, opes it way.
Some who have known good feeders far, and seen
Others for want of meat and drink grow l^an,
Sad if a man do fall on heedlesly
All sorts of meat, he will swell like toad and die.
And if he will nothing else but drink and drink,
Like vap'ring leaking ship, at last he will sink.
And if he food will obstinately lack.
Then like a ^un stands empty long, he will crack.
For nothing to man's delicate fine taste,
Can be so plaguey nocen't as to fast.
Season and measure which make all things good
Confer the wholesome energy to food.
Who eating slights these, backward eats and puts
A mere infectious dunghill in his guts.
^lague, soon (...), ^ecau^e
I^ finds its Cate^^e ^action in their maws.
Who for a dead year thus deceived, provide;
Forfeit their store and house of store beside.
Who heedless every where for air will seek*
May as a bladder draw it in to break.
Air's said to kill as well as animate:
As hand has power to strik^ and strok^ the pate.
If any through burning-glass desires
Sols chearing beams, he find^s them scorching fires
In heat that pleasant Aura makes you laugh,
When Gu^ny pepper's in it, will make you cough.
Arm's made for help; but furnished with a sword,
Can then take vengeance for bad act or word.
The snow that cools so kindly, when it has
Be^n heated well, may make a s^alding bath.
And spring that shows youth flouris^ing and fair,
With rimes and fogs will make him ho^ry hair.
So when in humane Victor is possessed
Of that fair Camp spreads the air's beni^n breast,
No otherwise she can effect our harms,
But as one must, compelled by force of arms:
By luckless accident; as when we say,
Kind^ mother does her infant overlay.
Avicen, Galen and Hippocrates,
May of the open air ^ay what they please:
That th^s that is stinted and abridg'd to no man,
But's each ones own as properly as common,
(...) that evil's pasture-ground,
(...) is, no sex or age can pound,
Sob^r hord well may dance over hedge and rail,
When aestrum plays musician in her tail.
Reno^n'd P^ripateti^k Prince, whose back
Could (...) ^^ar the gl^^e and never crack,
Would never allow the air to putrefie,
That kindly spread his lear^ed axioms sky.
That is, the air as it does first deri^e,
As unmixt w^x or honey from the hive.
When with its fellow peers its free consent
And power it has to vote in Parliament:
In it^ pure Naturals, as Eve e're she
A she^ps-eye cast at Adam or the tree.
Or else that air feeds high its own desire
With zealous courtship from the sphere of fire:
Neighbors so near it, that no fumes dare move
As ^iv^ls, to ^orrupt ^ts virgin love.
No fear of earths assault. Vapors as soon
May thither reach, as babes cry wake the moon.
But air, when under vapors tyranny,
She wants her splendid boundless regency,
Purulent efflux qualities then claim
Right to pollute the chaste illustrious dame.
As when one comes from fair, large gallery,
Where dripping-pans, pots, cook and scullion be
Is grim'd and smutcht so strangely, one might swe^^
Maskt beauty for the coals or ashes heir.
Air in its lower province, province finds
Hard task to employ laborious designs.
How many outrages it suffers, we
By dull suns beams it lends us, clearly see:
When fetent marshes tomb themselves in the air
To send out their deaths message every where
When Plague with filth fed high in poor (...)
And its own pride no longer can endure,
From vile restraint out of some hole does tea^
Its way, and builds vaste castles in the air:
When cloudy Juno's plague seed do disperse
To pregnant air, that breeds it by commerce
When oscitant earth too will not be said,
To stand between the living and the dead.
But the unburied carcasses can lie
And wreake reeke
revenge through air on the enemy.
Thus is the gentle air in every coast
Harrass'd, pestered and made deaths hackney post.
Idleness breeds Plague too. And who will not strive
To be of use, what should they do alive?
When mettle's never employed, we look it must
Be fruitful, when in nothing else, in rust.
Sloth ho-goos flesh alive, and's only good
To bring the odious muffo in our blood.
Other Plague sires this does maintain and cover,
As onion peels one wrapped within another.
Hence in the veins crowds a rebellious mass
Of humors spirits stop at every pass;
That they may have their treacherous intent,
To work the body to an excrement.
Which at last, while they vig'rously conspire,
Like heap of muck, sets its own self on fire.
Weemen ^^int or gravid in the plague,
Then seldom that they waste in bigness brag.
For often their bloods dregs long being kept within,
Tempt the disease to be their damerin.
If Mercur. lib 1. de venen. c. 14.
man's seed make worse poison then the pox,
Humors make pest without a paradox.
Wemens menses infect glass, green plants dry,
And bounteous are of leaprous charity.
Galen asserts, as every one may ^o E^^d (...)
read,
That mad man doing out of mouth his need,
Exquisite poison cast, that made a Turk,
To murder one he hated, play the shirk.
Such perf^ct bane his humors were, he could
Not longer keep them from the common good.
Infectious humors that for death contest,
Title thems^lve^ the partisans to pest.
Thus judge of all those things Physician call^
(For being abused, li^es s^es) non-naturals.
Plague's made by mot^s to tyrannize in the 'air.
(...) is how they should come there.
It Is doubtfully disputed wh^re the^ dwell:
Whether in Earth or Water, Heaven or Hell.
One may believ^ they are epidemical;
So tempting him to sacrifice t^ all.
Plague, as it is plague, must be concluded evil:
So fit to be a present from the Devil.
Who rebels lists and leads, a^t^r the fray.
To gratify their labors, gives them pa^.
I observed not God s^r naug^t, said one, did try
And scripture know better then you or I:
And (for the D^vils honor) do you think,
He Will let his faith^ul s^rvants want their chink?
He though he father lies; yet will and must
For his pow^rs sake, to ^is b^ true and just.
He Would have but cold fires in his smoaky Cell,
I^ he did not r^ward his C^^lops well.
He Would be but petty Prince, and well might pass
For one the World might play into an Ass;
If when he can command, then laughs and sleers,
As curre that wags his tail and sl^cks his ears:
Will court them with all ^ort of flattery;
As spirits do that cog men over sea:
When he had ruled them many years, at length
Will then be rid as beast not knows his strength.
After his long ammaliating charms,
When the enemy at last lays down his arms,
That then to sease on them he will not dare,
May do it as easily as move the a^r.
Though to his Prince he cannot be devout,
Gets in his favor, putting others out,
Lord Paramont whose laws he will not keep,
Uses him for corrector as his whip.
Under G^ds rule who will not be so civil
To bow to him, do homage to the Devil.
The Almighty, where his government we slight,
Assigns the Abisse's pote^tate his right.
Our Mother Earth some reckon such a flat,
As pudding makes, and never washes gut:
Eats carrion and digests not, then at last
Belches and blows us backward with the blast.
Her ftreaks and fits I should not tell you of,
B^t to procure your pity, not your scoff.
For when we are ^orsook of all our kin,
Want ^riends and harb^ur too, she will take us i^.
When in the worst condition disgrace
Or woe can put us, give us kind embrace.
But truly does sometimes much provoke us,
Giving us food is only fit to choke us.
Our diet's her allowance: Yet before
Belly's half full, we never can swallow more,
So Cimbick like she will her fare disburse,
That we no better are then starved at nurse.
Then will she as great bellied woman lust
To burst her crasie panch with coals and dust.
Mean while as sheep in winter lost, that crowd
Under deep snow, grass roots are all our food;
Or else as Plu^. in Alex.
Alexanders men, each sharks
Such plunder for his guts as ^erbs and barks.
To lie in ambush for our selves, we creep
Under green boughs, eat them then die like sheep
Sometimes her very petereaus prevail
TO immerge us by renversing of our sail.
Her breath's so strong that it will trip up all
Elephants feet, and give a post a fall.
Ex. gra. as in A Cave near Naples
grotto del cane, that
Stops nose of dog, and blindes the eyes of cat*
Who stoops down low, as to salute the ground,
Reverence with adoration must confound.
There Is nothing to be seen at all no more.
Then when the Fa^ries dance about the floo^
Yet Basilisk Earths steam, in that dark Cell,
Strikes present death not by the sight but (...)*
She Will have a Ca^on; then be after this
As cold as Charity in famine is.
Each joint will shake, as if she gave advice
To have her bones converted into dice.
Then, as if she could not her dyscrasie
Discover by her touch ^s well as eye:
Like one who best his own infirmities
In faulty mirror of another sees:
For this or else some reason God knows, we
Must languish and be sick as ill as she.
Her sighs must be our harpes, and her groans
To Nature pay the pur^hase of our bones.
A cruel diabolical intent
May well be wrought by weakest instrument.
^eedle can slyly murder, and we know
The smallest twig will strike the smartest blow.
Woman first cursed the earth; which by the ^kill
Of some Medea, may be cursed still.
Furies are females; and who Furies made,
Gave them their whips to labor in their t^ade.
Not to defraud the Devil of his right,
The King of ^isc^i^fs agents have his might.
Records will tell you Plague's an hellish itch.
That first attacks a sorcerer or witch.
No matter in what manner they receive it,
Whether as pain or pleasure, so they give it.
And if they cannot sow the enemies tares well,
Never hope to find one labo^rer in hell.
Some who by other^ cens^r'd are as nice
As those a fall or c^ibe make dread the ^ce,
Or as those think all muck and dirt profane,
Because they'^e toild with it and lost their pain,
Do (as Physicians, who by s^ent and show
Of ordure, Natures Crisi^ judge and know)
Opinionate such filthy stuff may breed
Plague, as plumb-b^oth break teeth of those that feed.
Hence in a plague time Scavingers great trouble
Brings Scutcheon on his grave with car^ and shove^.
At least by double charge and daily strife
With coach and cart, he is weary of his life:
Sleeps in his clothes all night, and on his feet
Eats dinner, if not breakfast, in the street.
Chambermaid too toiling with clout and broom
Often rids and sweeps her self into her tomb.
At least scarce having time to dress her head,
And make her fine, she thinks her self half dead.
Looses her Love by false and shining face,
As if it mock^ him with her l^oking glas^.
He slighting leaves her, being all dirt and grease,
And courts the cook maid as the choicer piece.
Who will not subscribe this ten^nt may surmile,
It Is 'cause he holds his nose and shuts his ^ye
The jakes, the putrid place or thing dispense
A loathsome sum that suff^cates his sense.
If he has staid long o'r^ the Hirpines land,
Or Charon^ ditches, (...) take his hand.
Philangia, scorpions and that Deaths spy,
Who makes a prey of mortals with his eye,
With the rest of like poisonous viper brood
They get, prove how they qualify the blood.
But who will proof require, when one ca'nt stay
On such a subject but must turn away?
In Adams days, though cu^se did earth infest:
Yet till the Flood we never read of Pest.
Of all plagues causes well may that be worst,
God us'dt' express his indignation first.
As if the passion of his heart did rise
So high to force an Ocean from his eyes.
With water which for those new born we save
In font, we but baptize them to the grave.
What e're be fair kind countenance of water.
Within '^is lurid sanglant house of slaughter.
It Is womb of soul corrup^ion, or rather
Mother conceives that brat without a father.
Hence it is that children, w^m^n, and such folk
Make from the^r sat bulks colo^les of smoke,
Are frequent victims to the Plague, because
Condemned before by Ari^^ ^ m^^co^. ^ ^
Aris^o^les laws.
For this it is that where plague takes its station
Not ^oist but drying meats are all in fashion.
Leaks, onions, garlik we are to feed on then,
As if brought in Egyptian bonds ag^n.
We are commanded not to make a dish
Of any sowl may be allied to fish.
We Are bid with other dry woods burn the witch,
The Rosemary and Bays to save our breech.
Bathe, drowsy bed and sudling booth, all these
Are tenements of pestilent disease.
They have ^oundation in the wet, are such
As Conduits water yield to plants too much.
This evils root and Image-tree has spread
To murder more then e're first woman bred.
We only say in praise of its desert,
'Thas found out means to make us die by art.
So long as men have bodies, this will be
Physicians greatest friend and enemy.
Their basis who advance their main design
To the highest pitch when they do unde^mine
It by its wisely tamp'ring with the blood,
For each disease makes birdlime very good.
Were It not for this, we'd wonders act, outlive
The world, and carry water in a s^eve.
The courteous and the careless both delight:
As well catch fish swim by as those that bite.
Some Ep^^^reans adverse to Plato,
As much as ever schoolboy was to Cato,
Having by much study new mode and way
Learned how to celebrate the Opalia,
D^gmatize thus, that as on earth they find
Each creature: so the World too in its kind^.
Not as if one should reckon by the score
^at weathers, r^nts, or hogs, but many more.
For (not to matter the ingenuity
Of those by whom they are called T^^ a stuli^ um^^^^^lus alter. M.^eur
B^iti^^ico
Moroniae)
In the universe that has so vaste a breast,
No pourprise can suffice to make a vest,
The little flying bodies there that use,
In every vacant space to rendezvouse,
In several troops agree to lay their lumber
Apart, and so make worlds that none can number.
Now as all earthly beings when for prey,
Their youth and strength yields to them time,
So when all-powerful Nature does untie decay.
The frame of any of their souls, they die.
As bird eats bird, beast murders beast, and pike
Makes meal of jack, and so devours its like.
As Butchers whetting mettle wears his knife,
And husband dies at pleasure of his wife.
As s^aby sheep the neighboring sheep may harm,
And perish side corrupt the appendant arm.
So one wo^ld makes another world its pr^ze,
That swallowed in its putrid garbage lies.
It Is for its woeful destiny involved
In that by which its f^llow is dissolved:
Feels fatal shafts, as when the Part^ians take
Leave of the field, and shoot behind their back.
As when some great p^rni^ous flame goes out,
And sends it^ sutling vapors all about.
Millions of subtle scouts carry sad fate
To every place, and pore they penetrate.
This is believed by diverse never could hear,
How many they should judge the wisemen were.
They Will never dissent, that they may none displease.
Like such good subjects will not break the peace.
We also may let this opinion go,
As one may passenger he does not know.
Pest as one guilty ca'nt enormious fact
Conceal, declares it is gotten by contact.
It Is called contagion, as what blatant Fame
Ca'nt make traliniate from its kind in name.
Hence one man from another runs away,
As if he were wild beast of Lybia.
As men's embracess were the treaceries
Of Centaurs or Mezentian carcasses.
Pest in its sphere does seem to govern, move,
Act and engender as Platonic love.
As when fair buxome wanton subt'ly tries
To work Arachnes sampler with her eyes:
^arts little sp^rits that are rays visive,
If Fracasto^ian authors we will believe.
If you with Cardan call them exhalations,
To gazers eyes they are sent to carry fa^^^ons.
From thence they work farther and farther in,
Till they have made the heart their magazine.
As the ^y^ has power to generate am^re,
Dispense it can contag^ous malore.
Its hairy bow that is so often bent
With Cupids shafts, sends those are pestilent.
Each pupil's sc^ntil, by whose fires and slashes
Our humane spray quickly consumes to ashes.
The aspects can soon infect; with but a glance
Look one for ever out of countenance.
He may be martyred in contagious fire,
By charming word or velenose suspire.
Things though inanimate may be possessed
With active and Smectymnu^^ soul of pest.
Ambrosia that so greedily we seek,
May swallowed swell our puddings till they break.
When we are filled with Nectar to the brink,
Or sail as vesle^s in the wine we drink,
We Are then drawn off the l^ss or sink: for Bacchus
May either as himself or Neptune rack us.
The pest to match our sure or mode, can we^^
Tatters or robes, silk, linen, cloth or hair.
Our Bodies but such coverings sustain
As gutter-tiles that help us to the rain
If Pest be ftorm, they then soke in the wet:
If fire, soment and multip^y the heat.
To take pest ribbon's bramble, skirt stool band
New cut of France, sleeve arm and gantlet hand
We must accept it for our garments sake;
As if for every purpose made to take.
We Are not so proud of them. as they of it:
Which they will keep when we are rotten in the pit.
Thus proves our glory our disgrace: the same
Betrays our misery that hides our shame.
While Poppey-headed Night dreams at her ease,
Sitting with Sleep and Death on both her knees,
Some would Contagion place between, but that
For want of wings it seems another brat.
All three for kindred well agree with it,
But when it should fly, it stands on Saturns f^et.
When one would think 't has spent its utmost bane,
Like root alive in earth, its sprouts again.
As spy that from under the hangings comes,
And takes one napeing at his sugar-plumbs.
Though in its usual fits it teezes folks,
As harness heifers newly put to yokes;
Makes them as vigilant as such whom spite
Of angry dame makes tell the clock all night:
Yet it as quietly lies now and then,
As Rhenald when he plots surprise of hen:
Can have a lethargy whole years, then drop
Asleep: as if the scourge were turned to top.
Marsil^^s Fisinus tells, a tale
Of one to whom Contagion gave bail:
Lurkt in a feather bed three years that lay
Stock still, because the birds were slown away.
No talk of Pest in all this time, and bed
Did nothing know but that the Pest was dead.
When ou^ter came to use the bed he had bought,
So his of ^ight, as any would have thought:
Pest wake't, proved the possession for three year,
And turned the Plaintiff out of bed to bier.
As well we this may credit as bancheer
Able to spend a thousand pounds a year.
For if bane long can stay where it does meet
Opposing forces from the bodies heat:
Much longer well may it continue, where
No dog once opens mouth to bait the bear.
If many Theoph. lib 9 de hist plant ^. 16
poisons given be that need,
A time of many months to come to seed:
If Albert. magn. l. 7 dea'imal ^ 2.
mad dogs bite lay twelve years as unknown,
As millers thumb within a marrow-bone.
And if Mercurial ^. 14 deep, l. pr^^^ 2
such hurt one could not find till he
Might, one each year, have got Thespiadae.
Why may not some where, then contagious pest,
For many suns and moons, conserve its nest?
And if in every glass, wine daily shows
Small nimble sparks cut capers to the nose.
Such as by mere smell can compel the brain
To ape the gambols of some giddy vein:
If smoke be from the fire exhal^d, if stream
Be lawful offspring of the fruitful stream.
If fl^wers and herbs do fragrant odours spread
And with their spicy breath perfume their bed
None think the Pest cannot give her atome, birth,
That shows a womb as open as the earth.
But must believe the bounteous airy sky,
( City of refuge free to all that fly;
That fumes and vapors makes communicable,
Not from the altar more then from the stable)
Gives these, as every other wandering drove,
Like full consent of liberty to rove.
That they to all antigonize their merit,
Giving the qualities that they inherit.
Thus as to those twin-brothers Mars began.
The wolf was parent cause subordinate.
So to have sound a Lupa to this Curse:
If not a Mother; yet at least a Nurse.
Those that with watchful eyes and listening ears
Attend the silent music of the spears,
Affirm our earths discord and harmony,
Answers to theirs, and's merely sympathy.
Our mirth and melancholy both come down
From great Celestial bodies smile and srown.
As our hearts joy and life's most sweet solace.
Are rays e^llux from their benign grace:
So war, dearth, plague fall as tempestuous rain.
From the malignant clouds of their disdain.
Our spindle in its action must cease.
As they, the hands governing fingers, please.
Like ropeing leads of ^lock to earth we may;
Guided by them, our (...) wheel; above.
To speak the power of stars, what e're does master
Our wish with cross success, we call disaster.
Their virtue who denies, with Dido's leather,
May bind the years four seasons all together.
As not the least of all his vaunts, may say
His worthy beard is neither green nor gray:
That Autumn suits in humor and desire
With Spring, and Summer sits by Winters fire.
The Psalm 19.
heavens and firmament most skilful be
In the Almighties glittering herauldry.
In hierogliphick characters there stand
The fairest printed wonders of his hand.
Well may he welcome be to heaven who rears
Himself up thither by a stair of stars.
To body as we ulcer find or shame
To reputation: Plague to soul's the same.
It Is such a witness proves sin capital,
And is the harvest season to its fall.
When from above we have such a fatal touch,
We Are taught we look upon the earth too much.
When by him made us we will not be found:
Our dearest friends then hide us under ground.
Infallibly they are Atheists must endure
Such viper stripes no humane hand can cure.
Plague's Gods artillery, thunders our fate
With his design not to capitulate.
Storm may show his displeasure: but when fire
Must make that storm, who then will doubt his ire?
Other plagues lightly follow at his word:
Pest not unless his Angel draw his sword.
They Are palmers, rods men have at their command
To chasten with: Plague's Gods own heavy hand:
Celestial bow of wrath and vengeance, when
All-powerful Lord of host makes war with men.
It Is Levit. 18. 25.
Death wages of sin, that none pretend
That pays him not by which he has his end.
(...). OR, THE ANATOMY OF THE Pestilence,
Part 3.
It Is not enough when life must fade away,
Its glass being run, to see old Time make hay:
To stand over heart-sick neighbor as he lies,
And wash his rancid ulcers with our eyes:
Behold the sword of wrathful Providence,
And read his venger in the present tense.
It Is not enough when Time has made escape,
To turn our heads and view his naked nape:
To stare into obscure expanded jaws
Of Pestilence to know it in its cause.
The point's how we should be hereafter. Time
Present and past should into future climb.
Who Plague, as Pox, deride, will never find it
Cured, as imposthume, by a laughing fit.
Wound prob^d, ia'd wide and naked to the eye,
Can gape for nothing then but Charity.
E're it is applied, that it may best redound
To Effect, let plagues precursors lance the wound.
"Ev is forewarned we better can endure,
"And give a kinder welcome to their cure.
When sense will neither heed what is showed or said,
No wonder body's destined to be dead.
"Who credit not their faithful eye nor ear,
"Unjustly will recriminate their fear.
When dogs combine in numerous company,
And arm themselves to make a mutiny,
They Are such pr^saging heralds make appear,
Plague is to follow victor in the rear.
And all that time here Rebels made an head,
How many dogs devoured the childrens bread?
E're Plague sets out to visit place, it^ mouth
Sends message from the cloudy, rainy south.
And in our wars what melkin did we find!
As if hot baths sweated the air and wind.
When Mars and Saturn join, they but contest,
Who shall do most to introduce the Pest.
And then the rage of sword and power of spite
Could all things do but share usurped right.
When Plague would sit in throne, its general
Frenzy, before prepares the Capitol.
And we saw by our State men's lunacy
Each had as many heads as Hecate.
Our siderated government did wane
After the cheating moonshine of their brain.
Evagr. l. 4. c. 25.
When Plague's designed to sease a man, he sees
Like one who ca'nt distinguish men from trees.
As Captain who endeavors to surprise
A fort or camp, first takes the scouts and spies.
And in our wars such blindness did bewitch
Our Seers, as to lead us into ditch.
Owls eagles, steeples stables seemed. Their seeing
Gave every object mere Vtopian being.
The had Idol-eyes, for show not sight, and that
Dazzled not more by water then by fat.
Our brightest and most noble part of all,
Vilely converted into washing-ball.
Direful prognostics reckon all that are
As our rebellion's aresenall's tools of war.
God spares our thorns and briars twenty years,
Looking they should have fruited sighs and tears.
And four or five his clement patience stays,
That we repair our rugged filthy ways.
Since by our daily factious dispute
We'd turn and patch our tattered rebel suit,
This being all we'd mend; our botchers trade
Fails, while he breaks our needle, rots our thread
No hand but his must guerdon our desert:
All rods but his too weak to make the smart.
Cause and disease do on another woo.
Offense malignant: punishment so too,
In this sad gloomy state what chearing ray
Has East in splendid bosom to display?
Where shall we find that kind Elysian vale,
Will echo to us joy while we bewail?
Can any sweet content of heart distill
From consolatrix Pithos sugar quill?
Will smart and rage of our disease, disband
At soft and gentle touch of Muses hand?
27. (...)
Natalis Comes makes a strange relation
Of many Pest killed by precipitation.
Strange power indeed makes patient ill at ease,
Till to destroy himself he turn disease.
As those when Siren sings, cannot forbear;
But must leap headlong in the mouth they hear,
So they by Siren charms of Pest, being brought
Under fly tyrant power of pensive thought;
First planet-s^ruck their senses loose and rave.
Then out of window, tumble into grave.
(...) Jo^ Imp^r.
Vicentine doctor, whose most ample credit,
Was lawful heir to his rich learned merit,
Seeing the unnatural Earth in time of Pest,
So greedily on her own children feast;
Disdaining life and earth, both quite forsook
At once, and gave his body to a brook.
What enthymem, or what dilemma finds
Place here to melt and couch between two lines?
Or what Sorites shall we flatter here,
To steal on us a placid change of cheer?
Were that great Sophie here never met mischance,
But with salute of laughing Demo^ri^s
countenance.
Or he whose breath dried tears, and did impart
To every heavy hearing ear an (...).
heart.
Where would he get such vigorous conceits,
Such flowrey words or smiling figure cheats,
As might have force to exhale out of our breast
Stomacho ^ apprehensions of the Pest?
Mercur. l. 1. c. 6.
Vul^ur^s and ravens, who do never chaw
The ca^rions crams they seek to impast their craw;
If such, appest^d cark^sses are shie
To touch, but leave unburied as they lie:
Alacrity the wonted lively guest
To sprightly object and vivacious breast,
What courtesy can get it here to accost,
Being so so capitol to death and ghost?
Yet if fair means will not do, it must be pressed
And fore't, as those were to the marriage feast.
If m^rth be judged to have at any time
Its season, when plague's ripe it is in its prime.
There Is none will doubt but melancholy soon
Can put our bodies organs out of tune.
For cooling, and so binding heart, it stops
The spirits, and detains them from their shops.
Thus bodies trading fails. Natural heat
Parts want, and can at market get no meat.
Hence humor makes a melancholy mood,
Cardan thought fit to call the Devils food.
This passion, when it may befriend the Pest,
In mischief will be sure to do its best.
For weak'ning then the noble parts, they are
Neither conditioned to resist nor dare.
We need no other testimony here,
But see how many pest themselves with fear.
For this sad sense can never the humors please,
But with an atrabilions disease:
For whose Nature we will no farther seek,
Then to Carbones kindle in the sick.
If you will not think, with Avicen, ima --
Gination can carry one shere away:
Fly to another man, there build its nest
Of botches, coals and blans: so lay the Pest.
Happily because you will say, who have a paten
To wrangle in the Physic schools in Latin,
Maintain that this same faculty ca'nt sit,
Translator like, and labor in the sheet;
Ad intra only operates: as he
Who will not have others learn his mystery:
That soul keeps in its sphere, and's never known
To act in other body then its own:
And that if it could others infect, it might
Cure them: so bid Physician good night.
Yet Pic intergris duchus lib m^d
Pic. Mirandolan and Fab. Paolin,
Francesc. of St. Nazar, and Mich. Medin;
With diverse other civil persons, strain
With all fair words to win you to their vein:
That you would believe a melancholy sense
Often projects to its self the Pestilence.
That those sad spirits strongly do enforce
The yielding bowels to its healths divorce
Alt'ring then strangely move a sympathy
In Plague, t'intrude and bear them company.
So teeming woman longs for such a dish
Or kick shaw marks her infant with her wish.
So Phil 1* grassi^^ part 2 (...) Pan
such did dread mad dog, taught their scared sense
To fall with sury on their patience:
To turn them giddy, and in corners lurk,
To set their venomed canine teeth on work.
So in Petrus Pa^h, in tract. de pest. c 9.
infected Trapani the sad
And simerous disease they feared, they had:
Fell dead where no indic^um could be found
To make foundation of sickly ground.
We, then, should keep high region of our mind.
As orb above dominion of the wind:
Serene as beauteous air, when in the deep
Rain, winds and clouds are all fast rockt asleep:
And only pleasant Zephyrus may dare
Make pastime with Apollo's golden hair:
Calm as when all the Sea Nymphs dance and play,
To celebrate the^r great Queens marriage-day.
Sadness we should abandon and refrain,
As we would ^ly from cloud for fear of rain:
Paint it, that with Alecto (...) may stand
Sister to Pest, with Fur^es whip in hand.
That so its fellowship we never brook,
Knowing its nature fiercer then it^ look.
The more disastres their effort employ
Against us, greater need we have of joy.
For breast burden ^n our (...) state,
Mirth should have free pu^ssance to make the weight:
Give met^^mental chyle to every part,
And be the Pertcardium to the heart.
Great doubt^s in th^s that is of ^o high esteem,
How our poor spirits purchase may the gem
When we n^, longer can resi^t or stand,
How to add vigor to our dagger hand.
When thousand^ fall in v^e^, to k^ep our g^ound,
And courage ra^se* against (...) cannot wound.
Some speculative Authors who do treat
About such works make men within side sweat,
That they to sadness never be forced to yield
Have thought their scull the best to be their ^^^eld.
For while, say they, the active mind does fall
Aboard such things are scientificall,
All melancholy species 'twill detest,
As raw flesh brought to board was never dressed.
And the more tetrick that the study be,
It Is best to match and ^oile the enemy.
But there be others of another gang.
Who studious are about such lines as twang;
Say Muse to Pest has great antipathy,
And so cry up Apollo to the sky.
That golden Archer 'twas say they, from whom
Python, symbol of Pest, received his doom.
For which kind act Apollinary plays
Be never forgot to propagate his praise.
How can Plague do him any prejudice,
Who Phoebus ^avourite and cl^ent is?
Upon Parnassus takes the suns first beams.
And drinks of Hippocrens pure crystal streams?
Beholds in sweet society of Muse
The brilliant caracolls of Pegasus?
How can one in a sad condition be,
Whose pen all day dr^ws lines of jubilee?
I^ flowers that at spisi^g so gay appear,
Do make the (...) of the year;
Needs must he joy who diligently plots
Poets contrivances and garden-knots.
And if the Sun's, alias, Apollo's flame,
Be godfather to mirth and gives it name:
Needs must he be allegre who displayes
Himself by luster of Apollo's rays.
Thus they. Which howsoever to purpose said,
None at their stairs are forced to run a head.
Not every Wood will make a Mercury.
Nor this sit those have other fish to fry.
Particular apply is endless: that
None will refuse wh'ch suits w'th every state.
Liranus Philo and Iesephus tell
How many sorts of plagues made Egypt Hell.
The Potshaw over which cursed train and show,
Was Pest, elate great Pharo's sovereign too.
Though this fed on the Memphians, like wave,
Promiscuously rolled man and beast to grave;
Yet all the Israelite^ it let alone.
Health took its quarters up with every one.
In Basil Plague fell on the Switzers; and
Gave to Hist Eccles. 1903
Italians and French its hand.
In Maximinus time it did insect
Heathens: but gave to Eusebius. 1.2, de niort Gal^ ^ 18.
Christians respect.
Another time when Indians were its meat,
Says Trajan, us it civilly d^d treat.
If Pest these times, would keep the same style still,
And only infidels and ethnicks kill:
We might have hope to lie out of its road,
And escape its touch; for being of Christian blood.
If our spirits to theirs be different:
Our bodies be of the same element.
As when fort^ess is took, the conquering foe
Puts all to sword, whether baptized or no.
And as when dearth is to some country sent,
Pagans and our cheeks too are macilent;
So without difference contagious Fate
Seases each age, religion, sex and state.
Iurists of old did Pestilence discuss,
As thing insolit and fortuitous:
Steem'd as unusual and strange a smart,
As was Alceste's passion of the heart.
As rarely happened as their deaths, decease
Of Chilo's or Diagoras disease.
But now it is, says Inc. 24 Matthew.
Testate, (And who fear
He speaks untruth, may be prolinctors here)
^ff^ct does only against nature fall,
For being so often to us unnatural.
It Is as familiar to us as gray ruffs,
When slic't and carbonado'd into cuffs:
Comes as the swallow or the flea, who knows
Its time, creeps near a^ rocket turned to hose.
We all its open se^ding common be,
To give it name of Pest from pascere
It Is called pandemos too: and so can fat in
A grazing place as well of Greek as Latin.
Our speculation, then, it must be bent
To find our joy some higher argument.
Our musing wit some Numen should inspire,
Elisha's 2 King 3 15.
minstrel or else David's lyre.
Till raised up to Heaven, it there commence
To penetrate Genius of Providence:
Advert the dispensation of his Graces.
Wont to come to us with disastrous faces.
How often has affront, says Seneca,
Foot-cloth to Honor laid and spread his way!
Blow struck to kill or agonize the heart,
Brought life and Phalercus cx. gr. and.
cure to some apostem'd part!
Egyptian pest gave Hebrews liberty;
Who'd by the Assyrian pest too victory.
David's Plague rid him of his sontick fears,
And made him sound by penitence and tears.
Could mortal eye reach its desire, and we
Supe^ humane wisdom's repostils see;
We should from cursed bed of present state
Discern how many blessings germinate.
What maiden troops makes Pest pure spouses be
In Heaven to be reserved from brothelry?
How many there advance their sather's fame,
Might here have been their earthly fathers shame?
How many there are safe, who here would stray,
Be lost and die an hundred times a day?
How many here had scarce one crust to eat,
There with the holy Lamb at supper sit?
Gods rod, Pest, with its stroke but cleans our cloth
From vanities and pleasures dust and moth.
When tender Mother calls her darling-dove,
To hug with kisses of her kindest love;
Wooes him by all that can be counted dear;
And stoeworm he harks with deaf adders ear;
She stuzzicates nurse, servant or some other,
Who with a vizard sc^^es him to his mother.
So larva- face of plague does but affright,
To make us fly where kindness ca'nt invite.
Opens our eyes wide till they stare and see
Gods lap the safest a^yle that can be.
Let Us, then, take con sort. For as David's pain
And trouble cased him of his love profane.
As sick Antiochus devoutly fell
Prostrate in Temple he abused when well.
And as afflicted Hebrews Idols broke,
That when tripudiant they did invoke.
So have we now occasion to retire
From what before trappan'd our fond desire.
The heavy flail we long have suffered under,
May break our vices ansrous wreaths assunder.
In recompense of its strokes bruise and pain,
Chaff is to fly and leave refined grain.
Let Us comfort take. For as the spinners lay
Their webs and weave them in a cloudy day:
As dug earth breeds the better; and the vine
Gratifies pruner plenteously with wine;
So we now under cloud and culture, may
Work well, and gardners care with fruit repay.
Let Us comfort take. For like as Jonas he
Courageously opposed tempestuous sea.
And Jacob wrestling with the Angel found
Best rise, as ball when hardest thrown to ground.
So now may our intrepid spirits be
Pompous rich victors over calamity.
Let Us comfort take. For if Physicians leave
The infirm, to whom what e're they like, they give.
If animal in fields and meadows rambles
Without control, he destined to the shambles.
And tree that husbandman never reclaims
With mattock, spade or knife, must fruit him flames.
So 't would but be bad omen, if heaven should
Never send us biting frosts to nip our blood.
If we in suns beams should be always warm,
And never knew what thunder was nor storm.
Let Us comfort take. For if the cloudy air
Gives the earth a richer livery to wear.
If stinging be for use of us does drive
Delicious anthine traffic in its hive.
If almond after crude, hard, acid meat
Gives us at last (as sumptuous feast) the sweet.
If springs ruby and beauties pride, the Rose,
Her fragrant body hides in thorny clothes.
And if the Night after she long has born
Great belly, be delivered of the Morn;
God happily after our hard tedious labor,
Intends to joy us with some signal favor.
Thus rightly aweful and well tempered fear,
Keeps all our arms safe marching in the rear.
When we are under government of vice,
Judgments reclaim and miseries entice.
The^a signs not our death but our reprieve;
And Condemnation tells us we shall live.
We here and there in sunshine gad and roam,
When rainey weather makes us keep at home.
And when Gods indignation pours on us,
His mercy's then most scaturiginous.
His clemency may show the sweetest face.
But his severity's the kindest grace.
This can over us spread joy, though we had bin
Inhabitants long in Trophonian den.
By such Nepenthe Melancholies earth
Will sink and every where be por'd with mirth.
Who can imbody spirits by their art,
And dexterously act Spagyricks part,
With those extract, as supine out of verb,
A trade or mystery from drug or herb,
May estimate these pareneticks worse
Then brass or lead helcysm of their purse:
Account they will stead the Patient as much,
As Bow Church Steeple him that needs a crutch.
After disease is charactered, and cause
Has opened poisonous throat and showed its paws;
When whatsoever ^s of prophetic note,
Has given in its signature and vote;
And diagnostick accidents are all
Adjoined that use to be propempticall:
As one e're Cain was born, the world should show
In parts, would distribute it into two;
So they the sick and healthy sever; which
They call, as pleases fortune, poor or rich.
Alexipharms must, as Physician, serve
Both sides, either to cure or else preserve.
They bid the Rich their prized health entrust
To rubies, emrods, saphires cordial dust.
Granates, pearls, jacints, musk and amber lack
Only their Gold to be dissolved to Sack.
The Germane species liberantes wait
TO enfranchise them in hygiastick state.
The Emperors powder shall be to them as free,
As can be open hand that drops their fee.
He affirmed he never saw any die of the Plague (...) used it.
Montagnana's Confection they shall try,
Then see for all their wealth if they can die.
With sweet manicarets they shall be fed,
And eat the golden egg and so to bed.
Several olla podrida's they shall choose,
That V. Hew^^.
sense and intellectuals may infuse.
To poor who salt may want, their charity
Gives peradventure sal absinthii;
Figs, nuts, salt, rue, berries of Juniper,
May serve their turn with sauce of vinegar.
While others greater ventures they insure, may
Prescribe to them pilulae sine cura.
Such as for always saving life, of old,
Were 'steem'd and called e're gilded, pills of gold.
But Panacea, or what e're can vie
With high and mighty peer of Alchimy.
Etites, amulet, elixar, all
That can to Pest ^e antipaticall,
Will little do against disease (must prove
Its Pharmaceutick virtue from above)
Chiefly derives from heaven. No hoplochrism
E're fought hand out of cloud, or cured a Schism.
We Are Palmer l de f^b pest. c. 17.
told that humane industry has found
^anchrestum, medicine for every wonnd.
The stoutest hector malady can fight.
Our nature, meets its vincent antithete.
Mad dogs and serpents poison often are tried
In list with what demits their turgent pride.
And that there is sends packing over seas
Collogueing Neapolitan disease.
The Plague amongst all subdued contagious harms,
Unconquered boasts its self sole King at arms.
Why this, but that we should in our dispute
Against its power, implore from God recruit?
Know he our force can only in such wars
Secundate, sends and curbs erratick stars?
Doctor, could he the smart of his sharp rod
Ease always, we should then adore as God.
Who with their useful lore the public serve,
Some secrets still to be admired reserve.
And God, who does his stellegg'd honor own
As dearly as his diadem or throne,
Though he has taught Physicians his art:
Some crypticks to them never will impart.
And why? because his bounty should assure
Him glory from our benefit and cure.
Because his sole opitulating care
Animates our desire, should voice our prayer.
^ Chron. 16 1.
Asa may let Physician control
Both his sick body and his sicker soul:
Sacre rule, mind, will, conscience to his art,
Enthone and idolize him in his heart;
Alas, he can share his infirmity,
And only knows to be as sick as he.
But what? As the Athenians their disease
Of Plague attributed to Pericles.
And Romans Lucius Verus the Emperor
Blamed, as who Plague had taught to domineer.
So now we say the Pest is progeny
Of star or body elementary.
Some Angel either good or bad we chide,
As falling Lucifer upon our pride.
None, as it were, lays faithful hand on breast,
To find it couch and pillowbear to Pest.
None think Plague sent as l^ctor to maintain
The cause of Gods terricrepant disdain:
That it is his burning missile to dispense
Revenging flames of his incandescence.
Vesanous ablepsie, that heavens clear light
Has made moon-cy'd and quite deprived of sight!
Pergamus great Gal. in Ep^d^m.
Physician could resign
Pest (though he neither knew) to power divine.
And that Achaian Poet who was cried
For wisdom up till he was de^sy'd;
Who whence he came on earth none e're could find:
But gave men eyes, though he himself was blind.
Ingen'ously told Greece, the Hom. pr. Ili.
Plague did follow
The will and order of incensed Apollo.
What shall we, then, we, Christians believe,
Who learn and write in his divine archive?
Know in Leviticus and D^ut. 23. L^vi^. 26.
Deuteronomy
He menac^s Israel with hierocomy;
Which one day with the Pest they having tried
To seventy thousand proved hospiticide?
Plutarke asserts Lacedemonian state,
When Pest among them did serpeggiate,
Consulted Oracles to make them wise,
That they voracious Pest might sepulize.
Athenians, as Thucidides reports,
Made for their Dieties new sacred courts.
And Romans, Livie writes, did fabricate
To every Idol votive seat of state:
Ordered processions; locked tribunal door,
And brought in Gods that never saw Rome before
Each did, though never so barbarous, the st^^
With pious superstition pumicate.
Why then will not we, to whom the Heav^^ rev^^
Their gracious, true light, realize our zeal?
That one foot may the head of Dragon press,
The other knee should make engonasis:
Supplicate his presidie that can be
Wall on each hand through our Erythrean Sea.
Pomona can afford no remedy
From her succinous flowery marquetry.
Nothing in her dominions can be found
To hedge in or repastinate our ground.
Nothing of adjument can Tellus bring
From rich encausted Jewels of the Spring.
No help of virtue seminal can come
From aught that is incadaver'd in her womb.
Noth^ng in Machaonian art can here
Ransom our health or medicate our fear.
If we'd find what does both and never fail,
We then must seek in the Peneian vale.
2 King 2.22
Elisha's salt should our sick waters heal,
And our deaths-pot be tempered with his meal.
Our Ajax s^ield must be the Rational,
Both phylactery and pharmatical.
When Planet who rules Capricorn or Spleen.
And he rules Scorpio or Gall convene.
From their cougress; such vegetables make
Purulent food, d^^nk from paludous lake.
And Aus^ral winds that usually breed
Anoxery, Pest is eructated.
No fear of Pest, then, where in sphere is s^t
Good Angel for benign starrulet.
Where our commensal's Christ, whom we view touch,
And's sacramental body too embouch.
Where heavenly cordial melitism flows,
And breeze of Holy Spirit gently blow^.
That we be'nt kept from such an happy state,
Anomy should not interequitate.
Such redolent and vernant Paradise
Cannot be, but first we must eructate vice.
Such bread's not for foul stomachs: such a flood
Will not expand its Cobrus streams on mud.
Such wind breaths not on dunghils, and who will win
Angels love, must be agamist to sin.
Brigades of flies, frogs and such vermin, these
Signs of corruption, are Pests oscines.
But one who liberally and daily ^eeds
Runcina with a sacrifice of Weeds.
They whose superior souls have their ^it ^est
In a polite, lixiviated breast:
There stantiate and have their constant tent,
Where nothing pedid is or feculent.
Such neither danger find nor omen to be
P^evious or protatick to ghiandusse.
How ever others smart and are d^strest,
Their fear will never isikle to Pest.
Each for himself covets the happy fate,
To be to Pest victor Crotoniate.
We'd Locri be; near Nig^r fix our foot;
Or be inhabitants of Calecut:
Places Cardan and Scaliger ^. 10 de subtle exer 32
relate
Never known to give Pest room to stabulate.
Health's dear to us: and yet we more befriend
Our lust, whose league we are loath to interscind.
It were, should we decrustate this, we think,
To be ablacted both from meat and drink.
We must do more then wish: 'te'nt to fulfill
Our own desire to saginate our will.
It is expected we with all our ^light,
Manticulate our pan^h and appetite:
Often keep Rogation week that it may raise
And crumble into dust of Ember days:
Feed at the table of Apelles, where
Abstinence waits and ushers in the fare.
And acolastick riot is put by;
As complice to A concivii^ ex^la^ philo^ophia.
proscribed philo^ophy.
By iconism made in every point
To p^t both eye and stomach out of joint.
Pest, In ^. 6 2 paral. verse. pestilen.
Tostate says, from pastus comes. Hence those
Most suffer by it are most crapulose.
As Dutch and Germans, while such are most free,
Substract their epigastricke husbandry.
Contagion fish atacks not. For they spare,
In want of lungs to gormandize the air.
And such who are unbowel'd of delight,
Secretly glides from innate appetite:
Have nothing in them serves, or may be meant
Organ to draw the vitiate ambient:
Who somewhat do peculiate from each dish
Crams luxury, may be as whole as fish.
You Will grant they very well may guizzants seem,
While in salt sea of penitence they swim.
This it is must give our carrack volant vogue,
And make us peccant humors dise^bogue.
This will extinguish fire of prur^ent lust,
And be smegmatick to our scabtous rust.
For crime, pest to the soul, does watch and carry
For bodies pest, and is its emissary:
With oily words does it eutrapelize,
And with Dardanean art too syrenize.
Finds it obsequious to its call and beck,
And rules it as its Hogan Mogan Smeck.
Because against wise In opus. de iis qui s^^o pu^iuntur.
Esop some did rage:
They felt from Pe^^ pounces of o^^frage.
Because the Romans Manlius did condemn
To death, being innocent, with punick crime:
They ( as some great Theologists have said,
With Sibil, thought to be Live. ^ec. 1.^.1.
entheated)
Infliction had pat to their villainy,
And suffered Pests coccinean cruelty.
David too thousands of his subjects found
By beccamorto given to the ground:
Because for giving holy prebend, curse
Of thrift had laid Abu^^^s.
embargo on his purse.
Because by a subduction all his state
He Will calcule, must himself denumerate.
Since, then, Pest's crimes punition, that so
Fares by it as thrush that dungs on misletoe:
Or as that smith and known Merc^^^al gull,
Who cowed himself by Phala^is's bull.
If contrary contrary meet to try
The mastership by mutual courtesy:
Collatcrate and be such friendly mates,
As one the others wounds consolidates.
Penitence never with Pestilence will station,
Never be coll^gue nor join in parentation.
Who would not in this cataclysm die,
Like Morkin, Leaches say, to hill must fly.
Infected house shun more than hate to carry
In an illuvious, mucid columbary:
Make gun as intestinum rectum, where
Physic may issue have to purge the air:
Charge sweat it tend at every pore to carry
Lethean humors out as ostiary.
Let cautery mouth open that may spawl,
As if provoked by some emeticall.
With vinegar make spear the spoil divide,
And lancepresado be to hosticide:
Sugar amand, and suffer no such choice
Sweet thing at board to have a choral voice.
But what say they who can with words transport
Sick soul to health, when their best skill's amort?
Who would not be this feral monsters prey;
Fall in insidious Catoblepa's way;
He must himself abduce and sevocate
From lu^ulent pe^caminou^ estate:
Make resip^scence his reverticle,
Can utmost rage of larval foe repel.
There Isa. 22 16.
grave his habitation in a rock,
And with his gemm'd Mausoleum danger mock.
Sakers of crebrous sighs must voice to clear
The souls threnetick, languid hemisphere.
Humors he must propel till they retreat,
Fall and precipitate themselves in sweat;
With dolorous and rainy eyes make wells
T'officiate as lugubrous fontenels:
Acerb Compunction use to cut, prick, fret,
And be to conscience as its tabouret.
Friandises, rambooz, mulse, all the throng,
Of dainties, sargeants be to t^eth and tongue,
As Sinons nauseate, and from the table
Keep as landloopers or abacted rabble.
Thus did the Royal Cytharist when he
Would subjugate Plagues pervicacity.
Fasting he in a P^ycomachy, strives
To win the host of heaven by collatives.
His eyes while they are stormed by showry South,
Nothing but shriveing's liquid in his mouth.
Decubiae and abstinance, these are
His Pylad^an protocolls to prayer:
Makes his Gilt with his tears together drop.
So takes the bight of heaven with telescope.
Sambuck lays by, agnizes all his rants.
And Isreal's sweet singer then recants.
While a cilicious Sambenit environs
His bare flesh, rakes his wounds with scalping irons:
Seposites robes, crown, septer, and in stead
With ashes spices his anointed head;
And his basilical great Honor must
Sit where alive he is buried, in the dust.
Thus he, and thus each Roman Matron, she
Though hackney strumpet to Idolatry:
Yet in such times when Apollyon came
With saliant lust to ravish every dame;
They sending troops of agonistick fears,
To hold their paillards by their andoillers:
Every salacious wish and wanton groan,
Licensing to catuliate alone,
Scarmigliate and contrite then they be:
Each stubborn, stiff Aloia bends her knee,
They wash their Idols temples with their tears,
Assurding them with sobs, complaints, suspires.
A better way we cannot well invent
TO avoid a quarantene then keeping Lent:
When we refrene wilful ingluvious maw
And Lust, with Fannian and Scatinian Law:
Do from the soul those kitchen vapors keep,
Which lull its entelechie fast asleep;
That power by which the heavenly satraps be
Assistant to us with their Hierarchy.
If in this lugent state we'd find compa^^on,
Revoke the sentence of our decimation:
Be in possession quietly at home,
Where Zums now and Is^. 13 21. and 34 14.
Ohims daily roam:
Desire Arachne with her Phalacrus,
Might eat their way securely out of us:
If we would have some remedy that brings
Vaginipennous Plague to close its wings:
Be eartht again; else fly and make retreat
To distant part of African or Get,
Kyrie Eleison be our charm. 2 Kings 1.10.
One may
Call Heavens fire: 1 King 8.37, 38, 39.
thousands voice it quite away.
Cardiognostick haubertne're 2 King. 13.4. Ma^k 11.24. Ma^^^^. 7.11.
deverts
His mercy from an hecatomb of hearts.
By obtestation from him we shall
Delin^ment have delen^sicall,
Calastick, septicall, emollient,
Peptick, what e're from Hygia can be sent;
What gives us reviviction: so can cure
With Loves supernal fire our calenture.
While we conslagitate his grace, he fights
His own arms, conque'ring our Amalekites.
By such a winding cockle-stairs as these,
We mount above the power of all disease.
Salacia and Thetis should contest,
Which from which eye can fluce out the ocean best.
Drawing amarous streams, from thence to obtain
Far more illustrious title over the Main.
The Penitential Psalms direct the way
To sing our plangent dirg and Naenia.
They Are safe from being by Plagues deluge drowned,
Who wash themselves in this Probatick Pond.
The virtuous Bethesda of our eyes,
Makes sin and Plague, not us, the sacrifice.
To gain lost virgin state the Lazarous*
Squalid and jacent find it Canathus.
With sighs we draw heavens vital air, with groans
New life: as those that touched 2 King 13.21.
Elisha's bones.
Remorse is such a thing by which we are made
To speed on then the most when retrograde.
Waters of Shiloah that softly fell
From Sions foot, were called the N.him 2. 13.
Dragons W^ll.
Such are our coulant tears steal down to meet
And pa's the humblest courtship of our feet.
That fig^r'd help: and this to us does so.
Coule-sang plague drinks here and bursts in two.
But we must take more pains, that it may fall
TO our lot to have a Year Sabbatical.
It Is not enough with folded arms to groan,
Sit and resolve to make Ephesian moan:
That we more then irrorate cheeks, so weep,
That couch and bed each floating seems a ship.
These are but ocious acts would fain be blessed
With ease at wish; have without labor rest.
If our arms be not busy after all,
Our tears will make our eyes but mopsical.
Our sacred tenure's soccage, which we owe
To sudatorious manage of the Plough.
We must saburrate ship, least in the brine
It swims it reel, stumble and turn carrine:
With hands as well as eyes be diligent,
If we Pests racemation would prevent.
The great Theoremist's digests, psephisms,
Decretals, scits, cancel our motacisms.
No student e're his sacred volume took
For practice, can be blotted out his book.
What ever of Palladium was said
Chimerically, here is the Word and Deed
Decachord makes Plagues spirits by the sound
In their Chimmerian hypoge abscond.
Each bankrupt reliquator here may be
Discharged by grant of novae tabulae
This gives us bill of health by sea and land:
Is our safe convoy and our caravan.
This Lesbian rule Levit. 26 Deuteronomy. 5 29. Deuteronomy. 7.12.15.
thus steads us: And his mouth
Who Will doubt, he being the Fidius of truth?
Nomark here tells us, who with things divine
Make in their hearts ablectick officine:
Do to their Attick Christian faith fit place
And class allow to every sister Grace:
Make them stand as such brious part'ners
As were to dance by music of the spears.
Handed with such associates 2 P^l 1, 5, 6, 7, and 10.
never will fall,
But be to Destiny despoticall.
Nona and the other two for ever be
Secluded from the Virtues company.
Those against these can harbor no designs
To sidelay or eyebite their Valentines.
They, though the puissant Regents of mishap,
Do never lay dead pledges in their lap:
These never act sad part in tragedy,
Nor sing in consort with Melpomene.
They face the ortive sun: but do not know
Funebrous blasts that from Sirocco blow.
These daimonds be to contagion:
Take all magnetic virtue from the stone.
Virtues become when sbirro pest affai^
Offenders, their mallevadors and bails.
Often they have courtiers who their kindness prove,
And then vacillate, as if drunk with love.
Their mercedaries for some present boon
They be; but only love them for a moon.
With them a while exceedingly rejoice,
But quickly are deponents of their choice.
Float as Cutilia's isle, and change their mind,
As often as Hyena's do their kind.
Staticall helps such want for cure and ease,
And need stegnoticks for their loose disease.
It Is not who starts nor he that runs apace:
But 1 Cor 9 24.
he runs well to goal, who wins the race.
It Is not French fury, but long faithful strife
Has promise of the Rev ^.10.
diadem of life.
Who virtues keep, do'nt euripize, but be
As constant to them as the Baltic Sea.
To have allodial lands we cannot devise
A better way then give them predial tithes.
The oil of these wise virgins lamps, on fire
Of Pest has force to make it soon expire.
Nothing can e're with Vices them engage
To make condict or join in voisinage.
They Are Amazons never but with cartel greet them,
Nor unless in steccado ever meet them.
The one as acolites are serviceable
To Angels at heavens high communion table.
In every languid and lugubrous breast,
Joyous invigorating power ingest.
The other wait Hells plots, trepans, snares, nets:
As Pagod's, Deumo's, Ashtaroths valets.
To intervert, enervate and infest,
They conders are and scuttles to the Pest.
They have an electricity to draw.
All acherontick Plagues to fire our straw.
That Plague may cease, Curtius life must be prized,
And populace of sin be sacrificed.
Who virtues for their help and favor choose,
To curb Pest's stasiastick boutefeu's,
Abdicate vice, and all that vice retains,
With their relicts, encliticks and remains.
That Virtues, birds of Paradise, may come,
Hawkers extrude, and vicious fowls deplume.
Who'd be their friend, his morals interpole;
His mind embellish, calander his soul.
They Will have none are vertiginous to woo them;
None blind or lame in their affection to them.
Nergal by heathen Sycophants was meant
Competitour with the Omnipotent.
They thought it fit, while they to him did pray,
To join the senseless aid of Ashima.
Nibhaz ca'nt move nor Tartak; yet each stands
To help their 2 King 17.31, 32, and 41.
servants, with their wooden hands.
So many their devotions sever now,
That quotient serves vice and virtue too:
Use vices as acetars, that with these.
Virtues may down and much the better please.
Thus as if in a quarrefour they stand;
Can on, or back, or turn to either hand.
Each with a vafrous slight can change their fist,
Be zelot now and then libidinist.
Mulato-like, seeming to have a right
To Hell and Heaven, have parents black and white.
But rivals they detest, unless they be
First wedded to their own society.
Bigots or bigamists they will have none.
But who takes them, all join and make but one.
Their Lovers they will have admire their worth,
As solely as the needle does the North.
To be a carnalist is to refuse
The true Olympus for mere spittle house:
T'obvaricate his dearest health, and vary
His arms from Temple into Mortuary.
His mirth's Abderian laughter; does but tend
To make him agelastick in the end.
Kenodoxist himself does vainly tire,
To follow false lights into pits and mire.
The lawlese's destructive Power and spite,
Breaks down an hedge that serpent may him Eccles 10.8.
bite.
The mammonist with all his ill-got gain,
Is Cerberus in adamantine chain.
Stasiarchs glory happily may flush
With mid-dayes beams, proves soon occiduous.
Gnatho's and they who lead Apicius life,
Devote to their delicious throats a knife.
Suist no care nor toil will let alone
To please himself, roules Sisyphus's stone.
Beauty's star-gazers have the unhappy luck
T'admire phantasms and be Planet-struck.
Vice is plagues whispring-place, that does afford
True correspondent sound to every word.
Who suffer under Libitines black rod,
First nourisht Vices colubriferous brood.
If plague tomb our elychnious bodies, these
Were first by vice brought to their obsequies.
This makes our Golgatha, and Death when he
Gives us the stroke, this holds the clepsydre.
Others may sing our dirge, this will devise
Our sad commendaces and close our eyes.
Noe Neades like Vices when they rave
And roar, to shake our Earth into the grave.
They every hour such serpents breed, as will
Defy and hiss in scorn at Ibis bill.
If we do apolactize, force and tread
Them under foot, we get above plagues head.
Best presentaneous help we have, 's to clear
All our araneous works and gossymeare.
Such rust delimate, our gold bright will show.
Filtre such dregs: from pest we run free too.
When all the World lay plagued mortally
With phagedaena of enorm^ty;
So virulent, that leach from heaven was sent,
And needs must die to save the patient.
Who 'tells us of his coming, cries, and prays,
That we prepare him clean, straight, even ways.
So now our taske's the same, to break and cart
Scelesticke scopelisin from the heart:
That nothing in our conversation be
Of rancid or mephiticke quality:
T'unbow crook^ wonts, wrie acts to regulate:
Make brochity of will and manners straight.
Euthemy both procures euthanasie,
And's fanative to Erysipely.
Ephemerist who his aberrancyes
Calculates faithfully with mouth and eyes,
With controbanded goods he does detest,
With his delicts he desecrates the pest.
Our mourning's dark red porphyry should now
With wilkie features enterlace its brow.
Though black without, yet fairer be then fire
Underneath, as Contemplatives attire:
Hewed as the Parian marble, or what shows
The beauteous argent smiles of Juno's rose.
Our salves and us can alabaster fence
Best from corruption with its innocence.
We are to get our health as those of Greece
Did gather golden grains, with Iasons fleece.
Our souls great shepherd, then, now seems to sleep,
While murrain plays the wolf among the sheep,
Will wake, its storm rebuke, and safely carry
His bleating lamkins in his oviary.
He Will be our nuptialist, and then esteem
We as with spotless pudor come to him.
While Virtue from him kindly rules our Nights,
He Will make the Delian twins, Latonian lights.
Our spouses salade is the surest fence
Against gisarmes of the Pestilence.
Among those conquer this, Physicians call
Treacle despot and podestate to all.
Treacle, to use the right, we must not make
Of trivial, aconicke earthly snake:
But what the true Fanus is, and is found
In heaven, like Zodiac to clasp it round.
The Serpent Moses lifted up who viewed,
By touch of visial beams their healths renewed.
We understand the figure well, that John 3.14.
'twas
Mystery of our Shiloh on the Cross.
Dragon Pest use all its mecidial tricks,
We cross its spite by eyeing Crusifix.
The Romans when they had endured the pain
Long time of Pests ign^vomous disdain,
To Epidaurus sent Ambassadors
For Esculapius snake to work their cures.
This came: Plague ceas't. And hence they make relation,
How their devotion to it made their piation.
But sure we are it is only he whose tread
Had the sole power to bruise the Old Serpents head.
The deadly steam reeks from his poisonous den,
In cursed revenge on us, repels again.
In pity to our humane frailty, he
Clothed himself with, cures its infirmity.
He whom Leviathan cannot resist,
Turns him with hook to breath which way he list.
None enter heavens Elysium, but they
Who pass through him is life's sole gate and way
He Is that harmonious 2 King 3.15, 16, 17, etc.
vent, that if we trust,
Focillate will our fires and quench our thirst.
Iliads of evils from us he will expel,
Our griefs and languors mancipate to hell:
All flagrant gledes and firedrakes drive from hence,
To ring the Curfew to the Pestilence.
Who basis takes away, sure, can forbear
To keep the structure hanging in the air.
Who imprecated sin, did cause dismiss,
Effect can chase, and ban the (...).
He needs, if brazen snake could save alive,
Must cure who cures by representative.
Against phymata, oedemata, what e're
Distringent is by chagrin, pain or fear,
What e're 's tabi^icall or makes us sick,
Christ's thorns expunge and mortise to the quick.
A tempest of acutest malady,
His rood converts into a malacy.
Then Carduus benedictus if more bitter,
Its virtue proves ten thousand times the sweeter
Relike of this with gratia Dei meets
Our dead flesh and exulcerate ferits.
Impolueriz'd by sufferings, it makes
Poma ambrae and manus Christi cakes.
A some it is does not depress but carry
Its gerents to the starry laqueary:
Flotes them above deluge of Earth and brings
Through all the Orb of fire on wooden wings.
This badge while in their Purpura they bear,
Makes them Knights here with the Patri^^i
It Is septer over both Globes, 1 Cor. 1 18
guidon of might, there.
And tables of the Law laid thwart and right.
Matthew. 10 18.
It Is Fortunes wheel, the Arts turnst^le solely ha^s
The place to give them way and let them pass.
Cyclopaedia's axis, Learnings hand,
Its sense does and the letters too expand.
Piazza of the worlds four parts, where they
To make a league together meet and stay.
Their symbol and impress, rule, protipe, frame,
Includes them and indigits whence they came.
Physics Pharmacopoea comprehends
Art infinite to all poor leach commends.
Its timber can, where ever need requires.
Contabulate our wants and our desires.
Physic may have hand of our cure at need,
But still Religion ownes the heart and head.
She 'twas that when sins Cypress tree was grown
All over the earth, gave charge to cut it down.
'Twas she that whole our piteous eyesore made,
By the detenebration of its shade.
'Twas that compassionate celestial dame,
Closed Divine Nature here in Virgin ^rame.
Was caliduct of sacred fires, whence we
May supervive by uranoscopy.
And when first the Creator gave each birth,
Was suppellecticarious to Faith:
So that to view defecated did come
All the agroted Chaos had in womb,
She every species genus claimed for his
Ordained; then penned the Physic genesis.
She plant and herb sororiant designed
Prol^sick and lustrifick in its kind.
She made it vegetive, and did it tie
With the frank almoine of her Charity.
She, she it was, that e're it budded forth,
Did to our use pastilicate its worth.
On humane art why should we fondly rest,
That is but stolen or borrowed at the best?
When we may have what is real beauty, seem
Content with the prestiges of a dream?
We ca'nt, when Nature does our Life disband,
Commit it to more safe and tender hand.
Rapine and Insolence, such as engage
To propagate ochlocrasie of Rage;
All macellarious accomplices and fiends,
Plot to abet and act pale Horrors ends,
Before her sink, while they themselves confound,
As giddy Eddy in its circles drowned.
And more indulgent touch then hers can never
Come from the close embrace of gentle air,
When smiling she a sunny mantle throws
About the blooming infant of the Rose.
More grateful and obliging courtesy
Never ray'd from Goddess of the Morn, when she
For her beloved weary Endymions head,
In blushing satin makes his spicy bed.
Never from serene Lucina came, who ties
Her vigils vestment round with starry eyes,
When the tired Hours of the day do creep,
Into her open douney breast to sleep.
O do'nt despise a Beauty, whose despite
Does all our wishes, hopes, designs benight.
Whose Injury and Indignation are
The rigid pregnant parents to despair.
Whose frown indusiated with threats, may stand
For gift from Circes or Roxana's hand.
And whose all-bounteous ^avour, when it is gone,
Leaves us despons't to Gods of wood and stone.
O do not slight a Beauty so supreme,
Brightens Heaven with her Juno's diadem.
Who, where she lists, the Civick crown confers,
Frustrates and makes irrite dire climacters,
And in whose smiles patulicates all this
And life hereafter can embrace of bliss
Slight not, O slight not her, with charms who sings
Plague dead, and covers you with Cupids wings.
Paul plants, Apollo waters: when all is done,
She Is wanted irradiation of the Sun.
When Doctors have exantlated t^eir skill,
Her Raphaels sacred Physic cure^ our ill.
That Plague surprise us not with fear or dread,
Sanctuary stands upon Religions head.
We see, through Art, where e're we cast our eye,
All Nature circuncluded with the Sky.
FINIS.
Books Printed for Nathaniel Brook, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Angel
in Cornhill.
Price s. d. 1. Morgans Heraldry in Folio, containing above 200 Cuts graven on
Copper, relating unto Heralds. 24 00 2. Morgans new Book called, Armilogia
sive are Chromocritica, The Language of Arms by the Colors and Metals, wherein
consists the Honourableness of Coats of Arms, how distinguishable; a work of
that nature never yet extant, in large quarto. -- 06 00 3. The beatitudes of
Christ, forty two Sermons on the 5. of Matthew; by Mr. Ier. Buroughs, in
quarto. -- 06 00 4. Mr. Buroughs Gospel Revelation, containing these three
Treatises; viz. 1. Nature of God. 2. Excellency of Christ. 3. Excellency of
man's immortal soul, in quarto. -- 03 06 5. The works of Mr. John Gregory of
Oxford, in two parts; the first containing no^es and observations upon several
Scriptures; the second, his Pos^huma, or diverse learned Tracts of various
subjects, in quarto. -- 06 00 6. Banisters Surgery, a practical Book for all
Surgeons, in quarto. -- 06 00 7. Edlin on the Conjunction of Saturn and
Jupiter, 1663. declaring the ground of the late Contagion, in quarto. -- 01 06
Large Octavoes. 8. The new Torch to the Latin Tongue, much enlarged, for the
use of all Gentlemen and Scholars whatever, in order to their ready writing
and speaking Latin right and elegantly -- 06 06 9. Complete Midwifes Practice
enlarged, being a complete Guide for Child bearing Women in their Conception,
Bearing and Nursing of Children, from the experience of Sir Theodore Mayern,
Dr. Chamberlain, and Mr. Culpepper, etc. with Cuts. -- 04 0^ 10. The Doctors
Dispensatory, being exact Rules to make up all Medicines used by Apothecaries,
with directions for application to each disease of the body of man: approved by
M. Nicholas Culpepper, as by his Preface annexed may be seen, in large octavo
-- 04 00 11. The Exact Surveyor, or directions for measuring all manner of
Lands, by Robert Air, in octavo -- 02 06 12. Mr. Robert Lovedayes exquisite
Letters Domestic and Foreign, to several persons of quality, in octavo. -- 02
06 13. The method of Chemical Physic and Philosophy, being an introduction to
the one, and true discovery of the other, namely, of Diseases, their Causes and
Cures. Published by M. Hump. Blunden, Chemist, octavo. -- 03 06 14. Mr. Jonas
Moor's vulgar Arithmetic, performed for the ease of memory by Napiers Rods,
Logarithms, etc. And to which is annexed his algibraical Arithmetic, his new
Contemplation Geometrical upon the Ellipsis, plainly setting out the nature of
that figure; as also Conical Sections, or the several Sections of a Cone, drawn
from the Papers. The whole Art of Mr. William Oughtred, all three at -- 04 06
15. Mr. Robert May's accomplished Cook, showing the expert and ready ways for
dressing all manner of Fish, Flesh, or Fowl, etc. and the manner to make all
kinds of Sauces, explained with above 200 Cuts for benefit and adorning of all
sorts of made dishes, in octavo. -- 05 00


