Observations upon some part of Sr FRANCIS BACONS NATVRALL HISTORY as it
concerns, Fruit Trees, Fruits, and Flowers: especially the Fifth, Sixth, and
Seventh CENTURIES, Improving the Experiments mentioned, to the best Advantage.

By RA: AUSTEN Practiser in the Art of Planting.

Gen: 2.8. And the Lord God planted a Garden Eastward in Eden, and there he put
the man whom he had formed.

And out of the ground made the Lord God to grow every tree that is pleasant to
the sight, and good for food.

Gen: 1.29. And God said: behold I have given you every herb bearing seed,
which is upon the face of all the Earth: and every Tree, in which is the fruit
of a tree bearing seed, to you it shall be for meat.

OXFORD, Printed by Hen: Hall, for Thomas Robinson. 1658.

To the honorable Robert Boil Esquire. son to the Lord Boil Earl of Co^ke^
Honored SIR,
THE Prophet David tells us, the works of the Lord are wonderful, sought out
of all them that have pleasure therein: and he has laid some of the secrets of
Nature so deep, that no humane understanding can fathom, or find them out: Yet
nevertheless he gives wisdom unto man (who is studious thereabout) to
discover multitudes of rare, and excellent things, for the use and comfort of
mankind, that God in all things may be glorified.

Every man has a Talent, (or more) given him, to improve, for the honor of
him that gave it, and the advantage of himself, and others: and not to hide
it, or lay it up in a Napkin, as very many slothful persons do, to their
shame, and destruction: Especially of those who have the greatest portions, and
Revenues in this world: and therefore think there is no need (nor reason) they
should labor, either with body or mind: Directions for walking with God; page
49.
But Mr Boulton (now in heaven) has left a Lesson behind him for such to
learn, He is (says he) a cursed drone, a child of idleness, and sloth, the
very tennis Ball of Temptation, most unworthy of the blessings, and benefits of
humane society, who does not one way or other, cooperate, and contribute to the
common good, with his best endeavors, in some honest particular calling, or
course of life. It brings true honor to be Isntrumental for the honor of
God, and good of others: we may take his word for it, who has said, Them that
honor me I will honor, but those that despise me, shall be lightly esteemed.
All men desire a good name, which is no way attainable, but by obedience
according to the Scriptures: the truest worth, and Nobility, is to be borne
from above, to have Relations in Heaven, all earthly honor is but a shadow to
it.

Now I wish (for their good) such persons would look upon you, (worthy Sr) and
set you as an Example, and Pattern before them, of Learning, and
studiousnesse, in all profitable knowledge, your diligent search, and indagation
into the noble Art of Chemistry, (as it relates to Vegetables, and Animals)
having already produced many excellent effects, and been profitable unto many;
your study also of other parts of Philosophy I doubt not but ^ill (in due time)
b^ing forth special fruits; And tha^ in par^icular about Fermentation, (and
other wa^es of pr^paration) of Liquors, more especially that of Cider, which
you are now in hand with. It is well known, how acceptable, and profitable it
is, and has been, for many generations past, for the health of our bodies,
abov^ many (if not any) other kinds of Liquors, known to us; Now in case it
may be advanc^d, and made much better, by Fermentation, (as there is no doubt
but it may) then it will be of more special and general use, then ever yet it
has been, if unto all this be added, vi^. to make it of those fruits which are
known by Experience to be the best for that purpose: The Learned, and
incomparable Author Sr Francis Bacon has left unto men such Rules, and helps
in all kinds of Learning, that they will be much wanting to themselves, if
Arts, and Sciences improve not, very much above what they have been in former
ages; And as the foresaid worthy Author was eminently seen in all Arts and
Sciences, so his delight was especially (as is recorded of him) in Vegetable
Philosophy, which was as it were, his darling delight, having left unto us much
upon Record in his Natural H^story; some part whereof referring to
F^uit-trees, Fruits, and Flowers, I have, (by encouragement from himself)
endeavored to improve unto public profit, according to what understanding,
and experience I have therein: (I think it would not be in vain, if others who
are seen, and experienced in other parts of the said History, would do the
like) And seeing I perceive (since you have been pleased to honor me with your
acquaintance) that your Genius is toward things of this nature, to promote
them, in order to the Common good, and that I have encouragements in my labors
thereabout, (both as to the Theory, and Practice) I humbly, present these
following Observations into your hands, and am (for all your favors)

(honored Sr) your obliged servant RA: AUSTEN.

To the Reader.
COncerning my undertaking this ensuing work, I give this Account: It may
(perhaps) by some be thought too bold an attemp in me, to examine the writings,
and to recede (in any thing) from the Judgment of so Eminent, and worthy an
Author; To which I Answer: For what I have here done, I doubt not, but if the
Author himself were now living, he would approve of it: But more
particularly, let it be considered that those things which I have to do with
herein, are directly within the compass of my Calling, and course of life:
about which I am daily conversant: And the Author has given to my self, and
others, sufficient encouragement in this: Having said (in his Advancement of
Learning) That the writings of speculative men upon active matter, seems to
men of Experience, to be but as dreams, and dotage: And that it were to be
wished, (as that which would make Learning indeed solid, and frui^full) that
active men would, or could become writers: Men that have Experience in things,
are like to see in the Mysteries, and secrets of them, more, and further then
such as have only Notions, and apprehensions of them without action, and
practice, It is concluded, and laid for a ground: That, peritis credendum in
sua Art: Men are to give credit to Artists in their own faculty, And f^rther
observe: That many of the ensuing particulars, are but only Queries, set down
by the Author, wherein not having Experience, he desired further light from it:
which I have ende^voured herein to resolve; And wherein I have perceived a
manifest mistake^ I have (for the Truths sake, and profit of men) discovered
it. I hope, without any reflection upon the worthy, and Learn^d Author, who I
verily believe, would have encouraged any Experienced man, in the like
undertaking: not seeking himself, (as he In his Epistle to his Natural
^istory.
professes) but the Truth, in these things, for the good of future Generatio^s.

Let it be observed also, That the Experiments set down by the Author in his
Natural History, are of two sorts, as himself says: Experimenta Fructifera,
and Experimenta Lucifera: Experiments of Light, and Discovery, (such as serve
for the illumination of the unde^standing, for the finding out, and discovering
of Natural things in their Cau^es, and ^ff^cts, that so A^ioms may be framed
more soundly, and solidly) And also Experiments of use, and Profit, in the
lives of men.

Now the Observations upon these Experiments tend also to the some ends. I have
endeavored to improve them for most advantage, and therefore have so much
enlarged, especially upon many of them, and where I have been more brief, and
the thing required further Di^covery, I have referred to it, in my Treatise of
Fruit Trees, where it is spoken to more fully.

And that there may be a brief view of what is contained in the ens^ing
Experiments, and Observations^ I have set down the chief particulars, in the
Table following, which I recommend to thy use, for thy profit,

RA: AUSTEN.

Good Reader.
THE Author of this piece has always thought fit (I disclaim any worth in me
that may deserve it) to give me leave some time before every impression to make
a judgment of what in this nature he has published.

But now bearing Reverence to the Greatness and Honor of the Person (without
controversy for that constellation of Learning and Nobility in him none of the
least credits of our Nation) with whom he is now seen, was desirous, that I
should not only tell him (which at other times served the t^rne) but thee, and
the World, my thoughts concerning this his adventure. Which are, that no man
ought to judge him presumptuous in this particular, I take him to be such who
has more mind to communicate to the World (for public profit) what he has
found by trial certain, than to make a book^ and indeed am Witn^sse my self
to the truth of most of his Experiments, the subjects of which no man dares
call too low for the p^n, that Remembers the Author whose writing first gave
occasion to th^se Animadversions.

The Nature of things, C^use^ of their generation, and of all appearing effect,
in them, is confessed to be a dark theme, and for ought I know, many questions
thereabouts are not likely to be concluded, especially to the conviction of
gainesayers, till Anaxagoras, Epicurus, Aristotle rise again: A little time by
Gods providence I have been continued in the World, some small pittance of
which has been laid out in that search: I dare not say that I have been
ascertained of the adequate, and true causes, with their manner in Causation of
any of those Vulg^r appearances which are in all men's Eyes, after the best
state that I can make in this subject, Fortasse non, if opposed, may put me to
a blanck^ nor am I confident of any man's Wisdom that concludes affirmatively
more than this. That such an effect may proceed in such a manner from such a
Cause: Sometimes in many opinions we have no probable causes assigned, but when
many probable, than it is hard^st of all to prove which is true^ This I sp^ak to
tak^ off the ^xceptions of such who are otherwise persuaded than our Author
d^clares himself, when the qu^stion is concerning c^uses, as in the 481.
Exp^riment: My Lord Bacon seems to maintain Anaxag^ras his opinion,
concerning the way of generation, and augmentation per (...), Mr Austen
A^istotles, I Will not be bound that in a severe judgment the M^ster of our
Schools shall have the sentence on his side: Yet we find few better Instances
(th^n Mr Austen brings) to explain how out of one Nature (if ind^ed there ^e
but one) in the j^yce drawn through the Roots to serve several grafts upon
the same stock several natures may be made. Others may likely be ^ffended at
his refusal to attribute many effects to the descention of Sap, which who ever
d^es, I give him leave to blame me too; For I have long beli^ved the opinion of
descention of Sap in Trees, a vulg^r Error, and h^ve always encourag^d him to
publish his argum^nts to the contrary. There may be others ready to stumble at
other things, but if it be in Matters wherein we are so much in the da^k^, by
my consent for all mistakes we will enterchangeably beg, and give pardon: his
arguments to me are all ^sp^cially commendable in this, that they smell more of
the garden than Library see page 100, 101, etc. of his Treatise of Fruit Trees.

If therefore my judgment must be made, I cannot but commend him heartily, and
his ex^mple to all, exercised in any like ways, and doubt not but that it
would be mightily to the advantage of knowledge in Natural P^ilosophy, if even
all to the Low^st of Mechaniques would communicate the m^steries of their Arts.
Interest ind^ed hinders most, and ^o it is like ^o do; from maki^g any thing
Valuable common. But it is Heroical and N^ble Charity when there is nothing but
selfe^Interest hindering, to d^ny that for the public good: I believe the
Author exp^cts to himself no a^tributes of so high Qualities. I wish he may
always have his du^ a^ l^ast from

(Good Reader) His and Thine to serve thee R. SHARROCK L. B. novi Coll: Soc:

Observations upon some part of Sr FRAN: BACONS Natural HISTORY the V. CENTURY.
WE will now enquire of Plants, or Vegetables, And we shall do it with
diligence. They are the principal part of the third days work: They are the
first Producat, which is the word of Animation; for the other words are but the
words of Essence: And they are of excellent, and general use, for Food,
Medicine, and a number of Mechanical Arts.

Experiments in Consort touching the Acceleration of Germination.
THere were sown in a Bed, Experiment. 401.
Turnip-seede, Wheat, Cowcumber-seede, and Pease: The Bed we call a Hot-bed:
Horse-dung (such as will Heat when laid together) laid a foot high, supported
on the sides, and mould laid thereon two or three fingers deep. The
Turnip-seede and Wheat, came up half an inch above ground, within two days
after; the rest the third day: This is a noble Experiment, for without this
they would have been four times as long in coming up. It may be tried also
with Cherries, Strawberries, and other Fruits, which are dearest when they come
early.

Obse^vation.
Though a Hot-bed conduce much to the speedy springing up of Seeds, Stones,
Roots etc. yet the end cannot be attained hereby: (they will not come to
ripen^sse earlier th^n others for profit) unless there be a continuance, and
concurrence of Causes, from first to last, all alon^, without intermission: For
the hasty, and sudden springing up of seed upon a Hot-b^d, is but a forcing of
Nature, for a little while, and serves to excite for the present, while the
heat continues in it; but what shall carry on the springing, and growth of
these things to pe^fection, when the heat of the Hot-bed is over: surely as
the Cause of springing and growth becomes weaker, and weaker, until it cease
altogether, so also will the ^ff^ct of that heat, that is, the growth of the
Plants.

Expe^iment. 402.
Steeping of Wheat in fat waters, and other Liquors, is a rich Exp^riment f^r
profit, if the goodn^sse of the Crop answer the earliness of the coming up
etc.

Observation.
S^eeping of Seed^, Kernell^, Stones etc. is chiefly to excite the spirit of
the kernel, or Seed, and to make them the sooner, and more easily to open,
and spring up out of the E^rth; which some kinds have much need of: As
Aprecots, Almonds, and other thick, hard stones.

As for Wheat, and such like seeds, sleeping will excite the spirits, and open
the grosser parts, and hasten their springing up; But I conceive the vigor,
and virtue (gotten by such steeping) will be soon gone, it will not be
lasting, as the natural properties of the seed; Whatsoever is natural, in
seeds, Plants etc. does continue, and cannot fall off, or be lost; but that
which is but accidental, and from Art, is but of short continuance, and soon
over; (like the virtue of a Cup of wine, or a meals meat, to our bodies) so
that the end will not be attained, unless the same help be ^enewed, and often
repented, by wat^ing of such steeped seeds^ with the same Liquors, from time to
time ^ntill they come to pe^fection.

Strawberries watered now, Experiment. 403.
and then (as once in three days) with water wherein has been steeped
Sheeps-dung, or Pigeons-dung, will prevent, and come early.

This is a good Experiment, Observation.
and profitable to make the B^rries earlier, and fairer, so it be seasonably,
and moderately done^ I conceive the morning is best, before the sun be hot;
but water them not too often, nor too much, lest it make the ground too rank,
and fat, which is not good for strawberries; it makes them commonly run into
great leaves and strings, and to bear Fruits less.

Dung, or Chalk, or Blood, applied in substance, Experiment. 404.
(seasonably) to the Roots of Trees, does s^t them forwards etc.

Too great a quantity of these things, Observation.
will hurt, especially young Trees; as the best meats, and drinks
immoderately, and unseasonably taken, hurt men: Blood, or Flesh, or the like,
applied to the Roots of old Vines, or other Fruit Trees being decaying, or old,
will refresh them greatly: Let this be done before winter, or in winter time,
that the virtue thereof may soke into the Roots, and the earth about them,
before the spring: And also that it may not be noisome, or offensive, in
spring, or summer after: Dig up the earth, and bare the Roots, as much as may
be, and power in the Blood, or lay the Dung, Flesh, or any fat substance to the
Roots, afterward cover it with the mould, all over: Otherwise take a Bar of
Iron, and make many holes, among, and about the Roots of old Trees (especially
where the ground i^ bad) and power in Blood of Beasts, fat water, or such like;
this will much refresh the Trees.

Fruit Trees upon a South, Experiment. 405.
or south-east Wall, will bring forth their Fruits early.

It is true^ that the South-wall is best, Observation.
and the South-east next^ to plant choice trees upon, to come early; the reason
why the West-wall is not so good as the East, for early budding, and ripening
of fruits, I conceive is mainely, because there is usually more rain, and
moisture, and greater and more winds out of the West, in spring and summer,
then out of the East, which do much coo^e the trees and fr^its, and so retard.
Also May-Cherry-trees, or other kinds which n^^urally bud, and bring fruits
early, being plan^ed (as is here said) against the back of a Chimney where fire
is much kept, the same will bud, and bear very early in the year, especially
if the wall be of Brick, and but a thin wall.

Experiment. 406.
Digging, and loosening the earth about the Roots of trees accelerate
germination.

Observation.
This culture is undoubtedly a benefit to Trees, as to their increase, and
growth: they will thrive the faster her^by; but I conceive not as to their
early budding; for all trees bud forth before they draw one jot of S^p out of
the earth: there is sap, existing in the buds and branches all the winter,
which is excit^d by the suns drawing near in the spring time, and breaks
forth into blossom, and leaf.

Experiment. 407.
A Dama^ke Rose tree in water budded in the space of ten days in a Chamber.

Observation.
I conceive this acceleration was not for that it was set in water, but because
the air was somewhat warmer in the house, then out of doors at that season, it
being in October; it would have done a^ much if it had been set in earth: And
as for the difference betwixt this, and that with the horse-dung mixed; it may
be that Rose tree in water only had the better, and more Roots, which would
certainly cause budding sooner.

Experiment. 408.
A dutch Flower that had a bulbous Root, was put under water; and within
seven days sprouted etc.

Observation.
I have tried several Flowers with bulbous Roots, and other kinds of Roots, in
water, in the house, in Autumn, which kept fresh, and seemed to come on
somewhat for a while, but afterward Flag'd, and faded; I know no advantage
that may be had hereby at that season, for the air (in a while) grows chill,
and cool, even within doors.

Experiment. 409.
Radish etc. in a Month.

Pease, Radish etc. are hastened in the spring, Observat^on.
and summer, and their returns quick, chiefly because ^hey are sowed, and set
in a warm place, upon g^ound sloping upon the South-east sun; with some
special shelters from the North, and cold winds.

For Nourishment, Experiment. 411.
water is almost all in all, therefore it is a comfortable Experiment for good
drink^rs.

Simply water affords but a feeble, Observation.
and weak nourishment, crude, and cold: and therefore we see that in low,
watr^sh grounds, fruit trees come on poorly, being full of Moss, by reason of
the cold nourishment: and that in dryer, deep, fat soyles, Fruit Trees are
three or four times bigger, and longer lived th^n those in watrish grounds:
Neither is this a comfortable Experiment for good drinkers; for Experience
shows us, such as live most upon good liquors (eating but little) are more
unsound, unheal^hy people, and shorter lived, then those who drink less, and
feed upon solid meats.

Housing of Plants will accelera^^ germination. Experiment. 412.


Certainly it will; Observation.
if the Plants be ordered with d^scretion, to be seasonably set out in the
sun, and rain, in the warmest seasons, and time of the day, (removing the
Box of earth in, and out, as occasion is) or otherwise Housing may spoil them,
and cause the branches, and Twiggs to contract, and become dry; for as the Air
within doors is warmer then that without, so al^o it is dryer, and does exhaust
and dry the Plants more, therefore they have need sometimes of the moist Air
without.

Experiments touching the putting back, or Retardation of germination.
TO make Roses come late. First, cut them after bearing. Experiment. 413.


This may be a means as to some Rose-trees, Observation.
that is, such as are old: I have known some of long standing, perhaps a
dozen, sixteen, or twenty years of age, and some of seven, or eight yea^es,
(cut newly after bearing) have borne Roses again, a sec^nd time, late in the
year, being cut the next full moon, after they have done bearing; but there
is a kind I have (amongst many other k^nds) which naturally bears a second
time, although the tree be but small and young; besides the Rose called the
Monthly Rose.

Experiment. 414.
Secondly, Pulling off the buds of the Roses that first spring forth.

Ob^ervation.
I have tried this second way, which succeeded not, it may be, because the trees
were young; but one affirmed he plucked off some Buds in the spring, and ^he
tree bore Roses in November.

Experiment. 415.
Thirdly, Cutting top Boughs in the spring.

Observation.
This has been tried also, but was ineffectuall, but the trial was upon young
trees; as for the Report that follows in this Experim^nt of Cyons perishing,
if the old top boughs be cut off^ it is otherw^se, for it is a common
Experiment to cut off all the boughs of a tree, and to graft them, and the
Grafts will not only not perish, but grow the better therefore; as having all
the s^p to themselves, which naturally rises (the sun also drawing it up)
without the help of any top bough left, as continual Experience sh^wes.

Experiment. 416.
Fourthly, Laying the Roots bare about the end of December.

Observation.
Many hundred^ of trees are thus bared, yet I find no difference at all in the
late budding, or bearing of such trees, from others.

Experim^nt. 417.
Fifthly, Removing the tree some Months before it buddeth.

Observation.
This has been done, but the Trees being removed so unseasonably (too late)
they grew poorly, so the end was not attained.

Experiment. 4^8.
Sixthly, Grafting Roses in May.

Observation.
I know an ingenious Ge^tleman that tried this Experiment^ Inoculating Buds in
the spring, which budded for Roses at the same time that others (of the same
kind) did; which buds being cut off they bore Roses afterward, the same year,
when others were gone.

Seaventhly, Experiment. 419.
Girding the body of the tree with some Packthread.

This will not do it neither, Observation.
we see commonly that grafts tied straight with strong flaggs, and some
branches of wall-trees nailed straight to the wall, so that I have seen the
bark dinted in with the straitness of the Lether, yet for all that sap rises
plentifully, through the place so girded, up into the branch.

Eighthly, Experiment. 420.
Planting them in the shade.

I have known Rose-trees in a shady place, Observation.
which have not bore at all, its a tree that loves the sun. So that I suppose
this Experiment will not hold: I have tried it in one or too, and it succeeds
not.

Experiments touching the Melioration of Fruits, Trees, and Plants.
AN heap of Flint, or stone laid about the bottom of a Tree upon the first
Planting, mak^s it prosper much. Experiment. 421.


Stones laid to the Roots of Fruit Trees, Observation.
when newly set, is a good Experiment in some grounds, but not in all: its
true, stones so laid, keep the Root of ^he Tree somewhat more moist, and
warm, and stedy, that winds shake it not, and so are profitable, but there is
danger (in some grounds) le^t they harbor^ Ants, or Pismires, about the Tree
Root, under the stones, which I have seen, to the hurt, and destruction of
diverse young trees. But it is a s^fer, and better way to lay a good quantity of
rotten dung, or litter, straw etc. round about the Roots of new set Trees, upon
the top of the mould, this keeps them warm in winter, and cool and moist in
summer, and Stedy, and the moisture, and fatness of the muck sokes down to
the Roots, and refreshes the tree very much: or for want thereof, lay a heap of
weeds round about the new set t^ee Root^, and so all the next summer after;
these things are special advantages to new set t^ees.

Experiment. 423.
A Tr^e at first setting should not be shaken, but after a years ro^ti^g th^n
s^aking is good.

Observation.
When y^ung Trees are first planted, its very convenient to set a st^ke to each
of them, and tie them together with a hay band, or some ^o^t band, that winds
shake them not: and this not for a year only, but diverse years, until the
young trees be we^l rooted in the earth, and also be grown strong, that the
winds ^ow not their bodie^, and cause them to grow crooked, which fault I have
seen in very many trees.

Experiment. 4^4.
Cutting away suckers, and side boughs, make trees grow high.

Obs^^vation.
All su^k^rs must be cut away from the Roots of Trees; And as for side branches,
those may be cut as men are minded to have their Trees to spread nearer, or
high^r from the ground: but cu^ not the side branches too soon, before the
body be grown strong enough to bear the head, else it will be top heavy, and
g^ow crooked.

Experiment. 4^^.
To have many new Roots of Fruit Trees, lay the Branches in the g^ound etc.

Observation.
The branch^s of all kinds of trees will not take Root thus, Thi^ way of
P^opagation is only for some kinds, As Mulberries, Fig^, Vine^, Q^o^li^gs,
Nurs-gardens, and some other kinds of T^ee^, whose branc^^s are sof^, and
porous. As for Aprecots, P^aches, and such like, they will not take Root thus:
I have tried, but not one Root could be got, neither will they take w^^h
graft^ng, I have tried many. The way to propagate these kind^, is by
Inocula^ing bu^s upon young stocks, full of ^ap.

Experiment. 4^7.
From May to July you may take off the bark of any bough etc. and set it, and
it will grow to be a fair tree in one year, the cause may be for that the
baring from the bark keeps the sap from descending toward winter.

It is true, Observation.
that the Boughs of some kinds of trees will take Root in this manner as is
here expressed; that is, such kinds as will take root with laying down in the
ground, mentioned in the last Experiment; which being cut off and set, may grow
to be a f^ire tree in certain years, not in one year (as is said) for the
Roots (got in this manner) are but small, and very disproportionable to the
bough, so that it can come on but very poorly, and slowly, for diverse years:
As for the baring from the bark, which is supposed to keep sap from
descending toward Winter; I say, the sap is as far from descending when the
bark is on, as when it is off; there is no such thing in nature as descention of
sap in any trees whatsoever.

This worthy Author took this upon trust, according to the general opinion of
men, for had he but stayed a little to consider it, he would have found it
groundless, and a mere conceit; For all the sap that asscends into the body
and bran^hes of a tree, is changed into wood, bark, buds, blossoms, leaves,
and fruits, it is turned into that body and substance which we see above
ground, and none at all descends at any time; for there is no Cause, and
therefore no such effect: sap is continually asscending all the year long,
more, or less, either for the growth of the tree, or for the conservation of
it in life, and in all its dimension^: for there is a continual extraction of
sap out of the body, boughs, and branches, by the sun, and air, as this
Au^hour elsewhere asserts, and which Experience proves. Now if there were at
any time, a descention also, what then would become of the tree, it would
q^ickly wither, be cont^acted, and shrink apparently: whosoever is unsatisfied
with what is here said against descention of sap in trees, may see (hereof)
more largely many Arguments against it in my Treatise of Fruit-trees^ page
100.101.102. etc.

If Trees bear not, bore a hole through the heart of the tree, Experiment. 428.
and it will bear.

Perhaps this course may do some good in letting out superfluous sap,
Observation.
if too much repletion be the cause: But there are diverse other Causes of
barrenness of Fruit Trees: As too deep setting, the Roots running down into
gravel, Clay, water etc. which must have answerable remedies. And sometimes it
is in the nature of the trees: that all the culture in the world used to the
Roots, and body will not help, without engrafting the branches with Grafts of
some good bearing kinds, which is the best way I know to have store of good
fruits, (and speedily too) from barren trees.

Experiment. 429.
To make Trees bear, cleave the chief Roots, and put in a small pebble.

Observation.
This may be profitable not only for that the Root may be bark-bound, as well
as the body, and branches (which must be scored down, and cut to the wood) but
also it will cause the Roots to shoot forth many young small Roots at the
place opened, which will afford more vigor, life, and sap to the branches, and
so make the tree stronger, and more in heart, and able to bring forth more, and
fairer fruits.

Experiment. 430.
Trees against a south-wall have more of the heat of the sun, then when they
grow round.

Observation.
Aprecots, Peaches, and such like cold fruits will scarce ripen but against a
south-wall: they have need both of the direct, and reflex beams of the sun:
And if it were more practiced to set some other choice kinds of fruits upon a
south-wall (as the great Burgaim^t, summer Boncriteu, Greene-field Pear, and
other special kinds) this would advantage them greatly, not only in bigness,
but also in their early ripening, and goodness of taste; thus, one, or a few,
would be worth many ordinary ones.

Experiment. 431.
Some pull off the leaves from wall-trees, that the sun may come the better
upon the boughs and fruit.

Observation.
This may hasten ripening, but I conceive it hinders the bigness of the fruits,
the sun ripening them before they have attained their natural greatness: in
case it prove then very hot weather: so that if leaves be pulled off, it should
not be till fruits are at biggest.

The lowness of the bough, Experiment. ^32.
makes the fruit greater; and to ripen b^tter, etc. Graft a tree low, and
maintain only the lower bough^.

Low trees, Observation.
and the lower boughs of high trees, have their fruit ripe somewhat sooner then
the higher, because they have some benefit by the reflection of the sun from
the Earth, as well as from the wall; (if they grow against a wall,) but that
the fruits are greater on lower, then on higher boughs, I perceive not; I am
sure I have seen sometimes fair fruit on the higher boughs, and but small on
the lower, in case the branches of a wall-tree have been permitted to grow
straight upwards, without bowing down along the wall, as most commonly they
be, and the reason is plain because the most, and greatest quantity of sap
presses upwards, and leaves the side branches indigent of sap, whereby they
grow poorly, and some even dye for want of sap: now according to the quantity
of sap in branches, so are the fruits, smaller, or greater. It is true indeed,
many little, and low trees, if they be vigorous, and shoot well, bear very
large fruits, it may be larger then high trees of the same kinds: but this is
not because low, but because they are more lively, and vigorous then the other.
And if we should graft a Tree low, and maintain only the low^r branches, by
continually cutting off the higher, this would much enfeeble the tree, by
deg^ees by obstructing of the s^p, and ^he fruit would be accordingly. But the
b^st way to order a wall-tree that shoots upwards strongly, is to bow those
strong branches along the wall both ways, and then there will be as large
fruits on the lower, as on the higher boughs, and sooner ripe.

To have fruit in greater plenty the way is, Experiment. 433.
to graft not only upon young st^cks, but upon diverse boughs of an old tree
etc.

It is an excellent Experiment to graft the boughs of an old tree, Observation.
(that is a bad bearer, or bears bad fruits) with grafts of some special good
bearing kinds, for this will have large branches and bear fruits, even in a
year or two: so that it is a very unwise course of many who (when some of
their trees bear not as they would have them) cut them down, and set young
ones in their Room, which cannot possibly attain the bigness of the former,
in many years.

Experim^nt. 434.
Digging yearly about the Roots of Trees is a great means both to the
acc^leration, and melioration of fruits etc.

Observation.
Old trees that grow in stiff, cold clay grounds have most need to be dug
about yearly, that thereby the gound may be more open, and mellow; but for
young trees of few years standing, (especially if in sandy^ mell^w grounds)
these have little, or no need at all of digging about: To dig about Roses, and
such like, which g^ow nee^e the top of the ground^ I conceive it is needless,
for this w^rk is chi^fly to open the earth about old fruit trees (whose Roo^s
are grown great, and deep,) that the Rain^, Snow, and Sun in win^er, may
reach the bottom Roots.

Exp^^im^nt. 435.
A Fruit-tree almost blown up by the Roots, and set up again, the n^xt year
bore exceedingly: loosing the earth, comfort any Tree.

Obse^vation.
I was (not long since) at the raising up of a couple of fair App^e-trees
blown down, the one Rooted, and bore well afterward: the other died. Though
digging about the Roots sometimes be good, yet overmuch digging, and loosening
the earth about the Roots of trees, will cause many to be blown down by great
winds, which will not fasten again to abide a strong wind, in many years, if
ever.

Expe^iment. 436.
To revive an old tree, the digging of it about the Roots, and applying new
mould to the Roots, is the way, and change of mould to the better, is
pr^fitable.

Observation.
D^gg^ng (as has been said) with caution, is good, and change of m^uld, if to
the better, is also very advantageous to f^ui^-^rees, in case the soil be
barren, but if it be very fat, as some is, (especially some pa^ticular places
by acc^dent) then mould that is more sterill, and hung^y, will do better; for
overmuch re^l^tion, and fertility may hinder fruitfulness; and cause the ^ap
to run most into long shoots, and broad leaves.

Experiment. 439.
The sh^fting of ground, is a means to better the Tree, and fruit: and all
things do prosper b^st, when they are advanced to the better. And a Nu^sery
ought to be in a more barren ground, then the places whither they are
transplanted.

It is true: Observation.
change of soyles sometimes is very good, if to the better: but its true also,
that if trees grow in over rank soil, then worse will be better; that is,
will help more toward fruitfulness: as a course, and mean fare is better for
a fat man, then the more delicious. Without controversy, young trees out of
barren Nurseries come on faster when transplanted, then out of fat soyles; but
in case the Nursery be fat soil, then some other as good, must be laid to
their Roots when set again.

Hacking of Trees does great good to Trees. Experiment. 440.


After eight or ten years growth, Observation.
cutting, or scoring, o^ hacking the bark of trees with a knife, is
profitable; but while they a^e young, the Bark is but thin, and tender, and
enlarges well enough without this cutting, unless some that through
barrenness of soil (or other cause) are bark^ bound.

Shade to some plants conduces to make them large, Experiment. 441.
and prosperous, more then Sun, As in strawberries, and Baies etc.

It is true, Observation.
Baies and Laurel prospers better in the Shade then in the Sun, being Hot
Plants, but Strawberries do better, partly in the shade, and partly in the
sun; then in shade only: as among Bushes, and other plants: I have observed
those in the shade, to bear little, or nothing: when others of the same kind,
and growth, somewhat in the sun, bore very much.

Pulling off many blossoms from a fruit-tree, does make the fruit fairer:
Experiment. 427.
and if some blossoms be not pulled off the first time a tree bloometh, it
will blossom it self to death.

Commonly the fewer blossoms upon a tree, Observation.
the fairer will the fruit be, because (as the Author says) of the plenty of
sap: And indeed in case a tree newly planted, blossom very much, and the Root
be but weak (which may be perceived by the weakness of the buds) then its
best to pull off most, if not all the blossoms: but many I have known (the
first years planting,) take Root so strongly, (being in good mo^ld,) as that
they blossom, and shoot forth, and bear fair fruits the same year.

Experiment. 450.
It were good to try what would be the ^ff^ct, if all the blossoms were pulled
from a Fruit-tree, for two years together.

Observation.
Fruit Trees that bear but every other year they (for the most p^rt) bear
that year very plentifully; and the exc^ssive expense of sap that year (its
like) makes the tree more feeble the next: but if blossoms be pulled ^ff a
year or two together: I suppose the sap would go mo^e into the shoots, and
ma^e them larger then if it bore fruits; and the issue a^ to bearing more, or
better f^uits, would be nothing worth.

Experiment. 452.
There is no doubt but that Grafting (for the most part) does m^liorate fruit;
The cause is manifest, for that the nourishment is better prepared in the
stock, then in the crude earth.

Obse^vation.
Grafting does not at all meliorate the fruit, simply in it self: for a ^ice
will not be the better for Grafting, unless the grafts be taken from a good
tree. If the tree from which grafts are cut, be no better then the tree which
is grafted, then grafting will not a jot mend the fruit; which it would, if
grafting were any thing toward the bettering of the fruit. The cause why
Grafted trees bear better fruits, then wild ungraf^ed trees, is not because
they are grafted, but because the graf^s are good, the tree from which the
grafts are cut, is of a good kind, and nature, and every ^wig, graft, and bud,
has the nature of the whole tree in it, perfectly; the properties of the tree
are in all, and every part, as the soul in the body, which is tota in toto,
and tota in qualibet pa^te; and the grafts retain the nature, and properties
being grafted upon wild stocks, and bring forth fruits accordingly: and that is
the cause that grafting does meliorate the fruit, and not because the
nourishment is better prepared in the stock, then in the crude earth, for the
branches of an ungrafted tree do no more receive nourishment from the crude
earth, then the branches of a grafted tree: but the s^p, and nourishment,
passes up a body, or stock to the branches, in the one, as well as in the
other.

And as i^ i^ true that the Peach and Melocot^ne do bear good fr^its coming
up of stone^, (which is not always so neither, only here and there one) so it
is true also that they bear as good fruits of the bud, being Inoculated.

It has been received, Experiment. 453.
that a smaller Pear grafted upon a stock that bears a greater Pear, will
become great etc.

It is true (as the Author thinks) that this will not succeed; Observation.
because the Grafts do govern, they always bring forth fruit answerable to
their own natures and kinds, else it were to little purpose to get Grafts from
such, or such a good Tree, to have more of the kind. Yet it is true also that
the stock has some influence upon the Graft, so as to make the fruit better,
or worse, according to the nature of the stock, in some small degree: As if we
graft upon a stock that naturally bears a sower, harsh fruit, the fruit of the
graft will not be altogether so pleasant as if it were grafted upon a stock
that bears naturally a sweet, and pleasant fruit: and hence it is that Pears
grafted upon Quince-stocks, will be more delicate, then upon Peare-stocks; The
Quince-stock gives an excellent taste to it, but these trees upon Quinces will
never attain to any great bigness, for all Quince-trees are but small in
comparison of Peare-trees, and where the stock can be but small, the graft
cannot be great, yet (as I have seen it) somewhat bigger then the stock: As
for a Pear upon a Thorn (which this Author speaks of) it cannot be good, it
makes it a harsh, hard Pear, at the core, if it thrive and bear, but most
commonly they dye in two, or three years: we know its natural fruit, ( Hawes)
have stones in them: But for the Apple upon the Crab, that's natural, the Crab
being a wild apple, and very proper to graft all sorts of Apples upon, in
regard of the soundness of the stock, its long lasting, and aptness to take
with grafts, and also when set in the ground; although its true, it makes the
fruit somewhat more tart, then the same fruit upon sweet apple-stocks.

As concerning grafting Apples on Coleworts, the kernells of which if set, will
be a Colewort, if the thing be true, then it confirms what has been
asserted, that the seed of fruits when sown, bring forth a bastard fruit,
which pertakes as well of the stock, as of the graft: Although it be true, that
the seeds of some Apples, and Pears, may bring forth very good fruit, and the
stones of some Peaches, may bring forth the same fruits, or near as good: the
cause, of this (I suppose) is, for that the stocks whereon these fruits were
grafted or Inoculated, were good kinds of themselves; and if so, no marvel
though the seeds bring forth good fruits without Grafting, or Inoculating: and
I verily believe that P^aches, (of which it is taken for granted (by some) that
these come the same again of stones) if they were Inoculated on harsh, sower
stocks, and the stones of the fruit set, they would not bring forth ^he ^ame,
but it would manifestly taste of the stock, as well as of the bud Inoculated: as
we see generally other kinds of stones, and seeds do; yea, and upon the
Experience of some others, Peach-stones have brought forth a paltry, naughty
fruit, many of them, though some good: As concerning the grafting of an Apple
Cions upon a Sallow, Poplar, Alder, Elm, or Horse plum; it is in vain to try,
for trial has been made upon stoc^s nearer in kind then these, and it would
not come to perfection, it will grow a year, or two (it may be) and then
decay, and dye.

Experiment. 452.
Flowers R^moved wax greater, because the nourishment is more easily come by in
the loose earth: It may be that often regrafting of the same Cions may lik^wise
make fruit greater.

Observation.
To r^move Flowers (small young Roots) into good fresh earth, w^ll improve them
in growth, and bigness: especially if withal some of the side-slips, (and
also of the buds which the Root shoots up for ^lowers) be cut off^ and some
half a dozen, or half a score of the buds, or shoots be left to grow upon the
Root; the Root then will be able to give plentiful nourishment to them,
whereby they will become much larger, then if all the spindle buds were
su^lered to grow.

But as for often regrafting the same graft in order to make a larg fruit; this
will not do it, for we see it is constantly done from year to year; for what
else is the cutting of g^^f^s from young trees (it may be of two, or three, or
but of one years growth) and grafting them again upon their sto^ks: and
repeating this ^or many yea^es together; and yet we know the grafts hold their
own natural properties from one year to another. And though there be (as has
been said) some small alteration according to the kind of the stock while it
grows upon it, yet that alteration is lost, and falls off, when the graft is
e^grafted upon another stock, and the graft retains its own natural
properties only: with some small addition of the nature of the stock on which
it (at present) grows.

It makes figs better^ Experiment. 455.
if a fig tree when it begins to put forth leaves, have his top cut off.

If the fig tree be very old, Observation.
cutting off the top may be profitable; for that such cutting (as in all other
trees) makes the sap shoot forth into branches more vigorously, then otherwise
it would; by which lively rising of sap, the whole tree, and the fruit upon it,
fares the better: but if the tops of young-trees be cut off, ( fig trees or
other) there will shoot forth (in the room thereof) such huge strong shoots,
that the maine stream of sap will run that way, which great shoots will be
for a year, or two (it may be) unfruitful.

It is reported, that Mulberries will be fairer, Experiment. 456.
and the Trees more fruitful, if you bo^e the Trunk of the tree through, in
several places, and put in wedges of h^t Trees, as Mastick, Juniper etc.

As for the black Mulberry-tree, Observation.
I suppose it needs not these things to make it fruitful, for I never knew any
of them fail of store of fruits every year; bu^ white Mulberry-trees (with
us) have need enough of all helps that may be.

It is reported that trees will grow greater, and bear better fruit,
Experiment. 457.
if you put salt, or Lees of wine, or blood to the Roo^e.

Concerning Lees of wine, washings of strong bear, Observation.
or Ale Vessels, blood flesh, or the like; it is certain these are helpful
to Fruit-tree^, both as to their growth, and bearing; if seasonably^ and
moderately used; especially to old Trees. I account it best to be applied to
the Roots of trees in the beginning of winter, that the v^rtue may soke into
the Roots, and earth about them before the spring.

Terebration of trees, as it makes them prosper better, Experiment. 463.
so also it is found that it makes fruit sweeter^ and better, by causing the
coursest juice to sweat out, and the rest is better digested.

Terebration (or boring holes into the bodies, Observation.
and great Roots) of fruit^trees with a wimble, or Awger, is most ne^dfull, as
I judge, for great trees which grow upon fat land, and have too rank
nourishment, and may be unfruitful, and bear over wat^ish fruit for that
cause; that may help to let out some of the raw, supers^^ous sap^ and juice as
an ^ssue in a man's body: but scoring, or cutting the bark of yo^^ger trees
under Twenty years may be better for them, and this to be done chiefly in the
spring time.

Experiment. 464.
As terebration does meliorate fruit, so does letting of Plants blood; as
Pricking Vi^es or other Trees, after they be of some growth. It is reported
that by this Artifice, bitter Almonds have been tu^ned into sweet.

Observation.
This must needs have the like e^^ect (in some proportion as those particulars
before mentioned, of boring with wimbles, (or the like) and scoring the bark,
with a kni^e in the sp^^ng time.

Expe^iment. 4^5.
The Ancients for the Dulcorating of fruit, do c^mmend swines du^g, above all
other dung; which may b^ for the moisture of that b^^st.

Observation.
I have s^ene diverse fair Fruit Trees q^ite sp^yld^ and deaded^ by ove^much
swines dung, the swine lying amongst them, and continually leaving their
ex^rements, by degrees the Trees withered, and died: but I doubt not bu^ that a
moderate quanti^y of ^wines dung, mixed with mould, and la^d to the Roots of
trees, will be good for them and it may be in order to the sweetning of the
fruit.

Experiment. 467.
As Grafting does generally advance, and meliorate f^uits; so (no doubt) even
in grafting, the choice of the stock does much: they commend much the grafting
of Pears, or Apples upon a Quince.

Ob^ervation.
Grafting, (simply as grafting) does not advance or meliorate fruits; as i^
showed elsewhere at large; But grafted trees bear better fruits, See page 18.
Trea^^^e of Fruit Trees. page 98.
and sooner, then ungrafted trees, because grafts are usually taken from good
bearing trees, and of the best kinds, and grafts (retaining the Nature of the
trees from which they are cut,) do bring ^orth the same fruits; so also do
Buds, (though they be much smaller then grafts) when Inoculated upon wild
stocks.

As concerning the choice of stocks in grafting, in order to the advancement of
fruits; it is certain, the goodness of the stocks in respect of nature, and
kind, is very considerable: The sweeter, and better the stock is, the better
will the fruit be, that is engrafted thereon; Though it be true, that grafts
govern, and bring forth the same fruits, according to their own kinds, yet
the stock has some considerable influence upon the fruit of the graft, and
thence it is, that Pears upon a Quince (as the Author speaks of) are better,
then the ^ame kind upon a wild Pear stock: (as Experience shows) because a
Quince is a more excellent fruit, then a wild Pear, so the nourishment of the
stock^, is answerable.

It is set down as tried, that a mixture of Brane, and Swines dung,
Experiment. 468.
or Chafe, and Swines-dung, rotten, is a great nourisher, and comforter to a
Fruit-tree.

There is no doubt but Swines dung, or any other dung, Observation.
with other Composts laid together till they be rotten, will nourish and
comfort fruit trees, and better when they are thoroughly rotten, and turned to
mould, then before, because new dung may be too hot.

It is delivered by some, that if one take the bough of a low tree, Experiment.
470.
newly budded, and draw it gently into an earthen Pot perforated at the bottom
to let in the Plant, and then cover the Pot with earth, it will yield a very
large fruit within ground; the like will be effected by an empty pot, with some
few pertusions made in the Pot, hanged in the Tree.

Concerning the first of these ways, Observation.
I suppose the fruit growing upon the bough so bowed down into a Pot, will not
be so large, as the fruit upon the other boughs; because we see by Experience
it is against the nature of sap to run vigorously, (or in any great plenty)
into boughe^ bended downwards so near the earth, as this must needs be, for
sap presses upwards in greatest plenty; and consequently those fruits will be
greatest which have most sap. I mean such as are of one kind, upon one tree.

And concerning the second m^anes by the perforated Pot, hanged in the tree,
that is more likely to work the effect, as to the greatness of fruit, not so
much (I suppose) because of the pertusions, or holes in the Pot, as by the
shade that the fruit has by the Pot: for although fruit that grows in the
sunn^, be much better, and more pleasant then that which grows in the shade,
(as being better co^cocted,) yet that in the shade (of the same kind) is
commonly the g^eater, but more flat, dull, and inconcoct: as we see in
Apr^cots, Cherries etc. under ^he leaves.

Experiment. 471.
All trees in high and sandy grounds, are to be s^t d^ep, and in watery ground^
more sh^llow: And all tr^es when they be removed (^specially Fruit-tr^^s) care
ought to be taken that the sides of the Trees be coasted (North, and South) as
they stood before.

Observation.
It is true, that trees on higher grounds are to be set somewhat d^^per, then in
moist grounds; yet bewa^e of setting below the good scyl^, See h^re^f Treatise
of Fruit-t^ees. page 63.64.
in any ground^ As for coasting of trees, that is, (seti^g the same side to the
South when tran^planted as was before) the Rule is good, but not necessary: for
many thousands are transplan^ed w^^h g^od success not observing which side
grew No^th or Sou^h: howsoever some reasons migh be showed why it is best to
observe it, if it may conveniently be done.

Experiment. 472.
F^uit-trees, set upon a wall against the sun, between ^lb^wes or
But^eress^s of stone, ripen m^re, then upon a plain wall.

Ob^ervation.
Fruit Trees soset, have their fruits ripe sooner then those upon a plain wall
no: so much because they are d^fended better from winds, but chi^^l^ because
the^ have a double, or ^reble d^gree of heat to what those upon a plain wall
have, the he^te being pent in by the E^b^wes, or Bu^ter^sses of the wall, and
so r^^l^cts the stronger upon the fruits and trees, there is a double
reflection of heat upon such.

Exp^^im^nt. 475.
Grafting Elms, (or other unfruitful trees) will make their Leaves larg^r: as
in Fruit Trees the Graft mak^th the greater fruit.

Ob^e^vation
Grafting, barely considered as Grafting, will not do this, it will neither
make Leaves, nor Fruits fairer: but as stocks are chosen for the purpose: for
though it be true (as has been elsewhere said) that Grafts govern, S^e page
18.
and overrule the stocks, bringing forth the same leaves, and fruits when
grafted, as before; according to their own Natures; yet it is true also, that
the stocks have some small influence upon them, in making the fruits better or
worse in taste, and bign^sse: and so of the leaves in fairness, according to
the goodness or badnesse of the stocks: yet notwithstanding Graf^s, and Buds
inoculated may be said to rule, and bring forth the same fruits, else it were
in vain to Graft.

Barr^nnesse of trees comes of their overgrowing with Moss, Experiment. 476.
or their being Hide bound; or planting too d^^pe; or by issuing of the sap too
much into the Leaves. Barrenness of Trees.


There are several Causes of the barrenn^sse of trees. Observation.
I conceive Mossinesse, as Mossinesse, is not the cause of barrenn^ss^; but the
Causes of Mossinesse are the Cau^es of barrenness, which are Coldness,
overmoistnesse, and barrenness of the soil, where the trees grow: Therefore
such soyles must be amended. See how, Treatise of Fruit Trees, page 114.

Also barrenness is often, by reason of the excessive sap, and moisture of
trees, which is m^nifest by their strong, and vigorou^ shoots, branches, and
broad green leaves; as in many young, full-fed trees, for while nature is
vigorous, and active, spending it self that w^y, in ^he excessive growth of
the Tree; it is then weak and feeble in bearing of fruits. Now as to some
kinds of trees, it is not best (for some time) to go about to remove the Cause,
that is, as to standard Apple Trees, Peare-trees, and other kinds, which g^ow
in the O^chards and fields at large: but let them alone, let them go on in
their large, and vigorous growthes for certain years, though they bear b^t
little, (provided that we know they a^e naturally of good bearing kinds,
otherwise it is in vain to wai^e for store of fruits from such trees:) After
that such trees have grown exceedingly some years, and attained a fair large
growth, they will then by degrees, grow less in the branches, and fall to
bearing of fruits: But in case the trees are Wall-trees, and shoo^e
excessively, and bear not, then it will be best to take away the Cause as much
as we can; that is, First, abate their overfull, and rank nou^ishment, by
putting in sand, gravel, Buck-ashes, or any thing that is barren, instead of
the ^at soil. Secondly, also cut off, and part, one or two of the biggest
Roots, from the body, that so it may have less nourishment, and that left will
turn to fruits. Thirdly, Bend downwards the branches, and fasten them to the
wall with their tops as low as may be, this obstructs, and restraines the
excessive ^^sing of sap, which rising moder^tely, turns to frui^^: But if the
Trees are Naturally bad bearers (if barren upon that account) then there is no
remedy for such, but grafting them ag^in, with Grafts taken from some good
bearing kinds, which are known by yearly experience to bear fruits well.


Experiments 477, 478, 479.
It has be^ne set down by one of the Ancients that two twiggs of several
Fruit Trees flatted on the sides, and bound together, and set, they will come
up in one stock. And that Vines of red, and white grapes slatted, and bound
together, will bear Grapes of several colors, upon one branch; Compound^ng
of Fruits.
Al^o the shoots of diverse seeds, will incorporate; And that young trees of
several kinds set contiguous, will incorporate.

These, and such like, are prescribed in order to the compounding of Fruits.

Observation.
Concerning compounding, or mixing of diverse kinds of fruits, whereof to make
one new kind, these things before mentioned, (and many such like) have been
prescribed by Ancient Authors, which are of the number of those things Not.
Hist. p^g. 16^.
Sr Francis Bacon accounts mere imaginations, and conceits without any ground,
or light from Experi^nce.

He says Advan^. L^a^. ^. 1. p. 32.
(elsewhere) That many things have been rashly, (and with little ch^ice or
judgment) receiv^d and registered, as app^ares in the writings of diverse
Authors, which a^e every where fra^ght, and forged with fabulous reports, and
those not only uncerta^^e, and untry^d, but notoriously untrue, to the great
derogation of Natural Philosophy with grave and sober men.

As for those things before mentioned, they can never effect what is promised,
to produce compound fruits. For we see by continual Experienc^, that Grafts,
and Buds (though never so small) set upon st^cks of different kinds, do hold
their own, and k^epe their kinds; and so it would be if two long shoots were
united, or three, or many: if it were possible to make them incorporate, and
become one body, yet they would retain every one their own nature, and bring
forth each its own kind of fruit, without commixture.

If any man desire to be set on work about these things, he may have
p^escriptions eno^gh out of a certain Book entitled, the Country Farm, page
360, 361, 362, 363, 364, 365, etc. For more full satisfaction about which, and
all of that nature, see my Treatise of Fruit Trees, page 91, 92, 93, etc. where
these things are spoken to largely.

But if the thing be possible in Nature, to mix and compound fruits, the
likeliest way that I apprehend is this, (which I h^ve upon trial, but is not
yet come to an issue) viz: To graft one fruit upon another, many times over,
every year a d^fferent kind^ (so that we keep still to those kinds that will
grow together) As first to grant a Crab tree, near the ground, with some good
kind of Apple graft, and the next year to graft that ag^ine a handful or two
above where the first was grafted, and the next year to graft that second
graft, and the fourth year to graft that third graft, a handful or two, above
where it was grafted, and thus every year to set graft upon graft for diverse
years together, this (probably) may make some alteration, and commixture in
the top branch and its fruit, although it be true that every graft keep^ his
own nature, yet so as that it receives some small alteration from the sto^k
(as h^th been said:) Now the sap arising and passing through so many kinds of
stocks (as before) up into the top branches, this (if any thing) I conceive
will have an influence into the fruit of the last graft to cause some
comm^xture (more o^ less) in the fruit; the sap passing through so many kinds
of stocks.

Thus as of many kinds of Apples, together, so also of Pears among themselves,
and of Cherries, and Plums, among themselves, but as for mixing contrary kinds,
Apples, Pears, Cherries, Plum^ etc. all together, as some prescribe, there is
no hope, nor possibility of any advantage thereby.

All Plants that draw much nourishment from the earth, Experiments 480, 481, etc
and exhaust it, hurt all things that grow by them, as Ash-trees, Coleworts
etc. Sympathy, and Antipathy of Plants.
And where Plants of several natures (which draw several juyces) are set
together, there the neerenesse does good, As Rue by a Fig Tree, Garlic by a
Rose-tree etc.

Observation.
It is true indeed, That all Trees, and Plants that draw much nourishment from
the earth, are no good neighbors to any thing that grows near them, because
such make the earth barren, in which plants must needs grow poorly: But that
several kinds of Plants, draw several kinds of juyces, out of one, and the
same soil, I much question: as that bitter plants ( Rue, Wormwood, and the
like) draw the bitter juice of the earth, and the sweeter kinds as ( Roses,
Flowers, etc.) draw the sweeter juice. For can it be immagined that there are
so many kinds of juyces in the earth, as there are several kinds of Trees, and
Plants, so that every one should draw only its proper, and peculiar
nourishment? May it not upon better grounds be said, that many Trees and Plants
growing near together in a piece of ground, though they draw all of them one
and the same juice, yet they convert, and assimilate the same, every one into
its own specifique nature. We see that in a little Garden, where there are (it
may be) diverse hundreds (or thousands) of distinct Plants, Trees, Flowers,
Herbs, and Simples, they growing all upon one, and the same soil, do convert
the juice, and fatness of it into their several natures: by the same Law in
Nature as several kinds of Grafts upon one Tree, drawing one and the same Sap,
do turn that one kind of nourishment, into their several natures, whereby
they bring forth (as we see by experience) distinct, and several kinds of
Fruits, made of the same single juice, or sap of the Tree whereon they all
grow: this they would do if there were all or many kinds of Apples grafted upon
one great Crab-tree, and so of Peare-trees, Cherry-trees, and the like, upon
their own kinds: though multitudes of distinct kinds of grafts, draw one and
the same sap, yet every one changes it into its own nature; and why should it
not be so also with several plants drawing one and the same juice out of the
earth?

So that I cannot conceive that those things mentioned, (or the like) if tried,
would succeed to the purpose: viz That Rue, set by a Fig Tree, will make the
Figs taste sweeter; or Garlike set by Rose-trees, will make Roses smell sweeter;
or sorrel set by Rasps, will make the Rasps sweeter, and the like: because
several, or contrary kinds of Plants, meet not with several kinds of juyces
in the same Soil, (shall we think there are hundreds, or thousands of several
juyces in one Garden) though they draw the same juice they convert it, and
assimilate it into their several natures, according to the inna^e, and
intrins^call Form that every one has, as was said before of several kinds of
grafts upon one tree.

The altering of the Sent, Experiment. 499.
Color, or Taste of Fruit, by infusing, mixing or letting into the Bark, or
Root^ of the tree, Herb, or Flower, any colored, ar^maticall, or Medicinal
substance; are but Fancies: All alteration of vegetables, Making Herbs, and
Fruits Medicinable.
in those qu^lities must be by somewhat that is apt to go into the nourishment
of ^he Plant.

Diverse Authors (in their Books of planting Fruit Trees) have given several
directions for the altering of the Sent, Observations.
Color, and Taste, of Fruits; but none of them from any well grounded
Experience. Many particulers are mentioned, and set down at large: (with
reasons, and Experience against them; that m^n may not be deceived by them, and
loose their t^me, cost, and labor about such Fancies) See page 91, 92. etc. of
the Treatise of Fruit Trees.

But as this Author sa^es well, The l^keliest way to make herbs, and fruits
Medicinable, and to give them a good relish is the often watring of the Tree,
or Plant with that substance, which we desire they should pert^ke of, for this
is certain, (and we see it by manifest experience) that Plants, and fruits of
Trees, do somewhat taste, and partake of the nature, and virtues of that kind of
nourishment which they continually draw. As if Trees grow upon a low, m^ist,
watrish ground, the fruits will be more spongy, and watrish, then the same
kinds of fruits, where the trees g^ow upon a dry, sandy, soil: So if Cabbages,
Turnips, Carr^ts, and such like, grow in a Rank Soil, full of Fil^h, and
Dung, they have a virtue, and relish accordingly, not half so swee^e, and
pleasant, as the same kinds growing upon pure mo^ld, or sweet sandy soil: so
here, If men think it worth the while, if they judge it will answer their
labor, cost, and time, to water Fruit Trees, herbs, plants, and flowers, with
Aromaticall, and Medicinal substances: Infusions of Cinnamon, Ginger, Cloves,
Mace, and such like spices, to give a pleasant relish, or (for physical
respects) with Hell^bore, Opium, Scammony etc. If they can afford to give them
enough from time to time, of these things, (wa^ring their Roots abundantly
therewith) why then its probable such Plants will somewhat pert^ke of their
virtues: but as for slitting of their Roots, or perforating the body of the
Tree, and infusing the medicine, or ste^ping the s^ede, or kernel, in some
Liquor wherein the m^dicine is infus^d, these I account a^ good as nothing; not
only for that the virtues cannot be commun^ca^ed, or trans^used by this means,
but also because, though they we^e carried to all the par^s of tree^, and
plants, yet such, ^mall quantities would be indiscernable, the effect would be
as nothing at all.

The VI. CENTURY.
Experiments 501. etc. Cu^iosi^^^s about (...), and P^ants.
IT is a curiosity to have several fruits upon one tree: some early, and s^m^
late, ripe fruits all s^mm^r. This is done by Grafting s^verall ^ruits upon one
tree: But I conceive the diversity of fruits must be such as w^ll graf^ upon
the same stock, not contrary kinds.

Observation.
It is true, (as the Author says) that several fruits may be graf^ed, or
Inoculated upon one tree, some early, and some late; but yet (as he also
observes) they must be of such as will take, and grow together, as many ^inds
of Appl^s, upon one tree, so of Pears, and of Ch^rries among themselves, and
the l^ke: And it is not true which some Authors have written, that Cherries,
and Plums, Figgs, Nuts, Peaches, and such like, will grow together upon one
tree.

Yet a Book, entitled the Country farm (composed by some Doctors of Physic,
and other inexperienced men) is full of such odd conceits, page 360, 361, etc.

Experiment. 502.
It is a curi^sity to have fruits of diverse shapes, and figures^ This is easily
performed by moulding them when the fruit is young, with moulds of earth or
wood, ^f several shapes on the inner side, as it is in mould works of Liquid
thing^^ let the moulds be made partible in the middle, that they may be opened.

Experiment. 503.
Also Trees, or Fruits may be with Inscriptions, and engravings upon them, by
writing with a N^edle, or Bodkin, or Knife, when the Trees, and Fruits are
young, and as they grow greater, so the Letters, or figures will be more
plain.

If men be not content with the Natural form of Fruits, Observation.
they may (if they have so much leisure to sp^re) put them into moulds as is
said, to make them of an artificial form; As for Inscriptions, figures^ and
shapes upon Fruit trees, that is (as the Author says) performed by scoring
through the Ba^ke with the point of a knife, in the spring, or summer, what
Letters^ or Words, or Figures a man pleases, which as the tree grows, will
become more plain, and discernable, and that for many years after: I use to
make a Letter, or two, or three, or more upon all young trees that I graft,
whereby to know the several kinds of Fruits, (or if any be stolen and found
again, they may thereby be known) And I have perceived the Letters plainly
Nine, or Ten years after, or more.

But as for the prescriptions of some Authors about these things they are
vain, and ridiculous: who direct to write upon the kernell^ of seeds, that we
sow, and set, and upon the Buds that we inoculate what letters, or shape we
please, and the fruits coming thereof, will have the sam^ upon them, See hereof
Treatise of Fruit Trees page 97.

You may have Trees apparelled with Flowers, Experiment. 504.
or herbs, by boring holes in the bodies of them, and putting into them good
mould, and setting slips, or ^owing seeds therein, those Roots of a more
Ligneous nature, will perhaps inco^porate with the tree it self.

This is a Curiosity indeed, Observation.
which may be done (as the Author says) by m^king h^les in Trees, and putting
in good mould; care must be taken to make them slopewaies, with the bottom
downwards; that so both mould, and moisture may keep in them, about the Roots
of things that are set. But yet I should be loath to spoil a good tree thus,
for it must needs make it rot, and perish in a certain time: howsoever, for
one, or two of indifferent kinds, it may rather be admitted, for satis^action
in this Curiosity.

Beauty in Flowers is their pre-eminence, Experiment. 506.
It is observed, that Gilly-flowers, Violets, etc. that are colored, if they
be negl^cted, and not watered, nor n^w molded, nor tra^splanted, will turn
white: And its probable, that the white with much cultur^, may turn colour^d.

Observation.
I doubt not but that the Flowers aforementioned, and diver^ other ^inds, will
not only l^o^e the beauty of their Colo^rs, if they be not sometimes removed
into new, and b^tter mould, but also that they will in time change from double,
to single; or else be much ^mal^r, then they will be in fr^sh^ strong mould.
Therefore, every other year, at least, let the mou^d be changed, more or
less: lay about all their Roots, some good, fresh, bla^k mould^ And that we
may have every ye^re new, young Roots, and that the best kinds man be
i^creased, the slips must be laid in s^mmer; as I shall here show how, though
it be a common thing, and well known amongst many, yet ^or the sake of those
tha^ ^now it not, and desire it. I shall brie^ly speak of it.

About the beginning of July, (and for six, or seven wee^es afterward) s^ips
may be laid thus. Observe the fairest, and bigg^st slips upon the Roots, and
with a sharp Kni^e, cut half way through the sl^p, on the out side, near to
the bottom, just from a joint, and cut the sl^p upwards, through the middle of
it, about half an inch, (or little more) in leng^h; then with a small hook
stick f^sten the cut part down into the mould, yet so as that the slip be not
bro^en, or parted from the Roo^e wherein it grows: so do to the rest of the
sl^ps upon the same Root, or to as many as you please: having so done, then
mould them all up, with f^esh mould, that is, cover all the c^t parts on every
side with mould, then water them, and press the mould close about them, and so
let them rest.

Afterward, in a Month, or five weeks t^ese slips (so laid) will have taken
Root, (especially if their mould have been watered now and then) then they may
be c^t off from the old Root, and taken up, and so set again in fr^sh, good
mould, prepared in the Garden plat for that purpose: Or else they may be let
alone until the spring after, and then set: these young, vigorous Roots, set
in good mould, and watered (now, and then) with ^at water, will have large
^lowers: especially if in June we break off, most of their buds, and suffer
only some few six, or eight, or ten flowers upon a Root, these the Root will
easily maintain, and each of them will have the more nourishment, then when
they are suffered to spindle up as many as nat^re will, such must needs be
smaller flowers, the Root being overburdened.

The Clove-Gilly-Flower, is of all other the best, for use, it is well known
how useful they are to make Syrups, which a^e very Cordial: they are good for
Sallets, prepared with sugar, to use all the year long: and have the best
smell of any other; therefore increase these, as much as may be, not only of
slips (for sl^ps of these will grow without laying^ better then o^ other kind
of ^lowers) but lay many of them also for more certain^y.

And among these prefer those which are largest, and of the deepest color,
and those that are without Horns (as they call them) they also are increased
of seed, as other kinds^

I have been the larger upon this particular, (and somewhat digressed from the
Experiment, which chiefly concerned c^lour) because hereupon mainly depends the
goodn^sse, and flourishing of a Garden, as to these k^nds of flowers; for if we
know not the best way to propagate flowers, nor to plant, and order them being
prepa^ed, the Garden will be but poor.

Whites are more inodorate (for the most part) then Flow^rs of the same kind
Colored: Experiment. 570.
we find also that Blossoms of trees that are white, are commonly inodorate,
As Cherries, Pears, Plum^. Whereas those of Apples, Crabs, Almonds, and
Peaches, are blush^, and smell sweet.

I conceive this Experiment was not thoroughly we^ghed, Ob^ervation.
and tried: for to my Observation white Flowers, have (generally) as much
smell, as those Colored: to i^stance in the white Rose, the ordinary k^^d, and
the White Musk Rose, I suppose they have as much smell (especially the Musk
Ro^e) as Red Roses, or Provosts, or Velvet, or Ma^ble, and some other colored
kinds yea and more too: And as for some white flowers, as the white Lilly, and
some other kinds, their smell is more full^ and rank then many Red, or other
colo^red flowers: And for blossoms of Trees, some that are white, smell as
much, as some that are Red, or colored, for what smell has the double
blossom Peach-fllower, or the Nectrin, or any kind of Peach Blossoms, which
are all colored excellentl^) more then the Blossoms of Peare-tree, Ch^rry, or
Plum-tree, which a^e said to be inodorate: So that I conceive there ^ust be
^ome other Cause found out, why some Flowers, and B^^^s^m^s ^m^ll not, (or
smell not so much as some others) then that which is assigned; viz: the
thinn^sse, or sc^ntn^sse of that substanc^ which m^keth the Flower is not the
Cause wh^ some Flowers and blos^^m^s ^m^ll not, so much as others: the same is
the Cause why some Flowers, and fruits are bigger then others, and of a better
taste then others; which proceeds (undo^b^edly) from the speci^ique, or d^stinct
intrinsecall Form, of each particular Plant, which the God of nat^re has
fixed in it as a Law, which nature never violates, but keeps in all kinds of
Creatures.

Experiments 5^8. and 5^9.
Contrariwise in Berries the White is commonly more delicate, and sweet in
taste, then the Colored; as we see in white-grapes, white-Ra^ps, white
strawberries, Currants etc. the Cause is, for that the C^loured are more
juyced, and courser juyced, and therefore not so well, and ^qually concocted.

But in Fruits the White commonly is meaner, as in Plums, The white ha^vest
Plum is a base Plum, the Musle, Damaze^ne, and other black Plums, are of the
best etc.

Observation.
This proves what was last said to be true, viz. that it is the speci^icall
Form of every Plant, that causes the difference of tastes in Fruits, and smell
in Flowers. For we see by experience that ^ome white kinds of Flowers, Fruits,
Berries etc. are sweeter, and better in smell, and taste, then some others of
Colored kinds: and that likewise some other colored kinds of Flowers, Fruits,
and Berries, a^^ sw^et^r, and better then some white k^nds: so that it is a
hard matter to find out the particular Cause, and give a distinct rea^^n, of
the differences of particu^ars, though men may venture a^ it.

Ex^er^ment. 510.
Gilly-^l^wer seed of one kind, being sewen, will come up of several Colors:
The Cause is (no doubt) that in earth though it be contiguous, and in one bed,
there are several juyces; and ^s the seed does casually meet with them, so
it comes forth.

Observation.
It is true, that Gilly-flowerseede of one kind sown, will bring up several
kinds: some double, and some single: but I much doubt whether it be, for that
the seed me^ts with several juyces in one bed of earth: for can it be
imagined that two, or three very small seeds, that lie as close together as can
be, in the earth, should draw several juyces, from the very self same mould,
so as to cause them to vary in the color of the flowers? May it not rather be
said, it is from a Law in Nature, which God of his general bounty to us, has
put into it; though we stand not in absolute necessity of them, yet in that he
gives us such variety, and ch^i^e? But for men to find out, and show a
particular Cause in Nature, of this variety, will be as hard to do, as to show
a Cause why several kinds of Grafts, upon one tree, See Exper. 481.
drawing one and the self same sap, do yet bring forth different Fruits; other
then to say, they keep their several Natures, and so convert the same sap
into several kinds of Fruits. And why may not the same be said of several
seeds, and Roots, in one Bed, drawing the same juice of the Earth?

Concerning sowing of Gilly flower seed, I advise those that sow it: first, to
gather it from the fairest, and best Clove-Gilly-flower, and that i^ be full
ripe, ere it be g^thered, which is, when it is turned black^ Also seed may be
g^thered from other double flowers, some commend especially the London white,
others, a flower called the old man's head^ and say the greatest varieties come
from these; some are for one, and some for another, but so it is, that most
will be single fl^wers from the best seed: but doubtless there is much in the
ground in which the seed is sown; if it be poor soil, they are more like to
be more single, then if the ground be special rich mould; for (as was said)
barren ground, as it makes flower^ small, so sometimes in it, they turn from
double to single, so it may be said as to the seed when sown.

It is a Curiosity to have Flowers double, Experiment. 513.
which is effected by often Removing them into new earth, as on the contrary
part double flowers, by neglecting, and not removing, prove single. And the way
to do it speedily, is to sow, or set seeds, or slips of flowers, and as soon
as they c^m^ up to remove them into new ground, that is good. Enquire also
whither Inoculating of Flowers (as Stock-Gilly-flowers, Roses, Musk-Roses etc.)
does not make them double.

Observation.
For the first part of ^his Experiment, to make Flowers double, or fairer, it is
a good Rule, as the Author has set down, especially if withal we observe
the directions given in the Observation to the 50^ Experim^nt, in breaking off
some of the Buds, and St^ms, and letting some few grow, to be fl^wers.

Concerning Inoculating of Flowers ( Stock Gilly flowers, or any other kind) I
know no such thing, and believe it is but a fancy, for having heard of it, I
have considered of the matter, and cannot find, nor apprehend what it is that
should be Inoculated; there are no buds, nor any thing like a bud, to be taken
off for that purpose: And I have spoken with diverse who have had skill in
Fl^wers; and they have said they have heard of such a thing, but have never
seen any thing thereof in Experience.

There are ^hree other ways sufficient for the propagation of flowers, which
are, by Seed, by Slips, and by Layers, but by Laying is by far ^he best, as is
showed at large, in the Observation to the 506. Experiment. But as for
Inoculating Roses, ( Musk R^se, and all other kinds) that is very common, and
sure; yet as to the intent of the Author, viz. (to make them double) it
succeeds not: and he himself has given the Reason, truly, upon another
occ^sion: That is, all Buds, and Grafts, Rule, and keep their own Natures,
and so change not, neither as to the making Ros^s more double^ or better then
they were before, nor as to the bettering of any F^uit: as has been showed
heretofore.

Experiment. 541.
The m^king of Fruits without Core, or Stone, is likewise a Curiosity; If a
Cions, or shoot, have the Pith finely taken forth, (and not altog^ther, but
some of it left, the better to save the life, it will bear a fruit with
little, or no Core, or Stone. The like is said to be of dividing a Quick tree
down to the ground, and taking out the Pu^, and then binding it up again.

Observation.
These prescriptions for making F^uits without Core, or stone, I cannon think
are from this worthy Author, but they are such as are set down by others,
which I have seen: And they are as weak, and groundless conceits as many
other things asserted by them, about chang^ing the species of Fruits: and
making them of an aromatique, and pleasant taste, and altering the Color of
Fruits, and such like co^ceits: the variety of which (I suppose) has been
sufficiently laid open in a late Treatise of Fruit Trees: see there Errors
discovered page 91 92. etc. For, let this thing be a little considered, and it
will appear to any man that has but half an eye, to be vain: suppose a
shoot, or Graft (as is here said) be cloven, and all, or most of the pith
taken out, and ad^it such a one be Grafted, (or any way set in the ground, so
as to take root) and grow^ yet we know all the Bark and Buds, are as they were
before; the taking out of the Pith makes no alteration at all, more, or less;
we know, in all the Buds that are Inoculated not only all the Pi^h, but also
all the wood is cast away; and nothing made use of but only the Buds, and Bark
of any young shoot; and yet we see by continual Experience what the effect
i^; that these Buds bring for^h the same Fruits, as the trees from which they
were taken.

And if a Some old fruit trees are holl^w, all along their bodies, having no
Pith at all, which bring forth fruits with no less Core, or Stone for that.
young tree were divided, and the Pith taken out, from the top to the Root (as
is said) there is less Reason, (if less can be) that that should work this
effect; because all the side twigs, (if it have any) would have pith st^ll, And
if it have none, or if the Pith were taken out of all; yet we know the increase
of the Tree, must be still from the Buds; which have the same nature in them,
as Grafts, or Buds Inoculated.

It is very probable, that any sower fruit, Experiment. 515.
grafted upon a stock that bears a sweeter fruit, may both make the fruit
sweeter, and more void of the harsh matter of the kernells, or seeds.

It is Reported, that not only taking out the Pith, Experiment. 516.
but the stopping of the juy^e of the Pith, from rising in the midst, and
turning it to rise o^ the outside, will make the fruit, without core or stone.

The Rule is General; that whatsoever will make a wild Tree, Experiment. 517.
a Gard^n tree, will make a Garden tree to have less Core, or stone.

It is true, Observation.
that a sower fruit grafted upon a stock of a sweeter kind, will make the fruit
somewhat sweeter; yet so as that the Graft still governs, (as this Author
elsewhere has said) and as Experience proves; B^t the fruits will have
k^rn^lls, and seeds, as before.

As for taking out the Pith, Of this See Exper. 514.
or stopping the juice of the Pith, it is all one, as to this intention.

Concerning the general Rule in the 517 Experiment I know nothing that will
make a Wild tree, a Garden tree, but grafting it with good kinds of grafts; And
I am sure grafting will not make any fruit to have less Core, or stone.

Experiment. 518.
Plants for want of Culture degenerate to be baser in the same kind; and
sometim^s to change into another kind.

1. By standing long unremoved. Degenerating of Plants.
2. By drought, and dryness of the Earth. 3. By the Barrenness of the earth,
removing Plants into worse mould, or forbearing to renew, and help the ground
with dung, or fresh mould.
Observation.
It has been Exper. 506.
said, That Violets, and some other Flowers, will change from double to single,
or change in color, when the mould wherein they grow, becomes barren, and
hartl^sse, through neglect; which is the same in substance with all the three
particulars mentioned in the Experiment. Therefore there is need of some fresh
mould from year to year, for the preserving of Flowers in their perfection.
See hereof at large, Experiment 506. and 510.

Experiment. 519.
Whatsoever Fruit uses to be set upon a Root, or slip, if it be sown, will
d^generate: And most of those Fruits that use to be Grafted, if they be set of
kernells, or stones, degenerate. It is true, that Peaches do better upon stones
set, then upon Grafting: And the Rule of exception should seem to be this;
That whatsoever Plant requires much moisture, prospers better upon the
stone, or kernel, then upon the Graft; For the stock though it gives a finer
nourishment, yet it gives a scanter than the Earth at large.

Observation.
The reason why Fruits that come of Seed, or stones, do degenerate (for the
most part) and become worse then the Fruits out of which the seed was taken, I
conceive to be this; Fruits that come of seed, or stones, do partake both of
the Graft, and of the stock of that tree from which they were taken; so that
although the graft was of a special good, and choice kind, yet the stock
whereon it was engrafted being a Crabtree, (or some other wild kind of
Fruit-tree) the seed participates of both Graft, and stock, and so brings
forth a mungrell fruit, between them both: For although Grafts govern, (as
has been said) and may be said to bring forth the same kinds, yet so as that
the stock has some influence into the Fruits, according to the goodn^sse, or
badnesse of the stock.

But now: In case the Tree from which seeds, or stones are taken, be an
ungrafted tree, one that came of seed it self, then I doubt not but that the
seed of that Tree, will bring forth the very same kinds again, without any
alteration.

As to that the Author says concerning Peaches; that they come better of
stones then grafting; I suppose there is a mistake in this: for although it be
true, that some Peaches will come good of seed; yet doubtless not better,
then by Inoculating, (they take not with Grafting) for we see by constant
Experience, that Peach Buds set upon good stocks, will bring forth the very
sam^, as the trees from which they were cut; if the rest of their culture, and
ordering be the same, or as good.

And as for some that have come of stones, I have observed they have been none
of the best: many that have come of stones have been stark naught; though
some have been good.

And why Peaches, or any other kind of fruit, should be thought to come better
of stones, or s^eds, then by Grafting, or Inoculating, I apprehend not any
reason: as for that which is given; That the stock gives a scanter
nourishment, then the earth at large; let it be considered: The Twigs and
Branches of a Peach tree, (or any other tree that came of seed, or stones)
they receive sap, and nourishment from a stem, or body, and Root, as w^ll as
if the Tree were engrafted; the twigs, and branches of an ingrafted tree, have
as free and full nourishment, (without any obstruction) as the branches of a^
ungrafted tree; the branches of a grafted tree, have no finer nourishment, no^
scanter, then the branches of an ungrafted tr^^: for we know, the Root, and
Body of a Graf^ed tree, and of an ungrafted tree, are alike: and the earth is
as free, to the one, as to the other.

It is reported^ Experiment. 534.
That a good strong Canvas, spread over a tree, grafted low, soon after it
puts forth, will dwarf it, and make it spread: Procerity, and Lowness of
trees.
The Cause is plain, for that all things grow, as they find room.

Observation.
It is true (as is said) That Cloth sometimes spread over a tree grafted low,
(and suffered to lie on for a time) will cause it to spread much; And that this
may be improved for our use, and benifit, this may be done: To plant some few
Cherry trees, Plum trees, or other kinds, grafted low, and caused to spread
much, and kept from rising up, by this means, keep the earth bare, clean from
weeds, grass, or any thing growing under, or about them: such trees (if they
be good kinds) will bear much and fairer fruits, then high trees: the
reflection of heat from the earth, will be almost as strong, as from a wall.
And the fruits may be kept long, growing upon the Trees; even till after
September, or October. For if a Cloth be sometimes, in hot weather, spread over
them, and moistened, it will keep the fruits from ripening too soon: (yet shade
them not too much, lest they come not to full ripeness) Afterward, the fruits
being ripe, some old Canvas hairecloth, (or such like) may be spread over them,
to preserve the fruits from Birds, and may be so kept long; (look that snailes
eat them not) Or else a Net may be spread over such trees, to preserve the
Fruits: I have known fair Cherries upon Trees toward the middle of October.
I conceive the great bearing Cherry, or other late ripe, tart Cherries, to be
the best to keep long, in this manner: such are more hardy then other kinds;
Cherries very late, are as great Rarities, as those that are early.

Experiment. 535.
Trees are generally set of Roots, or kernells; but if you set them of slips
(as the Mulberry etc.) they will grow, and those (as is reported) will be
dwarf trees; the Cause is, for that the slip draws nourishment more weakly,
then either a Root, or kernel.

Observation.
Mulberry-tree slips, and some other kinds of trees that will grow of slips,
may be made dwarf trees, if we will order them accordingly, that is; if we
suffer all the side branches to grow: or such slips (taking Root) may be made
high trees, in time, if we cut off all the side branches, and preserve only the
middle, straight shoot. But indeed at first, for certain years, they must
needs be dwarf trees, until they can rise higher, which in time they will do,
if they take Root well, and the ground be good.

Experiment. 544.
In Clay grounds, all Fruit Trees grow full of Moss, both upon body, and
Boughs: which is caused partly by the coldness of the ground, whereby the
Plants nourish less: And partly by the Toughness of the earth, whereby the
sap is shut in etc.

We see by Experience, that trees growing upon cold, Observation.
and moist grounds, or Clay, grav^ll, barr^n grounds, do generally breed Moss^,
which is caused, (as the Author s^ies) by the coldness and scantn^sse of the
nour^shment: And therefore there is need (besides the scraping off of the
Moss) to lay the Roots of Fruit Trees as dry as may be in such moist grounds,
by tre^ching, or otherwise, and also to bring in some soyles to make the g^ound
b^tter, and warmer, as much as may be.

It is to be noted^ that (commonly) trees that ripen their fruits latest,
Experiment. 578.
do blossom soonest.

Some Fruit Trees indeed which bring forth their fruits to perfect^on,
Observation.
and ripeness, late in the year, do blossom early; as having need of the
heat of the sun to ripen them, all the summer: But some other kinds blossom
early, and ripen the^r Fruits also ea^ly; As May Cherry trees, the
Premorden^plum, also the Mirabilon plum-tree blossoms exceeding early, and the
tree brings forth his Fruit early. I have got ripe plums from this tree about
the beginning of July, which is early for Plums.

There be fruits, Experiment. 579.
(but rar^ly,) that come twice a year, As some Pears, strawberries etc. Roses
bear twice, but it is not wit^out cutting.

The Winsor Peare-tree does blossom and bear fruits twice in the year^, some
years: Observation.
but the second bearing I could never see worth the ga^hering, for they are
poor, small, hard fruits, not worth any thing.

I have seen Cherries twice in the year upon one and the same tree, An early
Flanders, which I set upon a very warm southwall, bore ripe Cherries about the
twenteth of May, And the same tree bore a couple of ripe Cherries afterward,
the one about the sixth of Octob^r, the other a fortnight after.

Strawberries ordinarily bear twice a y^are, though but few the second time.
As for Rose-trees, some damask Roses, and some Provosts bear a second time,
the same year, though but few, if cut soon after the first bearing in the
full Moon. But besides, there is a Rose-tree, called the Monthly Ro^e, which
bears Roses until the coldness of the winter stop it, about November.

Nothing procures the lasting of Tr^es, Experiment. 586.
Bushes, and He^bs, so much as oft^n cutting, For every cutting causes a
Renovation of the juice of the Plant, that is neither go^th so far, nor
rises so faintly, as when the plant is not cut.

This is to be considered in cutting of trees, Observation.
else instead of making them last longer, we shorten their lives. That i^, that
we so cut them that the wet, and moisture get not into their bodies, which in
certain years will ^ot, and spoil them: as we see in many pollard trees,
which are hollow all along their bodies: And many Fruit Trees, having had their
heads cut off, when they were great Trees, and grafted again; we see the wet,
and moisture gets in at the top, before the Grafts can cover the head, and rots
the tree, which can never grow great after, nor last long, but rot^, and
decays in few ye^res. Whereas Trees that are sound, Fruit Trees, and all other
kinds, must needs last much longer: yet as to cutting of side branches, and all
supe^fluous branches. (which are not great) that conduces to the lasting of
Trees, as giving the more plentiful, and vig^rous nourishment to those that
are left, and to the whole body.

The VII. CENTURY.
Experiment. 624.
QVinces, or Apples if you will keep them long, drown them in Honey, but
because Honey (perhaps) will give them a taste overlushious, it were good to
make trial in powder of sugar, or in ^yrrup of wine only boiled to height.

Observation.
As for keeping of Apples, keeping them in honey, or sugar, would be too costly:
some Pippins, and John Apples, will (of themselves) last till new come again:
its good then to get such kinds, that we may have for use all the year long^
without charge in keeping.

And for keeping Quinces, they are kept long in pickle, made of the Pa^ings,
and Cores^ of those that are used for Marmalade, well boiled in water, with
Salt, and Ginger. Or a better way (as some account) is to ^eepe them in small
Ale, a penny a Gallon, and to draw i^ off, once in ten, or twelve da^es, and
put in f^esh; thus its said they will last two years.

Experiment. 627.
Take Grapes, and hang them in an empty V^ss^ll, well stopped, and s^t the
V^ss^ll, not in a Cellar, but in some dry place, and its said they will last
long.

Observation.
Grapes will keep for some short time, in this manner, as has been said: but
when cold moist Air toward winter comes on, they will begin to mould, and
^ot; I have kept some in Glass, as close stop^ with Cork^, and wax, as I
could, supposing the exclusion of Air, had been best, but though they were
good certain weeks, yet afterward they began to perish: I account it better
to hang the Bunches in a Kitchen, or some warm Room, where fire is much kept,
that so some of their supe^fl^ous moisture may be a little dried up; I have
kept them thus many weeks. For though the Air be much shut out from them in
any V^ss^ll, yet that A^re that is shut in with them and their own natural
moisture, will cause putrefaction; therefore there is need of some degree of
warmth, with dryn^sse: Cut off some of the wood with the Bunches, and cover
them with Paper from dust, and hang them up.

Also a Vine Branch full of ripe Grapes, may be drawn in at a window, and
Nailed up, upon the w^ll or ^eeling, letting the br^nch grow still to the Vine,
thus they will keep long.

The juyces of Fruits are either watery, or oily: Experiment. 633.
I reckon amongst the watery, all the fruits out of which drink is expressed,
as the Grape, the Apple, the Pear, the Cherry, the Pome-granate etc. And th^re
are some others which though they be not in use for drink, yet they appear to
be of the same nature, As Plums, Mulberries, Services, Rasps etc. And for those
juyces that are so fleshy as they cannot make drink by expression (yet perhaps
they may make drink by mixture of water. And some of the watery juyces, after
they have gathered spirit, will burn^, and inflame, as wine.

Concerning the juyces of Apples, Observation.
Pears, and Cherries, these are well known, and much in use, and esteem: the
two former with us in England, and all of them in other parts; And we might
have wine of Cherries, as plentiful in England, as it is beyond sea, if men
would but plant store of Cherry trees, of the best kinds, such as are fittest
for this purpose: As the Morello-Cherry, the Charoone, the Black-hart, and
other k^nds which have a pleasant taste, the j^yce of which is of a deep red
color: These would make a delicate wine, especially for summer time; And which
will last also all the year; as I have heard it credibly spoken, by a worthy
gentleman, who drank good Cherry wine, of a Twelve month old.

A^ for Cider, and Perry, these Liquors (especially Cider) begin to be better
known to us, in some parts where they have scarce been heretofore: And
doubtless when men are better acquainted with them, and know their good
properties, and virtues, in reference to Health, and Long^life, they will be
more diligent in planting Fruit Trees, such as are best, and fittest for this
purpose. As the Pear^-maine, Pippin, G^nnet-Moyle, Redstreake, and such like;
which make Cider better then French-winds.

Concerning the manner of making Cider, and Perry, with the k^eping, and
o^dering of it, I have spoken at large in my Treati^e ^f Fruit Trees: See, the
use of Fruits page 77.

Se^ Mr H^rtlibs Leg^cy of ^^^bandry page ^^
A^ for Plums, it is affirmed, that there may be made an excellent wine out of
them, and also Aquavitae, of those that are sweet, fat Plum^, as Musle plums,
Damson^ etc. And though the juice be too think of it self for that purpose,
yet water, Cider, or some other Liquor, may be mixed therewi^h, which being put
up into the Ves^ell; some Honey, Yest, (or the like) must be mixed, to cause it
to wo^ke.

Ex^eriment. 634.
It has been noted, that m^st Trees, (and specially those that bear Mast)
are ^^ui^full but once in two yea^es. The Cause (no doubt) is the expense of
s^p; For many Orchard Trees, well cul^ured, will be^re diverse y^ares together.

Observation.
Some Fruit Trees bear store of fruits but once in two years; and I conceive
it to be as natural so to do, as to bear such, or such a k^^d of Fruit. And
others are observed to bear store of F^uits e^^^y year, constantly; unless
(perhaps) in some extreme blast^^g spring, which spoils (in a manner) all:
But for many ye^^es t^gether, every yea^e, some are known to bear Frui^s
exceeding full in the same ground, and with the same culture, as those that
bear but each other year: so that we see the expense of sa^, in ^he ^^aring
year, is not the only Cause that Trees bea^e not the next year ^^ter; for
some that expend as much sap, do yet bear the next year after, as full as
before: So then, let care be taken, to ^h^se Graf^s from those trees that we
see by Experience are the best, and m^st const^n^ b^arers; and b^st fruits.

Ex^erim^nt. ^37.
The g^^at^r part of T^ees bear most, and best, on the lower Boughs; but some
bear b^st on the t^p b^ughes. Those that bear b^st below, are ^u^h as shade
does more good to, then hurt: for g^n^rally all fruits bea^e b^st l^west,
b^cau^e the sap tireth not, having but a short way; and therefore in F^uits
spread upon walls, the low^st are the greatest.

Ob^ervation.
To my Observation, Apple Trees, Pear trees, Cherry-trees etc. that are good
bearers, they bear all over alike. And generally all Fruit^t^ees in these
par^s, h^ve need enough of the sun, and bear better in the ^unne, then in
the sh^d^; But indeed as to Wall-t^ees, most commonly we see most fruits upon
the lower boughs, and The^^f^re o^serve the ^ir^c^ions given in ^he Tr^a^ise
^f Fruit trees, p. 70. in causing the b^a^ches to spread along the wall both
ways which causes f^uit bearing.
side^boughes, And the reason I apprehend to be this: Not the tiring of the
sap, in its going to the top branches; for the sap is too vigorous, and too
plentiful, in the top boughs, and thence it is we always see the fairest,
and greatest shoots toward the top of all w^ll-trees, and commonly of all
other trees. But the cause why the lower boughs, and side branches, have
usually more fruit, then the top branches, I conceive to be for that the sap
naturally presse^h upwards, in greatest plenty, and runs forth into shoots,
and branches: N^w nat^re being so intent, and vigorously active in one work
(viz. increase of the tree in those branches) it does not put forth it self,
at the same time, in that other effect of bearing fruit upon the same branches.
But now, as to the lower boughs, and side-branches, there nature is at work,
but in a r^misse, and weaker d^gree, as to the increase of the branches, such
grow but little, because the sap is somewhat obstructed, and curbed by bowing
the branches downwards, and so does attend to the other work also, viz. the
bearing of Fruits.

And the truth of this is made more evident, if we consider the same thing in
all young trees: We know young Apple Trees, Peare-trees, and the like, when,
and while they grow, and increase exceedingly in all the parts, shooting forth
great, large, strong shoots, and branches, they bear but little fruit, or none
at all: But after certain years, when they grow not so much, when they shoute
l^ss^, then they fall to bearing fruits more abundantly

There be Trees that bear^ best when they begin to be old; Experiment. 638.
As Almonds, Pears, Vines, and all trees that give Mast. The Cause is, for
that all trees that bear Mast, have an oily Fruit: and young trees have a
more watery juice and less concocted. But the most part of Trees: Amongst which
are Apples, Plums etc. bear^ best when they are young.

Pear^-trees, Apple Trees, Plum^ and Cherry trees, Observation.
if they be good ^earing kinds naturally, after they are three, or four years
grow^h (and some sooner) do all bear store of fruits, until they be extreme
old, and in a decaying, dying condi^ion; And therefor in planting of
Fruit Trees, be sure to procure those kinds that are known by Experience to be
good bearers, and good fruits, and such will bear well, both when they are
young, and when they are old, until extreme age.

Were I to plant an Orchard, or Garden of Fruit Trees, and might have Trees at
hand, freely, for nothing, of indifferent, common kinds, and but ind^fferent
beare^s, I would rather ch^^e to fetch those tha^ are choice kinds, and
special bearers one hundred or two hundred miles (if they could not be had
nearer) and there pay dear for them too, besides all other Charges, then take
those at hand, for when men plant Fruit-^r^es, It is not for a f^w ye^^es, but
for sev^rall generations: therefore take special care to have the b^st kinds,
for bearing, and for R^lish, or taste: that is the foundation of the work, the
principal thing in planting.

Now when fruit trees are grown to extreme old age, and therefore be^re but
little, this may be done; which will make them (as it were) young again, for
certain years, and to bear exc^eding much fruit year^ly: That is, Cut off
their Head^, or big bough^s, not straight over, but a slope, that so Rain, and
moisture may not rest upon the top, to rot it: These great Boughs will (the
next summer) put forth many young shoots; which may be Inoculated the same
summer, or Grafted the spring after, with special bearing kinds: And these old
Bodies h^ving young heads (which draw sap vigorously) will be much refreshed
thereby: and such trees will bear store of fruits many years after.

Experiment. ^53.
The Ro^ts of Trees do (some of them) put down^-wards, deep into the ground; As
the Oak, Pine, Fi^re etc^ some spread more toward the surface of the earth;
As the Ash, Cypresse-tree, Olive etc. The Ca^se of this l^^^r may be, for that
such Trees as lov^ the sun do not willi^gly d^scend far into the Earth.

Observation.
It is true, The Roots of Oak^ Trees, and some other kinds, shoot d^wne deeper
into the Earth, then Ash-trees, and some other ^^ees: May not the R^ason be
(why some put their Roots de^per then others) b^c^^se those Trees have gr^ater,
and larger bodies, then others: and Nature lays the foundation answerable to
what is to be set upon it: Now O^kes being the greatest Trees, Nature is wise
enough (acco^ding to a Law God ha^h put into it) to make the Root or
foundation Answerable: O^he^wise I conceive, the Roots of all trees would be as
near the top of the groun^ as may be, as loving the sun, as having an absolute
need of it in order to their growth; And I am persuaded, that the appetite of
the spirit, in all ^^ees whatsoever, (one as well as another) is upwards, and
not downwards, and never exerts it self down^-wards, but upon necessity: and
in order, or in subordination, to the growth of the body of the tree, above
ground.

Experiment. 654.
It has been Observed, that a Branch of a Tree, being unbarked some space at
the bo^tome, and so set into the ground, even of such trees as if the bark
were set on, they would not grow, yet contrariwise we see that a Tree ^ared
round in the body, above gr^und, will dye: The cause may be, for that the
unbarkt part draws the nourishment best, but the bark continues it only.

It is true^ some branches that are unbark't at the bottom, Observation.
and set in the ground will grow: of some kinds of Apple Trees; As the
Quodling, Nursgarden, Moyse, and some other kinds, that have soft barks^ Not
because, (not I suppose the sooner) for that the branch is unbark't, for such
will grow of cutting^, or slips, though they be not at all unbark't, And those
that be unbark't and grow, it is not the unbark't part that draws nourish
ne^t best, nor that draws it at all; but the Roots put forth from the bark,
even at the very edge of the cut part, and also some break out of the Bark
where it is not cut, As we see in those branches of Trees from which we get
Roots while they grow upon the tree, by disb^^king of them, an inch round, and
tying mould about: See how, at large, Treatis^ of Fruit Trees. p. 136.

The grafting of Vines upon Vines (as I take it) is not now in use; Experiment.
668.
the Ancients had it, and that th^ee ways: The first was insition, which is
the ordinary manner of grafting. The second was Terebra^ion through the middle
of the stocke^ and putting in the Cions there. And the third was, p^ring of two
Vines, that grow together, to the marrow, and binding them close.

I have tried several ways, to graft Vines: Observation.
by cleving, or insition, (as the Author calls it) and also by pari^g two
Vines, the stock, and Graft, on two sides, which is my usual, and best way of
grafting other Fruit Trees, but neither took effect: so that I am persuaded
those Fruit Trees that are so easily propagated by other means, as by laying
down the Branches, into the earth, and by cuttings, that these will not take
with Grafting, or Inoculating as Vines, Mulberries etc. I have tried many
Experiments about Mu^berries, both for grafting, and Inoculating, upon several
kinds of stock^, and yet none succeeded: but Mulberries are increased by laying
down the Branches, and by cutting, as Vines are: so that I conceive this
grafting, mentioned by some Ancient Authors, is but a conceit of theirs, See
the Observation upon the 477. Experim^
(a grafting in the brain) instead of a real Exp^riment, like multitudes of
other things recorded by some who (its probable by what they say) had no
Experimental knowledge, in the things they spoke.

As for Ma^uration of fruits, Experiment. 316.
it is effected by heat, motion, attract^on; and by a rudiment of
putrefaction, for the inception of putrefaction, has in it a maturation.

Concerning the maturation or speedy ripe^ing or concocting of Observation.
Fruits, all kinds of Heat (as the Author says) hastneth it faster, or
slower, according to the degree of heat: As we see by Experience, Apples, or
Pears laid upon a heap together (being newly gathered) they m^llow, and rip^n
faster then if they lay single, at distance one from another. Al^o Apples
covered in Lime, hay^ straw, etc. will be m^ll^w, in a short time; But the most
speedy way to ripen hard fruits, and to abate the gross tartness of them, is
the common Experiment by a gentle heat before the fire, or in an Oven after
bread is drawn.

So we see (as the A^thor obse^ves) If fruits are eat with Wasps, Hornets,
Bird^ etc. some part of them, the rest sweeten, and rip^n sooner, putrefaction
beg^nning, and hastening by reason of solution of continuity, in that part.

Experiment. 343.
We see that Beer or Wine in Bottles close stopped lasts long: And that Fruits
closed in Wax k^epe fresh: And lik^wise bodies put in Honey and Flower, keep
more fresh.

Observation.
It is true, that Liquors when they are well settled in the V^ss^ll, (after a
certain time) and after drawn ou^ into B^ttles, and stopped very close with
Cork, and set in a C^ll^r, or buried in sand, such will be much more fresh,
and quick th^^ the ^^me Liquor in a great Vessel, especially if any part of it
be drawn off: And therefore this is a good way to keep Cider, Perry,
White Wind, or the like, and that for a long time together.

As for Fruits closed in wax, or put in honey. I find that even Cherries (which
are more subject to corruption ^hen many other k^nds of fruits) will keep
fresh, many weeks together, more then they will do of themselves in the open
Air: exclusion of Air preserve^ them for a time, but yet putre^ac^ion at
length will work within, because of the superfluous moisture, which h^d need
of drying up. I have tried Fruits in Hon^y, (Aprecots, Plums, Cherries) and
they held good two, or three Months: a^terwards pu^re^action began.

Experiment. 378.
A Bottle of Beer buried four foot d^epe in the ground, became more liv^ly
better tasted, and clear^r, then it was^ and a Bottle of Wine in like manner: A
Bottle of Vinegar so buried came forth more lively, and more ^doriferous,
smelling almost like a Vi^l^t after a Month, burial all the three came forth^
as fresh and lively, if not better then before.

Observation.
This is certain, That Beer, Ale, Cider, and Wine, when well settled and
cleared in the Vessel, and drawn off into Bottles, and well stopped with Cork,
and wax; will continue fr^sh, and good, much longer then in the Vessel: If the
Bottles are buried in sand, (as was said before) or buried a yard, or more in
the ground: The reason I conceive is, for that as no Air can possibly
penetrate so deep, and through the Bottle, to the Liquor, nor can the spirits
of the Liquor (in the least) get out: so neither can the Liquor suffer any
prejudice by alteration of the Air from heat to cold, as it does in vessels
above ground.

Trial has been made, with earthen Bottles, well stopped, Experiment^ 385.
hanged in a well of Twenty Fathom deep, at the least, and some of the
Bottles have been let down into the water, some others have hanged above,
w^th^in about a Fathom of the water: Wine, and Beer in these Bottles have
kept better, then in a Cell^r, but those above water were apparently the best.

The Cause why Beer, wine, Cider or the like, Observation.
will keep better thus, and in Earth, sand etc. (as before) then in V^ssells,
or Bottles above ground, I apprehen^ (as was said) for that the Air is
excluded, and the spirits shut in: also the Air above ground is subject to
variation^ some^imes more hot, and sometimes more cold: which som^what stirrs,
and affects the spirits of the Liquor in the Vess^ll, whe^^by they become
weaker.

I have heard i^ repor^ed for a truth, That Bottles of Wine, (or some other
Liquor) were found in a deep draw-well, which had been many years f^^d up,
and afterward opened, and cle^sed again for use: and the Liquor was found to
be very fresh, and good, notwithstanding it had l^en there many year: whereby
it is manifest, that this way of keeping Liquors, will preserve it good a long
time.

The IX. CENTURY.
WE have partly touched before, Experiment. 854.
the means of producing fruits without Cores, or stones: And this we add
further, that the Cause must be abundance of moisture, for that the Core, and
stone, are made of a dry sap^ And we see that it is possible to mak^ a Tr^e put
forth only in Blossom without fruit, as in Cherries with double flowers: much
more in fruit, without stone or Cores.

This has been spoken to sufficiently before, Observation.
See Experiment 514. It is neither the taking out of the Pi^h, as is there
prescribed; nor the abundance of moisture, as here, that will work this effect:
some Trees have a great deal too much moisture, and yet the fruits of such
have nevertheless cores, or stones.

As for the Cherry-tree that puts forth Bloss^ms without Fruits: that is not
made to do so by any man's Art, or Skill: but it is natural: I know the kind
well, it is as natural for it to bear double blossoms, without Fruit, as for
any other Tree to bear such, or such a kind of fruit.

Exp^riment. 856.
Trees set upon the back^ of Chimneys, do ripen fruits sooner: Vines that have
been drawn in at the window of a Kitchen, have sent forth Grapes ripe a mo^th
(at l^ast) before others.

Observation.
Thi^ is certain (as the Author saie^^ such a kind of heat, as is upon the
back of Chimneys, where fire is continually, or most commonly kept, will much
hasten the ripening of fruits. I have seen a thin Brick wall where fire has
been kept on the one side; and Fruit Trees have been plan^^d on the other side:
which have brought forth ripe f^uits very early: much sooner then the same
^inds without such artificial heat.

But (as I remember) such trees dye, soon after bearing, they last but one
year: being so much forced with heat, it destroys nature.

And Branches of Vines being drawn in at the window of a Kitchen, or room
where fire is kept: the fruits will be ripe sooner then those without doors:
but let it not be too near the fire, lest it wither, or over much dry the
branch.

THE END.
I desire the Reader to amend these faults escaped in Printing.
Page 2. line 1^^ for forming^ read forcing of nature. p. 30. l. 6. put a full
point after the w^^d Flower. p. 30. ^. 7. for is, read with. p. 32. l. the
last, for vari^ty, ^ead (...). p. 40. l. the first, for winds, read wines.

A Table showing the Principal things contained in the ensuing Experiments,
and Observations.
ACceleration of Germination, by s^wing seed upon a hot-bed page 1. Steeping
of seeds, kernells, stones, etc. in Liquors before sowing, to make them spring
up the sooner p. 2. Watring of Strawberries, to hasten their ripening p^ 3.
Blood, and other things applied to the Roots of trees, helps toward th^iving
of the Trees, and bearing of Fruits, moderately, and seasonably observed p. 3.
Fruits upon the south, and East sun, ripen soonest p. 3. Digging about the
Roots of some Trees, is profitable p. 4. Rose-trees bud forth in the house p.
4. Flowers with bulbous Roots, grow a time in water p. 4. Pease, Radish etc.
Early p 4. Water nec^ssary to fruit trees but not overmuch p. 5. Plants housed
seas^^ably, bud soonest p. 5. To make Roses come late, several means p. 5, 6,
7. Stones, weeds, muck etc. laid about the Roots of new set trees, makes them
prosper b^tter p. 7. Keep Trees st^dy, at first se^ting p 8. Cut away suckers,
and side branches, as need is p. 8. Branches of some Trees laid in the ground,
take Root p^ 8. How to take ^ff the Boughs of some trees with Roots p. 8. No
descention of sap in Trees, diverse Arguments against it. p. 9. How to make
barren Trees fruitful p. 9, 10. Trees against a Southwall bear fruits ripe
soonest 10. Pull not off leaves too son p. 10. Fruits on low boughs, ripe
soon^st p. 11. Graft trees that bear not, or bear not good fruits, with
Grafts of good bearing kinds p. 11. Digging about the Roots of trees,
profitable to some p. 12. Opening the Roots of old trees, and putting in good
mould, is nec^ssary in barren ground p. 12. Tra^splant trees from bad ground,
to better p. 12. Cu^ting, or scoring the bark of trees^ sometimes profitable p.
13. Shade good for some trees p 13. Pull off Blossoms in some Cases p. 13, 14.
Grafting helps not trees, exc^pt the Grafts are of good kinds p. 14. G^afts
do govern, yet partake somewhat of the stock p. 14, 15. Fruit Trees of some
kernells, bear good fruits p. 15, 16. Remove Flowers into fresh ^arth p. 16.
Regrafting the same Graft mak^s not fruits greater p 16. Cut not off the ^ops
of young fig trees p. 17. Black Mulberry-trees great bearers p. 17. Lees of
Wine^ Blood etc. good especially to old trees p. 17. Terebration of trees, good
for some trees 17. Pricking, or scoring some trees, profitable p. 18. Swines
dung, good for trees, if moderately used p. 18. Simply grafting does not
meliorat^ fruits p. 18. Choose the b^st Grafts, and Stocks p. 18. Rot^en dung,
b^st for trees p. 19. Fruit growing in Pots p. 19. Set not any Trees below the
soil p. 20. Fruits upon warm walls ripen soonest p. 20. Graft upon the b^st
sto^k^ p. 20. The Causes of Barrenn^sse of Trees 21 Of Compounding fruits,
making of s^ve^all kinds, one n^w kind 22. Sym^athy^ and Antipathy of Plant 23.
Several kinds drawing ^he ^^me ^uyce, or sap, convert it into their own^
Natures p. 24 Of making herbs, and Fruits Medicinable p. 25. Curiosities about
F^uits, and Plants p. 26. Fruits of several shapes 26. Fruits, and trees wi^h
insc^iptions^ or ingravings upon them p. 26. Set Letters on Fruit Trees, to
know the kinds p. 27. Trees appa^elled with Flow^rs p. ^7. R^move Flowers into
fr^sh mould p. 27, 28. Lay Fl^wers to multiply them, see how p^ 28.
Cl^ve-Gilly^ Flowers, the most u^^full p. 29. White colors, more inodorate p
29^ White fruits c^mmonly b^st p. 30. D^ff^^^nt co^ours from one kind of seed^
p. 30. Ga^her s^^d^ from ^he best F^owers p. 31. How to have flowers fair, and
double p. 31. Roses multiplied by Inoculating p. 32. Fruits without Core, or
st^ne p. 32. Grafts upon the sweetest stocks, bear the sweet^st fruits p. 33.
Degenerating of Pla^ts p. 34. Some Fl^wers degenerate, and change, through
barrenness of the soil 34. Seed of some fruits d^generate, see the Cause p.
34. P^aches come not better of stones, then Grafting p. 35. Dwarf trees bear
great fruits, and many p. 35, 36. Help barren s^yles, and such as are too most,
lay them dryer p. 36, 37. Some trees bear twice a y^are p. 37. Cutting
fruit trees conduces to their lasting in some cases p. 37. How to keep fruits
long p. 38. Wine of Ch^rri^s, and other fruits p. 39. Cider, and Perry, conduce
to health and long life p. 39 An excellent drink made of Plums p. 40. Plant the
best be^ring tr^es p. 40. Most fruits commonly on the low^st bough^s, the Caus^
p. 40. Co^d b^aring kinds bear betime, and continue long p. 41. Get the best
kinds upon any rates p. 41. Graft again o^d trees if bad fruits, or bad
bearers p. 41. Some trees grow de^per then o^h^rs, the Cause p 42. Some trees
take Root of slips p 42. Vines take not with Graf^ing. Lay the branches in the
Earth p 43. H^^te hastneth Maturation of F^uits p. 43. How to keep Cid^r, (and
other Liquors) long p. 44. Bottles of Liquor in sand, earth etc. p. 44. Fruits
cannot be made without Cores, or stones p. 45. Artificial heat may h^lp to
ripen fruits ^ooner p. 46.

