THE MEDITATIONS, SOLILOQVIA, AND MANVALL OF THE Glorious Doctor S. Augustine.
translated into English.

THE SECOND EDITION.

PRINTED AT PARIS, By Mrs BLAGEART,

M.DC.LV.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER before the Meditations, Soliloquia, and Manual of
S. Augustine.
THESE three little treatises of the great S. Augustine, might all well have
been called Manualls, in respect that they are of so small bulk, as with
ease to be portable by every hand. But yet as the are are little Manualls, so
with all they may be accounted great Cordialls, for the relation which they
have, and for the place which they deserve to hold, in the heart of man. They
principally consist of most sweet affections, and aspirations, which the
enamoured soul of our incomparable Saint was ever breathing out to Almighty
God; beseeching him in most tender manner, to be dravving it still, nearer to
himself. We may see, how he aspired to perfect union with that divine
Majesty, but withal we must know, that first, he had taken pains to purge
himself entirely, from all error, sin, and vanity; and to plant the habits
of virtue in his heart, by a most attentive and faithful imitation of the
humility, and charity of Christ our Lord. Vade, and tu fac similiter. For
unless thou travail in that high way, thou will never arrive to that iourneys
end. Nor art thou to Look for any experimental Knowledge of Gods sweetness,
till by prayer and practice of solid virtue, the bitter juice of sin, and the
offensive smoke of passion be discharged. But that being done, room is made
for God, and he will maKe thee Know, and feel, how good he is.

THE TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS contained in the Meditations.
THE FIRST CHAPTER. THE Invocation of the Omnipotent God for the amendment of
his life page 1 Chap. 2. The accusation of man, and the commendation and
praise, of the divine mercy, 4 Chap. 3. The complainte of a man who is not
heard by our Lord through his disobedience, page 9 Chap. 4. The fear of the
Judge page 12 Chap. 5. The Father is inuoked by the Son, 16 Chap. 6. Here man
represents the Passion of the Son to the Father. page 19 Chap. 7. Here man
acknowledges that himself by his sins, is the cause of the Passion of
Christ our Lord, page 23 Chap. 8. Here man exposes the Passion of the Son,
to God the Father, for the reconciliation of man, page 28 Cap. 9. Of the
invocation of the holy Ghost. 35 Chap. 10. The prayer of the servant of God
conccauing humbly of himself, 37 Chap. 11. A Prayer to the blessed Trinity, 38
Chapter 12. A Confession of the Omnipotency, and Majesty of God, 39 Chapter 13.
How God the Eather vouchsafed to help mankind, and of the Incarnation of the
word, page 42 Chap. 14. Of the confidence which a soul ought to have in our
Lord Jesus, and in his Passion, 45 Chap. 15. Of the immense charity of the
eternal Father toward mankind, page 48 Chap. 16. Of the twofolde nature of
Christ our Lord, who pittyeth, and prays for us. 52 Chap. 17. Of the thanks
which a man owes to God, for the benefitt of Redemption, 56 Chap. 18. A prayer
to Christ our Lord page 60 Chap. 19. He distinguishes between that VVisdome,
which is called the house of God, and that other VVisdome which is supremely
divine, page 65 Chap. 20. He prays that the spiritual house of God, may pray
for him, page 70 Chap. 21. How full this life of ours, is, of bitterness, 73
Chap. 22. Of the felicity of that life, which our Lord has prepared, for them
that love him, 75 Chap. 23. Of the felicity of that soul which departs
hence. 78 Chap. 24. He inuoketh the Saints, 80 Chap. 25. The desire of the
soul toward the supernall City of Jerusalem, page 87 Chap. 26. A Hymn of
Paradise, page 88 Chap. 27. Of the continual praise, which a soul conceiueth
by the contemplation of the Divinity, 93 Chap. 28. What it is to see God, and
to enjoy him, after a sort, and how we are to think of God, 98 Chap. 29. He
declares many propertyes of Almighty God, 100 Chap. 30. Of the unity of God,
and the plurality of Persons in him, page, 107 Chap. 31. A prayer to the
blessed Trinity, 112 Chap. 32. That God is the true, and souuereigne life, 114
Chap. 33. Of the praise which men and Angels give to God, 117 Chap. 34. He
complayneth against himself for not being moved, with the contemplation of God
whereat the Angels tremble, 124 Chap. 35. A prayer which greatly moves the
heart to Devotion, and to Divine love, 128 Chap. 36. A most devout Prayer by
way of thanks-giueing, 138 Chap. 37. A most holy, and most excellent Prayer to
almighty God, whereby the soul is greatly moved to devotion, page, 148 Chap.
38. A Prayer to be made in affliction, 161 Chap. 39. Another Prayer to our Lord
Jesus Christ, 163 Chap. 40. Another Prayer to God. 172 Chap. 41. A Prayer upon
the Passion Christ our Lord, 180
THE TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS contained in the Soliloquia.
THE FIRST CHAPTER. OF the unspeakable sweetness of God, page 192 Chap 2. Of the
misery and fragility of man, p. 200 Chap. 3 Of the admirable light of God, 206
Chap. 4. Of the mortality of Man's nature, 208 Chap. 5. What it is, to be made
nothing, 211. Chap. 6, Of the fall of a soul by sin, 215 Chap. 7. Of the
manifold benefits of Almigthy God, 216 Chap. 8. Of the future Dignity of Man,
221 Chap. 9. Of the Omnipotency of God, 226 Chap. 10. Of the incomprehensible
praise of God, 228 Chap. 11. Of the hope, which is to be erected toward God,
231 Chap. 12. Of the snares of concupiscence. 234 Chap. 13. Of the misery of
man, and the benefits of God, 238 Chap. 14. That God does consider the works,
and purposes of mankind. with a perpetual attention, 243 Chap. 15. That Man
of himself can do nothing without divine grace, 248 Chap. 16. Of the
temptation of the devil, 255 Chap. 17. That God is the Light of just Persons,
259 Chap. 18, Of the benefits of God, 265 Chap. 19. Of the fervor of charity,
271 Chap. 20. That God has submitted all things to the service of man, 274
Chap. 21. That the greatenes of the divine counsel may be inferred by the
consideration of temporal blessings, 277 Chap. 22. That the divine sweetness
takes away all the present bitterness of the world, 280 Chap. 23. That all our
hope, ought to be placed in our Lord, 284 Chap. 24. That all our salvation
depends upon our God, 286 Chap. 25. That the will of man, wants efficacy
toward goods works without the grace of God, 289 Chap. 26. Of the ancient
benefits of Almighty God. 291 Chap. 27. Of the Angels which are deputed to the
custody of man, 293 Chap. 28. Of the profound predestination, and prescience of
God, 298 Chap. 29. Of them who first were just, and afterward became wiked,
303 Chap. 30. That a faithful soul is a Sanctuary of God, 306 Chap. 31. That
God is not to be found, either by the exterior or interior senses. 308 Chap.
32. A Confession of true faith, 322. Chap. 33. Of the Confession of our own
baseness, 331 Chap. 34. A considerations of the divine Majesty, 333 Chap. 35.
Of the desire and thirst of a soul toward God, 338 Chap. 36. Of the glory of
our celestial country, 346 Chap. 37. A payer to the blessed Trinity, 352
THE TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS contained in the Manual.
THE FIRST CHAPTER. OF the wonderful essence of God, page 355 Chap. 2. Of the
unspeakable knowledge of God 357 Chap. 3. Of the desire of a soul which
thirsts after God, 360 Chap. 4 Of the misery of a soul which loves not God,
362 Chap. 5. Of the desire of a soul, 365 Chap. 6. Of the felicity of a soul
which is freed from the prison of flesh. and blood, 367 Chap. 7. Of the Joys
of Heaven, page 369 Chap. 8. Of the kingdom of Heaven, page 341 Chap. 9. How
God does comfort an afflicted soul, 343 Chap. 10. Of the sweetness of divine,
love, 345 Chap. 11. Of the preparation of our Redemption, 349 Chap. 12. Of
spiritual joy, 378 Chap. 13. That the Word Incarnate is the cause of our
Hope, 381 Chap. 14. How sweet a thing is is to think of God, 382 Chap. 15. How
much tribulation endured for Christ our Lord, is to be desired, 384 Chap, 16.
How the kingdom of God may be obtained, 386 Chap. 17. What a happy place
Heaven is, page 387 Chap. 18. We cannot make any requital to Almighty God,
but only by love, 390 Chap. 19. What it is which God rereth of us, that so we
may be like himself, 392 Chap. 20. Of the confidence of a soul which loves
God, 394 Chap. 21. What God did for man, 397 Chap. 22. Of the remembrance of
the wounds of Jesus Christ our Lord, 399 Chap. 23. The remembrance of the
wounds of Christ our Lord, is our remedy in all adversity, 400 Chap. 24. An
exhortation of the soul to the love of Christ our Lord, 402 Chap. 25. That
nothing can suffice the soul, but the supreme Good, page 405 Chap. 26. What
the knowledge of Truth is, 407 Chap. 27. What at the mission of the holy Ghost
does work in us, page 448 Chap. 28. Of the working of that soul which loves
God, 411 Chap. 29. Of the hearts true Repose, page 413 Chap. 30. VVatsoeuer does
withdraw the sight of the mind from God, is wholly to be avoided, 414 Chap. 31.
How the vision of God was lost by sin, and that misery came so to be found
out, 416 Chap. 32. Of the Goodness of God, 419 Chap. 33. Of the delightful
fruition of God, 421 Chap. 34. That this supreme Good is to be desired, 423
Chap. 36. Of the mutual Charity of the Saints in Heaven, 426 Chap. 36. Of the
fulness of the joy of Heaven, 428
THE MEDITATIONS OF THE GLORIOUS Doctor S. Augustine.
THE FIRST CHAPTER. He inuokes Almighty God for the amendment of his life and
manners.
O LORD my God! bestow upon my heart. that I may desire thee; that by desiringe
thee, I may seek thee; that by seekinge thee, I may find thee; that by
findinge thee I may love thee, that by loueing thee, I may be freed from all my
sins; and that once being freed, I may return to them noe more. O Lord my
God! grant repentance to my heart, contrition to my spirit, a fontaine of tears
to mine eyes, and liberality in giueinge alms, to my hands. O my King!
extinguish all desires of sense, and kindle the fire of thy love in me. O thou
my Redeemer, drive away the spirit of pride; and grant me, through thy mercy,
the treasure of thy humility. O thou, my Savior! remove from me the fury of
anger, and vouchsafe me (of thy grace) the shield of patience. O thou my
Creator! take all rancor from me; and through thy meekenes, enrich me with a
sweet, and gentle mind. Bestow on me, o most merciful Father, a solid
faith, a convenient hope, and a continual charity! O thou my Directour! remove
from me, vanity and inconstancy of mind, vnsetlednes of body, scurrility of
speech, pride of eyes, gluttony of diet, the offense of my neighbors, the
wickedness of detractions, the itch of curiosity, the desire of riches, the
oppression, which is imposed by the mighty, the appetite of vain glory, the
mischeife of hipocrisy, the poison of flattery, the contempt of the necessitous
and poor, the oppression of the weak, the biteinge of covetousness, the rust
of envy, and the death of blasphemy.

Cut away from me, O thou who art my maker! all ungodly temerity, pertinacy,
unquietness, idleness, sleepiness, slothe, dullnes of mind, blindness of
heart, stiffnes of opinion, harshnesse of conversation, disobedience to virtue,
and opposition to good advice, vnbridlednesse of speech, oppression of the
poor, violence of the rich, slander of the innocent, sharpness toward my
servants, ill example toward mine acquaintance, and hard-hartednes toward my
neighbors. O my God, and my mercy, I beseech thee, by thy beloved Son, grant
that I may perform the works of mercy, and pity; sufferinge with the
afflicted, aduising such as err, succourring such as are miserable, supplying
such as are in want, confortinge such as are in sorrow, releiuing the
oppressed, refreshing the poor, cherishinge the spirits which are wounded;
forgiueing those that trespass against me, perdoninge such as do me wrong,
loueing them, who hate me, rendringe good for evil, dispiseing none, but
honouringe all, imitating the good, taking heed of the bade, imbraceing
virtue, reiectinge vice, haueing patience in adversity, and moderation in
prosperity; and, that, keepeing a guard upon my mouth, and shuttinge the door
of my lips, I may despise, all earthly, and aspire to heavenly things.

CHAP. II. The accusation of man, and the commendation and praise, of the
divine mercy.
BEhold, (O thou who haste framed me) how many things I have desired, while yet
I deserve not, so much as a few. I confess, woe is me. I confess that not
only these graces, which I have begged, are not due to me, but rather many,
and most exquisite torments. Yet does the example of the Publicanes, and
Harlotts, and murdering thieves, give me heart; who being suddenly drawn out
of the very jaws of the enemy, have been embraced, in the bosom of the good
shepherd. And thou, o God, the Creator of all things, though in all thy
works thou be admirable, yet we believe that thou art much more admirable, in
the works of mercy. Whereupon thou said, by a certain servant of thine, His
mercyes are over all his works. And we do confidently hope, that it was, as
if thou hadest spoken it of every one of us in particular, when thou did thus
express thy self of the whole people: saying, But I will not remove mercy
from it: For thou despisest noe man, thou reiectest noe man, thou abhorrest noe
man, unless perhaps it be some one, who is so mad as to abhor thee.

When therefore thou art angry, thou do not only not strike the offenders,
but eue^ impartest blessings to them; if they give over offending.

O thou, my God! the very horn of my salvation and my vpholder, I wretched
creature, have offended thee: I have done wickedly in thy sight: I have
deserved thy wrath: I have provoked thy fury: I have sinned, and thou have
suffered me: I have offended, and thou yet endurest me. If I repent, thou
pardonest; if I return, thou receiuest; nay more then this, whilst I am
deferring, thou expectest me. Thou do reduce me when I err: thou inuitest me
when I resist: thou staiest for me when I am dull, thou imbracest me when I
return: Thou teach me when I am ignorant: thou cherrishest me when I am
afflicted: thou raisest me whilst I fall: thou restorest me when I am fallen:
thou give me when I ask: thou art found when I seek thee; and thou openest
when I knock.

O Lord, the God of my salvation! behold, I know not what I may allege: I know
not what to answer: I have no refuge, nor hole to retire my serfe into from
thee. Thou have showed me the way of good life, and thou have given me
knoweledge how to conduct my self: thou haste treatned me with the fear of
hell, thou have allured me with the hope of the glory of heaven And now, O
Father of mercyes! o God of all consolation, strike through my very flesh with
thy fear; to the end, through fear I may avoid that which thou threatnest;
and restore to me the joy of thy saving grace, that by love, I may obtain the
things which thou promisest.

O Lord! my strength, and my fundation, my God, my refuge, and my deliverer,
inspire me with what I ought to think of thee; teach me with what words I
should inuoke thee; impart the power of performeinge those works, whereby I may
please thee. I know there is one thing, whereby thou art appeased, and an other
which thou art not wont to despise. To wit an afflicted soul, is a sacrifice
to thee: and thou vouchsafest to accept an humble and contrite heart.

O my God, and my helper! enrich me, I beseech thee, with these gifts; defend
me against mine enemy by these graces; impart this refreshinge to me, against
the burninge heat of sensualityes, and let this refuge be open to me, against
the importunity of all inordinate desires. O Lord! the strength of my
salvation, do not permit me to be of them, who believe in thee for a season;
but in the time of temptation depart from thee. Over shadow this head of mine,
in the day of battle O thou who art my hope in the time of affliction, and my
saueing health in the time of tribulation. Behold, o Lord! o thou my light, and
my salvation! I have begged those things of thee which I need: I have
intimated those things which I apprehend and fear, but my conscience fills me
with remorse, the secretts of my heart reprove me, and that which love gathered
together, fear scatters; and that which zeal moves me too, distrust draws
me from. My sins, give me terror, but thy pity putts me into hope; thy
bounty exhorts me, though mine own malignity holds me back. And that I may
confess a truth, the images, and representations of my old sins, be still
obtrudeing themselves on my memory, and they hold me down from presumeing too
far.

CHAP. III. The complainte of a man who is not heard by our Lord, through his
disobedience.
FOr in fine, when a man is worthy of hate, with what face shall he desire
favor? To whom punishment is due, what rash boldness is it for him, to expect
glory? He provoke his Judge, who instead of giueinge satisfaction for his
offense, pretends to be honored with rewards. He insults upon his King, who
being obnoxious to punishment, will adventure to beg a prize which is not due
to him. And that foolish son, would exasperate the tender heart of his father,
who (having reproached the same father) would presume to usurp the honor of
the inheritance, before he had disposed himself to penance. What is this, o my
dear Father, which I say I have done! I have deserved death, and yet I ask
life. I have offended my souueraigne King, whose aid I do yet thus
impudently implore. I have despised my Judge whom thus rashly, I desire to be
my helper. Most insolently have I refused, so much as to harken to my Father,
whom yet I am presumeinge, to have for my defender. Woe be unto me, how late
do I come: woe be to me, how slack am I in making haste; woe be to me, who am
runninge still, having received fresh wounds and yet vouchsafe not when I am
well, to prevent the pearcinge of new arrows. I have neglected to forsee the
darts before they came; but now that I behold my death at hand, I am full of
trouble. I added wounds to wounds, because I feared not, to add crimes to
crimes. My ancient scarrs, I have broken through with new violence; because my
late iniquities, have corresponded with my ancient sins; and that which thy
divine physic had cured, and closed; the itch of my frensy, has opened
again. The skinn which being drawn over my wounds, did conceal my infirmity,
has putrified by the breaking out of filthy blood; whilst that iniquity which
I iterated, did euacuate the mercy which thou did grante. For I well know, how
it is written: In what hour soever the just man shall sin, all his justice
shall be forgotten. And now if the justice of the just man shall be forgotten when
he falls, how much more shall the peunance of a sinner be forgotten, if he
return again to comitt those sins? How often, like a dog, have I returned
to my vomitt, and like a sow, have I weltered again, in the mire? I may well
confess it, for it is impossible, but I should remember it. How many ignorant
persons have I taught the way how to sin? how many have I persuaded, who had
no mind to it? I have compelled such as resisted; and I have consented to such
as desired. For how many have I laid a snare, who were already in the right
way? and for others who sought that way, I have dug a pit, and to the end
that I might not abhor the doeinge of these things, I feared not to cast them
out of my mind. But thou o just Judge, who sealest up the accounts of my
sins, and who stand watchinge over all my ways, and haste numbered every
one of my stepps; thou I say, heldest thy peace, thou have ever been silent,
and ever patient. But woe is me, thou will at length cry out, like a woman who
is in the torment of child-bedd.

CHAP. IV. The fear of the Judge.
O God, of Gods, O Lord who art too hard for the malice, and sin of man. I
know that one day thou will appear; I know that thou will not be always
silent, when the fire shall burn in thy sight, and that strong tempest, shall
compass thee inn round about; when thou shall call the heaven and earth, at
such time as thou will judge thy people. And behold all my iniquities shall be
discovered then, before so many thousands of nations; and all my greiuous
crimes not only, deeds, but even words, and very thoughts themselves, shall be
manifested, to so many legions of Angels. Before so many judges, shall I,
desolate creature, stand, as there will be men, who have far outstripped me in
good works. By so many reprouers shall I be confounded, as have given me
examples of good life. And by so many witnesses shall I be convinced, as have
taught me by good speeches; and instructed me, toward an imitation of them, by
their good examples. O my Lord, I can light upon nothing which I may say;
nothing does occurr which I can answer. And now, whilst I am subject to this
sharp trial, my conscience racks me, the secrets of my heart torment me,
covetousness streightens me, pride accuses me, envy consumes me, concupiscence
inflames me, lust importunes me, gluttony dishoners me, ebriety ouercomes me,
detraction tears me, ambition supplants me, greediness disquiets me, discord
scatters me, anger disturbes me, mirth dissolues me, heaviness oppresses me,
hypocrisy deceiues me, flattery alters me, favor exalts me, and slander
wounds me. Behold o thou, who art my deliverer from these feirce nations!
behold who they be, whom I have lived with all, from the very day of my birth;
whom I have observed, and to whom I have dedicated my self. Those very
employments which I loved, condemn me; they which I praised, dishonored me.
These are those friends with whom I did so carefully comply; those Masters,
whose direction I followed, those Lords whom I have served; those Counseillers
whom I have believed; those citzens with whom I have dwelt; and those
domestics whom I have consented too. woe is me, o my King, and my God, that
my habitation here, is so much prolonged. Woe is me! O thou light of mine eyes,
that I have dwelt amongst the inhabitants of Cedar. And if holy David could say
that he had dwelt much with them, how much more, may I wretched creature say (O
thou my God, and my strong fundation) that my soul has dwelt too much with
them; for in thy sight, noe man liueinge can be justified.

My hope is not reposed in the sons of men, for if thou judge them (when thy
mercy is laid a side) whom will thou be able to find just? And if thou
prevent not the wicked man by showeing mercy? thou will not find any good man,
upon whom to bestow thy glory. For I believe (O thou who art my salvation)
that which I have been told, that it is thy mercy which brings me to
penance. Those lips of thy mouth more sweet then Nectar, have sounded forth
these words: Noe man can come to me, unless my Father who sent me, draw him.
Because therefore thou haste instructed me: because by that instruction, thou
have mercifully framed me; as now I am; I do with the most inward marrow of my
soul, and with all possible strife of my heart, inuoke thee, o Omnipotent
Father, with thy most beloved Son; and thee, o most sweet Son, with the
most excellent souueraigne Holy spirit, that thou will draw me toward thee,
and that so I may runn after the fragrance of thy precious odours: and that I
may do it most dearly.

CHAP. V. The Father is inuoked by the Son.
INuoke thee, o my God! I inuoke he, because thou art present, to all such as
call upon thee, in the way of truth: for thou art Truth. Teach me, o holy
Truth, by thy mercy, how I may inuoke thee, in thee, because I know not how
that must be done; and therefore I do most humbly beg of thee, to be taught
by thee For to be wise without thee, is to play the fool; but to know thee,
is perfectly to be wise. Teach me, o divine Wisdom, and instruct me in thy
law, for I believe that he whom thou teach, and whom thou instructest in
thy law, shall be happy. I desire to inuoke thee, and I beseech thee, that it
may be in all Truth What is it to call upon Truth, in Truth, but to call upon
the Father in his Sons. Thy speech therefore, o holy Father, is Truth, and
Truth is the beginning of thy words. For this, is the beginning of thy words,
that in the beginning was the word. In the very beginning do I adore thee, who
art the prime, and supreme beginning. In that very word of Truth, do I also
inuoke thee o perfect Truth, in which word I beseech thee, who art that very
Truth, that thou will direct, and teach me that Truth. For what is more
delightful, then to inuoke the Father, in the name of his only begotten
Son; to induce the Father to mercy, by the remembrance of his Son; and to
mollify the Kings heart by the mention of his dearest Son. For thus do
prisoners use to be freed from their restrainte: So are slaves, freed from
their chains; and men who are liable to the sadd doom of death, are not only
absolved; but grow entitled, sometimes, to extraordinary favor, when they
putt angry Princes in mind, of the love they bear to their progeny: And when
the intercession of the Son is employed, the poor slave is wont to avoid
the punishment of his Lord.

Just so, o thou Omnipotent Father, I beg of thee, by thine Omnipotent Son,
that thou will draw my soul out of prison, that I may confess to thy name. I
beseech thee, by that only begotten Son of thine, who is coeternall with
thee; that thou will discharge me, from these fetters of my sins; and that by
the mediation of thy most precious issue, who is sitting at thy right hand;
thou will, of thy goodness, restore me to life, who for my great demerits am
threatened with the sentence of death. For I know not what other intercessor I
should be able to use toward thee, but him who is propitiation for our sins,
and who sits at thy right hand pleadinge for us. Behold, o God the Father,
him who is my advocate with thee. Behold that supreme Bishop, who has noe
need to be expiated by any others blood, because he is resplendent by being all
bathed, in his own. Behold here the holy Sacrifice which is holy, perfect,
and well pleasing; and which is offered in the odor of sweetness, and so
accepted. Behold the lamb without spott, who is silent before the shearrer; and
who being beaten upon the face with blows, and defiled with spittle, and
reproached with scorn, did not yet so much as open his mouth. Behold, he who
never committed sin, has borne our sins; and by his own wounds, has cured
our diseases.

CHAP. VI. Here man represents the Passion of the Son to the Father.
Behold dear Father, thy most holy Son, who has suffered such bitter
pains for me. Behold o most clement King, who it is that suffers, and
mercifully remember, for whom he suffers. Is not he, o my Lord, that innocent
person, who being thine only Son, was delivered by thee, to the end that he
might redeem thy slave? Is not he the author of life, who yet is carried like
a sheep to slaughter; and being made obedient to thee, did not fear to
undergo a most outrageous kind of death, which was most hydeously greiuous?
Call to mind, o thou who art the dispenser of all salvation, that this is,
that very he, whom although thou did begett, out of thine own substance,
and strength; thou did yet ordeyne to be partaker of my infirmity. Yea this
indeed is that Deity of thine, which apparelled it self with my nature, and
that nature ascended up to the tree of the Cross, and endured bitter torment
in the flesh, which it assumed. Send down, o Lord my God, the eyes of thy
Majesty, upon this work of thy unspeakable piety. Behold thy sweet Son,
being stretched out from head to foot. Behold those innocent hands all
distillings with his precious blood, and thou being once appeased, forgive the
wickedness which my hands have wrought. Consider that disarmed side of his,
which is pierced by the point of a cruel Lance; and renew me in that most
sacred spring, which I believe flowed down from thence. Cast an eye toward
those immaculate feet of his, which never stood in the way of sinners, but did
always walk in thy Law. See how they are fastened, with cruel nails, and
do thou perfect my paces in thy pathewayes, and mercifully make me hate all
ways of wickedness. Remove the way of iniquity from me, and of thy goodness,
make me choose the way of truth. I beseech thee, o King of Saints, by this
Redeemer of mine, that thou will make me runn with speed through the way of thy
Commandeme^tes, that so I may be united to him in spirit, who disdayned not to
be vested with my flesh.

Do thou not, o holy Father, observe how that most dear head of thy Son
(he being yet but in the flower of his youth) is hanging down upon that neck,
which is as white as snow, and does resolve it self into a most precious
death? Behold, o thou most meek Creator, the humanity of thy beloved Son;
and take pity upon the weakness of our frail nature. That bare breast of his,
is lilly-pale; that side is all read, and goared with blood, those bowels are
withered, with being stretched out, those sweet bright eyes do languish; that
imperial face is all discolored; those long and graceful arms, are grown
stiff; those marble thighs are hanging down; and those springs of that
precious blood, do bedew, and bathe, his transperced feet. Behold o glorious
Father the torn lymms of thy most beloved Son; and in thy mercy, remember
that he carries my nature about him. Behold the punishment of that man, who is
God; and release the misery of that man who was created by him. Behold the
punishment of the Redeemer, and remitt and pardon his offense who is redeemed.
This is he, o my Lord, whom thou did strike for the sins of thy people,
though he be still that beloved, in whom thou art so well pleased. This is
that innocent person, in whom noe guile was found, and yet, he was esteemed to
be one of the wicked.

CHAP. VII. Here man acknowledgeh that himself by his sins, is the cause of
the Passion of Christ our Lord.
WHAT have thou committed, o thou most sweet child, that thou should so be
judged? what have thou committed, o most amiable young man, that thou should
be treated so? what is thy wickedness? what is thy crime? what is the cause of
thy death? what is the occasion of thy condemnation? It is I, it is I, who am
that wound, which putts thee to pain, and I am the crime which kills thee: and
I am the man who deserved that death which thou endurest. I am the wickedness,
whereof reueng is taken upon thee. I am that sornes of thy Passion: I am the
labor of thy torment. O admirable kind of sentence! O disposition of an
unspeakable mystery! The wicked man sins, and the just man is punished: The
guilty person offends, and the innocent man bears the blows; the impious man
errs, and the holy man is condemned. That which the wicked man deserves, the
holy man endures; that which the slave borrowes, his Lord pays; that which man
committs, God undergoes. How low, o Son of God, how low did thy humility
descend? how high did thy charity burn up? how far did thy piety proceed?
how wide did thy benignity extend? whither did thy love aspire? and where did
thy compassion arrive? For it is I, who have done wickedly, and thou art
punished. I, who have committed the crime, and thou art laid upon the Rack. I,
grew proud, and thou art humbled. I was puffed up, and thou art extenuated. I
have showed my self disobedient, and thou being obedient, do answer for
the pain due to that disobedience. I have obeyed the temptation of gluttony,
and thou art half consumed for lack of meat. Distempered affection drew me
on apace to unlawful concupiscence; and perfect charity was that, which led
thee on to the Cross. I presumed to do that which was forbidden, thou did
undergo torments. I am delighted with meat, thou art in labor upon the
Cross. I am fed with delight: thou art torn with nails. I tasted the
sweetness of the apple; thou the bitterness of gall. Eve laughs, and congratulats
my sin with me; but Mary weeps and takes compassion with thee. Behold, O King
of glory, behold how my impiety, and thy piety, are made apparent by one
another. Behold how my injustice and thy Justice are made clearly manifest.
What! O my King, and my God, shall I render for all those things, which thou
have bestowed on me? For there is nothing to be found in the heart of man,
which can bear any portion to thy singular benefits. Can the sharpnes of man's
conceit, think of any thing, to which the mercy of God may be compared? Noe,
it is not in the power of a creature to perform any service that can make full
amends to his Creator.

But yet, O Son of God, there is somewhat in this admirable dispensation of
thine, there is some what, wherein my frailty may answer, in some small
proportion to what I owe if by the visitation of thy holy Spirit, my contrite
heart, may crucify my flesh with the vices, and concupiscences thereof. And when
this favor is granted me by thee, I do already, as it were, beginn to suffer
sweetly with thee, because thou did vouchsafe to dye for my sins.

And thus by the victory of the inward man, he is prepared through thy help,
toward an evident triumph; so that the spiritual persecution being overcome,
he fears not to submitt himself, for the love of thee, to a material sword.
And in this manner, if it be pleasinge to thy mercy, the weakness of our
condition will be able, according to our little strength, to correspond with
the greatenesse of our Creator.

This, O dear Jesus, is that celestial medicine: this is the antidote of thy
love. I beseech thee, by those ancient mercyes of thine, infuse some such thing
into my wounds, as wherreby, I (casting up the contagion of vipers, which I
have sucked) may be reintigrated to my former health, and that upon the taste of
the Nectar of thy divine sweetness, I may be drawn to despise the inticeinge
vanities of this world, with my whole heart; and that, by thy goodness, I may not
be freighted with any adversity which can happen here; but, being mindful of
that nobility which is to last for ever, I may still loath the winds of this
transitory world. Let nothing, I beseech thee, be delightful to me, witheut
thee. Let nothing be pleasinge, nothing be precious, nothing beautiful
besides thee. Let all things, I beseech thee, grow base, and odious without
thee. That which is contrary to thee, let it be troublesome to me, and let
thy good pleasure, be my eternal desire. Let it be a tedious thing to me, to
rejoice without thee; and let it delight me, to be greiued for thee. Let thy
very name, be a joy to my heart; and let the comfort of thy memory, bring my
tears, which may be the bread I feed on, day and night, whilst I seek thy
law. And let that law be esteemed by me, beyond thousands of gold and
silver. Let it be an amiable thing for me, to obey thee, and execrable to
resist thee. I beseech thee, o my hope, by all thy works of pity, that thou will have mercy upon my sins. Make mine ears stand open to thy Commandments.
And I beseech thee, by thy holy Name, let not my heart decline toward the
words of malice, to the makeinge of excuses upon excuses, of my sins: and I
beseech thee also, by that admirable humility of thine, that the foot of pride
may not come toward me, and that the hand of a sinner may not stir me.

CHAP. VIII. Here man exposes the Passion of the Son, to God the Father, for
the reconciliation of man.
Behold, O thou Omnipotent God, the Father of my Lord, dispose thou
graciously, and have mercy on me. I beseech thee, I say, since whatsoever I
have conceived to be best, I have devoutly offerred; and whatsoever I have
found to be most excellent, I have humbly presented to thee. I have left
nothing in my self, which I have not exposed to thy Majesty; Nothing now
remains for me to add, for I have fastened all my hope on thee. I have
directed to thee, thine own dear Son, who is mine Advocate. I have placed
that glorious ofspringe of thine, as a mediator between thee, and me. I have
placed him, as I said, for an intercessour; by whose means I hope for pardon.
I have offered by these words of mine, that Word of thine, who, as I said
before, was sent, for the pardon of my sins; and I have recounted to thee,
the Passion of thy most Holy Son, which I believe he has endured for me. I
believe that the Deity was sent by thee, and that it took upon it self, my
humanity; wherein he disdained not to suffer blows, fetters spittings, and
scorns; yea even the Cross, Nails, and Lance.

His Humanity was entertained with the cries of infancy; it was bound in by the
swathinge clothes of that tender age; it was vexed by the labor, and sweat of
his youth; it was extenuated also by fasting, afflicted by watchinge, and
wearied out by traveling. It was afterward laden with stirpes, and torn in
sunder with other torments. It was ranked amongst the dead, and when once it
was endued with the glory of Resurrection, he introduced it into the joys of
heaven. This is that, which must appease thee, and this must propitiate for me.

Observe therefore here, O God with mercy, what Son thou have begotten, and
what slave thou have redeemed. Observe who is the Maker, and despise not the
thing which he has made. Embrace thou the shepherd with joy, and with mercy
look upon that sheep, which he has brought home upon his own shoulders.
This is that most faithful shepherd, who with many, and great labors,
has fought this poor sheep, which so long was erring up and down, by those
abrupt, and rocky hills, and by those precepices, which ouerlooke those
valleys. And who when it was even dyinge, through the faintness to which it
was grown by that tedious error, and exile; yet as soon as he could meet
with it, he did with joy putt himself underneath it; and with an admirable
exercise, and strife of charity, he raised it out of that profound pit of
confusion; and haueinge imprisoned it in his own bosom, by dear
imbracements, he brought that one which he had lost, to the ninty nine which
remained.

Behold, O Lord my King, and my God Omnipotent! Behold how the good Pastor
brings thee, that which thou haste committed to his charge. He undertook the
salvation of man by thy direction, and he restores him to thee, free from all
infection. Behold how thy most dear Son reconciles thy Creature to thee,
which had wandered from thee so far. Behold how that meek Pastor of mine,
brings back to thy flock, that which the violent thief had driven away. He
restores that slave to thy sight, whom his own conscience had made a
fugitive; that he, who of himself deserved punishment, by means of him, may
obtain pardon; and that he to whom hell was due for his sins, by the means
of so great a Captain, may confide that he shall be recalled to his country. I
was well able, O holy Father, to offend thee of my self; but of my self, I
was not able to appease thee. Thy beloved Son, O my God, is become my helper,
participateinge of my humanity, that he might cure my infirmity; that so from
whence the cause of mine offense was grown, from thence he might offer the
Sacrifice of praise to thee; and might thereby make me acceptable to thy mercy;
since, he shows himself, sitting at thy right hand, as a confort of my
substance, and nature. Behold, this is my hope, this is all the confidence I
have. If thou despise me, as thou have reason for my sin, yet look back upon
me at least with mercy, for the love of thy beloved Son. Consider that, in
thy Son, whereby thou maisttake pity upon the slave.

Behold the mystery of his Incarnation, and pardon the sensuality of my
conversation. As often as thou beholdest the wounds of thy blessed Son; I
beseech thee, let my wickedness shrink out of thy sight. As often as thy
precious blood, looks read from that holy side, I beseech thee, that the
spotts of my corruption may be washed away. And as flesh provoked thee to
wrath, so let flesh, I beseech thee, incline thee to mercy. And in fine, as
flesh seduced us to sin, so let flesh bring us back to pardon. It is much
that my impiety diserueth; but yet it is much more which the piety of my
Redeemer does justly exact. My injustice is great, I confess it: but far
greater is the Justice of my Redeemer. For, as much as God is Superior to man,
so much is my malice inferior to his goodness, both in quantity and quality.

For in what has man sinned, wherein the Son of God, being made Man, has not
redeemed him? What pride was able to swell so high, as that so great humility
would not be able to beat it down? What dominion of death could be so
absolute, which the torment of the Cross, endured by the Sone of God, will not
destroy. Infaillibly, O my God, if the faults of a sinful man, and the grace
of him who redeemed them, be putt into an equal balance, the East will not be
found so far distant from the west; nay the lowest part of hell, will not be
found so far distant from the highest pich of heaven, as they two will be.

Now therefore, O thou most excellent Creator of light, pardon my faults,
through the immense labors of thy beloved Son. Let now I beseech thee, his
piety propitiate for my impiety; his modesty for my peruersity; his meekenes
for my rudenes; his humility for my pride; his patience for my impatie^ce; his
benignity for my harshnes; his obedience for my disobedience; his tranquillity
for my unquietness, his sweetenes for my bitterness; his mildness for my
anger; and let his charity ouerworke my cruelty.

CHAP. IX. Of the invocation of the Holy Ghost.
O Love of that divine power, the Holy communication of the Omnipotent Father,
and of the most blessed Son, O thou Omnipotent Holy Ghost, the most sweet
comforter of the afflicted; slipp thou down even very now, by thy puissant
virtue, into the most secrett corners of my heart, and by the splendour of thy
clear light, illuminate, (o thou dear dweller in our souls) these dark
retreyts of our neglected habitations; and by thy visitation, and by the
abundance of thy dew from heaven, make my soul grow fruitful, which by
reason of so long a drought, is all deformed and decayed. Wound thou the most
retired parts of this inward man, with the darts of thy love; and inflame, and
pearce the very marrowe of my dull heart, with those healthful fires of thine.
And by the flame of thy holy fervor, illuminate thou and feed the very
interior, both of my whole body and mind.

Give me once to drink of the torrent of thy delights: that now I may noe more
have a mind, so much as even to taste, of the pestiferous sweetness of wordly
things. Judge, me, o Lord, and discern my cause from all wicked people, and
teach me to do thy will, for thou art my God. I believe therefore, that
whomesoeuer thou do inhabit, thou do build up a dwellinge place in him
both for the Father and the Son. Blessed is he, who shall arrive to
intertayne thee; because by thee, both the Father and the Son will remain
with him. Come, come even now, O thou most benign Comforter of all woeful
souls. Thou, who protectest them, when they have most need, and art their
helper in tribulation. Come, o thou clenser of sins, and curer of wounds.
Come, o thou strength of the weak, o thou who stayest such as are falling.
Come o thou teacher of the humble, and distroyer of the proud. Come, o dear
Father of Orphants, and favorable Judge of widows. Come, thou hope of the
poor, and thou cherisher of such as fainte. Come, thou propitious starr of
such as sail, and thou haven, against the danger of shipwreck. Come, o thou
excellent ornament, of such as live; and the only help of such as dye. Come,
o most holy Spirit: Come, and have mercy on me; make me fit for thy self, and
condescend to me with pity, that my meandness may grow pleasing to thy
greatness, and my weakness to thy strength. According to the multitude of thy
mercyes; through Jesus Christ my Savior, who with the Father does live ad
reign in thy unity, for ever, and ever. Amen.

CHAP. X. The Prayer of the Servant of God conceauing humbly of himself.
I Know, O Lord, I know, and I confess that I am not worthy, that thou
should love me; but yet at least, it is certain, that thou art not unworthy
to be beloved by me. It is true that I am unworthy to serve thee; but it is
also true, that thou art not unworthy to be served by thy Creatures. Give me
therefore somewhat, O Lord, of that which makes thee so worthy, and so I shall
grow worthy, who am unworthy. Make me cease from sin, by what means thou will; to the end that I may serve thee as I ought. Grant that I may so
address, and order, and end my life, that I may sleep in peace, and repose in
thee. Grant that in the end, the sleep of death may receive me with rest; rest
with securiry, and security with eternity. Amen.

CHAP. XI. A Prayer to the blessed Trinity.
WE confess to thee, with our whole heart, and with our mouth, we praise and
bless thee, O God the Father, who art unbegotten; and thee, O God the Son,
who art the only begotten; and thee, O God the holy Ghost, who art the
Paraclete. To thee. O holy, and indeuiduall Trinity, be glory for all
eternityes. Amen.

CHAP. XII. A Confession of the Omnipotency, and Majesty of God.
O Supreme Trinity, O thou sole power, and undivided Majesty, O God of ours, O
Omnipotent God, I confess to thee, who am the vnworthyest of thy servants, and
the weakest of thy members. I confess to thee in thy Church, and I give thee
honor, by offering thee a due sacrifice of praise, according to that little
power, and skill, which thou haste vouchsafed to afford me, thy miserable
creature. And because I have no external presents, which I can make to thee,
therefore these desires, and vows of service and praise, which by the gift of
thy mercy are in me, behold, how with an unfeigned faith and with a pure
conscience, I offer them to thee, not only with a good will, but with a heart,
which is full of triu^ph, and joy. I believe therefore with my whole heart, and I
confess with my mouth, O thou King of heaven, ad Lord of earth, that thou the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, art in Persons three, and in Substance
one, and that thou art God Omnipotent, of one simple, incorporeall, invisible,
and uncircumcised nature. That there is nothing either above thee, or below
thee, or greater then thou; but that thou art sublymely, and absolutely
perfect, whithout the least deformity. Great, without quantity, good without
quality, eternal, yet wholly without Time. That thou have life without death;
that thou art strong without any weakness; true without falshoode; every
where present, without being situated any where; filling all things, yet
without any extension; occurringe every where, yet without any crossinge, or
contradiction. Transcending all things, without Motion; remaneinge in all
things, without Station; creatinge all things, without looseinge, or wantinge
any thing, and ruleinge all things without labor.

Giueinge a beginning to all things, thy self haueinge noe beginning;
making all things changeable, and being yet unchangeable in thy self; being
infinite in thy greatenesse, Omnipotent in thy power, souuereigne in thy
goodness, inestimable in thy wisdom, terrible in thy decrees, just in thy
judgments, secret in thy thoughts, true in thy words, holy in thy works, and
plentiful in thy mercyes. Toward sinners, thou art most patie^t; toward
penitents thou art most pitiful. Thou art ever the same, eternal,
sempiternall, immortal, and unchangeable God, whom neither space can dilate,
nor littleness of place can streighten, nor any receptacle can keep in, or
constrain, nor the will vary, nor partiality corrupt; nether do sad things
afflict thee, nor joyful things transport thee. From whom neither
forgetfullnes takes any thing, neither does memory restore any thing; neither
do things past pass away; nor future things succeed To whom neither the
first gave beginning: nor the continuance of time increase: nor shall any
accident give it any end. But thou live for all eternity, both before, and
in, and through all aages And let immortal praise, and eternal glory, and
souuereigne power, and supreme honor, and a Kingdom, and Empire for all
eternity, remain with thee, through those infinite, unwearied, and immortal
ages, of ages. Amen

CHAP. XIII. How God the Father vouchsafed to help mankind, and of the
Incarnation of the word.
HItherto, O Omnipotent God the beholder and searcher of my heart, I have
confessed the Omnipotency of thy Majesty, and the majesty, of thy Omnipotency.
But now, as I believe with the heart to Justice, so will I confess before thee,
with the mouth to salvation, in what sort thou haste been pleased, at the end
of many ages, to releive the misery of mankind. Thou, O God, and our only
Father, were never to be sent any whither. But of the Son, the Apostle
writes thus, When the fullnes of time was come, God sent his Son. When he
says sent, he does sufficiently show, that then he came sent into this world,
when being borne of the ever B. Virgin Mary, he became, and appeared, true and
perfect man, in flesh. But what is that, which that chief of all the
Evangelists says: He was in the world, and the world was made by him. He was
sent thither in his Humanity, who was ever, and is there, by his Divinity. Now,
that this Mission is the work of the whole blessed Trinity, I confess with my
whole heart, and mouth.

But how then did thou love us, O thou holy and good Father? how much did
thou love us, O most dear Creator; who did not even, spare, thine own
Son, but did deliver him up for us wretched Creatures, He was subject to
thee, even unto the death, and that, the death of the Cross, takeinge the
hand-writinge of our sins and nailinge it to the same Cross. He crucified
also sin it self, and killed death: He, who only is free amongst the dead;
haueing power both to lay down his life for us, and afterward, to take it up
again. Hence was he both the conqueror and Sacryfice. And therefore the
Conqueror because the sacryfice for us To thee he was the Priest, and the
Sacrifice; and therefore the Priest, because the Sacrifice. Most justly have I a
strong hope in him, that thou for his sake, who sits at thy right hand, and
is continually interceedinge for us, wilt cure all our languishing diseases.
For my infirmityes, O Lord, are great and many; great they are and many.

The Prince of this world has much to say against me, I know and confess it,
yet deliver me I beseech thee, by that Redeemer of mine, who sits at thy
right hand, in whom he was able to find none of his malice By him I beseech
thee, to justify me; by him, who committed noe sin, nor was there any guile
found in his mouth. I beseech thee by that head of ours, in whom there is noe
one little spott, deliver this member, which yet is his, how weak and poor
soever it be. Deliver me, I beseech thee from my sins, my vices, my faults,
and my negligence. Fill me with thy holy virtues, and make me of most innocent
conversation. And grant, for thy holy names sake, that I may continue even to
the very end, in those good works, which thou commaundest, according to thy
holy will.

CHAP. XIV. Of the confidence which a soul ought to have in our Lord Jesus,
and in his Passion.
I Could easily have despaired, through the excess of my greiuous sins, and
of my infinite negligences, if thy word, O God, had not become flesh, and had
not dwelt amongst us. But now I dare not despair, because when we were enemies
we were reconciled, by the death of thy Son, and how much more now, we being
already reconciled, shall we be saved by him? For all the hope, and stay of all
my confidence, does consist, in that precious blood of his, which was shed for
us, and for our salvation. In him do I take breath; and hopeing firmly in
him, I earnestly desire to come to thee; not haueinge any justice of mine own,
but that which is in thy Son, our Lord Iesus-Christe.

We do therefore thank thee. O most Clement, and benign lover of mankind; who
when we were not, did powerfully create us, by Iesus-Christe thy Son our
Lord. And when we were lost, by our own fault, thou did admirably deliver,
and recover us. I give thanks to thy mercy; many thanks do I give thee with
the whole affection of my heart; who (through that unspeakable charity,
wherewith thou did vouchsafe, with strange goodness, to love us miserable, and
unworthy Creatures) did send thine only begotten Son, from thine own
bosom, for our common good; so to save us sinners, who were then the sonns of
wrath. I give thee thanks for his holy Incarnation, and Nativity, and for his
glorious Mother, of whom he vouchsafed to assume flesh for us, and our
salvation; that as he was true God of God, so he might also, be true man of
man. I thank thee for his Cross and Passion, for his death and Resurrection;
for his Ascension into heaven, and for his seat of Majesty at thy right hand.
For upon the fortieth day after his Resurrection, ascendinge above all the
heavens (whilst his Disciples were lookeing on) and being seated at thy right
hand, he did according to his promise, power forth the Holy Ghost upon the
Children of adoption.

I thank thee, for that most sacred effusion of his most precious Blood, whereby
we are redeemed; and withal, for that Sacred, and Holy, and quickninge Mystery
of his Body and Blood, which daily we eat and drink in the Church, and whereby
we are washed and sanctified, and made partakers of that one supreme divinity.
I thank thee for this admirable, and unspeakable charity of thine, whereby thou
have so loved, and saved us, unworthy creatures, by that only, and beloved
Son of thine. For thou did so love the world, as to give thy only begotten
Son, that every one who believed in him, might not perish, but have eternal
life. And this is eternal life, that we may know thee our true God, and whom
thou have sent Iesus-Christe, by right faith, and by works which are worthy,
and suitable to that faith.

CHAP. XV. Of the immense charity of the eternal Father toward mankind.
O Immense Piety, O inestimable Charity; that thou might free thy slave, thou
haste delivered up thy Son; God is made man to the end that wretchd man,
might be drawn out of the prower of the Devil. How inspeakably a benign
lover of man, is thy Son our God, to whose bowels of mercy, it seemed not
sufficient, that he should diminish himself, so much as to be made man of the
true Virgin Mary; unless withal, he had undergone the torment of the Cross,
shedding so his Blood for us, and for our salvation. Our merciful God came
down; he came, through his own pity, and goodness; he came to seek, and
save, that which was lost. He sought his lost sheep, he sought and found it,
and he brought it home upon his own shoulders into his fold. Being a
merciful Lord, and extremely dear Pastor. O Charity! O Piety! who ever
heard of such things as these? who is he, that upon the disclosinge of these
bowels of mercy, will not be amazed? who will not wonder? who will not rejoice,
for that excessive Charity of thine, wherewith thou louedst us; Thou did send
thy Son in the likeness of the flesh of sin, that by sin he might condemn
sin, and that we might be made thy justice in him. For he is the true
unspotted lamb, who has taken away the sins of the world who has distroyed
our death, by dyinge, and restored our life, by his Resurrection. But what can
we return to thee, O our God, for the benefitts of thy mercy, which are so
great? What praises, and what thanks can we give? For althouge we did possess
that knoweledge and power, which the Angels have, yet should we be unable, to
make return of any thing which might be worthy of thy mercy and goodness. If
all the parts of our body, were converted into tongues, this meanness of ours
would never yet be able to answer thee with due praise. For that inestimable
Charity, which thou haste been pleased to show to us unworthy Creatures,
through thine only pity, and goodness, does far transcend all our knoweledge.
For thy Son our God, did not assume the Angelical nature, but the seed of
Abraham, being made like to us, in all things except sin. And so our Lord,
takeinge the Nature, not of Angels, but of men upon him, and glorifying it
with the Stole of holy Resurrection, and immortality; he exalted us above all
the Heavens, above all the Quires of Angels, and above Cherubine, and
Seraphine, placeing it at thy right hand. And this Nature, do the Angels
praise, and the Dominations adore; and all the Virtues of Heaven tremble to
behold above them all, God-Man.

This is all my hope, and all my confidence. For there is in Iesus-Christe, our
Lord himself, a portion of the flesh, and blood of every of us. Where then any
part of me reigns, there I am confident I also reign. Where my flesh is
glorified, there do I conceive my self to be glorious. Where my blood does
bear Dominion, there do I find my self to rule. Though I be a sinner, yet I
cannot diffide not to participate in this grace. Though my sins keep me back,
yet my substance calls me on. Though my offenses shutt me out, yet my communion
of nature with him, reiects me not. For God is not so cruel, that he can
forgett man, and not remember the thing which he bears about himself; and
which, for my sake, he took upon him, and which for my sake he sought. No, our
Lord God is full of meekness, and benignity; and he loves his flesh, his
body, and his bowels* in the same God, and Lord Iesus-Christe, who is most
sweet, most benign and most clement; in whose person we are already risen,
and are ascended into heaven, and are already seated in those heavenly
habitatio^s. Our own flesh loves us, and we have the prerogative of our blood
in him. We are his members and his flesh; and he in fine, is our head; and of
these parts, the whole body is made, as it is written: Bone of my bones, and
flesh of my flesh and they shall be two in one flesh. And again, No man did ever
hate his own flesh but he cherishes* and loves it. This is a great mystery,
I say in Christ, and in his Church, says the Apostle.

CHAP. XVI. Of the twofolde nature of Christ our Lord, who pittieth, and
prays for us.
I Give thee thanks O Lord our God, with my lips, and with my heart, and with
the whole power I have, for thy infinite goodness; and for all those mercyes,
by which thou did vouchsafe, to succor us poor creatures, after an
admirable manner, by thy Son our Savior, and Redeemer, who dyed for our
sins, and rose for our justification, and now liueinge in eternity, does sit
at thy right hand, and interceedeth for us. And together with thee, he takes
pity of us, because he is God, of thee, his Father, coeternall, and
consubstantiall with thee in all things, whereby he may for ever save us. But
for as much as he is man, in those respects wherein he is less then thou, all
power is given him, both in Heaven and in earth, that at the name of Jesus,
every knee may bow, celestial, terrestrial and infernal; and every tongue my
confess, that our Lord Jesus Christ is in thy glory, Omnipotent God the
Father. He indeed is appointed by thee, to be the Judge of the quick and the
dead, but thou iudgest noe man, but thou haste given all judgment to thy
Son, in whose breast all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge are laid up,
and hidd. But he is both the witness, and the Judge. A Judge and witness he is,
from whom noe sinful conscience can fly; for all things lie open and naked to
his eyes. That very he, who was judged unjustly, shall judge the whole world
in equity, and the people in Justice.

I do therefore bless thy holy name for all eternity, and I glorify thee,
with my whole heart, O merciful, and Omnipotent Lord, for that admirable, and
unspeakable conjunction of thy divinity and humanity, in the unity of one
person; not that God might be one, and Man another, but that one and the same
should be God and Man, man and God. But although, The word was made flesh, by a
strange graciousnesse and mercy; yet nether of those two Natures, is changed
into another substance. There is no fourth person, added to the mystery of the
Trinity, for the substance of the Word, of God and Man, was united, and not
confounded, that so, that might be assumed to God which he had taken from us,
and yet that, which had been before, might still continue the same it was.

O wonderful mystery, O unspeakable kind of commerce. O admirable, and for
ever to beloved benignity of the divine mercy. We were not worthy to be
servants, and yet behold, we are made the Sons of God. Nay, we are the heirs
of God and coheirs of Christ. Whence came this to us, and who brought us to
this? But I beseech thee, O thou most merciful God the Father, by this
inestimable goodness and piety, and charity of thine, make us worthy of the many
and great promises of thy Son our Lord Iesus-Christe employ thy strength,
and confirm that in us which thou have wrought. Perfect that which thou haste
begun, that we may deserve to attain to the fullness of thy mercy. Enable us
by thy Holy Spirit, to understand, deserve, and reverence with due honor, this
great mystery of piety, which is manifested in the flesh, justified in the
spirit, has appeared to Angels, is preached to Gentiles, is believed in the
world, and is assumed to glory.

CHAP. XVII. Of the thanks which a man owes to God, for the benefitt of
Redemption.
O How deeply are we thy debtors, O Lord our God, being redeemed by so high a
price: being saved by so rich a gift: being assisted by so glorious a
benefitt? How much art thou to be feared, loved, blessed, praised, honored and
glorified by us miserable creatures, whom thou haste so loved, saved
sanctified, and exalted? For to thee do we owe all our power, all our being,
and all our knowledge. And who has any thing which is not thine? Thou art our
Lord, and our God, from whom all things proceed. For thy self, and for thy
holy Name, give us So me part of thy heavenly riches, that by means of those
blessings and gifts of thine, we may serve and please thee in truth, and that
by way of return we may daily render thee all due praise, for so many benefits
of thy mercy. Nor can we serve thee, or praise thee by any other means, then
by thy own gift For every good grace; and every perfect gift, is from above
descending from thee, the Father of lights, wiht whom there, is noe change, nor
so much as any shadow of mutability.

O Lord our God! dear God, good God, Omnipotent God, unspeakable God, whose
nature cannot be circumscribed, God the ordeyner of all things, and the Father
of our Lord Iesus-Christe, who did send the same beloved Son of thine,
our most sweet Lord, out of thy bosom, for our universal profitt, to take
our life upon him, that he might bestow his life upon us, and that he might be
perfect God, of thee the Father, and perfect Man of his Mother, all God and all
Man, and one, and the same Christ, eternal, and temporal, immortal and
mortal: Creator, and creature; strong and weak triumphant, and yet overcome;
the nourse, and the creature which is nourished; the Pastor and the sheep: he
that dyed for a time, and dyed in time, and yet is liueinge for all eternity.
He promiseinge to such as loved him, that they should be provided for, said
thus to his Disciples: What soever you shall ask the Father in my name, he will
give it to you By this Supreme Sacrifice, and true Priest, and good Pastor,
who offered himself in Sacrifice to thee, laying down his life for his
flock, by him I beseech thee, who sits at thy right hand, and interceedeth
for vt, being our Redeemer and Advocate before thy pity and goodness, I
beseech thee, I say, O God, the most dear and benign lover of mankind, that
thou will give me grace, with the same Son of thine, and the Holy Ghost, to
praise, and glorify thee in all things, with great contrition of heart, and a
fountain of tears, with much reverence and trembling, because theirs whose
the substance is, theirs also are all the accessaryes thereof. But because the
body which is corrupted, does depresse the soul, I beseech thee, to rowse up
my dullnes by thy virtue and make me persevere with strength in thy
Commandments, and praises day and night. Grant that my heart may wax warm
within me, and that, whilst I am in meditation, the fire may burn. And
because thy only Son himself did say: No man comes to me, unless the
Father who sent me, draw him, and no man comes to the Father but by me, I
beseech, and humbly pray thee, be thou ever draweing me to him, that at last he
may bring me thither to thee, where he is sittinge at thy right hand. where
there is an eternal life eternally happy, where there is perfect love, and noe
fear, where there is an everlasting day, and one spirit of them all; where
there is certain and supreme security, and secure tranquillity, and serene
alacrity, and sweet felicity, and happy eternity, and eternal beatitude, and a
blessed praise, and vision of thee, which never ends. where thou with him, and
he with thee, and both, in the communion of the same Holy Ghost, do
sempiternally live, and being God, do reign, for ever, and for ever. Amen.

CHAP. XVIII. A Prayer to Christ our Lord.
O Christ my God my hope
Sweet lover of mankind,
Light, life, way, health
And beauty most refined;
Behold those things which thou
Did suffer, us to save;
The chains, the wounds, the Cross,
The bitter death, the grave,
Riseing within three days
From conquering death and hell,
By thy Disciples seen,
Reforminge minds so well,
Upon the fortieth day,
Climeing the Heavens so high,
Thou live now, and thou
Shall reign eternally.
THou art my liueing and true God, my holy Father, my dear Lord, my great
King, my good shepherd, my only instructor, my best helper, my most
beautiful lover, my liueinge bread, my Eternal Priest, my guide into my
country, my true light, my holy sweetness, my right way, my excellent wisdom,
my pure simplicity, my peaceable concord, my safe custody, my good portion, my
everlasting salvation, my great Mercy, my invincible patience, my imaculate
Sacrifice, my holy Redemption, my firm hope, my perfect charity, my true
Resurrection, my eternal life, my excessive joy, and most blessed Vision,
which is for ever to remain. I pray thee, I beg of thee, I beseech thee, that
I may walk by thee, pass on by thee, and repose in thee, who art the way, the
truth, and the life, without whom, no man comes to the Father. For thou art
he, whom I desire, O thou most sweet and most beautiful Lord, O thou
splendour of thy Fathers Glory, who sit above the Cherubins, and beholdest
from thence, the most profound Abysses, which are below; thou light, which
declares truth; illuminateing light: light, which never leaves to shine, whom
the Angels desire to behold Lo my heart is before thee; disperse the darkness
thereof, that by the clearnes of thy love, it may be yet more fully stricken,
and beaten through with light.

Give thy self to me, O my God, restore thy self to me. Behold I love thee,
and if it be to little, make me love thee more. I cannot measure out, to know,
how much of my love is wanting to thee, of that which ought to make it up
enough. Let my life runn on toward thine imbracements, and let it never look
aside, till it be all hidden up, in the hidden joy of seeing thy face. In the
mean time this I know, that it goes ill with me, when I want thee O Lord. And
not only is it ill with me, in respect of the things which are without me, but
in respect of them also which are within me. For whatsoever plenty there may be
in the world, which is not my God, is noe better to me, then mere beggary. For
it is thou alone, who can not be changed, either into better or worse; thou,
who indeed, and simply, art alone; thou to whom it is not one thing to live,
and an other thing to live happily, beccause thou art thine own Beatitude. But
thy creature, to nhom it is one thing to live, and another thing to live
happily, must not attribute either happy life, yea or so much as life, to any
other thing, then thy grace. Therefore is it, that we stand in need of thee,
and not thou of us. For although we had noe being at all, yet there would be
nothing wanting to thee, of that complete good, which thou art.

It is necessary therefore that we adhear still to thee, O Lord, that by thy
continual assistance, we may be able to live holyly, and uprightly. For we are
drawn down fast enough, by the weight of our frailty; but by thy guifte we
are kindled, and carried upward, and we are inflamed, and we fly on, whither we
are goeinge, which is toward the peace of Jerusalem. For I have rejoiced in
those things, which have been said to me, let us go into the house of our
Lord. There, has a rectifyed and good will placed us; and so, as that we can
desire noe more, but that we may remain there for ever.

But because whilst we are in this body, we wander as pilgrims from thee,
therefore we have not here any permanent City, but we expect another which is
to come, for our habitation is in Heaven And therefore, by the conduct of thy
grace, do I go into the most retired corner of my heart, and I sing love songs
to thee, O my King, and my God; groaninge out certain groans, which indeed
cannot be described, in this place of my pilgrimage where thy law is the song
in which I delight my self. And calling Jerusalem to mind, I extend, and
stretch the whole power of my heart toward it: Jerusalem which is my Country,
Jerusalem which is my Mother; And toward thee also who art the ruler, the
illuminator, the father, the tutor, the defendor, the pastor, the chaste and
strong delight thereof, the solid joy, and all wnspekable good things; yea all
of them together, because thou art the only supreme and true good. Nor will I
be drawn aside from this exercice, till thou, O my God, and my mercy, shall
draw together all that which I am, from this despersion, and deformity wherein
I find my self, and till thou shall conform me to thy self, and confirm me
therein for all eternity, in the communion of that most dear Mother of mine,
whither the flower and first fruits of my spirit, are already gone before.

CHAP. XIX. He distinguishes between that wisdom, which is called the house
of God, and that other wisdom which is supremely divine.
THis is that house of thine, O God, noe earthly house, nor yet built of any
corporeal thing in heaven, but I mean that spiritual house, which is
partaker of thine eternity, because it is for ever to remain without spott;
For thou have appointed that it should remain for ever, and for ever thou
haste imposed a precept, and it shall not pass away. Yet that creature, O God,
is not eternal, as thou art eternal; because it was not without beginning;
for it was made. Of all the Creatures, this Wisdom is that which was created
first. I mean not that Wisdom, which was absolutely coeternall, and coequall
with God the Father, whereby all things were created, and in which Beginning,
heaven and earth was made: but I mean the Wisdom which is created; namely
that spiritual nature, which by the contemplation of thy light, is light; for
even this, although it be created, is called Wisdom. But as much difference as
there is, between the light which does illuminate, and that which grows to
be light by being illuminated; so much difference also there is, betweane thee,
who art the supreme wisdom, creatinge all things, and this other which is
created; as also there is between that Justice which justifies, which is thy
self, O our God, and that Justice which is produced in us by our being
justified. For we also are called the Justice of God the Father, in thee, who
art his Son our Lord, by the testimony of the Apostle. Though therefore the
first of all the creatures was a kind of Wisdom (Which was made to be a
rational, and intellectual mind; inhabiting thy holy City, our mother which
is above, and which is free, and eternal in the Heavens) and what Heavens but
those Heavens of the Heavens, which praise thee, because this is that, whereof
it is said, The Heavens of the Heavens to our Lord, and although we find no
Time before that Creature, because it was before the creation of Time, as being
the first of all the creatures; yet nevertheless thou art before it. O
Eternal God, the Creator of all things, from whom, as soon as it was made,
it took a beginning, though not indeed, of Time, because Time was not then
created; but yet a beginning of that nature, which it was come to have. It
came therefore so from thee; O Lord our God, as that it is clearly another thing
then thou art. For although I find noe Time neither before it, nor in it; it
is yet nevertheless fit to behold thy face; neither is it ever diuerted from
thence, Hence it comes that it is not subject to any change. Yet a kind of
mutabillity is still in it, whereby it would grow all dark and cold, unless,
by adhearing to thee, with an excessive love, it did (like a sunn which were
ever bright as noone day) both shine, and boil up with heat toward thee.

In fine, that creature does so adhear to thee, our true God, who art truly
eternal, that although it be not coeternall to thee, yet nevertheless it is
not discharged, nor distracted from thee, into any variety, or vicissitude of
time. But it reposeth in the most true co^templation of thee alone. For to
such, an one o Lord as loves thee, as much as thou command, thou do
clearly discover thy self, and it suffices him. And from hence it grows,
that the Angels do never decline, either from thee, or from themselves; but
perpetually they remain in the same state, incessantly beholding thee, and
incessantly loueinge thee, who art the true light, and the chaste love. O how
blessed and sublyme is this Creature of Creatures, most happy in eternally
adhearing to thy beatitude; happy and excessiuely happy, in haueinge thee to
inhabit, and to illuminate it, and that for ever. Nor can I find what I may
more fittly call this heaven of the heavens to our Lord, then that house of
thine, which is contemplateinge thy delighte, without any defect at all, and
without the least inclination to depart from that to any other; that pure
mind, most entirely one, that establisheme^t of those blessed spirits in the
foundation of peace, in those heavens above, which are yet above these heavens
which we see.

Hereby, my soul (whose pilgrimage is so far of from thee) may understand, if
now it thirst affer thee; if now her tears, are not made her bread; if now she
desire that one thing, and beg it again and again, that she may inhabit
thy house all the days of her life. And what is the life of that house, but
thou thy self; and what are the days thereof, but thy eternity, as thy years
are, which never fail. Let therefore the soul understand here, as well as it
can, how sublymely thou art Eternal before all times, since that house of
thine, which never wandered from thee (although it be not coeternall with thee,
yet by reason that it adheareth to thee, without any failing, or ever
faintinge) undergoes noe variety of time: but sucking up thee, her
immutability, with a perpetual and perseuering purity of mind, she does at no
time, and in noe place depart from thee, to whom she cleaues with inseperable
love, and to whom thou art ever present. And so, haueing no future which it may
expecte, nor any transitory thing passing by, which it may remember; it is not
varied to and fro by turns, nor extended into future times.

CHAP. XX. Here man prays that the said spiritual house of God, may pray for
him.
O Thou bright and beautiful house of God, I have loved thy comeliness, and
the place of the habitation of the glory of my Lord God, who did both build
thee, and does possess thee. Let this pilgrimage of mine, send sighs to
thee, day and night, let my heart pant toward thee; let my mind think on
thee; and let my soul desire to attain to the Society of thy beatitude I say
to him who made thee; that he would possess me in thee, for it is he who made
both thee and me. Or rather do thou desire and beseech of him, that he will
make me worthy of the participation of thy glory. For I do not challenge thy
holy Society, nor thy admirable beauty, by any meritt of mine; but I despair
not to obtain it, by the Blood of him who redeemed me. Only let thy meritts
help me, let thy most holy and most pure Prayers, which cannot but be
effectual with Almighty God, succor my sinfulness.

I confess that I have wandered like a lost sheep, and my habitation here is
prolonged, and I am cast far of from the face of my Lord God, into this
blindness of banishment. where, being driven from the joys of Paradise, I am
daily lamentinge with my self, the miseryes of my captivity; and I singe a
mornefull song, and I make huge lamentations, when I remember thee, O
Jerusalem who art my mother: and whilst I find my feet standinge in thy
outward Courts, O thou fair and holy Sion, but am not able so much as to look
into those interior parts of that Temple. But yet I hope that I shall once be
brought into thee, upon his shoulders, who is my Pastor, and who was thy
builder, that I may triumph with thee, in that inspeakable joy, wherewith they
rejoice, who stand with thee before God our Savior himself, who discharged
our enmytyes in his flesh, and who pacifyed all things which are both in Heaven
and in earth, by his blood. For he is our peace, who made both to become one;
and who joined in himself, those two walls, which went by contrary ways.
Ordeyninge thy permanent felicity, and promissing that he would give himself
to us, according to the same measure, saying: And they shall be equal to the
Angels of God in Heaven. O Jerusalem, thou eternal house of God, be thou
(after the charity of Christ our Lord) my joy, and my comfort, and let the
sweet memory of thy blessed Name, be a solace to my sorrows and heaviness of
heart.

CHAP. XXI. How full of biternesse this life of ours, is.
O Lord I am extremely weary of this life, and of this woeful pilgrimage.
This life, this miserable life, frail life, uncertain life, laborious life,
unclean life. Life which is the lady of wicked men, the queen of proud men,
full of miseryes and errors, which deserves not to be called a life, but a
death, since we are dying in every moment, by diverse kinds of death, through
the several miseryes and changes, which we are subject too. Does therefore
this, which we live in this world, deserve to be called life; when humors make
us swell, and grief extenuates, and unnatural heat dryes up, and impressions
of the air infect. Meat makes fatt, fasting makes lean, mirth makes
dissolute, sorrows consume, care straitneth, security makes dull. Riches puffs
us up; poverty casts us down; youth extolls us; and old age makes us stoop;
sickness breaks, and sorrow oppresses us. And to all these miseryes, furious
death succeeds, and at a clapp does so impose an end upon this miserable life,
that as soon as it has left to be, it is scare believed, that ever it was.

This vital death, and this mortal life, although it be all sprinkled with
these, and many other bitter miseryes: alas, alas, it does yet take very many,
by the inticeinge pleasures thereof, and it deceiues them, by the false
promises which it makes. And although, of it self, it be so very biting, and
so bitter, as that it cannot be concealed from her blind lovers; yet are there
an infinite number of fools in the world, whom she intertaynes and
inebriates, with the golden chalice which she has in her hand. Happy are they
(but they are to few) who refuse her familiarity, who despise her slight
entertaniements, and ioys; and who forsake all society with her, lest they be
forced to perish together with her who deceived them.

CHAP. XXII Of the felicity of that life, which our Lord has prepared for them
that love him.
O Thou life, which our Lord has prepared for them who love him. O thou vital
life, happy life, quiett life, secure life, beautiful life, pure life, chaste
life, holy life; life which knows not what belongs to death, which knows not
what belongs to sorrow; life without spott, without grief; without anxiety,
without any perturbation without corruption, without variety and mutation:
life, toppfull of all excellency, and dignity; where there is noe adversary to
impugn us; noe inticeinge bait of sin to allure us; where there is perfect
love, and noe fear; and an everlasting day, and one spirit of us all; where
God is seen face to face; and where the soul is full fedd with this food of
life, without all defect.

I am resolved to look earnesly toward thy light; Thy felicity, and delights
draw me to thee with a greedy heart. The more I consider thee, the more do I
languish with thy love, and with a vehement desire of thee; and I am extremely
delighted with the sweet remembrance of thee. I am therefore resolved, I am
resolved to cast up mine eyes to thee, to erect the state of my mind, and to
conform the affections of my will to thee. I am resolved to talk of thee, to
hear speak of thee, to write of thee, to conferr with others of thee; daily
to read somewhat of thy felicity and glory; and when I shall have redd it, to
reuolue it very often in my heart; that at least by this means, I may pass on
from the burninge heats, and dangers, and toyling labors of this mortal, and
dying life, to the sweet refreshing of that vital air of thine; and that I
may proceed at last, (when I shall lay my self down to sleep) to repose my
head a little, in that bosom of thine.

To this end, I enter now and then, into those sweet feilds of thy holy
Scriptures; and whilst I am turninge over those leaves, I gather the fresh
flowers of sentences from thence. By reading them I eat; by frequenting them I
ruminate; and by gathering them up at last, I lodge them in the deep
receptacle of my memory; that, by this means, haueing taken a taste of thy
sweetness, I may feel the biteernes of this most miserable life, so much the
less. O thou most happy life, O Kingdom which art truly blessed, free from
death, and far from haueing an end, to which noe times shall ever succeed,
where that day which is still continued without night, admitts of noe Time;
where the conquering soldiers being associated to those chantinge quires of
Angels, sing that Canticle of the Canticles of Syon, to Almighty God, without
ceasinge; the garland of triumph imbraceinge their glorious heads, and that for
ever.

I would to Christ, that my sins being once forgiven me, and then this
burden, being laid down, I might be assigned to eternal rest; and might
enter into thy joys, within those excellent and beautiful walls of thy City;
receiuinge the crown of glory from the hand of my Lord. That I might be
present, with those most holy Quires of Angels; That together with those
blessed Spiritts, I might concur to glorify our Creator; that I might veiwe
the present face of Christ our Lord; that I might for ever behold that
supreme, unspeakable, and uncircumcised light: and that so not being subject
to any fear of death, I might for ever rejoice, in the everlasting endowment
of incorruption.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the felicity of that holy soul which departs hence.
HAppy is that soul, which being discharged from this body of earth, goes
freely up to heaven, and is in peace, and safety, not fearing, either any
enemy, or death it self. For it will then have present, and shall for ever
behold, that most beautiful Lord, whom it has served, and whom it has loved,
and to whom at length it arriueth all full of glory, and joy. This glory of so
great beatitude, noe time shall diminish, nor wicked enemy be able to bereeue
us of. The Daughter of Syon saw this soul, and did publish it to be most
happy: The queens and the concubines saw it, saying, Who is this, which
goes forward like a riseinge morninge, fair like the Moon, bright like the
Sunn, and terrible like a pitched field of armed men? How joyfully does she go
forth, make haste, and runn, when with astonished ears, she hears her spouse
say thus: Rise up, and make haste, O thou my friend, and my beautiful
creature, and come with me: for now the Winter is ouer-past, the Storm is
gone, and has hidd it self: the flowers have appeared in our Land, the time
of pruninge is now come, the voice of the turtle has been heard in our land,
The figg tree, has brought forth her young fruit, the vines are in flower,
and send forth their odor. Rise up, maKe haste, O thou my friend, my fair
Creature, my dove, in the holes of the Rock, in the lowes places of the wall:
Show me that face of thine, let thy voice sound forth in my ears: for thy uoice
is sweet, and thy face is full of comeliness, and grace. Come my elected, and
my beautiful Creature, my dove, my immaculate, my Spouse, Come, and I will
place my throne in thee, because I have had a greedy desire of thy beauty.
Come, that thou may rejoice in my presence, with my Angels, whose society I
have promissed thee. Come, after many dangers, and labors, and enter into the
joy of thy Lord, which none shall be able to take from thee

CHAP. XXIV. A prayer to the sanites to secure us in our dangers.
HAppy are all you, O Saints of God, who now have passed through the sea of
this mortality, and have obtained to arrive at the gate of eternal quietness,
security, and peace, your selves being peaceful and secure, and perpetually
full of triumph and joy. I beseech you, by your own Charity: you, who are
secure concerning your selves, be yet solicitous concerning us. You are
secure, concerning your own incorruptible glory; be you solicitous of our
manifold misery. By him I beseech you, who chused you, who made you what you
are; in the fruition of whose beauty you are satiated: by whose immortality you
are now immortalized: by whose most blessed vision, you are continually in joy:
be you also continually mindful of us. Help us miserable creatures, who in
the salt waters of this life, are tossed, with storms round about us. You are
those most beautiful gates, who have been erected, to a huge altitude: O give
some help to us* who are noe better then a base pauement lying so far
underneath you. Stretch forth your hand, and raise us up upon our feet, that
we recovering out of our infirmity, may become strong, and fit for war.
Interceede, and pray with constancy, and perseverance for us miserable, and
most negligent sinners; that by your Prayers, we maybe joined to your holy
society, for otherwise we shall not be saved. For we are extremely frail; and
of no strength or virtue, miserable, base wretches: beasts, who care but for
the belly, the slaves of flesh and blood, in whom the very shadow of goodness,
does scarce appear. And yet not withstandinge, being placed under the
confession of Christ our Lord, we are borne up, by the wood of his Cross,
whilst we sail through this great and spacious sea; where there are creepinge
creatures without number: where there are wild beasts, great and small, where
there is a most cruel dragon, ever ready to devour us; where there are places
full of dangers, as Scylla and Charybdis, and innumerable others; where
careless persons, and they who are of a waueringe faith, suffer shipwreck.
Pray you to our Lord, pray, O you who are full of pity, pray all you troops
of Saints, and all you compagnies of blessed Spiritts, that being assisted by
your Prayers, and meritts, we may, with our shipp and merchandise obtain to
arrive sound and safe, at the haven of eternal salvation, and quietness, and
continual peace, and of that security which must never have an end.

CHAP. XXV. The souls desire to attain to the heavenly City of Jerusalem.
O Jerusalem, that art my mother, O thou Holy City of God, thou most dear
Spouse of Christ our Lord, my heart loves thee, and my soul is extremely
desirous to enjoy thy beauty. O how graceful, how glorious, and how noble art
thou? Thou art all fair, and there is noe spott in thee. Exult, and rejoice, O
thou fair Daughter of the Prince; for the King has earnestly desired thy
beauty: and he who excels all the Sons of men in beauty, has been
enamoured with thy Comeliness. But what kind of man is that beloved of thine,
who is so much beloved, O thou fairest of women? My beloved is white and read,
the choice of a thousand. As a fruite-tree in the midest of a wild wood, so is
my beloved, amongst the Sons of men: Under his shadow, whom I have desired,
behold I sit down with joy, and his fruit is sweet to my throat. My beloved
putt forth his hand through a division in the wall, and my belly trembled upon
that touch of his. I have sought him whom my soul loves, in my little bed by
night, I have sought him, and I have found him: I hold him fast, and I will not
let him go, till he introduce me into his house, and into his chamber, which
is this glorious mother of mine. For there, will thou afford me those most
sweet breasts, more abundant and more perfectly; and satisfy me with so
admirable a saciety, as that I shall hunger, and thirst noe more for ever.

O happy soul of mine, happy for ever, and for ever, if I may merit to behold
thy glory, thy beatitude, thy beauty; those gates and walls of thine, thy
streets, thy many mansions, thy most noble citizens, and that most powerful
King of thine our Lord, seated in his Majesty. For thy walls are of precious
stones, thy gates are of most Orient pearl, thy streets are paued with purest
gold, wherein that joyful Alleluya is perpetually sunge. Thy many mansions
have their fondatio^ of squared stone, built up with saphires, and covered with
plates of gold, where no man shall enter who is not clean; no man inhabit who
is defiled. Thou art made fair, and sweet in thy delights, O Jerusalem our
mother. There is no such thing in thee, as we suffer here, nor such things as
we see, in this miserable life of ours. There is nor darkness, nor night, nor
any diversity of times in thee. In thee there shines no light of the la^pe, noe
splendour of the Moon, noe beam of the Stars, but God of God, light of light,
the Sun of Justice, is ever illuminateing thee. The white and immaculate
lamb, is that clear, and most beautiful light of thine. Thy Sun, and thy
brightness and all thy Beatitude, is that indeficient contemplation of this
most beautiful King.

The King of Kings himself, is in the midest of thee; and his Children, are
circlinge him inn, round about: There are those musical Quires of Angels,
there is that congregation of heavenly Citizens. There is the sweet solemnity,
of all them, who are goeing into thy joys, out of this sad pilgrimage of
theirs. There is that Quire of the Prophetts; There is the entire number of the
Apostles; There is the triumphant army of inumerable Martyrs; There, is the
holy Congregation of blessed Confessors; There, are those true, and perfect
Moncks; There, are those holy women, who have overcome the pleasures of this
world, and the infirmity of their sex: There, are young men, and maids, who
have outrunn their years, by the Sanctity of their actions: There, are those
sheep, and lambs* who have escaped from the snares of terrene pleasures, and
they all triumph in their propter mansion. The glory of every one is different,
but the joy common to them all True and perfect charity reigns there, because
God is there, who is all in all, whom they see without end, and by ever seeing
him, they are all burning in his love. They love and praise him, and they
praise and love him. All the work they do, is the praise of God without end,
without ever leaueing off, and yet without ever laboring. Happy shall I be,
and for ever truly happy, if, after this poor body of mine comes to be
dissolved, I may obtain to hear those Canticles of celestial melody, which
are sung to the praise of that eternal King, by the inhabitants of that
supernall City, and by those troops of blessed spiritts.

Happy shall I be, yea too happy, if I also may obtain to sing my part there,
and to stand in the presence of my king, my God, and my guide, and to see him
in his glory, as he has vouchsafed to promise, saying: Father, I Will that
they whom thou haste given me, may be with me, that they may see my glory,
which I had with thee, before the creation of the world. And else where, he
says. Let him who ministers to me, follow me; and where I am, there shall my
servant also be. And yet again he says: He who loves me, shall be beloved of
my Father and I will love him, and I will manifest my self to him.

CHAP. XXVI. A Hymn of Paradise.
Unto the spring of purest life,
Aspires my withered heart;
Yea and my soul confinde in flesh,
Employes both strength, and art,
Working, suing, struggling still,
From exile, home to part.
And whilst she sighs, to see her self
In furious tempests tossed;
She looks upon the glorious state
Which she by sinning lost.
And present ills, or past contents,
Do make us think of most.
But who can fully speak the joy
Or that high peace unfold;
Where all the buildinges founded are
On Orient perles untold.
And all the works of those high rooms,
Do shine with beams of gold.
The structure is combined with stones,
Which highest price do pass;
Nay even the streets, are pau'd with gold
As if it were but glass.
No trash, no base material,
Is there, or ever was.
The horride cold, or scorching heat
Has no admittance there;
The roses do not loose their leaves,
For Spring lasts all the year:
The Lilly's white, the Saffron redd,
The Balsam droops appear.
The fields are green, the plants do thrive,
The streams, with honey flow.
From spices odours, and from gummes,
Most precious liquors grow.
Fruits hang upon whole woods of trees,
And they shall still do so.
The season is not changd, for still
Both Sun, and Moon are bright.
The Lamb of this fair City, is
That clear immortal light
Whose presence, makes eternal day,
Which never ends in night.
Nay, all the Saints themselves, shall shine
As bright as brightest Sun;
when after triumph, crowned they
To mutual joys shall run.
And safely count their fightes, and foes,
When once the war is done.
For being freed from all defects,
They feel no fleshly war.
Or rather, both the flesh and mind,
At length united are.
And ioying in so rich a peace,
They can admit no jar.
But having quitt these fading leaves,
They seek their root again;
And look upon the present face
Of Truth, which has no stayne;
Still drinking, at that lively spring,
Huge draughtes of joys in grain.
From thence they fetch that happy state,
Wherein no change they see;
But clear, and cheerful, and content,
From all mishaps are free.
No sickness there, can threaten health,
Nor young men, old can be.
There, have they their Eternity;
Their passage, then is past.
They grow, they flourish, and they sprout,
Corruption, off is cast.
Immortal strength, has swallowed up
The power of death at last.
Who know the knower of all things
What can they choose but know?
They all behold their fellows hearts,
And all their secretts show.
One simple act of will, and nill,
From all their minds does flow.
Though all their merits diverse be
According to their pains,
Yet charity makes that ones own,
Which any fellow gaynes,
And all which does belong to one,
To all of them pertaynes.
Unto that body justly go
The Eagles all, for meat.
Where, with the Angels, and the Saints,
They may have room to eat.
One loaf, can feed them all, who live
In both these Countries great.
Hungry they are, yet ever full,
They have what they desire.
Since no saciety offends,
Nor hungar burns like fire.
Aspiringly they ever eat,
And eating they aspire.
There, ever are your new concerts
With songs which have no end
The organs of eternal joy,
Do on their ears attend.
In praise of their triumphant King,
They all their voices spend.
O happy Soul, which can behold
This King still present there,
And under thee discern the world
Runn round, secure from fear,
With Stars and Plannettes, Moon and Sunn:
Still moueing in their Sphere.
O Christ thou valie^t soldiers crown
Cast down an eye: of pity;
That having once our arms putt down,
we may enjoy that City:
And with those heavenly Quires bear part.
In their eternal dittie.
Grant Jesus grant we still persiste,
In thy just cause defending:
As long as worldly war may last,
As long as strifs depending:
That we may carry thee ith end
The prize which knows noe ending
CHAP. XXVII. Of the continual praise, which a soul conceiueth by the
contemplation of the Divinity.
O My soul, bless our Lord, and all the powers within me sing praise to his
holy Name. O my soul, bless our Lord, and forgett not all his benefitts. O
all yea works of our Lord, bless our Lord, in all the places of his dominion.
Let us praise God, whom the Dominations adore, whom Cherubin and Seraphin,
with a never ceasing voice, proclaim, Holy, Holy, Holy. Let us join our voice,
to the voice of the holy Angels, and let us praise this Lord, who is common
to us both, to the uttermost of our power. For they praise our Lord, most
purely, and incessantly, who are always plunged in that divine contemplation,
not by a glass, or in a figure, but face to face.

But who shall be able to say, or so much as to think, what kind of innumerable
multitude of blessed Spiritts, and celestial powers, that is, which stands
in the sight of our Omnipotent Lord God? What glory, what endless festiuity they
enjoy, by the vision of God? What delight, without any defect? what ardour of
love, not tormenting, but delighting? who can say, what desire there is, of the
vision of God, when they have saciety, and how they can have saciety with
desire? where in nether desire, procures any pain, nor saciety breeds any
loathinge? How they grow to be happy, by adhearing, to that supreme
beatitude? How they grow to be made light, by their conjunction with that true
light? How by ever beholdinge the immutable Trinity, themselves are changed
into immutability?

But how shall we be able to comprehend that higth of Angelical dignity, when
we are not able, so much as to find out, the nature of our own soul? what
kind of thing is that, which is able to give life to flesh, and yet is not
able so much as to conteyne it self in good thoughts? what king of thing is
this, so strong, and se weak, so little, and so great; which searches into
the secrets of God, and rises into contemplation of celestial things; and is
proved to have found out, with such subtle power of wit, the skill of so
many arts, for the use of man? what kind of thing is this, which knows so
many other things, and yet is so wholyignora^t of how it self comes to be
made? For although many doubtful things be said by many about the beginning
of the soul, yet we find it to be a certain intellectual spirit, a spirit
made by the power of the Creator; liueinge after a sort immortaly, and
quickninge the body which it does sustain, subject to mutability, and
forgetfulness which is often depressed by fear, and extolled by joy. O
admirable thing, and to which all astonishment is due. Of God, the Creator of
us all, who is unspeakable and incomprehensible, we read, we speak, and we
write excessiuely, sublimely, and wounderfull things, without any ambiguity at
all but whatsoever we say of Angels, and souls, we are not so well able to
prove.

But yet let the mind pass on even from these things, and transcend all
that which is created. Let it runn and rise, and flutter, and fly through; and
let it fix the eyes of Faith, as eagerly as it can, upon him who created all
things. I will therefore, make certain stepps of riseinge in my heart; and by
them I will assend into my soul; and by the purest power of my mind, I will
assend to my Lord, who remains over my head.

Whatsoever is visibly seen, whatsoever is imagined, though in a most
spiritual manner, I will remove far of, from the sight of my heart and mind,
with a strong hand. Let the pure and simple power of my understanding passing
on, with a speedy flighte toward him, arrive to him who is that Creator
himself both of Angels and souls, and all things else.

Blessed is that soul, which forsakes inferior things, and aspireth to them,
which are sublyme; and placeing the seat of her habitation, in those high
unhaunted ways, does conte^plate the Sunn of Justice, from those mighty rocks,
with eagles eyes. For there is nothing so beautiful, and so delightful, as
with the sharp sight of the mind, and the eager desire of the heart, to
contemplate this God himself alone, and after a wounderfull manner inuisibly
to behold him who is invisible, and so, to taste, not the sweetness of this
world, but of another; and to behold not this inferior; kind of light, but
another. For this light, which is shutt up in place, is also ended in time, its
varied by the interruption of night; and this light, which is common to us with
worms, and other unreasonable beasts, in comparison of that other souueraigne
light, is rather to be called night then light.

CHAP. XXVIII. What it is to see God, and to enjoy him, after a sort, and how
we are to think of God.
But although that supreme and unchangeable essence, that indeficient light,
that light which is enjoyed by the Angels, can be seen by noe creature in
this life; (this being the reward, which is reserved only for the Saints, who
enjoy celestial glory) yet to believe, to conceive, to have a feelinge, and
ardently to aspire toward this Glory, is to see it, after a sort, and to
possess it. Let our voice therefore extend it self beyond the Angels, and
let man contemplate God, with an carnest mind; and let him, with what words
he can, express Gods praises, to God himself. For it is all reason, that the
Creature should praise his Creator, since he vouchsafed to create us, that we
might praise him, when yet he had noe need of our praises. For his virtue is
incomprehensible, he needs none, but is all sufficient for himself. Our Lord
is great, and his virtue is great, and of his wisdom there is noe end. Our
Lord God is great, and highly worthy to be praised. Let our soul therefore love
him, let our tongues sing of him, and our hand write of him; and let the
faithful heart employ it self, only, in these holy thoughts. Let the man of
spiritual desires, and a contemplator of celestial mysteries, be daily
recreated, with the most delicious food of this heavenly contemplation; that so
being fully fed, with this heavenly repaste, he may cry out with great
exclamation, he may cry out with the very bowels of his heart; cry out with
excess of joy, and say as follows with a most ardent affection of his mind.

CHAP. XXIX. He declares many propertyes of Almighty God.
O Thou Supreme, most excellent, Omnipotent, most merciful, most just, most
secret, most present, and most strong; most stable and incomprehensible,
invisible, yet seeinge all things; Unchangeable, yet changeing all things;
Immortal, without place, without term, or circumscription; Vnlymited,
inestimable, ineffable, inscrutable; Immovable, yet moueinge all things;
Unsearchable, inexpressible, terrible, and to be greatly feared, to be honored,
and trembled at; to be worshipped and reverenced. Never new, and never old, and
yet innouating all things, and draweing proud people into decay though they
mark it not Ever in action, yet ever quiet; gathering together, and yet
needinge nothing; carryinge all things, without feeling any weight; fillinge
all things, without being includede; creatinge, protectinge, nourishinge, and
perfectinge all things. Thou seek, and yet thou want nothing: Thou art
in love, yet without passion; Thou art jealous, yet thou art secure; Thou
repentest, yet thou art not sorry; Thou art angry, yet thou are not moved; Thou
changest thy works, but thou never changest thy decrees. Thou take that
which thou find, yet did thou loose nothing; Thou art never poor, and
yet thou art glade of gain; Thou art never covetous, yet thou exactest usury
at our hands by our saperrogatio^, thou becomest our debtor; and yet who has
any thing which is not thine; Thou payest debts, yet thou owe nothing; Thou
forgiuest debts, yet thou loosest nothing. Thou alone doste quicken all
things, thou haste created all things, thou art every where, and thou art every
where altogether; Thou can be felt, yet thou can not be seen: Thou art not
wanting any where, yet art thou far from the thoughts of wicked men. But
thou art not wanting even there, although thou be far of from them, because
where thou art not present by Grace, there thou art present by revenge. Thou
touchest all things, yet thou touchest them not all alike. For some, thou
touchest only, that they may be, but not that they may live, and feel, and
discourse. But some thou touchest, that they may be, and live, but yet not so,
as that withal, they may feel and discourse. And some again, thou do so
touch, as that they may be, and live, and feel, and discourse also. And
although thou be never unlike thy self, yet do thou touch unlike things,
after an unlike manner. Thou art ever present, yet sometimes thou art hard to
be found We follow thee, when thou stand still, and yet we are not able to
lay hold on thee, whilst yet thou hold all things, fillest all things,
comprehendest all things, exceedest all things, vpholdest all things. Neither
do thou on the one side undergo them, and art overcome by them on the other.
Neither do thou fill things, on the one side, and yet art comprehended by
them, on the other; but by comprehending them, thou fillest them; and by
filling them, thou comprehendest them; as by sustayning them, thou exceedest
them; and by exceeding them, thou sustaynest them. Thou teach the hearts of
the faithful, yet without the noise of words. Thou reachest from one end to
the other strongly; and thou disposed of all things, sweetly. Thou art not
extended, according to the proportion of places; nor art thou varied by the
vicissitude of times. Thou haste neither access, nor recesse, but thou
inhabitest that inaccessibile light, which no man ever saw or can see.

Remaineinge quiet in thy self, thou doste make thy circuit about all things,
and thou art every where expressly and entirely all. For thou can not be
divided or cut, who art truly all; nor can thou be made into parts,
because thou, wholly hold all, fillest all, and do possess and illustrate
all.

The mind of man cannot conceive the immense profundity of this mystery, nor
the tongue of eloquence declare it; nor can learned speech, nor all the volumes
of all Libraryes, unfold it. If there were books to fill the whole world, yet
they could not unfold thy admirable knowledge, because thou art truly
unspeakable: and can not by any means be concluded, nor expressed, as thou
art, who art the fountain of divine light, and the Son of everlasting
charity.

Thou art great, without quantity, and therefore thou art immense: thou art
good, without quality, and therefore thou art truly, and supreamely good, and
there is none good but thou alone, whose will is thy work, and whose
inclination is thy power, who did create all things of nothing, and thou
did it, by the only act of thy will. Thou doste possess all thy creatures,
without needing any of them: Thou gouuernest them, without labor, and thou
rulest them without trouble: and there is nothing at all, either, in the
highest or lower things which can disturb the order of thy dominion. Thou art
in all places, without being contained in any place: Thou conteynest all things
without circuit: and thou art present every where, without either situation,
or motion. Thou art not the Author of ill, nor can thou do it: yet is there
nothing which thou can not do; nor did thou ever repent thy self of any
thing which thou hadest done, nor art thou troubled with any commotion, or
tempest of thy mind; nor do the dangers of the whole world, draw any danger
upon thee.

Thou command not, nor yet allowest of any wickedness or sin. Thou never
lie, for thou art eternal Truth. By thy only Goodness we are made, by thy
Justice we are punished, and by thy mercy we are delivered.

Nothing, neither in Heaven, or which is Elementary, either of fire, or earth,
or any other thing subject to our sense, is to be worshipped instead of thee,
who truly art what thou art, and art not changed; and to whom it does most
principally agree, that thou be called that which the Grecians call On, and the
Latins Ens, which signifies. The thing which is, for thou art ever the same,
and thy years will never fail.

These, and many other things have been taught me, by my holy Mother the
Church, whereof I am made a member, by thy grace. It has taught me, that thou,
the only one, and true God, art not corporeal, nor passible: and that
nothing of thy substance or nature, is any way violable, or mutable, or
composed, and framed: and therefore it is certain that thou can nor be
perceived, by corporeal eyes: and that thou could never be seen, in thy
proper essence, by any mortal creature. Hereby it is clearly to be vndestood,
that as the Angels see thee now, so are we to see thee, after this life. But
yet, nether are the Angels themselves, able to s^e thee just as thou art: and
in fine the Omnipotent Trinity, is not wholly seen by any, but by thy only
self.

CHAP. XXX. Of the unity of God, and the plurality of Persons in him.
But thou art truly Unity in thy divinity, though manifold in the plurality of
thy Persons, so that thou can not be numbered by any number, nor measured by
any measure, nor waighed by any weight. For we do not pretend, to find out
any beginning, of that supreme goodness, which thou thy self art, from
whence all things, by which all things, and in which all things: but we say,
that all other things, are good by the participation of that goodness, For thy
divine Essence, did ever, and does still want Matter, although it do not want
Form, namely that Form which was never formed, the Form of all Forms, that
most beautiful Form, which when thou do imprint upon particular things (as
it might be some seal) thou make them, without all doubt, differ from thy
self by their own mutabilitie, without any change in thee, either by way of
augmentation, or diminution. Now whatsoever is within the co^pass of created
things, that also is a creature of thine, O thou, one Trinity, and three in
Unity, thou God, whose Omnipotency possesses, and rules, and fills all
things, which thou did create. And yet we do not therefore say, that thou
fillest all things, as if they did conteyne thee, but rather so, as that they
be contained by thee. Nor yet do thou fill them all by parts, nor is it to
be thought, by any means, that every creature receives thee after the rate of
the bigness which it self has: that is to say, the greater, the greater
part: and the less the less: since thou thy self, art in them all, and all
of them in thee: whose Omnipotency concludes all things nor can any man find
a way, whereby to make escape from thy power, For he, who has thee not well.
pleased, will be sure not to escape thee, being offended; as it is written,
neither from the East, nor from the West, nor from the desert mountains,
because God is the Judge. And else where it is said: Whither shall I go from
thy spirit, and whither shall I fly from thy face. The imme^sity of thy divine
greatness is such, that we must know thee to be whithin all things, and yet not
included, and without all things, yet not excluded. And therefore thou art
interior, that thou maiste conteyne all things: and therefore thou art
exterior, that by the immensity of thy greatness, thou maiste conclude, all
things. By this therefore, that thou art interior, thou art showed to be the
Creator; but by this, that thou art exterior, thou art proved to be the
Governor of them all. And least all things which are created, should be
without thee, thou art interior; but thou art exterior, to the end that all
things may be included in thee. Not by any local magnitude of thine but by the
pote^tiall presence of thee, who art present every where, and all things to
thee are present, though some understand these things, and others indeed,
understand them not. The inseparable unity therefore of thy nature, cannot have
the persons seperable, because as thou art Trinity in Unity, and Unity in
Trinity, so thou can not have separation of persons.

It is true, that those persons are named severally; but yet thou art so
pleased to show thy self, O God, thou Trinity, to be inseparable in thy
persons, as that there is noe name belonginge to thee in any one of them, which
may not be referred to another, according to the rules of relation. For as the
Father to the Son, and the Son to the Father; so the Holy Ghost is most
truly referred, both to the Father and Son. But those names, which signify
thy substanec, or person, or power, or Essence, or any thing which properly is
called God, do equally agree to all the persons; As great God, Omnipotent and
eternal God; and all those things which naturally are said of thee, O God.
Therefore there is noe name, which concerns the nature of God, which can so
agree to God the Father, as that it may not also agree to God the Son, as
also to God the Holy Ghost. As for example, we say the Father is naturally
God, but so is the Son naturally God; and so also is the Holy Ghost
naturally God; and yet not three Gods, but naturally one God, the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost: Therefore art thou o Holy Trinity, inseparable in
thy persons, as thou art to be understood by our mind, although thou have
seperable names in word; because thou do by no means, endure a plural
number, in the names belonging to thy nature. For herby it is showed, that the
persons cannot be divided in the blessed Trinity, which is one true God,
because the name of any one of the Persons, does ever relate to an other of
them. For if I name the Father, I show the Son; if I speak of the Son, I
proclaim the Father: if I speak of the Holy Ghost, it is necessarily to be
understood, that he is the Spirit of some other, namely of the Father, and of
the Son. Now this it that true Faith, which flows from sound doctrine. This
indeed, is the Catholic, and Orthodoxall Faith, which God has taught me, by
his Grace, in the bosom of his Church, which is my Mother.

CHAP. XXXI. A prayer to the blessed Trinity.
MY Faith does therefore call upon thee, which thou, O Lord haste given me,
through thy goodness, for my salvation. Now the faithful soul, lives by Faith.
He now holds that in hope, which hereafter he shall have indeed. I call upon
thee, O my God, with a pure conscience, and with that sweet love, which
grows out of Faith, whereby thou haste brought me, to the understanding of
truth; casting away the darkness of ignorance, and whereby thou haste drawn me
out of the foolish bitterness of this world; and so accompanyinge it, with the
sweetness of thy charity, thou haste made it delightful, and deer to me. I do
with a loud voice inuoke thee, O blessed Trinity, and with that sincere love
which grows out of Faith, which Faith, thou haueing nourished even from my
cradle, did'dst inspire by the illustration of thy grace; and which thou have
increased and confirmed in me, by the documents of my Mother the Church. I
inuoke thee, O holy and blessed, and glorious Trinity, in Unity; the Father,
the Son, and the Holy Ghost, our God, our Lord, and our Paraclete, Charity,
Grace, and Communication, the Father, the Son, and the Illuminator; the
Fountain the River, and the Irrigation, or wateringe. All things by one, and
all things in one, from whom, by whom, in whom, all things. The living life,
the life proceeding from the living life, the life living. One from himself,
One from one, and One from two. One, being from himself, One, being from
another, and One, being from two other. The Father is true, the Son is Truth,
and the Holy Ghost is Truth. Therefore the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost are one essence, one power, one goodness, one beatitude, from whom, by
whom, and in whom, all things are happy what things soever are happy

CHAP. XXXII. That God is the true, and souuereigne life.
O God the true and Souuereigne life, from whom, by whom, and in whom, all
things do live, which have any true, and happy life. O God who art that
goodness, and that beauty, from whom, by whom and in whom all things are
fair, and good, which have any beauty, or goodness in them. O God, whose
faith does excite us, whose hope does erect us, and whose charity does unite us
O God, who requirest that we seek thee, and who make us find thee, and who
openest to us, when we knock. O God, from whom to be auerted is to fa^l; and
to whom to be converted is to rise; and in whom to remain is to be immovable.
O God whom noe man loses, but he who is deceived; no man seeks, but he who
is admonished; and noe man finds, but he who is purged. O God whom to know,
is to live; whom to serve is to reign; whom to praise, is the joy and
salvation of the soul. I praise thee, I bless thee, and I adore thee, with my
lips, with my heart, and with all the whole power I have. And I present my
humblest thanks to thy mercy, and goodness, for all thy benefitts; and I sing
this Hymn of glory to thee, Holy, Holy, Holy, I inuoke thee, O blessed Trinity,
beseechinge, that thou will come into me, and make me worthy to be the Temple
of thy glory. I beg of the Father, by the Son: I beg of the Son, by the
Father; I beg of the Holy Ghost, by the Father, and the Son, that all vice
may be far removed from me, and that all holy virtue may be planted in me.

O Immense God, from whom all things, by whom all things, in whom all
things, both visible and invisible are made. Thou who doste inuiron thy works,
without, and fillest them, within; who do cover them from above, and do
sustain them from below; keep me who am the work of thy hands, and who hope
in thee, and who only confide in thy mercy. Keep me, I beseech thee, here,
and every where, now and ever, within, and without; before me, and behind me;
above and below, and round about; that no place at all, may be left, for the
treacherous attempts of my enemies against me. Thou art the Omnipotent God, the
keeper and the Protector of all such as hope in thee, without whom noe man is
safe, none freed from danger. Thou art God, and there is noe other God but
thou, neither in heaven above, nor on earth below. Thou who performest works
of prowess, and so many wonderful and vnscrutable things; which exceed all
number.

Praise is due to thee, honor is due to thee, and to thee Hymns of glory are
due. To thee do all the Angels the heavens and all the power thereof, sing
Hymns, and praises, without ceaseing; and all creatures, and every spirit does
praise thee, the holy and individual Trinity, as it becomes the creatures
there Creator, the slaves their Lord, and the soldiers, their King.

CHAP. XXXIII. The praises of men and Angels.
TO thee do all the Saints, and they who are humble of heart, to thee do the
spiritts and souls of just persons, to thee do all the Citizens of heaven,
and all those orders of blessed spiritts sing the hymn of honor and glory,
adoreinge thee humbly without end. All the Citizens of heaven do praise thee,
O Lord, after a most honorable and magnificent manner; and man who is an
eminent part of thy Creatures does also praise thee. Yea and I wretched
sinner, and miserable Creature that I am, do yet labor with an extreme
desire to praise thee, and wish that I could love thee, with excessive love. O
my God, my life, my strength, and my praise, vouchsafe to let me praise thee.
Grant me light in my heart, putt thou the word into my mouth, that my heart may
think upon thy glory, and my tongue may singe thy praises, all the day long.
But because it is noe hansome praise, which proceeds out of the mouth of a
sinner, And because I am a man of polluted lips, Cleanse thou my heart I
beseech thee, from all spotts, sanctify me, O thou Omnipotent sanctifier, both
within and without, and make me worthy to set forth thy praise. Receive with
benignity, and acceptance, from the hand of my heart, which is the affection of
my soul, receive I say, the sacrifice of my lips, and make it acceptable in
thy sight, and make it ascend up to thee in the odor of sweetness.

Let thy holy memory, and thy most divine sweetness, possess my whole soul;
and draw it up at full speed, to the love of invisible things. Let it pass
from the visible to the invisible; from the earthly to the heavenly; from the
temporal to the eternal; and let it pass on so far, as to see that
admirable vision.

O eternal Verity, O true Charity, O deer Eternity, thou art my God; to thee
do I sigh day and night; to thee do I pant; at thee do I aim; to thee do I
desire to arrive. He who knows thee, knows Truth and he knows Eternity.
Thou, O Truth, do preside over all things. We shall see thee as thou art,
when this blind and mortal life is spent, wherein it is said to us, where is
now thy God? And I also said to thee Where art thou, O my God? In thee am I
refreshed a little, when I power out my soul toward thee, by the voice of my
exultation and confession, which is as the sound of a man, who is
bankquetting, end celebratinge some great festiuity -- And yet again it is
afflicted, because it falls back, and returns to be an Abyss; or rather it
finds that still it is so. My faith which thou have kindled, in this night of
mine, before my feet, does say, Why art thou sad, O my soul, and why doste
thou afflict me? Hope thou in God; his word is a lantern to my feet. Hope,
and continue to do so, till the night (which is the mother of the wicked) do
pass a way; till the wrath of our Lord pass away; whereof sometimes we were
the Children. For sometimes we were darkness. Till this fury of water pass
clean a way, we still dragg on, in our body (which is dead through sin) the
relics of that darkness: Till such time as the day shall approach, and all
shadows may be removed. I will hope in our Lord.

In the morrow of the next life, I shall assist, and contemplate, and I will
ever confess to him. In that morrow, I shall assist, and behold the health of
my countenance, which is my God, who will revive even our mortal bodies, for
that spiritts sakes, which dwells in us; that now we may be light, even
whilst we are saved here, by hope. That we may be the Sonns of light, and the
Sonns of God, and not of night, and darkness; For sometimes we were darkness, but
now we are light in thee, O our God, and yet we are so here, but by Faith, and
not face to face. Because that hope which is seen is not hope.

All that immortal people of thy Angels praises thee O Lord; and those
celestial Powers glorify thy Name. They have no need to read any such writing
as this, toward the makeinge them know, the holy and individual Trinity. For
they see thy Face for ever, and there they read, without any syllabes of time,
what that eternal will, requires. They read, they choose, and they love. They
ever read, and that never passes, which they are readinge. By choosing, and by
loueinge they read, the very immutability of thy counsel; and their book is
never shutt, and their scrowle never folded up; for thy self is all that to
them, and so thou art to be for ever. O how excessiuely happy are those powers
of heaven, which are able to praise thee, most purely and holyly, with
excessive sweetness, and unspeakable exultation? They praise thee for that, in
which th(...) joy; because they ever see reason (...) they should rejoice, and
praise them But we, being oppressed by this burden of our flesh, and being
cast far of from thy face, in this pilgrimage of ours, and being so racked by
the variety of worldly things, are not able worthily to praise thee. Yet we
praise thee as we can, by Faith, though not face to face; but those Angelical
spiritts praise thee face to face, and not by Faith. For our flesh puts this
upon us and obliges us to praise thee, far otherwise, then they do. But how
soever even we sing praise to thee in a different manner; and yet thou art but
one, O God, thou Creator of all things to whom the sacrifice of praise is
offered, both in heaven and earth. And by thy mercy, we shall one day arrive to
their society, with whom we shall for ever see, and praise thee. Grant, O
Lord, that whilst I am placed in this frail body of mine, my heart may praise
thee, my tongue may praise thee, and all the powers of my soul may say, O
Lord, who is like to thee.

Thou art that Omnipotent God, whom we worshi(...) as Trine in Persons, and
On(...) the Substance of thy Diety. We adore the Father unbegotten, the Son,
the only begotten of his Father, and the Holy Ghost, proceedinge from them
both; and remaininge in them both. We adore thee O Holy and individual
Trinity, one Omnipotent God, who when we were not, did most puissantly make
us; and when, by our own fault we wear lost, by thy pity, and goodness, thou
did recover us, after an admirable manner. Do not I beseech thee, permit
that we should be ungrateful for so great benefitts, and unworthy of so many
mercyes. I pray thee, I beseech thee, I beg of thee, that thou will increase
my faith, hope, and charity. I beseech thee, make us, by that grace of thine,
to be ever firm in beleiueinge, and full of efficacy in working; that so, by
means of incorrupted Faith and works worthy thereof, we may through thy mercy,
arrive to everlasting life. And there beholding thy glory; as indeed it is,
we, whom thou haste made worthy to see that glory of thine, may adore thy
Majesty, and may say together: Glory be to the Father, who created us: Glory be
to the Son, who redeemed us, Glory, be to the Holy Ghost, who sanctified us:
Glory be to the supreme, and individual Trinity, whose works are
inseparable, and whose empire is eternal. To thee our God, praise is due, to
thee a Hymn of glory, to thee all honor, benediction, clarity, thanksgiueing,
virtue, and fortitude, for ever, and for ever. Amen.

CHAP. XXXIV. He complayneth against himself for not being moved, with the
contemplation of God whereat the Angels tremble.
PArdon me O Lord, pardon me, through thy mercy, pardon, and pity me; pardon
my great ignorance and imperfections. Do not reject me, as a presumptuous
creature, in that I adventure, being thy slave (I would, I could say a good
one, and not rather that I am unprofitable and wicked, and therefore very wicked
because I take this boldness) to praise, and bless, and adore thee, who art our
Omnipotent God, and who art terrible, and excessiuely to be feared, without
contrition of heart, without a fountain of tears, and without due reverence,
and trembling. For if the Angels, who adore, and praise thee, do tremble,
whilst they are filled with that admirable exultation; how comes it to pass,
that I, a sinful creature, whilst I am present with thee, and sing praises,
and offer sacrifices to thee, am not frighted at the heart, that I am not pale
in my face; that my lips tremble not, and my whole body is not in a shiueringe
and that so, with a flood of tears, I do not incessantly mourn before thee. I
would feign do it, but I am not able, because I cannot do what I desire.
Herupon I am vehemently wondringe at my self, when by the eyes of Faith, I see
how terrible thou art; but yet, who can do even this, without thy grace? For
all our salvation, is nothing but thy great mercy. Woe be to me, how comes my
soul to be made so senseles, as that it is not frighted, with excessive
terror, whilst I am standing before God, and singinge forth his praise? Woe
be to me, how comes my heart to be so hardened, that mine eyes cannot incessantly
bring forth whole floods of tears, whilst the slave is speaking before his
Lord, Man with God, the. Creature with the Creator; he who is made of durte,
with him who made all things of nothing?

Behold O Lord, how I place my self before thee; and that which I conceive of
my self in the most secret corner of my heart, that do I not conceal from thy
paternall ears. Thou art rich in thy mercy, and liberal in thy rewards; grant
me some of thy good gifts, that thereby I may do service to thee. For we
cannot serve, nor please thee, by any other means, then of thy gift.

Strick through, I beseech thee, this flesh of mine, with thy fear. Let my
heart rejoice, that it may fear thy name. O that my sinful soul might so
fear thee, as that holy Man did, who said: I have always feared God, like
the waves of a Sea, which were flowing over me. O God, thou giver of all good
things grant me, whilst I am celebratinge thy praises, a fountain of tears,
together with purity of heart, and joy of mind; that loueing thee perfectly,
and praiseinge thee worthily, I may feel, and taste, and savor with the very
palate of my soul, how sweet, and delicious thou art: O Lord, according to
that which is written: Taste, and see, how sweet our Lord is: Blessed is the
man who hopes in him. Blessed is the people which understands this joy.
Blessed is the man whose help is from thee: He has disposed of certain
degrees, whereby to rise up in his heart, in this valley of tears, in the place
which he has appointed. Blessed are the clean of heart; for they be the men,
who shall see God. Blessed are they who dwell in thy house, O Lord, for they
shall praise thee, for ever, and for ever.

CHAP. XXXV. A prayer which greatly moves the heart to Devotion, and to Divine
love.
O Jesus, our Redemption, our Desire, and our Love; thou God of God, give help
to me, who am thy servant. I inuoKe thee, I call upon thee, with a mighty cry,
and with my whole heart. I inuoke thee into my soul, enter into it, and make it
fit for thy self, that thou may possess it without spott, and wrinckle.
For to a most pure Lord, a most pure habitation is due. Sanctify me therefore,
who am the vessel which thou have made. Euacuate me of malice, and fill me
with grace, and still keep me full, that I may be made a Temple, worthy to be
inhabited by thee, both here, and in the other everlasting world. O thou most
sweet, most benign, most loueing, most deer, most powerful, most desirable,
most precious, most amiable, most beautiful God: thou who art more sweet then
honey, more white then any milk or snow, more delicious then Nectar, more
precious then gold or jewels, and more dear to me, then all the riches and
honors of the earth. But what do I say, O my God, O thou my only hope, and my
so abundant mercy? What do I say, O thou my happy, and secure sweetness? What
do I say when I utter such things as these? I say what I can, but I do not
say what I should.

O that I could say such things, as those Quires of Angels do utter, in those
celestial Hymns O how willingly would I even spend, and power out my whole
self, upon thy praises? O how feign would I, most devoutly, and most
indefatigablie proclaim those Hymns of celestial melody, in the midst of
thy Church, to the praise and glory of thy Name; But because I am not able to
do these things completely, shall I therefore hold my peace: woe be to them,
who hold their peace of thee, who loosest the tongues of dumm persons, and
make the tongues of children eloquent. Woe woe be to them who hold their
peace of thee, for even they who speak most, may be accounted to be but dumb,
when they do not speak thy praise.

But now who shall be able worthily to praise thee, O thou unspeakable Wisdom of
the Father? But yet although I find noe words whereby I may sufficiently
unfold thee, who art the Omnipotent, and Omniscient Word; I will yet; in thy
mean time say what I can, till thou biddest me come to thee, where I may say
that of thee, which is fit, and which I am bound to say. And therefore I
humbly pray, that thou will not have an eye, so much to that which I say now in
deed, as to that which I say in my desire. For I desire (and that with a great
desire) to say that of thee, which is fit and just, because it is fit that
thou be praised; and celebrated, and all honor is due to thee Thou see
therefore, O God, thou who know of all secrett things, that thou art more
deer to me, not only then the earth, and all that is therein, but that thou
art more acceptable, and amiable to me, then heaven it self, and all that it
conteynes. For I love thee, more then heaven, and earth, and all those other
things which are in them; Nay these transitory things are without doubt not to
be beloved at all, if it wear not, for the love of thy Name. I love thee, O my
God, with a great love, and I desire to love thee yet more.

Give me grace, that I may ever love thee as much as I desire, and as much as I
ought, that thou alone may be all my intention, and all my meditation. Let me
consider thee, all the day long without ceasinge; let me feel thee, even when
I am sleeping, by night; let my spirit speak to thee; let my mind converse
with thee; let my heart be illustrated with the light of thy holy vision; that
thou being my Director, and my Captain, I may walk on, from virtue to virtue;
and that at last, I may see thee, the God of Gods in Syon. Now as in a glass,
or in a cloud; but then face to face, where I shall know thee, as I am known.

Blessed are the clean of heart, for they are the men who shall see God.
Blessed are they who dwell in thy house, O Lord, for ever, and for ever, shall
they praise thee. I beseech thee therefore, O Lord, by all thy mercyes, whereby
we are freed from eternal death, mollyfy my heart, which is hard, and stony,
and rocky, and steely, with thy powerful, and most sacred unction; and grant,
that by the fire of contrition, I may become a liueing sacrifice before thee,
in every moment of my life. Make me ever to have a contrite and humbled heart,
in thy presence, with abundance of tears. Grant that through my great desire of
thee, I may be utterly dead to this world; and that I may forgett these
transitory things, through the greatness of my love, and fear of thee; and this
so far forth, as that I may never rejoice nor mourn, nor fear any thing,
which is temporal; and that I may not love them; least so I be either
corrupted by prosperity, or dejected by adversity. And because the love of
thee, is strong as death, I beseech thee that the fiery and mellifluous force
of thy love, may suck up, and devour my whole mind, from all those things
which are under heaven; that I may in hear to thee alone, and be fedd with the
memory of thy only sweetness.

O Lord, I beseech thee, I beseech thee, and still I beseech thee, that the
most sweet odor of thee, and thy mellifluous love may descend, and enter into
my heart, Let that admirable, and unspeakable fragrance of thy savor, come
into me, which may kindle an everlastingly a burning desire of thee in my heart,
and which may draw out from thence, those veins of water which spring up to
eternal life. Thou art immense, O Lord, and therefore it is but reason that
thou be loved and praised, beyond all measure, by them whom thou have redeemed
with thy precious Blood. O thou most benign lover of man. O thou most
merciful Lord, and most impartial Judge, to whom the Father gave all power
of Judgment; Thou see how unjust a thing it is, that the children of this
world, the children of night, and darkness, should with a more ardent desire,
endeavor, and study, and seek perishing riches, and transitory honors, then
we thy servants do love thee our God, by whom we are created and redeemed.
But if on the other side, a man will affect some man, with so great love, as
that one of them will scarce endure the absence of the other; if the Spouse be
transported, with so great ardour of affection to her fellow Spouse, that
through the greatness of her love; she can take noe rest, nor bear the absence
of that dearest friend, without deep sorrow; with what love, with what labor,
with what fervor ought that soul, which thou haste espoused to thy self by
Faith, and other mercyes, love thee her true God, and her most beautiful
Spouse, who have so loved, and saved her, and haste done so many, and, so great
things for her good. For although this world have certain delights and loves
belonging to it, yet do they not so delight, as thou O God. In thee the just
man is indeed delighted, because thy love is sweet, and quiet; for the hearts
which thou do possess, thou fillest with tranquillity, sweetness, and
delight, On the other side, the love of this world, and of the flesh, breeds
anxiety, and pertubation, and depriues thoses souls of quietness into which it
enters; for it does ever solicit them, with suspicions, perturbations, and
many fears. Thou art therefore the delight of just persons, and that justly.
For the strength of rest and peace, is with thee, and a life incapable of
perturbation. He who enters into thee, O dear Lord, enters into the joy of his
Lord and shall have nothing more to fear; but shall find himself to be
perfectly well, in the most excellent place which can be thought; and he will
say, This is my rest for all eternityes, this shall be my habitation, for I have
chosen it; And again, Our Lord gouernes me, and nothing shall be wantinge, in
that place of full feedinge; yea there it is, that he has lodged me.

Sweet Christ, dear Jesus, fill my heart for ever, I beseech thee, with the
unquenchable love, and the continual memory of thee; in such sort, as that I
may all burn up, like any eager flame, in the sweetness of thy love, which many
waters, may never be able to extinguish, in me. Grant O most sweet Lord, that
I may love thee, and that through the desire of the I may discharge my self of
the weight of all carnal desires; and of the most greiuous burden of all
earthly concupiscences, which impugn, and oppress my miserable soul, that
running lightly after thee, in the odor of thy precious oyntements, till I be
effectually satisfied with the vision of thy beauty, I may, with all speed,
arrive thither by thy conduct. For there are two kinds of loves; one good, and
another badd; one sweet, and another bitter, and they cannot both remain in
one heart. And therefore if any man love any thing, in dishonor of thee, thy
love, O Lord, is not in him. That love of sweetness, and that sweetness of love;
not tormenting but delightinge; a love, which remains sincerely, and chastely
for all eternity, a love which ever burns, and is never quenched.

O sweet Christ, O deer Jesus, O Charity! my God, inflame me all with thy
fire, with thy love, with thy sweetness and delight, with thy joy and
exultation, with thy pleasure and ardent desire which is holy, and good;
chaste, and pure, secure, and serene; that being all full of the sweetness of
thy love, and all burnt up, in the flame of thy charity, I may love thee, O
God, with my whole heart, and with all the marrow of my affections; haueing thee
still, and every where, in my heart, in my mouth, and before my eyes, so that
there may never be any place open in me, for any adulterine or impure love.
Hearken to me, O my God, hearken to me, O thou light of mine eyes. Hearken to
what I ask, and teach me what to ask, that thou may hearken to me. O thou
pittious and most merciful Lord, do not become inexorable to me for my sins;
but for thine own goodness sake, receive these prayers of thy Son, and grant
me the effect of my petition, and desire, by the intercession, prayer, and
impetration of the glorious Virgin Mary my Lady, and Mother, and of all thy
other Saints. Amen.

CHAP. XXXVI. A most devout Prayer by way of thanks-giueing.
O Christ our Lord, the Word of the Father, who came into the world to save
sinners, I beseech thee, by the most indulgent bowels of thy mercy, amend my
life, better my actions, compose my manners, take all that from me, which
hurts me, and displeaseh thee; and give me that which thou know, to please
thy self, and profitt me. Who is he but only thou, O Lord, who can make a man
clean, he being conceived of unclean seed. Thou art an Omnipotent God of
infinite piety, who iustifiest the wicked, and reuiuest such as are dead,
through sin; and thou changest sinners, and they are so no more. Take from me
therefore, whatsoever is displeasing to thee in me; For thine eyes have seen
my many imperfections. Send forth, I beseech thee, thy hand of piety toward
me, and take from me, whatsoever is offensive in me to thine eyes. Before thee,
O Lord is my health, and sickness, conserve that, I beseech thee, and cure this.
Heal me, O Lord, and I shall be healed, do thou save me, and I shall be saved;
thou, who curest the sick, and conseruest the sound; thou who with the only
beck of thy will, restorest that which is in decay, and ruin. For if thou
vouchsafe to sow good seed in thy field, which is my heart, it will first be
necessary, that, with the hand of thy pity, thou should pluck up the
thorns of my vices.

O most sweet, most benign, most loueing, most deer, most desirable, most
amiable, and most beautiful God, infuse, I beseech thee, the multitude of thy
sweetness, and of thy love into my heart; that I may not so much as desire, yea,
or even think, of any carnal thing; but that I may love only thee, and have
only thee in my heart, and mouth. Write, with thy finger in my heart, the sweet
memory of thy mellifluous Name, which may never be blotted out again. Write
thy will, and thy law, in the tables of my heart, that I may have both thy
law, and thy self, O Lord of immense sweetness, at all times and places,
before mine eyes. Burn up my mind with that fire of thine, which thou did
send into the world, and did desire that it might be much kindled; that I
may daily offer to thee, abundance of tears, the sacrifice of a troubled
spirit, and contrite heart.

O sweet Christ, O deer Jesus, as I desire, and as, with my whole heart I
crave, so give me thy holy and chaste love, which may replenish, and take, and
possess me wholly. And give me that evident sign of thy love, a springing
fountain of tears, which continually may flow; that my tears themselves may
witness thy love to me, and they may discover and declare, how deerly my soul
loves thee; whilst through the excessive sweetness of that love, it cannot
conteyne it self from tears. I remember, dear Lord, that good woeman Anna,
who came to the Tabernacle, to beg a son of thee, of whom the Scripture
says that after her tears, and prayers, her countenance was cast no longer
toward several things. But whilst I call to mind her so great virtue, and
constancy, I am racked with grief, and confounded with shame, because I find
my self too miserably cast down, toward vanity. But if she wept so
bitterly, and did so persevere in weepinge, who only desired to have a son;
how ought my soul to lament, and continue in lamentation, which seeks and
loves God, and earnesty desires to get home to him? How ought such a soul
lament, and weep, who seeks God, day and night, and is resolved to love
nothing but Christ our Lord? It is no less then a wonder, if such a persons
tears, become not his bread, day and night.

Look back therefore, and take pity on me, for the sorrows of my heart are
multiplied. Give me of thy celestial contemplation; and despise not this
sinful soul, for which thou dyedst. Give me I beseech thee, internal
tears, which may spring from the most secret corner of my heart, whereby the
chains of my sins may be broken; and let them ever fill my soul, with
celestial joy, that I may obtain some little portion in thy Kingdom, if not
in the Society of those true and perfect Moncks, whose stepps I am not able to
follow, yet at least with devout woeman.

I do also call to mind, the admirable devotion of another woema^, who sought
thee with tender love, when thou were laid in the Sepulcher. Who retired not
from the sepulcher, when the Disciples retired; who satt down there, all
afflicted and wounded; and she wept there long, and much, and riseing up with
many tears, she did again and again, play as it were the spy, with her
watchful eyes, upon that solitary place; to see if perhapps she might be able
to find thee any where, whom she sought with such ardour of desire. She had
already entered into the sepulcher once and again; but that which in it self,
seems too much, seems not enough, to one that loves. The virtue of a good
work is perseverance; and because she loved thee beyond the rest, and loueing
wept, and weeping sought, and seeking perseuered, therefore did she deserve, to
be the first of all others to find the out; and to speak with thee. And not
only that, but she was the first proclamer of thy glorious Resurrection, to
thy Disciples; thy self thus directing, and sweetly commanding that it should
be so, Go, and will my brethren that they pass on into Gallile; they shall see
me there, But now, if that woeman wept, and continued in weepinge, who sought
the liueing, amongst the dead, and who touched thee but with the hand of Faith;
how ought my soul to lamente, and persiste in lamentation, which believes
with the heart, and confesses with the mouth, that thou art her redeemer,
praesiding now in heaven, and regninge every where? How ought such a soul to
lament and weep, which loves thee with her whole heart, and couetts to see thee
with her whole desire? Thee who art the sole refuge, and the only hope of
miserable creatures, to whom one can never pray without hope of mercy? Afford
me this favor, I beseech thee, for thine own sake, and for thy holy Name,
that as often as I think of thee, speak of thee, write of thee, read of thee,
conferr of thee; as often as I remember thee, and am present with thee, and
offer praise and prayers, and sacrifice to thee, so often may I weep
abundantly, and sweetly in thy presence, that so my tears may be made my
bread, day and night,

Thou, O King of glory, and thou instructor of souls in all virtue, haste
taught us, both by doctrine and example; that we are to lament, and weep,
saying: Blessed are they who mourn, for they shall be comforted. Thou did
weep over thy deceased friend, and thou did shedd abundant tears over that
miserable City, which was to perish. And now, O dear Jesus, I beseech thee,
by those most precious tears of thine, and by all those mercyes, whereby thou
did vouchsafe so admirably to releyue us wretched Creatures, give me the
grace of tears, which my soul does greatly affect, and covet. For without thy
gift, I cannot have it, but be thou pleased to impart it to me, by that holy
Spirit of thine, which mollifyes the hard hearts of sinners, and gives them
compunction to weep; as thou did give it to our Fathers, whose footesteps I
am to imitate, that so I may lament my self, duringe my whole life, as they
lamented themselves, day and night.

And by their merits and prayers who pleased theo, and did most devoutly serve
thee, I beseech thee, take pity upon me, thy most miserable, and unworthy
servant; and grant me the grace of tears, Grant me that superior kind of
irrigation or watering, and that inferior also, that my tears may be my bread
day and night; and that; by the fire of sorrow, I may be made a fatt, and
marrowy Holocauste, in thy sight.

O my God, let me be all offerred up, upon the altar of my heart; and let me be
received by thee as a most acceptable sacrifice to thee in the odor of
sweetness.

Grant me, O most sweet Lord, both a continual, and a clear founteyne,
wherein this unclean Holocauste, may be cleansed. For although I have already
offered my self to thee, by thy favor, and grace; yet in many things, do I
offend daily, through my excessive frailty. Give me therefore the grace of
tears, O blessed, and amiable God, through the great sweetness of thy love, and
by the commemoration of thine own mercyes. Prepare this table for thy servant,
in thy sight, and putt it into my power, that as often as I list, I may be
filled therewith. Grant through thy pity, and goodness that this excellent and
inebriating chalice, may quench my thirste; and let my spirit pante toward
thee, and my heart burn bright in thy love; forgetting all vanity, and misery
Hearken to me, o God, hearken, o thou light of mine eyes, hearken to that which
I desire, and make me desire such things, as thou will grant. O Lord, thou who
art holy, and exorable in thy self, do not become inexorable to me, for my
sins; but for thine own goodness sake, receive the Prayers of thy servant, and
grant me the effect of my desire, and suit, by the prayers and merits of my
Lady, the glorious Virgin Mary, and of all thy Saints. Amen.

CHAP. XXXVII. A most holy, and most excellent Prayer to Almighty God, whereby
the soul is greatly moved to devotion.
O Lord Jesus, O Holy Jesus, O good Jesus, who did vouchsafe to die for our
sins, and to rise again, for our Justification; I beseech thee, by that
glorious Resurrection of thine, raise me up from the sepulcher of all my vices,
and sins; and daily give me a part, in thy Resurrection by grace, that I may
obtain to be made a true pertaker of thy Resurrection to glory. O thou most
sweet, most benign, most loueinge, most precious, most amiable, and most
beautiful, Lord, who did ascend up to heaven, in a triumph of glory; and
being a most puissant King do sit at the right hand of thy Father: Draw
me upward, that I may runn after thee, in the pursuit and sent of thy
odoriferous ointments. I will runn, and not faint. Whilst thou art leading,
and draweinge me, I will be runninge. Draw up this mouth of my thirsty soul,
into those celestial spirings of eternal satiety. Nay, rather draw me to thy
very self, who art the true liueinge fountain; that so according to the
vttermoste of my capacity, I may drink that, whereupon I may for ever live, O
thou my God, and my life. For thou haste said, with thy holy and blessed mouth:
If any man thirst, let him come to me, and drink. O thou fountain of life,
grant to my thirsty soul, that it may always drink of thee; that, according
to thy holy and faithful promise, the liueing waters may flow from me, O
thou fountain of life, fill my mind, with the torrent of thy delight, and
inebriate my heart with the sober ebriety of thy love; that I may forget all
vain, and earthly things, and may perpetually have thee, and thee alone, in my
memory; as it is written: I have been mindful of God, and I was delighted.
Imparte to me the holy Spirit, which was signified by those watters, which
thou did promise, that thou would give, to such as thirsted after them.

Grant, I beseech thee, that with my whole desire, and endeavor, I may tend
thither, whither I believe thee to have ascended, upon the fortieth day, after
thy Resurrection That so my body only, be held in this present misery; and
that I may ever be with thee in desire and thought. That my heart may be there,
where thou art, who art my incomparable, disireable, and extremely amiable
treasure. For in the great deluge of this life, wherein we are tossed with
storms to and fro surrounding us; and where there is noe secure castinge of
anchor; nor place more eminent, wher-vpon the Dove may place her foot, and
repose her self in some small measure; there is nowhere, any safe peace; nowhere any secure quietness, but every where wars and strife; all places full of
enemies; fighting without, and fears within. And because one part of us is
celestial, and the other terrestrial the body which is subject to coruption,
does dull and stupify the soul Therefore does this soul of mine, which is my
companion, and my friend, and which colmes all weary, from trauellinge, upon a
long, and laborious way, lie languishinge, and torn in sunder, by those
vanities, which it passed by; and it does hunger, and thirst extremely; and I
have nothing to set before it, because I am a poor creature, and a mere
beggar. Thou o Lord my God who art rich in all things, and art a most
plentiful imparter of celestial satiety, give food to it being weary,
recolect it being scattered; and repair it being torn in pieces.

Behold it is at the door, and knockes. It beseeches thee, by those bowels of
thy mercy, whereby thou did visit us riseinge from above, to open thy hand
of pity, to this miserable soul which knockes; and command (out of thy
benignity and grace) that it may enter in to thee; that it may repose in thee,
and that it may be recreated, and fedd with thee who art that true celestial
bread, and wine. That when it is satisfied therewith, it may recover strength
and so asce^d up to the things above it and being snatched up out of this
valley of misery, by the wing of holy desires it may fly into those celestial
Kingdoms. Let my spirit, o Lord, let my spirit, I beseech thee, take the
wings of an Eagle, let it spring up and never fainte; let it fly, till it
arrive even! as far as the beauty of thy house; that place of the habitation
of thy glory; that it may there be full fedd upon that table, where thy
celestial Citizens are refreshed, with those secret delights of thine, in
that place of rich feedinge; close by those full fountaynes; and there, o my
Lord, let my heart repose, and rest in thee.

My heart is a high sea. swelling up with waves. Thou, who did command both
winds and seas, where upon great tranquillity did follow, come down, and
walk upon these Waves of my heart; that all my thoughts may become serene and
quiet; to the end that I may embrace thee, my dear, and only Lord; and that I
may contemplate thee (who art the sweet light of mine eyes) being freed from
the blind mistes, or foggs of all unquiet cogitations. Let my heart fly under
the shadow of thy wings, from the scorching heat of the cares, and
cogitations of this world; that so being hidden up in that sweet refreschinge
of thine, it may exult, and singe: In thy peace, in thy very self will I
sleep and rest.

Let my memory sleep, let it sleep, I beseech thee, O my Lord God, from all
sin and vice. Let it hate iniquity, and love sanctity. For what is more
beautiful, what is more delightful, then in the midst of the deep
darkness, and the many bitter sorrows of this life, to pante toward that
divine sweetness of thine, and to aspire to that eternal beatitude; and there
to have our hearts fixed, where it is most certain that true joy is to be
found, O thou most sweet, most loueinge, most benign, most dear, most
precious, most desirable, most amiable, and most beautiful Lord, When shall I
be able to see thee: When shall I apppeare before thy face? When shall I be
satisfied with that beauty of thine? When will thou lead me out of this dark
prison, that I may confess to thy Name; that so, from thence forth,, I may
have noe more cause of grief? When shall I pass on into that admirable, and
most goodly house of thine? where the voice of joy and exultation, is ever
ringing out, in those Tabernacles of the Just? Blessed are they who dwell in
thy house, O Lord, for ever, and for ever, shall they praise thee. Blessed are
they, and truly blessed; whom thou have chosen, and assumed into that
celestial inheritance. Behold how thy Saints, O Lord, do flourish like the
Lilly; they are filled with the ever springinge plenty of thy house; and thou
give them to drink of the torrent of thy delights. For thou art the fountain
of life, and in thy light they shall see light; in so high degree as that they
who are but a light illuminated by thee, o God, who art the illuminateing
light, do yet shine in thy sight, like the Sunn it self.

O how admirable, how precious, and how beautiful, be the habitations of thy
house O thou God of all strength? This sinful soul of mine is carried with
extreme desire to enter thither. O Lord, I have loved the beauty and order of
thy house; and the place of the habitation of thy glory. One thing I have
begged of our Lord, and I will never leave to beg the same; that I may dwell
in the house of our Lord, all the days of my life. As the Stagg runns panting
towords the fountains of water, so does my soul runn thirstinge after thee, O
God. When shall I come, and once appear before thy face? When shall I see my
God, after whom my soul is in a deadly thirst? When shall I see him, in the
land of the Liueinge; for in this land of the Dyinge, he cannot be seen, with
mortal eyes. What shall I do, miserable creature that I am; being bound up,
hand and foot, by these chains of my mortality, What shall I do? Whilst we
remain in this body, we wander from our Lord. We have not here any permanent
City, but we are looking after another, which is to come, for our habitation
is in heaven Vvoe be unto me, for that my abode nere is prolonged. I have dwelt
with the inhabitants of Cedar; and my soul has been too true a dweller
there. Who will help me to the wings of a dove, that I may fly and rest?
Nothing can be so delightfully dear to me as to be with my Lord. It is good
for me to adheare to my God. Grant to me, o Lord, whilst I am confined to this
mortal flesh, that I may adheare to thee, as it is written: He who adhears to
our Lord, becomes one spirit with him.

Grant me, I beseech thee, the wings of Contemplation; that being endued
therewith, I may fly up a pace toward thee. And because all that which is
sinful, and weak, is workeinge downward, o Lord hold hold thou my heart, that
it may not rush into the bottomes of this dark valley; that by interposition
of the shadow of the earth, it may not be severed from thee, who art the true
Sunn of Justice; and so may be hindered from beholdinge celestial things, by
the drawinge of black clouds over it. Therefore am I aspireinge to those joys
of peace; and to that most calm and delight-full state of light. Hold thou
fast my heart in thy hand; for unless it be by thee it will never be able to
raise it self to things above. Thither do I make all haste, where supreme
peace does reign; and where eternal tranquillity is resplendent. Hold fast,
and guide my spirit, and raise it; according to thy good will; that so thy
self being the guide thereof, it may ascend into that region, where there is
an eternal spring; and where thou feedest Israel for ever, with the food of
truth; that there (at the least with some swifte, and catchinge thought). I
may now lay hold of thee, who art that Sovereign Vvisdome, remaineinge over
all things, and gouerninge, and conducteinge all things.

But to the soul which is striving, and struglinge toward thee, there are
many things which call upon it, by way of giueinge it impediment. O Lord, I
beseech thee, that they may all be putt to silence, by thy commandment. Let
my very soul be silent to it self. Let it pass by all things: Let it
transcend all things created, and dispatch them all away from it self. Let
it arrive to thee, and upon thee, who art the only Creator of all things: let
it fasten the eyes of Faith: let it aspire toward thee: let it be wholly
attentive to thee: let it meditate upon thee: let it contemplate thee: let it
place thee ever before her eyes, and lock thee up in her heart: thee who art the
true and sovereign good, and that joy, which must never have an end.

Many Contemplations there are, whereby a soul which is devout to thee, may
be admirably intertayned and fedd; but in none of them is my soul so
delighted, and laid to rest, as in the thought of thee; and when it thinks and
contemplates, thee alone. How great is the multitude of that sweetness of thine,
wherewith thou do admirably inspire the hearts of thy lovers? How admirable is
that deernes of thy love, which they enjoy who love nothing but thee; who
seek nothing, nor desire, so much as to think of any thing but thee. Happy,
souls are they, whose only hope thou art: and whose only work, is Prayer.
Happy is that man, who sits in solitude and silence, and stands still upon his
guard, day and night; and who, whilst he is imprisoned in this poor litte
body of his, may yet be able in some proportion, to have a taste of thy divine
sweetness.

I beseech thee, o Lord, by those precious wounds of thine, which thou were
pleased to bear upon thy Cross, for our salvation; and from whence that
precious Blood did flow, whereby we are redeemed; be pleased to wound this
sinful soul of mine, for which thou did also vouchsafed to dye. Wound it
with the fiery and most puissant dart of thy excessive charity. For the Word of
God is full of life, and efficacy; and it is more penetratiue then any sharp
two-edged sword. Thou art that choice arrow, and that most sharp sword, which
is able, by thy power, to pearce through the hard buckler of man's heart. Strike
through my heart, with the dart of thy love, that my soul may say to thee: I am
wounded with thy love. And do it in such sort, as that out of this very wound
of thy love, abundance of tears may stream down from mine eyes, day and
night. Stricke through, O Lord, strike through, I beseech thee, this most hard
heart of mine, with the dear, and strong pointed lance of thy love; and pearce
down yet more deeply into the most interior part of my soul, by the mighty
power of thy hand. And so draw forth out of this head of mine abundance of
water; and from these mine eyes, a true fountain of tears, which may
continually flow, through my excessive love, and desire of the vision of thy
beauty. To the end that I may mourn, day and night, admittinge of no comfort,
till I shall obtain to see thee, in thy celestial bed of state: Thee, who
art my beloved, and most beautiful Spouse, my Lord and my God. That beholding
there (in the society of such as thou have chosen) that glorious, and
admirable, and most beautiful countenance of thine, (which is topp full of all
true sweetenes,) I may with profound humility adore thy Majesty. And then at
last, being replenished, with the celestial, and unspeakable iubilation of
eternal joy, I may cry out with such as love thee, and say: Behold, that
which I aspired too, I see. That which I hoped for, I have, That, which I
desired, I enjoy. For to him am I conjoined in heaven, whom being yet on
earth, I loved witth my whole power: I embraced with entire affection; and I
inheared to, with invincible love. Him do I praise, adore, and bless, who
lives and reigns, God, for ever, and ever. Amen.

CHAP. XXXVIII. A Prayer to be made in affliction.
Have mercy on me, O Lord, have mercy on me, deer Lord, have mercy on me, most
miserable sinner, who co^mitt unworthy things, and do endure such as I am
worthy of; for I am daily sinninge, and daily feeling the scourge of sin. If I
consider the evil which I co^mitt daily, it is noe great matter which I
suffer. It is much wherein I offend, and it is little which I endure. Thou art
lust, O Lord, and thy judgment is right; yea; all thy judgments are just and
true. Thou art just and true, O Lord our God, and there is noe iniquity in
thee. Thou, O merciful and Omnipotent Lord, do not afflict us sinners,
cruelly, and unjustly. But when we were not, thou did make us with thy hand
of power; and when we were lost, through our own fault, thou didist admirablie
restore us by thy pity and goodness. I know, and am well assured, that our life
is not driven on, by rash. and irregular motions; but it is disposed, and
governed by thee, O Lord our God. So that thou have a care of all, butt
especially of thy servants, who have placed their whole hope in thy mercy. I
do therefore beseech, and humbly pray thee, that thou will not proceed with
me, according to my sins, whereby I have deserved thy wrath; but according
to thine own great mercy, which surpasses the sins of the whole world. Thou
O Lord; who do inflict exterior punishments upon us, give us interior
patience, which may never fail; that so thy praise may not depart from my
mouth. Have mercy on me O Lord, have mercy on me, and help me, according to
what thou know to be necessary for me, both in body and soul. For thou
know all things, thou can do all things, thou who live for ever.

CHAP. XXXIX. A very devout Prayer. to God the Son.
O Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the liueing God, who did drink up that
Calice of thy Passion, thou being exte^ded upon thy Cross, for the Redemption
of all mortal men; vouchsafe this day to give me help. Behold I come poor
to thee who art rich; miserable, to thee who art merciful. Let me not go
empty, or despised from thee. I am hungry now when I beginn, let me not give
over, empty of thee. I come to thee almost starued, let me not depart from
thee unfed. And if now, before I eat, I sighe; grant at least, after I have
sighed, that I may eat. First of all, O most sweet Jesus, I confess mine
own injustice against my self, before the magnificence of thy mercy. Behold O
Lord, how I was conceived and borne in sin; and thou did wash me, and
sanctify me, and after that I did yet pollute my self with greater sins. For
I was borne in Original sin, which was necessary to me, but afterward I
weltred in actual sin, which was voluntary. Yet thou O Lord, being not
unmindful of thy mercy, did take me from the house of my father, of flesh
and blood; and out of the Tabernacles of sinners, and did inspire me to
follow thee, with the generation of them who seek thy face, and who walk in
the right way, and who dwell amongst the Lillyes of chastity; and who feed with
thee, at the table of profound poverty. And I, ungrateful for so many
benefits, did, after I had received Baptism, work many wicked deeds, and
committed many execrable crimes. And whereas I ought to have removed those
former sins, I did after, add new sins to those.

These are my wickednesses, O Lord, whereby I have deshonored thee, and defiled
my self, whom thou haste created after thine own Image and likeness, by
pride, vain glory, and a number of other sins, whereby my unhappy soul is
afflicted, torn, and destroyed. Behold, O Lord, how my iniquityes have
ouergrowne my head, and how they oppress me, as any heavy burden might do.
And unless thou, whose property it is to have mercy, and to forgive, be
pleased to put the hand of thy Majesty under me, I shall not fail to be
miserably drowned in that bottomless pit.

Consider, O Lord God, and see, because thou art holy; and behold how my enemy
insulteth over me, saying, God has forsaken him, I will persecute him, and
take him, for there is none to deliver him. But thou, O Lord, how long? Convert
thy self to me, and deliver my soul, and save me for thy mercyes sake. Have
mercy upon thy Son, whom thou did begett weth noe small sorrow of thine,
and do not so consider my wickedness, as thereby to forgett thine own goodness,

Who is that Father, which will not deliver his Son? Or who is that Son,
whom the Father will not correct with the staff of pity? Therefore, O my
Father, and my Lord, though it be true that I am a sinner, yet I leave not, for
all that, to be thy Son, because thou haste both made me, and made me again.
As I have sinned, so do thou reform me; and when thou shall have mended me by
thy correction, deliver me then to thy Son. Can the Mother forgett the Child
of her womb? Yet supposeing she could, thou have promised, O Father, that thou will not forgett him.

Behold I cry out, and thou hear me not, I am tormented with sorrow, and
thou comfortest me not; What can I say, or what shall I do, most wretched
creature that I am? I am utterly without all comfort, and I am cast of from the
sight of thine eyes,. Woe is me, from how great happiness, into how great
misery am I fallen? Whither was I goeinge, and yet where am I arrived? where am
I, or rather where am I not? To whom did I aspire, and yet now, what kind of
things be they, for which I pant, and sighe? I have sought for happiness, and
behold I hawe met wish infelicity. Bebold I am even dyinge, and Jesus is not
with me and without fail it is better for me not to be at all, then not to be
with Jesus; it is better for me not to live at all, then to live without life.

But thou, O Lord Jesus, and what is become of thine ancient mercyes? will thou
be anggry with me for ever. Be thou appeased, I beseech thee, and have mercy
on me, and do not turn thy face from me; thou, who for the redeeminge of me,
did not turn thy face from such as did reproach, and spitt at thee. I
confess that I have sinned, and that my conscience calls for nothing but
damnation, and my penance will not serve for satisfaction* but yet it is
certain, that thy mercy does surpass all sin, Do not, I beseech thee, most
deer Lord, marite up my wickedness against me, to the end that thou may enter
into exact account with thy servant. but blott out my iniquity; according to
the multitude of thy mercyes. woe be unto me miserable creature, when the day
of Iugdment shall come, and the book of consciences shall be opened, and it
shall be said to me: Behold the man, and his works. what shall I do then, O
Lord my God, when the heavens will reveal my iniquityes, and when the earth
will rise up against me? Behold, I shall be able to make noe answer; but my
head, hanging down through confusion I shall stand trembling, and all
confounded before thee. Vvoe is me, wretched creature, what shall I say? I will
cry out to thee, O Lord my God! For why should I consume my self with holding
my peace? and yet if I speak, my grief will not be appeased. But yet,
howsoever, if I hold my peace, I am inwardly tormented with extrcame bitterness.
Lament O my soul, as the Widow uses to do, over the husband, of her youth.
Howl thou miserable creature, and cry out, because thy spouse, who is Christ
our Lord, has dismissed thee. O thou wrath of the Omnipotent, do no thou
rush down upon me, for I am notable to receive thee. It is not in all the
power I have to be able to endure thee. Have mercy on me, least I despair, and
grant that I may repose in hope; and if I have committed that for which thou
maiste condemn me: yet thou haste not lost, that for which thou art wont to
save sinful men.

Thou, O Lord, desire not the death of a sinner; nor do thou rejoice in the
perdition of dyinge souls; nay thou dyedst thy self to the end that dead men
might live, and thy death has killed the death of sinners. And if they lived
by thy death, I beseech thee, O Lord, that I, by the means of thy life, may
not die.

Send forth thy hand from on high, and take me out of the hand of mine
enemies, that they may not rejoice over me, and say: We have devoured him. Who
can distrust of thy mercy, O deer Jesus, since thou did redeem us, and
reconcile us to God, by thy Blood, when we were thine enemies? Behold how,
being protected under the shadow of thy mercy, I come runninge to thy Throne
of glory, askinge pardon of thee, and crying out, and knocKinge, till thou take
pity of me. For if thou haste called us to take the benefit of thy pardon when
we sought it not, how much more shall we obtain it, when we seek it? Do not,
O most sweet Jesus, remember thy Justice against this sinner, but be mindful
of thy benignity toward thy creature. Be not mindful of thy wrath, against
him who is guilty; but be mindful of thy mercy, toward him who is in misery.
Forget the proud wretch, who provoke thee, and take pity of that miserable
man, who inuoketh thee, For what is Jesus, but a Savior; and therefore, O
Jesus, I beseech thee by thy self, rise up to help me, and say unto my soul,
I am thy salvation. I presume much O Lord, upon thy goodness, because thy self
teaches me to ask, to seek, and to knock; and therefore being admonished by
that voice of thine I do ask, seek and knock. And thou, O Lord, who biddest
me ask, make, me receive; thou who aduisest me to seek, grant that I may
find; thou who teach me to knock, open to me, who am knockinge. And
eonfirme me who am weak; reduce me who am lost, raise me to life, who am dead,
and vouchsafe, in thy good pleasure, so to govern my senses, my thoughts,
words, and deeds, that from hence forth I may serve thee, and live to thee, and
deliver my self wholly up into thy hand. I know, O my Lord, that for thy only
haueinge made me, I owe thee all my self; and in that thou were made Man for
me, and did redeem me; I should owe so much more to thee, then my self (if
I had more) as thou art greater then he, for whom thou gave thy self But
behold I have no more, nor yet can I give thee what I have, without thee; but
do thou take me, and draw me to thy self, to thy imitation and love, as
already I am thine by creation, and condition: thou who ever live and
reignest.

CHAP. XL. A profitable Prayer,
O Lord God Omnipotent, who art Trine and One, who art always in all things,
who were before all things, and who art ever to be in all things, God, to whom
be praise for ever; to thee do I commend (for this day, and for all my life
herafter) my soul, my body, my sight, my hearing, my taste, my smell, and my
touch; All my thoughts, affections, speeches, and actions: all my exteriors,
and interiors; my sense, my understanding, and my memory; my faith, my hope,
and my perseverance, into the hands of thy power, by day and night, and in all
houers and momenta.

Hearken to me, O Holy Trinity, and conserve me, from all evil, from all
scandal, and from all mortal sin; from all ambushes, and vexation of
Devils, and from all our enemies, visible, and invisible; by the Prayers, of
the Patriarchs. by the Meritts of the Prophets, by the suffrages of the
Apostles, by the constancy of the Martyrs, by the Chastity of the Virgins, and
by the intercession of all the Saints, who have been pleasing to thee, since
the beginning of the World. Expel from me all boasting of mind: increase
compounction of heart, diminish my pride, and perfect thou true humility in me.
Stir me up to shed tears, mollify my hard, and stony heart, deliver my soul, O
Lord, from all the trecheryes of mine enimyes, and conserve me in thy will.
Teach me, O Lord, to do thy will, for thou art my God.

Give me O Lord, perfect seesing, and understanding, that I may be able to
comprehend thy profound benignity. Give me grace to ask that, which it may
delight thee to hear, and may be expedient for me to obtain, Give me tears
which may rise from my whole heart, whereby the chains of my sins may be
dissolved, Hearken, O my Lord, and my God, hearken to what I ask, and
vouchsafe to grant it. If thou despise me, I perish: if thou reguard me, I
live: if thou look for innocence at my hands, I am dead already, and I stink:
if, thou look upon me with mercy, though I stink, yet thou raisest me out of
the grave. Put that far from me, which thou hate in me, and ingrafte in me
the spirit of chastity, and continency, that whatsoever I may chance to ask
of thee, yet in the very askeing of it, I may not offend thee. Take from me
that which hurts, and give me that which helps. Give me O Lord, some Physic
whereby my wounds may be cured. O Lord, give me thy fear, compunction of
heart, humility of mind, and a pure conscience. Grant O Lord, that I may ever
maintain fraternal charity, and that I may not forget mine own sin, nor
busy my self with those of other men. Pardon my soul, my sins my crimes;
visit me who am weak, cure me who am sick, strengthen me who am languishing,
and revive me who am dead, Give me a heart, O Lord, which may fear thee, a will
which may love thee, a mind which may understand thee, ears which may hear
thee, and eyes which may see thee. Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me,
and look down on me, from that holy seat of thy Majesty; and illuminate the
darkness of my heart, with the beam of thy splendour. Give me, O Lord discretion,
that I may discern between good and bade; and grant that I may have a
vigilant mind. O Lord, I beg of thee the remission of all my sins, from
whom and by whom, propitiation may be granted me in the time of my necessity
and of my greatest streights, O holy and immacutate Virgin Mary, the Mother of
God, the Mother of our Lord Jesus Chirste, vouchsafe to interceede of me with
him, whose Temple thou deseruedst to be made, Holy Michaell, holy Gabriel, holy
Raphael: O you holy Quires of Angels, and Archangells, of Patriarchs, and
Prophetts, of Apostles, and Evangelists, Martys, and Confessors, Priests, and
Leuitts, Monckes, and Virgins, and of all the Saints, I presume to beg of you,
hy him, who chose you, and by the contemplation of whom you are in such joy,
that you will vouchsafe to make supplication to God himself for me; that I may
obtain to be delivered from the jaws of the Devil, and from eternal death.
Vouchsafe, O Lord, to grant me eternal life, according to thy Clemency, and
most benign mercy,

O Lord Jesus Christ, grant concord to Priests, and to Kings, Bishopps, and
Princes, who judge justly, give tranquillity, and peace. O Lord, I beseech
thee, for the whole holy Catholic Church, for men, and women, for Religious
and secular people, for all the governors of Christians, and all such, as,
believing in thee, do labor for the holy love of thee, that they may obtain
perseverance in their good works.

Grant, O Lord, O Eternal King, chastity to Virgins, continency to such as
are dedicated to thee, O Almighty God, sanctimony to married foll^es, pardon to
sinners, releife to orphans, and widows, protection to the poor, safe arriual
to such as are in journey; comfort to such as mourn, everlasting rest to the
faithful souls departed* a safe haven to such as are at Sea, to thy best
servants, that they may continue in their virtue, to them who are but
indifferently good, that they may grow better, to them who are wicked and
sinful, (as to me poor wertch) that they may quickly reform themselves.

O most sweet, and most merciful Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the
liueinge God, the Redeemer, of the world, I confess my self to be a miserable
sinner in all things, and above all men; but thou also, O most merciful and
supreme Father, who take pity upon all, do not suffer me to become an
alien from thy mercy. O God, thou King, of Kings, who haste given me this
truce of liueing till now; grant me devotion to reform my self, stir up in
me a mind which may earnestly desire and seek thee, and love thee above all
things, and fear thee, and do thy will, thou who art all every where in
Trinity, and Unity, and that for ever. Especially therefore I beseech thee, O
Lord, O Holy Father, who art glorious and blessed for ever, that all they who
remember me in their Prayers, and who have commended themselves to my unworthy
ones, and who have performed any office of charity, or work of mercy toward
me, and they also who are joined to me by kindred; and by the natural
affection of flesh and blood, and as well all they, who are now alive, as those
others who are departed, may be mercifully and graciously governed by thee,
that they perish not. Vouchsafe to give succor to all the Christians who live,
grant absolution with eternal rest, to the faithful who are dead. And
moreover I do in most particular manner beg of thee, O Lord, thou who art
Alpha and omega, that when the last day, and point of my life shall arrive,
thy self will vouchsafe to be my merciful Judge against that malign accuser,
the Devil, and be thou my continual defend or against the sleights of that
ancient enemy of mine, and make me continue in that holy heaven of thine, in
the society of all the Angels and Saints, thou who art blessed for ever and
ever.

Amen.
CHAP. XLI. A Prayer in memory of the Passion of Christ our Lord.
O Lord Jesus Christ, my Redemption, my mercy, and my salvation; I praise
thee, I give thee thanks, though they carry noe proportion to thy benefits.
Though they be very void of devotion, though they be lean, in respect of the
fatnes of that most sweet love of thee which I desire; yet such as they are,
not such, I confess, as I owe, but such as I am able to conceive, my soul is
now paying to thee. O thou hope of my heart, and thou virtue of my soul, and
the life and end of all my intentions, let thy most powerful dignity supply
that, which my most fainte weakness does endeavor. And if I have not yet
deserved so much of thee, as to love thee so much as I ought, yet at least I
have an earnest desire to. perform the same O thou my light, thou see my
conscience, because, O Lord, all my desires are before thee. And if I endeavor
to do any thing which is good, it is thou who bestowest it upon me. If that be
good, O Lord, which thou inspirest, or rather because the inclination which I
have to love thee is good: grant me that, which it is thy will that I should
desire, and grant that I may obtain to love thee, as much as thou requirest. I
give thee praise, and thanks, for what I have, lest otherwise thy gnift might
prove unfruitful to me, which thou have bestowed, of thine own free will.
Perfect that which to have begunn, and give me that, through thy mercy, which
thou made me desire, without any merit of mine. Convert, O most benign Lord,
my dull heaviness, into a most fervent love of thee. To this, O my most
merciful Lord, my prayer, my memory, my meditation of thy benefitts, do all
tend, that thou maiste kindle thy love in me. Thy goods, O Lord, created me,
thy mercy, when I was created, did cleanse me from original sin, thy patience,
after that I was washed in Baptism, has tolerated, nourished and expected me,
when I was all wrapped up, in the filth of other sins. Thou, O my good Lord,
did expect my amendment, and my soul expects the inspiration of thy holy
grace, that I may come to penance, and good life. O my God, my Creator, my
expecter, and my feeder I thirst after thee, I sigh toward thee, and
vehemently desir to attain to thee. And as the poor child, being deprived
of the presence of his most benign father, does incessantly weep and cry out
and embrace, by his memory, that fathers face, with his whole heart, so I (not
so mueh as I should) but so much as I can, am mindful of thy Passion,
mindful of thy strokes, mindful of thy stirpes, mindful of thy wounds,
mindful how thou were murthred for me, how thou were embalmed, how thou were
buried; and mindful also of thy glorious Resurrection, and admirable
Ascension. These things do I hold fast, with undoubted faith, I lament the
miseries of my banishment, I hope for the only consolation of thy coming, and
I desire the glorious contemplation of thy face.

Woe be unto me, in that I was not able to behold that Lord of Angels, being
humbled to the conversation of men; to the end that he might exalt men, to the
conversation of Angels, when God, being offended, dyed, that man who offended
him, might live. Vvoe be unto me, that I obtained not to be amazed, in being
present at that spectacle of admirable and inestimable piety. Why, why, at
least, O my soul does not the sword of most sharp sorrow pearce thy heart,
since thou were not able to have endured, that lance which wounded the side of
thy Savior; since thou could not behold those hands and feet of thy
Creator, to be so violated with nails, and the blood of thy Reddeemer, so
hydeously to be shedd? Why, at least, art not thou inebriated with the
bitterness of tears, since he drunck the bitterness of gall? Why art thou not in
compassion of that most holy Virgin, his most worthy Mother, my most worthy
Lady? O my most merciful Lady, what fountaynes shall I say they were, which
brake out of thy most chaste eyes, when thou did observe, how thy only
innocent Son, was bound, and scourged, and slain in thy presence?

What tears shall I believe did bedewe? and bathe thy most sweet holy Face,
when thou did behold that Son of thine, who was also thy God, and thy
Lord, extended upon the Cross, without any falt of his? and that flesh, which
was of thine own flesh, to be so wickedly torn, by wretched people: wiih what
kind of sobbing sighs, shall I conceive thy most pure heart to have been
torn, when thou heardest those words, Woeman, behold thy Son, and the
Disciple, Vvoeman behold thy Mother; when thou tookest the Disciple for the
Master, and the servant for the Lord.

O that I had been the man, who took down my Lord from the Cross, with that
happy Joseph? That I had embalmed him with odours? That I had Lodged him in the
sepulcher? or at least, that I had followed him, and had obtained so much,
that, to so great a funeral as that, some little part of my obsequiousness,
had not been wantinge. O that with those happy woeman, I had been frighted,
by that bright vision of those Angels; and had heard that message of the
Resurrection of our Lord: That message of my comfort: That message so much
expected, and desired. O that I had heard these words from the mouth of the
Angel, Do not fear, you seek Jesus crucified, but he is risen, he is not
here.

O thou most meek, most benign, most sweet, and most excellent Lord! when
will thou give me a sight of thee? for yet I never saw that incorruption of
thy blessed body; I never kissed those places of thy wounds. and that pearcinge
of the nails; I never bathed those ouuertures of thy true, thy admirable, thy
inestimable, and incomparable Flesh and Blood, with the tears of joy. When will thou comfort me, and when will thou give me cause to conteyne this sorrow of
mine? For indeed this sorrow will not end in me, as long as I shall be in
pilgrimage, from my Lord.

Vvoe be to me, O Lord, woe be to my soul; for thou who art the comforter
thereof, did go thy ways out of this world, without so much as biddeing me
farewell. When thou did putt thy self upon those new ways of thine, thou
gave thy blessing to thy servants; but I was not there Thou were carried up
to heaven in a cloud, but I saw it not. The Angels promised, that thou
would return; but I heard them not. What shall I say, what shall I do,
whither shall I go, where shall I seek him, and when shall I find him?
Whom shall I ask? Who will declare to my beloved that I languish for love?
The joy of my heart is gone. My mirth is changed into sorrow. My very flesh and
my heart have fainted, O thou God of my heart, and my part: God, who art my
portion for ever. My soul has refused to be comforted, unless it be by thee,
my true sweetenes. For what have I to care for in heaven but thee; and what
have I desired on earth but thee? It is thou, who^ I desire, for whom I hope,
and whom I seek: To thee my heart does say, I will seek thy countenance, and I
will seek it yet again. O turn thou not thy face from me.

O thou most benign lover of mankind, to thee the poor creature is left,
thou art the helper of the Orphan. O thou my safe Advocate, have mercy on me,
who am a forsaken Orphan. I am left as a pupil wihout a father; my soul is as
solitary as a Vvidowe. Behold the tears of my desolation, and widowehoode,
which I offer thee, till such time as thou shall return. Come therefore, Lord,
come now, appear to me, and I shall be comforted. Afford me thy presence, and I
shall have obtained my desire. Reveal thy glory, and I shall be in perfect
joy. My soul has thirsted toward thee, O how abundantly does my very flesh
thirst after thee. My soul has thirsted toward God, who is the liueinge
fountain. When shall I come and appear before the Face of our Lord? When will thou come, O my comforter, whom I will expect? O that I might be sure to see
that joy, which I desire O that I might be satiated, when thy glory shall
appear, of which I have so great hunger. O that I might be inebriated, by that
springinge plenty of thy house, toward which I sighe: O that thou would
give me to drink deeply of the torrent of thy pleasure, which I thirst after.
O Lord, let my tears in the mean while, be my bread, day and night, till such
time as it may be said to me, Behold thy God; till my soul may hear this word,
Behold thy Spouse. Feed me in the mean time with my sighs, refresh me with
my sorrows.

Perhapps my Redeemer will come, because he is good; and he will not stay long
behind, who was here from the beginning. To him be glory, for ever, and for
ever. Amen.

DEO GRATIAS.
The end of the Meditations of Saint Augustine.
THE SOLILOQVIA OF THE GLORIOUS Doctor S. Augustine.
THE FIRST CHAPTER. Of the unspeakable sweetness of God.
LET me know thee, O Lord, thou who know me. Let me know the, O thou
strength of my soute. Show thy self to me, O thou who art my comforter: let me
see thee, O thou, who art the light of mine eyes. Come, O thou joy of my
spirit, let me behold thee, O thou solace of my heart. Make me love thee, O
thou life of my soul. Appear to me, O thou who art my great delight, my
sweet consolation, my Lord, my God, my life, and the total glory of my soul.
Let me find thee, O thou desire of my heart: Let me possess thee, O thou love
of my soul. Let me embrace thee, O thou celestial Spouse! O thou my
sovereign, and both my external, and internal joy. Let me possess thee, O
thou eternal beatitude. Let me possess thee in the very center of my heart, O
thou blessed life, and thou sovereign sweetness of my soul.

I will love thee, O Lord, my strength, O Lord, my foundation, and my refuge,
and my deliverer, Let me love thee, O my God, and my helper; thou who art a
tower of strength to me, and my dear hope in all my adversity. Let me embrace
thee, who art that Good, without which nothing is good, and let me enjoy me
thee, who are that best, without which nothing is best. Open the deep hollowes
of mine ears, by thy word, which is more penetratiue then any two edged sword,
that so I may grow to hear thy voice. Thunder, O Lord, from above, with that
voice of thine, which is so loud and strong Let the Sea, and the fullness
thereof tunder out: let and the Earth, and all which is therein, be moved.
Illustrate mine eyes, O thou incomprehensible light: Darte forth that bright
lightening, and dissipate the^, that they may not behold vanity. Draw down
the rivers at full speed, put them into commotion, that the fountaynes of
water may appear, and the foundations of the Earth may be disclosed.

O thou invisible light, grant to us such a power of seeing, as that we may be
able to behold thee. Grante, O thou odor of life, such a new power of smelling
in us, as that we may runn after thee, upon the odor of thy ointments. Cure
this taste of ours, that it may relish, and discern, and know, how great that
multitude of thy sweetenes laid up, for such as fear thee: that is, of such as
are full filled with thy love. Grant me a heart which may think of thee, a
will, which may love thee, a mind, which may remember thee; an understanding,
which may conceive thee; and a reason, which may adheare close to thee, who art
the supreme delight, and art to be so for ever. Let that love which is wise,
be ever loueinge thee.

O thou Life, to which all things live; Life which give me life: Life which
is my very life it self, whereby I live, and without which I dye: Life,
whereby I am revived, and without which I perish: Life whereby I rejoice; and
with out which I am in misery: Life, which art a vital life, a Life which is
sweet and amiable, and to be remembered for ever, where art thou? I beseech
thee, that I may find thee, that I may faint in my self, and be refreshed in
thee? Be thou near to me in my soul, near in my heart: near, in my mouth: near
in mine ears: near, to give me help, because I languish with love; because I
dye without thee, and I am revived by remembering thee. Thy odor does refresh
me: the memory of thee does cure me, but I shall then only be satisfied when
thy glory shall appear, O thou life of my soul.

My soul earnestly desires, and does even languish through the memory of thee.
When shall I come, and appear before thee, O thou my joy? Why do thou turn
thy face from me, O thou my joy, wherein I rejoice? where art thou hidden o
beauty, which I desire? I smell the sweet odor of thee: I live, and I joy
therein. Thy self I do not see, but I hear thy voice, and it reuiues me. But
why do thou hide thy Face from me? Do thou say perhaps, that noe man
shall see my Face, and live? well then, O Lord, let me dye, that I may see
thee, and let me see thee, that I may dye here below.

I will not live, but I will die. I desire to be dissolved, and to be with
Christ. I desire to dye that I may see Christ, I refuse to live, that I may
live with Christ.

O Lord Jesus, receive my spirit! O thou my life, receive my soul. O thou my
joy, draw my heart up to thee; O thou my sweet food, let me feed on thee. O
thou my Head, direct me: Light of mine eyes, illuminate me: O thou my true
sweetenes, temper me; thou precious odor quicken me; thou Word of God,
recreate me. O thou my praise, delight thou the soul of thy servant; enter
into it, O thou joy of mine, that it may rejoice in thee. Enter into it, O thou
sovereign sweetenes, that it may relish those things which indeed are sweet.
O thou eternal light, illustrate it, that it may understand, and know, and
love thee. For therefore it is, o Lord, that he who loves thee not, does not
love thee, because he knows thee not: and therefore does he not know thee,
because he understands thee not, and therefore he understands thee not, because
he comprehends not thy light: For the light shined in darkness, and darkness
comprehended it not.

O thou light of our minds, O bright Truth, which illuminatest all men comeing
into this world: comeing into it indeed, but not loueinge it. For he who
loves the world is made the enemy of God.) Drive of all darkness, from the
face of the Abyss of my mind; that it may see thee, by knoweing thee; that it
may know thee, by comprehending thee; and that by so knowing thee, it may
love thee. For whosoever knows thee, forgetts himself, that he may love thee.
He loves thee more then himself; he forsakes himself, that he may fly to thee,
and that he may rejoice in thee. From hence therefore it grows, O Lord, that I
love thee not so much as I ought, because I do not fully know thee. But
because I know thee little, I love thee little; and because I love thee
little, I rejoice little in thee; but departing from thee, (who art the true
interior joy) toward exterior things, whilst I want thee alone. I affect to
find impure, and false freindships, amongst thy creatures. And so (wretch that
I am) I have bestowed this heart of mine, upon vain things, which I ought to
have employed upon thee with an entire appetite, and affection; and so, by
loueing vanity, my self am grown to be wholly vain. And hence also it is, O
Lord, that I rejoice not in thee, and that I adheare not to thee. For I, am in
exterior things, thou in interior: I am in temporal things, thou in
spiritual: my mind is scattered and spilt, my thought is entertained, my
speech is employed upon transitory objects: but thou, O Lord, do dwell in
the eternities, and art eternity it self. Thou art in heaven, I on earth: thou
love high, and I low things; thou celestial, I terrestrial: and when shall
these contrarietyes, be ever able to meet?

CHAP. II. Of the misery and frayletie of Man.
WRetch that I am, when shall this crookednes of mine be straightened,
according to that rectitude of thine. Thou, O Lord, love to be alone, and I
to be in multituds: Thou love to be in silence, and I in noise: Thou love
truth, and I love vanity: Thou love purity, and I uncleanness. What should I
say more, O Lord: thou art truly good, and I naughty: thou art holy, and I am
wicked; thou art happy, and I unjust: thou art light it self, and I am truly
blind: thou art life it self, and I am dead: thou art Physic, and I am
sick: thou art joy, and I am sorrow, thou art sovereign Truth, and I am an
universality of vanity, as indeed all men liueinge are Woe be therefore to
me, O thou Creator of mine, what shall I say? Yet hearken thou, O my Creator,
for I am thy creature, and I am even now upon perishing; I am thy creature, and
am even very now, upon dying. I am the work of thy hands, and I am, even now,
reduced to nothing. I am the thing which thou haste made. Thy hands* O Lord,
have made me, and fashioned me; those hands I say, which were fastened to the
Cross, with nails, for me. Do not, O Lord, despise the work of those hands
of thine I beseech thee, behold the wounds which are in thine own hands.
Behold, O Lord, how thou haste written me, in thine own hands. Read that
wrightinge of thine, and save me. Behold I thy creature do sigh toward thee,
thou art my Creator, and do thou refresh me. Behold I, who am the work of
thy hands, cry out to thee; thou art life it self, do thou quicken me. Behold
I, whom thou haste framed, am lookeing toward thee; thou art my maker, and
therefore do thou restore me. Pardon me, O Lord, for my days are nothing.

And yet, what is any man, that he should presume to speak to his Creator, who
is God? Pardon me whilst I am speakeing to thee; forgive thy slave, who
presumes to open his mouth, to so great a Lord. But necessity has noe law.
Grief forces me to speak; the calamity which I endure, constraynes me to cry
out. I am sick, and I cry out to my Physician. I am blind and I make haste
toward the light. I am dead, and I aspire toward life. Thou, O Jesus of
Nazareth, art the Physician, thou art the Light, and thou art life

Have mercy on me, O thou Son of David: Take pity on me, O thou fountain of
mercy. Give ear to thy poor creature which cries out after thee. O thou
light, which art passing by, expect this blind man, reach forth thy hand to
him, that he may come to thee, ard may see light in thy light. O thou liueing
life revive thou this dead man. But yet, who am I, that am speakinge to thee?
Woe be to me, O Lord, have mercy on me, O Lord: on me, who am a rotten carkas,
the food of worms, a stinkeing pott, and that matter, whereon fire must feed:
VVoe be to me, O Lord, wretched man that I am: Man, who being borne of a
woeman, is to live but a little time, and is to be filled with many miseries:
Man, I say, who is grown like to vanity it self, and being compared to the
foolish beasts, is now also become like to them.

But yet still what am I? a dark abyss, a wretched piece of earth, a child
of wrath, a vessel even made fit for reproach; begotten with impurity,
liueing in mysery, and dying in agony. Alas poor wretch, what am I? and yet
again, alas, what am I to be? A vessel full of dunge, a hollow shell full of
putrefaction, full of stinkeing filth, which even breeds horror. Blind,
poor, naked, subject to a world of myseries, and, wholly ignorant, either how
I came into the world, or how I shall get out. Miserable, and mortal, whose
days pass away like a shadow, whose life does vanish, like awayning Moon,
like a flower which grows upon a stalk, and presently decays. Now it
florisheth, and in the turneing of a hand, it withers.

This life, I say, this frail life of mine, this transitory life, this life,
which how much the more it increases, so much the more it decays: how much
the more it proceeds, so much the nearer it draws to death. A deceiptfull
life, and like to a shadow, and all besett, with the very snares of death. Now
I rejoice, and even now again I am sadd; now I am strong, and now again I am
weak; now I live, and now I am about to dye; now I laugh, and now again I
weep, now I seem happy, whilst yet I am all ways miserable. And so subject
are all things to change, upon all warninges, as that there is scarce any one
of them, which continues permanent for the space of an hour. Here fear and
apprehension, and hunger, and thirst, and heat, and cold, and sickness of
body, and sorrow of mind is in all abundance. And all these are followed by
untimely death, which snatcheth men out of the world by a thousand ways. It
kills one man with a fever, another man is oppressed with grief of mind;
hunger consumes one, thirst makes an end of another; one man is drowned by
water, another man is strangled by a halter; another is destroyed by fire,
another is deuowred by wild beasts. One is killed by the sword, another is
corrupted by poison; and another ends his miserable life, by the surprise of
some strange and sudden fear, And now besides, and beyond all these things, a
huge misery it is, that as nothing is more certain then death, so of nothing
is a man more uncertain, then of the time when he shall die. When he thinks he
stands fastest, he is tripped up, and his hope perishes. Noe man can tell,
either when or where, or how he shall dye; and yet he is sure enough, that dye
he must.

Behold, O Lord, how great this misery of man is, wherein I am placed, and yet
I am void of fear. How great the calamite is which I endure, and yet I am
far from grief, nor do I cry out to thee. But I will cry out O Lord, before
I pass away, to the end that I may not pass away, but remain in thee. I will
therefore declare, I will declare my misery. and I will not be ashamed to
confess my baseness before thee. Help me, O thou my strength, whereby I am
raised; succor me, O thou Power whereby I am sustained. Approach to me, O thou
light, whereby I see; Appear to me, O glory, wherein I joy; disclose thy self
to me, O thou life, whereby I live, O thou my Lord and my God.

CHAP. III. Of the admirable light of God
O Thou light, which Tobias saw, when he taught his son the way, of life,
though himself were blind. Thou light which Isaac saw interiourly, when he
foretold future things to his son, though his eyes of flesh and blood, were
full of darkness. Thou invisible light I say to which all the abysses of humane
hearts are visible. Thou light which Jacob saw, when thou teaching him
interiourly, he did exteriourly prophecy to his children. Behold, whilst thou
art light, deep darkness is spredd over the face of the abyss of my mind.
Behold, whilst thou art truth, a thick mist, is spredd over the wateres of my
heart. O thou word, whereby all things are made, and without which nothing is
made: Thou Word, which art before all things, and nothing was before it: Thou
Word, which guidest all things, and without which all things are nothing; thou
Word which saydest in the beginning, Let light be made, and light was made;
say that also to me; let light be made, and let it then indeed be made. And
make me also know whatsoever is not light, because, without thy help, I shall
mistake light for darkness, and darkents for light, And so without thy light,
there is noe truth; but error and vanity are at hand; There is no order, but
eonfusion; noe knowledge, but ignorance; noe sight but blindenes; noe open way,
but wandering mazes; noe life, but death.

CHAP. IV. Of the mortality of Man's nature.
BEhold, O Lord, because there is noe light, there is death; or rather, I
cannot say, that death is there; because death indeed is nothing? and by that
we tend to be nothing; whilst we are not affrayd to make our selves nothing,
by committing sin. And this, O Lord happens justly to us. For we receive
penishement, fit for our demerits, whilst we slide away, like a little
falling water. For nothing is made without thee. And by doing, and making
that which is nothing, we grow to be nothing, because we are nothing without
thee, by whom all things are made, and without whom nothing is made. O Lord,
(thou who art the Word; O God, who art the Word, by whom all things, and
without whom nothing is made) Vvoe be to me miseaable creature, who have been
so often blinded, for thou art light, and I have been void of thee. Vvoe be
to me miserable creature, who have been so often wounded; for thou art health
it self; and I am void of thee. Vvoe be to me miserable creature, who have so
often been infatuated by error; for thou art Truth, and I am void of thee.
Vvoe be to me miserable creature, who have so often gone astray; for thou art
the way, and I have wandered from thee. Vvoe be to me miserable creature, who
have been so often dead, for thou art life, and I am without thee, Vvoe be to
me miserable creature, who have been annihilated so often; for thou art that
Word, by which all things were made, and I am without thee, without whom
nothing is made.

O Lord who art the word. O God the Word, who art that light, whereby light is
made; who art the way, the truth, and the life, in whom, there is noe
darkness, nor vanity, nor death. Light, without which all is darkness; Way
without which all is error; Truth, without which, all is vanity; and life,
without which, all is death. O Lord, do but say this word, Fiat lux: let light
be made, that so I may see light, and avoid darkness; that I may see the way,
and avoid straying; that I may see truth, and avoid vanity: that I may see
life, and avoid death.

O Lord, my light, do thou illuminate me: O thou, my illumination, and my
salvation, whom I will praise: my God, whom I will honor; my Father whom I
will love; and my spouse, for whom I will preserve my self. Shine forth, I
say, shine forth, thou light, upon this blind creature of thine, who is
sitting in darkness, and the shadow of death; and direct his feet into the way
of peace; Whereby I may enter into the place of thy admirable Tabernacle, as
far as the house of God himself, and the voice of exultation, and
confession. For a true Confession, is the way whereby one may enter into thee,
who art the way; whereby we may depart from all wandering, and may return
again, to the same way; because thou art that true way of life.

CHAP. V. What it is, to be made nothing.
I will therefore confess my misery to thee; I will confess to thee, O thou my
Father, and my Lord, that maker of Heaven and Earth, that so I may be
admitted, to approach thy mercy. For I am made wholly miserable, and am reduced
to nothing, and I knew it not. For thou art truth and I was not with thee. My
iniquityes have wounded me, and I was not troubled thereat. For thou art life,
and I was not with thee.

They brought me to nothing, because I was not with thee, who art the Word,
whereby all things were made, and without it nothing, and therefore did I
become nothing without thee. For that is nothing which leads to nothing. All
things are made by him; whatsoever are made; and what kind of things where
they? God saw all those things which he made, and they were very good. All
things which are made, were made by the Word, and whatsoever things were made
by that Word, are very good. Why are they good, in regard that all things are
made by the Word, and without it nothing is made? Because nothing is good
withaut a participation of that souueraigne Good But sin is there, where that
Good is not: and for that cause, it is even nothing. For evil is nothing, but
a privation of good; as blindenes is noe other thing but a privation of light.
Sin therefore is nothing because it is made without the Word, without which
nothing is made; and that is sin or evil which is deprived of that good,
whereby all things are made, which have any being. But now those things which
are not, are not made by him; and consequently they are nothing. Therefore
those things are evil, which are not made, because all things which are made,
are made by the Word, and all things which are made by the Word are good.
Since therefore all things are made by the Word, sin is not made by it; and
therefore it remaynes that all things, which are not made, be not good, for as
much as all things which are made, be good, and therefore those things are
evil, which are not made: and therefore they are nothing, because nothing is
made, without the Word. Sin therefore is nothing, because it is not made.
But then how is it evil, if it be nothing? Because evil is a privation of
that good, whereby that which is made is good.

To be therefore whithout the Word, is to be evil, which yet is not properly
to be; because nothing is without it. But what is it to be separated from the
word? If thou desire to know this, learn first what this Word is. The Word
of God says, I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life. To be separated therefore
from the Word, is to be out of the Way, and without Truth, and life; and
therefore without it, is nothing, and so it is evil, in being separated from
the Word, whereby all things were made very good. To be separated then from
the Word, whereby all things were made, is noe other thing, then to fail, and
to pass from being a fact, to be a defect; because nothing truly is without
it. As often therefore as thou departest from good, thou do separate thy
self from the Word, because the Word is good; and so thou growest to be
nothing, because thou art without the Word, without which nothing is made.

Now therefore O Lord, thou O light, have illuminated me, that I might see
thee: I saw thee, and I know my self; for so often have I grown to he
nothing, as I have separated my self from thee; and because I forgett that
good which thou art, therefore did I grow to be wicked. Woe be to me, wretched
man, how came it to pass, that I knew not that by forsakeing thee, I grew to
be nothing? but why do I ask, how I could be ignorant thereof, if I were
nothing? we know what it is to be nothing, that it is not, which is nothing;
and that the thing which is not good, is not, because it is nothing. If
therefore I were not, when I was without thee, I was as nothing; and as an
idol, which is nothing. Which has ears indeed, but it hears not;
nostrells, but it smells not; eyes, but it sees not; a mouth, but it
speaks not; hands, but it feels not; feet, but it walks not; and it has
all the lineaments or parts of a body, but yet without that sense, which,
belongs to them.

CHAP. VI. Of the fall of a soul, by sin.
WHen therefore I was without thee, I was not any thing, but I was nothing; and
therefore I was blind, deaf, and insensible, because I discerned not that
which was ill, nor felt the affliction of my wounds, nor could I discern mine
own darkness, because I was without thee, who art the true light, which
illuminateth all men comeing into the world. Vvoe be to me, they have any other
part thereof; but only so far forth, as they are conserved by the Word,
whereby all things are made. Let me therefore adheare to thee, O Word, that
thou may conserve me. For as soon as I departed from thee, I had utterly
perished in my self, but that thou, who had made me once, did vouchsafe
to make me yet again. I sinned, and thou did visit me. I fell, and thou
did raise me. I was ignorant, and thou did teach me. I was blind, and
thou did illuminate me.

CHAP. VII. Of the manifold benefitts of Almighty God.
DEclare to me, O my God, how much, I, miserable creature, am bound to love
thee. Declare to me, how much I am obliged to praise thee; and make me see,
how much I must procure to please thee. Thunder down O Lord, from above, with
a shrill, and steady voice, into the interior ear of my heart. Teach me, and
save me, and I will praise thee, who did create me, when I was nothing, who
did illuminate me, when I was in darkness; who did revive me, when I was
dead; and who have fedd me, from my very youth, with all thy good blessings.
Yea and do now nourish this unprofitable worm who is stinkeing, and
rotteing in his sinn^s, with all thy most excellent gifts.

Open to me O thou key of David thou who openest, and noe man shuts, to
whom thou openest: and who shuttest, and noe man opens to him, to whom thou
shuttest. Open, I say, the gate of thy light toward me, that I may enter in,
and see, and know and confess to thee, with my whole heart, because thy mercy
toward me is great, and thou have drawn my soul, out of that lower hell. O
Lord, my God, how admirable and prayseworthy is thy Name, throughout the word?
And what is man that thou should be mindful of him, or the son of man,
that thou should visit him? O Lord thou hope of thy Saints, and thou tower
of their strength: O God, thou life of my soul, whereby I live, and without
which I dye. Thou light of mine eyes, by which I see, and without which I am
blind; thou joy of my heart, and thou delight of my spirit; I beseech thee
that I may love thee, with my whole heart, and with my whole mind, and even
with all the very bowels of my affection, since thy self did first love me.

And how came I to obtain this favor at thy hands, O thou Creator of the
Heavens, and of the Earth, and of that deep abyss: Thou who haste noe need
of any thing, which is mine? Whence came I to be so happy, as that thou
should carry love to me? O thou VVisdome, which openest the mouths of dumb
men: O thou Word whereby all things were made; open thou my mouth, endewe me
with the voice of praise, that I may recount all those benefits, which thou O
Lord, have bestowed on me, from the beginning.

For behold, I am, because thou have created me, and that thou would create
me, and number me out, in the multitudes of thy other creatures, thou did
preordeyne from all eternity, before thou made any thing; in that beginning
of the world, before thou did extend, and spread the heavens abroad, nether
yet, was there any abyss of the sea, nor hadest thou made the Earth, nor laid
a foundation for the mountains nether yet had the fountaynes broken forth.
Before all these things, I say, which thou made by thy Word, thou did
foresee by the most certain providence of thy truth that I was to be thy
creature, and thou were resolved, that I should be so. And whence grew this
benefit to me, O thou most benign Lord, most high God, most merciful Father,
most puissant, and withal for ever meek Creator? What merits were there of
mine? What means was there to make me so acceptable, that it should be
pleasing in the sight of thy mighty Majesty, to create me? I had noe being,
and thou made me of nothing.

But what kind of thing did thou make me? Not some dropp of water: not some
spark of fire? not some bird, some fish, some serpent, or any other
unreasonable creature, not some stone, or piece of wood: Nor any thing of that
kind, which only has a being, or of that other kind, which has not only
a being, but growth, and sense; but beyond them all, thou were pleased, that I
should be of them, who have a being because I am; and of them who have a
being, and increasing, because I am and grow; and of them which are, which
grow, and which feel, because I am, I grow, and I feel. And thou have
created me, little inferior to the Angels; because I have received a power of
knoweinge thee, which is common between them, and me. But yet I said well, in
saying, that it was a little inferior. For they have that happy knowledge of
thee, by express vision; whereas I have it but by hope; they have it face to
face, and I, but by a glass as in a cloud: they have it perfectly, and I, but
partly.

CHAP. VIII. Of the future Dignity of Man.
But when that shall come which is perfect, that will be euacuated which is
imperfect: when also we shall see thee clearly, face to face, what shall now
hinder us, to be but little inferior to the Angels, Whom thou, O Lord, do
vouchsafe to crown with the crown of hope, which is adorned with honor and
glory; whom thou do excessiuely honor, as thy friends; and as persons who
are every way equals, and Peers of the Angel. Yea and thy truth says this.
For they are equal to the Angels and they are the sons of God. And what are
they but sons of God, if they be equal to Angels. They shall indeed be
sons of God, because the son of man, is made the son of God. When
therefore I consider this, I am bold to say, that man is not somewhat less
then the Angels: nay, he is not only equal to the Angels, but superior to
them, because man is God, and God is a man, and not an Angel. And therefore I
will say, that man is the most worthy crsature, because the Word which was in
the beginning God, with God; the Word, whereby God said, let light be made, and
light was made (that is the Angelical nature) the Word, Whereby God created
all things, in the beginning: the same Word was made flesh, and dwelt amongst
us, and we have seen his glory.

Behoulde the glory, wherein I glory, when I glory as I ought. Behoulde the
joy, wherewith I joy, when I joy as I ought. O Lord my God, my life, and the
entire glory of my soul; I confess to thee O Lord, my God, that when thou
did create me capable of reason, thou did, in some respect, make me
equal to the Angels, because I may be perfected by thy word, so far, as
that I may arrive to an equality with the Angels: and that I may have the
adoption of thy sons, by thy only begotten Word* O Lord, by that beloved
Son of thine in whom thou art well pleased; by that only heir, who is
coeternall and consubstantiall with thee, which is Jesus Christ, our only
Lord, and Redeemer, our Illuminator, and Comforter, our Aduocat with thee, and
the light of our eyes; who is our life, our Savior, and our only hope, who
loved us more then himself; by whom we have confidence, laid up for us with
thee, and a firm hope, and access in comeing to thee, because he gave power
to such as would believe in his Name, that they might become the sons of God.

Let me give praise to thy Name, O Lord, who by creating me, according to thine
image, and likeness, haste ordained me to be capable of so great glory, as that
I may be made thy son. Trees are not capable of this; stones are not capable;
nor in fine, any of those things, which are moved, or grow in the air, or in
the Sea, or on the earth, because he did not give them power, by the Word, to
become his sons; because they are not capable of reason. For this power does
consist in reason, whereby we know God. But he gave this power to men, whom
he created capable of reason, according to his own image, and likeness. And I
also, O Lord, am, by thy grace, a man, and by grace, I may become thy Son,
which they cannot be.

From whence came this favor to me, O Lord, thou sovereign truth, and thou
true souueraignity, and thou who art the beginning of all thy creatures? whence
came this blessing to me, that I had a capacity to become the son of God,
which they had not? Thou art he, who remainest for ever, who did create all
things at once. At once thou did create men, and beasts, and stones, and the
plants of the earth. Noe merits, of any of them, did preceede, noe former
privilege was due to them. For thou did create them all, out of thine own
mere goodness; and all the creatures were equal in merits, because none of
them had any merits at all.

And how then grew thy goodness, to be greater toward this thy creature, whom
thou haste made rational, then toward all the rest, which are not endewed
with reason? Why am not I as all they are; and why are not all they as I am? or
why at least am not I alone like them? What merits were there of mine? What
favor was dew to me, that thou should create me capable of being thy son,
which yet thou would deny to all them? Far be it from me, O Lord, to think
that this proceeded from any merits of mine. It was thy only grace, thy only
goodness which made me partaker of the sweetness thereof. Now grant me therefore,
O Lord, of that grace, whereby thou did create me of nothing; grant me, I
beseeh thee of that grace, to the end that I may be grateful to thee, for the
same.

CHAP. IX. Of the Omnipotency of God.
THy Omnipotent hand, which is ever one, and the same, did create the Angels
in Heaven, and the base worms on Earth; and yet thou were not greater in the
creation of the former, and less in the creation of the later. For as noe
other hand but thine was able to create an Angel; so nether could any hand
but thine, create the poorest worm. As noe hand but thine, had been able to
create the Heavens; so could none else, create the lightest leaf of any tree.
As noe hand but thine, could create any body of ours; so none but thine, could
make any one hair of our heads, either black or white,

Thy only Omnipotent hand, does all these things; to which all things, are
possible, a like. For it is not more possible for it, to create a miserable
worm then an Angel; nor more impossible to extend, and spread abroad the
whole heaven, then one single leaf; nor is it easier to frame one hair of our
heads, then to make our whole body; nor is it harder for it, to plant and build
the earth upon the waters, then the waters upon the earth. But whatsoever he
had a mind to do, he has done as he was pleased to do both in heaven and on
earth, and in all the deep Abysses, so has he framed things, and me among
them all; as he would, and could, and knew them. Thy hand, O Lord, could have
made me a stone, a bird; or a serpent, or any other brute creature; and thou
know how to do it, but thou would not, through thy great goodness to me.
Why therefore am I not some stone, or some tree, or some brute beast; but
because thy goodness has ordained otherwise concerning me; and that thou
should so ordeyne; was not caused by any precedent merits of mine.

CHAP. X, Of the incomprehensible praise of God.
WHence came this mercy to me O Lord, and whence shall I be able to get power,
wherewith I may be able to praise thee. For as thou made me without me,
according to thine own good pleasure, so art thou praised in thy self, as thou
art best pleased, without me. Thy praise O Lord, is thy very self. Let all
thy works praise thee, according to the multitude of thy greatenes: Thy
praise, O Lord, is incomprehensible. It is not comprehended by the heart, nor to
be measured by the mouth, nor received by the ear; For these things pass on
away, but thy praise, O Lord, remaynes for ever. The cogitation of man begins,
and his cogitation ends; the voice sounds and the voice is blown over; the
ear hears, and it leaves of to hear; but thy praise endures for ever. Who
is therefore he, that shall praise thee? What man shall be able to announce
thy praise? Thy praise is not transitory, it is eternal.

He prayseth thee, who beleiues thee to be thine own praise. He prayseth thee,
who knows, that he cann never arrive to praise thee, enough. Thy praise is
everlasting, and does never pass. In thee is our praise, and in thee shall my
soul, be praised. It is not we who praise thee but it is thou who prayseth
thy self; and in thy self and by thy self, and we also have our praise in
thee. Then have we true praise when we have praise from thee: when light
approves light. For thou O true Praise, do imparte true praise; but as
often as we seek praise, from any other but thee, so often do we loose thy
praise, because that other is transitory, but thine, eternal. If we seek
that praise which is transitory, we shall loose the praise which is eternal.
If we desire that which is eternal, let us not love that, which is transitory.

O thou eternal Praise, O thou my Lord, and my God, from whom all praise
proceeds, and without whom, there is no praise I am not able to praise thee
without thee: but let me possess thee, and I shall praise thee. For who, O
Lord am I, that, of my self, I should be able to praise thee? dust, and ashes
I am; a dead and stinkeing dog I am. I am a very worm, and putrefactio^ it
self. Who am I, that I should praise thee, O thou most Mighty Lord, and thou
God of the spirits of all flesh; who inhabitest Eternity? Shall darkness be
able to praise light or death, life? Thou art light, and I am darkness; thou
art life, and I am death. Shall vanity be able to praise truth? Thou art truth,
but I am a man, as vane, as vanity it self. How then O Lord, shall I be able
to praise thee? Shall my misery be able to praise thee? Shall stinkes be able
to praise precious odours? Shall the mortality of a man, who is here to day,
and will be gone to morrow, be able to praise thee? Shall man who is rottennes
it self, be able to praise thee? and the son of man, who is noe better, then
a base worm? Shall he be able to praise thee, O Lord, who is conceived, and
borne, and bredd up in sin? verily thy praises cannot be grateful in the
mouth of a sinner.

O Lord my God, let thy incomprehensible power; thy wisdom which cannot be
circumscribed, and thy goodness which cannot be declared, praise thee. Let thy
supereminent clemency, thy superabondant mercy, and thy sempiternall virtue,
and divinity praise thee. Let thy most Omnipotent fortitude, thy supreme
benignity, and charity, whereby thou did create us, O Lord thou God of my
soul, praise thee.

CHAP. IX. Of the hope, which is to be erected toward God.
But I, who am thy creature, reposing under the shadow of thy Vvings, will hope
in thy goodness, whereby thou did create me. Assiste thy creature, who was
created by thy benignity; let not that perish through my malice, which has
been wrought by thy goodness. Let not that perish by my misery, which has been
framed by thy mercy. For what does it profit thee, to have created me, if I
shall descend to hell, through mine own corruption? For have thou, o Lord, in
vain made all the sons of men? Thou have created me O Lord, and therefore
govern that which thou have created. Do not, O Lord, despise the the work of
thine own hands. Thou made me of nothing, and if thou do not govern me, O
Lord, I shall again return into my nothing. For as once I was not, O Lord
and then thou made me of nothing; so if thou do not govern me, yet once
again I shall of my self, be reduced to nothing.

Help me; O Lord my life, and let me not perish in my wickedness. If thou
had not created me, O Lord, I had not been; and because thou did
create me, Behold I am. But if now thou do not govern me, behold I am noe
more. For neither my merits, nor any privilege of mine: compelled thee to
create me, but thine own, most benign bounty and clemency. Let that charity
of thine, O Lord my God, which compelled thee to create me, I beseech thee,
oblige thee to govern me. For what does it profit me, that thy charity
constrained thee to create me, if now I perish in my misery: and if thy right
hand do not perfect me. Let that mercy compel thee, O Lord my God, to save
that which thou have created, which compelled thee to create that which thou
had not created. Let charity overcome thee to make thee save, which
overcame thee, to make thee create: because now that charity, is not less then
it was. For that very charity, is thy very self, who art the same for ever.
Thy hand O Lord is not so abbreuiated, as that it cannot save us; nor is thine
ear out of tune, that it cannot hear us; but my sins have made a division
betwixt thee and me, between light, and darkness; between the image of death,
and life: between vanity, and verity, between this lunatike inconstant life
of mine, and thine, which is capable of noe change, or end^

CHAP. XII. Of the snares of Concupiscence.
THese are those shadows of darkness, wherewith I am covered, in the Abyss of
this dark prison, where I lie prostrate, till such time as the day may dawne,
and the black shadows be removed; and the light may be made, in the firmament
of thy power. Let the voice of our Lord in power. The voice of our Lord in
magnificence, say thus. Let light be made, and let darkness be driven away, and
let the earth appear dry, and sprout forth fresh, and green plants. which may
bring forth seed and the good fruit of the Justice of thy Kingdom.

O Lord, our Father, and our God, thou light, whereby all things live, and
without which all things are accounted for dead, do not leave me in my wicked
thoughts, and, do not continue me, in the pride of mine eyes. Take from me all
concupiscence, and deliver me not over to have an irreuerent, and unbridled
mind: but possess thou my heart, that it may be ever thinkeing upon thee.
Illuminate mine eyes, that they may see thee, and let them not be vanely
extolled in thy sight, who art eternal glory, but let them have humble
thoughts, and not be employed upon certain wounderfull things, which are too
high. Let them behold those things, which are on the right hand, and not those
which are on the left hand, which are misliked by thee; and let thine eyelids
point out the steps, which I am to make. For even thine eyelids, do examen the
sins of men.

Dispatch away, and distroy my concupiscence, by that sweetness of thine which
thou have laid up, for such as fear thee, that I may couett thee, with an
everlasting desire. Lest otherwise, the interior gust of my soul being
entyced, and deceived by vane objects, may esteem sweet to be bitter, and
bitter, sweet; darkness to be light, and light, darkness. That I may be
deliured, out of the midst of so many pitfalls, which are spread every where,
by the enemy, over the face of this way, wherein we walk, for the taking of
sinners souls, whereof the whole world is full. Which one, who saw would not
pass over in silence, but said, For whatsoever is in the world, is either
concupiscence of the eyes, concupiscence of the flesh, or pride of life.
Behoulde, O Lord my God, how all the word is full of the snares of
co^cupisce^ce, which they have prepared for my feet. And who shall be able to
escape these snares? It must certainly be he, from whom thou shall have taken
the pride of his eyes that the concupiscence thereof, may not catch him; and
from whom thou shall have taken the concupiscence of the flesh, lest he be
taken by it; and from whom thou shall have taken an irreuerent, and unbridled
mind; least pride of life should craftily deceive him. O how happy is he, to
whom thou voutchsafest these things: for he shall pass on in safety.

And now, O my Redeemer, I beseech thee by thy self, assist me, that I may
not be cast down, in the sight of mine enemies, being enwrapped in those
snares, which they have prepared for my feet, that so they may oppress my
soul. But deliver me, O thou strength of my salvation, lest else mine enemies,
who hate thee, may contemn, and deride me. Rise up, O Lord my God, O thou
strong Champion of mine, and let mine enemies be dispersed, and let them, who
hate thee, be made to fly, from before thy face. As wax dissolueth in the
prese^te of the fire, so let sinners perish, before thy face And as for me,
let me be hidden up, in that secret of thy countenance, and let me rejoice with
thy children being satisfied with all good things. And thou, O Lord God, the
Father of orphans, and the mother of thy pupils, hearken to the loud and
woeful cry of thy children; and spread abroad thy wings, that we may fly
under them, from the face of the enemy, O thou tower of the strength of Israel,
who do not slumber, nor sleep, whilst thou keep Israel; because the
enemy who impugneth Israel, does nether slu^ber, nor sleep.

CHAP. XIII. Of the misery of man, and the benefits of God.
O Light. which noe other light does see. O brightenes, which noe other
brightness can discern. O light, which obscureth all light. O brightenes, which
blinds all other brightenes. O light, from which all light, O brightenes,
from which all other brightenes grows. O light, in respect of which all light
is darkness and all brightenes, blackenes; Light in whose presence, all
obscurity is bright, and all darkness light. Sovereign light, which noe cloud
can ouershadow, and noe dark miste, make dull; and noe fogg obscure, which noe
close prison shuts up, and which noe shadow can separate. Light, which does
illuminate all things: all together, once and ever, O swallow me up, I
beseech thee; into that Abyss of thy clarity; that I may on all sides see
thee, in thee; and my self in thee; and all things under thee.

Do not forsake me, and let not the shadows of mine ignorance increase, and
my sins be multiplied. Without thee, all things are darkness; to me all
things are evil, because there is nothing good without thee, who art the true,
the only. and the sovereign good. This I confess, and this I know, O Lord my
God, that wheresoever I am without thee, it goes ill with me; not only
without me; but even with in me also. For all abundance whatsoever, which is
not my God, is but mere beggary to me. Then shall I be satisfied, when thy
glory shall appear. And thou, O Lord, who art my very life of beatitude;
grant that I may confess my misery to thee, from the time that the uariety of
temporal things, did dissipate and divide me, when I fell, through the
treachery of my carnal senses, from thee, who art that unity of goodness, that
one sovereign good. And it divided me from that one, amongst many things: and
I grew thereby, in to a laborious kind of abundance, and a copious kind of
want; whilst I would be seeking after this, and that; and was satisfied with
nothing, so long as I found not in my self, that incommutable, and singular,
and undivided one good; which haueing once obtained, I need nothing, nor have
grief for nothing; and which possessing once, the desire of my whole soul is
fully satisfied.

Woe is me, what misery is this upon misery, when the wretched soul flies
from thee; with whom it might ever abound, and rejoice; and when it follows
the world, by means whereof, it is still in want, and pain? The world calls
me after it, and I faint in following it. Thou call me, O Lord, and I am all
refreshed by thee. And yet I am so peruersly miserable, as to follow that,
which makes me faint, rather that, which refreshes me.

This is directly the infirmity, which I am subject too, O cure it, thou
Physician of souls, that I may confess to thee, (O thou salvation of my
soul, with my whole heart) all that abundance of thy benefits, wherewith thou
have fedd me from my very youth; and wherewith thou will feed me to the
extremity of my old age. I beseech thee by thy self, that thou forsake me
not. Thou did make me, when I was not: Thou did redeem me, when I was
lost: For lost I was, and dead. And to him who was dead, thou did descend,
thou tookest mortality upon thee; nay thy self being a King, to thou did
descend to thy slave; and redeem that slave thou deliver ledst thy self. That
I might live, thou vndertookest to dye: Thou ouercamest death, and by pulling
down thy self thou did raise me up. I perished, I was sold away, and
thou came down to redeem me; and thou did love me so much; as to buy
me, upon the price of thine own blood.

O Lord, thou did love me more then thy self; since thou did resolve to
dye for me. By so costly a bargain, and at so high a price, thou did
reduce me from banishement; thou did redeem me from servitude, thou
did retire me from punishment. Thou did call me in thy Name; thou
did mark me out with thy blood, that the memory of thee, might for ever
stand before me, and that my heart might never receede from him, who did not
refuse the Cross for me. Thou did annoint me with that oil, which
belonged in cheyf, to thy self; that as thou art Christ, so from thee, I
might be called a Christian. And in thy hands thou have written me; that thou
might have a continual memory of me, with thee; upon condition that the
continual memory of thee, might be still with me.

Thus has thy grace and mercy, ever prevented me. For thou, O my deliverer,
have often freed me, from many, and great dangers. When I wandered, thou
broughtest me back to the way, when I was ignorant, thou did teach me; when
I sinned, thou did reprove me; when I was in sorrow, thou did releive
me; when I was in despair, thou did comfort me; when I fell, thou did
raise me: when I stood, thou heldest me: when I walked thou did lead me;
when I slept, thou did guard me; and when I cried out to thee, thou
did hear me,

CHAP. XIV. That God does consider the works, and purposes of mankind, with a
perpetual attention.
O Lord my God, and the life of my soul, thou have imparted these, and many
other benefits to me, whereof it would be a dear thing for me, to be ever
speaking, ever thinkeing, and ever giueing thanks. That I might for ever
praise, and love thee for all thy good blessings with my whole heart, and my
whole soul, and my whole mind, and my whole strength, and with all the very
marrow, and the most intimate parts of my affection. and with all the parts and
powers of my whole man, O Lord my God, who art the happy sweetness of all them,
who are delighted in thee. But thine eyes, have seen my imperfections: Those
eyes, I say, of thine, which are far brighter then the Sun, lookeing down
round about, at ease, upon the ways of men, and upon the profound Abyss, and
they do every where contemplate, both the good and badd. For as thou do
preside over all things (thou being all, for ever, present every where, and
taking particular care, of all these things, which thou have created, because
thou hate none of them, which thou have made) so also do thou consider all
my paces, and steps, and do ever keep a watchful guard over me, day and
night; and like a perpetual centinell, do diligently note my ways; as if
thou had forgotten all the whole world of thy other creatures, both in
heaven and earth, and did not care for the rest.

For nether would the light of thine own unchangeable sight, increase in thee,
though thou should behold, but any one only thing; nether is it
diminished, although thou behold diverse, and innumerable things. For as thou
do perfectly, and at once consider any one thing by one only act of
seeinge, so does thy whole sight, most perfectly, and that at once behold the
whole of every particular thing, how different soever they may be among
themselves. And as it considers all, so it considers one, and as any one,
so every one, and all of them at once, do thou consider, without any
division, or mutation, or diminution. Therefore all thou, in all time, without
time, do consider all me, at once, and that continually, as exactly, as if
thou had nothing else to consider. And so therefore, do thou stand in
guard of me, as if thou would attend to me alone, and did forgett all
the rest. For thou do ever show thy self to be present, and if thou find
me ready, thou do ever offer thy self also ready. Whither soever I go, O
Lord, thou forsakest me not, unless I be the first to forsake thee, wheresoever
I be, thou departest not away, for thou art every where; and wheresoever I go
I shall find thee. By what means may I be kept from perishing, without thee,
since without thee, I cannot be at all.

I confess that whatsoever I do, whether it be little, or much, I do it all,
in thy presence; and whatsoever that be, thou see it better then my self.
For whatsoever I do, thou find thy self present there, as a perpetual
spectatour of all my cogitations, intentions, delectations, and operations. O
Lord, all my desires, and thoughts, are ever standing before thee. Thou
discernest, O Lord, whence the spirit comes, where it is, and whither it goes.
For thou art the ponderer, and waigher out of all spirits; and whether that
root be sweet or bitter, from which the fair leaves of our actions are sent
out, thou, as an internal Judge, do know best. Yea and thou do sifte most
subtilely, into the most secret parts and pith of those very roots; and do
not only observe and number, and contemplate, and keep account of the
intention, by the most exquisite truth of thy light: but also of the most
profound, and hidden sapp of that root; to the end that thou may repay to
every one, not only according to their works, or their express intention,
but also according to that interior and original spirit of the root of their
actions, from whence the intention of him that works, does proceed.

To whatsoever I tend; when I work; whatsoever I think, in whatsoever I am
delighted; thine ears hear me, thine eyes see me, and consider me. Thou
do mark, and judge, and note, and write in thy book, whether it be good, or
badd: to the end, that afterward, thou may render either rewards for that
which is good; or torments for that which is evil: When thy books shall be
opened, all souls shall be judged, according to those things which shall be
written in those books. And this perhaps is that, which thou did already
say to us: I will consider the last things of those men. And that also, which
is said of thee. O Lord, He considers the end of all men, For thou O Lord
do in all those things, which we do, more attend to the end of our
intention, then to the act of our operation.

And when I consider those things diligently, O Lord my God, who art so
terrible, and full of strength, I am alike confounded between huge fear, and
shame. For a mighty necessity is imposed upon us, of liueing with rectitude and
justice, who do all the things which we do before the eyes of a Judge, who
sees all things.

CHAP. XV. Tat man of himself can do nothing without divine Grace.
O Thou most mighty, and Omnipotent God, the God of the spirits of all flesh;
whose eyes are over all the ways of the sons of Adam, from the day of their
nativity, to that other of their death, to the end that thou may reward
every one of them, according to their works, whether they be good or bad:
Teach me, how I may confess my poverty to thee. For once I said that I was
rich, and that I wanted nothing, and I did not know the while that indeed I
was poor, and naked, and a miserable wretch. I believed that I was somewhat,
when yet indeed, I was nothing. I told my self that I would become wise, and
I turned a stark fool. I thought my self to be prudent, but I was deceived.
And now I see that all is thy gift, without whom we can do nothing. For
unless thou, O Lord, keep the City, he watches but in vain, who pretends to
keep it.

Thou have taught me thus, to know thee, whilst thou did leave me, for a
while, and prove me; not that thou might know me thereby, but for my
sake, that so I might come to know my self. For (as I was saying, o Lord) I
thought once that I was somewhat of my self; I conceived, that I was
sufficient by my self; nor did I discern, that thou were he that governed me,
till thou did a little withdraw thy self from me. And then presently I
fell, and so I saw, and knew, that thou did govern me; and that it was
of my self, that I fell; and that it was of thee, that I rose again.

Thou, O Light, did open mine eyes, and did rowse me up, and
illuminate me; and I saw, that the life of man upon earth, is all temptation;
and that noe flesh must presume to glory before thee, for so noe man liueing
can be justified. For if there be any good in him, whether it be great, or
little, thy gift it is, and nothing is ours, but that which is naught. Of what
therefore shall any flesh be able to vant? Shall he glory in sin. This is not
glory but misery. May he glory in that which is good? Noe: For he may not glory
in that which belongs to another. Thine O Lord, is the Good, annd thine must
be the Glory. For he who seeks glory to himself, and not to thee, out of
the good he does, that man is noe better, then a thief, and robber, who had a
mind to bereave thee of thy glory. For he who will be praised for any gift of
thine, and seeks not thy glory, but his own therein, although he be praised
by men, for that gift of thine, yet he is dispraysed by thee; in regard that
he sought not so much thy glory by it, as his own. And now he who is praised
by men, whilst thou dispraysest him, shall not be defended by men, when thou
iudgest him, nor delivered by them, when thou condemnest him.

But thou, O Lord, who did frame me in my mothers womb, do not suffer me
to fall under so great a reproof, as that I should be charged with procureing
to robb thee, of thy glory. To thee be glory, of whom all good things are; and
to us, confusion of face, and misery, unless thou vouchsafe to have mercy on us.
But thou have mercy, O Lord, thou have mercy upon us all, who hate none of
those things which thou have made; and who bestowest of thy good gifts, upon
us; and do enrich us, O Lord our God, with thy most excellent graces. For
thou love poor creatures, and thou enrichest them with thy abundance. And
now behold, O Lord, we are thy poor children, and thy little, little flock;
open thy gates to us, and thy poor shall eat, and be satisfied, and they who
seek thee, and praise thee. I do also know, O Lord, and I confess, (for I
am taught to do it by thee) that they only who know they are poor, and
confess their poverty to thee, shall be enriched by thee; and they who
conceive themselves to be rich, whereas indeed they are poor; will be found
excluded from thy riches. For my part therefore, I confess my poverty to thee,
O Lord my God, and let all glory remain to thee. For all that, which has been
well done by me, is thine.

O Lord, I confess to thee, as thou have taught me, that I am nothing, but an
universality of vanity, and a shadow of death, and a black kind of Abyss,
and a plott of earth, which is all empty, and unfruitful, and which shootes
not up one leaf without thy blessing; and of it self, it yields no other
fruit, then confusion, sin and death. If ever I had any good thing, I
received it of thee; Whatsoever good I have now is thine, and of thee I have
it. If ever I stood fast, I stood by thee; but whenever I fell, of my self I
fell; and for ever had I weltered in that mire, if thou had not raised me.
And for ever had I continued blind, unless thou had illuminated me. When I
fell, I had never risen, unless thou had reached forth thine hand. And when
afterward thou did raise me, I had instantly retournend to fall, unless
thou had sustained me: and I had perished very often, unless thou had
governed me. So perpetually, O Lord, so perpetually was I prevented by thy
mercy, and grace; delivering me from all my sins, saueing me from all such as
are past; solliciteing me against such as were present, and fortifying me,
against such as might be future; Cutting of, before my face, those snares of
sins, by preventing the occasions, and causes thereof. For, unless thou
had also done this favor to me, I might have committed any sin in the
whole world. And I know, O Lord, that there is noe kind of sin, which any
one man did ever committ, which another man may not also committ, if the help
of the Creator, whereby man is made, be wanting. But thou art the cause why I
committed them not: Thou did command that I should abstain from them, and
thou did infuse thy grace, that I might believe in thee. For thou, O Lord
did govern me for thy self; and thou did keep me both for thy
self, and for my self: and thou did give me light and grace to the end
that I might not commit adultery and every other sin.

CHAP. XVI. Of the manifold temptations of the devil.
THe Tempter was absent, and thou were the cause that he was abse^t. Fit time,
and place for sin were wanting; and thou were the cause that they were
wanting. The Tempter was present, and nether time, nor place, were wanting; but
thou did keep me from consenting. The Tempter came to me, all ugly and
frightfull as he is; and thou did comfort me so far, as to make me
despise him. The Tempter came to me all strong, and armed; and to the end that
he might not conquer me; thou restraynedst him, and did strengthen me. The
Tempter came transfigured into an Angel of light; and to the end that he might
not deceive me, thou rebukedest him, and thou did illuminate me, that I
might know him. For he is that great, and redd dragon, that ancient serpent,
and he is called the Devil, and Satan, haueing seven heads, and tenn horns.
Whose employment is, to inueigle this great huge Sea, wherein innumerable
creatures are still creeping, creatures; great, and small; that is to say,
several kinds of devils, who study nothing else, day and night, but how they
may walk their round, seeking whom they may devour, unless thou deliver
them. For this is that ancient Dragon, who sprung up first, in that paradise of
pleasure, and who with his tail, draws the third part of the stars of
heaven after him, and brings them down to the earth; he who is poison,
corruptes the waters of the world, that so me^ who drink thereof, may dye,
and who tra^ples upon gold, like so much durte; and into whose mouth, the river
of Jordan flows; and he is grown to that presumption, that he fears non at
all. And who shall be able to defend us from the crushing of his teeth? who
shall be able to deliver us out of his jaws, but thou, O Lord, who have broken
all the heads of that huge Dragon.

Help us, O Lord, and spread thy wings over us, that so we may fly under
them, from the face of this dragon, who persecureth us. And do thou defend us
by thy shield, from the push of his horns. For to this, does he direct his
continual study: upon this is his chief desire employed, that he may devour
the souls which thou have created. And therefore, O my God, we cry out to
thee; deliver us from this daily adversary of ours, who whether we sleep, or
wake, or eat, or drink, or whatsoever else we do, is pressing upon us, by
all means, and by many frauds, and tricks, he is addressing poisoned arrows
against us, both privately and publicly, that so he may destroy our souls.
And yet O Lord, so strangely miserable are we made, as that although we see
this Dragon continually comeing toward us, with his mouth wide open, ready to
devour us; yet nevertheless, we sleep, and we are eue^ wanton again in our
sloth as if we were secure before him, who yet couets nothing but our
destruction.

Our enemy, that he may kill us, is continually awake, and wants his sleep;
and yet we, will not so much as wake from sleep, that we may defend our
selves.

Behold, he has spread infinite snares before our feet; and he has stuffed
all our ways with several kinds of gynnes, whereby to catch our souls; and
who then shall be able to free himself? He has laid snares in riches, and
snares in poverty; snares in meat, in drink, in pleasure, in sleeping, and
wakeing; he has spread snares in words and in works, and in all our ways. But
thou, O Lord, deliver us from the snares of the hunter, and from that bitter
word; that we may confess to thee, and say: Blessed be our Lord who has not
given us to a pray to their teeth. Our souls is delivered as a sparrow might
be, out of the hunters snare; The snare is broken, and we are delivered.

CHAP. XVII. That God is the Light of just Persons.
ANd thou, O Lord, who art my Light, illuminate mine eyes, that I may see and
walk in thy light, and not stumble upon the snares of the enemy. For who shall
be able to avoid such a multitude of snares, unless he see them; and who shall
be able to see them, unless he be illuminated by thy light? For that father of
darkness, hides all those snares, in his own darkness; that all they may be
taken by them, who are in his darkness; and who are the sons of darkness; not
discerning thy light, wherein, whosoever walks needs not fear. For he who
walks by day, stumbles not; but he stumbles who walks by night: for the light
is not in him.

Thou O Lord art Light, thou art the light of the sons of light; thou art the
Sun, which knows not what belonges to setting; that day wherein thy
children walk without stumbling; and without which, all they who walk are in
darkness, as being destitute of thee, who art the light of the world. Behold
we discover daily, that by how much the more, any man is estranged from thee,
who art the true light, so much the more intricately is he wrapped up in the
darkness of sin. And how much the more he is in darkness, so much the less
can he discern the snares, which are spread for him, in his ways. And so by
not discerneing them, he falls often into them, and is taken by them; and
which deserves to strike us full of horror, such a man, does not so much as
know, that he is fallen: Now he, who knows not that he has taken a fall;
will care so much the less to rise, as he still conceiueth, that he stands.

But thou, O Lord, my God, thou true light of the mind, illuminate now mine
eyes that I may see thee, and know thee, and not tumble headlong down, in the
sight of mine enemies. For this main adversary of ours, does labor even to
exterminate us outright; whilst we, the while, beg of thee, that thou will
make him melt before our face, as wax does, upon the approach of fire. For he,
O Lord, is that cruel thief, first, and last, who took counsel, how he
might robb thee of thy glory, but so, being puffed and swollen up, he burst,
and fell upon his face, and thou did precipitate him down from that Holy
Hill of thine; and from the midst of those bright stones, in the midst,
whereof he had once been walkeing. And now, O Lord my God, and my life, he
never gives over to persecute thy children, ever since he fell.

And out of his hatred to thee, O Mighty King, he procures to destroy thy
creature, which thy Omnipotent goodness has created, according to thine own
Image; to the end that he may possess thy glory, which himself lost, by
pride. But crush thou him to pieces, O strong Champion, before he devour thy
lambs; and illuminate us, that we may discern the snares, which he has
prepared for us; and make us able to escape, and arryue to thee, O thou joy of
Israel.

Thou best know all these things thou know his contentious spirit, and
his most stiff neeke. Nor do I speak of these things, as pretending to
discover them to thee, who know all things, and from whom noe little thought
can lie hidd. But make my just complaint against this enemy of mine, before the
feet of thy Majesty; that so thou may both condemn him, and save us, thy
Children, Whose strength thou art.

This enemy of ours, O Lord, is full of craft, and shifts, nor can those
intricate ways of his, be easily traced out, no nor so much as the air of his
countenance be discerned by us, unless we be illuminated by thee. For sometimes
he is here, and sometimes he is there. Now he shows himself like a lamb, and
then like a wolf; now like darkness, and then like light; and according to the
several qualityes of persons, according to the variety of times, and places;
and according to the momentary change of things, he suggesteth several
temptations. For to the end that he may deceive sad people, he pretends
himself to be sad for company. To the end that he may delude, such as are in
joy, he faynes himself also to rejoice. That he may beguile such as are
spiritual, he transformeth himself, into an Angel of light. That he may
insinuate himself, and by that means crush such as are strong, he takes the
semblance of a lamb, that he may devour such as are meek, he borrowes the
face of a Wolf. All these things he takes upon him, according to the
similitude and proportion of the temptations, which he means to use. As some,
he frights with a nocturnall fear, others, by the arrow which flies by day,
others, by the business which walks by night; others, by express assault, and
others by that devil of high noone.

Now, who is he that can think himself a match for this enemy so far, as
that he may so much as know him; and who did ever reach to the bottom of his
craft? Who shall reveal the making of his garment to us, and who shall make
us know the walk of his teeth? Behold he hides his arrows in his quiver,
and he couers his snares, under a show of light; and so he is less subject to
be understood, unless O Lord, O thou hope of ours, we beg light from thee,
whereby we may discern all things. For not only does he strive to deceive us
in the sensual works of flesh and blood; nor only in the exercise of vice,
which is easily discerned; but even amongst our most spiritual actions, he
hides certain subtle snares; and under the color of virtue, he puts on vice,
and transformes himself into an Angel of light. these, and many other things,
O Lord our God, does this very son of Beliall, this Satan, endeavor to bring
against us. And now as a Lion, then as a Dragon, both manifestly and secretly,
interiourly, and exteriourly, both by day and night, he is laying traynes for
us, that so he may destroy our souls. But thou, O Lord, deliver us, thou who
sauest such as hope in thee, that our enemy may have cause to be sorry for as
much as may concern us; but that thou O Lord our God, may be praised in us.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the benefits of God.
But let me the son of thy handmayd, who have commended my self into thy
hands, confess to thee, O my deliverer, with my whole heart in these little
poor confessions of mine, and let me call to mind, all those good blessings,
which thou have voutchsafed to bestow on me, from my youth, and in my whole
life. For I well know that ingratitude does much offend thee, which is the
root of all spiritual mischeife; and a kind of dry and parching wind, which
blasteth all goodness; and it shuts up the fountayns of divine mercy toward
man; and by this means, both our ill deeds which were dead get life again;
and our good deeds which live, do quickly grow to die, and have noe more life
afterward.

But as for me, O Lord, I will give thanks to thee. Let not me, O thou my
deliverer, be ungrateful to thee, since thou have freede me.

How often had that Dragon even swallowed me up, and thou O Lord did draw
me out of his mouth? How often have I sinned, when he was ready to have
devoured me, but thou O Lord my God did defend me? When I did wickedly
against thee, when I transgressed thy commandments, he stood ready to snatch
me away into hell, but thou forbadest him. I offended thee, and the while,
thou defendedest me. I did not fear him, and yet thou did preserve me. I
departed from thee, and made offer of my self to mine enemy; but thou did
fright him so, as that he should not dare to carry me away.

These benefits did thou bestow upon me, O Lord my God; and I wretched
creature knew it not. Full often have thou freed me, from the uery jaws of
the Devil, and snatched me out of the mouth of the Lion; and full often have
thou brought me back again from hell, though I was ignorant thereof. For I
descended even toward the very gates of hell, and thou heldest me back from
goeing in. I drew near the gates of death, and thou were the cause why they
opened not themselves to receive me. Thou also, O my Savior, have often
delivered me from corporal death, when I was subject to great sickness. And
when I found my self in many dangers, by sea, by land, by fire, by sword, and
many other ways; thou were ever delivering me, ever present to me, and ever
saueing me with great mercy. For thou, O Lord, did well know, that if
death had then seized upon me, hell had possessed my soul, and I had been
damned for ever. But thy mercy and thy grace, O Lord my God, prevented me, and
gave me deliverance from that death of my body, and consequently from the
death of my soul.

These and many other benefits did thou imparte to me, but I was blind,
and knew them not, till I was illuminated by thee. But now, O thou light of my
soul, O Lord my God, my life, by which I live, and the light of mines eyes, by
which I see; Behold, thou have illuminated me, and now I know thee, and
confess my self to live by the gift of thy hand; and I give thanks to thee
Which though they be mean, and poor, and full of disproportion to thy
benefits, yet they are the best, which my frailty can afford. For thou alone,
art my God, my benign Creator, who do love our souls, and hate none of
those things, which thou have made.

Behold, I who am the greatest of those sinners, whom thou have saved (to the
end that I may give an example to others, of thy most benign piety) will
confess thy great benefits to me: For thou have snatched me out of that lower
hell, once, twice, and thrice, and a hundred, and a thousand times. And
indeed, I was ever tending toward Hell, and thou were ever drawing me back.
And thou might justly have damned me a thousand times, if thou had been
so disposed. But thou would not, because thou love souls, O Lord my God,
and thou dissemblest the sins of men, that so they may come to penance, and
there is much mercy in all thy ways

Now therefore I see these things, O Lord my God, and I know them, by thy
light; and my soul does even faint, and is sick with love, upon the
consideration of thy great mercy toward me; since thou have snatched my
soul, out of that lower Hell, and have brought me back again, to life. For I
was all plunged in death, and thou have wholly revived me. Be therefore all my
life and being thine; and I do wholly offer my whole self up to thee. Let my
whole spirit, my whole heart, my whole body, and my whole life, live to thee, O
thou my sweet life; for thou have delivered me wholly, that thou might
possess me wholly, thou have entirely repaired me, that so again thou may
have me entirely. Let me therefore love thee, O Lord, my strength; let me
love thee, O thou unspeakable exultation of my soul. And let me live now not
to my self but to thee. My whole life which perished by my misery, was raised
up by thy mercy, thou who art that merciful God, and full of pity, which thou
do extend, in thy goodness, to thousands of such as love thy Name. Therefore O
Lord my God, and my sanctifyer, have thou commanded in thy Law, that I should
love thee with my whole heart, with my whole soul, with my whole mind, with
my whole strength, and with all the powers I have. Yea and with the most
internal marrow of all my affections and this, in all the hours, and moments
of my time, wherein I am enjoying the benediction of thy mercyes. For I should
ever perish, but that thou do ever govern me. I should ever die; but that
thou do ever quicken me. And thou do oblige me to thee, in every moment
of my life; since in every moment thereof, thou impartest great benefits to me.

As therefore, there is noe houer or point of time in my whole life, wherein I
am not assisted by thy benefits; so also ought there not to be any moment,
wherein I should not have thee before the eyes of my mind; and wherein I
should not love thee with my whole strength. But even this I cannot do, save
by thy gift only to whom every good gift belongs, and every excellent
grace is descending from thee the Father of Lights, with whom there is noe
transmutation, nor shadow of change. For it is not of him that wills, nor of
him that runs, but of thee, taking mercy that we love thee. Thine, O Lord
is this gift to whom every good thing belongs. Thou commaundest that thou
be beloved: Give us that which thou command, and then, command us what thou will.

CHAP. XIX. Of the fervor of charity.
I Love thee, O my God, and I am ever desireing to love thee more. For in very
deed, thou art more sweet, then any honny; more nutritive then any milk; and
more clear then any light. Therefore art thou more dear to me, them gold, or
silver, or precious stone. And whatsoever delightful thing I had in the world,
was displeasing to me, in comparison of thy sweetenes, and the order of thy
house which I loved. O thou fire which ever burnest, and art never quenched; O
love, which is ever boiling hot and never growest lukewarm; do thou inflame
me. Let me, I say, be wholly inflamed by thee; and let me wholly love thee. For
he loves thee too little, who loves any thing together with thee, which he
loves not for thy sake. Make me love thee, O Lord, because thou did first
love me.

And how shall I find words, whereby I may unfold the notions which I have of
thy singular love to me, testified by those innumerable benefits, by which
thou have trained me up, from the beginning? For after the benefit of the
creation, when in the beginning thou did make me of nothing, after thine
own Image, doing me honor, and exalting me beyond the rest of thy creatures,
which thou made; and innobling me with the light of thy countenance, which
thou did stamp upon the entry of my heart; whereby thou did disseuer me,
both from insensible creatures, and from brute beasts, which are endewed with
sense, and thou madst me, not much inferior to the Angels; yet even this,
seemed not enough, in the sight of thy deity. For since that time, thou have
entertained, and nourished me, with daily and singular, and great presents of
thy benefits, without intermission. And thou have given me comfort, and made me
suck, like sum little tender infant of thine, at the breasts of thy
consolation. For to the end that I might yield thee my entire service, thou
have appointed, that whatsoever thou have made should serve me.

CHAP. XX. That God has submitied all things to the service of man.
THou have made all things subject to the feet of man, to the only end, that
man might become wholly subject to thee. And to the end that man might be
wholly thine he is entitled to a dominion over all thy works. For thou have
created all exterior things, for the body; the body for the soul; and the
soul for thy self; to the end that man might tend only to thee, and might
love only thee, possessing thee, by way of comfort to himself; and thy
creatures, by way of receiving service from them. For whatsoever is contained
under this vaute of heaven, is inferior to the soul of man; which was
created, that it might possess the supernall, sovereign good above; by the
fruition whereof, it might be happy: and whereunto when it shall adheare,
outstripping and ouerlooking all relations and respects to all inferior
things, which are subject to mutation, it shall calmely and constantly behold
the face of that eternal immortality, and the vision of that supreme
Majesty, to which it has aspired here. Then shall they be in fruition, of
those most excellent delights in the house of our Lord; in comparison whereof
all those things which here we see, may well go for nothing. Those are they,
which the eye has not seen, nor the ear heard, nor have they entered into the
heart of man, which God has prepared for them who love him. And these things O
Lord, will thou imparte to the soul of man. And with the consideration of
these things, do thou who love souls, delight the souls of thy servants.

But yet, why should I wonder at those things, O Lord my God, therein thou do
but honor thyre own Image, and that similitude of thine, according to which
they are created. For whilst we are yet in th^s corruptible and ignoble body,
to the end we might see thou have given this light of heaven, by the hands of
thy unwearied ministers the Sun and Moon, which do perpetually observe thy
precept, in serueing thy children day and night. To the end that we might
breath, thou have given the purity of the air. That we might hear; the
variety of sounds. That we might smell; the sweetness of odours. That it might
taste, the variety and quality of sauoures. That it might touch, thou have given
the bulk of all bodies. For the other necessary occasions of man, thou have
given beasts to carry him. And thou have imparted the birds of the air, the
fish of the sea, and the fruits of the earth for his refection. Thou have also
created out of the earth several medicines, which may be applied to the
several infirmities of men; and thou have prepared particular comforts, which
are to encounter and reuerse those particular-inconueniences which may occur.
And all this thou have done because thou art full of mercy, and pity; and thou
being our potter, do know the matter whereof we are made. For, in fine, we
are but as so much dirt in thy hand.

CHAP. XXI. That the greatenes of the divine counsel may be inferred by the
consideration of temporal blessings.
BEhold me, I beseech thee; let thy great mercy stand open to me. Illustrate
me yet more with thy light; that so it may be discovered to me, more and
more. For by these little works of thine, we grow to comprehend thy great
ones; and by thy visible works, we are enabled to take some aim at thy
invisible works, O Lord our God, the holy, and good Creator of us all. For
if, O my Lord; whilst we are in this body, which is so corruptible and
ignoble, thou do imparte to us so great, and even innumerable benefits, by
means of the heavens, and of the air; of the earth and sea; of light and
darkness; of sun and shade, of dew and gentle rain; of wyndes and stiff
showers; of birds, and fishes; of beasts and trees; of the multiplicity of
herbs and plants of the earth; and by means of the ministry of all thy
creatures, which do successively serve us at due and several times; to ease
us thereby, of that trouble, and fastidiousnes, which otherwise we might be
subject too; what kind of benefits, I beseech thee, and how great, and even
innumerable will they be, which thou have prepared for such as love thee, in
that celestial country, where we shall behold thee face to face. If thou do
us so much honor in this prison, what will thou do in thy palace?

Great, and innumerable are thy works, O Lord, thou King of the heavens. For
since these of the lower rank, which thou have delivered over, to be used
promiscuously here, both by good an badd; be all of them very excellently good
and delightful; what kind of things shall they prove to be, which thou have
only treasured up for them alone who are good? If thy gifts be so diverse,
and even innumerable, which now thou bestowest both upon thy friends, and upon
thine enemies; how great, how innumerable, how dearly sweet, and how
delightful, are they to be, which thou will only bestow upon thy friends? If
the solace be so great, which thou give us in this day of our tears, what
will thou give, in that day of our espousalls? If this place of exile, and
restraint afford such pleasures, what I beseech thee will our Country do?

The eye cannot see, without thee, what thou have prepared for such as love
thee. For according to the great multitude of thy magnificence, so also the
multitude of that sweetenes is great, which thou have hidden up for them that
fear thee. For thou, O Lord, my God, art great, thou art immense, there is noe
end of thy greatenes, there is noe number of thy Wisdom; and there is noe
measure of thy benignity; and there is neither end, number, nor measure of the
reward, which thou bestowest. But as thou art great, so are thy rewards great;
for thou thy self art the reward, and the gift, which thou bestowest upon all
such as shall valiantly have fought thy battayles.

CHAP. XXII. That the divine sweetenes takes away all the present bitterness of
the world.
THese are those great benefits wherewith thou, O Lord God, the sanctifyer of
thy Saints, wilt satisfy, and remove the want of thy hungry children. For thou
art the hope of the desperate; the comfort of the desolate; thou art that very
crown of hope, which is adorned with the glory prepared for such as overcome.
Thou art the eternal satiety, of such as have been almost starued; and thou
art to be bestowed upon such as hunger after thee. Thou art that everlasting
consolation, who bestows thy self, upon them alone, who despise the comforts
of this world, for that everlasting consolation of thine. For they who look
for their comfort here, are esteemed unworthy of thy comforts; but they who are
afflicted here are comforted by thee; and they who partake with thee in thy
Passion, shall partake with thee also, in thy consolation. Noe man must think
to be comforted, both in this, and in the other world; nor must he think to be
in joy, both here and there; but he must necessarily loose the one, who will
possess the other.

When I consider these things, O Lord my comforter, my soul refuses the
comforts of this life, that so it may be held worthy of thy eternal
consolations. For it is high reason, that any man should loose thee, if he make
choice to be comforted, more in any other, then in thee. And I beseech thee
even by thy self, O thou supreme Truth, that thou permit me not to be
comforted by any vain consolation; but that it may only be in thee. And I
beg, that all things may grow bitter to me, that thou alone may appear
sweet to my soul, thou who art that inestimable sweetness, whereby all bitter
things are made sweet. For thy sweetenes is the thing which made that torrent
of stones, sweet to Steven. Thy sweetenes made that burneing gridyron, sweet
to blessed Laurence. Through thy sweetenes, the Apostles went reioyceing, from
the Council, because they were held worthy, to suffer reproach for thy Names
sake. Andrew went both with security and joy to the Cross, because he hastened
to taste of thy sweetenes. And this sweetenes of thine did so fill the two
Princes of the Apostles, that for it, the wood of the Cross, was chosen by one
of them; and the other was not affrayed, to submitt his head to the murtheringe
sword. For the purchasse of this sweetenes Bartholomew sold away his very
skin. And to have a taste thereof, the undaunted John, drunk off that
poysened cupp. And as soon as Peter had tasted of it, he forgott all other
things, and cried thus out, like one who were inebriated, saying, O Lord, it is
good for us to be here. Let us here make three Tabernacles. Let us dwell here;
let us contemplate thee; For we need nothing else. It is enough for us, O
Lord, to see thee. It is enough, says he to be satiated with so great
delight. And the reason was this; Because he had tasted some one dropp of
divine sweetenes, all other sweetenes was lothed by him. What then shall we
think, that he would have said, if he had once tasted, of the great multitude
of the sweetenes of thy divinity, which thou have hidden up for them that fear
thee.

That Virgin had also tasted of this unspeakable sweetenes of thine, of whom
we read, that she went topp full of joy, and glory to the prison, as if she
had been invited to some marriadge Feast. And of this, I suppose, he also had
tasted who said, That the multitude of that sweetenes of thine, O Lord, was
great which thou had hidden up for them that fear thee, and who also
advised men thus, Taste, and see, how sweet our Lord is. For this is that
beatitude, O Lord our God, which we expect, by the gift of thy hand, for
which we fight as in a warfare under thee, O Lord; for which we are mortifyed
to thy honor, all the day long; that at last we may live to thee, in that
life of thine.

CHAP. XXIII. That all our hope and ardent desire of our heart ought to be
placed in our Lord.
But thou O Lord, the expectation of Israel, and that desire, to which our
heart does every day aspire, make haste to us, and do not stay. Rise up, make
have, and come; and bring us out of this prison to confess unto thy Name, that
we may glory in thy light. Open thine ears, to the cry of the tears of thy
forsaken children, who thus are calling out to thee. Give us, O thou Father of
ours, our daily breard this day, in the strength whereof we may walk day and
night; till at last we may arrive to thy Holy Mountain Horeb. And I also,
poor little one that I am, amongst the poor little ones of thy familly, when
shall I, O my God, my Father, and my strength, come, and appear before thy
face; that I, who confess unto thee now for a time, may do it there, for all
eternity. Happy shall I be, if once I may be admitted to behold thy brightenes.

Who will grant me so much favor, as that once I may be admitted to that
happiness. I know, O Lord, I know, and confess, that I am unworthy to enter
under thy roof. Yet do thou admit me for thine own honnours sake; and
confound not thy slave, who hopes in thee. And who shall be able to enter into
thy Sanctuary, to consider the wonders of thy power, unless thou open him the
gate? And who can open it, if thou shutt it? For if thou destroy, there is none
can build us up. And if thou shutt a man in, there is none, who ca^ putt him
out. If thou contain the waters, all the world will be dried up, but if thou
let the^ loose, they will ouerrune the earth. If thou have a mind to anihilate
all that which thou have created, who shall presume to contradict thee? Now
therefore, o thou eternal goodness of thy mercy (which is that whereby thou
made whatsoever thou would) thou art the Archytect of the whole world: and
therefore do thou also govern us. Thou did creat us, and therefore do not
thou despise us; for we are the work of thy hands. And it is plain enough, O
Lord our God, that we, who are but base worms, and dirt shall never be able
to enter into thy eternityes, unless we be introduced by thee, who have created
all things of nothing.

CHAP. XXIV. That all our salvation depends upon God.
But I, the work of thy hands, will confess to thee, in thy fear, that I
will not putt my confidence in my bow, or think that my sword can save me,
but that must be done, by thy right hand, and by thine arm, and by the
illumination of thy countenance. For otherwise I should despair. But thou, who
did create me, art my hope, that thou will not forsake such as trust in
thee. For thou art our Lord God, sweet and patient, and disposeing of all
things, in mercy. For it we have sinned, we are thine; and if we have not
sinned, we are thine, because we are numbered among thy creatures.

We are but as a leaf, in respect of the world, and all mankind is but
vanity; and our life is but as a vapor upon the earth. Be not angry, if we
thy poor, forsaken little children fall, because thou, O Lord our God, know
the matter whereof we are made. Will thou, O God of inestimable fortitude,
show forth thy power, against a leaf which is whipped away by the wind? And
persecute a withered straw. Will thou, O Eternell King of Israel, damn a
dead dog? will thou damn a single gnatt, We have heard O Lord, of thy mercy,
and thou put not to death, nor reioycest in the perdition of dying men.

Therefore do we beseech thee, O Lord, that thou will not permit that,
which thou have not made, to have dominion over this creature of thine, which
thou have made. Nay thou art greiued with our perdition; and what then O Lord
shall be able to hinder thee, who art omnipotent, from eternally reioyceing in
our salvation? If thou will, thou can save me; but I cannot do it, though I
would. The multitude of the miseries which I carry about me, is very great.
It is at hand with me, to will a thing, but I cannot find the way to perfect
it. Yet I cannot even will a good thing, unless thou also wilt; nor can I
perform that which I have a will to do, unless thy power strengthens me.
Yea, and that which I have power to do, falls out sometimes, that I will not
do it, unless thy will may be done in Earth as it is in Heaven. And what I will
do, and can do, I do not know, unless thy wisdom illustrate me. And
though also I do know, having sometimes a will to do a thing, and sometimes
also a power to do it, yet my VVisdome passes away, all imperfect and empty
as it is, unless thy true VVisdome help me.

But in thy will, all things are placed; and there is none who can resist that
will of thine, O thou the Lord of all thy Creatu-Creatures, who have supreme
dominion over all flesh; and do work whatsoever thou will, in Heaven, and
in Earth, in the Sea, and in all the Abysses.

Let therefore thy will be done in us, upon whom thy Name has been inuoked;
and let not this noble work of thine perish, which thou did create for
thine own glory. And what man borne of woeman is he, who can live, and not
see death, and deliver his soul from the hand of hell, unless thou alone do
snatch him thence; Thou who art the vital life of all life, whereby all things
live.

CHAP. XXV. That the will of man, wants efficacy toward good works without
the Grace of God.
I Have now confessed to thee, O thou praise of my life, O Lord, my God, and
the strength of my Salvation, that there was a time, when I had confidence in
mine own strength, which yet was noe strength at all. And when I was so
resolved to run on, where I thought my self to stand fastest, there I fell
fowlest; and insteede of aduanceing, I retired; and I was more and more
estranged, from that which I thought to have apprehended. And so being come to
know the little proportion of my strength by the many experime^ts which I made
for the want thereof; I do now understand, (because I have been illuminated by
thee) that whatsoever I have thought my self most able to do that could I
ever bring least to pass. For I said sometimes, I will do this, and I will
perfect that, and I did neither the one, nor the other. If I had the will, I
wanted the power. If I had the power I had not then the will; because I trusted
in mine own strength.

But now, I confess to thee, O Lord, my God, the Father of Heaven and Earth,
that noe man shall overcome in his own strength, to give occasion thereby to
the foolish presumption of flesh and blood, to glory in thy sight. For it is
not in the power of a man, to will that which he has power to do; or to do
that which he cann will, or to know what he cann will, and do; but rather the
paces of men are directed by thee: the paces of them, I mean, who confess
themselves to be directed by thee, and not by themselves. We beseech thee
therefore, O Lord, by the bowels of thy mercy be pleased to save that which
thou have created. For if thou will, thou can save us; and the strength of
our salvation consists in the pleasure of thy will.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the ancient benefits of Almighty God.
CAll to mind thy ancient mercy, whereby thou did prevent us, from the
beginning, in those benedictions of thy sweetenes. For before I was borne, (I
who am the son of thy handmayde, O Lord, who have been my hope, even from the
breasts of my mother) thou did prevent me, by preparing those ways for
me, wherein I might walk, and whereby I was to arrive to the glory of thy
house. Before thou framedst me in my mothers womb, thou knew me; and
before I parted from her womb thou did praeordayne concerning me,
whatsoever was pleasing to thy self. What things are contained and written in
thy book, concerning me, in that secret of thy Consistory, I, for my part,
do not know, and there upon I am in extreme fear, but it is well known to
thee. For that which I might expect to happen in success of days and times
between this, and a thousand years hence; all that is already done, in the
sight of thy eternity; and that which is future, is finished already there.

Now therefore whilst I live in this dark night; and whilst I am ignorant of
these things, fear, and trembling come upon me, since I see, on all sides,
that many dangers do set upon me close at hand; and that I am hunted by many
enemies, and hemmed in, by innumerable miseryes in this life. And unless I had
thy help, in the midst of so great calamityes, I should despair. But still
I have a strong hope in thee, O thou most meek Prince, and my God. And the
consideration of the multitude of those mercy which thou have showed to me,
does ease my mind; and the fore-running signs of thy mercyes which prevented
me before I was borne, and do now shine particularly toward me, do
solicit me to have good hope, concerning those future, better, and more
perfect gifts of thy benignity, which thou reseruest for thy friends. That so
I may rejoice, O Lord my God, with that lively, and holy joy, whereby thou do
ever recreate my youth.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the Angels which are deputed to the custody of man.
FOr thou have loved me, O thou only Love of mine, before I loved thee; and
thou have created me after thine own Image, and thou have preferred me,
before all thy creatures. Which dignity, I keep now also having known thee,
for whom thou have made me. Thou have also made thy Spirits, Angels, for my
benefitt, and thou have commanded them to keep me in all my ways, lest else
perhaps I might hurt my foot against a stone. For these are the Guard which
stands upon the walls of the City of thy new Jerusalem; and these are those
Mountains, which are said to stand in the circuit thereof, keeping watch by
night, over thy flock; least, at any time, the Lion should snatch away our
souls, whilst none were by, to deliver them, that ancient serpent I say, our
adversary, the devil, who is ever walkeing the round, seekeing whom he may
deuowre.

These are those happy Citizens, of Jerusalem, that supernall City, that
mother of ours, which is above, and they are sent in ministry, to them, who
are to take hold of the inheritance of salvation; that they may deliver them
from their enemies, and guard them in all their ways; that they may comfort
and admonish thy children, and offer up their prayers in the sight of the glory
of thy Majesty. For they love their fellow-Cittizens, by whose society they
expect that the ruin of the Schism which was made by the rebellious Angels
may be repaired.

They do therefore assist us, with great care, and watchful endeavor at all
times, and in all places succouring us, and making provision against our
necessityes; and passeing with great solicitude, between us and thee, O Lord;
presenting our sighs, and sobs to thee, that they may obtain for us, an easy
pardon, from thy mercy; and may bring down from thee, the desired benediction
of thy grace. For they walk with us, in all our ways; they go in, and out
with us; considering with great attention, how virtuously, and piously we
converse in the midst of a wicked nation; with great endeavor, and desire,
we seek the Kingdom of God, and the justice thereof; with how great fear
and trembling we serve thee; and how also we exult toward thee; in the joy
of our hearts.

They help such as are taking pains; they protect such as are at rest; they
encourage such as fight; they crown such as conquer; they rejoice with such as
joy, (I mean such as joy in thee) and they suffer with such as suffer, I mean
such as are in sufferance for thee.

They have a mighty care of us. Great is the ardour of their affection toward
us; and all this for the honor they bear to that inestimable charity,
wherewith thou love us, For they love them, whom thou love; they keep
them whom thou keep, and they forsake them whom thou forsakest. Nor do they
love the workers of wickedness, because thou hate all the workers of iniquity;
and destroys all them who speak lies. As often as we do well, the Angels
joy, and the Devils grieve. But as often as we swerve from virtue, we make
the Devil glad, and we deprive the Angels of their joy. For they have joy by
one sinner, doing penance; but the Devil has joy, when penance is given
over, by a good man.

Grant them therefore, O Father, grant that they may ever rejoice concerning
us; and that thou may ever be praised by them, in us; and that both they,
and we, may be brought into one, and the same sheepfoulde; that together we
may confess to thy Holy Name, O thou Creator, both of men, and Angels.

Whilst I am calling these things to mind before thee, I confess to thee
with praise, that these are great benefits, whereby thou have honored us,
whilst thou give thy Spirits for Angels, to assist us. Thou had already
bestowed, whatsoever was contained under the vaut of heaven, yea and thou
reputest that as but little, which is contained under heaven, unless thou may
also, add those things, which are above the heavens.

Let all thy Angels praise thee also, for this, O Lord; Let all thy works
also, confess to thee; and let all thy Saints themselves bless thee for it. O
thou our Supreme honor, thou have too highly honored us; and thou have
beautifyed, and enriched us with many gifts.

Thy Name, O Lord, is admireable over the whole Earth. For what is Man, that
thou should magnify him, or so apply thy heart toward the love of him. For
thou, O ancient Truth, have said, My delight is to be which the Sons of men.
But yet, is not Man rotennes, and the Son of Man a very Worm? Is not every
Man liueing, a kind of universality of vanity? And yet do thou think it
worthy for thee, to cast thine eyes upon him, and to bring him with thee into
Judgment?

CHAP. XXVIII Of the profound Predestination, and prescience of God.
TEach me, O thou most profound Abyss, O thou Wisdom, which art the
Creatrix of all things, which have poysed the mountains in weight, and the
lesser hills in a balance, and have hung up the whole bulk of the Earth in
three fingers. Suspend thou toward thy self the weight of this corporal
heaviness which I carry about me, in thy three invisible fingers, that I may
see and know, how admirable thy Name is, over the whole Earth.

O thou Light most ancient, which did shine before all other light, in
those holy hills of old Eternity, to which all things were open and clear,
even before they were made. O thou light, which hate every little spott, thy
self being most immaculate, and most pure, what delight can thou take in
man, and what agreement cann there be, between light and darkness? For where
in fine is the ground of those delights which thou take in man? Or how
did thou prepare in me, a sanctuary worthy of thy Majesty, into which
when thou enterest, thou may take delight and gust? For it is fit, that
thou, who art the very power which cleanses all things, should have a
clean room to be in; thou who can not be so much as seen, and much less
possessed but by pure souls? But where is this Temple so pure in any man, as
that it may be fit for the reception of thee, who rulest the whole world of
men?

Who can make a man clean, he being conceived of unclean seed? Is it not
thou who art only clean? For who can be cleansed, by one who is himself
unclean? For according to the Law, which thou gave to our Fathers, in the
fire which burned the hill; and in the cloud which covered the dark water, we
are told, that whatsoever an unclean man did touch, should be unclean. But
all we, are as a menstruous cloth, proceeding out of an impure, and corrupted
mass; and we cannot become clean, unless we be cleansed by thee, who art
only clean. And we carry the mark of our impurity in our very foreheads,
and are far from being able to conceal it from thee, who see all things.
So that we can never be clean, unless we be cleansed by thee who art only
clean.

But amongst us, who are the sons of men, thou cleansest some, in whom thou
have been pleased to dwell. Whom out of the inaccessible profound secrets of
the incomprehensible judgments of thy Wisdom, (which are ever just, though
secret) thou have been pleased to predestinate without any merits of theyrs,
before the world was made, and have called them out of the world and have
iustefyed them in the world, and wilt magnify them after the world. But thou
do not this to all, which all the wise men of the earth do wonder at, even
to amasement.

And I also, O Lord, whilst I consider this, do all tremble, and am
astonished, at the altitude of the riches of thy Wisdom, and knowledge, and
at the incomprehensible judgments of thy Justice, to the reason whereof I cann
noe way arrive. Since out of the same clay thou designest some vessels to
honor, and others to eternal reproach.

Such therefore as thy chusest out of many, to be a holy Temple for thy self,
them do thou cleanse, powreing out pure water upon them; whose names and
number thou know, who alone, do number the multitude of the stars, and
call them all by their names; who are also written in the book of life,
and cann noe way perish; to whom all things, yea even their very sins
themselves, do cooperate toward their good. For when they fall, they are not
bruised, because thou do putt thy hand under them keeping all their bones
in such sort, that noe one of them may be broken.

But the death of sinners is most pernicious, of those I mean, whom before
thou made heaven and earth, thou did, according to the most profound
Abyss of thy judgments, (secret indeed but ever just) fore know, to
eternal death. The number of whose names, as also of their foul demerits, is
with thee; who have numbered the sands of the Sea, and have measured the
bottom of the Abyss; whom thou have left in their uncleanness; and in whom
all things cooperate to their ill, yea even their very prayer is turned into
sin. So far forth as that although they should mount up, as high as the
sky, and their heads should touch the very clouds, and should build their
nest amongst the Stars of Heaven, they yet shall perish in the end, like a
very dung hill.

CHAP. XXIX. Of them who first were just, and afterward become wicked.
Great are these judgments of thine, O Lord my God, O thou just and powerful
Judge, who iudgest according to equity, and do work, and perform
inscrutable things. Which when I consider, all my bones do even shiuer with
trembling, because noe man liueing upon the earth can be secure. But we must
learn hereby, to serve thee piously, and purely all the days of our life;
exulting to thee with reverence; and that we may not serve thee, without
fear; nor rejoice without trembling. And that neither he, who is girt, nor
ungirt, nor in fine, any creature of flesh and blood, may glory, but may be
full of apprehension and horror before thy face; since noe man knows,
whether he be worthy of love, or hate, but all things are reserved in
uncertainty for the future time.

For we have seen many, O Lord, and we have also heard it from our elders,
(which certainly I cannot call to mind without much trembling, nor repeat
without much fear) who at the first, ascended after a sort, up to heaven, and
did place their nest, even amongst the stars; and yet afterward fell down,
to the very Abyss; and their souls grew to be even stupifyed in sin. We
have seen stars, fall down from heaven, through the force of the Dragons
tail, who struck them: And others who lay prostrate upon the dust of the
earth, have ascended up by the help of thy hand, which raised them, after an
admirable manner. We have seen liueing men die, and dead men raise again to
life; and them, who walked amongst the sons of God, in the midest of those
shineing stones of his Temple, to have mouldered away into nothing, like so
much dirt. We have seen light, grow dark; and again, we have seen light
proceed out of darkness; because the Publicanes and harlots have precedence of
the natural inhabitants in the Kingdom of heaven, whilst the children of the
same Kingdom are cast out into exterior darkness.

But how come all these things to pass, but only, because they would needs
ascend, into that mountain, into which that first Angel did go up, and came
down a devil. But whom thou have predestined, them thou have called, and
sanctified, and cleansed, that they may be a fit habitation for thy Majesty,
in whom, and with whom thou take holy and pure delight, and in whom thou art
pleased, and thou do recreate their youth. Dwelling so with them in their
memory, that they prove a holy Temple for thee, which is a matter of much
dignity and honor to our humanity.

CHAP. XXX. That a faithful soul is a Sanctuary of God.
THe soul which thou have created, not of thy self, but by thy Word; not of
any elementary matter, but of nothing; this soul which is rational,
intellectual, spiritual, ever liueing, ever in motion, which thou have
stamped, with the light of thy countenance, and consecrated, by the virtue of
thy Baptism, is made so capable of thy Majesty, that it can only be filled by
thee, and by noe other. When it possesses thee, the desire thereof is fully
satisfied: and there rests then, noe more exteriourly which it can desire.
But when it is found to desire any thing exteriourly, it is clear, that it
possesses not thee interiourly; upon the haueing of whom, there remains
nothing more to be desired. For since thou art the sovereign and total Good,
the soul which possesses that total Good, can ask noe more. But if it
desire not that total Good, it remains that it must desire somewhat which
is not that total Good, and which therefore cannot be that sovereign Good;
and consequently not God, but a Creature.

Now, as long as it desires a Creature, it is subject to continual hunger. For
although it obtain that of the Creature, to which it pretends; yet still it
is not full, because nothing can fill it, but thou, according to whose Image it
is made.

But thou do only fill them, who desire nothing else but thee; and thou, O
God make such to be worthy of thee, and holy, blessed, immaculate, and in
fine, thy friends, as repute all things but dunge that they may gain thee
alone. For this is that Beatitude, which thou have bestowed on man. This is
that honor, wherewith thou have honored him, both amongst, and above all thy
other Creatures; that thy Name may be admirable, over all the earth.

Behold, O Lord my God, Supreme, most Excellent, and Omnipotent, I have found
that the place wherein thou dwell, is the soul which thou created, after
thine own Image, and likeness, and which seeks and desires thee alone. For
in that soul which seeks or desires thee not, thou do not dwell.

CHAP. XXXI. That God is not to be found, either by the exterior or interior
senses.
I Have wandered like a lost sheep in exterior things, seekeing thee who art
interior; and I did putt my self upon much labor, by seekeing thee without
my self, who dwell in me, if indeed it be true, that I desire thee. I
have walked round about the streets, and open places of the city, of this
world, in search of thee; but I found thee not, because I did foolishly look
that abroad, which was within. I sent all my exterior senses, as my
Ambassadors abroad, that so I might seek thee; but I found thee not, because
I sought thee ill. For I see, O my light, and my God, who have illuminated me,
that I sought thee ill, by their means, because thou art within, and yet they
scarce can tell how thou did enter. For the eyes will say, if he were not
of some color, he came not in, by us. The ears say thus, if he made noe
noise, he did not pass by us. The nose says, if he had no smell, I know
nothing of him. The taste says, if he had noe savor, he entered not in by me.
The sense of touching also adds, if it have noe corpulency, there is noe
cause, why you should interrogate me.

These kind of things, O my God, are not in thee; and therefore the beauty of
bodies, or the order of time, or candor of light, or color, or the concerts
of sweet music, or whatsoever other thing of delightful sound; or the odor
of flowers, and precious ointments, or other aromaticall odours: or honey, or
Manna, which is so delightful to the taste, or other things, which is so
amiable to be embraced, or touched; or in fine any other object which are
subject to these senses of ours, are the things which I seek, when I seek my
God.

Far be it from me, that I should believe these things to be my God, which
are comprehended, by the sense of brute beasts. And yet nevertheless, when I
seek my God, I seek a certain light above all other light, which the eye
does not receive; and a certain voice beyond all voices, which the ear does
not contain; a certain odor, beyond odours, which the nose does not
apprehend; a certain sweetenes, beyond all sweetenes, to which the taste does
not reach; and a certain imbracement, beyond all imbracements, whereof the
touch cannot judge. For this light shines where place does not contain; this
voice sounds, where the air does not carry away, this odor gives smell,
where it is not scattered by any wind; this savor gives taste, where it is
not diminished by being eaten; this embracement is touched, where it cannot be
divorced. This is my God, and noe other can be compared to him. This do I
seek, when I seek my God; and when I love my God, I love this.

Too late am I come to love thee, O thou beauty which art so ancient, and I
so new; too late am I come to love thee. Thou were within, and I without; and
without I sought thee, and I rushed with deformity, upon those things which
thou made fair. Thou were with me, but I was not with thee. Those things did
keep me far from thee, which yet had noe being at all, but only in thee.
For I raunged over all things in seekeing thee; and for the love of them, I
lost my self.

I asked the earth, if it were my God, and it told me, noe; and all things
which are upon the earth made the same confession. I asked the Sea, and those
Abysses, and the creeping creatures which are therein and they answered, We
are not thy God, thou must look him above us. I asked the stable air, and the
whole air, with all the inhabitants thereof, said, Anaxinenes is deceived, I
am not thy God. I asked the heaven, the Sun and Moon, and the Stars; and
they said, Neither are we thy God. Then I said to all them who stand about the
doors of my flesh and blood, tell me somewhat of my God, which you know; tell
me somewhat, I say, of him. And they all cried out, with a loud voice, He
made us.

Then I said thus to the whole bulk of the World, Tell me whether thou be my
God, or not: And it answered also thus, with a loud voice: I am not thy God,
but I am by him. He made me, whom thou seek in me. Seek him above me,
for he governs me, who made thee.

By the question which I ask of these inanimate creatures, I mean nothing,
but a profound consideration of them; and by my sayeing that they make such or
such an answer I mean, but the attestation which in in their several kinds
they make of God. For they all cry out in this manner, it is God who made us.
For as the Apostle says, The invisible things of God are discerned and
understood, by considering the creatures of this world.

Then I returned to my self, and I entered into my self, and said, who art
thou? And I answered my self thus. A man rational and mortal. And I begun to
discuss, what this might be, and I said; Whence comes such a liueing
creature, O Lord my God? Whence, but from thee, who made me, and not I my
self. Who art thou then by whom I live; thou by whom all things live. Who
art thou? Thou O Lord art my true God, and only Omnipotent, and eternal, and
incomprehensible, and immense, who ever live, and nothing dies in thee, for
thou art immortal, and do inhabit eternity. Thou art admirable in the eyes
of Angels, unspeakable, inscrutable, and vnnameable; thou art the true, and
liueing God, terrible, and powerful, admittinge in thy self, nether
beginning, nor end, but being both the beginning, and end of all things, who
art before the first ages, and before the very first beginnings of them all.

Thou art my God, and the Lord of all those good things, which thou have
created, and with thee do stand the causes of all things which are stable; yea
and the beginning of all things, which in themselves be mutable, are yet, and
do remain immutable with thee; And the reasons of all things, not only which
are eternal, and rational, but even of such as are temporary and irrational,
do yet live eternally with thee: tell O my God, this humble servant of thine;
tell, o merciful God, this miserable creature of thine whence grows such a
creature as man, but from thee? O God Is man perhaps of skill enough to make
himself? Is his being, and liueing, derived from any roore but thee? Art not
thou, the supreme being, from whom all being does proceed? For whatsoever
is, is of thee, and nothing is without thee? Art not thou that fountain of
life, from which all life does flow; for whatsoever lives, lives by thee, and
without thee nothing lives?

Therefore thou, o Lord, did make all things, and now do I ask, who made
me? Thou o Lord did make me, without whom nothing was made. Thou art my
maker, and I am thy work. I give thee thanks, o Lord my God, by whom I live,
and by whom all things live, for haueing made me. I give thee thanks, o thou
my framer, because thy hands have made, and faschioned me. I give thee
thanks, o thou my light, because thou have illuminated me, and I have found
both thee, and my self. where I found my self, there I knew my self; where
I found thee there I knew thee; and where I knew thee, there thou did
illuminate me.

I give thee thanks, O thou my light; because thou have illuminated me. But
what is that, which I said, when I affirmed I knew thee. Art not thou God
incomprehensible, and immense, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, who only
possessest immortality, and do inhabit an inaccessible light, whom, noe man
has ever seen or can see. Art not thou that hidden God of inscrutable
Majesty, the only perfect knower, and admirable contemplator of thy self? who
did ever perfectly know that, which he never saw, and thou have said in thy
truth, Noe man shall see me and live. Thy Apostle did also say, in the Truth,
Noe man did ever see God. Who has therefore known, that which he never saw?
Thy Truth also it self has said, Noe man knows the Son, but the Father;
and noe man knows the Father, but the Son.

The Holy Trinity, is perfectly known to it self alone; and that knowledge
far passes the understanding of man. What is therefore that, which I said,
I who am a man made all of vanity, in saying I know thee. For who knows
thee, but thou thy self? For thou alone, art God Omnipotent, superlaudable,
and superglorious, and superexalted, and supreme; and thou art named
superessentiall, in these most holy, and most divine Scriptures. Because thou
do exceed all essence, which is intelligibile, or intellectual, and
sensible. And thou art known to be above all the names, which can be named;
and that not only in this world, but in the future, superessentially, and
superintelligibly. Because, by this hidden and superessentiall divinity, thou
do dwell within thy self, inaccessibly, and inscrutably beyond all created
reason understanding, and essence. Where there is an inaccessible brightness,
and an inscrutable, unspeakable, and incomprehensible light, to which noe other
light arryues; because it it believed to be incontemplable, and invisible, and
superrationall, and superintelligible, and superinaccessible, and
superunchaungeable, and superincommunicable; which noe Angel ever did see, or
ever shall be able to see perfectly.

This is that heaven of thine, O Lord, that heaven of the heavens, that
supersecret, superintelligibile, superrationall, and superessentiall light,
whereof it is said, the heaven of the heavens to our Lord. The heaven of the
heavens; in respect whereof, these other material heavens, are but a kind of
earth, because that former heaven is superadmireably exalted, above all
material heauene, and the Empireall heaven it self, is but as earth in respect
of it. For this is that heaven of the heavens to our Lord; because it is not
known by any but by our Lord, to which noe men ascends, but he who descended
from heaven; because noe man knows the Father, but the Son, and the Holy
Spirit of them both; and noe man knows the Son, but the Father, and the
Holy Spirit of them both. Thou, O Trinity, art entirely known to thy self
alone. Holy Trinity, truly superadmireable, superinessable, superinscrutable,
superinaccessible, superincomprehensible, superintelligible, superessentiall;
and superessentially surpassing all sense, and reason, all understanding, all
intelligence, all essence, even of the most supercelestiall minds; which it is
wholly impossible, even for the Spirit of Angels to speak of, or to know it,
or to understand it, or even to think perfectly thereof.

How therefore have I known thee, O Lord my God, who art most high, over all
the earth, and above all the heavens; whom nether Cherubin, nor Seraphin, do
exactly know, but their faces are vayled with the wings of their
contemplation, before him, who sits upon that high Imperial Throne; cryeing
out, and sayeing, Holy; Holy, Holy Lord God of hoasts, The Earth is full of thy
glory As for thy Prophet, he was all in trembling, and he said, Woe be unto
me, for I have held my peace; because I am a man of polluted lips. But my
heart has quaked, and said Woe be unto me, who am a man of polluted lips;
because I have not held my peace, but said, that I knew thee. And yet O Lord,
woe be to them who are silent concerning thee. For the greatest talkers may be
accounted but dumb, if they do not speak of thee.

And as for me O Lord my God, I will not be silent concerning thee, because
thou have made me, and I have therefore known thee, because thou have
illuminated me. But yet how have I known thee? I have known thee in thy
self. Yet I have no known thee in thy self, as thou art to thy self; but I
have known thee, as thou art to me. But yet howsoever, it is not without
thee, but in thee; because thou art the light which have illuminated me. For
as thou art to thy self, thou art only known to thy self; but as thou art
to me by thy mercy and grace, thou art known to me.

But what art thou unto me? Tell me O merciful Lord, who am thy miserable
servant; tell me by thy mercy, what thou art to me. Say to my soul, I am thy
salvation. Do not hide thy face from me; lest if thou do, I dye. Suffer me
to speak; me; who am dust, and ashes; suffer me to speak to thy mercy. For
thy mercy toward me is great, and I will presume to speak to thee, though I
be but dust and ashes. Tell me who am thy supplyant; say O merciful Lord to
thy miserable creature; say, by thy mercyes, what thou art to me. And thou
have thundered down, with a mighty voice, upon the inward ear of my heart, and
thou have broken through my deafenes, and I have heard thy voice. And thou have
illuminated my blindenes, and I have seen thy light, and have known that thou
art my God. It is therefore that I said, that I have known thee. For I have
known, that thou art my God. I have known that thou art the only true God,
and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. For thrre wat a time, when I knew thee
not, bu, woe be to that time, when I knew not tgee. Woe be to that blindenes,
when I saw not thee. Woe be to that deafnes, when a heard not thee. For being
blind, and deaf, I did rush, with great deformity, upon those things, which
yet thou had dest made fair; and thou were still with me but I was not with
thee. And those things kept me far from being with thee, which yet, if they
had not been in thee, could have had noe being at all. Thou did illuminat
me, O thou light of the world, and I saw thee, and I loved thee. And indeed,
noe man loves thee, but he who sees thee; and noe man sees thee, but he who
loves thee, Too late am I come to love thee, O thou beauty, which art so
ancient, and yet so new. Too late am I come to love thee; and woe be to that
time, when I loved thee not.

CHAP. XXXII. A Confession of true faith.
I Give thanks, O thou who art my light, because thou have illuminated me,
and I have known thee. How have I known thee? I have known thee to be the
only liueing God, and my true creator. I have known thee to be the Creator
of heaven, and earth, of all things visible, and invisible; to be the true,
Omnipotent God, immortal, invisible, uncircumcised, unlimited, eternal,
inaccessible, incomprehensible; inscrutable; unchangeable, immense, infinite,
the first beginning of all, both visible, and invisible creatures by whom all
things are made, and by whom all the Elements subsist. Whose Majesty, as it
never had any beginning, so neither shall it end, for all eternity.

I have known thee to be one only true God, the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost; three Persons indeed, but one essence, and the same, wholly,
simple, and undivided nature. And that the Father is of none; that the Son is
only of the Father; and that the Holy Ghost, is jointly of them both; ever
without beginning, and for ever to be without ending, to be Trine, and only
One; and that, the true Omnipotent God. That thou art that one beginning of all
things, and the Creator of all things, both visible and invisible, spiritual
and temporal; who by thy Omnipotent virtue, did, in the beginning of Time,
create both the spiritual and corporal creature; that is to say the Angels
in heaven, and the fabric of the world, and then thou made man, as being
compounded both of body and soul.

I have known thee, and I do confess thee, O God the Father, to be
unbegotten; and thee O God the Son, to be begotten of the Father, and thee O
holy Ghost, the Paraclete to be neither begotten, nor unbegotten, And I believe
with my heart to Justice, and I confess with my mouth to salvation, the holy
and individual Trinity, in three persons, coequall, consubstantiall, and
coeternall, Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity.

I have known thee the true God and our Lord Jesus Christ, to be the only
begotten Son of God, the Creator, the Savior and the Redeemer of me. and
all mankind, whom I confess to have been begotten of the Father, before all
ages God of God, light of light, true God of true God, not made but begotten,
consubstantiall, and coeternall with the Father, and the Holy Ghost by whom
all things were made, from the beginning. And I believe firmly, and confess
truly. that thou O Jesus Christ, the only begotten God, were incarnate,
jointly by the holy Trinity for the salvation of man; and that thou were
conceived, through the cooperation of the Holy Ghost, by the perpetual Vithin
Mary, and that thou were made true man, consisting of a reasonable soul and
humane flesh. Who being the only begotten of God, and consequently both
impassible, and immortal, yea for the great love, wherewith thou love us,
thou being still the same son of God, were yet, according to thy humanity,
made both passible, and mortal; who being the only son of God, did
voutchafe to suffer Passion, and death, upon the tree of the cross, for the
salvation of mankind, to the end that thou might deliver us from eternal
death. And being the author of light, thou did descend to Hell, where our
Forefathers satt in darkness. And the third day, being a glorious conqueror,
thou did rise up, from the dead, resumeing thy sacred body, which had lain
dead in the sepulcher; for our sins; and thou did quicken it, the third
day, according to the scriptures; that thou might place it, at the right
hand of thy Father.

For haueing ledd with thee, out of captivity, them whom our ancient enemy,
the enemy, of all mankind, had captiued in Hell, thou being the true Son of
God, did ascend above all the heavens, with the substance of our nature;
that is to say both with thy soul, and that human flesh, which thou had
taken, of the glorious Virgin. And thou did surpass all the quyers of
Angels, where thou sit at the right hand of thy Father; and where that
fountain of life is, and that inaccessible light, and that peace of God, which
passes all understanding. There do we adore, and believe thee, O Jesus
Christ to be true God and man; confessing, that thou have God for thy Father,
and that from heaven we expect thee, to come as Judge in the end of the world,
to judge the quick and the dead; that thou may render either reward or
punishment to all men, either good or badd, according to those works, which
they shall have wrought in this life, that so they may be either in rest, or
eternal misery. For all those creatures who have received a humane soul into
that flesh, which here they have carried about them, shall rise at that day, in
the voice of thy strength, to the end that the whole man may receive, either
glory or torments, according to his merits. Thou art that life and resurrection
it self, whom we expect to be our Savior Jesus Christ our Lord, who will
reform this poor mean body of ours, by conformeing it to the body of his
clarity.

I have known thee also to be true God, O thou one holy Spirit of the Father
and the Son, proceeding jointly from them both, to be consubstantiall and
eternal with the Father and the Son, to be our Paraclete and Advocate, who
did also descend in the shape of a dove, upon the same God Jesus Christ our
Lord, and did appear upon the Apostles in tongues of fire. who also from
the beginning, have taught all the elect and Saints of God, by the gift of thy
grace; and have opened the mouth of the Prophets, that they might relate
wounderful things of the Kingdom of God; and who. together with the Father and
the Son, art adored, and glorified by all the Saints of God. Amongst whom I
also, who am the son of thy handmayd, do glorify thy name, with my whole
heart, because thou have illuminated me. For thou art that real light, that
light which tells us truth, the fire of God, the Doctor of souls; the very
Spirit of Truth, which teaches us all truth, by thy unction; without which, it
is impossible for us to please God. For thou thy self, art God of God, and
light of light, proceeding from the Father of lights, and from his Son our
Lord Jesus Christ, after an ineffable manner; with whom thou, being coequall,
and coeternall, art glorified, and do reign jointly with them
superessentially, in the essence of the same Trinity.

I have known thee, my one, liueing, and true God, the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Ghost, three in persons, but one in essence; whom I confess, adore,
and glorify with my whole heart, as my only true, Holy, immortal, invisible,
unchangeable, and vnscrutable God; that one Light, one Sun, one bread, one
Life, one Good, one Beginning, one End, one Creator of heaven and earth, by
whom all things live, by whom all things subsist, by whom all things are
gouuerned, ordered, and quickened which are in heaven, on the earth, and under
the earth; and besides whom, there is noe God, either in heaven, or in earth*

I have known thee, by thy faith, wherewith thou have inspired me, O thou my
light, and the sight of mine eyes, O Lord my God, the hope of all the ends of
the earth; the Joy which does recreat my youth, and the good which
stre^gtheneth my age. For in thee O Lord, do all my bones excessiuely rejoice,
and say, O Lord who is like to thee. Who amongst the Gods is like thee, O Lord.
Not they who are made by the hands of men but thou by whom the hands of men
are made. The Idols of the Gentiles are gold, and silver, the work of men's
hands. But so is not the maker of men. All the Gods of the nations, are
Devils; but our Lord made the heavens; and this Lord is God. As for those
Gods, who made not heaven, and earth, let them perish, both from heaven and
earth But let heaven and earth, bless that God, who made heaven and earth.

CHAP. XXXIII Of the Confession of our own baseness.
WHo, O Lord, is like thee among the Gods? Who is like thee, O thou who art
magnificent in thy sanctity, who art terrible and laudable, and doing
wonderful things? Too late I come to know thee, O thou true light; too late
am I come to know thee. But there was a great and dark cloud before these
vain, eyes of mine; so that I could not see the sun of Justice, and the
light of truth. I was wrapped up in darkness, my self being the child of
darkness, and this darkness of mine, I loved, because I did not know the
light. I was blind, and I loved blindenes, and by darkness I walked on, to
further darkness. Who brought me out from thence, where I, blind creature, was
sitting in darkness, and in the shadow of death; who took me by the hand, and
led me out; Who was he, that did illuminate me? I sought not him, but he
sought me? I called not upon him, and he cried out upon me? But who is he that
did all this It is thou O Lord my God, the Father of mercyes, and the God of
all consolations; it is thou O holy Lord and my God, whom I confess with my
whole heart, giueinge thanks to thy Name. I sought not thee, but I was sought
by thee. I inuoked not thee, and thou calledest me. Thou calledst me by thine
own Name; thou did thunder thus down into the inward ear of my heart,
with this mighty voice, Let Light be made, and light was made, and that great
cloud flew away; that dark thick cloud, was dissolved which had closed up
mine eyes And I saw thy light, and I knew thy voice, and I said O Lord that
thou indeed art my God, Who have drawn me out of darkness, and out of the
shadow of death; and thou have called me into thy admireable light, and behold
I see. Thanks be given to thee O thou who art the Illuminator of my soul. And
I looked back, and saw the darkness wherein I had been, and that profound
black pit wherein I had lain; and I did all quake, and shiuer, and I said,
Woe woe be to that darkness, wherein I lay. Woe, woe be to that blindenes,
wherein I was not able to see the light of heaven. VVoe, woe to that former
ignorance of mine, when I had noe knowldege of thee O Lord. But I give thee
thanks, O thou my illuminator, and deliverer, because thou have illuminated
me, and I have known thee. Yet still I am come too late, to know thee, O
thou ancient Truth; too late I am come to know thee, O thou eternal Truth.
Thou were in the light, and I in darkness and I knew thee not because I could
not be illuminated, without thee; nor indeed without thee, is there any light
at all.

CHAP. XXXIV. A consideration of the divine Majesty.
O Thou holy of holyes thou God of inestimable Majesty, the God of God, and
the Lord of Lords. who art admirable, inexplicable, and inconceivable; before
whom the Angelical power of heaven, do even shiuer, whom the Thrones, and
Dominations do adore, and in whose presence all the Virtues of Heaven do even
quake; of whose power and Wisdom there is noe number, who have laid the
foundations of the whole world upon nothing, who have tied up the Sea, as if it
were in some skin, who art most Omnipotent, most Holy, and the most powerful
God over all the spirits of all mankind. From whose sight the heaven and earth
do fly away; to whose beck all the elements are subject, let all thy
creatures adore and glorify thy Name.

And I, the Son of thy handmayd, do by faith bow down the neck of my
heart, under the feet of thy Majesty, presenting thee with thanks, for that
thou have voutchsafed to illuminate me by thy mercy. True Light, holy Light,
delightful Light, admirable Light, superlaudable Light, which illuminateth
every man comeing into this world, and the eyes also of the Angels.

Behold, now I see, and I thank thee for it. Behold I see the light of heaven;
there is a beam which strikes brightly down, from the face of thy light,
upon the eyes of my mind, and it fills all the powers of my soul, with joy.
But O, that once it might be perfected in me.

Increase I beseech thee, O thou author of light, increase I beseech thee, that
which so brightly strikes through, upon me. Let this light be dilated, I
beseech thee, let it be dilated by thee. What is this, which I feel: what fire
is this which heates any heart; what fire is this whereby my heart is stricken
through with beams? O fire which ever burnest, and art never quenched, do
thou kindle me. O light, which do ever shine, and art never darkened, do
thou enlighten me. O how very feign, would I been flamed by thee? O Holy fire,
how sweetly do thou heat, how secretly do thou shine, and how
delightfully do thou burn? Woe be to them who do not burn by thee. VVoe be
to them which are not illuminated by thee.

O thou light which teach truth to men, illuminating all the world, which is
filled by the beams thereof. VVoe be to those blind eyes, which see not thee,
thou being the sun, illuminating both heaven and earth. VVoe be to those
weak, and daseling eyes, which cannot look on thee. VVoe be to those eyes,
which turn themselves away from seeing truth; and woe be to those eyes, which
do not turn them selves away, for fear least they behold vanity. For eyes,
which are acustomed to darkness, have not strength wherewith to behold the
beams of sovereign truth; nor can they make any true judgment of light, whose
habitation is wont to be in darkness. They see darkness, they allow of
darkness, they love darkness; and so, goeing from darkness to darkness, they
fall headlong, and they know not where. Miserable creatures they are, who
know not what they loose; though yet more miserable are they, who know what
they loose, and who yet fall with open eyes, and dropp down quick, into Hell.

O most blessed light, which can not be beheld, but by eyes, which are pure,
and wholly purged, Blessed are the pure of heart for they shall see God. Do
thou cleanse me, O thou clensing power; cure my sight, that I may contemplate
thee, with strong eyes. For they are none but strong eyes, which can look on
thee: Putt away I beseech thee, O thou inaccessible splendor, the skales of
that ancient mistynes, by the beam of thy illumination, that so I may be
able to look on thee, with certain casts of my eye, which may not be checked,
and beaten back, and that I may see light in thy light

I give thee thanks, O my light, for behold now I see. I beseech thee O Lord,
that it may be spread abroad by thee. Vnuayle mine eyes, that I may consider
the wonderful things of thy law, thou who art wonderful in thy Saints. I
give thee thanks, O my light, for behold I see; though as yet it be but by a
representation, as in a glass: But when will it be face to face? when will
that day of joy, and exultation arryue, when I may enter into the place of that
admireable Tabernacle, the very house of God, that so face to face, I may see
him, who sees me, and so my desire may be fullfilled.

CHAP. XXXV. Of the desire and thirst of a soul toward God.
AS the heart desires the fountaynes of water, so does my soul thirst after
thee, O God. My soul has thirsted after thee O God, who art the liueing
fountain; when shall I come and appear before thy face? O thou fountain of
life, thou vain of liueing waters, when shall I arrive to those waters of thy
sweetness, from this barren unhaunted, and dry earth, that I may see thy power,
and thy glory, and that I may appease my thirst, by the waters of thy mercy. I
thirst O Lord, O thou fountain of life, satisfy me, for I thirst: O Lord, I
thirst toward thee, who art the liueing God. When O Lord shall I approache,
and appear before that face of thine? do thou think that at length, I
shall see that day; that day I say of delight and joy; that day which our Lord
has made, to the end that we may rejoice, and exult therein?

O sweet, and beautiful day, which has noe evening, and whose Sun has
nothing to do with setting; wherein I shall hear the voice of praise, the
voice of exultation and confession, wherein I shall hear this word, Enter into
the joy of thy Lord; enter into eternal joy, into the house of thy Lord, and
thy God, where there are great, and unsearchable, and wounderfull things,
whereof there is noe number.

Enter into joy, without sorrow, which contains eternal joy: where all good
shall be, without any kind of evil. Where whatsoever thou will have, shall be,
and where nothing shall be which thou will not have. Where there will be a
life, which is vital, sweet, amiable, and eternal: Where there will be noe
enemy assaulting, nor noe false delight allureing; but a supreme, and certain
security, secure tranquillity, a quiet joy, a joyful felicity, a happy
eternity, and eternal beatitude; a blessed Trinity, a Trine Unity, a sole
Deity, and a happy vision of that Deity, which is the joy of thy Lord and thy
God.

O joy upon joy, joy which excels all joy; and without which there is noe
joy; when shall I enter into thee, that I may see my God, who dwells in thee,
that so I may there partake of this great vision. What is it which deteyneth
me? VVoe be unto me, because my habitation here is perlonged. VVoe be unto
me, and how long shall it be said to me, where is thy God? How long shall it
be said to me, Expect, and reexpect. But now what shall I expect? Is it not
thee, O Lord my God? We expect a Savior, our Lord Jesus Christ, who will
reform this poor mean body of ours, and conform it to the body of his
glory: we expect when our Lord returns from the marriage, that he may carry
us in, with him.

Come Lord, and do not stay. Come O Lord Jesus Christ; come visit us in peace;
come, and carry us out, who are bound in prison, that we may rejoice before
thee with a perfect heart. Come, O thou Savior, come thou who art the desired
of all nations; do but let us see thy face, and we are safe. Come my Light,
and my Redeemer, lead my soul out of this prison, that I may confess to thy
holy Name.

How long shall I, wretched creature, be tossed up and down, in these waves of
my mortality, cryeing out upon thee, O Lord, whilst thou hear me not.

Harken to me, O Lord, who am cryeing to thee out of this deep Sea, and waft
me into the Haven of eternal bliss, to their society, who being conducted
out of this dangerous Sea, have obtained to repose in that most safe harbor,
which is thy self, O God. O how truly happy are they, who be delivered from
that Sea to the shore, from banishment to their country, and from the prison to
the Palace. Happy are they, who in their desired place of rest, are eternally
to rejoice, for haueing so with such prosperous joy obtained that prize of
eternal glory, toward which they here made their course, through such a
multitude of tribulations. O how truly happy are they, O thrice, and three
thousand times happy, who being freed from all misery, and being secure in the
possession of that inviolable glory, have deserved to arryue to that Kingdom
of order and delight.

O Eternal Kingdom, Kingdom which out lives all ages; where there is a
light which never fails, and a peace which passes all understanding; where
the souls of the Saints repose; and eternal joy ha^geth over their heads.
For they shall obtain delight, and exultation: and grief, and sorrow, shall
fly away. How glorious, O Lord, is that kingdom, wherein all thy Saints shall
for ever reign with thee, being cladd with light, as with a garment; and
heauing a crown of precious stone, upon their heads. O kingdom of eternal
beatitude, where thou O Lord, who art the hope of the Saints, and the diadem
of their glory, art beheld by them, face to face; delighting them on all sides,
with thy peace, which passes all understanding. Where there is infinite joy
without grief; health without pain workeing without labor, light without
darkness, life without death, all good without any ill. Where youth never
waxes old; where life never comes to an end; where beauty is never
diminished; where love is never weakened; where health is never blasted, where
Joy is never impaired, where pain is never felt, where groan is never heard;
where sadness is never seen; where joy is ever had; where noe evil is feared,
because the souueraigne good is possessed there, which consists in ever seeing
the face of our Lord the God of all strength.

Happy therefore are they, who have obtained to come to so great joy, out of
this life, where so many shipwrakes are suffered. And O, unhappy and wretched
creatures we, who are steereing our ships, through the floods of this great
sea, and through these stormy whirlepooles, not knoweing whether or no we
shall be able to arryue, to the port of salvation. Miserable, I say, we are,
whose life is spent in banishement, and whose way in danger, and whose end in
doubt, for we know not our end, because all things are reserved in suspense,
for the future.

We are still tossed, in these sea-waues aspireing to thee, who art the
haven. O thou country of ours, we see thee, though it be from far of, We
salute thee from this sea; we sigh to thee, from this valley, and we strive
with tears, if perhaps we may be able to get thither.

O Christ, thou God of Gods, thou hope of mankind, thou refuge and strength of
ours, whose light, like some beam of the sea star, does strike our eyes,
from far of, amongst the foggy mists and tempests of this sea, wherein we
live; that so our course may be directed to thee, who art our haven; govern,
I beseech thee, our ship, with thy right hand, by the instrument of thy Cross;
that we may not perish in these floods, that the storms of water, may not
drown us; that the profound pit may not swallow us up; but draw us out of
this sea, to thee, who art our only solace, whom we see with our lamenting
eyes, to be expecting us, though from far of, upon the shore of that
celestial country, as it might be some Sun of Justice, or morneing star.

Behold we cry out to thee, who are redeemed by thee, and who are now those
exiles of thine, whom thou have redeemed, with thy precious blood. Harken to
us, O our Savior, the hope of all the sands of the sea, how far soever it be
of. We are tossed in this turbulent sea, and thou standing upon the shore,
do see our dangers, and save us for thy names sake. Grant to us O Lord,
that we may hold so even away, between Sylla, and Caribdis, that haueing
escaped the danger of them both, we may securely, arrive in the port, with our
ship, and our adventure safe.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of the glory of our celestial country
WHen therefore we shall be come to thee, O thou fountain of wisdom, to thee
O indeficient light, to thee, O thou who art the splendor, which cannot be
defaced, that we may then behold thee, not by representation, as in a glass,
but face to face: then shall our desire be fully satisfied with good things;
because no other thing will remain to be desired by us, when we shall possess
thee, O Lord our sovereign good, who art to be the reward of the blessed, and
the diadem of their glory, and the sempiternall Joy, which hangs over
their heads; possessing them, both inwardly, and outwardly in that peace of
thine, which passes all understanding. There shall we see, and love, and
praise. We shall see light, in thy light, because with thee is the fountain
of life, and in thy light, we shall see light. But what kind of light? an
immense light, an incorporeall, incorruptible, and incomprehensible light; a
light indefcient, a light which cannot be put out, an inaccessible light, an
uncreated light, a light which shows truth* a divine light, which
illuminateth the eyes of Angels, which rejoices the youth of saints, which is
a light of lights, and the fountain of life, which is thy self, O Lord my
God. For thou art that light, in whose light we shall see thy self, who art
that light; hat is to say, thee, in thee; in the splendor of thy countenance,
when we shall see thee, face to face.

What is it to see face to face, but as the Apostle says, to know thee, as I
am known, To know thy truth, and thy glory, is to know thee face to face. To
know the power of the Father the, wisdom of the Son, the meekenes, of the
Holy Ghost; the one and individual essence, of the supreme Trinity. For to see
the face of the liueing God, is to possess the sovereign good. It is the joy
of the Angels, and of all the Saints; the reward of eternal life, the glory
of spirits, the eternal Joy, the crown of beauty, the prize of felicity, the
rich repose, the beauty of peace, the internal, and external Joy; the
celestial Jerusalem, the Paradise of God, the happy life, the fullnes of
felicity, the delight of eternity, the peace of God which passes all
understanding.

This is that full beatitude, and that total glorification of man, to see the
face of his God; to see him who made heaven and earth, to see God who made him,
who saved him, and who glorified him. He shall see him by knoweing him, he
shall apply himself to him, by loueing him; and he shall praise him, by
possessing him. For he is the inheritance of his people, of the people of
Saints, of the people which he redeemed. He is the possession of their
felicity, he is the reward, and recompense of their expectation. I will, says
he, be a great, and excessive reward to thee. For great things become great
persons.

Indeed O Lord my God, thou art excessiuely great, beyond all Gods, and thy
reward is excessiuely great. For it cannot be true, that thy self should be
great, and thy reward little: but as thou art great so thy reward is great for
thy reward, and thy self, are not two several things. But thou thy
selfartexcessiuely great, and thou thy self, art that reward, which is so
excessiuely great, Thou thy self, art he, who crowns us, and who art the
crown; thou thy self art he, who makes the promise, and who art that very
promise it self; Thou art he who bestowest the gift, and who art the gift it
self; Thou thy self art the rewarder, and thou art the reward of eternal
felicity. Thou art therefore he, who crowns, and thou, O my God, art the
crown, and diadem of my hope which is ad orned with glory. Thou art that
recreatiue brightness, that reviving light, that graceful beauty, thou art my
great hope, the desire of the heart of thy Saints, and desired by them. Thy
vision therefore is the total pay, the total reward, and the total Joy,
which we expect. For this is eternal life; this I say, is thy wisdom, This
is eternal life, that we may know thee, only true God. and Jesus Christ,
whom thou have sent. When therefore we shall see thee, the only God, the
true God, the God living, Omnipotent, simple, invisible, incomprehensible, not
to be circumcribed, and thy only begotten Son Jesus Christ our Lord who is
consubstantiall, and coeternall, with thee, whom thou have sent into the world
for our salvation, in the virtue, and power of the Holy Ghost, they being Trine
in persons, and one in essence; one only Holy God, besides whom there is noe
God, Then, we shall enjoy, what now we seek, which is eternal life, and
everlasting glory, which thou preparest for them, who love thee, and hidest up
for them who fear thee, and wilt impart to them who seek thee, them who seek
thy face for ever.

And thou O Lord my God, who framedst me, in the womb of my mother, who
recommended me over to thy hand, do not permit me any longer to be distracted
into many things, from thee, who art one. But gather me up from exterior
objects into my self, and then take me from my self into thee; that my heart
may be ever saying to thee, my face has sougt thee O Lord, and I will seek
thy face; The face of our Lord power wherein alone of the total eternal glory
of blessed souls, does consist; and the vision whereof is the eternal life
and everlasting glory of the SSts, Let therefore my heart rejoice, that it may
fear thy name; let the heart of such as do but even seek our Lord, rejoice;
but much more let them rejoice, who find him. For if Joy be taken in the
search of him, what joy will that be, which is felt in findeing him. Therefore I
will be ever seeking thy face ardently. and without giueing over; to see if
once at length that door and gate of Justice, may perhaps be opened unto me,
that I may enter into the Joy of my Lord. This is the gate of our Lord, and the
Just shall enter into it.

CHAP. XXXVII. A prayer to the blessed Trinity.
O You three, coequall, and coeternall persons, who are one true God, the
Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost; thou who alone, dwell in eternity, and
inaccessible light. Who have laid the foundations of the earth with thy power;
and who gouernest the world with thy wisdom, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of
Sabbath, terrible and powerful, Just and merciful, admireable, laudable. and
amiable. One God three persons, one essence, power, wisdom; one only
undivided Trinity; Open thou the gates of Justice to me who am crying out
after them; and being once entered by them, I will confess to thee O Lord.
Behold, I, who am a poor beggar, do knock at thy door. O thou who art the
sovereign Master of the house, command that it may be opened to me thou who
say dest, knock, and it shall be opened to you. For the desires of my bowels
which do even roar again; and the cries of the tears of mine eyes, are they,
who knock at thy gate, O most merciful Father. Before thee, is my whole
desire, and my groans are not hidden from thee. And thou O Lord, turn thy
face noe longer away from me; and decline not in thy wrath, from thy servant.
O thou Father of mercyes, hearken to the loud cry of thy poor child, and
reach forth thy best helping hand; that it may draw me out of the profound
pitts of water, and out of the lake of misery, and out of the dirt, and dregs;
that I may not perish, whilst the mercy of thine eyes, is beholding me; and
the charity of thy bowels is lookeing on. But enable me, to escape to thee,
who art my Lord, and my God, that I may see the riches of thy kingdom; and may
behold thy face for ever, and may sing praise to thy holy name. O Lord thou who
workest wonderful things, thou who make my heart joyful by the memory of
thee, and who illuminatest my youth, do not despise my old age; but fill my
bones full of joy, and renew my gray heirs, as that of an eagle is renewed. All
glory, all praise, all strength, all power, all magnificence; all beatitude,
all mercy, be ascribed to God the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost.
Amen.

The end of the Soliloquia.
Deo gratias.
THE MANVALL OF S. AUGUSTINE.
THE FIRST CHAPTER. Of the wonderful essence of God.
Thou O Lord, do fill heaven and earth; carrying all things, and yet they are
no burden to thee. Thou fillest all things, without being shut up by them.
Thou art ever working, yet ever quiet; gathering together, yet thou need
nothing; seeking, yet wanting nothing; loving, yet without passion; jealous,
yet without fear. Thou repentest, yet thou art not sorry; thou art angry, yet
thou art not moved; thou changest thy works, yet thou do not change thy
decree. Thou take what thou find, yet thou did never loose any thing;
thou art not poor, and yet thou exactest usury at our hands; thou payest them,
to whom thou owe nothing; and we are enabled by thee, to pay thee more then
we owe thee, and yet who has any thing, but of thy gift? Thou payest thy
debtes, and yet thou owe nothing; thou releasest our debtes, and yet thou
loosest nothing; thou art every where, and yet altogether; thou can be felt,
and yet thou can not be seen; thou art no where absent, and yet thou art
far from the hearts of wicked men. For thou art not absent even when thou art
far off, because where thou art not by grace, thou art by revenge; thou art
present every where, and yet we can hardly find thee out; we follow thee who
art standing still, and yet we are not able to lay hold on thee; thou
contaynest all things, thou fillest all things, thou imbracest all things,
thou exceedest all things, and thou sustainest all things. Thou instructest
the hearts of thy faithful servants, without noise of words, thou art not
extended in place, thou art not varied by time, nor have thou any commings, or
goinges; thou do inhabit that inaccessible light which no eye of man has
seen, or can see. Reposing all quiet in thy self, thou go every where
about all things; for thou can not be divided, or cut, because thou art
truly one, nor do thou impart thy self by parts, but all that which thou
art, holds all things, fills all things, illustrateth and possesses all
things.

CHAP. II. Of the unspeakable knowledge of God.
IF the whole world were filled with books, yet thy unspeakable knowledge
could not be declared thereby. For in regard that thou art unspeakable, thou
can not be expressed or declared; thou art the fountain of divine light, and
the Sun of splendor, which never sets; thou art great without quantity, and
therefore thou art immense; thou art good without quality, and therefore it is
indeed, that thou art truly and supremely Good, and there is none Good but
thou alone, whose will is a work, whose being pleased to do any thing, is to
be able to do it. For thou who did create al things of nothing, did create
them only by thy will. Thou do possess all thy creatures, without needing
any of them; thou gouernest them without labor, thou rulest them without
wearines; nor is there any thing which can disturb the order of thy dominion,
from the highest to the lowest; thou art in all places without place; thou
conteynest all things without departing to the outside of them; thou art every
where present, yet without either situation, or motion; thou art not the Author
of evil, for thou can commit none; and yet there is nothing which thou can
not do; nor did thou ever repent thy self of any work of thine. By thy
goodness we are made, by thy justice we are punished, by thy mercy we are freed,
and thy omnipotency does govern, rule, and replenish whatsoever it did create.
Neither yet do we say, that thou fillest all things, as if thou were contained
by them; but rather they are contained by thee, neither yet do thou fill
them, as by parts. For we are in no case to think, as if any thing did
receive thee, after the rate of that greatness, more or less, which it self
may have (that is the greatest things a greater quantity, and the less a
lesser) since rather thou art all, in all things; and all things in thee;
whose omnipotency concludes all things. Nor has any thing, any means of
delivering it self from thy power. For whosoever he be that finds thee not
being pleased, will be sure to be found by thee, being offended.

CHAP. III. Of the desire of a soul which thirsts after God.
I Therefore inuoke thee, O most merciful God, to come into my soul, which
thou preparest toward the receiving of thee, through that desire wherewith it
was inspired by thee. Enter into it, I beseech thee, and make it fit for thy
self; that as thou have made it, and restored it, thou may possess it also:
and enable me to place thee as a seal upon my heart. I beseech thee, O most
holy God, do not forsake me, who am now inuoking thee; since, before I inuoked
thee, thou did both call me, and seek me, to the end that I thy servant,
might seek thee; and by seeking thee, might find thee, and that once having
found thee, I might love thee. I have sought thee, and I have found thee, and I
desire to love thee, O Lord Increase thou my desire, and give me that which I
am desiring. For if thou should give me all the things which thou have made,
they will not all be sufficient for thy servant, unless with all thou give thy
self. Give thy self therefore unto me O my God, restore thy self to me,
Behold I love thee, and if it be too little, make me love the more strongly.
Behold, I am held fast by the love of thee; I am set on fire by the desire of
thee, and in the sweet memory of thee I am delighted.

Behold, whilst my mind is sending up sighs to thee; and whilst it is
meditating upon thy unspeakable pity, the burden of my flesh does less
oppress me; the tempest of my thoughts is laid; the weight of my mortality and
misery does not dull my edge as it was wont. All things are in quiet, all
things are in peace* my heart does burn, my mind does joy, my memory is fresh,
my understanding is bright, and my whole spirit, being kindled through a desire
of thy vision, does find it self to be carried away, at full speed, by the
love of invisible things. O let this spirit of mine get the wings of an Eagle,
that it may fly and not faint. That it may fly till it arrive to that
delightful beauty of thy house, and to the throne of thy glory; and that there
it may be fed, at the plentiful table of those heavenly Citizens of thine;
upon that hidden food, in that place of pasture, near those full rivers of
running water. Be thou our exultation, who art our hope, our health and our
redemption. Be thou our joy, who art to be our reward. Let my soul ever seek
thee, and grant that whilst it seeks thee, it may never faint.

CHAP. IV. Of the misery of a soul which loves not God.
WOE be to that wretched soul, which seeks not nor loves Christ; for it
remains all miserable and dry. It is lost labor, for him even to live, who
loves not thee, O God. He who cares to live, O Lord, and not to do it for thy
respect, is nothing; and does serve for nothing. He who refuses to live to
thee, is dead; he who is not wise to thee has lost his wits. O thou most
merciful God, I recommend my self, I restore my self, and I make a grant of
my self to thee; through whom I am, through whom I live, and through whom I
have the use of reason. I hope, I trust, and I place all my confidence in thee,
by whom I may be able to rise again, and to live, and rest. It is thou whom I
desire, whom I love, and whom I adore; and with whom I am to remain and
reign, and be happy.

The soul which seeks not thee nor loves not thee, does love the world, and
serves sin, and is a slave to vice, and is never quiet or secure. O thou
most holy God, let my mind be ever performing service to thee; let this
pilgrimage of mine, be ever sighing toward thee: let my heart burn through the
love of thee, let my soul, O my God, repose in thee: let it contemplate thee,
in excess of mind; and let it singe praises to thee in full joy, and let this
be my comfort, in this banishment of mine.

Let this mind of mine, fly to the shadow of thy wings, from the scorching
cogitations of this world. Let this heart of mine be at a calm in thee; this
heart, which is such a deep Sea full of swelling waves. O thou, who art so rich
of heavenly food, thou most abundant imparter of that spiritual celestial
satiety, give nourishment to him, who is defeated with hunger; gather him up,
who is scattered; free him who is entrald, and stitch him together who is
torn. Behold he stands at the door and knocks. I beseech thee by those
bowels of thy mercy, in which thou, being the Orient, did visit us from on
high; command that it be opened to this miserable creature who is knocking:
that so, with nimble feet, I may enter into thee, and repose in thee, and be
refreshed by that bread of heaven. For thou art both the bread and the
fountain of life; thou art the splendour of immortal light. In fine, thou art
all those things, whereby just persons live, who love thee.

CHAP. V. Of the Desire of a soul.
O God the light of those hearts which see thee; and the life of those souls
which love thee, and the strength or virtue, of their thoughts who seek thee,
grant that I may be incorporated into the holy love of thee. Come, I beseech
thee, into my heart, and inebriate it, with the springing plenty of thy
delights; that so I may forget all worldly things. I am ashamed; and I am
afflicted to find my self suffering such things, as this world is doing. All
that which I see concerning transitory things, makes me sorry, and all that
which I hear, makes me sad. Help me, O Lord my God, infuse joy into my heart;
and come to me that so I may grow to see thee. For this house of my soul, is
strait, till thou come into it, and so it be enlarged by the. It is ruinous,
till it be repaired by thee, It has many things, which may offend thine eyes,
I know it and confess it; but yet who is he, that can cleanse it, or to whom
but thee, shall I cry out: Cleanse me, O Lord, from my hidden sins, and
pardon also thy servant, those sins, which he has caused in others,

Make me, sweet Christ, O dear Jesus, make me I beseech thee, lay down the
burden of carnal desires, and of the concupiscence which I have after earthly
things. Give dominion to my soul over my body, and to my reason, over my
soul, and to thy grace, over my reason; and subdue me, both in my outward and
inward man, to thy will. Grant to me that my heart may praise thee, together
with my tongue, and all the strength I have. Dilate my mind, and hoyse up the
sight of my heart, that at least by some glymse, my spirit may with a swift and
sudden thought, lay hold upon that eternal wisdom, whach is above all
things, and whach lasts beyond them all. Discharge me I beseech thee from he
chains wherein I am bound by sins; chat at last I may give over all things,
and that I may hasten to thee, and behold, and adhere to thee alone.

CHAP. VI. Of the felicity of a soul which is freed from the prison of flesh
and blood
HAPPY is that soul, which being freed from this earthly prison arriues to
heaven; and sees thee her most dear Lord, face to face. And which is no
longer subject to the least fear of death; but does rejoice in the
incorruptibility of eternal glory. She is then in peace, she is secure and
does no longer fear either death, or any other enemy. For she possesses her
dear Lord whom she has long sought, and whom she has ever loved; and being
associated to those Quires of Angels, she does eternally sing those melodious
Hymns of thy ever lasting solemnity. O Christ thou King, thou dear Jesus, to
the praise of thy glory. For then she is inebriated by the fresh and springing
plenty of thy house, and thou give her to drink of thy delights. O happy
society of those heavenly Citizens? O glorious solemnity of them who return
to thee, from the sad labor of this pilgrimage of ours, to that sweetness of
beauty, to that delightfulnes of all splendor, and to that dignity of all
pleasing grace, where thy Citizens, O Lord, do continually behold thy
countenance. There is no ear in that place which can hear any thing that may
offend it. What songs, what Organs, what Hymns, what melodies are sung there
without any end? Eternally are there sounded forth mellifluous co^cents of
Hymns; that most sweet melody of the Angels; those most admirable canticles of
Canticles which are sung forth by those heavenly Citizens, to thy praise and
glory. No bitterness, nor any kind of vnsauorynes or gall, can have any place in
that Country of thine; for there is no wickedness, nor any wicked man: There is
no adversary or enemy; there is no tempting bayte of sin, there is no want,
no shame, no quarrel, no reproach, no exception taken; no fear, no unquietness,
no pain, no doubt, no violence, no dissension. But there is souueraigne peace,
pertect charity, eternal iubilation, and praise of God, secure and everlasting
repose, and perpetual joy in the holy Ghost. O how happy shall I be if once I
may arrive to hear those most sweet songs of thy citizens, those mellifluous
Hymns, which with due honor, shall declare the praises of the most blessed
Trinity. But O how happy, even too happy shall I be, if my self may obtain to
sing to our Lord Jesus Christ, some one of those sweet songs of Syon.

CHAP. VII. Of the Joys of Heaven.
O Vital life, O eternal life, and eternally happy; where there is joy
without grief, rest without labor, dignity without fear, riches without
want, life without death, perpetuity without corruption, and felicity without
calamity. Where all things are good, in perfect charity; where there is
showing, and seeing face to face; where there is complete knowledge in all, and
by all; where the sovereign goodness of God is discerned; where the
illuminating light is glorified by the Saints; where the Majesty of God is
beheld present, and the mind of the beholders is satiated by this food of life,
without all defect. They ever see, and yet they ever desire to see; but they
desire without anxiety, and they are not glutted by their satiety. Where the
true Son of Justice does recreate them all, by the admirable sight of his
beauty; and so does illuminate all the inhabitants of that heavenly Country.
Where the light of them who are illuminated by that other superior
illuminating light, does shine far beyond the splendour of our Sun, and beyond
the clarity of all the Startes; adhering to that immortal Deity, them selves
being made thereby incorruptible and immortal, according to this promise of our
Lord and Savior: Father, they whom thou gave me I will, that where I am,
they may be also there; that they may see my brightness; and that they all may
be one, as thou O Father art in me, and I in thee, so they also may be one in
us.

CHAP. VIII. Of the kingdom of Heaven.
THE kingdom of heaven, is a most happy kingdom; a kingdom which has no
death nor end; where there shall be no succession of times, nor no interruption
of the day by any night. Where the victorious soldier is even laden with
unspeakable treasures; an immortal crown being placed upon his triumphant
head. O that the divine mercy (having first discharged the weight of my sins)
would command me (who am the least amongst the servants of Christ) to lay
down this burden of flesh and blood, that so I might pass on toward my true
repose, in those eternal joys of his City; that I might bear my part, among
the inhabitants of those heavenly Quires; that I might assist in glorifying our
Creator with those blessed spirits; that I might behold the face of God there
present; that I might not be so much as touched with the least fear of death;
but that I might securely rejoice, through the incorruptibility of immortal
glory; that being conjoined to him who knows all things, I might loose all
blindness of ignorance; that I might esteem meanly of all earthly things; that
I might no longer vouchsafe to behold, or even so much as to remember this
valley of tears, the life whereof is laborious and corruptible; a life which
is full of all bitterness; a life which is the mistress of sin, and the slave
of Hell. The humors of our body do puff it up, pains put it down;
intemperate heats dry it; the ill affections of the air, indispose it; meat
makes it fat; fasting makes it shrink; loose mirth dissolueth it; afflictions
consume it; solicitude straitens it; security makes it sottish, riches make it
vane; poverty makes it base, youth extolleth it; age makes it stoop; sickness
breaks it; sorrow deiects it; the Devil lies in wait for it; the world
flatters it; the flesh is delighted; the soul is blinded; and the whole man is
disioynted. And to all these, so many and great mischiefs, death does
furioussy succeed; and does so impose an end upon these vain joys, that when
once they leave to be, it is scarce so much as believed that they ever were.

CHAP. IX. How God does comfort an afflicted soul after too great lamentations.
BUT what praise, what thakes shall we be able to give thee, O our God, who even
in the midst of these great miseries of our mortality, do not fail to
comfort us with the admirable visitation of thy Grace. For Behold, when I am
full of many sorrows; whilst I am fearing the end of my life; whilst I am
considering my sins; whilst I am meditating upon death; whilst I am frighted
with thinking on thy judgment? whilst I tremble at the torments of hell;
whilst I am ignorant with what scales my works are to be wayghed by thee;
whilst I cannot know by what kind of end shall be able to shut them up, whilst
I am ruminating upon these and many other things in my heart; thou O my Lord and
my God, according to thy wonted pity, art present with a resolution to comfort
me wretched creature. And when I am in the midst of these complaints, and
excessive lamentations, and in the profoundest sighings of my heart, thou take
up this afflicted and perplexed mind, above those high topps of the
mountains, even to those odoriferous spicy beds of thine; and thou do place
me, in that deep pasture, near those brooks of sweet waters; where thou
preparest, in my sight, a table full of choice and curious meats, which may
refresh my wearied spirit; and may give joy to my afflicted heart, And so at
last, being all restored by those delights, and forgetting mine own many
miseries, and being exalted above the highest parts of the earth and earthly
things, I repose in thee, who art true peace.

CHAP. X. Of the sweetness of divine love.
O My God I love thee, I love thee, and feign would I love thee yet more, and
more. Grant to me, O Lord my God, O thou beautiful beyond the sons of men,
that I may desire thee and that I may love thee, as much as I list, and as much
as I ought. Thou art immense; and without measure, thou ought to be beloved;
especially by us, whom thou so have loved, and so have saved, and for whom thou
have done so many, and so mighty things. O love, which ever burnest, and art
never quenched; sweet Christ, dear Jesus, O charity, my God, kindle me, with
all that fire of thine; with thy love, with thy lyking, with thy sweetness, with
thy desire, with thy Charity, with thy joy and exultation, with thy piety and
suauity, with thy pleasure, and with that ardent desire of thee, which is holy,
and good, and chaste, and clean, That so being all full with the sweetness of
thy love, and all perfumde and sweetened by the flame of thy Charity, I may
love thee, my most sweet, and most beautiful Lord, with my whole heart, with my
whole soul, with my whole strength, and with all the application of my mind,
with much contrition, and even with a very fountain of tears; with much
reverence and trembling love, carrying thee in my heart, and in my mouth, and
before mine eyes, at all times, and in all places; that so there may never be
found any room in me, for any disloyal and impure love.

CHAP. XI. Of the preparation of our Redemption.
O Most beautiful Christ Jesus, I beseech thee by that most sacred effusion of
thy most precious blood, whereby we are redeemed grant me contrition of heart,
and a very fountain of tears, especially whilst I am offering up, both my
vocal, and mental prayers to thee. Whilst I am singing the Office of thy
praise to thee; whilst I do either declare with my mouth; or consider in my
mind the mystery of our redemption, that express testimony of thy mercy:
Whilst I (though unworthy) am assisting at thy sacred Altar, intending to
offer up to thee, that admirable and celestial sacrifice, which is so worthy
of all reverence and devotion; and which thou, O Lord, our God, and our Priest,
did immaculately institute, and did command to be offered up, in
commemoration of thy charity (that is, of thy death and passion) for our
salvation, and for the daily reparation of our frailty. Let my mind be
confirmed whilst I am in the midst of those so great misteryes, by the
sweetness of thy presence. Let it find, that thou art there at hand; and let it
rejoice before thee. O thou fire which ever flamest, O thou love which ever
burnest, sweet Christ, dear Jesus, thou eternal and never failing light; thou
food of life, which do refresh us and yet do never diminish in thy self;
who art daily eaten, and yet do ever remain entiere, shine thou upon me,
kindle me, illuminate and sanctify this vessel which is thine own. Make it
empty of malice, replenish it with grace; and when it is once full, keep it so
that I may receive this food of thy flesh, to the salvation of my soul; and
that by feeding on thee, I may live of thee, and by thee; that so I may arrive
to thee, and repose in thee.

CHAP. XII. Of spiritual joy.
O Thou sweetness of love, and thou love of sweetness, let my stomach feed on
thee; and let even my bowels be all filled with the Nectar of thy love, and let
my mind utter that good word. O charity, O my God, thou hunny which is so
sweet, thou milk which is so white. Thou art the food of strong persons, make
me increase toward thee, that so I may feed upon thee, and taste thee withth
epalate, not of a sick, but of a sound person. Thou art the life by which I
live, the hope to which I do adhere, and the glory which I desire to obtain.
Hold thou fast my heart, rule my mind, direct my understanding, erect my love,
suspend my thoughts, and draw the mouth of this spirit, which thirsts after
thee, into those living streams of celestial running waters. I beseech thee
impose silence upon these tumultuous thoughts of flesh and blood; let these
conceits of the earth, and of the waters, and of the air, and of these heavens
which re we see, hold their peace. Let all visions, and revelations which are
imprinted upon the imagination be silent, and every tongue and sensible
expression, and what soever else, which has his complete being by passing on.
Let even the soul be islent to it self, and let it outstrip and exceed it
self, by not thinking of it self, but only of thee, O my God; because thou,
in very deed, art all my hope, and all my confidence. For in thee, O my God,
and my Lord, in thee, O most sweet, O most amiable, O most merciful Christ
Jesus, there is a part of the flesh and blood of every one of us. Now therefore
where a part of me does reign, there do I believe my self to reign. Where my
blood has dominion, there do I also confide my self to be in dominion; where
my flesh is glorified, there do I know my self to be glorious. For howsoever
I am a sinner, yet I cannot despair, but that I shall be admitted to this
communication of thy grace. And although my iniquityes forbid me, yet that
substance of mine does inuit me; and although my sins do exclude me, yet
that participation of nature does not suffer me to be rejected.

CHAP. XIII. That the Word Incarnate is the cause of our Hope.
FOr our Lord is not so an enemy as that he can forebeare to love his own
flesh, and the parts of his own body, and his own bowels. I might justly
have despayred, by reason of my excessive sins, and vices and of those
infinite negligences and faults which I have committed, and which I daily do
commit, by thought word and deed, and by all those means, whereby the frailty
of man's nature may sin, unless the Word my God, had become flesh; and had
dwelt amongst us. But now I dare not despair; because he growing obedient to
thee, even to the death, and that the very death of the Cross, did take that
handwriting of our sins, and nayling it to the same Cross did crucify both
sin and death. In him therefore, do I securely conceive hope, who sits at
thy right hand and interceedes for us. And confiding in him, I trust I shall
arrive to be with thee, in whom we are risen, and have lived again, and have
ascended up to heaven, and are remaining there. To thee be praise, glory,
honor, and thanksgiving for ever.

CHAP. XIV. How sweet a thing it is to think of God.
O Thou most merciful Lord, who did so love, and save us, who did so
quicken and exalt us; O most merciful Lord, how sweet is the memory of thee;
How much more I meditate on thee, so much more art thou sweet and amiable to
me. Therefore does it delight me extremely, to behold thy excellencyes with a
pure sight of the mind, and with a most sweet affection of pious love,
according to the little power I have, in this place of my pilgrimage. Where
although I be apperrelled with a poor garment of flesh and blood, I do yet
continually aspire to the consideration and desire of thy admirable amability
and beauty. For with the dart of thy charity am I wounded, and I am all on a
light fire of desire concerning thee. I covet to arrive to thee, and thee do I
desire to behold. Therefore will I ever stand upon my guard, and with vigilant
eyes I will be singing in spirit; and I will also sing with my understanding,
and with all my forces will I praise thee; who art both my Creator and my
Redeemer I will penetrate the heavens with my affection, and I will so approach
to thee with my desire, that I may be held but only in body, by this present
misery; and all my thoughts, and the greedines of my desire shall be ever upon
thee; that so my heart may be where thou my treasure art, who art so desirable,
so incomparable, and so dearly amiable.

But behold, O my most pitiful and most merciful God, whilst I am applying
my self to the consideration of thy immense goodness and pity, my heart is not
able to go through with it. For thy grace, thy beauty, thy virtue, thy glory,
thy magnificence, thy Majesty, and thy charity, does exceed all the powers of
our mind. And as the splendor of thy glory is inestimable, so is the benignity
of that eternal charity of thine unspeakable; whereby thou have adopted them
for thy sons, and joined them close to thy self, whom formerly thou have
created of nothing.

CHAP. XV. How much tribulation endured for Christ our Lord, is to be desired.
O My soul, if daily we were to suffer torments, yea and even to endure the
very pains of hell, and that for a long time together; to the end that we
might arrive to see Christ in his glory, and to be associated to his Saints,
would it not be fit for us to bear all that affliction, if thereby we might be
thought fit to be made pertakers of so high a good, and so great a glory? Let
therefore the devils lie in wait for us; let them prepare their temptations;
let fasting break our bodies; let garments load our flesh; let labors weigh
heavy upon us; let watching dry us; let one man cry out upon us, and let
another man disquiet us; let cold contract us; let the conscience repine; let
heat burn us; let the head ache, the breast be inflamed, let the stomach be
swollen, let the face grow pale, and let the whole body be distempered; let my
years be spent in groaning, yea let rottennes enter into my bones, and
multiply therein, so that yet I may rest in that day of tribulation, and may
ascend to our elected people. For how great will that glory of just persons be;
how great will be that joy of the saints, when every one of their faces, shall
be resplendent, like a Sun? When our Lord shall begin to muster up his people
by different ranks in the kingdom of his father; and shall assign the
promised rewards according to the works and merit of every one. Celestial
rewards, for works which were performed here on earth. Great rewards for
little works and eternal, for such as were but temporal. That, indeed, will
be a whole huge heap of felicity, when our Lord shall bring his Saints into
the vision of his Fathers glory, and shall place them upon their seats in
heaven, that so he may be all in all.

CHAP. XVI. How the kingdom of God may be obtained.
O HAPPY sweetness, O delicious happiness, which it will be for us, to behold the
Saints, be with Saints, and to be Saints, to see God, and to possess him, for
all eternity, and even if it might be, beyond eternity. Let us be continually
thinking on these things; let us aspire to them with our whole desire, that so
we may speedily arrive to enjoy them. If thou ask how this may be done; by
what merits, or by what helps; give ear and I will tell thee, This affair is
put into thine own power; for the kingdom of heaven suffers violence. The
kingdom of heaven, O man, does exact no price at thy hands but only thy
self. So much is it worth, as thou thy self art. Give thy self, and thou
shall have it. Why art thou troubled about the price? Christ our Lord did give
himself away that he might purchase thee, to be a kingdom for his father; and
so do thou also, give thy self, that thou may become a kingdom for him, and
that sin may not reign in thy mortal body, but the Spirit in the renouation
of life.

CHAP. XVII. What a happy place Heaven is.
O My soul, return toward that heavenly City wherein we are written, and
enrold as Citizens. And as Citizens amongst the Saints, and the household
servants of God, and as the heirs of God and coheires of Christ our Lord. Let
us consider that excellent felicity of this city of ours, to the very
uttermost of what we are able. Let us therefore say with the Prophet: O how
glorious things are said of thee, thou City of God, the habitation which is
made in thee, is, of them who are all full of joy. For thou art founded in the
exultation of the whole earth. No old age is in thee, nor any misery which is
wont to wait upon old age. In thee, there is no man lame, of arm or leg, nor
crooked nor other wise deformed; when once they meet together, becoming perfect
man, in the measure of the age, of the fullness of Christ. What is more happy
then such a life where there is no fear of poverty, nor no incommodity of
sickness; where no man is offended, no man is angry, no man envious, no desire
does solicit us; there is no appetite of meat, no man is importuned by
thirsting after honor and power; there is no fear of the Devil, or the craft
of those infernal spirits; all terror of hell is far off, there is no death
either of body or soul, but a life which is made full of joy by the gift of
immortality. In fine, there is no kind of ill, or discord, but all things are
full of agreement and proportion, for as much as the concord of all the Saints
is intierely one; all things are full of peace and joy; all things are quiet,
and serene. An everlasting splendour there, is not like that of this Sun of
ours, but another, which is so much more bright, at it is more blessed. For
that City (as we read) shall need neither Su^ne, nor Moon; but our Lord
omnipotent, will illuminate it, and the Lamb is the bright lamp thereof. Where
the Saints shall shine like stars, and they who instruct many others, like
the splendor of the firmament. No night shall be therefore there, no darkness, no
concourse of clouds, no incommodity at all of heat or cold; but such a temper
of things there will be, as neither the eye has seen, nor the ear has heard,
nor can it enter into the heart of any other me^, but such as shall be thought
worthy to enjoy it; Whose names are written in the book of life. But it
exceeds all these things to be associated to the Quires of Angels and
Archangells; to behold the Patriarchs and the Prophets, to see the Apostles,
and all the Saints; yea to see our own parents and friends. These things
indeed are glorious, but yet still incomparably a more glorious thing it is to
behold the present face of God; and to look upon that unlimited light of his.
A superexcellent glory it will be, when we shall see God in himself: we shall
see, and we shall possess him in our selves, and of that sight, there will be
no end.

CHAP. XVIII. We cannot make any requital to Almighty God, but only by love.
THE soul which is beautifyed by the Image, and dignifyed by the ressemblance
of God, has ground enough within it self (which is also imparted by the same
God) whereby she may be advised to remain perpetually within him; or at least to
return toward him, if she chance to have been separated by her affection, or
rather by her defectes. And not only has she ground of solace in the hope
which she may conceive of pardon and mercy; but yet further, she may also
presume to aspire, even to the marriage of the Word, and to contract a league
of friendship with God; and together with that king of the Angels, to be
drawing in the same sweet yoke of love. Now all this is performed by the same
love, if the soul do make it self like to God by her will, as already she is
like him by nature; and if she love him, as she is beloved by him. For only
love, amongst all the motions, passions and feeling senses of the soul, is the
thing whereby a creature may answer the benefits of a Creator; and repay,
after a sort, what it owes, though it be not in any equal manner.

Where love enters in, it draws and captiueth all other affections of the
mind, to the dominion thereof. Love alone, is sufficient, and is pleasing of it
self, and for it self. Love is the merit, it is the reward, it is the cause,
it is the fruit, it is also the use of the fruit; for by love, we are conjoined
to God. Love makes that two spirits grow to be one. Love makes that the same
things, be willed, and not willed by them. Love makes us first to order and
compose our lives; afterward it enableth us to consider of all things which
are present, as if they where absent; and, in the third place, it enableth us
to behold internal, and supernall things, with a clean and pure eye of the
heart. By love we are first taught how to use those contentements well, which
may be taken in the world, afterward those worldly contentements grow to be
despised; and at the last even the secrets of God come to be disclosed.

CHAP. XIX. What it is which God requires of us, that so we may be like him
self.
GOD the Father is love, God the Son is love, God the holy Ghost, is the love
of the Father, and the Son. This charity, this love, does require somewhat of
us which is like that; that is to say, it requires charity, whereby (as by a
kind of coniunctio^ in blood) we may be associated, and joined to him* Love
forgets that supreme dignity, it considers not the reverence which it is bound
to bear. He that loves, does of himself draw confidently near to God, and
expresses himself in a familiar manner, without perturbation or fear: He
loses his labor and lives in vane, who loves not. But he that loves, does
still carry his eyes erected toward God, whom he loves, whom he desires,
upon whom he meditateth, in whom he delights, by whom he is fedd, and even
made fat. Such a loving and devout person, does so sing, and so he reads, and
in all his actions he is so full of circumspection, and care, as if God were
ever present before his eyes, and so indeed he is. He does so pray, as if he
were taken, and presented before the face of that Majesty, in his sovereign
Thron, Where thousands of thousands are serving him, and a million of thousands
are present with him. When love visits a soul, it awaketh her, if she be
asleep; it counsels, and softneth, and does wound the heart. It illuminateth
those things which are dark; it vnlocketh those things which are shut up; it
inflameth those things which are cold; it mitigateth a harsh, untoward, and
impatient mind; it puts sin to flight; it represseth all carnal affection,
it amendeth manners, it reformeth and renews the spirit, and it bridleth the
light acts, and evil motions of slippery youth. All these things are done by
love, when it is present, but upon the departure thereof, the soul begins
already to be faint, and weak, as if the fire were withdrawn from underneath
a pot which had been seething.

CHAP. XX. Of the confidence of a soul which loves God.
A Great thing is love, whereby the soul, of her self, does confidently
approach to God, does constantly inheare to God, does familiarly ask questions
of God, and consulteth with him, upon all occasions. The soul which loves God
can neither think, or speak any other thing, she contemns all things else,
she loatheth all. Whatsoever she considers, whatsoever she says, it smells
of love, it savors of love; so truly does the love of God, make her all, his
own. Whosoever ever desires to have the knowledge of God, let him love. In vain
does any man give himself to reading, to meditating, to preaching, to praying,
if he do not love. The love of God, begets love in a soul, and makes her
bend her self toward him. God loves, to the end that he may be loved again.
When he loves, he desires no other thing, but to be beloved; as knowing that
they who love him, are to be made happy by that love. The soul which loves,
does renounce al her own particular affections, and does wholly apply her self
to love; that so she may be able to pay love, with love. And yet when she shall
have spent whatsoever she either has, or is, upon the love of that torrent
which flows out, from that over tunning fontaine of love; we must take heed of
thinking, that there is any equality of springing plenty afforded between that
love, and this love: between God, and the soul; between the creator, and
the creature. And yet, on the other side, if the soul do love, as much as it
can; there can be nothing said to be wanting, where al is given. Let not that
soul fear, which loves; but let that other tremble, which loves not. The
soul which loves, is carried on by prayers, she is drawn by her desirs, she
dissembleth her merits, she shuts her eyes against his Majesty, she opens them
to delight in his beauty: she lodges her self in him, who is her saving
health, and she treats with him after a confident manner. By love the soul
does step aside, and does grow into excess, beyond the senses of the body; so
that she which feels God, does no longer feel her self. This is done, when
the soul (being allured by the unspeakable sweetness of God) does steal her
self, as it were, from her self; or rather when she is forcibly carried, and
so does slip from her self, that she may enjoy God with supreme delight.
Nothing were so highly sweet, if withal it were not extremely short. Love
gives familiarity with God; familiarity gives a daring to aoproach; that
daring gives gust; that gust gives hunger. The soul which is touched with
the love of God, can think of nothing else, can desire nothing else; but does
often sigh and say, As the Heart desires the fountains of water, so does my
soul desire thee, O my God.

CHAP. XXI. What God did for man.
GOD for the love of men came down to men; he came into men, and he was made
man. The invisible God, was drawn by love, to become like his slaves, Through
love, he was wounded for our sins. Weak and wicked men, may find a safe and
strong retreat in the wounds of our Savior. There do I securely dwell; for I
see his very bowels through his wounds. Whatsoever is wanting to me, I fetch
from those wounds of my Lord, which flow with mercy; nor want they holes,
through which it may be able to flow. By those holes which were made in his
body we may discern the very secrets of his heart; we may discern a great
mystery of goodness; we may discern the bowels of the mercy of our God where
with that Orient from on high has visited us. The wounds of Jesus Christ are
full of mercy, full of pity, full of suauity, and full of charity. Men dug
through his hands and feet, and they transpierced his side with a lance. By
these ouertures, I have means to taste how sweet my Lord God is; for indeed he
is meek, and sweet, and of abundant mercy, to all such as call upon him in
truth; to all such as seek him, but especially to them that love him. A
copious redemption is given to us in the wounds of Jesus Christ our Savior. A
great multitude of sweetness, a fullnes of grace, and the perfection of virtues,

CHAP. XXII. Of the remembrance of the wounds of Jesus Christ our Lord.
WHEN I am solicited by any impure thought, I make my recourse unto the
wounds of Christ; when my body oppresses me, I recover strength by calling
the wounds of my Lord to mind; when the Devil is laying some ambush whereby to
take me, I fly unto the boweles of my Lords mercy, and so the Devil departs
from me. If the ardour of lust make any alteration in my body, it is quenched
by the memory of the wounds of our Lord, the Son of God. In all the
aduersityes which I have been subject to, I never found so effectual a
remedy, as in the wounds of Christ. In them do I sleep secure, in them do I
repose void of fear. Christ dyed for us; there is nothing so deadly bitter,
which may not be cured by the death of Christ. All the hope I have, is in the
death of my Lord. His death is my merit, my refuge, my saving health, my life,
and my resurrection. My merit is his great mercy. I shall never be void of merit
as long as he who is the Lord of mercy, shall not be wanting to me. And since
my merits go after the rates of his mercyes, look how much more mighty he is
toward the saving of me, so much the more may I be secure.

CHAP. XXIII. The remembrance of the wounds of Christ our Lord, is our remedy
in all adversity.
I Have committed a grievous sin, nay I am guilty of many sins; neither yet
will I despair, because where sins have abounded, there has been
superaboundance of grace. He who despaireth of the pardon of his sins,
denies God to be merciful. He much wrongs God, who distrustes in his mercy
Such a one does his best, to deny that God has Charity, Verity, and Piety,
wherein all my hope consists. Namely in the Charity, of his adoption, in the
Verity of his promise, and in the Piety of his redemption. Let therefore my
foolish thought be murmuring as much as it will, whilst it is saying: What a
poor thing art thou; and what a great glory is that, and by what merits do
thou hope to obtain it? For I will confidently answer: I know well who it is,
whom I have trusted. And because he has adopted me for his son, with
excess of Charity, because he is true in his promises, and powerful in his
performances; and because he may do what he will, I cannot be frighted by the
multitude of my sins, if withal I be able, to call the death of my Lord to
mind; for those sins of mine cannot conquerre him. Those nails, and that
lance, do cry out to tell me, that in deed I am reconcyled to Christ, if I
resolve to love him. Longinus opened the side of Christ with his lance, there
do I enter in, and there I do safely rest. He that fears, let him love; for
charity will put fear away. There is not so potent and effectual a remedy
against the ardour of lust, as the death of my redeemer. He stretches forth
his arms abroad upon the Cross; and he spreads his hands which are ready to
embrace us sinners. Between those arms of my Savior, I resolve to live, and I
desire to dye. There will I securely sing, I will exalt thee O Lord, because
thou have taken me up, and have not given mine enemies their pleasure over me.
Our Savior bowed down his head, at his death, that he might kiss his
beloved, and so often do we give a kiss to God, as we have compunction of our
sins, for the love of him.

CHAP. XXIIII. An exhortation of the soul to the love of Christ our Lord.
O Thou my soul, which art dignified with the image of God, redeemed by the
blood of Christ, espowsed by faith, endoweth with a spirit, adorned with
virtues, rancked with Angels, be sure thou love him, by whom thou art so much
beloved. Make him thy business, who has made thee his. Seek him who seeks
thee, love thy lover, by whom thou art beloved; by whose love thou art
prevented, and who is the cause of thine. He is thy merit, thy reward, thy
fruit, thy use, and thy end. Be thou careful together with him, who is so
careful of thee; be attentive to him, who is attentive to thee, be pure with
him who is pure; be holy with him, who is holy. Such as thou do appear in
the sight of God, such art thou to expect that he will appear to thee. God who
is so sweet, so meek, and so full of mercy, does require that thou should
be sweet, and meek, and gentle, and humble, and full of mercy. Love him who
has drawn thee out of the lake of misery, and the filth of dirt. Choose him
for thy friend, above all thy friends; who when all they shall fail thee, will
be ever sure to make good thy trust, at the day of thy death. When all thy
friends are departing from thee, he will not leave thee, but he will defend
thee, against those roaring lions, who are sharp set upon their prey. And he
will lead thee by a Country, wherewith thou art not yet acquainted, and he
will bring thee to those streets of the celestial Sion; and there he will
place thee, together with his Angels, before the face of his own Majesty,
where thou shall here that Angellicall Music of., Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God
of Sabbath. There is the Canticle of joy, the voice of exultation, and
salvation, and thanksgiving; the voice of praise, and that everlasting
Alleluya. There is that high heap of happynes, that superemine^t glory, that
superaboundant gladness, and all good things put together. O sigh thou
ardently, O my soul; and desire vehemently that thou may arrive at that
heavenly city, whereof so glorious things are said, and where of all the
inhabitants, are so full of joy. By love thou may ascend. Nothing is
impossible, nothing is hard to one who loves. The soul which loves ascends
often; and does familiarity run too and fro, through those streets of the
Celestial Jerusalem. Sometimes visiting the Patriarchs and the Prophets;
sometimes admiring those armies of Martyrs, and Confessors; and contemplating
somtymes the Quires of Virgins. The heaven and the earth, withal which is
therein, do never cease to let me know, that I ought to love my Lord my God.

CHAP. XXV. That nothing can suffice the soul, but the supreme Good.
THe heart of man which is not fixed in the desire of eternity, can never be
stable and firm, but is more wavering then the wind; and it passes from one
thing to another, seeking rest where it cannot be found. For in these frail
and transitory things, where the affection thereof is imprisoned, it can never
find true repose. Because our soul is of so great dignity, that no Good, but
only the supreme Good can satisfy it; and withal it is of so great liberty,
that it cannot be constrained to commit any sin. It is therefore the proper
will of every one, which is the cause of his salvation or damnation; so that
nothing more rich, can be given to God, then a good will. A good will draws
God down to us, and it addresseth us up to him. By a good will we love God, we
choose him we run to him, we arrive to him, and we possess him. O how
excellent a thing is this good will, whereby we are reformed, according to the
resemblance of God, and are made like to him. So amiable to God is this good
will, as that it refuses to inhabit that heart wherein a good will is not to be
found. A good will does make that supreme Majesty of the Trinity stoop down to
it For, wisdom does illuminate it toward the knowledge of truth; Charity
does inflame it toward the love of goodness, and the Paternity does preserve,
that which it did create, that it may not perish.

CHAP. XXVI. What the knowledge of truth is.
WHat is that knowledge of truth? It consists first in a man's knowing
himself, and in being that which a man ought to be, and in reforming that
which should be amended. It does therefore consist in knowing and loving the
Creator, for this is the whole good of man. See then how unspeakable the love
of this divine love is. It made us of nothing; and it gave us whatsoever we
have. But because we loved the gift, more then the giver, we fell into the
snare of the devil, and became his slaves. Then did God, being moved to mercy,
send his Son to redeem those slaves, and he also sent the holy Ghost, to the
end, that he might make those slaves his sons. He gave the Son as a price
of our redemption, and the holy Ghost, for the privilege of his love; and so
he imparteth his whole self, as the inheritance of our adoption. So does God,
as being most pitiful, and most merciful, through the desire which he has
of the love of man, not only impart his mercyes, but his very self, that so he
might recover men; not so much to him, who is God, as to themselves. That men
might be borne of God, God was first born of man.

Who then is he that has a heart so hard, as that it cannot be softened by this
love of God? this love I say of his so preventing, and so vehement which made
him be content to become man for the love of man? Who now will be able to hate a
man, whose nature and resemblance he sees in the humanity of God? Infaillibly
whosoever hates him, hates God, and so he destroys whatsoever he does. For
God was made man for man; that as already he was man's Creator, so also he
might be his redeemer, and that he might purchase him, out of his own stock.
And to the end that God might be beloved by man, in a more familiar manner, he
appeared in the similitude of man; that so both his external and internal
senses, might be made happy in God; the eye of his soul being entertained, and
fed by his divinity, and the eye of his body by Gods humanity; to the end, that
whether he should work inwardly or outwardly, this human nature which he
created, might be able to feed deeply, and sweetly upon him.

CHAP. XXVII. What the mission of the holy Ghost does work in us.
THis Savior of ours, was borne for us, he was crucified and he died for us,
that so by his death he might destroy ours. And because that bunch of grapes of
his flesh and blood, was carried to this wine press of the Cross, and because
the expression thereof being made, the new winer of his Divinity began to flow
from thence, the holy Ghost was sent down, whereby the vessels of our hearts
were to be prepared, and new wine to be put into new skins; that first our
hearts might be cleansed, least else the wine powered in, should be polluted; and
that afterward, they should be tied up, least otherwise when it were infused,
it might be spilt. That they might (I say) be cleansed from all joy, which
could be taken in sin; and that they might be fastened against all joy which
could be taken in vanity. For that which is good, can never come, unless first
that be sent away, which is evil. The joy which is taken in sin, polluteth;
and the joy which is taken in vanity, scatters us. The joy which is taken in
sin, makes the vessel foul, and the joy which is taken in vanity, makes
it to be full of holes. Joy is taken in sin, when sin is loved, and joy is
taken in vanity, when transitory things are beloved. Cast the refore away,
that which is evil, that thou may receive that which is good. Power out all
bitterness, that thou may be filled with sweetness. The holy Ghost is joy and
love. Cast out the spirit of the devil, and the spirit of the world, that thou
may receive he spirit of God. The spirit of the Devil, breeds a joy in
sin; and the spirit of the world, breeds a joy in vanity. Now both these
joys are naught; for the one of them has vice in it, the other gives
occasion to vice. The spirit of God will come when these wicked spirits are
cast out; and it will enter into the tabernacle of thy heart, and will produce a
good joy, and a good love, whereby the love of the world, and the love of
sin, shall be put to flight. The love of the world, does entice and deceive;
the love of sin, does pollute, and carry on to death. But the love of God
does illuminate the mind, it does purify the conscience, it makes the soul
rejoice, and it demonstrates God.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the working of that soul which loves God.
HE, in whom the love of God remains, is ever thinking how he may arrive to
God; how he may leave the world; how he may decline the corruption of flesh and
blood: and to the end, that he may find true peace, he ever has his desire,
and his heart erected toward heavenly things. When he is sitting, when he is
walking, when he is resting, and in fine whatsoever he be doing, his heart
departs not from God. He exhorts all men to the love of God, he
recommendeth it to all men, and he proves to all the world, both by his heart,
and by his tongue, and by his works, how sweet the love of God is, and how
bitter that is of the world. He despises the glory of the world, he
discovers it to be full of affliction; and he declares how fond they are,
who place their confidence therein. He wondreth at the blindness of men, for
loving such things as those; he wondreth, how it is possible for all men not
to forsake these transitory, and frail things of the world. He conceaueth that
every one should find taste in that which is so sauoury to himself, that every
one should love that which he likes so well; that every one should desire that
which is so plainly discerned by him. He does frequently contemplate his God,
and by that contemplation he is sweetly fed; so much more happily, as more
frequently. For that is most delightfully considered, the loving and praising
whereof, is so full of delight.

CHAP. XXIX. Of the Hearts true Repose.
THen indeed is the heart in true repose, when it is all fixed by desire in the
love of God; and when it couets nothing else, but in him, in whom it delights
with sweetness, and whom it enjoys with delight. And if perhaps it be a little
diuerted from him, either by any vain thought, or else by business, it returns
instantly again at full speed; esteeming it for no better them banishement,
during the time that it remains any where but in him. For as there is no
moment of time, wherein a man has not experience of the divine goodness, so
ought there not to be any moment, wherein it should not be present to our
memory. He is not liable to a little fault, who in prayer, whilst he is
conuersing with God, does easily wander out of his sight, as if God did nether
hear, nor see him. Yet this is done, when he follows his own importunate
and evil thoughts, and when he prefers any poor and base creature (toward
whom the sight of mind is easily withdrawn) before God. Reflecting and
rolling, as it were, that creature up and down in his mind, by oftener
thinking on it, then upon God, whom continually he ought to remember, as his
redeemer; to expect as his Savior; and to fear as his judge.

CHAP. XXX. Whatsoever does withdrav the sight of the mind from God, is wholly
to be avoided.
Whosoever thou be, that love the world, consider well, whither, it has a
meaning to carry thee. That way whereby thou go, is a most wicked way, and
full of misery. Fly therefore for a while, O man, from all worldly business, and
hide thy self from those tumultuous thoughts of thine. Now cast away thy
weighty cares, dismiss those laborious employments; be a little at leisure for
God, and repose with him a little, in the closet of thy heart. Exclude all but
God, and those things which may help toward the finding of him. Let all thy
heart now say to God, I seek thy countenance, and yet again I seek it O my
God. Come therefore O Lord my God; teach my heart, both where, and how it may
seek thee, and where and how it may find thee. O Lord, if thou be not here,
where shall I find thee being absent; and if thou be here, why do I not see
thee, being present. But thou indeed do inhabit inaccessible light, yet how
shall I then approach to that light, if it be inaccessible; or who shall lead
me, and admit me to it, that I may see thee in it? And again, by what signs,
or by what address shall I seek thee? I never saw thee, O Lord my God; nor was
I ever acquainted with thy countenance, What thou most high God, shall this
creature who has be exiled so far off from thee, what I say, shall he be
able to do? What shall thy slave be able to do; who on the one side, is so
deadly taken with the love of thee, and yet on the other, does find himself to
be cast so far off from thy face? Behold how he does even pant to see thee,
whilst yet thy face is so far remote? It desires to draw near to thee; but
thy habitation cannot be approached unto; It desires to find thee, but it knows
not where; it strives to seek thee, but it is a stranger to thy presence.

CHAP. XXXI. How the vision of God was lost by sin, and that misery came so
to be found out.
O Lord, thou art my God, and my Lord. I never saw thee and yet thou did
create me, and redeem me, and thou have given me all good things; but yet
still I never saw thee nor do I know thee. And though it be true that I was
made of purpose, for the seeing of thee, yet hitherto, I never did that for
which I was made. O miserable condition of man, who lost the thing to which he
was ordained. O woeful heavy chance! Alas what is it, that he lost; and what
is it that he found? What departed, and what remained. He lost felicity, to
which he was ordained; and he met with misery, to which he was not ordained.
That departed, without which nothing can be happy; and that remained, which of
it self is nothing but pure misery. Then did man feed upon the bread of
Angels, after which now he has such hunger; and now he feeds upon the bread
of sorrow, to which then he was a stranger. O thou my Lord, how long will thou
forget us? How long will thou turn thy face from us? When will thou regard,
and hear us? When will thou illuminate these eyes of ours, and show us that
face of thine? When will thou restore thy self to us, and hear us? Behold us,
O Lord, and hearken to us, and enlighten us, and show thy self to us, and
restore thy self to us; that once we may be happy in thee, without whom we
are so truly unhappy. O Lord, I beseech thee, inuit and help us. My soul is
all made bitter, by her desolation; sweeten it by thy consolation. I beseech
thee, O Lord, since I have been hungry in search of thee, let me not be
forsaken in being unfed by thee. I come faint with hungar toward thee, let me
not depart empty from thee. I come poor to thee who art rich; miserable to
thee who art merciful. Do not send me away needy, and disgraced. O my Lord, I
am all bent downward, nor can I look but downward, do thou erect me that I
may look upward, and that with great attention. My iniquityes have ouergrowne
my head; they have overwhelmed me; and they hang upon me like a huge weight.
Unfold me, and empty me, and let not that Well stretch out his mouth to
swallow me. Teach me to seek thee; and when I seek thee let me see thee; for
neither can I seek thee, if thou do not teach me, nor can I find thee, if
thou do not manifest thy self to me. Let me seek thee by desiring thee; let
me desire thee by seeking thee. Let me find thee by loving thee; and let me
love thee, by finding thee.

CHAP. XXXII. Of the Goodness of God,.
I Confess to thee, O Lord, and I give thee thanks, in that thou have created
me after this thine Image, that so being mindful of thee, I may consider, and
love thee. But so is my soul defaced, with the corruption of vice; and it is
so obscured with the smoke of sin, that it cannot perform that for which it
was made, unless it be renewed and reformed by thee. O Lord, thou who
impartest the gift of spiritual understanding, I beseech thee grant that I may
understand as much as thou know to be expedient for me. For thou art as we
believe, and thou art that very thing which we believe and we believe that
thou art some what, then which nothing greater, and nothing better can be
conceived. What therefore art thou, O Lord God (since nothing can be conceived
either greather or better then thou art) but only that sovereign good, which
existing by it self alone, did create al other things of nothing? What good
can therefore be wanting, to that sovereign good, whereby all good things are.
Thou art therefore just, and true, and blessed; and whatsoever else, which it is
better to be then not to be, that thing thou art. But yet if thou be all
supremely just, how comes it to pass, that thou pardonnest sinners? Is it
because thy goodness does exceed our understanding? This mystery lies hid in
that inaccessible light, which thou do inhabit, yea in that most deep, and
most secret profoundity of thy Goodness, that fountain does lie hid, from
whence the river of thy mercy flows. For although thou be wholly, and
supremely just; yet therefore art thou merciful to wicked men, because thou
art also wholly and supremely Good. And thou should be less good, if thou
were not good to any who is wicked. For he is better, who is, good both to the
good and to the had, then he who is good, but to the good. And better is he who
is good both in pardoning, and in punishing wicked men, then another who is
only good in punishing. And therefore art thou also merciful, because thou art
wholly and supremely Good.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of the delightful fruition of God.
O Thou immense goodness, who exceedest all understanding. Let thy mercy, which
so abundantly preceedeth from thee, descend down on me, let that flow into
me, which flows from the. Pardon me by thy mercy, least else thy justice be
forced to take revenge upon me. Styr thy self up, now, O my soul, and erect
thy whole understanding, and consider (to the uttermost of all thy power) what
kind, and how great a good that is, which is God himself. For if every
particulier good thing do carry with itsome delight do but seriously consider
how delightful that good must needs be, which contains the delight of all
good things; and that too, no such kind of delight, as we experience in
things created, but a delight so very different, as the Creator, is more
excellent then the creature. Now if that life which is created be good, how
good is that other life, which created this? If this health be delightful,
which is made; how delightful must that needs be, which made all this health?
If the Wisdoms be amiable, which is exercised in the consideration and
knowledge of created things; how amiable must that other Wisdoms be, which
created and framed all of nothing? And in fine, if the delight which is taken
in delightful things be very great, and of great variety; how various, and how
great is that delight, which is taken in him, who created all these delightful
things? O how happy shall he be, that shall arrive to, and e^ioy this good;
Yea how happy shall he not be? Infaillibly whatsoever he would have to be,
shall be; and whatsoever he would not, shall not be. He shall there, be so
endued with such felicity, both of body and soul, as neither the eye has
seen, nor the ear has heard, nor has it entered into the heart of man.

CHAP. XXXIV. That this supreme good is to be desired.
WHY do thou therefore wander, O thou man, in the search of any good,
concerning either thy body or thy soul? Love thou that one good, wherein all
good things are, and it is enough. Desire thou that one single good, which
conteyneth all good, and it will suffice. For what do thou, O boby of mine,
desire, what do thou desire, O my soul? There is in that good, whatsoever
thou can desire or love. If thou be delighted with beauty, the just shall
shin bright like the Sun. If speed or strenght, or ability to do what thou will with thy body; nothing shall be able to resist thee, since the. Saints
shall be as the Angels of God: For a corporal body is sowed, but it shall rise
up a spiritual body; not that it is so by nature, but by participation. If
thou desire a long and healthful life, in heaven there shall be a health full
eternity, and an eternal health for the just shall live for ever; and their
saluatio is of our Lord. If thou desire to have a satiety, and fullnes of all
things; Men shall be satisfied when the glory of our Lord shall appear. If thou
desire to be inebriated, me^ shall there be inebriated, by that ever growing
plenty of the house of God. If music; the Angels shall be singing there, for
all eternity. If pleasure which is chaste and pure, our Lord shall give then to
drink of the torrent of his pleasure. If wisdom, the very wisdom of God
will to them declare himself who is wisdom. If friendship they shall love God
more then themselves, and God will love them better them they can love
themselves; because they love him, and themselves and one another, in him; and
he loves himself, and them, by himself. If concord with one another be
esteemed; they have all but one will, because they have no other will, but the
supreme will of God. If power, they shall have the same dominion over their
own will which God has over his. For as God can do what he will by himself,
so shall they be able to do what they will by him. And as they cannot will any
thing but what he wills; so will he will, whatsoever they will; and so what they
will cannot choose but be. If wealth and honor, God does place his good and
faithful servants over many goods; yea they shall be called the sons of God,
and Gods; and they shall be his heirs, and the coheirs of Christ. If true
security, they shall be as certainly assured, that no good thing shall be ever
wanting to them, as they shall be sure that neither they will forgo it
willingly, nor that he who loves them, will take it away against their will,
whom he so loves; nor yet that there is any thing mightier then God, which is
able to separate him and them from one another. Now what kind of joy, and how
great must that needs be, where such a good as this, is to be inioyed.

CHAP. XXXV. Of the mutual Charity of the Saints in Heaven.
O Thou heart of man, thou poor heart, thou heart which know what belonges to
cares and miseries, by experience; or rather which art even ouer-welmed by
them, how much would thou rejoice, if thou did abound with all those
blessings. Ask thy most inward powers if they would be able to contain the
joy, which would grow to thee, by such felicity as that. But now if any other,
whom thou did absoluty love, as thou did love thy self, should possess
the self same beatitude, with thee; thy joy would be doubled, because thou
would rejoice no less for him, then for thy self. And if two or three, or
many more were possessors of it, thou would rejoice for every one of them, as
for thy self; supposing that thou louedst every one of them as thy self. What
kind of thing, will therefore, that perfect Charity be, of innumerable Angels,
and blessed men, since no one loves another less then himself; and no
otherwise will every one rejoice, for any other then for himself. If therefore
the heart of man will scarce be able to contain it self for the single joy,
which himself will takes in so great a good; how will he be capable of this so
great joy, of so many others?

Again, look how much more a man loves another, and so much more does he
rejoice at his good. And now, as in that supreme felicity, every one will,
without comparison, love God better then himself, and all the rest; so also
will he, without comparison, rejoice more in the felicity of God then in that
of himself, and of all the rest of his fellow-Saints. And if they shall love
God withal their heart, all their mind, and al their soul, in such sort as that
yet all their heart, and all their mind, and all their soul cannot
sufficiently comprehend the dignity of that love; without fail they will also
rejoice with all their heart, withal their mind, and withal their soul, so
that all their heart, mind, and soul, shall not be able to contain the fulness
of that joy.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of the fulness of the joy of Heaven.
O My God, and my Lord, my hope, and the joy of my heart; tell my soul, if this
be that joy, whereof thou have said by thy son, Ask, and you shall receive,
that so your joy may be full. For I have found a certain joy, which is full,
and more then full; the heart, the mind, the soul, and the whole man being full
thereof: But yet in heaven there will be another joy beyond measure, greater
then this is. There, they who are to enjoy it, shall not enter into all that
joy; but they, being all full of joy, shall enter into that joy of their Lord.
Tell me O Lord, tell thy servant, and tell it to my heart within, if this be that
joy, into which those servants of thine shall enter; who are to enter into the
joy of their Lord? But even that joy where with thy elect shall rejoice, has
neither been seen with the eye, nor heard by the ear, nor has it entered into
the heart of man. So that yet, I have not been able to say, O Lord, how great
that joy is, which thy Elect shall enjoy. It is certain, that they shall joy
as much as they love, and they shall love as much, as they shall know thee O
Lord. But how great shall that love be? It is certain that neither the eye
has seen, nor the ear has hard, nor has it entered into the heart of man, in
this life, how much they shall know and love thee, in that other life, O my
God, I beseech thee that I may know thee; that I may love thee, that I may joy
in thee. And if, in this life, I may not do it to the full, yet at least make
me profit in it more, and more, that at last I may arrive to that fullnes. Let
the knowledge which here I have of thee, proceed further that so it may there,
be full. Let my love of thee increase here, that so it may be full there; and
that here, my joy, may be great in hope, and there, full, in deed. O Thou
true God, I beg, that I may receive what thou have promised, that so my joy may
be fulfilled. In the mean time, let my mind meditate upon it; let my tongue
speak of it; let my heart love it; let my discourse work upon it; let my soul
be hungry and even my very flesh thirst after it; and let my whole substance
desire it; till such time as I shall enter into the joy of my Lord, where I may
remain for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

