

Lyric Poems, Made in Imitation of the ITALIANS. Of which, many are
TRANSLATIONS From other Languages.

Mart. Epigram. Dic mihi quid meliuus desidiosus agam? By PHILIP AIRS Esquire

Licensed, R. L. S.

LONDON, Printed by I. M. for Ios. Knight and F. Saunders at the Blue Anchor in
the Lower Walk of the New-Exchange, 1687.

TO THE HONORABLE Sir JOHN FENWICK, Baronet, Brigadier General of His
Majesty's Forces, and Lieutenant Colonel of the Second Troop of His Majesty's
Guards of Horse.
SIR,
NEITHER the considerable Posts, to which your Merits have formerly advanced
you in Armies abroad in other Countries, nor those which by your Experience in
Military Affairs, you have justly gained at home in your Own, could ever be
able to hinder you from delighting your self with Books. Those are your
Companions, as well in your Tent, as your House; wherein your Genius has
faithfully guided you in the true Paths of Honor; Pallas being the Goddess
both of Arms and Learning. The Greek Hero could not sleep without Homer's
Iliads under his Pillow. Besides whom, you have two others for your Pattern,
the most accomplished Gentlemen, and Men admirable in your Profession, the
World could ever boast of, I mean the famous Scipio, and Julius Caesar, both
equally addicted to Arts and Arms.

I confess I know your Inclinations lead you to things of more solid Learning,
yet guessing that a Variety may not be unpleasant, I have ventured to Dedicate
this to you, hoping it may serve your Diversion when tired with Business, or
your more serious Studies. In this Piece there is a Mixture of Subjects as well
as of Authors, some of which, I presume, may give you the Satisfaction, I wish,
in their Perusal; For I can justly boast that the Translations, are from many
of the most admired Poets both Ancient and Modern, in their several Languages
extant, which of themselves would need no Apology for their appearing in
public, were it not for the Blemishes they may have received in passing through my
hands; And none of these having been Englished by the Ingenious Translators of
our late published Miscellanies, as I ever heard, may possibly appear new to
you.

Sir, I hope you will pardon the Liberty I have taken, in showing, by so slight
a Present, the Respect, and Honor I justly bear you, I being glad to lay hold
on any occasion to declare to the World that I am,

SIR, Your most Obliged, Humble Servant, Ph. Airs.

THE PREFACE.
EVery Product of a Man's Wit nowadays, had need be like that of Jove's
Brain, at least in its coming out armed, that it might immediately be in a
Condition of defense against the furious Assaults of Critics, some of which
are ready to run down a Book when they have scarce read the Title Page: Of
these I expect not a few that will be carping, and first perchance at my Title,
Why Lyric Poems? I having in most of them exceeded the proper measure, which in
strictness should not reach to the Heroic. To these I say, that I have herein
followed the modern Italian, Spanish, and French Poets, who always call Lyrics,
all such Sonnets, and other small Poems, which are proper to be set to Music,
without restraining themselves to any particular Length of Verse. And our grand
Master of Lyrics, even Horace himself, has sometimes inserted the Heroic
amongst his: This also his great Imitator Casimire the Polander, has often
done: And the ingenious Mr. Gibbs or Gibbesius our Countryman at Rome takes
the same liberty; which yet, I confess, the Greeks would never allow of. If any
quarrel at the Economy, or Structure of these Poems, many of them being
Sonnets, Canzons, Madrigals, etc. objecting that none of our great Men, either
Mr. Waller, Mr. Cowley, or Mr. Dryden, whom it was most proper to have
followed, have ever stooped to any thing of this sort; I shall very readily
acknowledge, that being sensible of my own Weakness and Inability of ever
attaining to the performance of one thing equal to the worst piece of theirs,
it easily dissuaded me from that attempt, and put me on this; which is not
without President; For many eminent Persons have published several things of
this nature, and in this method, both Translations and Poems o^ their own; As
the famous Mr. Spencer, Si^ Philip Sidney, Sir Richard Fanshaw, Mr* Milton, and
some few others; The success of a^ which, in these things, I must needs say,
cannot much be boasted of; and tho I have little reason after it to expect
Credit from these my slight Miscellanies, yet has it not discouraged me from
adventuring on what my Genius prompted me to. As for those Pieces which I have
translated from the modern Poets, I may presume to say, I have taken them from
the most celebrated in each Language: The Italians were, Fra. Petrarca, Cav.
Marino, Girolamo Preti, Cav. Guarini, Allessandro Tassoni, and others; The
Spaniards, Garci Lasso de la Vega, Don Francisco de Quevedo, Don Luis de
Gongora, etc. The Portugueses, Luis de Camoens, etc. But for the French I could
scarce find any thing amongst them of this sort, worth my pains of translating.
The Latin Authors are so well known, I need say nothing of them. Some of the
small Greek Poets I have endeavored to render as close to the sense of the
Original as I could: with others I have taken the liberty of paraphrasing on
them: or being but Fragments, have only taken Hints from them; the like I have
done with many of the Italian and Spanish Poets. Nor can I deny, but that I
have purposely omitted the names of some of the Authors, not acknowledging them
to be Translations: Either because I was not willing my own things should be
distinguished from the rest; Or indeed because most of those nameless Pieces
may more properly be said to be mine, than the Authors, from whom I only took
the Hints of them. Now if any accuse me of Injustice for it, I have this to
say, that there were but few of the Old Latin Poets, to whom it might not be
objected, that they have often assisted themselves, by such Hints, and almost
entire Translations from the Greeks, or Imitations of one another. So did
Terence from Menander, Seneca from Euripides, and Virgil is not content to walk
in the Footsteps of Homer, but also to have followed, and considerably borrowed
from Hesiod, Theocritus, Euripides, and amongst the Latins, from Ennius,
Pacuvius, Lucretius, and others, of which I could give many instances. There is
a learned Italian, one Fulvio Ursini, who composed a Book of the Thefts of
Virgil, which tho I call Thefts, deserve not the Name, for in that manner which
he has used them, they are rather an Honor than a Discredit to him; and it is
reported ^e himself, when it was alleged to him by some of his Detractors,
that he had stolen his Poem from Homer, answered, Magnarum esse virium, Herculi
Clavam extorquere de manu. Meaning, That as it was a great matter to wrest
Hercules's Club out of his hand, and keep it; so was it to take Homer's Verses,
and make them his own. This is an Art, which to perform it very well, but few
attain to the Skill, and is not only allowed of, but commended by Horace in his
Art of Poetry.

If I should be blamed for thus exposing my self, when so many of our Ingenious
Poets have of late published their Works with such general Applause, I hope I
may be allowed, without being thought arrogant, to say, as some of those might,
with Theognis, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)


And if for the Credit of my several Authors, whom I have here promiscuously
shuffled in with mine own Things: Together with the Genius of the Age which
seems to be delighted with such Variety, shall make this Piece acceptable to
the Judicious Reader; I shall not care for the Bolts of those Censurers, who
make it their Business to cry down every thing which comes to their hands, and
which they many times understand not, to such I shall apply this of the
afore-recited Author.

-- (...)
(...).
To Philip Airs, Esquire On his POEMS.
AS when with utmost Skill some Architect
Designs a Noble Structure to erect,
Searches what ever each Country does produce
For outward Ornament, or inward Use:
So, Friend, from diverse Books thy laboring Thought
Has all the huddled amorous Notions sought,
And into form and shape the unlickt Cubs has brought.
Here Proteus Love thou show in various Dress,
From Gaudy France to more Mejestick Greece;
Something thou gather'st too from Roman Ore,
And Spain contributes to thy well-got Store,
Whence (each by thee refined in English Mold)
Verse smooth as Oil does slow, and pure as Gold.
Thus the laborious Be with painful Toil
From various Flowers of a various Soil,
Duly concocting the abstracted Juice,
In plenty does th'Ambrosial Food produce.
C. Dartiquenave.

Lyric Poems.
The PROEM. To LOVE. A Sonnet.
LET others sing of Mars, and of his Train,
Of great Exploits, and Honorable Scars,
The many dire Effects of Civil Wars,
Death's Triumphs, and Encomiums of the Slain.
^sing the Conflicts I my self sustain,
With her (Great Love) the Cause of all my Cares,
Who wounds with Looks, and fetters with her Hairs.
This mournful Tale requires a Tragic Strain.
^yes were the Arms, did first my Peace control,
Wounded by them, a Source of Tears there sprung,
^unning like Blood from my afflicted Soul;
Thou Love, to whom this Conquest does belong,
^eave me at least the Comfort to condole,
And as thou wound'st my Heart, inspire my Song.
The REQUEST. To LOVE. A Sonnet.
O Love, who in my breast's most noble part,
Did that fair Image lodge, that Form Divine*
In whom the Sum of Heavenly Graces shine,
And there ingrav'dst it with thy golden Dart.
Now mighty Work man! Help me by thy Art,
(Since my dull Pen trembles to strike a Line)
That I on paper copy the Design,
By thee expressed so lively in my Heart.
Lend me, when I this great Attempt do try,
A Feather from thy wings, that whilst to write,
My hand's employed, my thoughts may soar on high*
Thy Torch, which fires our hearts and burns so bright,
My darker Fancy let it is Flame supply,
And through my numbers dart celestial Light.
The COMPLAINT. A Sonnet.
NOW angry Juno sends from Heaven in spite
Rivers and Seas, instead of moderate showers:
Horror invests the World, and the bright Hours
^f Delos God, are changed to dismal Night.
^ crowds of anxious Thoughts on every side,
Invade my Soul, and through my restless Eyes,
I shed such streams of Tears, my Heart even tryes
^eath's pangs, whilst I by force in Life abide.
^^t the brisk Gales, which rising by and by,
^here Sol at night in Thetis Lapp shall ly,
Will make Heaven clear, and drive away the Rain.
(...) Cynthia! That the blasts of Sighs I vent,
^^uld ease my Breast of cloudy Discontent,
Which still with fresh Assaults renews my Pain.
From Girolamo Preti, out of Italian, on a Race-Horse.
SON of the Air, Rival of Winds when high,
Swift Courser, thou that without Wings do fly,
Quicker than Arrows from a Parthian Bow;
Compared to thee, Jove's Thunderbolts are slow.
Men come from Lands remote, thy Race to see,
But when you are passed, no Eye can follow thee;
Thine far exceeds the Motion of the Spears,
Thought cannot equal thee in thy Carrears.
Thy Feet shake The Earth, whilst Sparks do thee surround*
Yet tread not on the Flints, nor touch the Ground:
Thee for his Charrot, Sol would have away,
But that he knows thy Speed would shorten Day.
Invites Poets and Historians to write in Cynthia's Praise. A Sonnet.
COME all ye Wits, that with Immortal Rhymes,
Glory to others, and your selves create:
And you that gratify the future Times,
Whilst Tales of Love, and Battles ye relate;
^ome, turn your Studies, and your Eyes this way,
This Theme will crown your heads with lasting Bays,
It Is Cynthia's Beauty, Heavenly Cynthia;
Come swell your Volumes all with Cynthia's Praise.
^osterity will then your Works admire,
And for her sake shall them as Jewels prize,
(...) things to Cynthia's Glory must conspire,
She shall be worshipped with the Deities.
To her make foreign Lands pay Honors due,
Thus shall you live by her, and she by you.
Cynthia on Horseback. A Sonnet.
FAIR Cynthia mounted on her sprightly Pad,
Which in white Robe with silver Fringe was clad,
And swift as wind his graceful steps did move,
As with his Beauteous Guide he would been in love.
Though fierce, yet humble still to her command,
Obeying every touch of her fair hand;
Her golden Bitt his foaming mouth did check,
It spread his Crest, and raised his bending Neck.
She was the Rose upon this Hill of snow,
Her sparkling Beauty made the glorious Show;
Whence secret Flames men in their bosoms took:
The Graces and the Cupids her surround,
Attending her, while cruel she does wound,
With Switch her Horse, and Hearts with every Lo^
On the Death of Cynthia's Horse. A Sonnet.
Whatever the World could boast of fair or good,
Thy back with pride has born, thou happy Horse,
By which you are fallen in middle of thy course,
Too feeble to sustain so great a Load.
Oh happy Fall! Oh dying full of Bliss!
Whilst she that guided Love did guide thy Head,
Big with this thought, thou willingly art dead,
Scorning another burden after this.
A Heaven of Beauty over-press'd thy Back,
This might have made Alcides shoulders crack,
And Atlas truckl'd under such a weight:
Heaven thee amongst its Horses longed to see,
As here the World was late in love with thee,
When carrying her who to the Sun gave light.
On a Fountain, and its Architect.
A Watery Heap by a fresh Torrent fed,
Hoary with Froth, lifts up its reverend Head,
Whence various Currents falling, their Recoyl
Makes them, when cold as Ice, appear to boil.
Out from his Temples in an artful Crown
Clear Drops, like strings of Pearls, come trickling down,
Which quickly caught, and thence dispersed again,
Seem like a Cloud burst into Showers of Rain.
As once Enceladus, our Architect,
Great Heaps on Heaps of Marble does erect;
And, like a second Moses, when that is done,
Commands fresh Springs of Water from the Stone.
When Heavens are clear, this Man a second Jove,
From Earth exhales the Waters up above,
And thence in Cataracts can make them pour,
When i^ the Sky there is neither Cloud nor Shower.
Describes the place where Cynthia is sporting her self.
BEhold you' Hill, how it is swelled with pride,
And that aspiring Oak upon its side,
With how much scorn they overlook the Plain,
Proud of the lovely Guest they entertain.
See with what have those Crystal Springs do flow,
T'incorporate with the Silver Brook below;
There does my wanton Cynthia sporting stand,
Printing her Footsteps on the yielding sand.
Look Thyrsis how she fills with Joy the place,
She Baths her Feet, and views her Angels Face;
Sure I Have a Rival of that amorous Hill,
And those are streams of tears which thence distill.
His RETIREMENT.
A Purling Brook glides by this place away,
It Is Tribute to the Royal Thames to pay,
Nature makes Arbours here, and every Tree
Disposes all it is Boughs to favor me;
The Birds sweet Notes here Echo's do repeat,
Here gentle Winds do moderate Summers heat:
Clear is the Air, and verdant is the Grass,
My Couch of Flowers, the Stream's my Looking-glass.
Ah Cynthia! All the Birds that hear and see,
Seem in their Language to condole with me,
And as I mourn, they pretty Songs do sing,
TO express thy Rigor, and my Suffering.
Whilst to the listening Air I make my moan,
And sigh and murmur sitting here alone:
The very Air sighs at my misery,
The Waters murmur too in Sympathy.
A Character of his Friend, W. B. Esquire
TO raise up Virtue when it is sinking down,
Toy^ less for Wealth than to acquire Renown,
T'inrich the Mind, and crown the Head with Bays,
Subdue the Passions, and the Soul to raise.
TO increase in Glory, as in years he grows,
To bear ripe Fruit, even e're his Blossom blows,
Faster than Honors, Merits to repeat,
Keep the Sense cold, but ^ill the Soul with heat.
Not Arts neglect, nor slight Apollo's Lute,
Whilst of Astrea he is in hot pursuit,
In ancient Tongues new Eloquence rehearse,
To master both the Greek and Latin Verse.
Against Sloth, perpetual Hatred to maintain,
But with the Muses Friendship still retain;
Here upon Earth all others to transcend,
(...) still the labor of my Noble Friend.
A Sonnet. Of LOVE.
IF Love it be not, what is this I feel?
If it be Love, what Love is, fain I Would know?
If good, why the effects severe and ill?
If bad, why do its torments please me so?
If willingly I burn, should I complain?
If against my will, what helps it to lament?
Oh living Death! oh most delightful Pain!
How comes all this, if I do not consent?
If I consent, it is madness then to grieve;
Amidst these storms, in a weak Boat I Am tossed
Upon a dangerous Sea, without relief,
No help from Reason, but in Error lost.
Which way in this distraction shall I turn?
That freeze in Summer, and in Winter burn.
On the Picture of Lucretia stabbing her self.
LVcrece inflamed with Anger, Grief and Shame,
Despising Life, yet careful of her Fame,
Wounds her fair Breast, tho armed with Innocence
Could suffer Death, but could not the Offense.
Her Steel was sharp, her End with Glory Crowned,
She sought Revenge, and valued not the Wound;
This so appeased her rage, that being Dead,
She looked like one revenged, not injured.
'Twas Beauty sinned, said she, then let it dye,
That forced me to this last extremity;
Were It not for Beauty I had guiltless been,
For it was that made lustful Tarquin sin.
So I to Violence a Prey was made,
No Tears availed when Virtue was betrayed.
Haughty he was, my Beauty proud as he,
They made me Slave, but thus my self I free.
Complains, being hindered the sight of his Nymph.
TO view these Walls each night I come alone,
And pay my Adoration to the Stone,
Whence Joy and Peace are influenced on me,
For it is the Temple of my Deity.
As Nights and Days an anxious Wretch by stealth
Creeps out to view the place which hoards his Wealth,
So to this House that keeps from me my Heart,
I come, look, traverse, weep, and then depart.
She Is fenced so strongly in on every side,
Thought enters, but my Footsteps are denied.
Then sighs in vain I breathe, and Tears let fall:
Kiss a cold Stone sometimes, or hugg the Wall*
For like a Merchant that rough Seas has crossed,
Near home is shipwrack'd, and his Treasure lost;
So, tossed in storms of sorrow, on firm ground,
I in a Sea of mine own Tears am drowned.
The Pleased Captive. A SONG.
A Glorious Angel coming on the Wing,
From Heaven descended near a River side,
Where me alone my Destiny did bring;
To view the pleasant Fields without a Guide;
A Net she would laid drawn by a silken String,
So hid in Grass, it could not be espied,
There was I captive taken in her Snare,
But Cynthia's chains who would not choose to wear!
The Incurable. A SONG.
ONE, amongst Flowers, green Leaves, and the cool Grass
Takes his delight, and pleasant hours does pass,
This in a Cave can rest, or quiet Grove,
And that in Wars forgets the Thoughts of Love:
Some vent their Sighs to the Air, and ease do find,
A Spring may quench the fever of the Mind.
But to my Grief no Remedy can bring,
Flowers, Leaves, Grass, Cave, Grove, Wars, the Air, nor Spring.
On a Fair Beggar.
BArefoot and ragged, with neglected Hair,
She whom the Heavens at once made poor and fair,
With humble voice and moving words did stay,
To beg an Alms of all who passed that way.
But thousands viewing her became her Prize,
Willingly yielding to her conquering Eyes,
And caught by her bright Hairs, whilst careless she
Makes them pay Homage to her Poverty.
So mean a Boon, said I, what can extort
From that fair Mouth, where wanton Love to sport
Amidst the Pearls and Rubies we behold?
Nature on thee has all her Treasures spread,
Do but incline thy rich and precious Head,
And those fair Locks shall pour down showers o^ Gold.
A Sonnet. Out of Italian, from Claudio Achillini. Written by a Nymph in her
own Blood.
SINCE, Cruel Thyrsis, you my Torments slight,
And take no notice of my Amorous Flame,
^n these Vermilion Letters thus I write
My bloody Reasons to confirm the same.
These of my Passion are the lively Marks,
Which from my Veins you here in Blood see writ,
Touch them, your Breast will kindle with the Sparks,
The ardent Characters are re^king yet.
Nor can my Pen alone my Heart explain,
My very Soul o're-charg'd with grief, I fain
Would send enclosed herein, the truth to prove.
And if I Have been too sparing of my Blood,
This is the Reason why I stopped the Flood,
I would not spoil the Face I Would have you love.
A Sonnet. The Rose and Lily.
COurted by Cupids, and the Amorous Air,
Upon a shady Throne, at her Repose,
She sat, than whom, none e're so sweet or fair;
It was the Queen of Flowers, the Blushing Rose.
With no less pride, upon his Bed of State,
A Lily, pale with Envy, looked that way;
With humble Flowers, encompassed round he sat,
And scorned the Scepter at her Feet to lay.
To Arms, with Thorns and Prickles, they prepare,
And each designs to try it out by War;
Till on good Counsel, they in Rule combine:
So in your Face, the lovely White and Red,
Cynthia, I see, all Quarrels banished,
And Rose and Lily do in Empire join.
A Defiance, returning to the Place of his past Amors.
A Heart of Ice, did here my Heart inflame,
Bound with loose Hairs, a Prisoner I became,
^ere first sweet Love, tho bitter in the end,
^latter'd with Spite, with Kindness did offend.
^ut from Assaults, a new Defense I Am taught,
and my past Ills an Antidote have brought;
^o the poor Bird that once escape has made,
^eturns with caution where the Net is laid.
^ith my late Damp, all Sparks of Love expire,
My Feet approach, yet does my Soul retire,
^ho near her Presence, I can justly say,
My Eyes, and Mind tend quite another way.
With her my Lute could no Attention find,
^ow will I please my self, not sing to the Wind;
With Laurel here, where Cypress late I wore,
^ll triumph more than e're I grieved before.
DISTANCE.
FAR from the Fire I burn, and run in vain,
Slowly from winged Love, to 'scape the Pain;
So the swift Arrows, flying quick as Wind,
Wound them that run, when th'Archer stays behind.
Love, though I strive with Art to shun the Blow,
Fiercely assaults my Heart where e're I go;
As he can best a mortal Stroke command,
Who has most compass for his striking Hand.
Hoping to 'scape, I as the Bird do fare,
That has his Foot entangled in a Snare;
Fears Death, or in a Prison to be cast,
Flutters its Wings, and strives, but still is fast.
So I, with all my Toil, no Ease have got,
My Struggling does but faster tie the Knot,
For Cynthia imitating Heavens swift Ray,
Near, or at distance, can her Flames convey.
A Sonnet. On Signor Pietro Reggio his setting to Music several of Mr. Cowley's
Poems.
^F Theban Pindar raised his Country's Fame,
Whilst its great Deeds he does in Odes rehearse,
And they made greater by his Noble Verse,
Gratitude are Trophies to his Name:
^hen English Pindar shall for ever live,
Since his Divine, and Lofty Poetry,
Secured, Great Reggio, by thy Harmony,
^all to it self Immortal Glory give.
^he World's amazed to hear the sweet Consent,
^^wixt thy charming Voice and Instrument,
They Would stop the Bays which from Apollo fled;
^^y skilful Notes would make in full Carreer
^^^ebus the God of Music stay to hear,
And with his Daphne crown thy Rival Head.
From a Drinking Ode of Alcaeus, Beginning, (...).
DRink on, tho Night be spent and Sun do shine,
Did not the Gods give anxious Mortals Wine?
To wash all Care and Sorrow from the Heart,
Why then so soon should Jovial F^llows part?
Come, let this Bumper ^or the next make way,
Who Is sure to live, and drink another Day?
An EPITAPH. On a Dutch CAPTAIN.
HERE lies a Soldier not obliged to Fame,
Being forced his own Achievements to reher^^
He died not rich, yet I would tell his Name,
Could I but comprehend it in my Verse.
On Cynthia, singing a Recitative Piece of Music.
O Thou Angelick Spirit, Face, and Voice,
Sweet Siren, whose soft Notes our Souls rejoice,
^et when thou do recite some Tragic Verse,
Thy Tone and Action make it sweetly fierce.
^^ thou soft, loud, sad or brisk Note do hit,
^^ carries still our Hearts along with it;
Thou can heat, cool, grieve us, or make us smile,
^ay stab or kill, yet hurt us not the while.
Thy Gesture, Shape, and Mien, so pleasing are,
With thee, no Humane Being can compare;
Thy Passions, all our Passions do excite,
And thy feigned Grief does real Tears invite.
^^istning to thee, our Bodies seems as dead,
^or our rapt Souls then up to Heaven are fled;
^o great a Monarch art thou, that thy Breath
^as power to give us either Life, or Death.
A Sonnet. On the Picture of Cavalier Guarini, Author of Il Pastor Fido,
painted by the Famous Borgianni, and set up in his Funeral Pile at Rome.
YOU, who to Famed Guarini, now he is dead,
Your Verses consecrate, and Statues rear,
For that sweet Padan Swan your Tears have shed,
Sweetest that ever did, or will sing here.
Behold this Picture on his Funeral Pile,
Your mournful Spirits 'twill with Joy revive,
Though th'Artist cheats your Senses all the while,
For it is but Paint which you would swear does live.
This serves to keep our Friend in Memory,
Since Death has robbed us of his better Part,
And that he so might live as never to dye,
He drew himself too, but with different Art.
Judge, which with greatest Life and Spirit looks,
Borgianni's Painting, or Guarini's Books.
On old Rome.
HERE was old Rome that stretched her Empire far,
In Peace was feared, triumphant was in War:
Here 'twas, for now its place is only found,
All that was Rome lies buried under Ground.
These Ruins hid in Weeds, on which Man treads,
Were Structures which to Heaven raised their proud Heads:
Rome that subdued the World, to Time now yields,
With Rubbish swells the Plains, and strews the Fields.
Think not to see what so Renowned has been,
Nothing of Rome, in Rome is to be seen;
Vulcan and Mars, those wasting Gods have come,
And taken Romes Greatness utterly from Rome:
They spoiled with Malice, e're they would depart,
What e're was rare of Nature or of Art:
Its greatest Trophies, they destroyed and burned;
She that over turned the World, to Dust is turned.
Well might she fall, against whom such Foes conspire,
Old Time, Revengeful Man, and Sword and Fire:
Now all we see of the Great Empress Rome,
Are but the Sacred Relics of her Tomb.
A SONG. Revenge against Cynthia.
SEE, Cupid, we have found our lovely Foe,
Who slights thy Power, and does my Flame despise,
Now thou art armed with all thy Shafts and Bow,
And she at Mercy 'twixt two Enemies.
Asleep she is laid upon this Bed of Flowers,
Her Charms the sole Defense to save her Breast;
Thoughtless of injured me, or of thy Powers;
Oh, that a Guilty Soul can take such rest!
Now may thou easily with a single Dart
Revenge thy self, and me upon her Heart.
A Sonnet Love's Contrariety.
I Make no War, and yet no Peace have found,
With heat I melt, when starved to death with cold.
I soa^ to Heaven, while grovelling on the Ground,
Embrace the World, yet nothing do I hold.
I Am not confined, yet cannot I depart,
Nor loose the Chain, tho not a Captive led;
Love kills me not, yet wounds me to the Heart,
Will neither have m' alive, nor have me dead.
Being blind, I see; not having voice, I cry:
I wish for Death, while I of Life make choice;
I hate my self, yet love you tenderly;
Do feed of Tears, and in my Grief rejoice.
Thus, Cynthia, all my Health is but Disease;
Both Life and Death do equally displease.
Invites his Nymph to his Cottage.
ON you' Hill's Top which this sweet Plain commands,
Fair Cynthia, all alone my Cottage stands,
Against Storms, and scorching Heats well fortified,
With Pines, and spreading Oaks on every side.
My Lovely Garden too adjoining lies,
Of sweetest Flowers, and of the richest Dies:
The Tulip, Jas'min, Emony, and Rose,
Of which we'll Garlands for thy Head compose.
Nature to make my Fountain, did its Part,
Which ever flows without the help of Art,
A faithful Mirroir shall its Waters be,
Where thou may sit beneath a shady Tree,
Admiring what above the World I prize,
Thy self, the Object of thine own fair Eyes;
And which is greatest let the Spring proclaim,
Thy Powers of Love, or this my Amorous Flame.
It Is hard to follow Virtue.
I Raised sometimes my Thoughts and fixed them right,
Where Virtue, and where Glory did invite,
And in the Steps of Few, and Best, have trod,
Scorning to take the Vulgar, Beaten Road.
But him who aims at Glory they deride,
He Is one against most, and worst must stemm the Tide*
Since now on sordid Wealth, this Age so blind,
As on its Chiefest Good has fixed its Mind:
For the Great Things, the World has in its Hand,
Are Gold and Silver, Jewels, and Command;
These are the Gifts, which Fortune does dispense,
And may be got by Theft, and Violence.
Yet from this Lethargy tho I arise,
And shake the Clouds of Error from my Eyes;
Reject the wrong, and Right to choose begin,
Than change my Course, I sooner can my Skin.
ENDYMION and DIANA. An Heroic Poem.
Written in Italian by Allessandro Tassoni.
I.
ON Bed of Flowers Endymion sleeping lay,
Tired with the Toil of a long Summers-day,
Whilst softest Winds, and Season of the Year,
Agree to make his Graces all appear:
The wanton Cupids in a Troop descend,
Play with his Horn, and do his Bow unbend,
And Love, this small Assembly came to grace,
Wondering to see the Shepherd's charming Face.
II.
The Air to view him could not choose but stay,
And with his Locks upon his Forehead play.
The Cupids round about him were employed,
While some did into Curls his Hair divide;
Others of Flowers, of which they would pic'kd and brought
Their Hands-full, many various Fancies wrought;
Fetters, as if they would his Feet restrain,
Wreaths for his Head, and for his Wrists a Chain.
III.
This, with his Lips compared, a Piony,
Another, a Vermilion Emony;
Then at his Cheeks a Rose and Lily tried,
The Rose it faded, and the Lily died.
Still was the Wind, the Meadow, Field and Grove,
The very Waters were not heard to move.
All things were hushed, and did a silence keep,
As some had whispered, Peace, here is Love asleep.
IV.
When the bright Goddess of the lowest Orb,
^eck'd with the Rays of Sol her absent Lord,
Of Heaven the dusky Mantle did unfold,
And silently Earth's wondrous Scene behold;
Then having first dispersed in little Showers,
The Pearly Dew upon the Grass and Flowers;
Spying this place which such delights could yield,
Came down to take the Pleasure of the Field.
V.
Quickly the little Cupids disappear,
^o soon as e're the Goddess drew but near;
Who seeing the sleeping Youth alone, she stays,
With Passion on his lovely face to gaze:
Till Virgin Modesty quenched her bold Flame;
Of Folly then convinced, she blushed for shame;
And just was turning to have quit the place,
But was recalled by that alluring Face.
VI.
^n through her Eyes a Spark slid to her Heart,
Which fired her Soul; Nor could she thence depart,
But nearer by degrees, her steps does guide,
Till she sat down close by the Shepherd's side;
And of the Flowers with which the Cupids played,
When Gyves, and Fetters they in Sport had made:
Such Snares she wove, her self was in them taken,
And as the Shepherd's Captive, wore his Chain.
VII.
Straight on his hand an eager Kiss she pressed,
Then thousand on his Lips, Cheeks, Eyes and Breast;
Nor in this Transport could her self contain,
'Till she with Kisses waked the sleeping Swain,
Who being amazed at that Celestial Light,
With Reverence trembled at the Glorious Sight:
He would have gone when fre'd from his Surprise,
But though he strove, she would not let him rise.
VIII.
Fair Sleeper, would thou go, said she, so soon,
Be not afraid, Behold it is the Moon,
That comes to sport with thee in this sweet Grove,
Guided by Fate, Necessity and Love:
Be not disturbed at this unusual Sight,
We silently in Joys will spend the Night:
But if thou tell what I to thee have sed,
Expect Heavens utmost Vengeance on thy Head.
IX.
Goddess of Night, that take'st from Sol thy Flame,
I, said the Youth, a silly Shepherd am;
But if thou promise me in Heaven a Place,
To be translated hence from Humane Race,
Then of my Faith thou may assured live,
Of which this Mantle as a Pledge I Will give;
The same my Father Etho gave the Night,
That he his Faith to Calice did plight.
X.
This said, his Mantle quickly he unbound,
That was with Flowers of Pearl embroidered round,
Which then he wore over his left shoulder flung,
And with two Ends beneath his right Arm hung;
Save it the Goddess, who had now thrown by
All Sense of Honor and of Modesty:
And like a Frost-nip'd Flower, she by his Charms
Being thus o'^come, dropped down into his Arms.
XI.
^ever more closely does the tender Vine,
about the shady Elm her Lover twine,
^or the green lvie more Affection bring,
^hen she about her Pine does kindly cling,
^han these two vigorous Lovers there expressed,
^^ve having shot his Fire through eithers Breast:
With all their Art and Industry they strove,
How they might then enjoy their fill of Love.
XII.
^^us Whilst in Wantonness they spend the Night,
^^d use all Skill that might promote delight;
^^w ^^r'd with what before they never had tried,
^^ese happy Lovers rested satisfied:
^hen Fair Diana lifting up her Eyes,
^^cused her cruel Stars and Destinyes,
That her so long through so much Error drew,
And let her rather Beasts than Love pursue.
XIII.
Ah, Fool! said she, How I too late repent,
That to the Woods I e're a Hunting went;
How many Years have I consumed since then,
Which I must never think to see again?
How many precious Minutes every Day,
Did I in that mad Pastime fool away!
And how much better is one sweet Embrace
Than all the toylsome Pleasures of the Chase?
From an Ode of Horace Beginning Vides ut alta stet nive candidum.
SEE how the Hills are candy'd over with Snow,
The Trees can scarce their Burdens undergo;
Frost does the Rivers wonted course retain,
That they refuse their Tribute to the Main:
Winds, Frost, and Snow against our Lives conspire;
Lay on more Wood (my Friends) and blow the Fire
Against their Assaults let us our Forces join,
Dissolve the Weather by the strength of Wine.
A COMPLAINT.
WHEN first I here to Cynthia spoke my Mind,
Near these sweet Streams, which to our thoughts were kind:
^h then in perfect Harmony we met,
and to our Concert joined the Rivulet.
^he Flowers, Plants, Echo's, Craggy Rocks and Dales,
^he pleasant Meads, proud Hills, and humble Vales,
^em'd then o're-joy'd at my Felicity,
Which now condole with me in Misery.
^t still the winged Inhab'tants of the Wood
^g, as my Change they had not understood:
^o sure the Melancholy Tunes they vent,
^e rather Notes of Grief, than Merriment.
^ Nymphs, that in these Crystal Streams do dwell!
^d after Sport rest quiet in your Cell:
^ce, clear as yours, a Happy Life I led,
^o now overwhelmed, with Grief, and live as dead.
Thus we through various Turns of Fortune run,
And sind no certain Rest till Life be done.
Love's Garden. Translated from Girolamo Preti.
I To Love's Garden came, with my Attire,
Was wove with Herbs of Hope, and of Desire,
Branches of Trouble too by me were worn,
Whose Flowers and Fruit, were Prejudice, and Scort*
'Twas walled with Pain, and Anguish round about,
And from a thousand places issued out,
Water of Grief, and Air of Sighs, beside,
Deceit and Cruelty did there reside.
Pride was the Keeper; and to cultivate
Was Jealousy, who still with mortal Hate,
Tare up my Happiness e're it could grow;
Whilst, like a Madman, thus I strive to sow,
Under the Shadow of a Thought that is kind,
I plow in Stone, dig Water, stop the VVind.
Seeing his own Picture, discourses of his Studies, and Fortune.
^HIS, which the Shadow of my Face does give,
Whose Counterfeit seems true, and Art alive,
^ows but the part of Man's Infirmity,
which to Age subject, must decay, and dye:
^t the Internal Nature's Excellence,
which does this Earthly Shadow influence:
(...)haps some Image may on Paper draw,
(...)ose Essence, never of Time shall stand in awe;
(...) by my Muses Help I hope to build
(...) Monuments, as never to Time shall yield;
(...)er than from these Colors can be had,
(...) to my Years, shall greater Numbers add.
^ when some Noble Work I enterprise,
^t might advance my Honor to the Skies;
^envious Fortune strikes a thousand ways,
(...)royes my Labors, and so blasts my Bays.
A Sonnet, of Petrarc, On the Death of Laura.
I Fill with Sighs the Air when e're I stand,
On yon' high Hill, and thence survey the Plain,
Where Laura, she who could my Heart command,
Did in her Earthly Paradise remain.
For now she is dead, and left me here alone,
Grieved for her loss, that I could gladly dye;
Drowning my Eyes in making of my Moan,
My Tears have left no space about me dry.
There is no Stone upon that craggy Hill,
Nor these sweet Fields, an Herb or Plant do bring*
Nor Flower amongst all that do the Valleys ^ill,
Nor any drop of Water from the Spring;
Nor Beasts so wild, that in the Woods do dwell*
But of my Grief for Laura's Death can tell.
Another, of Petrarc, On Laura's Death.
OH Death! How has thy utmost Malice sped?
Thou have Love's Kingdom quite impov'rished;
^ropt Beauty's Flower, put out our chiefest Light,
and one small Stone deprives us of her sight.
^ur Joy's extinct, we are left in Discontent,
^ript of our Honor, and our Ornament:
^ut to her Fame thou never can put an end,
^hy Power but over her Body did extend.
^^r her pure Soul above is glorified
^s brightest Star, she is there the Heaven's Pride:
and here her Virtuous Deeds shall never dye,
^t be admired by all Posterity.
(...)w Glorious Angel, thou that dwell'st above,
(...)d with more powerful Charms attractest Love;
(...)y'st thou be vanquished by my Piety,
(...)here thy Beauty triumphed over me.
Complains of the Court.
IN a Great Court, near a Famed River's side,
With Hopes of Greatness sed, I still reside;
But where to fix I never shall understand,
Foll'wing what flies, and shunning what is at hand.
Others from me the Gifts of Heaven retain,
The lucky Fool does still the Purchase gain;
At Air I grasp, and after Shadows strive,
Live for my Foes, if this be said to live.
I slight my self, love him that injures me,
And in soft Words find greatest Treachery;
I, Mortal Hatred under Smiles, behold,
And starve for want, amidst great heaps of Gold.
Now Envy's Strokes, then Fortune's I sustain,
And want a Friend to whom I might complain;
I see the ensuing Storm, and no Help nigh,
Grieve for one Loss, and straight another spy.
Being retired, complains against the Court.
REmote from Court, where after Toil we get
More Hopes than Fruit, I now have changed my Seat,
And here retired with calmer Thoughts abide:
As Lea more smooth, than troubled Thames does glide.
I need not Great Men here with Flattery please,
No Pride nor Envy shall disturb my Ease;
If Love ensnares my Heart, I from its Net,
Or servile Chain at least, my Freedom get.
Since my new Flame brake out, my old is death,
With Falsehood kindled, and with Scorn 'twas fed;
And here the greatest Rigor pleases more
Than all dissembled Favors could before.
There Love's all Counterfeit, and Friendship too,
And nothing else but Hate and Malice true:
If here my Nymph be cross, or prove unkind,
Vanquished, I triumph; fighting, Peace I find.
To Cynthia.
HARK how the little Birds do vie their Skill,
Saluting, with their Tunes, the welcome Day;
Spring does the Air with frag^ant Odours fill,
And the pleased Fields put on their best Array.
With great Serenity the Heavens move;
The Amorous Planet rules in fullest power;
All things their Cruelty away remove,
And seem to know of Joy the Time, and Hour.
Only my Cynthia still this Glorious Morn
Retains the frozen Temper of her Heart,
Of Birds, and Flowers, does imitation scorn,
Nor from her wonted Rigor will depart.
Ah change, my Fair, that harsh and cruel Mind!
Why should your Looks and Humor disagree?
Let not my Love such Opposition find,
You're would by Heaven, and Earth to favor me.
The Withered Rose.
GO, Fading Rose, a Present to my Fair,
To whose ungrateful Breast I gave my Heart,
And tho my Grief could never affect her Care,
To her do thou my dying Mind impart.
I late have seen thee Lovely, Sweet, and Gay,
Perchance the influence of her Looks on thee,
Now pale as Death, thy Beauty's gone away;
Thou art the Emblem of my Misery.
Say, if to cast an Eye on thee she deign,
Since no Relief from her my Life receives;
My Body soon as Bloodless will remain,
As thy once fresh, but now decaying Leaves.
And thou perchance the Benefit may find,
For thy pale Looks and Message understood,
To cure thy dying Spoils she may be kind,
With Water of my Tears, or with my Blood.
A Sonnet. On the Death of Sylvia.
OH Death! without regard to wrong or right,
All things at will thy boundless Rage devours;
This tender Plant thou have cut down in spite,
And scattered on the Ground its Fruit, and Flowers.
Our Love's extinct that with such Ardour burned,
And all my Hope of future Pleasure dies;
Nature's chief Masterpiece to Earth's returned,
Deaf to my Passion, and my grievous Cries.
Sylvia, the Tears which on thy Sepulcher,
Hereafter shall be shed, or those now are,
Tho fruitless, yet I offer them to thee,
Until the coming of the Eternal Night
Shall close these Eyes, once happy with thy Sight,
And give me Eyes with which I thee may see.
To the WINDS. A SONG.
I.
YE Winds, that in your hasty Flight,
Just kiss the Leaves, and then away,
The Leaves that tremble with Delight,
And murmur at so short a stay;
Stop here, and e're you further go,
Give audience to a Lover's Woe.
II.
Condoling Air, to you I speak,
Since she is deaf to all my Grief,
You see my Heart will quickly break,
If careless She gives no Relief:
I Am sure you're troubled at my Pain,
For when I sigh, you sigh again.
III.
Go, gentle Air, fly to my Dear,
That thus with Love inflames my Breast,
And whisper softly in her Ear,
It Is she that robs my Soul of Rest:
Express, if possible, such Moans,
May imitate my dying Groans.
IV.
Or with thy rougher Breath make bold
To toss the Treasure of her Hair,
Till thou do all those Curls unfold
Which cunningly Men's Hearts ensnare;
Try all thy Skill to break the Net,
That I, like thee, may Freedom get.
V.
Then let some thicker Blasts arise,
And with her Face so sport, and play,
Till the bright Rays of her fair Eyes
Be qualified, or taken away;
Make all those Charms which Men assail,
Of lesser force, and less prevail.
The Silent Talkers.
PEACE, Peace, my Dear, Corinna said
To her enamored Corydon,
Lest we by Listners be betrayed,
And this our Happiness undone.
Our wishes answer every way,
And all my Thoughts center in thine;
If thou have any thing to say,
Speak with thy Eyes, I Will speak with mine.
It Is dangerous jesting with LOVE. A SONG.
I.
VEnture not with Love to jest,
Though he is blind, and but a Boy,
Whosoe'er would live at rest,
Must not dare with him to toy;
If you play, he will seem to smile,
But conspire your Death the while.
II.
^ my self was such a Sot,
Once to act a Lover's Part,
^^em'd to love, but loved her not,
Sighed, but sighed not from my Heart;
Long I did not this maintain,
E're my Play was turned to Pain.
III.
^s I gazed upon my Fair,
And of Love showed every Sign,
^^e played too the Flatterer,
With her Glances answering mine;
Till his Arrows Cupid took,
Pierced me with each Flattering Look.
IV.
Love the Jester will assail,
And when scorned, the Mastry get;
Art I see can ne'e avail
Him that plays the Counterfeit;
For I find, now time is past*
Jest to Earnest turned at last.
V.
Cupid drew with more desire,
Seeing me his Net despise;
Was more active with his Fire,
While he ^ound my heart was Ice:
Now my Sighs no pity ^ind,
But are scattered in the Wind.
On WINE. From a Fragment of Hesiod, Beginning (...) --
WINE chears our Hearts, and makes us glad;
When Grief, and Cares have left us sad:
But more than Nature does suffice,
Will cast a Cloud before our Eyes;
'Twill bind the Tongue, the Feet, and Hands;
E're we perceive, with strongest Bands;
And us its Drunken Slaves will keep,
Till we our Freedom get by Sleep.
A DREAM.
ONE Night, with Sleep my Senses being oppressed,
Fixed on that Thought, which still over ruled my Breast;
^ Mourning Dress, with Silence did appear,
^^e of her Sex was to my Soul most Dear:
^ynthia, methought, I said, and gazed awhile,
Where Is thy accustomed Look, and cheerful Smile?
What sad Occasion thus disturbs thee now,
and hangs that gloomy Sadness on thy Brow?
^e only sighed, and offering to depart,
^natch'd her Hand, and laid it to my Heart,
and whilst I in this trembling Rapture stand,
^e took, and held me by my other Hand.
^hought my Heart 'twixt Joy, and Grief would break,
^dding with Tears, My Dear, I prithee speak;
and grasped her fast, she struggling to be gone,
^ll waked: but then I found my self alone.
Often have I grieved to think what this might prove,
And gathered hence ill Omens to my Love;
But since I may too soon the Mischief find,
I Will strive to chase the Fancy from my Mind.
The Restless Lover.
THE Birds to wanton in the Air desire;
The Salamander sports himself in Fire;
The Fish in Water plays; And of the Earth,
Man ever takes possession at his Birth:
Only unhappy I, who born to grieve,
In all these Elements at once do live:
Grief does with Air of Sighs my Mouth supply,
My wretched Body on cold Earth does lie,
The Streams which from mine Eyes flow Night and Day
Cannot the Fire which burns my Heart allay.
The RESOLUTION. A Sonnet of Petrarc, out of Italian.
OH Time! Oh rolling Heavens, that fly so fast,
And cheat us Mortals ignorant and blind!
Oh fugitive Day, swifter than Bird or Wind!
Your Frauds I see, by all my Sufferings past.
But pardon me, it is I my self must blame,
Nature that spreads your Wings, and makes you fly,
To me gave Eyes, that I my Ills might spy:
Yet I retained them to my Grief, and Shame.
Time was I might, and Time is still I may
Direct my Steps in a securer way,
And end this sad Infinity of Ill;
Yet it is not from thy Yoke, O Love, I part,
But the Effects; I will reclaim my Heart:
Virtue's no Chance, but is acquired by Skill.
Invokes DEATH.
COME, Terror of the Wise, and Valiant, Come,
And with a Sigh let my grieved Soul have room,
Amongst the Shades; then shall my Cares be gone;
All there drink Waters of Oblivion.
So went the Heroes of the World, and so
Or soon, or late, all that are born must go;
Thou Death to me art welcome as a Friend,
For thou with Life putt'st to my Griefs an End.
Of this Poor Earth, and Blast of Breath allied,
How easily by thee, the Knot's untied:
This Spring of Tears which trickles from mine Eyes
Is Natural, and when I dye, it dryes.
Matter for Sighs, I drew with my first Breath,
And now a Sigh ushers my Soul to Death;
So Cares, and Griefs determine by Consent,
This Favor owe I to my Monument.
A Hint from the Beginning of the Third Satyr of Juvenal, Laudo tamen vacuis
quod sedem figere Cumis
Destinet, atque unum Civem donare Sibyllae, etc.

A Neighbor, now, shall Aged Sibyl have,
For I Will withdraw to Cuma's Sacred Cave,
Where I, Vesuvius like, when Years attire
My Head with Snow, shall still maintain my Fire.
In Hatred of the World my Days I Will spend,
Till with Despite my wretched Life shall end;
My haughty Plumes I Have clipped, I Will soar no more,
So the Fates cut what they had spun before.
I was when Bad, of Virtuous Men despised,
And by the Scourge Vice brings with it, chastis'd:
That Course I left, and turning good again,
Was hated, and oppressed by Wicked Men.
Thus seems the Partial World on all sides bent,
It Is utmost Spite on wretched me to vent.
My Sins were fruitless: Must, when Life is done,
Virtue lie buried in Oblivion?
A Contemplation on Man's Life. Out of Spanish.
VILE Composition, Earth inspired with Breath,
Man, that at first were made of Dust and Tears
And then by Law Divine condemned to Death;
When will thou check thy Lusts in their Carreers?
Change all thy Mirth to Sorrow, and repent,
That thou so often did just Heaven offend,
Deplore thy precious Hours so vainly spent,
If thou will 'scape such Pains as have no end.
The gaping Grave expects thee as its right,
It Is a straight place, but can contain with ease,
Honor, Command, Wealth, Beauty, and Delight,
And all that does our Carnal Senses please.
Only the immortal Soul can never dye,
Therefore on that thy utmost Care employ.
The Nightingale that was drowned.
UPON a Bough, hung trembling over a Spring,
Sat Philomel, to respite Grief, and sing.
Tuning such various Notes, there seemed to nest,
A Choir of little Songsters in her Breast.
Whilst Echo at the close of every Strain,
Returned her Music, Note for Note again.
The Jealous Bird, who never had Rival known,
Not thinking these sweet Points were all her own;
So filled with Emulation was, that she
Expressed her utmost Art and Harmony;
Till as she eagerly for Conquest tried,
Her Shadow in the Stream below she spied:
^hen heard the Waters bubbling, but mistook,
And thought the Nymphs were laughing in the Brook;
^he then enraged, into the Spring did fall,
and in sad Accents thus upbraids them all:
^ot Tereus self offered so great a Wrong,
^ymphs, take my Life, since you despise my Song.
On a Child sleeping in Cynthia's Lap.
SLEEP, Happy Boy, there sleep, and take thy Re^^
Free from the Passions which disturb my Breast;
Yet know it is Innocence that thee has freed,
And lets thee sleep so quiet on this Bed.
Thy wearied Limbs have sweetly rested here,
If with less Sun, in a more happy Sphere;
Whilst in Despair my Soul afflicted lies,
And of mere Envy to behold thee, dies.
Dream, thou enjoy'st more true Felicity,
Than lavish Fortune can bestow on thee;
That thou, amidst such Precious Gems, art hurled,
Are able to enrich the insatiate World:
That thou, the Phoenix shall transcend in Fame,
Who sleep'st, and risest, in a Purer Flame;
That you are an Angel, Heaven's that Lap I view:
^et all this while, it is no Dream, but true.
Cure for AFFLICTIONS. A Hint from an imperfect Ode of ARCHILOCHVS; Beginning,
(...).
SOUL, rule thy Passions, dry thy weeping Eyes,
Thou Breath of Heaven, should Earthly Cares despise:
When fiercest troubles thus disturb thy Rest,
To their Assaults oppose a constant Breast.
Over Fortune's Power then shall thou have command:
So Rocks unmoved against Beating Surges stand.
Nor boast, if in this Conflict thou overcome,
Or when subdued, poorly lament at home.
Think, having cause to grieve, or to rejoice,
No Course of Humane Things is in thy Choice.
Cynthia sporting.
ALONG the River's side did Cynthia stray,
More like a Goddess, than a Nymph, at play;
The Flood stopped to behold her; pleased to see it,
She to its Kisses yields her naked Feet.
Brisk Air saluted her, never stayed to woo;
The very Boughs reached to be toying too;
The little Birds came thronging to admire,
And for her Entertainment made a Choire:
The Meadows smile, and Joy surrounds the place,
As if all things were infl'enc'd by her Face;
The Grass, and Leaves take Freshness from her Eyes,
And as of lesser Force, Sol's Beams despise.
No Herb pressed by her Foot but blossoms strait,
Flowers, for her Touch to ripen them, do wait;
They, from her Hand, new Fragrancy do yield,
Her Presence sills with Perfumes, all the Field.
The FLY. Out of Spanish from Don Francisco de Quevedo.
Out of the Wine-Pot cried the Fly,
Whilst the Grave Frog sat croaking by,
Than live a Watery Life like thine,
I Would rather choose to dye in Wine.
I.
Never Water could endure,
Though never so Crystalline and Pure,
Water's a Murmurer, and they
Design more Mischief than they say;
Where Rivers smoothest are and clear,
Oh there is the Danger, there is the Fear;
But I Will not grieve to dye in Wine,
That Name is sweet, that Sound's Divine.
Thus from the Wine-Pot, etc.
II.
Dull Fish in Water live we know,
And such insipid Souls as thou;
While to the Wine do nimbly fly,
Many such pretty Birds as I:
With Wine refreshed, as Flowers with Rain,
My Blood is cleared, inspired my Brain;
That when the Tory Boys do sing,
I buz in the Chorus for the King.
Thus from the Wine-Pot, etc.
III.
I Am more beloved than thou can be,
Most Creatures shun thy Company;
I go unbid to every Feast,
Nor stay for Grace, but fall of the Best:
There while I quaff in Choicest Wine,
Thou do with Puddle-water dine,
Which makes thee such a Croaking thing.
Learn to drink Wine, thou Fool, and sing;
Thus from the Wine-Pot, etc.
IV.
In Gardens I delight to stray,
And round the Plants do sing and play:
Thy Tune no Mortal does avail,
Thou art the Dutch-man's Nightingale:
Would thou with Wine but wet thy Throat,
Sure thou would leave that Dismal Note;
Lewd Water spoils thy Organs quite,
And Wine alone can set them right.
Thus from the Wine-Pot, etc.
V.
Thy Comerades still are Newts and Frogs,
Thy Dwelling Saw-pits, Holes, and Bogs:
In Cities I, and Courts am free,
An Insect too of Quality.
What Pleasures, Ah! did thou but know,
This Heavenly Liquor can bestow:
To drink, and drown thou would never repine;
The Great Anacreon died by Wine.
Thus from the Wine-Pot, etc.
On GOLD.
THIS Glittering Metal, Dazler of the Eyes,
In so small Bulk, where so much Mischief lies,
Disclaims the Earth, when it has passed the Fire,
And then no longer owns the Rock for Sire.
When coined, it boasts of Power Omnipotent;
Which Monstrous Birth the long scorned Mountains sent:
^Tis Bane of Peace, it is Nourisher of War;
And over the World does spread its Venom far.
With Confidence this bold Usurper can
Hold Competition with its Former, Man:
Man whose sublimer Soul should upward soar,
Yet for a God can his own Works adore.
Laws are remiss when Thou the Power do git,
All Vices thou unpunished do permit;
Torrent of Mischiefs, Source of Ills the worst!
The more we drink of thee, the more we thirst.
To his Grace, George Duke of Northumberland.
The Unruly Steed by Laws to tame and ride;
With graceful Course the well-pois'd Lance to guide
In Martial Sports ever to win the Prize;
And Troops with Skill and Judgment exercise:
In a calm Breast a Warlike Heart to show;
To Glory Friend, to Wantonness a Foe:
To keep on Passion, Reason's powerful Hand;
Over his Soul, and self to have command:
To sport with Books, whilst Arms aside he lays:
To interweave the Olive with the Bays:
When tired with Arts, to tune Apolo's Lyre:
To merit Honors e're he them desire.
These Fruits which others bring with Art and Time
Your Blooming Age does yield before your Prime.
Love's New Philosophy.
I.
WHO'e're a Lover is of Art,
May come and learn of me
A New Philosophy;
Such as no Schools could ever impart.
love all my other Notions does control,
and reads these stranger Lectures to my Soul.
II.
This God who takes delight to lie,
Does Sacred Truths defame,
And Aristotle blame,
Concluding all by Subtilty:
^is Syllogisms with such Art are made,
^ot Solomon himself could them evade.
III.
So wondrous is his Art and Skill,
His Reasons pierce like Darts,
Men's Intellects and Hearts;
Old Maxims he destroys at will,
and blinded Plato so, he made him think,
^was Water, when he gave him Fire to drink.
IV.
That Water can extinguish Fire,
All Ages did allow;
But Love denies it now,
And says it makes his Flame rage higher;
Which Truth my self have proved for many Years:
Wherein I Have wept whole Deluges of Tears.
V.
At the Sun's Rays, you Cynthia know,
The Ice no more can melt,
Nor can the Fire be felt,
Or have its wonted Influence on Snow:
By your relentless Heart is this expressed,
Your Eyes are Suns, the Fire is in my Breast.
VI.
When Soul and Body separate,
That then the Life must dye;
This too I must deny,
My Soul's with her, who rules my Fate.
Yet still my Organs move a Proof to give,
That Soul and Body can divided live.
VII.
Remove the Cause, The Effects will cease.
This is an Error too,
And found by me untrue;
My Fair when near disturbs my Peace,
But when she is furthest off, no Tongue can tell
The raging Pangs of Love my Heart does feel.
VIII.
All Creatures Love not their own Kind,
I this new Axiom try:
And that all fear to dye
By Nature; a Mistake I find:
^or I, a Man, do a Fierce Creature love,
and such, I know, that will my Murd'ress prove.
IX.
Here two Extremes are easily joined,
Joy and Grief in my Breast,
Which give my Soul no Rest;
Both to torment me are combined:
^or when I view the Source of all my Wrong,
^ sigh my Music, mix with Tears my Song.
X.
That, all things like Effects produce:
I readily can prove
A Paradox in Love,
And my Conclusion hence deduce;
Cold Cynthia to my Zeal yields no Return,
Though Ice her Heart, she makes my Heart to burn.
XI.
Whilst in this Torment I remain,
It is no Mystery
To be, and not to be;
I dye to Joy, and live to Pain.
So that, my Fair, I may be justly sed,
To be, and not to be, Alive and Dead.
XII.
Now, go, my Song, yet shun the Eyes
Of those never felt Love's Flame,
And if my Cynthia blame
Thy Arguments as Sophistries,
Tell her, this is Love's New Philosophy,
Which none can understand, but such as try.
The Vanity of Unwarrantable Notions. Done out of Portugueze, from Lewis de
Camoens.
TRUTH, Reason, Love, and Merit may endure
Some Shocks, to make us think our selves secure:
But Fortune, Time, and Destiny, do still
Dispose all Humane Matters at their Will.
What various strange Effects perplex the Mind,
For which we can no certain Causes find?
We know we live, but what succeeds our End,
Man's Understanding cannot comprehend.
Yet Doctors will their Notions justify,
And vouch for Truths what no Man ever could try;
Doubt Real Things, as if no such had been,
And Things believe which never yet were seen.
These Men are proud to have their Madness known;
Believe in Christ, and let the rest alone.
To the NIGHTINGALE.
Why, Little Charmer of the Air,
Do thou in Music spend the Morn?
Whilst I thus languish in Despair,
Oppressed by Cynthia 's Hate and Scorn:
Why do thou sing, and hear me cry;
Tell, wanton Songster, tell me why?
I.
WILL thou not cease at my Desire?
Will those small Organs never ti^e?
Nature did these close Shades prepare,
Not for thy Music, but my Care:
Then why will thou persist to sing,
Thou Beautiful Malicious Thing?
When Kind Aurora first appears,
She weeps, in pity to my Tears;
If thus thou think to give Relief,
Thou never knew'st a Lover's Grief.
Then, Little Charmer, etc.
That do in Music, etc.
II.
Thou Feathered Atome, where in thee,
Can be comprised such Harmony?
In whose small Fabric must remain,
What Composition does contain.
All Griefs but mine are at a stand,
When thy surprising Tunes command?
How can so small a Tongue and Throat
Express so loud, and sweet a Note?
Thou have more various Points at Will,
Than Orpheus had with all his Skill.
Then, Little Charmer, etc.
That do in Music, etc.
III.
Great to the Ear, tho Small to Sight,
The Happy Lovers dear Delight,
Fly to the Bower where such are lade,
And there bestow thy Serenade.
Haste from my Sorrow, haste away;
Alas, there is Danger in thy Stay,
L^st hearing me so often complain,
Should make thee change thy cheerful Strain,
Thy Songs cannot my Grief remove,
Thou harmless Siren of the Grove.
Then cease, thou Charmer of the Air,
No more in Music spend the Morn,
With me that languish in Despair,
Oppressed by Cynthia 's Hate and Scorn;
And do not this Poor Boon deny,
I ask but Silence whilst I dye.
APOLLO and DAPHNE.
PAnting for Breath, toward her Parent Brook,
Like the tired Deer before an eager Chase,
Fair Daphne ran, nor durst behind her look:
With winged Feet, and with a blub'red Face.
The Beardless God, who taken with her Charms,
Had long pursued, by his hot Passion led,
Straight saw her stop, and upward stretch her Arms
On Pencus Banks, where she for Aid had sled.
He saw her Nimble Feet take Root and grow,
And a rough Bark her Tender Limbs enclose;
Her Hairs, which once like Curls of Gold did show,
Changed Green, and in a Shade of Boughs arose.
To the resistless Tree, He Courtship makes,
And with vain Kisses his Fond Love deceives;
Then of her Bays by force a Chaplet takes:
So stead of Fruit, He only gathers Leaves.
A Sestina, In Imitation of Sig. Fra. Petrarca.
I.
SO many Creatures live not in the Sea,
Nor ever above the Circle of the Moon,
Did Man behold so many Stars at Night,
Nor little Birds do shelter in the Woods,
Nor Herbs, nor Flowers ever beautified the Fields;
As anxious Thoughts my Heart feels every Day.
II.
^, wishing Death, pray each may be the Day,
And seek in vain for Quiet in the Fields,
My Griefs succeed like Waves upon the Sea;
^uch Torments sure, no Man beneath the Moon
^'er felt as I; It Is known amongst the Woods,
Where to complain I often retire at Night.
III.
^ never could enjoy a quiet Night,
And do in Pain and Sorrow spend the Day,
^ince Angry Cynthia drove me to the Woods;
^et ever I quit my Love I Will weep a Sea:
The Sun his Light shall borrow of the Moon,
And May with Flowers refuse to deck the Fields.
IV.
Restless I wander up and down the Fields,
And scarce can close my Eyes to sleep at Night:
So that my Life's unstable as the Moon,
The Air I fill with Sighs both Night and Day;
My Showers of Tears seem to augment the Sea,
Make the Herbs green, and to refresh the VVoods.
V.
I hating Cities, ramble in the VVoods,
And thence I shift to solitary Fields,
I rove and imitate the troubled Sea,
And hope most Quiet in the silent Night.
So that I wish at the Approach of Day,
The Sun would set, and give his place to the Moon.
VI.
Oh, that like him who long had loved the Moon,
I could in Dreams be happy in the VVoods;
I Would wish an End to this most Glorious Day,
Then should I meet my Cynthia in the Fields.
Court her, and entertain her all the Night;
The Day should stop, and Sol dwell in the Sea.
But Day nor Night, Sea, Moon, nor Wood, nor Field*
Now Cynthia frowns, can Ease or Pleasure yield.
A Sonnet of Sig. Francesco Petrarca, Giving an Account of the Time, when he
fell in Love with Madonna Laura.
WILL spurs me on, Love wounds me with his Dart.
Pleasure does draw me, Custom pulls me too,
Hope flatters, that I should my Ends pursue,
And lends her Right Hand to my Fainting Heart.
My wretched Heart accepts, nor yet espyes
The Weakness of my blind disloyal Guide,
My Passions rule, long ^ince my Reason did,
And from one fond Desire, still others rise.
Virtue and Wealth, Beauty and Graceful Mien,
Sweet Words, and Person fair as ever was seen,
Were the Allurements drew me to her Net:
'Twas Thirteen hundred twenty sev'n, the Year,
April the sixth, this Nymph did first appear,
And tied me so, I never shall Freedom get.
A Sonnet, of Petrarc, Showing how long he had loved Madonna Laura.
PLeasure in Thought, in Weeping Ease I find;
I catch at Shadows, grasp Air with my Hand;
On Seas I float are bounded with no Land;
Plow Water, sow on Rocks, and reap the Wind.
The Sun I gazed so long at, I became
Struck with its Dazzling Rays, and lost my Eyes;
I chase a Nimble Do that always flies,
And hunt with a Dull Creature, Weak and Lame.
Heartless I live to all things but my Ill,
Which I Am sollicitous to follow still;
And only call on Laura, Lov^, and Death.
Thus Twenty Years I Have spent in Misery,
Whilst only Sighs, and Tears, and Sobs I buy,
Under such hard Stars first I drew my Breath.
A Sonnet, of Petrarc, Going to visit M. Laura, remembers she is lately dead.
OH Eyes! Our Sun's extinct, and at an End,
Or rather glorified in Heaven does shine;
^here shall we see her, there does she attend,
and at our long Delay perchance repine.
Alas, my Ears, the Voice you loved to hear,
Is now raised up to the Celestial Choire;
And you, my Feet, she is gone that used to stear
Your Course, where you till Death can never aspire.
Cannot my Soul nor Body yet be free?
'Twas not my Fault, you this Occasion lost;
That Seeing, Hearing, Finding her you are crossed:
Blame Death, or rather blessed be ever He,
Who binds and looses, makes and can destroy,
And when Life's done crowns with Eternal Joy.
A Sonnet. Petrarc laments for the Death of M. Laura.
THIS Nightingale that does so much complain,
Robbed of her tender Young, or dearest Ma^^^
And to the Fields and Heavens her Tale relate,
In such sad Notes, but yet Harmonious Strain:
Perhaps this Station kindly does retain,
To join her Griefs with my unhappy State;
'Twas may Assurance did my Woe create:
I thought Death could not have a Goddess slain.
How soon deceived are those, who least mistrust!
I never could think that Face should turn to Dust,
Which, than all Humane Beauties seemed more pure
But now I find that my malicious Fate,
Will, to my Sorrow, have me learn too late:
Nothing that pleases here, can long endure.
A Sonnet. Petrarc on Laura's Death.
HOLD, Treacherous Thoughts, that dare my Rule despise,
Is It not enough against me in War are joined
Love, Fortune, and Grim Death, but I must find
Within me such Domestic Enemies?
And thou my Heart, that do my Peace oppose,
Disloyal thou will give my Soul no Rest,
But harb'ring still these Thoughts within my Breast,
Keep'st Correspondence with my Deadly Foes;
To thee Love all his Messages conveys,
Fortune my now departed Pomp displays,
Death in my Mind does all my Grie^s express;
That my Remains fall by Necessity,
My Thoughts with Errors arm themselves in thee:
Thou art the Cause of my Unhappiness.
CONSTANCY.
PLace me where Sol dryes up the Flowery Fields,
Or where he to the Frosty Winter yields:
Place me where he does moderate Heat dispense,
And where his Beams have a kind Influence:
Place me in humble State, or place me high,
In a dark Clime, or a serener Sky;
Place me where Days or Nights are short or long,
In Age mature, or be it Old or Young:
Place me in Heaven, on Earth, or in the Main,
On a high Hill, low Vale, or l^vel Plain:
Let me have vigorous Parts, or Dullness have;
Place me in Liberty, or as a Slave:
Give me a Black, or an Illustrious Fame:
As I have lived, I Will ever live the same;
Where I at first did fix my Constant Love,
Nothing from Cynthia can it ever remove.
To his VIOL.
I Tuned my Viol, and have often strove,
In MARS's Praise to raise his humble Verse,
And in Heroic Strain his Deeds rehearse,
^ut all my Accents still resound of Love.
^n Foreign Countries, or on English Ground,
Love for my Theme does dictate Cynthia's Charms,
Nor will he let me sing of other Arms,
Than those with which he Lovers Hearts does wound.
This Viol then unfit for rougher Notes,
My Muse shall tune to its accustomed Way;
So shall it may Harmonious Points obey,
^or it to Cynthia all its Tunes devotes.
Then to my Soft and Sweetest Strokes I keep,
Whilst angry Mars his Fury may lay by,
He listening to my Song will quietly,
And in his Cytherea's Bosom sleep.
HOPE. Out of Italian from Fra. Abbati.
I.
GRieve no more, Mortals, dry your Eyes,
And learn this Truth of me,
Fate rowls, and round about us flies,
But for its Ills carries a Remedy.
The Leaveless Boughs on all those Stocks,
With Green shall beautify their Locks;
And straight
Such Store ^f various Fruits shall yield,
That then ^ough Backs shall truckle with the weight*
For in a little space
Winter shall give to Spring its Place,
And with Fresh Robes, Hopes Emblem, cloth the Field*
CHORUS.
He has no Faith who sighs and whines,
And at his present Ill repines:
For we should strive
Against all Afflictions to apply
This Universal Remedy,
To hope and live.
II.
Hope does our Future Joys anticipate,
It eases all our Pains;
For in the present Ill that raigns,
Endurance only triumphs over Fate.
Young Colts fierce and untaught,
In time submit,
For they to yield are brought,
Their Backs to Burdens, and their Mouths to the Bit:
With Patience also will the Country Swain
His Conquest gain;
And make the stubborn Heifer bow
^ts Neck to the Yoke, and labor at the Plow.
CHORUS.
Then he wants Faith who sighs and whines,
And at his present Ill repines:
For Man should strive
Against all Afflictions to apply
This Universal Remedy,
To hope and live.
III.
Thus sang a Smiling Courtier to other Day,
Under the Covert of a Spreading Tree,
And to his Song upon his Lute did play,
By whom an Ass you might attentive see.
The Ass in Scorn drew nearer him and brayed,
And arguing thus, methought, in Answer said:
If this Green Grass on which I fed but now,
To be of Hope the Symbol you allow,
And if the Asses proper Meat be Grass,
Sure He that lives on Hope, feeds like an Ass.
Finding Cynthia in Pain, and crying. A Sonnet.
WHY, Idol of my Heart, these mournful Cries,
And so much Grief on those fair Cheeks appears
From whence proceed those envious Showers of Tear^
Dark'ning the Luster of thy Beauteous Eyes?
How dares bold Sorrow labor to remove,
So many Graces from their proper Place?
Ah, Cynthia! Pain endeavors, in thy Face,
To poison all the sweetest Charms of Love.
Sense of thy Grief, my Soul with Anguish fills,
Which out of Pity into Tears distills,
And for thy Ease would sain endure thy Woe;
But this Affliction, sure thy Heart sustains,
That, Cruel Thou, being sensible of Pains,
May, to thy Constant Martyr, Pity show.
Cynthia sleeping in a Garden. A Sonnet.
NEAR a cool Fountain, on a Rose-bed lay
My Cynthia, sleeping in the open Air;
Whom Sol espied, and seeing her so Fair,
Gazed, till his wanton Coursers lost their Way.
The proudest Flowers were not ashamed to find,
Their Scent, and Color rivall'd in her Face;
Her bright curled Hairs were tossed from Place to Place,
On Neck and Bosom by the Amorous Wind.
Her Smiles were animated by her Breath,
Which still as soon as born received their Death,
Being Mortal made in Pity to Men's Hearts:
Poor Lovers then did lie and take their Rest,
For the Blind Boy who does our Peace molest,
Had in her sleeping Eyes hid all his Darts.
Lesbia's Complaint against Thyrsis his INCONSTANCY. A Sonnet.
I Loved thee, Faithless Man, and love thee still,
Thou Fatal Object of my Fond Desires,
And that which nourishes these Amorous Fires,
Is Hope, by which I love against my Will.
Great was the Passion thou did late express,
Yet scorn'st me now, whom long thou did adore,
Sporting with others, her thou mind'st no more,
Whom thou have called thy Heaven and Happiness.
Think not by this, thy Lesbia thee invites,
To spend thy Years in Dalliance, and Delights,
It Is but to keep her Faith in Memory;
But if to grieve my Soul thou only strive,
To thy Reproach, and to my Boast I Will live,
A Monument of thy INCONSTANCY.
On Lydia distracted. A Sonnet.
WIth Hairs, which for the Wind to play with, hung,
With her torn Garments, and with naked Feet,
Fair Lydia dancing went from Street to Street,
Singing with pleasant Voice her foolish Song.
On her she drew all Eyes in every Place,
And them to Pity by her Pranks did move,
Which turned with gazing longer into Love,
By the rare Beauty of her charming Face.
In all her Frenzyes, and her Mimickries,
While she did Natures richest Gifts despise,
There active Love did subt'ly play his part.
Her antic Postures made her look more gay,
Her Ragged Clothes her Treasures did display,
And with each Motion she ensnared a Heart.
The Four Seasons.
SPRING.
WHEN Winter's past, then every Field and Hill,
The SPRING with Flowers does fill,
Soft Winds do cleanse the Air,
Repel the Fogs, and make the VVeather fair;
Cold Frosts are gone away,
The Rivers are at Liberty,
And their just Tribute pay,
Of liquid Pearls, and Crystal to the Sea;
To whom each Brook, and Fountain runs,
The stable Mother of those straggling Sons.
CHORUS.
But then,
In a short space,
WINTER returns again,
E're Sol has run his annual Race;
But, Ah! When Death's keen Arrow flies,
And hits Poor MAN,
Do what he can,
He dies;
Returns to Dust, a Shadow, and a Nothing lies.
SUMMER.
WHEN Flowery May is past, The Spring is over,
Then our cool Breezes end;
For Aeolus does send,
His soultry Blasts from off the Southern Shore;
The Sun bows down his Head,
And darts on us his siery Rays,
Plants droop, and seem as dead,
Most Creatures seek for Shade their different ways;
All things as if for Moisture cry,
Even Rivers with the common Thirst grow dry.
CHORUS.
But then,
In a short space,
The SPRING returns again,
E're Sol has run his Annual Race:
But, Ah! When Deaths keen Arrow flies,
And hits Poor MAN,
Do what he can,
He dies;
Returns to Dust, a Shadow, and a Nothing lies.
AUTUMN.
WHen Summer's done, green Trees begin to yield;
Their Leaves with Age decay,
They Are stripped of their Array;
Scarce can the Rains revive the Russet Field:
The Flowers run up to Seed,
Orchards with Choice of Fruit abound,
Which Sight and Taste do feed:
The grateful Boughs even kiss their Parent Ground:
The Elm's kind Wife, the tender Vine,
Is pregnant with her Heavenly Burden, Wine.
CHORUS.
But then,
In a short Space,
SVMMER returns again,
E're Sol has run his Annual Race:
But, Ah! When Death's keen Arrow flies,
And hits Poor MAN,
Do what he can,
He dies;
Returns to Dust, a Shadow, and a Nothing lies.
WINTER.
WHen Autumn's past, sharp Eastern Winds do blow,
Thick Clouds obscure the Day,
Frost makes the Currents stay,
The Aged Mountains Hoary are with Snow.
Although the Winter rage;
The wronged Trees Revenge conspire,
Its Fury they assuage;
Alive they serve for Fence, when dead for Fire;
All Creatures from its Outrage fly,
Those which want Shelter or Relief must dye.
CHORUS.
But then,
In a short Space,
AVTVMN returns again,
E're Sol has run his Annual Race:
But, Ah! When Death's keen Arrow flies,
And hits Poor MAN,
Do what he can,
He dies;
Returns to Dust, a Shadow, and a Nothing lies.
A Sonnet. Translated out of Italian. Written by Sig. Fra. Gorgia, who was born
as they were carrying his Mother to her Grave.
UNhappy I came from my Mother's Womb,
As She, Oh Blessed She! who gave me Breath,
Having received the Fatal Stroke of Death,
By weeping Friends was carried to her Tomb.
The Sorrow I expressed, and grievous Cries,
Love's Tribute were, for her to Heaven was gone,
My Coffin, and my Cradle, both were one,
And at her Sunset, mine began to rise.
Wretch, how I quake to think on that sad Day!
Which both for Life and Death at once made way;
Being gave the Son, and Mother turned to Earth.
Alas, I dye! Not that Life hasts so fast,
But that to me each Minute seems the last,
For I, in Death's cold Arms, received my Birth.
The Scholar of his own Pupil. The Third Idyllium of Bion Englished, Beginning.
(...) --
I Dreamt, by me I saw Fair Venus stand,
Holding Young Cupid in her Lovely Hand,
And said, Kind Shepherd, I a Scholar bring,
My Little Son, to learn of you to sing.
Then went away; and I to gain her Praise,
Would fain have taught him all my Rural Lays,
How Pan found out the Pipe, Pallas the Flute,
Phoebus the Harp, and Mercury the Lute.
These were my Subjects, which he still would slight,
And ^ill my Ears with Love-Songs, Day and Night;
Of Mortals, and of Gods, what Tricks they used,
And how his Mother Venus them abused.
So I forgot my Pupil to improve,
And learned of him, by Songs, the Art of Love.
An EPITAPH, On a Foolish Boaster.
HERE to its pristine Dust again is hurled,
Of an Inconstant Soul, the little World;
He lived, as if to some great things designed,
With substance small, boasting a Princely Mind.
Of Body crooked, and distorted Face,
But Man^ers that did much his form disgrace.
In Bro^ls, his ^age pusht him beyond his Art,
Was kicked, would face again, but wanted heart.
In his whole course of Life, so swelled with Pride,
That failed in all is Intriegues, for grief he died.
Thus with ambitious Wings we strive to soar,
Flutter a while, fall, and are seen no more.
The Danger of the Sea. From the Thirteenth Book of the Macaronics of Merlinus
Cocalius. Beginning, Infidum arridet saepe imprudentibus Aequor.
THE treacherous Seas unwary Men betray,
Dissembling Calms, but Storms in ambush lay;
Such who in bounds of safety cannot keep,
Flock here to see the Wonders of the Deep:
They hope they may some of the Sea Gods spy,
With all their Train of Nymphs, and Tritons by:
But when their Eyes lose the retiring Shore,
Join Heaven with Seas, and see the Land no more:
Then wretched they, with Brains are swimming round,
Their undigested Meats, and Choler drown:
Nor yet their boiling Stomachs can restrain,
Till they the Waters all pollute, and stain.
When Aeolus enraged that Humane Race,
Should his old Friend the Ocean, thus disgrace,
To punish it, he from their hollow Caves,
With rushing noise, lets loose the Winds his Slaves.
Who up toward Heaven such mighty Billows throw,
You Would think you saw from thence He^^s Vaults below.
Fools! To whom Wrecks have of no Caution been,
By other Storms you might have this foreseen;
Ever your bold Sailers lanch'd into the Main,
Then y' had never strove to reach the Shore in vain*
An Expostulation with Love.
THY Laws are most severe, Oh Winged Boy!
For us to love, and not enjoy:
What Reason is it we should this Pain abide?
If love we must, you might provide,
Either that our Affections we restrain,
From her we are sure to love in vain:
Or after our Desires so Guide our Feet,
That where we love, we may an equal Passion meet.
On the Art of Writing.
SURE 'twas some God, in kindness first to Men,
Taught us the Curious Art to use the Pen.
^Tis strange the speaking Quill should, without Noise,
Express the various Tones of Humane Voice;
Of loudest Accents we no Sound retain,
Voice to its Native Air resolves again;
Yet tho as Wind Words seem to pass away;
By Pen we can their very Echoes stay.
When we from other Converse are confined,
This can reveal the Secrets of the Mind:
All Authors must to it their Praises own,
For 'twas the Pen that made their Labors known.
Good Acts with bad Tradition would confound,
But what we writ is kept entire and sound:
Of this Ingenious Art Fame loudly sings,
Which gives us lasting Words, and lasting Things.
The MORN.
WHEN Light begins the Eastern Heaven to grace,
And the Nights Torches to the Sun give place,
Diana leaves her Shepherd to his Sleep,
Grieved that her Horns cannot their Luster keep.
The Boughs on which the wanton Birds do throng,
Dance to the Music of their Chirping Song,
Whilst they rejoice the Duskey Clouds are ^led,
And Bright Aurora rises from her Bed.
Then Fools and Flatterers to Courts resort,
Lovers of Game, up and pursue their Sport,
With last Nights Sleep refreshed, the Laboring Swain
Cheerfully settles to his Work again.
Pleased Hobb unfolds his Flocks, and whilst they feed,
Sits, and makes Music on his Oaten Reed;
Then I wake too, and viewing Lesbia's Charms,
Do glut my self with Pleasure in her Arms.
To his Ingenious Friend Mr. N. Tate.
THROUGH various paths, for Pleasures have I sought,
Which short Content, and lasting Trouble brought;
These are the Clouds obscure my Reasons Light,
And charge with Grief, when I expect Delight.
Spite of all Letts, thou Honor's Hill do climb,
Scorning to spend in Empty Joys thy Time;
Thou in the foremost List of Fame do strive,
Whose present Virtues, Future Glory's give.
With Myrtle I, with Bays, thou crown'st thy Head,
Thine still is verdant, but my Wreath is dead:
The Trees I plant, and nurse with so much Care,
Are barren; thine the Glory of the Year.
^ only ^une my Pipe to Cynthia's Fame,
With Verse confined, but constant as my Flame;
^n thousand Streams thy plenteous Numbers fall,
Thy Muse attempts all Strains, excels in all.
Less Security at Sea than on Shore. An Idyllium of Moschus Englished.
Beginning (...) --
WHEN Seas are calm, tossed by no angry Wind,
What roving Thoughts perplex my easy Mind?
My Muse no more delights me, I would fain
Enjoy the tempting Pleasures of the Main:
But when I see the blustering Storms arise,
Heaving up Waves, like Mountains, to the Skies;
The Seas I dread, and all my Fancy bend
To the firm Land, my Old and Certain Friend.
In pleasant Groves I there can Shelter take;
Amongst the Tall Pines the Winds but Music make:
The Fisher's Boat's his House, on Seas he strives
To cheat poor Fish, but still in danger lives.
Sweetly does gentle Sleep my Eyes invade,
While free from Fear, under the Plane-trees Shade
I lie, and there the Neighboring Fountains hear,
Whose Purling Noise with Pleasure Charms the Ear.
A Sonnet. PLATONIC LOVE.
CHASTE Cynthia bids me love, but hope no more,
Never wish Enjoyment, which I still have strove
TO obey, and every looser Thought reprove;
Without desiring her, I her adore.
What Humane Passion does with Tears implore,
The Intellect Enjoys, when it is in Love
With the Eternal Soul, which here does move
^n Mortal Closet, where it is kept in Store.
Our Souls are in one mutual Knot combined,
Not Common Passion, Dull and Unrefin'd;
Our Flame ascends, That smothers here below:
The Body made of Earth, turns to the same,
^s Soul to Eternity, from whence it came;
My Love's Immortal then, and Mistress too.
Translated from Iovianus Pontanus. Praises the Fountain Casis.
CASIS where Nymphs, and where the Gods resort,
Thou art a Friend to all their amorous Sport;
Often does Pan from his Lycaeus run,
In thy cool Shades to 'scape the Mid-days Sun;
With Music he thy neighboring Hills does fill,
On his sweet Syrinx, when he shows his Skill;
To which the Naides Hand in Hand advance,
And in just Measures tread their Graceful Dance:
By thee the Goats delight, and browsing stray,
Whilst on the Rocks the Kids do skip and play;
Hither Diana, chasing Deer, does hye,
For on thy Banks her Game will choose to dye,
Here tired and hot, she sits and takes the Air,
Here bathes her Limbs, and combs and dryes her Ha^^
The Muses in their Songs thy Praise express;
Dryas by thee begins to trick and dress:
Often to thy Streams Calliope retires,
And all the Beauties of thy Spring admires;
In whose close Walks, while she from Heat does keep,
Charmed with thy murmuring Noise, she falls asleep.
To Cynthia gone into the Country.
THOUGH the late Parting was our Joint Desire,
It did with different Passions us inspire;
Thou were o'erjoy'd, oppressed with Sorrow I;
Thy Thoughts did faster than thy Footsteps fly;
But tho I strove and labored to depart,
Spite of my ^eet, I followed with my Heart;
Since thus I grieved my Loss, it was unkind
Not once to sigh for what thou left'st behind.
Soneto Espan^ol de Don Felipe Airs. En alabanza de su Ingenioso Amigo, Don
Pedro Reggio, vno de los mayores Musicos de su tiempo.
SI el Thebano Sabio, en dulce Canto
De su Tierra los Hechos escrivia,
Y en elegantes Versos los dezia,
Que viven y con embidia, con espanto;
Tu Reggio, ya con soberano encanto,
Del Pindaro Ingles, con Armonia,
Assi exprimes la dulce Melodia,
Que la admiration suspende el llanto.
No es mucho pues, que vences lo mas fuerte,
(Si ya tu voz mer^ce eterna Palma)
Y tu Instrumento al mismo Apolo assombre,
Pues Logras dos Victorias en tu suerte,
Vna de la Armonia para L'alma:
Otra del Instrumento para el Nombre.
A Sonnet. On CYNTHIA sick.
HELP! Help! Ye Nymphs, whilst on the neighboring Plain
Your Flocks do feed, Come and Assistance bring,
Alas! Fair Cynthia's sick and languishing,
For whom my Heart endures a greater Pain.
Ye Sirens of the Thames, let all your Train
Tune their shrill Instruments, and to them sing,
And let its Flowery Banks with Echo's ring,
This may her wonted cheerful Looks regain.
Ye Herbs, that richest Medicines can produce,
Come quickly and afford such Sovereign Juice,
As from her Heart may all the Pains remove*
But in her Face if Death would Paleness give*
And Fate ordain that she in Torment live,
Then let her suffer in the Flames of Love.
The TURTLE DOVES. From Iovianus Pontanus.
YE Happy Pair of Turtle Doves,
Renewing still your former Loves,
Who on one Bough, both sing one Song,
Have but one Care, one Heart, one Tongue;
Whilst our Loves varying as our Fate,
Can scarce sometimes be known from Hate;
You to your first Amors are true,
Would we could Pattern take by you.
What Force of Love amongst us, tell,
Such Opposition can compel?
If from some powerful Fire it Spring,
Whence all this Cold and Shivering?
From Cold if Love's strange Force arise,
How are our Hearts his Sacrifice?
This Mystery I can never unfold,
Why Love is ruled by Heat and Cold.
You might the Scruple best remove
That are the Emblem of TRUE-LOVE.
An Essay toward a Character of His Sacred Majesty King JAMES the II.
I Paint the Prince the World would surely crave,
Could they the Sum of all their Wishes have;
Pattern of Goodness Him on Earth we see,
Who knows He bea^s the Stamp of Deity;
He Is made, by Nature, fit for Sword or Gown,
And with undoubted Right enjoys his Crown;
As Gold by Fire, He Is tried by Suffering,
Preserved by Miracles to be a King;
Troubles were Foils to make his Glories shine,
Through all conducted by a Hand Divine:
Malice long strove his Fortunes to defeat,
Now Earth and Heaven conspire to make him Great:
He of all Temp'ral Blessings is possessed,
But in a Royal Consort doubly blessed:
His Mind, as Head, with Princely Virtue crowned,
To him, no Equal can on Earth be found.
His every Action has peculiar Grace,
And MAJESTY appears in Mien and Face.
In Subjects Hearts, as on his Throne he raigns;
Himself the Weight of all his Realms sustains;
Of a blessed Statesmen ever seeks Advice,
And of best Councils knows to make his Choice;
Is taught by long Obedience, to command;
His own best General He for Sea, and Land.
Loves Peace, whilst thus for War and Action sit,
And Arms and Hate lays down when Foes submit:
Not of too open, nor too frugal Mind,
In all things to the Golden Mean inclined;
Seems for himself not born, but People rather,
And shows by's Care, that He Is their Common Father;
Lewdness expels both from his Camp, and Court;
No Flatt'rers please, nor Fools can make him Sport;
Grave in Discoursing, in his Habit plain,
And all Excess endeavors to restrain:
As Fates decree, so stands his Royal Word,
Over all his Passions governs as their Lord;
Nicely does he inspect each Fair Pretense,
Justice alike to Friend and Foe dispense;
He Is the Retreat to which Oppressed do fly,
Extending Help to those in Misery.
Gracious to Good, to Wicked Men severe,
^upports the Humble, makes the Haughty fear;
To true Deserts in Mercy unconfined,
His Laws do more Himself than others bind,
At Sea his Naval Power He stretches far,
^n Europe holds the Scales of Peace and War,
His Actions lasting Monuments shall frame,
None leave to Future Age so sweet a Name.
Add ten times more, the Royal Image must
Fall short of JAMES the Great, the Good, the Just.
Sleeping Eyes.
FAIR Eyes, ye Mortal Stars below,
Whose Aspects do portend my Ill!
That sleeping cannot choose but show
How wretched me you long to kill;
If thus you can such Pleasure take,
What would you, if you were awake?
An Ode of Anacreon Englished. (...). To the SWALLOW. Beginning (...)
I.
DEAR Bird, thy Tunes and Sportings here,
Delight us all the Day;
Who dwell'st amongst us half the Year,
And then art forced away.
II.
Thou can not Winter's Fury bear,
But cross the Southern Main,
To warmer Africa do repair,
Till Spring return again.
III.
But, Ah! No Force of Storm, or Art,
Drives Cupid from my Breast,
He took Possession of my Heart,
And in it built his Nest.
This Bird there hatches all his Young,
Where each by Instinct led,
Learns of its Sire his Tricks and Song,
With Shell upon its Head.
V.
And ever these Loves have plumed their VVings,
They multiply apace,
For as one plays, or cries, or sings,
It propagates its Race.
VI.
Now their Confusion's grown so loud,
It cannot be expressed:
I Have such Disturbance with the Crowd,
They give my Soul no Rest.
Love so as to be beloved again. An Idyllium of Moschus. Beginning (...) --
PAN loved his Neighbor Echo, Echo strove
To gain a nimble Satyr to her Love;
This Satyr had on Lyda fixed his Flame,
Who on another Swain had done the same.
As Echo Pan, did Satyr Echo hate;
And Lyda scorned the Satyr for her Mate:
Thus Love by Contrarieties did burn,
And each for Love and Hatred took the turn.
For as these did the other's Flame despise,
As little those their Lovers Passions prise:
Then learn all you who never felt the Pain,
To love, as you may be beloved again.
All things should contribute to the Lover's Assistance. An Idyllium of Moschus
Englished. Beginning (...) --
OF Loving Venus, O Celestial Light!
Hesperus, Usher of the sable Night,
Tho paler than the Moon, thou do as far
Transcend in Brightness every other Star.
To my Dear Shepherdess my Steps befriend,
^^ Luna's stead do thou thy Conduct lend;
With waining Light, not long before the Sun,
^he rose, and now by this her Course has run.
No base Intriegue this Night I undertake,
No Journey I for Common Business make:
Love, and bear within me Cupid's Fire,
And all things should to Lovers Aid conspire*
CUPID turned Plowman. An Idyllium of MOSCHUS. (...) --
ONCE for his Pleasure LOVE would go
Without his Quiver, To^ch, or Bow;
He took with him a Ploughman's Whip,
And Corn as much as filled his Scrip;
Upon his shoulders hung the Load;
And thus equipped he went abroad;
With Bulls that often Yoaks had worn,
He plowed the Ground, and sowed his Corn,
Then looking up to Heaven with pride,
Thus mighty Jove he vilify'd.
Now scorch my Field, and spoil my Seed,
Do, and you shall repent the deed;
Europa's Bull I Will make you bow
Your haughty Neck, and draw my Plow.
Love's Subtilty. An Idyllium of Moschus. Beginning (...) --
BY Pisa's Walls does Old Alpheus flow
To Sea, and thence to's Arethusa go,
With Waters bearing Presents as they move,
^eaves, Flowers, and Olive-Branches, to his Love:
And of the Sacred Dust the Heroes raise,
When at Olympic Games they strive for Bays;
^e sinks and dives with Art beneath the Sea,
and to Sicilia does his Streams convey.
^^t still will he his Purity retain,
^or is his Course obstructed by the Main.
^Twas Love, whose subtle Tricks will never be done,
That taught the Amorous River thus to run.
Love makes the best Poets. An Idyllium of BION. Beginning, (...) --
DArts, Torch, or Bow, the Muses do not fear,
They love and follow Cupid every where,
And him whose Breast His Arrows cannot reach,
They all avoid, refusing him to teach.
But if Love's Fire begin to warm a Heart,
They straight inspire it with their Sacred Art;
Let none with subtle Logic this deny,
For I too well the Truth can testify.
If Men, or Gods I strive to celebrate,
My Musick's Discord, and my Verse is flat:
For Love, or Lyci^, when my Vein I show,
My Viol's tuned, and sweetest Numbers flow.
The Death of ADONIS. (...) Of Theocritus Englished.
WHEN VENUS her ADONIS found,
Just slain, and weltring on the Ground,
With Hair disordered, ghastly Look,
And Cheeks their Roses had forsook;
She bad the Cupids Fetch with speed,
The Boar that did this horrid Deed:
They, to revenge Adonis Blood,
As quick as B0irds searched all the Wood,
And straight the murderous Creature found,
Whom they, with Chains, securely bound:
And whilst his Net one over him flung,
^o drag the Captive Boar along;
Another followed with his Bow,
^ushing to make him faster go*
Who most unwillingly obeyed,
^or he of VENUS was afraid.
No sooner she the Boar espied,
^ut, Oh! Thou cruel Beast, she cried,
That had the Heart to wound this Thigh,
How could thou kill so sweet a Boy?
Great Goddess (said the Boar, and stood
Trembling) I swear by all that is Good,
By thy Fair Self, by Him I Have slain,
These pretty Hunters, and this Chain;
I did no Harm this Youth intend,
Much less had Thought to kill your Friend:
I gazed, and with my Passion strove,
For with his Charms I fell in Love:
At last that naked Thigh of his,
With Lovers Heat I ran to kiss;
Oh Fatal Cause of all my Woe!
'Twas then I gave the heedless Blow.
These Tusks with utmost Rigor draw,
Cut, break, or tear them from my Jaw,
It Is just I should these Teeth remove,
Teeth that can have a Sense of Love;
Or this Revenge, if yet too small,
Out off the Kissing Lips and all.
When Venus heard this humble Tale,
Pity did over her Rage prevail,
She bad them straight his Chains unty,
And set the Boar at Liberty;
Who never to Wood returned again,
But followed Venus in her Train,
And when by Chance to Fire he came,
His Amorous Tusks singed in the Flame.
Love a Spirit.
I Told Iacinta the other Day,
As in a pleasant Bower we sat,
Sporting and Chatting Time away,
Of Love, and of I know not what;
That Love's a Spirit, some maintain,
From whom (say they) we are seldom free;
He gives us both Delight and Pain,
Yet him we neither touch, nor see.
But when I view (said I) your Eyes,
I can perceive he thither skips,
He now about them hovering flies,
And I can feel him on your Lips.
Commends the SPRING. A Paraphrase on an Idyllium of BION. Beginning (...).
CLEODEMVS and MYRSON.
CLEO. WHICH Season, Myrson, does most Pleasure bring
The Summer, Autumn, Winter, or the Spring
Does not the SUMMER? When the Joyful Swain
Pays Ceres Rights, and fills his Barns with Grain.
Or is the AUTUMN best in your Esteem?
That drives no Shepherd to the distant Stream
To quench his Thirst: Or wanting common Food,
To range for Nuts and Acorns in the Wood.
For then our Vines their Nectar Juice afford:
And Orchards with Ambrosian Fruits are stored.
Or can you the Cold WINTER more admire?
When Frost and Snow confine you to the Fire,
With Wine and Feasting, Music and Delights,
And pleasant Tales, to shorten tedious Nights.
Or give you for the Flowery SPRING your Voice?
Pray tell me, for I long to hear your Choice.

MYR. SINCE God at first (as we from Poets hear.)
Distinguished these Four Seasons of the Year,
^acred to Deities, to whom we bow,
Our Judgment of them they will scarce allow.
Yet, Cleodemus, answ'ring your Request,
^'ll tell my Thoughts, which I esteem the best.
^UMMER offends, when Sol with fiercest Ray,
^n my tired Limbs, does Fainting Heats convey:
and me as little can moist AUTUMN please,
^ngendring Fogs, That Season's all Disease;
^uch less could I delight in WINTER's Snow,
(...) Nipping Frosts, or Tempests when they blow.
^^t, Oh, the SPRING! Whose Name delights the Ear.
Would a Continual Spring were all the Year.
(...) the others brought no Damage, yet the Spring
With purer Air, makes Birds in Concert sing.
^cloaths our Fields, our Gardens, and our Bowers,
Fresh Array, adorned with various Flowers.
makes the Fruitful Earth, when pregnant long,
^ing forth, and kindly nurse her Tender Young.
^^ds leave their Fodder, and in Pastures keep;
^^d Day is equal to the Time of Sleep.
When God from Nothing made the Heavens and Earth,
And first gave all his Creatures Life and Birth:
Sure it was Spring, and gentle Winds did blow,
And all Earth's Products full Perfection show.

To sweet Meat, sour Sauce. An Imitation of Theocritus or Anacreon.
AS Cupid from the Bees their Hony-stole,
Being stung, he in the Anguish of his Soul,
Fled with his Dear-bought Purchase, which he laid
On Cynthia's Lips, and thus in Anger said;
Here I Am resolved shall a Memorial be,
Of this my sweet, but punished Robbery;
Let him endure as great a Pain as this,
Who next presumes these Nectar Lips to kiss;
Their Sweetness shall convey revenging Smart,
Honey to's Mouth, but Torment to his Heart.
The Young Fowler that mistook his Game. An Idyllium of BION. (...) --
A Brisk Young Archer that had scarce his Trade,
In search of Game, alone his Progress made
To a Near Wood, and as he there did rove,
Spied in a Box-Tree perched, the God of Love:
For Joy, did he his lucky Stars adore,
Never having seen so large a Bird before;
Then in due Order all his Lime-twigs set,
Prepared his Arrows, and displayed his Net;
Yet would the Crafty Bird no Aim allow,
But flew from Tree to Tree, and Bough to Bough;
At which his strange Success, for Grief he cried,
In Anger throwing Bow, and Toyls aside:
And to the Man that taught him, ran in Have,
To whom he gave Account of all that past,
Making him leave his Plow, to come, and see,
And showed him Cupid sitting in the Tree.
The good Man, when he saw it, shook his Head;
Leave off, Fond Boy, leave off, he smiling sed;
Have from this Dangerous Fowl, that from you flies,
And follow other Game, let me advise.
For when to riper Age, you shall attain,
This Bird that shuns you now, you will find again;
Then use your Skill, 'twill all your Art abide;
Sit on your Shoulders, and in Triumph ride.
CUPID 's Nest.
AH! Tell me, Love, thy Nesting Place,
Is It in my Heart, or Cynthia's Face?
For when I see her Graces shine,
There art thou perched with Power Divine:
Yet strait I feel thy pointed Dart,
And find thee fluttering in my Heart;
Then since amongst us thou will show,
The many Tricks thou Love can do,
Prithee for sport remove thy Nest,
First to my Face, and then to Cynthia's Breast.
An Ode of ANACREON. To HIMSELF. (...). Beginning (...) --
WHEN Fumes of Wine ascend into my Brain,
Care sleeps, and I the Bustling World disdain,
Nor all the Wealth of Croesus I esteem,
^^ng of Mirth, for Jollity's my Theme.
With Garlands, I my Ruby Temples crown,
Keeping Rebellious Thoughts of Business down;
^n Broyls, and Wars, while others take Delight,
(...) with choice Friends indulge my Appetite.
Then fetch more Bottles, Boy, and charge us round,
We'll fall to Bacchus, Victims on the Ground;
Nor value what dull Moralists have sed,
I Am sure it is better to be drunk, than dead.
An Ode of ANACREON. To his Mistress. (...). Beginning (...) --
NEAR Troy, Latona's Rival makes her Moan,
Changed by the Gods, into a Weeping Stone;
And ravished Philomel, (they say it is true)
Became a Bird, stretched out her Wings, and flew.
But I could wish to be your Looking-Glass,
Thence to admire the Beauties of your Face:
Or Robe de Chamber, that each Night and Morn,
On those sweet Limbs undrest, I might be worn.
Or else a Crystal Spring for your Delight,
And you to bathe in those cool Streams invite:
Or be some precious Sweets to please the Smell,
That in your Hand, I near your Lips might dwell.
Or String of Pearls, upon your Neck to rest,
Or Pendent Gem, kissing your Snowy Breast;
Even to your Feet, would I my Wish pursue,
A Shoe I Would be, might I be worn by you.
To LOVE. An Ode of ANACREON. (...). Beginning (...) --
IT IS sad if Love should miss a Heart,
Yet sadder much to feel the Smart,
But who can Cupid's Wounds endure,
And have no Prospect of a Cure?
We Lovers are not looked upon,
For what our Ancestors have done?
Wit and good Parts have slight Regard,
No Virtue can obtain Reward.
They ask what Coin our Purses hold,
No Object's like a Heap of Gold.
But doubly be the Wretch accursed
Who taught us to esteem it first.
This Thirst of Gold incites one Brother
To ruin or destroy another:
Our Fathers we for Gold despise.
Hence Envy, Strife, and Wars arise:
And Gold's the Bane, as I could prove,
Of all that truly are in Love.
A Sonnet. Out of Spanish, from Don Luis de Gongora. On a Death's Head, covered
with Cobwebs, kept in a Library, and said to be the Scull of a King.
THIS Mortal Spoil which so neglected lies,
Death's sad Memento, now where Spiders weave
Their Subtle Webs, which Innocence deceive,
Whose Strength to break their Toyls cannot suffice:
Saw it self Crowned, it self Triumphant saw,
With Mighty Deeds proclaiming its Renown;
Its Smiles were Favors, Terror was its Frown,
The World of its Displeasure stood in Awe.
Where Pride ordaining Laws did once preside,
Which Land should Peace enjoy, which Wars abide.
There boldly now these little Insects nest;
Then raise not, Kings, your Haughty Plumes so high,
For in Death's cold Embraces when you lie,
Your Bones with those of common Subjects rest.
From an Imperfect Ode of Hybrias the Cretan. Beginning (...) --
MY Riches are a Trusty Sword, and Spear,
And a tough Shield, which I in Battle wear;
This, as a Rampart, its Defense does lend,
Whilst with the others I my Foes offend.
With these I plow, with these my Crops I reap,
With these, for Wine, I press the Juicie Grape,
These are (unless I fall by Fickle Chance)
Machines which me to Dignities advance.
Oh thrice Beloved Target, Spear, and Sword,
That all these Heavenly Blessings can afford!
Those who the Havoc of my Weapons fear,
And tremble when of Blood, and VVounds they hear.
They are the Men which me my Treasures bring,
Erect my Trophies, style me Lord and King:
And such, while I my Conquests spread abroad,
Fall and adore me, as they do their God.
Complains of the Shortness of Life. An Idyllium of BION. (...) --
THOUGH I had writ such Poems, that my Name
Deserved Enrollment in the Book of Fame;
Or tho my Muse could never acquire the Bays,
Why thus in drudging do I spend my Days?
For should indulgent Heaven prolong our Date,
Doubling the Term of Life prescribed by Fate,
That we might half in Care, and Toil employ,
And spend the other in Delights and Joy:
We then this sweet Assurance might retain,
To reap in Time the Fruits of all our Pain:
But since none can the Bounds of Life extend,
And all our Troubles have a speedy End,
Why do we wrack our Brains, and waste our Health,
To study Curious Arts, or heap up Wealth?
Sure we forget we came of Mortal Seed,
And the short Time Fate has for us decreed.
Out of Latin from Iovianus Pont^^^s* Being sick of a Fever, complains of the
Fountain CASIS.
CASIS to craving Fields, thou liberal Flood,
Why so remote when thou should cool my Blood?
From Mossie Rocks thy Silver Streams do glide,
By which the soultry Air is qualified;
Tall Trees do kindly yield thy Head their Shade,
Where Choirs of Birds their sweet Retreats have made;
But me a Fever here in Bed detains,
And Heat dries up the Moisture of my Veins.
For this, did I with Flowers, thy Banks adorn?
And has, for this, thy Head my Garlands worn?
^ngrateful Spring, It Is I, thy Tale have told,
And sang in Verses, thy Renown of Old.
How on a Time, Jove made in Heaven a Feast,
To which each God, and Goddess came a Guest;
Young Ganymede was there to fill the Bowl,
The Boy, by's Eagle Jove from Ida stole:
Who proud the Gods admired his Mien, and Face,
And active in the Duty of his Place:
Turning in haste, he made a careless Tread,
And from the Goblet all the Nectar shed,
Which pouring down from Heaven upon the Ground*
In a small Pit, it self had forced, was found.
At which Jove smiled, and said, my Lovely Boy,
I Will make this keep thy Chance in Memory;
A Brook shall flow where first thy Liquor fell,
And Casis called, which of thy Fame shall tell;
Then with a Kiss he did his Minion grace,
Making a Crimson Blush overspread his Face.
This flattering Tale I often used to sing,
To the soft Music of thy bubling Spring;
But thou to distant Vmbrians do retire,
Forgetful grown of thy Aonian Lyre;
No Kindness now thou yield'st me as at first,
No cooling Water to allay my Thirst;
I have thy Image in my troubled Brain,
But to my Palate no Relief obtain.
Whole Vessels in my Dreams I seem to drink,
And that I cool my raging Fever think;
My Sleep to me at least this Comfort yields,
Whilst the fierce Dog Star chaps the parched Fields.
Some Help, ye Muses, to your Poet bring,
Let him not thirst that drinks your sacred Spring;
Persephon's Favor with your Songs implore,
Orpheus appeased her with his Harp before.
His Heart, into a Bird.
THE Tears o'erflow'd fair Cynthia's Eyes,
Her pretty Bird away was flown;
For this great Loss she made her Moan,
And quarreled with her Destinyes.
My Heart a secret Joy expressed,
As hoping Good from that Escape,
Took Wings, and in the Fug'tive's Shape,
Got Shelter in her Snowy Breast.
Which proved a Fatal Resting Place,
For she, th'Impostor when she found,
Gave it with Spite a Mortal Wound,
Then pleased, she laughed, and dried her Face.
In Praise of a Country Life.
THE Bliss which Souls enjoy above,
He seems on Earth to share,
Who does Divine Retirement love,
And frees himself from Care,
Nor Thought admits which may his Peace control,
But in a quiet State contents his bounded Soul.
Faction, and noisy Routs he hates,
Fills not his Head with News,
Waits at no State-man's crowded Gates,
Nor servile Phrase does use;
From all false Meaning are his Words refined,
His sober Outside is the Index of his Mind.
In pleasant Shades enjoys his Ease,
No Project spoils his Sleep,
With Rural Pipe himself can please,
And charm his wandering Sheep,
Till to his Cottage in some quiet Grove,
By dusky Night's Approach he is summoned to remove.
On tempting Gold, and Baits of Gain,
With scorn he casts his Eyes,
As Mischief's Root, and Virtue's Bane,
Can their Assaults despise;
^iches he sees our Liberty abuse,
and to their slavish Yoke he does his Neck refuse.
Fruit Trees their loaded Boughs extend,
For him to take his Choice;
His wholesome Drink the Fountains lend,
With pleasant purling Noise;
Notes untaught, Birds that like him are free,
^^ive which shall most delight him with their Harmony.
The Industrious Be example shows,
And teaches him to live,
While she from Woodbine, Pink, and Rose,
Flies loaded to her Hive:
(...) narrow bounds contain his Winter's Store,
(...) Nature be supplied, and he desires no more.
No Misery this Man attends,
Vice cannot him allure,
Each Chance contributes to his Ends,
Which makes his Peace secure;
Others may boast of their Luxurious Strife,
But happy He possesses more of solid Life.
Mortal Jealousy.
Begone, O thou distracting Care,
Partner of Sorrow, and Despair!
Thy Poison spreads to every Part
Of this my poor tormented Heart.
If it be false, with which of late,
Thou have disturbed my quiet State,
Why, to affright me, would thou bring
So well composed a Monstrous Thing?
But if with Truth thou would delight,
To clear my long deluded Sight,
Under that Vail does Falsehood lie,
It Is Death thou bring'st, not Jealousy.
The Innocent Magician; or, A Charm against LOVE.
A Great, but Harmless Conjurer am I,
That can Love's Captives set at Liberty;
Hearts led astray by his deluding Flame,
^ to their peaceful Dwellings can reclaim;
Love's Wings I clip, and take from him his Arms,
By the sole Virtue of my Sacred Charms;
His Empire shakes when I appear in Sight,
My Words the Winged and Quiver'd Boys affright;
Their close Retreats my boundless Power invades,
Nor can they hide them in their Myrtle Shades.
Their Sun's bright Rays, they now eclipsed shall find,
Whose fancied Light strikes giddy Lovers blind,
Rays of fair Eyes, which they proclaim Divine,
And boast they can Sol's dazzling Beams outshine.
The Storms of Sighs, and Rivers of their Eyes,
My Skill allays, and their large Current dryes.
Hearts that are dead, I from their Graves retrieve,
And by my Magick-Spell can make them live.
For know, they are only Tricks, and subtle Arts,
With which the Tyrant Love ensnares our Hearts;
This Traitor plants his Toils to gain his Prize,
In Curls of Flaxen Hair, and Sparkling Eyes:
In each soft Look, and Smile, he sets a Gin,
White Hands, or Snowy Breasts can tempt us in.
Wholly on Mischief is his Mind employed,
His fairest Shows do greatest Dangers hide;
With Charming Sounds his Vot'ryes he beguiles,
Till he destroys them by his Syren's Wiles;
His Cunning Circes every where deceive,
And Men of Souls and Humane Shape bereave.
A thousand other Arts this Treacherous Boy,
To heedless Lovers Ruin does employ.
Be watchful then, and his Allurements shun,
So ends my Charm. Run to your Freedom, Run.
The happy NIGHTINGALE.
MELodious Creature, happy in thy Choice!
That sitting on a Bough,
Do sing, Dear Mate, my Dear, Come to me now;
And she obeys thy Voice.
Ah, could my Songs such Bliss procure!
For mine could Cynthia never allure:
Nor have I Wings like thee to fly,
But must neglected lie;
I cannot her to Pity move,
She scorns my Songs, and me:
While thou rejoycest all the Grove,
(As well thou may) with Melody,
For thou art happy in thy Love.
No Creature ever could boast a perfect State,
Unless to thee it may belong,
Since Nature lib'rally supplies,
All thy Infirmities,
To thy weak Organs gave a powerful Song;
Tho small in Size, thou art in Fortune great,
Compared to mine, thy Happiness is most complete.
On FAME.
THE Fame we covet, is a wandering Air,
Which against Silence wages constant War;
For to be Mute does her so much displease,
That true, or false, she seldom holds her peace;
She but a while can in a place remain,
It Is running up and down, does her sustain;
Tho Dead, she seem, she quickly can revive,
And with a Thousand Tongues, a Hydra live.
LEANDER drowned.
THOUGH Winds, and Seas oppose their utmost Spite,
Joined with the Horror of a dismal Night,
To keep his word the brave Leander strove,
Honor his Convoy, and his Pilot Love;
He long resists the envious Billows Rage,
Whose Malice would his generous Flame assuage;
At last, his weary Limbs overcome with Pain,
No longer could the mighty Force sustain;
Then Thoughts of losing Hero made him grieve,
Only for Hero could he wish to live.
With feeble Voice, a while to respite Fate,
He with his Foes would fain capitulate:
Whilst they against him still their Fury bend,
Nor these his dying Accents would attend.
Since to your greater Powers I must submit,
Ye Winds and Seas, at least, this Prayer admit;
That with my Faith I may to her comply,
And at return let me your Victim die.
To SLEEP. When sick of a Fever.
HAppy are we who when our Senses tire,
Can slack the Chain of Thought, and check Desire.
Nature her Works does in Perfection frame,
Rarely producing any weak, or lame;
She looks on Man with kindest Influence,
Does for one Ill a thousand Goods dispense;
Sleep, blessed Sleep she gave our laboring Eyes.
Oh how I now those happy Minutes prize!
This Rest, our Life's Cessation we may call,
The Ease of Toil, of Care the Intervall.
For such Refreshment we from Sleep obtain,
That we with Pleasure fall to work again.
To Minds afflicted, Sleep a Cure imparts,
Pouring its Sovereign Balsom on our Hearts.
When Wounds, or sharp Distempers rage, and sting,
Kind Slumbers then some welcome Respites bring:
But waking kept by an Excess of Grief,
We from Eternal Sleep expect Relief.
So wretched I, tormented to Despair,
With Pain my Body, and my Soul with Care,
Implore thy Comfort, Gentle Deity,
Whom none could ever but with closed Eyelids see.
An EPIGRAM On WOMAN.
SINCE Man's a Little World, to make it great
Add Woman, and the Metaphor's complete;
Nature this Piece with utmost Skill designed,
And made her of a Substance more refined,
But wretched Man composed of Dust, and Clay,
Must like all Earthly Things, with Time decay;
While she may justly boast of what is Eternal,
A Heavenly Countenance, and a Heart Infernal.
A PARAPHRASE. On CALLIMACHVS. (...) Of LEARNING. Beginning (...) --
THE Rosy Chaplets which my Head adorn,
And richest Garments on my Body worn,
^n Beauty and in Substance must decay,
And by Degrees shall all consume away:
The Meats and Drinks which do my Life sustain,
Nature in certain hours expels again.
We of no outward Blessings are secure,
They cannot time's, nor Fortune's Shocks endure.
For all my Worldly Goods are subject still
To a Thief's Mercy, or Oppressour's Will:
But Sacred Learning treasured in the Mind,
When all things else forsake me, stays behind.
Cynthia returned from the Country.
IS Cynthia happily returned,
Whose Absence I so long have mourned?
Or do I dream, or is it she?
My Life's Restorer it is, I see.
Ah, Fugitive, that had the Heart,
Body and Soul so long to part!
Thy Presence is a sweet Surprise,
A welcome Dream to waking Eyes;
Who can such Joy in Bounds contain,
My Cynthia is come back again!
No notice of your Coming? This
Is just to surfeit me with Bliss.
You are (as when you went) unkind,
With such Extremes to charge my Mind;
This sudden Pleasure might destroy,
Ever Sorrow could make way for Joy.
The Eye is struck before the Ear,
We Lightning see, ever we the Thunder hear.
A Paean, or Song of Triumph, translated into a Pindaric; supposed to be of
Alcaeus, of Sappho, or of Praxilla the Sycionian. Beginning, (...). --
THIS Sword I Will carry in a Myrtle Bough,
It is my Trophy now;
Aristogiton, and Harmodius,
They bare it thus,
When they the Tyrant had destroyed,
Restoring Athens to those Liberties,
Which she so much does prize,
And which she anciently enjoyed.
O Dear Harmodius! Thou art not dead,
But in the Island of the Blessed,
Do live in Peace, and Rest:
For so it is sed,
Thou happy art in Company
Of swift Achilles, and fierce Diomede,
And do Tydides see;
Therefore this Sword in a Green Myrtle Bough,
I carry as in Triumph now,
The brave Harmodius,
And famed Aristogiton bare it thus:
For when they had performed the Sacrifice,
To our great Patroness, Minerva, due,
They, as he in his Grandeur sat,
The Tyrant, Proud Hipparchus slew,
Who over the Athenian State,
Without Pretense of Right, did tyrannize.
Eternal Honors you on Earth shall gain,
Aristogiton, and Harmodius!
You have the bloody Tyrant slain,
By which you do restore,
Your City to the Laws which governed it before.
Beauty makes us happy.
HAppy's the Man who does thy Beauty see;
Yet Happier he who sees and sighs for thee:
But he does greatest Happiness obtain,
Who sighs for thee, and makes thee sigh again;
Some powerful Star did govern at his Birth,
Who for the lov'liest Creature upon Earth,
Shall in Content his Eye and Wishes join,
And safely say of thee, That Heart is mine.
To John Dryden Esquire Poet Laureat and Historiographer Royal, his Honored Friend.
MY Muse, when heated with Poetic Flame,
Longs to be singing thy exalted Name;
The noble Task she sets before my Eyes,
And prompts me to begin the Enterprise;
My eager Hand no sooner takes the Pen,
But seized with Trembling, lets it fall again:
My timorous Heart bids stop, and whispering says,
What can thou sing that may advance his Praise;
His Quill's Immortal, and his Flights are higher
Than Eye of Humane Fancy can aspire:
A lasting Fountain, from whose Streams do ^low
^ternal Honors where his Works shall go.
from Him the Wits their Vital Humor bring:
^s Brooks have their first Currents from the Spring;
^ould my unskilful Pen augment his Fame,
^ should my own eternize with his Name.
^^t hold my Muse, thy Theme too great decline,
^emember that the Subject is Divine:
^^s Works do more than Pen, or Tongues can say,
^^ch Line does Beauty, Grace and Wit display.
To a Singing BIRD.
DEAR imprisoned Bird, how do the Stars combine,
To make my amorous State resemble thine?
Thou, happy thou! do sing, and so do I,
Yet both of us have lost our Liberty;
For him thou sing'st who Captive thee detains,
And I for her who makes me wear her Chains:
But I, alas, this disproportion find,
Thou for Delight, I sing to ease my Mind:
Thy Heart's exalted, mine depressed does lie;
Thou liv'st by Singing, I, by Singing dye.
The Happy LOVER.
HARK Lovers, hark, and I shall tell
A Wonder that will please you well;
She, whom I loved as my own Heart,
For whom I sighed and suffered Smart;
Whom I above the World admired:
When I approached, who still retired:
Was so reserved, but yet so fair,
An Angel to what others are:
Her self from Love escapes not free,
The Man beloved? It Is happy I am He.
The Paean of Bacchylides, (...). On PEACE. Beginning (...) --
GReat Goddess PEACE does Wealth on us bestow,
From her our Sciences and Learning slow,
^ur Arts improve, and we the Artists prize,
^ur Altars fume with richest Sacrifice:
^ouths mind their active Sports they often meet,
^evel and dance with Maidens in the Street;
^he useless Shield serves to adorn the Hall,
^hence Spiders weave their Nets against the Wall;
^antlets and Spears lie covered over with Dust,
and slighted Swords half eaten up with Rust;
(...) Trumpets sound, no rattling Drums we hear,
(...) frightful Clamours pierce the timorous Ear;
^^r weary Eyes enjoying natural Rest,
^^fresh the Heart when it is with Cares oppressed:
^^ys steal away in Feasting and Delight,
^^d Lovers spend in Serenades the Night.
An Ode of ANACREON. Beginning (...) --
MY Hairs are hoary, wrinkled is my Face,
I lose my Strength, and all my Manly Grace;
My Eyes grow dim, my Teeth are broke or gone,
And the best part of all my Life is done;
I Am drowned in Cares, and often sigh and weep;
My Spirits fail me, broken is my Sleep;
Thoughts of the gaping Grave distract my Head;
For in its Paths 'wake or asleep we tread;
None can from it, by Art their Feet restrain;
Nor back, tho wide its Gates, can come again.
Then since these Ills attend the Life of Man,
Let Us make their Burden easy as we can.
Cares are no Cares, but whilst on them we think,
To clear our Minds of such dull Thoughts, let us drin^
The Musical Conqueress.
LED by kind Stars, one Evening to the Grove,
I spied my Cynthia in the Walk of Love;
Her Heavenly Voice did soon salute my Ears,
I heard, methought, the Music of the Spears.
Those Notes on all the Birds had laid a Spell,
And listening amongst the rest was Philomel;
Who thinking she, in Credit, suffered wrong,
Strove, tho in vain, to equal Cynthia's Song;
But when her self, in Voice, outdone she knew,
Being grieved, she ceased, and from her Rival slew.
^ stayed, and saw my Fair walk round the Tree,
And sing her Triumph for the Victory.
Thus whilst my Ears were feasted with Delight,
My Eyes no less were charmed at her Angelic Sight.
A Nymph to a Young Shepherd, insensible o^ LOVE.
WHY do thou fly me thus? Oh cruel Boy!
I am no Wolf that would thy Life destroy:
But a fond Nymph Admirer of thy Face,
As Echo once of fair Narcissus was.
Thou even in Dangers do thy Fancy please,
Striving with Toil the hunted Game to seize:
While wretched me, who languish for thy sake,
When in thy Net thou do refuse to take.
But I, alas, in vain attempt to sind
Effects of Pity in a hardened Mind:
As soon the Hare its Hunters may pursue,
As I with Prayers thy cruel Heart subdue.
My Power, I see, cannot thy Steps retain
Thus led by Sports, and winged by thy Disdain.
Compares the Troubles which he has undergone for Cynthia's Love, to the
Labors of Hercules.
NOT Hercules himself did undertake
Such toylsome Labors for his Mistress sake:
As I for many Years with endless Pain,
The Slave of Love, Love's grand Fatigues sustain.
Tho he slew Hydra; From The Infernal King,
Did the three-headed yelping Porter bring;
Tyrants destroyed; Nemaean Lion tare,
And Atlas Burden on his Shoulders bare.
^o stand the Scorns of an Imperious Brow;
(...) such Hate as would no Truce allow;
^ stubborn Heart by patient Suffering, tame;
and with weak Rhythms, exalt her Glorious Name;
^re Acts shall more the World with Wonder sill,
^han his who did so many Monsters kill;
^onquer a crafty Bull; Disturb Hell's Court;
^h' Hesperian Garden rob, and Heaven support.
The TROPHY.
NOW, now, my Heart's my own again,
The Vict'ry's won, no more I Will grieve;
My Mind's at Peace, it is eased of Pain
And now I shall with Pleasure live.
Lovers from your IDOL fly,
He Is the common ENEMY;
Let him flatter, let him smile,
All his Drifts are to beguile;
His Poison he distills,
By cunning ARTS,
Into our HEARTS,
And then with torment kills;
Trust not his deluding FACE,
Dangerous is his kind Embrace;
Believe not what you hear or see,
For He Is made up of TREACHERY;
Nor be by TRICKS into his Ambush charmed,
The more He naked seems, the more He Is armed*
CLAVDIAN, In Sphaeram Archimedis, Englished.
JOVE saw the Sphere Old Archimedes made,
And to the other Gods, he laughing said,
Such wondrous Skill can crafty Mortals get,
Of my great Work to make the Counterfeit?
Heaven's and Earth's Constitutions, fixed by Fate,
This Syracusans Art does imitate;
His various Planets their just Order have,
Keeping by Springs the Motions which he gave;
Through the twelve Signs his Sun compleats its Years,
And each new Month, his Mock-New-Moon appears;
Pleased with his World, this Artist unconfined,
Boldly rules Heaven in his aspiring Mind.
No more Salmoneus Thunder I admire,
Here Is one has ap'd all Nature's Works entire.
The Frailty of Man's Life.
THE Life we strive to lengthen out,
Is like a Feather raised from Ground,
A while in Air it is tossed about,
And almost lost as soon as found;
If it continue long in sight,
It Is sometimes high and sometimes low,
Yet proudly aims a towering Flight,
To make the more conspicuous Show.
The Air with ease its Weight sustains,
Since it is by Nature light, and frail;
Seldom in quiet State remains,
For Troops of Dangers it assail.
And after various Conflicts with its Foes,
It drops to Earth, the Earth from whence it rose.
Posidippus the Comic Poet, Of the Miseries attending Mankind, Beginning (...);
--
OH Misery of Mankind! For at the Bar
Are Strifes and Quarrels; At our Houses, Care;
In Fields, hard Labor; Dangers, on the Sea;
Who travels rich, can never from Fears be free;
Grievous is Want; Marriage, Eternal Strife;
A Single, is a Solitary Life;
Children, bring Care, and Trouble; To have none,
The Happiness of Wedlock is not known;
Our Youth, is Folly; Ever we can grow wise,
We Are Old, and loaded with Infirmities.
So we may wish, who have The Experience tried,
That we had never been born: Or, soon as born had died.
Metrodorus the Athenian Philosopher, Of the Blessings attending Mankind.
Contradicting the former. Beginning (...) --
HAppy Mankind! For where we six to live,
The Gods a Blessing to that Station give;
If at the Bar it be our Lot to plead,
There Wisdom reigns, and there is Justice weighed;
Or if at home we would our selves maintain,
We there by Industry may Riches gain,
Of Nature's Bounty, Fields the Prospect show;
From Sea the Merchant knows his Treasures flow;
Who travels rich, with Honor does appear;
Who has least Wealth, has still the less to fear;
If married, thou may rule as Lord at home;
If single, have the Liberty to roam;
Children, the Comfort of our Lives procure;
If none, we are from thousand Cares secure;
To Exercise, and Sports, is Youth inclined;
Old Age does ever Veneration ^ind*
So we may those Imprudent Fools deride,
That wish they would never been born: or soon as born had di'd*
From Menander the Athenian, To make a Married Life happy. (...), --
A Brisk young Wife, who did a Fortune bring,
Proves to her Husband a vexatious Thing;
Yet these Advantages to him she gives,
By her, in his Posterity, He lives;
She takes of him, when sick, a prudent Care,
In his Misfortunes bears an equal share;
To her, for Ease, he does his Griefs impart,
Her pleasant Converse often chears his Heart;
And when (if she survive) he ends his Life,
She does the Office of a pious Wife*
Set these against her Ills, and you will find
Reasons to quiet your uneasy Mind:
But if you will strive her Temper to reclaim,
Slight these good Things, the bad expose to Shame,
And no Compliance to her Humor lend,
To your Vexations never shall be an End.
Simonides (...). On Man's LIFE. Beginning (...).
NO Humane thing in Constancy will stay;
The Learned Chian used of old to say,
Our Life was frailer than the Fading Leaves;
Which Man ^orgets, and scarce its Flight perceives:
He harbors Idle Fancies in his Brain,
Many which he from Childhood did retain:
And whilst his Vigor lasts, he is still inclined
To fill with Trifles his unsettled Mind;
On Age or Death never thinks, nor takes he care
Health to preserve, or Active Limbs to spare.
We to more serious Things our Minds should give;
Youth hasts, and we have little time to live.
To weigh this well, is a Material Part,
This Thought's of VVorth, record it in thy Heart.
From two Elegies of Mimnermus. (...). The Contempt of Old Age. The first being
imperfect begins, (...), --
IT IS a short time our precious Youth will stay:
Like some delightful Dream it steals away;
And then comes on us, creeping in its stead,
Benumming Old Age, with its hoary Head;
Which Beauty spoils, our Nerves with Crampings binds,
It clouds our Eyesight, and disturbs our Minds.
When Jove to Tithon endless Old Age gave,
'Twas sure of greater Terror than the Grave.
Some have in Youth been for their Beauty pris'd,
Which when deformed by Age, become despised;
Then peevish grown, and vexed at Childrens Slight,
Take not abroad, nor at their Homes delight.
Bedridden, and scorned, with Pains, and Rheums, they lie:
The Gods on Age throw all this Misery.
From Anaxandrides the Rhodan Poet. In Praise of Old Age. Beginning (...),
(...) --
Old Age which we both hope, and fear to see,
Is no such Burden as it seems to be:
But it uneas'ly if we undergo,
It Is then our selves take pains to make it so.
A yielding Patience will create our Ease,
So do the Wise compound in Youth for Peace.
Who thus complies, both to himself is kind,
Whilst he secures the Quiet of his Mind:
And to his Friends a just Respect does show,
Which gains him Love, and Veneration too.
From Crates the Philosopher, on the same. Beginning (...) --
SOME giddy Fools do Reverend Age deride,
But who enjoyed it not, untimely di'd;
We pray we may to good Old Age attain,
And then of its Infirmities complain;
But their ins^tiate Minds I must admire,
Who Old, Infirm, and Poor, can longer Life desire.
The timely MEMENTO.
THE shipwrack'd Bark cannot more sure convey
Our Humane Life into the Raging Sea:
Nor Darts to Mark can more directly fly:
Nor Floods to The Ocean, than we post to dye.
Then happy thou, who do so well begin,
And so thy Race hold on, the Palm to win!
Blessed Runner! that when tired, and lying down,
Do rise possessed of an Eternal Crown.
Only by closing here thy Mortal Eyes,
Opens the Passage to Celestial Joys.
Then let him take the Earth who loves to reign,
Yet a small Tract, ever long, shall him contain;
Where he as Monarch cannot be obeyed,
For saucy Worms his Limits shall invade.
^f all must dye, why should we fear and grieve,
^ince Dying is the only way to live?
On Good Friday, The Day of our Savior's Passion.
WEep this great Day! Let Tears oreflow your Eyes,
When Father gave his Son in Sacrifice;
This Day for us his precious Blood was spilt,
Whose Dying made Atonement for our Guilt.
He on a Cross, with Shame, gave up his B^eath,
Even He who could not dye, did suffer Death:
Closing his Eyes, to Heaven He opened a way,
And gave those Life who then expiring lay.
Death did against our Souls those Arms prepare,
But He the Fury of the Conflict bare;
To guard our Lives his Body was the Shield,
And by our Gen'ral's Fall, we gain the Field.
When Graves shall open, Temples Vail be torn,
The El'ments weep, and Heavens themselves shall mourn*
O Hearts more hard than Stones, not to relent!
May we shed pious Tears, and of our Sins repent.
Rhianus the Cretan. (...). Of IMPRUDENCE. (...), --
WHat is it that thus frail Men with Error blinds?
Who bear Heaven's Gifts in such imprudent Minds;
The Poor with Eyes, and Hearts dejected go,
Charging the Gods as Authors of their Woe;
They suit their Habit to their humble State,
And scarce their Minds with Virtues cultivate;
How they should speak, or move, they stand in fear,
When amongst the Rich, and Powerful they appear;
They every Gesture do to Sadness frame,
And blushing Faces show their inward Shame.
But he whom Heaven has blessed with liberal Hand,
And given him over his Fellow Men Command,
Forgets he on the Earth his Feet does place,
Or that his Parents were of Mortal Race;
He, swelled with Pride, in Thunder speaks like Jove,
Does in a Sphere above his Betters move.
But tho so Rich, so Stately, and so Grave,
Has not more stock of Brains than others have.
Yet would he climb to Heaven to find a Seat
Amongst the Gods, and at their Banquets eat.
Till swift-wing'd Ate, Mischief's Deity,
Light on his Head, ever he her Coming spy;
Who can her self in various Shapes disguize,
When Old or Young, she would in Snares surprise;
She on Poor Fools, as well as those in Height,
Does to great Jove, and to Astraea Right.
Timocles the Athenian His Remedies against the Miseries of Man's LIFE. More at
large exemplified. (...).
COnsider well this Truth, for it is of Use,
Nature did never a Thing like Man produce,
So charged with Ills, from which so seldom free.
Sometimes his Life's a Scene of Misery.
Nor Humane Industry can Respite gain,
For his Soul's Anguish, or his Body's Pain,
But by reflecting what some Men endure,
Which to himself may present Ease procure,
And Tales of what in former times was done,
Laid in the Scale, and weighed against his own.
Art thou reduced to beg from door to door?
When Telephus was young he suffered more;
In Woods exposed, without Relief he lay,
For some devouring Beasts a Royal Pray;
If thou, with his, thy Miseries compare,
Thou will confess he had the greatest share.
Have Troubles turned thy Brain to make thee rage?
Thoughts of Al^maeon may thy Griefs assuage;
By Fury's scourged, he Mad, in Torments di'd,
Yet justly suffered for his Parricide.
Were thou by chance, or made by others blind?
Call OEdipus the Theban King to mind;
Who quit his Throne, himself of sight deprived,
Became more wretched still, the more he lived,
Till Sorrow brake his Heart, which scarcely could
Atone ^or Incest, and his Father's Blood.
Thy Son if dead, or was in Battle slain?
A greater Loss did Niob^ sustain;
She saw her fourteen Children slaughtered ly,
A Punishment for her IMPIETY,
Who great Latona's Offspring had defied,
By whom, thus Childless, drowned in Tears, she died.
On Ph^^octetes think, should thou be lame;
He a most powerful Prince endured the same;
To conquer Troy he showed the Greeks a Way,
To whom he did the Fatal Shafts betray;
His Foot disclosed the Secret of his Heart,
For which, that treacherous Foot endured the Smart.
Have thou thy Life in Ease and Pleasure led,
Till Age contract thy Nerves, and bow thy Head?
Then, of thy greatest Joy on Earth, bereft,
Overwhelmed in Sorrow, and Despair, art left?
So old King OEneus lost his valiant Son,
For Slights himself had to Diana shown,
Slain by his Mother when he had destroyed
The Boar, which long his Father's Realm annoyed:
Which Actress in this Mischief felt her share,
Her self becoming her own Murderer.
The Father losing thus his Son, and Wise,
Ended in Cries and Tears his wretched Life.
Are Kings thus forced to yield to rig'rous Fate?
It may Thy lesser Ills alleviate.
FINIS.
THE TABLE.
Page. THE Proem. To Love 1 The Request. To Love 2 The Complaint. To Cynthia 3
On a Race Horse. From Girolamo Preti 4 Invites Poets and Historians to write in
Cynthia's Praise 5 Cynthia on Horseback 6 On the Death of Cynthia's Horse 7 On
a Fountain and its Architect 8 Describes the Place where Cynthia is sporting
her self 9 His Retirement 10 To his Honored Friend, William Bridgman, Esquire 11 A
Sonnet of Love 12 On the Picture of Lucretia stabbing her self 13 Complains,
being hindered the sight of his Mistress 14 The Pleased Captive 15 The Incurable
ib. On a Fair Beggar 16 A Sonnet writ by a Nymph in her own Blood, from Claudio
Achillini 17 The Rose and Lily 18 A Defiance, returning to the place of his
past Amors 19 Distance no Cure for Love 20 On Sig. Pietro Reggio his setting
to Music several of Mr. Cowley's Poems 21 From a Drinking Ode of Alcaeus.
(...) 22 An Epitaph on a Dutch Captain ib. On Cynthia, singing a Recitative
Song 23 On the Picture of Cavalier Guarini 24 On Old Rome 25 Revenge against
Cynthia 26 Loves Contrariety 27 Invites Cynthia to his Cottage 28 It Is hard to
follow Virtue 29 Endymion and Diana. An Heroic Poem taken out of the 8th Canto
of Alessandro Tassoni his La Secchia Rapita 30 From an Ode of Horace. Vides ut
alta stet nive candidum, etc. 34 A Complaint against Cynthia's Cruelty 35 Loves
Garden. From Girolamo Preti 36 Seeing his own Picture, discourses of his
Studies and Fortune 37 Petrarc. On the Death of Laura 38 Another of Petrarc on
Laura's Death 39 Complains of the Court 40 Being retired, complains against the
Court 41 To Cynthia 42 The Withered Rose 43 On the Death of Sylvia 44 To the
Winds 45 The Silent Talkers 46 It Is dangerous jesting with Love 47 On Wine.
From a Fragment of Hesiod. (...) 48 A Dream 49 The Restless Lover 50 The
Resolution. Out of Italian 51 Invokes Death 52 A Hint from the Beginning of the
third Satyr of Juvenal. Laudo tamen, etc. 53 A Contemplation on Man's Life. Out
of Spanish 54 The Nightingale that was Drowned 55 On a Child sleeping in
Cynthia's Lap 56 Cure for Afflictions. From an Imperfect Ode of Archilochus.
(...) 57 Cynthia sporting 58 The Fly and Frog. Out of Spanish, from Don
Francisco de Quevedo 59 On Gold 61 To his Grace the Duke of Northumberland 62
Loves New Philosophy 63 The vanity of unwarrantable Notions. Out of Portugueze,
from Luis de Camoens 67 To the Nightingale 68 Apollo and Daphne 70 A Sestina,
in Imitation of Petrarc 71 A Sonnet of Petrarc, giving an account of the time
when he fell in Love with Madonna Laura 73 A Sonnet of Petrarc, showing how
long he had loved Madonna Laura 74 Petrarc going to visit M. Laura, remembers
she was lately dead 75 Petrarc laments the Death of M. Laura 76 Petrarc on
Laura's Death 77 Constancy of Love to Cynthia 78 To his Viol 79 Hope. Out of
Italian from Fr. Abbati 80 Finding Cynthia in Pain and Crying 82 Cynthia
sleeping in a Garden 83 Lesbia's Complaint of Thyrsis his Inconstancy 84 Lydia
Distracted 85 The Four Seasons. SPRING 86 SVMMER 87 AVTVMN 88 WINTER 89 A
Sonnet written in Italian by Sig. Fra. Gorgia who was Born as they were
carrying his Mother to her Grave 90 The Scholar of his own Pupil. The third
Idyllium of Bion Englished. (...) 91 An Epitaph on a Ridiculous Boaster 92 The
Danger of the Sea. A Latin Song taken out of the 13th Book of the Macaronics of
Merlin Cocalius. Infidum arridet saepe imprudentibus Aequor 93 An Expostulation
with Love. A Madrigal 94 On the Art of Writing 95 The Morn. Out of French from
Theophile 96 To his Ingenious Friend Mr. N. Tate 97 Less Security at Sea, than
on Shore. An Idyllium of Moschus. (...) 98 Platonic Love 99 Out of Latin.
Jovianus Pontanus. In Praise of the Fountain Casis 100 To Cynthia going into
the Country 101 Soneto Espanol de Don Felipe Airs. En alabanza de su Ingenioso
Amigo, Don Pedro Reggio, uno de los Mayores Musicos de su tiempo. 102 On
Cynthia Sick 103 The Turtle Doves. From Jovianus Pontanus 104 An Essay toward
a Character of his Sacred Majesty King James II. 105 Sleeping Eyes. A Madrigal
107 An Ode of Anacreon. (...). To the Swallow. (...) 108 Love so as to be
beloved again. An Idyllium of Moschus. (...) 110 All things should contribute
to the Lovers Assistance. An Idyllium of Moschus. (...) 111 Cupid at Plow. An
Idyllium of Moschus. (...) 112 Loves Subtilty. An Idyllium of Moschus. (...)
113 Love makes the best Poets. An Idyllium of Bion, (...) 114 The Death of
Adonis. (...) 115 Love is a Spirit 117 Commends the Spring. A Paraphrase on an
Idyllium of Bion, (...) 118 To sweet Meat, sour Sauce. In Imitation of
Theocritus, or Anacreon 120 The Young Archer that mistook his Game. An Idyllium
of Bion, (...) 121 Cupid's Nest 122 An Ode of Anacreon. (...). To himself.
(...) 123 An Ode of Anacreon. (...), To his Mistress. (...) 124 An Ode of
Anacreon. (...), To Love. (...) 125 On a Death's Head, covered with Cobwebs,
kept in a Library, and said to be the Scull of a King-Done out of Spanish from
Don Luis de Gongora 126 From an imperfect Ode of Hybrias the Cretan. (...) 127
A Complaint of the shortness of Life. An Idyllium of Bion, (...) 128 Being sick
of a Fever, complains of the Fountain Casis. Out of Latin from Jovianus
Pontanus 129 His Heart into a Bird 131 In Praise of a Countrey-Li^e. An
Imitation of Horace's Ode, Beatus ille 132 Mortal Jealousy 134 The Innocent
Magician; Or, a Charm against Love 135 The Happy Nightingale 136 On Fame 137
Leander drowned 138 To Sleep, when sick of a Fever 139 An Epigram on Woman 140
A Paraphrase on Callimachus. (...). Of Learning, beginning (...) 141 Cynthia
returned from the Country 142 A Paean, or Song of Triumph, translated into a
Pindaric; supposed to be of Alcaeus, of Sappho, or of Praxilla the Sycionian.
Beginning, (...) 143 Beauty makes us happy 144 To John Dryden Esquire Poet Laureat
and Historiographer Royal 145 To a Singing Bird 146 The Happy Lover ibid The
Paean of Bacchylides. (...), Of Peace. Beginning (...) 147 An Ode of Anacreon,
beginning (...) 148 The Musical Conqueress 149 A Nymph to a Young Shepherd,
insensible of Love 150 Compares the Troubles which he has undergone for
Cynthia's Love, to the Labors of Hercules 151 The Trophy 152 An Epigram of
Claudian Englished, In Sphaeram Archimedis 153 The Frailty of Man's Life 154
Posidippus the Comic Poet, On the Miseries of Mankind, beginning (...) 155
Metrodorus the Athenian Philosopher, Of the Blessings attending Mankind.
Contradicting the former, beginning (...) 156 From Menander the Athenian, To
make a married Life Happy. (...) 157 Simonides, (...). On Man's Life,
Beginning, (...) 158 From two Elegies of Mimnermus. (...). The Contempt of Old
Age. The first being imperfect begins, (...) 159 From Anaxandrides the Rhodian
Poet, in Praise of Old Age, beginning (...) 160 From Crates the Philosopher, On
the same, beginning, (...) ibid The Timely Memento 161 On Good Friday, the Day
of our Savior's Passion 162 Rhianus the Cretan (...), Of Imprudence. (...) 163
Timocles the Athenian, His Remedies against the Miseries of Man's Life,
beginning (...) 163
The End of the Table.
Books Printed for H. Herringman, and sold by J. Knight and F. Saunders at the
Blue Anchor in the Lower Walk of the New-Exchange.
MR Cowley's Works. Mr Dryden's Plays, in 2. Vol. Mr Beaumont and Fletcher's
Plays. Mr Shakespeare's Plays. Sir William D' Avenant's Works. Mrs Phillips's
Poems. Mr Waller's Poems. Sir John Denham's Poems. Sir John Suckling's Poems.
Sir Richard Fanshaw's Il Pastor Fido. Dr Donn's Poems.

