THE Strong Man Armed not Cast Out, BUT Removed to a Stronger Hold: VIZ. FROM
PROFANENESS to HYPOCRISY.

OR, An Answer to a Book, Entitled, The Strong Man Armed Cast Out, and his
Goods spoiled; Or, The Poor Man sitting at Jesus's Feet, Clothed, and in his
Right Mind.

Written by James Jackson, formerly a Parish Priest, and afterward a Teacher
among the Independents: And now Walking with the People called Quakers, as he
Testifies of himself.

In which Answer is plainly Discovered the Ignorance and Darkness, the
Delusions, and False Apprehensions of this James Jackson, Concerning himself,
and the Churches, and Assemblies which he Disowns, and Separates from. And also
the Erroneous Interpretations and Applications of the Scriptures, which he
mentions in his Book.

Herein are also Discovered several Characters, plain Marks of those False
Teachers that the Spirit speaks expressly should come into the World in these
last days.

Written for the Vindication of the Truths of the Gospel, the Stablishing of
those who are in the Truth, and the Reducing of those who have Erred from it:
And in all for the Exaltation of the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ.

By R.a. Austen.

1 John 3.1. Try the Spirits, whether they are of God, for many false Prophets
are gone out into the World.

Isa. 8.20. To the Law, and to the Testimony, if they speak not according to
this Word, it is because there is no Light in them.

Jer. 8.9. Lo, they have Rejected the Word of the Lord, and what Wisdom is in
them?

London, Printed for Peter Parker, at the Leg and Star over against the Royal
Exchange in Cornhill. 1676.

The Epistle to the READER.
IT is certain that these are the Last Times; and that many False Prophets are
gone out into the World; Deceitful workers, Ministers of Antichrist,
transforming themselves into the Ministers of Christ: It is time therefore, and
our Necessary Duty, to try the Spirits whether they are of God: and verily here
is one as dangerous a Person, with as subtle, insinuating Doctrine, as I ever
yet met with. When I had Read his Book, and Observed how he Exalts and
Magnifieth himself, and those of his way, as the only Holy People in the
World; and Separateth from all the Godly, their Societies, and assemblies, of
all persuasions, without Exception: and not only so, but also vilifieth them,
Ranking them with the wicked and unregenerate world, and how he asserteth and
maintains a false Principle, That the true Light (meaning Christ) is in every
Man and Woman; and is sufficient, being believed in, and Obeyed, to bring them
to Salvation: and that whosoever will not Receive, and own this Doctrine, are
accounted by him Enemies to Christ. When I considered these things, with many
other Lies in Hypocrisy and Blasphemies, mentioned in his Book, my Spirit was
vehemently moved within me, and I said in my self, Shall this uncircumcised
Philistine thus come forth, and Challenge, and Defy the Hosts and Armies (...)

The Light within shall be in Hell for ever. p. 31. The Quakers draw people to
Idolatry. ibid. The Quakers are under spiritual Judgments. p. 32. The Quakers
Perfection in sin. p. 34. The Quakers imperfection in grace. 35. 1 In
knowledge. ibid. 2 In Faith and Hope. 36. 3 In Love. ibid. Paul preaches
Christ, and not the Light in every man and woman. p. 38. The Devils fundamental
doctrine. p. 39. Obstinate Quakers to be rejected. p. 41. The Quakers sin is
like the great sin of the hardened Jews. p. 42. Advice to the hearers among the
Quakers. p. 44. The Quakers great Idol near falling. p. 45. Ten Arguments
proving the Light within is not Christ. p. 46. The Quakers Humility. p. 56. The
Quakers Unity. ibid. The true Unity, of the true Church. 59. 1. One Body. ib.
2. One Spirit. ib. 3. One Hope. 60. 4. One Lord. ib. 5. One Faith. ib. 6. One
Baptism. ib. 7. One God. ibid. The Quakers Patience. p. 62. A false persuasion
of Conversion. p. 63. The Light within converts none to the Lord. p. 65.
Natural Light, is Spiritual Darkness. p. 67. This Scripture Joh. 1.9. grossly
mistaken. p. 68. The Quakers Doctrine is directly-contrary to the Scriptures.
p. 70
Conscience is a natural light. 72. Christ, the true Light, is really in
believers, and in none else. ib. The Scriptures are the word of God. p. 74. The
Scriptures are Gods Love letters to mankind. p. 77. Characters of false
Prophets whereby they are known. p. 78. 1. Departing from the Faith. p. 79. 2.
Character: Giving heed to seducing Spirits, and Doctrines of Devils. p. 80. 1.
Against Christ. ib. 2. Against the Scriptures: ibid. 3. Against the Church:
81.4. Resting upon their own Righteousness: ib. The third Character of false
Prophets: Lies in Hypocrisy p. 82. The first Lie in Hypocrisy p. 83 The
second Lie in Hypocrisy ib. The third Lie in Hypocrisy p. 84. The fourth Lie
in Hypocrisy ib. The fifth Lie in Hypocrisy p. 86. The sixth Lie in Hypocrisy
p. 88. The Quakers Railing accusations p. 89. The fourth Character of false
Teachers: their Consciences are seared with an hot Iron p. 91. The fifth
Character of false Teachers: denying the Lord that bought us p. 92. The Apostle
Peter, and Jude, both agree in the same. Characters of false Teachers p. 93.
Enoch Prophesied of these ungodly men p. 100. The Quakers have spoken many hard
speeches against Christ. ibid. The Quakers separation from Christ and his
people proves they are no Christians. p. 101. A Lying Spirit is gone forth
among the Quakers, which seduceth them. p. 105. Births of the Spirit, and of
the Flesh. p. 106. Spiritual sins are greater than fleshly sins. p. 108. The
false Opinions of the Quakers spring from Pride and Ignorance. p. 109. The
Quakers deceive weak and simple minds. p. 110. The Quakers shall not long
continue to deceive. p. 113. Good Counsel to the Quakers. p. 115. Leave the
Quakers Meetings p. 116. Come to the Assemblies of the Saints. p. 117.
THE Strong Man Armed not Cast out, BUT Removed to a stronger Hold: VIZ. From
PROFANENESS TO HYPOCRISY.
WHen Man at his first Creation came out of the Hand of God, he was then a
Holy, and a Righteous Creature: But we all know (to our sorrow) he lost that
Holy state; and now, and since then, he is by Nature a Child of Wrath, and an
Enemy to God, in his mind afar off from him, and most unlike unto him: So that
there is no Recovering that Holy, and Happy Estate again, to have Fellowship
and Communion with God, but by Regeneration and Conversion; from this Carnal
state, to a New Spiritual state; by true Repentance and Faith in Christ,
wrought by the Mighty Power of the Spirit of God, in those whom he (according
to his determinate Counsel and foreknowledge) calls in due time unto himself;
in whom he (by degrees) destroys the works of the Devil, the Image of the first
Adam, and Creates; and works, the Image or Nature of the Second Adam Jesus
Christ, in Righteousness, and true Holiness; or as it is in some other
Expressions in Scripture, he casts out the strong Man Armed, that keeps the
House, and Divides the Spoils, when this stronger than he comes, he turns out
this first strong Man (though Armed, and in his strong Hold of every Faculty of
the Soul) and Enters himself, and takes Possession of the Soul, and turns all
to his own Use and Interest, even for his own Glory; the Exaltation of his
Free Grace, and that for ever.

Now, here comes this great Question to be Debated and Determined, The Author
of the Strong Man Armed, Tried.
Concerning the Person here mentioned, James Jackson, Author of the Book
Entitled, The Strong Man Armed cast out, (which also Comprehends and includes
all others of his Mind, with whom he has now joined himself.) He is strongly
persuaded (it appears) That the strong Man, the Devil, with all his wares and
works, is cast out, and that Christ is entered, and dwells in his stead.

He tells us in his Epistle to his Friends and Relations, what an Ungodly,
Dissolute, Debauched, and Extravagant Course of Life the had Lived, against all
Counsels, Admonitions, Reproofs, Vows, Promises, and Engagements, breaking all
these as so many Bonds and Fetters (alluding to the poor Man that was possessed
with Devils, and Bound with Chains and Fetters, and brake all in pieces, and no
Man could tame him.) So did he, to the grief and wounding of his dear Friends.
But the Lord working mightily, and Revealing his Son in him, (he says;) and
making a wonderful and great Change, he would not eat his Morsels alone, but
thought it his Duty to Communicate these things to his Friends and Relations,
and to tell them what great things God has done for him, and has had
Compassion on him, in turning him from Darkness into his Mavelous Light, and
from the Power of Satan, into the Kingdom of his dear Son.

So that now our work is to bring him and his works to be Weighed in the
Balance of the Sanctuary, and to try them by the true Touchstone, whether
they be true Metal or Counterfeit; for many Foolish Builders Build upon the
Sand, and not upon the Rock: Yea, and some that Build upon the firmer
Foundation, yet they Build much Wood, Hay, and Stubble, instead of Gold,
Silver, and Precious Stones, 1 Cor. 3.13. but every Man's work shall be made
Manifest, for the Day shall Declare it, because it shall be Revealed by Fire;
And the Fire shall Try every Man's work of what sort it is. Now, this Fire is
the Spirit of God speaking in the Scriptures; if Men speak according to his
Mind and Will, then it is the Truth; but if they speak, or Act otherwise, then
it is not according to Truth, but is from a False Spirit: That is, either from
the Devil (the Spirit that works in the Children of Disobedience) or from a
Man's own Spirit, or from both.

Therefore, that we may know which to follow, when Men Differ and Contend about
things, this is the sure and only way, (according to the Apostl^s Counsel) to
try the Spirits, whether they are of God, or not, 1 John 3.

But it may readily be asked, how shall we know the Spirits, which is which;
which is the true Spirit, and which the false, when they speak in men different
things, who disagree in their Sayings and Apprehensions?

I Answer; That the Spirit of God speaking in any Man, How to know the true
Spirit from the false Spirit.
or if any Man speak by the Spirit of God, he speaks according to what he
has already spoken, and not contrary: That is, according to what he has
already spoken in the Scriptures, by those Holy Men of God that wrote the
Scriptures, and were Inspired by the holy ghost; and if any man speak contrary
to what the Spirit of God has already spoken, and Revealed in the Scriptures,
he is a Liar, and speaks from a false Deluding Spirit, and not by the Spirit
of God.

The Apostle Paul tells us plainly, 1 Cor. 2.13. We speak things which the Holy
Ghost teaches, comparing Spiritual things with Spiritual. Paul had the Spirit
of God, and spoke and taught by the Spirit of God. But if a Natural Man (one
that has not the spirit of Christ in him) does go about to compare spiritual
things with spiritual things, he is sure to mistake, and speak Erroneously; For
the Natural Man (as he there says) perceives not the things that are of God,
neither can he know, or perceive them, because they are spiritually Discerned:
That is, they are seen in the Light, and by the Discovery of the Spirit of
Christ, the true Light, and not otherwise.

So that this being laid down as a Ground and Foundation, an Infallible truth,
as it is; we may then proceed to the Examination and Trial of the Spirits and
Doctrines of Men; for no Man speaking by the spirit of God, will, or can speak
contrary to the Scriptures; if he do, let it be Rejected: Paul says, If any
Man Preach any other Gospel than that which we have Preached unto you, let him
be accursed; yea, if an Angel from Heaven bring any other Gospel than that ye
have Received, (and is written in the Scriptures) let him be Accursed.

He says, not only let him or them be Disowned, and Rejected, but let him be
Accursed: so Zealous was he, and so should we be to hold fast, and maintain the
Doctrine of the Gospel, the Scriptures, given out by God himself, spoken and
written by the Men of God, in their Day, and Generation, by the immediate
Dictates, Teachings, and Movings of the Holy Ghost, the Spirit of God, so that
(as was said) whatever Spirit it be (in whomsoever) that speaks contrary, or
not according to the Scriptures, is to be disowned, and rejected, as false and
erroneous.

Now therefore, here comes in the Trial of Particulars; the several Doctrines,
Opinions, and Practices of Men, of any persuasions whatsoever: Either they
speak according to the Spirit of God in them, or from some other Spirit; if
they speak from the spirit of God in them, then it must needs be according to
what he has already spoken, (as was said) for he is one and the same Spirit,
and changes not: But if it be otherwise, then it may be said, as Paul said of
some in his Time, This Persuasion comes not of him that calls you, Gal. 5.8.
it comes not from the Spirit of God, but from a false and Deluding Spirit.

And here now is thy Trial and thy Judgment, James Jackson, Author of the
strong Man Armed cast out; and all that are of thy Mind and Way; who speak
contrary to what the Holy Ghost has spoken already in the Scriptures, as is
hereafter showed in several particulars.

First, 1. Strong Man Armed, p. 3.
That Spirit in thee Declares to all People, That thou art now Converted, and
turned from Darkness to Light, and from the power of Satan unto God; that thou
art changed from a wicked Profane course of Life, unto a Holy Life, walking
with a Holy People, and that thou have left off to be a Parish Priest; yea, and
after that, have left off from being a Teacher among the Independents, and have
disowned, and forsaken the Congregations and Assemblies of the Independents;
and art now come and joined with the People called Quakers. And thou tellest
us, That these are the only Holy People of God upon Earth; and that all other
Churches, Assemblies, and Congregations (Naming the Presbyterians,
Independents, Baptists, and others) are out of the way; and that though they
differ in Forms or Persuasions, yet they agree in the same Faith, Foundation,
and Root.

Answ. For Answer hereunto briefly; I shall not speak to Reproach thee, or rail
upon thee, or any of thy way, as thou have done against many of the Precious
Saints in the Churches of Christ, saying of the Independents (whose Assemblies
thou have forsaken) That there was sufficient ground for thee to separate from
the Tents of those ungodly Men, Strong Man Armed, p. 8.
their Teachers, who are no better than Filthy Dreamers, Blind Guids, and
Belly-gods, which belch out nothing but Lies, Slanders, Blasphemies, and evil
speeches against Christ, his Ways, Truths, and People; and this (thou say)
thou see, and declarest against them in the Light. I say, I will not bring
against thee Railing Accusations, as thou do against others; but the Lord
Rebuke thee, and that Lying Spirit in thee, and Convince thy Spirit of the
Truth.

Concerning thy leaving off to continue a Parish Priest, thou did well; but
thou had done better if thou had never undertaken it; for there are too
many such Priests, like the Priests of Old, the Sons of Eli; who (by reason of
their wickedness) made the Sacrifices of the Lord to be Abhorred: There are
many in these Days of the same Tribe, who make the Gospel of Christ, his Ways,
Truths, and People to be evil spoken of; yea, they make the Name of Christ to
be Blasphemed, and his People Reproached, even through them, and by their
means: And making others, who are the true and Faithful Ministers and
Ambassadors of Christ to be evil spoken of, Reviled, and Disowned for their
sakes, and because of them; yea, more, They Occasion Separations in all parts
of the Land. Woe unto them, for they have gone in the way of Cain, and run
greedily after the Error of Balaam for a Reward, and get into the Priests
Office, that they may eat a piece of Bread, that they may get a Living by it:
Many of them more sit for the Cart, or the Plough, than the Pulpit, having
neither Gifts of Nature, nor of Grace fit for the Ministry. Men that never
learned Christ, were never taught of God, and how then can they Teach others?
Nay, instead of Instructing others in the ways of Life and Salvation, they by
their wicked Examples draw them down to Hell, they are the worst of Men upon
Earth. I have Indignation against such, and am greatly grieved for the Misery
of those poor Ignorant Souls of their Parishes, who are like to perish for lack
of Knowledge; the Blind leading the Blind, both will fall into the Ditch: The
Lord Remove them, or Reform them, and give Pastors after his own heart,
according to his Promise.

And for this I Commend thee, James Jackson, that thou did leave off thy
Profaneness, and also deceiving the People as a Parish Priest.

But now take heed, The Strong Hold of Hypocrisy is stronger than that of
Profaneness.
lest thou art not yet deceived, in the state and condition thou art now in,
lest the false spirit be not too subtle for thee; lest Satan (that strong Man
Armed) having quit one strong hold, be not got into another that is stronger
than the former; for certain it is, the Devil's power and policy in a way of
Gross wickedness and profaneness, is not half so strong a hold as the strong
hold of Hypocrisy: Where Reason, Natural Conscience, all outward Occurrences,
Moral, Civilized Persons, all can readily Reprove, and help to draw a Man out
of such an Estate; but the strong hold of Hypocrisy, and Erroneous persuasions
and Practices, in a way of Religion, is more Dangerous, and a stronger Hold;
where nothing but the spirit of God, and an enlightened Understanding to discern
the Truth of the word of the Gospel, can Instruct a Man, especially when a Man
has passed through many, or diverse States, Forms, Opinions, and persuasions,
and at last has pitched upon one that he Judges and Concludes does Exceed all
the former; if yet this be false, and he know it not, he is then in greater
Danger than ever, seeing his own Natural Reason, and his Ignorant dim-sighted
Conscience, confirmed by the strong delusions of Satan, (that spirit that
works, and Rules in the Children of Disobedience, do all concur and join
together, and hold the poor soul in Bondage under Darkness, which is by many
taken for the true Light of Christ.

I say, Take heed of being deceived in these things, thou and thy Friends; for
I say, the strong hold of the Devil, in a way of Profaneness, is not so strong
as his strong hold in a way of Hypocrisy, or false Worship; this is Evident
both by Scripture and Experience. Christ told the Pharisees, who were Zealous
in a way of Hypocrisy: That Publicans and Ha^lots, (great and gross sinners,
in a way of Profaneness,) should enter into the Kingdom of Heaven before them,
Mat. 21.31. And that I may show my true Love to your souls (whether you will
Accept it or no) I will Endeavor to show unto thee and them, things in a
clearer Light than yet shines in you.

Thou say, the strong Man Armed (the Devil) is cast out of thee, and Christ
a stronger than he, is come in, and now keeps the House: How is this made
manifest? Thy saying so does not prove it, but thy Sayings, and thy Doings
prove the contrary; and this I shall make good, both by positive Scripture, and
by Example.

If any Man be in Christ, The New Creature does Evidence it self where it is.
he is a New Creature, 2 Cor. 5.17. He that is Converted, and changed from the
state of Nature, to the state of Grace, out of whom Satan is cast, and Christ
come in; he is New in his Understanding, Will, Affections; yea, New in his
whole Life and Conversation: But now it appears plainly, that thy Understanding
is still Old, the same Ignorance, Blindness, Darkness remains upon it, as is in
all Natural Men; and this is seen, and manifest by thy false Interpretations of
Scriptures; and Secondly, by thy false applications of them, in Applying those
Scriptures to the Saints, true Believers, Members of Christ, as do belong only
to the unregenerate World; such as are yet in the state of Nature; neither art
thou changed in thy Will and Affections, they are not yet New, but according to
the Old Nature in all unregenerate Persons, as plainly appears in that thou
show forth no true Love to the Lords precious People, Members of the Body of
Christ; but contrariwise, disownest them, and separatest from them; nay more,
thou do Revile them, and falsely speak evil of them, as is plainly seen in
many passages of thy Book: And as for thy Love and affections toward Christ,
it is Love but only in Tongue, in Word, and Profession only, not in Truth.
Thou professest that thou Know, and Love him, but indeed thou denyest him,
in denying of his People, and disowning of them, for he has said, He that
Despises you, Despises me; nay more, Thou, and those of thy way, Deny and
dishonor Christ, in that ye set up his Creature, and Adore it, and Worship it,
for Christ, and call it Christ in you; and so make the Creator and the Creature
all one.

Now, seeing thou art an Old Creature still, both in thy inner Man and outward
Man in thy Conversation: How can thou think thou art changed, or that the
Strong Man Armed is cast out, but rather that he is Removed to a stronger hold.

Nay, Paul's Example a Looking-Glass.
further; Let us try by another Touchstone, whether thou art true Gold or no:
Paul, we know, was once in a Carnal state, in a state of Nature, in Darkness;
but was Called, and Converted: And we see, he shows forth, and manifests to
all, that his state was changed; for he soon after, prayed earnestly to God,
and he Preached the Gospel, he stood up Zealously to Preach that Jesus, which
lately before he persecuted in his Members: He Banished them, and Imprisoned
them, and did many mischiefs to them; yea, and thought verily he did well, and
that he ought to do many things against Jesus of Nazareth; and this was from
the Light within, which thou and thy Friends say, is in every Man and Woman,
and which ye adore for God and Christ: But when he was Converted, this Light
was known to be but Darkness, by the true Light, Jesus Christ, when he shined
into his soul; when this Sun of Righteousness arose, it scattered his Darkness.

Now, Compare thy Change and Conversion (as thou call it) with Paul's
Conversion, for his was true, and see how like thine looks to his, or how
unlike it; and thereby thou and others may gain Instruction. Thou and others
may plainly see how much thou art Deceived, in that thou think, and say,
The strong Man armed is cast out of thee.

Do but look thy self in this glass of the Example of Paul, and thou will see
thy self like him, as he was before his Conversion, as like him as one Man can
be like another: But if thou look thy self in the Example of Paul after his
Conversion, then thou art no more like him, than an Ape is like a Man; perhaps,
some dark shadows, and simple Resemblances, some seeming likeness, but nothing
of Truth or Reality, in any Spiritual Respects.

Paul before his Conversion Raged against the Saints, and was very bitter
against them; but afterward when he was enlightened and Converted, he joins
himself to them, is one with them, and counts it a great and precious
Privilege so to be: He Preached to them that Jesus whom before he knew not;
but Persecuted him, yea, he is tender of them, and Nourishes them, and
Cherishes them, as a Nurse Cherishes her Children.

Now, consider with thy self, James Jackson; do thou do so? do thou show
forth these clear Evidences of Conversion and a New state, as Paul did? if so,
then thou have good grounds to believe that the strong Man is indeed cast out;
if thou say it is so, then tell me, what means this Bleating of the Sheep,
and Lowing of the Oxen which I hear? What means thy loud out-crys, and
Clamours against the Lords People; thy Railing Accusations against all the
Churches and Congregations that are not just of thy Mind? Is this Cherishing
them as a Nurse cherishes her Children, as Paul did?

Paul Fed the Young ones, and the Weak with Milk, and tenderly dealt with them,
until they were able to Digest stronger Meat. Thou regardest not the Weak, nor
the Young, no, nor the Strong, but Cryest them down all, as Deceived Persons,
in Darkness, in Babylon, as Paul did before his Conversion: So this proves thee
to be like him before his Change; and consequently, that the strong Man armed
is not yet cast out of thee, but removed to a stronger hold.

If thou say, Nay, but I Own, and Love, and Cherish the Holy People of the
Lord, unto whom I am now joined, which is a good Evidence of my Conversion and
Change.

It is Answered; That if it were supposed, and granted, that those People with
whom thou walk, were indeed the People of the Lord, (as I hope many of them
are, who know not their false Doctrines, for I will not be severe, as the
manner of some is, to Condemn all, for the Errors of some amongst them) yet art
thou far short of Paul's Spirit, who owned all the Saints, though under
Different Forms: To the Jews, he became as a Jew; to the Greeks, as they; to
those under the Law, as under the Law; to those without Law, as without Law; he
became all things to all, in such Indifferent, Un-commanded things as Forms
are, that so he might gain them to Christ.

But thou cleavest to a few, and many of them under strong Delusions, and there
thou helpest to strengthen their Deceived Minds in Errors; De^eiving, and being
Deceived: Why art thou not a Follower of Paul herein, as he beseeches all to
be; as he is a Follower of Christ? Now, Christ Owns, Loves, and Accepts all his
People, under all Forms, being United to him, as Members of his Body;
Worshipping of him in Spirit and in Truth: So the Apostle tells us, In every
Nation (though they are not one in their Forms, there being several in this
Nation) he that fears God, and works Righteousness, is accepted with him.
Now, how are we Followers of Christ, or of Paul, herein, if they are not
Accepted of us also?

The Apostle Paul was Exercised with such proud, Proud Professors in Paul's
Time Reproved.
self-conceited, troublesome persons in his time, as are now in ours; and he
deals with them, and Reproves them, even for this very thing that I am now
speaking of, that is, Highly esteeming of themselves, and Despising others; as
we see, 2 Cor. 10.7. some High, Proud Persons, that Commended themselves, and
valued themselves above Paul, and those that were of his Assemblies, they
thought that they themselves were the only people of the Lord; but as for Paul
and his Followers, they had no such persuasion of them; But the Apostle
Reproves them, and tells them they have as good grounds and Reason to think as
well of him, and those with him, as of themselves, 1 Cor. 10.7.

If any Man think that he is Christ's, let him think this again, that as he is
Christ's, even so are we Christ's; let them have as good an Opinion of us, as
they have of themselves, for they have as good grounds for it.

But (says he) they are a People that look upon some things in Themselves, but
take no Notice of any good in Us; and so they Measure themselves by themselves,
and compare themselves among themselves, and in so doing they are not wise, v.
8.

Howsoever we know our Measure, and our Time, our Gifts and Graces that God
has given us; and although they think highly of themselves, and but Meanly of
us; yet we know, that not he that commends himself, is approved, but whom the
Lord commends, as v. 18.

Is it not so in our Days? are there not a People among us, who have high
esteem of themselves, and that think of themselves more highly than they ought
to think, that account themselves the only Holy People of the Lord, and all
others to be of the World; and cast off, and disown, and separate from all
other Societies, Communities, Congregations, and Churches of the Saints, and
people of God, in all the World, and Measuring themselves by themselves, and
comparing themselves among themselves, are thereby grossly mistaken, and misled;
they Commend and Applaud themselves above all other People, as being in the
right and true way, and all others out of it; but not he that commends
himself is approved, but whom the Lord commends, and approves, he shall
stand, and be accepted. v. 18.

Now, let us consider the ground and cause of all this; Apostasy from the
Faith; what it is.
whence is it that many have such high thoughts of themselves, and Despise
others better than themselves: The Apostle tells us, and the Spirit has spoken
it expressly, and plainly, that in the last days (which are these we now Live
in) Men shall depart from the Faith, that is, from Faith in the Doctrine of the
Gospel (not from Justifying Faith) and shall give heed to Seducing Spirits, and
Doctrines of Devils; they having once departed from the Doctrine and Truths of
the Gospel, they shall then give heed to Seducing Spirits, and Doctrines of
Devils; they shall slight, and make light of the Scriptures, and then shall
give heed to seducing spirits, a spirit within them, yea, many spirits are
watchful to insinuate into such a mind, as take no heed to the Scriptures; for
in such a Frame of Mind what should direct them; what Touchstone or Rule of
Trial can they have (when the Scriptures are laid aside) of what spirit speaks
in them? In such a case Men often think it is the spirit of God, when it is but
a seducing spirit, who has Transformed himself into an Angel of Light; and
resembles the spirit of God, under the pretense of Holiness and Truth: In some
things that are like Truth, it Resembles it, but is not so: And hereby their
Weak and Dark Minds are missed and deceived: For the Devil does often in many
things, speak the very Truth, but it is with an intent to deceive in other
things that are of greater Moment and Consequence; like cunning, deceitful
Tradesmen, who bring forth, and show some good and right Commodities, that so
amongst these they may put off their counterfeit Wares the better, and with
less suspicion.

Now, The Spirit within known by the Scriptures.
know this; That men shall not be able to know the false seducing spirit from
the true, but by the Fruits and effects of it, and by trying it by the spirit
of God speaking in the Scriptures; and by these it may be known, and not
otherwise. And hence it is, That many in our Days finding and feeling strong
impressions and impulses in their minds, and not Examining of them, and trying
of them by the spirit speaking in the Scriptures, do err grossly, and are
misled by them, both in Doctrine and Practice: They give heed to, and are
carried away with the present Impression, moving in their minds, looking upon
it immediately, by, and in it self, as Christ the true Light, speaking in them,
when oft-times it is a seducing spirit.

Quest. But if it be asked, How then shall we certainly know the Impressions of
the seducing spirit in our minds, and the Impressions of the Spirit of God?

Answ. The spirit of God, which is given to them that Believe, Instructs them
how to know its own Operations.

First, by Comparing these immediate Impressions in the Mind, with what is
already written in the Scriptures, dictated by the same spirit, concerning the
same things now in the Mind or Judgment; therefore we ought to compare them
together, and Examine whether they agree, and are one and the same: if the
Impressions of the Spirit in the mind be contrary to the Spirit speaking in the
Scriptures, we may then be sure it is a false and a seducing spirit; but if it
be the same with the Spirit in the Scriptures, and confirmed thereby, then it
is the true spirit.

The Spirit of God gives (more especially to some of his People) the Gift of
discerning of spirits: As we see, 2 Cor. 12. To another he gives the Discerning
of Spirits: And it is by this means aforementioned.

And Secondly, Causes known by Effects.
we may know the true spirit from the seducing spirit, by the Fruits and
Effects of it; we may know Causes by the Effects, as in Nature, so also in
Grace.

And therefore when we are doubtful what Spirit it is that speaks in us or
others, let us try it by the Effects, the Fruits that it produces; for every
Tree is known by its own Fruits: The Effects and Fruits of the Spirit of God
are such as the Scripture tells us of in many places, as in the 5th. Gal. The
Fruits of the Spirit are Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness,
Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Patience, Humility, Temperance, etc. Our Lord
Christ, the Head, who was filled and Anointed with this Spirit above his
Fellows, what Effects did it work in his Humane Nature, as our Mediator, he
tells us, Mat. 11.28. he is Meek and Lowly in heart; and again, 2 Cor. 10.1. I
beseech you by the meekness and gentleness of Christ: What wonderful Humility
did he show forth in all his Life amongst us; and in that astonishing Example
of Washing his Disciples Feet: And though he were a King, yea, the King of
Kings, yet behold he came Meek and Lowly, Riding upon an Ass, and so tender of
his Young Lambs, his Weak ones, that he carries them in his Bosom, and gently
leads such as are Young and tender; he will not break the bruised Reed, nor
quench the smoking Flax: Though Faith be but as a grain of Mustard Seed, it
shall be watered to grow up and increase to more strength.

Now, the like Effects the same spirit works in his Members, (in every one in
their Measures;) Paul fed his Newborn Babes with Milk, and not with Meat,
because they were not able to bear it; and cherished them, as a Nurse
cherishes her Children, often weeping over them, Traveling from place to
place to strengthen the New gathered Churches, Teaching, and Instructing them
in those two great, and chief Doctrines, Faith in Christ, and Love to all the
Saints. So the Apostle John, the same spirit brought forth the same Fruits and
Effects in him, 1 John 1. I have no greater Joy, than to see my Children Walk
in Truth. And Teaches Love, Unity, Peace, Fellowship, and Communion with all
the Saints; And so are all the Children of God thus inclined by the same
spirit, they show forth the same Fruits and Effects, in their Degrees and
Measures.

But now on the contrary, consider, The false seducing spirit brings forth in
its Followers the quite contrary Fruits and Effects, as we plainly see amongst
Men: And hence are those high and proud Conceits and Apprehensions of
themselves, their Ways, their Doctrines, as better, above, and beyond all
others; being free from sin, and become perfect; saying in Effect, stand
further from me, I am Holier than thou: Despising that Low, Childish Doctrine
of sin abiding in us, in the remainders of it, whilst we Live, though the Power
and Dominion of it be Destroyed. I say, these Fruits and Effects spring from a
Cause like unto them, whereby we may safely conclude what the Cause is; so
again, when we see Men Separating from others better than themselves, leaving,
and forsaking other Assemblies and Congregations sound in Doctrine, and Holy in
Life, and Conversation (excepting common, un-avoidable Infirmities) we may be
sure hereby, that this is from a seducing spirit; not from the spirit of God
(whose contrary Fruits and Effects we heard before.)

As Solomon, The true Spirit is for Unity, the salfe Spirit for Division.
by his Wisdom given him of God, plainly Discerned, and knew the true Mother
from the false, by this very thing, by this clear Evidence: She that was for
Unity, and for preserving together, and Nourishing the parts and Members of the
Child, was the true Mother: But she that was for the Dividing of the Child, and
separating the Members of it, he knew by that, she was the Harlot, and not the
true Mother: Just so it is in this Case; The true spirit is for Unity, Love,
Fellowship, and Communion with all the Members of Christ, as Occasion and
Opportunity is, but the false seducing spirit is for separation, and Dividing
the Members of Christ's Body, upon one pretense or another.

And herein it is too manifest, that not only some in our Days are more
grossly guilty; but also many of the true Members of Christ have been
deceived, and carried away very far by this deluding and seducing spirit
(through the remainders of Pride, and self-love in them) and have thought it
their Duty to separate from others of their Brethren, upon slight, weak, and
insufficient grounds and Causes; by which they have greatly Displeased, and
Offended their Head, Jesus Christ, and wronged their Fellow Members: And as an
Evidence of his Displeasure, and a just Correction upon them, he has permitted
a People in these days to separate from them all, and to disown them all; which
I am persuaded is one End God has in suffering these People to appear in this
day; which as from God is a just Retaliation, to do to them, as they have done
to others; the same Measure they have meeted to others of their Brethren, is
now Measured to them again: Seeing no Rules in Scripture, nor Councels, nor
Entreaties of their Brethren would persuade, or win them to be of one mind, and
to keep in Fellowship together; this now comes at last as the greatest and
sharpest Reproof and Correction of all the former; I hope, and desire they will
consider it, and Learn from it; to hear the voice of God's Rod, as well as of
his Word, and be Instructed thereby.

And now having Tried the Author of the strong Man armed cast out, and proved
that the strong man is not cast out, but removed to a stronger Hold; let us
proceed further, and make it appear also by diverse other Proofs and Evidences,
taken out of his own Book, (which also are sufficient to convince all others of
his Mind and Way) that they may plainly see (if the God of this World has not
blinded their Minds, and hid plain and clear Truths from them) the false and
unsound Foundations which they Build upon, as well as the Wood, Hay, and
Stubble, which they Build withal, both as to their Opinions and Practices, in
esteeming themselves the only Holy People of the Lord in this Day, and
Despising, and Condemning those that are indeed the People of the Lord.

First then; 1. The Quakers Seize above others.
This Author tells us, what he, and the People with whom he now Walks, have
attained unto above all others from whom they separate. The People (the
Quakers) he says, Build upon a true and right Foundation, 1. In the Foundation.
the Rock of Ages; Christ in us the hope of Glory; but all other Professing
People in the World Build upon the Writings of Men, and all of them are
strangers to that one Spirit, which gave forth the Scriptures. See strong Man
Armed, etc. p. 12.

In Answer to which, I say plainly; That if this were Truth which He has
spoken, I would separate also, and Build upon the same Foundation which he says
they Build upon: But he has herein spoken falsely, and that in a double
Respect. 1. In Respect of themselves. 2. In Respect of other Professors, the
Churches of Christ. As for themselves, such of them as Build upon the
Foundation, the Light within every Man and Woman, and believe in it, and Obey
it, and look for Salvation from it, as they Profess to do, such Build upon a
false and unsound Foundation, and not upon Christ, the only true Foundation.

Secondly, As for the other Professing People, from whom they Separate, he has
belyed them also grossly, in saying, they Build not upon Christ, the true
Foundation; for it is the chief and Fundamental Doctrine which they Preach, and
Teach in all their Assemblies and Congregations, according to the Word and
Gospel of Christ: And upon which we are sure many thousands have Built, by the
Guidance, and Teaching, and Operations of the spirit of the Lord, and are by
the same spirit joined, and United in a firm and everlasting bond and Union to
Christ; whereby we have Light, Life, Virtue, Strength, Wisdom, and all Grace
from this Root and Fountain, our precious Lord Jesus Christ.

This Author proceeds further, 2. Strong Man Armed, p. 13.
and tells us, That the Faith of the People called Quakers is the Faith of the
Son of God, Jesus Christ is the Author and Finisher of it; it renews the whole
Man. 2. The Quakers Faith.
By this Faith sin is subdued, slain, and Mortified perfectly; the heart
purified, the World conquered, the Soul Sanctified, Justified, and Saved
perfectly: But the Faith of all others is an Unholy, Dead, Imperfect Faith; it
Sanctifies but in part (as they say) and so will never save to the uttermost.
Thus far he.

Answ. Here is another double gross untruth, both as to themselves and others:
If their Faith be the true Justifying, Saving Faith of God's Elect, then it
would Evidence it self by the Fruits and Effects of Faith, which the Scriptures
speak of, and all the Saints Experience in their Measure; as might be made
evident in particulars: It would (as it does in all true Believers) purify the
Heart, and work by Love; to God, to his People, to his Word and Ordinances, to
all the things that are of God. But fine Words and Professions will not prove,
or evidence true Faith.

This Author does plainly manifest to a Spiritual Eye that that which he calls
Faith in himself, (and in such as are like him) is but presumption, wrought by
the great Deceiver, the seducing spirit, in weak, Ignorant, Proud Hearts and
Minds; for it has not purified their Hearts, neither does it work by Love, but
on the contrary; their Hearts are yet Dark, Blind, Ignorant of God, of
themselves, of the Truths of God, of the People of God; they know not the
Difference between Nature and Grace: They call Natural Conscience and Reason
(which is in every Man and Woman by Nature) God, Christ, his Spirit, the true
Light; which will Save and Justisie whosoever hearkens to it, and believes in
it. I say, Faith has not Purified their Hearts from this Blindness and
Ignorance, nor from Pride, Self-love, and many other Corruptions, Manifest, and
Evident in, and amongst them; as any gross sins or Abominations are in the
Profanest Persons in the World.

Neither does this Faith of theirs (which they boast of) work by Love; Love to
God, Love to all his People, to the Law, and Word of God, as it did in David; O
how I love thy Law! it is my Meditation continually, Psalm. 119. but they Love
not the Scriptures, neither are they led by the spirit speaking in them, but by
a false spirit speaking in themselves, contrary to the spirit in the
Scriptures. And as for their Love, it is but a self-love; it confines it self
to their own party, that say as they say, and do even as they do, that are one
with them in the same things; and in the Pride of their Hearts reject all
others, though the most eminent Saints upon the Earth.

How far then is this Faith of theirs (which they boast of, accounting it far
better than all others) from purifying their Heart perfectly, as he there says;
that has not yet purified it from these gro^^ and apparent Corruptions and
sins; as Ignoran^ Pride in a high Degree, Self-love, Hatred, Despising,
Disowning, Scandalizing, and Separating from the Lords People of all
persuasions, though Select Congregations, and Precious in the sight of the
Lord, and dear as the Apple of his Eye: O the subtle, strong, seducing spirit
is got into a strong Hold indeed, and Fortified himself therein, that can make
them Speak, and Declare these Lies in Hypocrisy, and these Doctrines of
Devils, as the Apostle calls them, 2 Timothy 3.1.

Thirdly, This Author of the Strong Man Armed cast out goes on, 3. The Quakers
Knowledge.
and tells us, what Knowledge the People (the Quakers) have attained unto above
all others; and says, it is Spiritual and Experimental, from the immediate
Unction of the Holy Ghost, and proceeds not from hearsay, but Divine
Revelation; this is Life Eternal to know God, which is Light, yea, the Father
of Lights, and that the Light within is the Son of God. This is that Mystery
that is hid from the Wise and Prudent, and Revealed unto Babes: They know him
not, but say, it is the Devil; or at best, but the Light of Nature, and so they
know not whence it is, and yet he has enlightened Thousands; and it was never
known that the Devil, or the Light of Nature Converted any to the Lord.

For Answer hereunto, Quakers put Light for Darkness, and Darkness for Light.
I say, it is a very dreadful thing for any Man to put Darkness for Light, and
Light for Darkness (as this Man does) a Dreadful Woe is Denounced against such,
Isa. 5.20. Woe to them that call Evil Good, and Good Evil; that put Darkness
for Light, and Light for Darkness. If therefore the Light in thee be Darkness,
how great is that Darkness, Mat. 6.23?

But the Light in Thee, James Jackson, is Darkness: That is to say, Thy
Understanding is Darkened and Blinded, not only by Corrupt Nature, (as all
Unregenerate Men and Women are) but Darkened also by the Prince of Darkness, as
is Manifest by all thy Writings, that thou put'st Darkness for Light: For the
Minds of all natural Men are dark, yea, darkness it self; they cannot see
Spiritual things no more than a Blind Man can Distinguish Colors; or than a
Man that has his sight, in a dark Dungeon, can Discern, or Distinguish of
Objects. The Natural Man perceives not the things of God, neither can he know
them, because they are Spiritually Discerned, 1 Cor. 2.14. Such an
understanding and knowledge have thou, and others of thy Principles and Ways.
Thou and they (it seems) have attained to this Knowledge, which others (though
the most Wise of other Persuasions) have not attained to: That the Light within
is the Son of God, whom he has sent, and that this is in every Man and Woman,
and to know, and abide in this Light is Life Eternal.

I am grieved for this thine and their Ignorance, though thou call it
Knowledge. Now, if ye will Hearken to the true Light indeed, he will drive
away, and dispell this Darkness, and shine into the Heart, and give the Light
of the Knowledge of God, in the Face of Jesus Christ: Thou despisest the
Knowledge of all others, that comes by hearsay meaning the Scriptures, as it
plainly appears; thine (thou say) is by Immediate Revelation: But let me ask
thee and them, how comes any one to know Christ, and to Believe in him, but by
the Scriptures? How shall they Believe in him of whom they have not heard but
by the Word of the Gospel, Romans 10? As for Immediate Revelations we are not to
Believe any of them, further than as they are Consonant, and Agreeable to the
Scriptures, which the Holy Spirit of God has already spoken; else we may
believe a Lie, from a false Spirit; Witness thy own Case, with many others
also, who have listened to Immediate Revelations, and prefer them before the
Revelations of the Spirit of God in the Scriptures; which (undoubtedly) will be
your undoing, except ye Repent, and see your Error, for in thus doing ye prefer
the Devils Doctrine before the Doctrine of Christ: Yea, ye shut out the sayings
of Christ, and take in the sayings of Satan.

If we have no way to try the Spirits, Three Spirits speak in Men.
how shall we know what Spirit it is that speaks in us; for there are three
distinct Spirits that speak in Men at certain times: Sometimes the Spirit of
God moves and works in Me^; he dwells and abides in his People, but not in his
Enemies; he sometimes Reproves wicked Men, the World, of sin, Righteousness,
and Judgment.

Secondly, There is the seducing spirit, he also moves in the Minds of Men,
both in the Godly and Ungodly: He moved David, and prevailed with him, to his
hurt: This spirit all are to Watch and War against daily. He sometimes moves to
that which is Good, as well as to Evil, but with an intent to deceive thereby:
he subtly mixeth some Current Coin with the Counterfeit, that it may the
better pass without suspicion.

Thirdly, Many things proceed immediately from a Man's own spirit (his
Understanding, Reason, and Natural Conscience) many things are wrought and
Forged in this Mint, according to a Man's Natural Faculties.

Now, how shall a Man know from which of these spirits things proceed, Trial of
Spirits.
and whether they be good or not, or what they tend to, but by some known,
fixed, perfect Rule; and what is that, but the Scriptures? The spirit of Truth
having given them as a Light to our Feet, and a Lanthorn to our Paths, even ^o
our inward Paths, (the Movings and workings of our Hearts) as well as to our
outward Paths in our Conversations: He that shall take heed to the Immediate
Revelations, and Motions in his heart, and follow them, and not take heed to
the Revelations of the spirit in the Scriptures to compare them together, shall
be sure to err; in this thou, James Jackson, and many more of the Quakers; are
sad Instances and prooss of this Truth at this day; for if the seducing spirit
once perceive that any Person will take heed to, Observe, and follow the
Dictates and Motions within him, and never try them by the Scriptures, he may
then suggest what he will, and never be Discovered, but Obeyed as God,
especially in all those things that have a show, and Resemblance of good in
them, and which weak and Ignorant Minds are not able to Discern or Distinguish;
partly, by Reason of the Lowness and Weakness of their Natural Parts and
Faculties; and partly, by Reason of the Weakness of Grace, and small Measures
of Light, if any at all be here.

And Observe this also for a certain Truth, Light of Nature sees some Sins, and
some Duties.
That Natural Conscience in all Men and Women does Rebuke, and Reprove them for
many gross Evils, which they at any time are guilty of: If they Commit Murder
or Theft, or Cheat and Deceive their Neighbor, or such like; this Light within
every one is sufficient to see these to be Evil, and that they ought not to be:
And this Natural Light within will also secretly move them to some things that
are good and Honest, to do to others, as they would have others to do unto
them: It shows them that Meekness, Patience, Temperance, Chastity, Charity, and
such like Moral Virtues are good and commendable in the Lives of Men; and when
they follow after these things (as many Heathens have done) then their
Consciences (or the Light within) will Excuse them, and they have Peace in so
doing: But if they do those other gross Evils, then this Light within will
Accuse, Disquiets and Disturb them.

But this Light within can never Discover to them Spiritual Evils and sins:
Light within sees not Spiritual sins.
As Pride, Self-love, Unbelief, Hypocrisy, and such like; neither can it lead
them to see, or Discern Jesus Christ, or the things of Christ, Revealed in the
Gospel; the things of the Kingdom of God, and the Righteousness thereof,
without the Light of the spirit of God, and the Scriptures. All this is but
Nature, it is not Grace; neither is it Christ the true Light, as this Author of
the strong Man Armed cast out, and his Followers do call it, and contend
earnestly for it, and account it true Knowledge, and such a Measure and Degree
of Knowledge, as no other Professors have attained to but themselves, as he
there tells us: Whereas indeed they have not yet reached to the very first
Principles of the Oracles of God: And therefore thou, James Jackson, did
well to leave off to be a Parish Priest, and to be any longer a Teacher among
the Independents: As thou told'st us, I wish thou would also leave off to be
a Teacher any longer among the Quakers, or rather a Seducer. And first go, and
Hear, and Learn, and be Instructed in the saving Knowledge of Christ, as the
Scriptures have Revealed him; lest thou be one of those who will Cry at the
last day, Lord, Lord, have we not Prophesied in thy Name, and in thy Name done
many Wonderful Works: And then thou hear among others, that Dreadful Sentence,
Depart from me, ye Workers of Iniquity, I know you not; I own not your
Teachings, your Prophecyings, or Declarings in my Name; ye have Blasphemed my
Name, and caused my Name, my Gospel, and my People to be despised amongst many
by your means; ye Disowned, Reproached, and Separated from my People, and in as
much as ye did it unto these my Brethren, ye did it unto me.

You the Teaching Quakers, The Quakers guilty of these two great sins.
are guilty of those two great Evils that the People were guilty of in the
Prophet Jeremiah's Time, Jer. 2.12. The Prophets Prophesied Lies unto them, and
Taught the People to forsake the Living and true God, and to look unto Idols;
and the Lord pleads with them about it, and tells them such a thing was never
heard of amongst any People or Nations, that they should Change their God; but
this sottish People, who had no understanding, they changed their Glory for a
Vain thing, for that which cannot Profit: And it is such stupendous Folly and
Madness, that he calls to the very Heavens to Behold it, and Admire it; ver.
12. Be astonished, O ye Heavens, at this, and be horribly afraid: Be ye very
Desolate, says the Lord; v. 13. For my People have Committed two Evils, They
have forsaken me, the Fountain of Living Waters, and hewed them out Cisterns,
broken Cisterns, that can hold no Water.

Now Consider, ye have even done thus; Ye have forsaken the Living and true
God, the Savior of sinners (all that do Believe in him, and rest upon him and
his Righteousness for Justification) and ye have set upon an Idol, Natural
Conscience, and trust to it, and your own Personal Righteousness and Obedience,
for Life, Justification, and Salvation; and what are these, but as their Broken
Cisterns, that can Afford no Refreshing in a Time of Need? Take heed then, and
be Instructed, thou and they, and Teach no longer this False Doctrine, that the
Light in every Man and Woman is Christ, the true Light; seeing it is but a
Creature, and in every one by Nature: Will ye Debase, and Degrade Christ, by
calling him a Creature? Or Deisie the Creature, by calling it Christ the true
Light? It is true, it is from Christ, he is the Creator of it, as of all other
Creatures in the World, the World was made by him, and without him was nothing
made that was made, John 1. How then can it be Christ? Is the Carpenter the
house that he has Builded? Or is the house the Carpenter? Are they both one
and the same? Is not the Carpenter a Man, and the house his Workman-ship? Is
not God the Creator of all things, and his Creatures distinct Beings? Why do
thou Confound them together, and make them all one?

Let Christ be the true Light, and Conscience his Created Light, as the Sun and
the Moon in the Firmament are also his Created Lights: Let these and other
Lights be distinct, and known one from another, and not confounded together any
more.

For this Light of Natural Conscience (which is in every Man and Woman) as it
does now in this World Reprove for many gross sins, and move unto many Moral
Virtues and Duties; Excusing for the one, The Light within shall be in Hell for
ever.
and Accusing for the other; (as we see it is plainly Asserted by the Apostle
Paul, Romans 1.) This Light, I say, will Remain, and Abide in Reprobates and
Unbelievers for ever, in the next World, as well as in this; and will be there
a Tormentor to them, World without end. Will thou and thy Followers then call
it Christ, and the true Light: Take heed then, James Jackson, and all those of
thy Mind, and Repent of your Errors, lest this Light shine clearly, and in the
midst of that outer Darkness, and be as the Worm that never dies, and a Light
and Fire that shall never go out, or be Extinguished to all Eternity.

This Doctrine of the Light within takes Men off from Christ, The Quakers draw
People to Idolatry.
and Directs them to look after, and follow an Idol; and this is so great an
evil and sin, as that it is not to be endured, nor spoken of, without great
Indignation against it, and in Zeal for our precious Lord Jesus Christ; who is
certainly greatly provoked by it; which will appear when he begins to Execute
his Wrath and Indignation against his Enemies: We may see how he stands
affected toward such Persons as seek to draw away the Hearts of the People
from him after other gods: See Deuteronomy. 13. the whole Chapter. If there arise a
Prophet, or any other Persons, and seek to draw away the hearts of the People
from the Lord, unto Idols, they were not to be spared, but should certainly be
put to Death; no, not the nearest Friend or Relation whatsoever. Ver. 6. If thy
Brother, the Son of thy Mother, or thy Son, or thy Daughter, or the Wife of thy
Bosom, or thy Friend which is as thine own soul, shall entice thee secretly,
saying, let us go and serve other gods: Thou shall not consent unto him, nor
hearken unto him, neither shall thine Eye pity him, neither shall thou spare,
neither shall thou conceal him: Ver. 9. But thou shall surely kill him, thine
hand shall be first upon him, to put him to Death, and afterward the hand of
all the People.

And if any City should be known to Depart from God, and go after Idols, it was
to be Burnt with Fire, and all that was in it.

We see how Jealous God is of his Glory, His Glory he will not give to another,
The Quakers under Spiritual Judgments.
nor his praise to Graven Images; surely he is God, and Changes not; as he
has Discovered his Displeasure against his Enemies, so he does, and will do
still: Therefore take Notice of these things, ye Seducers among the Quakers;
for although God does not deal with Men now, in these Gospel-days, to punish
them with Corporal or Temporal punishments, as in former times under the Old
Administration; yet as sure as God is true, he will deal with his Enemies
severely at last; and his Judgments in these Days of the Gospel are more
spiritual than formerly: Spiritual Judgments are greater than Corporal
Punishments; Hardness of Heart, Blindness of mind, a Reprobate Sense, a Seared
Conscience; these are Dreadful Judgments: And surely these Judgments and tokens
of Gods Anger are upon the very Men that we are speaking of, the false Prophets
and Teachers among the Quakers, as is plainly to be seen; and their Sin is seen
in their Punishments. They seek to draw away the Hearts of People from the
Lord, from our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; from his Word and Gospel, unto an
Idol of their own setting up, and would have all People to bow unto it, and
Worship it, and trust in it, and Obey it; and therefore God has justly
withdrawn himself from them: He denies them his Grace, his Spirit, yea, in a
great Measure the very Light of Nature, which is common to other Men, as is
seen by their Doctrines, Tenets, and Principles, and by their Foolish,
Irrational Arguing, in maintaining their Idle Fancies, which have neither
Scripture, nor any solid Reason to uphold them. And as is seen also by their
Rage and Anger against any that do oppose their Errors, seeking to turn them to
the Truth; they find hard and bitter speeches, and Railing Accusations against
them for so doing. And as the heart of God is against them, so also are the
hearts of his People; for Their heart goes where the heart of God goes: And
this also Declares their sin, as it is likewise a punishment due to them. So
that these Judgments are not small that are upon them, even in this Life,
though they may yet escape other external punishments.

Obj. What does it avail them to say, They do not seek to draw away Peoples
Hearts from Christ, but rather to Direct their Minds to Christ; they teach them
to take heed to the Light within every Man and Woman, which is Christ.

Answ. It is Answered, This is false, ye do not seek to Direct Peoples Minds to
Christ, but to an Idol, Natural Conscience, as has been proved here, and by
many others formerly: Be not deceived, Christ is not Mocked; it is not Christ
because ye give it the Name of Christ: He is the more provoked by your making
use of his Name, and denying him his Worship, that Love and Obedience that is
due unto him; that trust and confidence that ought to be put in him, that Glory
and Praise that ought to be given unto him; all is taken away from Christ, and
given to this Idol: Ye do also exceedingly Dishonor him, and Blaspheme him, by
Entituling him to false Doctrines, and Erroneous Opinions; saying, it is from,
or by the Light within; and in the External Light ye see, and speak these and
these things; yea, many times when ye utter Railing speeches, Lies, and false
Accusations against his People, in seeking to do you good. O dreadful Blindness
and Hardness of Heart!

Does Christ within deny Christ without? Does the Light within deny the Person
of Christ (as ye do in your Pamphlets) his being in Heaven, and his Coming from
thence in Glory to Judge the World in Righteousness, even by that Man whom God
the Father has appointed: Had you not a double or treble vail of Darkness upon
your Minds you would never speak after this sort.

Ye say, The Quakers Perfection: In Sin.
ye Witness Perfection: Indeed so ye do: Ye prove it to all against your
selves: And we Witness your Perfection also; all that know your Principles and
Ways, do Witness that ye are come to Perfection, to Perfection in Sin, to the
highest Degrees of sinning, your Iniquities are even full, or very near it; for
how can ye rise Higher? what steps are there for you yet to ascend up unto,
above what ye have already attained? Ye have already denied the Holy one, and
the Just, our Lord Jesus Christ that bought us; ye have Crucified the Son of
God afresh, and put him to an open shame; yea, ye have trodden him under foot,
and counted the blood of the Covenant as a common thing, and done despite to
the Spirit of Grace, denying his true Operations in his People, and also
Blasphemously Attributing the Inspirations of the Devil unto the Spirit of God
in your selves; ye have despised the Word of God, the Scriptures, the Gospel of
our Lord Jesus; and therein the tenders of Rich and free Grace in the Covenant
of Life and Peace, and preferred your own vain Fancies; yea, the subtle
insinuations and inspirations of seducing spirits before the clear truths of
the Gospel of Christ, and resting in your own Righteousness for Justification;
and what can ye do more, or worse?

Ye have also Despised, Rejected, Disowned, and Separated from the people of
the Lord, all the particular Churches, Congregations, and Assemblies of the
Saints, yea, and Reproached them also, and uttered many hard and bitter
speeches against them, and that for seeking to do you good, in turning you from
the ways of sin and Death: And being lifted up in your selves in the height of
your Pride and vain Minds; ye have thought and said of your selves, that ye are
the most holy people upon Earth; yea, the only people of God upon the Earth.
And what can ye say, or do more, or worse than these things? Have ye not
attained the highest degrees of sinning, even to such a Perfection as the
Nature of Man is capable of, or that Satan can bring it unto? and therefore we
witness your perfection in these Respects.

But as to Perfection in Grace, The Quakers Imperfection in Grace.
as ye vainly think of your selves, (and would have others to esteem of you
also,) ye are at the remotest distance that may be, 1. In Knowledge.
seeing that ye have not as yet laid the Foundation of the Knowledge of Christ:
Yea, are Ignorant (even your Teachers) of the very first Principles of the
Oracles of God; ye know not the difference between Nature and Grace, ye are not
yet able to distinguish between Natural Light in the Conscience of every Man
and Woman, and the true Light, Jesus Christ, but mistake the one for the other:
Ye are not able to discern the workings of the Spirit of God, and the seducing
spirit, but mistake the one for the other: Ye are so Ignorant and Blind, that
ye think and say, Men must be Justified by the works of the Law, a Man's own
personal Obedience, and not by the Imputed Righteousness of Christ by Faith,
quite contrary to the Gospel of Christ; a deadly, damning Doctrine. Herein lies
your Perfection in Knowledge.

And as for your Perfection in Faith and Hope, 2. In Faith and Hope.
how can ye believe, or in what, or in whom do ye Believe; seeing ye have
denied Christ, the Object of Faith to all true believers; denied him in his
Death, Righteousness, Merits, and in all that he has done and Suffered for his
People: these things are herein, (and by others) made manifest against you by
your own Writings, 1 Cor. 13.

And as for your Perfection in Love, 3. In Love.
the chiefest of all Graces, ye are far from Perfection in that also: All the
Love ye show forth, is but self-love to your selves, and among your selves:
Every particular Person thinking, and esteeming of himself more Highly than he
ought to think, and would that all others should esteem highly of him also. And
as for any Love to others, it is but to your own party, such as say as ye say,
and do as ye do: And because they (poor, ignorant, silly people) are willing to
hang upon your Lips (the Teachers) and to take all for granted that ye say, as
if your sayings were the Oracles of God, for that ye Love them. They esteem
more of the sayings of their Teachers, than of the sayings of God; as one of
them (not long since) expressing her desires to have some of her Friends Books;
one said to her, she had the Scriptures, she might employ her self there: She
Answered, That the Bible (indeed) is a good honest thing, but she had rather
Read some of her Friends Books.

So we see, That in all these things ye have Witnessed perfection, as ye call
it, which indeed is at the furthest distance from perfection; so far, as not
yet Witnessing the first beginnings of Grace in you: But as for the other kind
of Perfection, that is, Perfection in sin, in the highest degrees of sinning,
ye do Witness it, and have given many clear and manifold Proofs and Evidences
of your perfection in that Respect; and we (all that fear God, who know your
deadly Principles) do join with you in this Testimony, and do Witness also that
ye have Witnessed Perfection.

O how have ye Despised the Free Grace of God, and Neglected great Salvation,
tendered in the Gosspel, which all the Saints so highly prize and value, seeing
God in Christ does vouchsafe to condescend so low to poor sinful Dust and
Ashes, in the sweet terms of the Gospel, Offering Peace and Reconciliation,
Happiness and Glory to all those who will Accept thereof; yea, even Entreating
and Beseeching of Miserable sinners to come in, and be Reconciled to him. 2
Cor. 5.20. We as Ambassadors for Christ, as if Christ did beseech you by us, be
ye Reconciled to God. How then shall they escape who Neglect so great
Salvation? Surely such as are deeply wounded, and under the sight and sense of
sin, death and hell, the Wrath of God, the Curse of the Law, they highly prize
the Terms of the Gospel, the Covenant of Grace, the sweet and precious promises
of Life, Rest, and Peace: But those that are whole see no need of the
Physician, as it appears ye do not, that can make so light of the terms of
Free Grace and Love through Christ; as we find ye do by many passages in your
Books.

Where shall we find in all your Books and Pamphlets such Doctrine as the
Apostle Paul Preached, Paul Preaches Christ, and not the Light in every Man
and Woman.
and wrote in all his Epistles, by the Inspiration of God; he set forth Christ
crucified in all places where he came, and instructed the people in that
Fundamental Doctrine. 1 Cor. 2.2. I determined not to know any thing among you,
save Jesus Christ and him Crucified: Paul lays aside, and slights all things
for Christ, Phil. 3.8. Yea, doubtless, and I count all things but loss, for the
Excellency of the Knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have suffered
the loss of all things, and do count them but dung, that I may win Christ. Ver.
9. And he found in him, not having mine own Righteousness, which is of the Law,
but that which is through the Faith of Christ, the Righteousness which is of
God by Faith.

We can hear no such Doctrine as this amongst the Quakers; nay, the very
contrary: slighting the Person of Christ, and the Righteousness of Christ
Imputed to Believers; who of God is made Righteousness to them: And setting up
their own Righteousness, and the Perfection of it, which may be made appear by
their Books.

And yet they tell (and so deceive) their simple, silly Hearers, that they do
Declare Christ unto them, the Light within every Man and Woman, that is God,
and Christ, the Savior of the World: But will this serve their turn, to put
the Name Christ upon one of his Creatures? Will Christ allow any to take away
his Name, and his Glory, and cloth an Idol with it; and then say, they
Declare, and set forth Christ? This is the way to divert and draw off the minds
of poor Ignorant People from Christ, as he is Revealed in the Gospel.

This is the great Fundamental Doctrine of the Devil; The Devil's Fundamental
Doctrine.
The chief point of Doctrine that he Teaches his Disciples; That is to say, To
Deny Christ: Eo disown him according as the Gospel has Revealed him; and then
to set up something else in his stead: Let them call it Christ if they will,
that is no Matter to give it the Name, so it be not Christ, he knows it will
deceive Ignorant Minds the sooner, the more easily: For thereby he knows they
do but Mock Christ, and disown him the more; and also the more provoke him,
that Men should give his Name and Title to any thing, and disown himself, as
these Men do: They call the Light within Christ, but deny Christ himself, as
the Gospel sets him forth. Now, this the Devil knows is enough to serve his
turn, and destroy them, and therefore he still keeps the Eye of their Mind upon
this, and makes them look upon it through a Multiplying Glass, and shuts the
Eyes of their Mind against Christ, as he is Revealed in the Scriptures: The God
of this wicked World has Blinded the Minds of them that believe not, lest the
Light of the glorious Gospel of Christ should shine unto them: And if the
Gospel be hid from them, it is hid to them that are lost. We see in all their
Declarings, in all their Books and Pamphlets, this is the Main and Chief point;
to Teach their Hearers to take heed to the Light within, to the Witness of God
within, with variety of Expressions to that purpose: But what do we hear in all
their Books, and Teachings concerning Christ that was Promised long before he
came into the World; of Christ that was born when the fullness of time was come;
of Christ that Lived amongst us, and Preached, and Taught amongst us the way of
Salvation; of Christ that Dyed for us, and rose again, and Ascended into
Heaven; that is now at the right Hand of God, making Intercession for us; of
Christ that shall shortly come again in glory (and yet in his Humane Nature,)
to Judge the World in Righteousness? This is the Christ that the Gospel
Declares, and that all true Believers know, and own, and Teach plainly and
clearly (without Equivocations and subtle Evasions as these false Teachers
among the Quakers use to speak of him,) and whom all believers have Received by
Faith, who dwells in them, and they in him.

But what do we hear of all this in the Teachings of these Men among the
Quakers? Nay, on the contrary, their Doctrines in their Books and Pamphlets
that they frequently send forth, do Directly Oppose these things: And therefore
we may safely conclude their Doctrine is the Doctrine of Devils; for if all the
Devils in Hell should combine together, and join their Cursed Craft and Malice
against Christ and the Souls of Men, they could not bring forth a more Damning
Doctrine than this is: For, to Deny Christ is to deny all.

What then shall we say to these Men, or of them? Surely, Obstinate Quakers to
be Rejected.
seeing these things are so, That they have thus denied the Lord that bought
us, and Preach up another Christ, and maintain and uphold this their Idol, in
Opposition to Christ, as the Gospel has Declared him; and slight, and Despise
the Scriptures, we have grounds to conclude they are Men of Corrupt Minds, of
Seared Consciences, Idolaters, and Heretics. Now, the Apostle by the
Inspiration of God, gives us a Rule, 1 Timothy 3. Reject an Heretic after once or
twice Admonished, but these Men have been often Admonished, Pleaded, and
Disputed with; and they regard not Admonition, they resist the Truth, and the
Spirit of Grace and Truth speaking in the Scriptures, and in, and by his
People, they will not hear, they will not regard the Counsel of God: But in
their Ignorance and Pride they despise both God and Men; and do prefer their
own Idle and vain Fancies, and Satan's subtle false Insinuations, before the
Teachings of the Spirit of God.

If God should work a Miracle, and raise up the Apostle Paul from the Dead, to
Declare against them and their Doctrines, they would no more regard him, nor
his Teachings, than they regard Tho. Hicks, in his three Dialogues Between a
Christian and a Quaker; or than they regard any other Messenger of Christ, who
pleads with them, and lays the very truths of God before them, as it is
Revealed by the Spirit in the Gospel. We are assured of this, from Luke 16.31.
If they will not Hear Moses and the Prophets, neither will they hear, though
one should rise from the Dead: So if they will not hear Christ and his Apostles
in the Gospel, if they will not hear the Scriptures; neither will they be
persuaded to embrace the Truth, though one should be sent to them from the
Dead. Nay, if Christ himself should come, and speak to them in that mean state
and condition that he was when he conversed among us here below, these People
would regard him no more than the hardened Jews did in their Day: For they
Reject and Deny him now, his Doctrine, and his Person, in his Merits,
Righteousness, Satisfaction, etc, And so would do, if he were Personally
present.

So that my Judgment is, Let them alone, they be blind Leaders of the blind;
they talk of a Light within, but the Light in them is Darkness; and it is a
great darkness, a double darkness; more than a single Natural darkness (as is
the state of all Mankind by Nature) but also a darkness added to that; even a
darkness as a punishment or a Judgment, a Judicial darkness. Natural darkness
is the sin of man, but this darkness is the Judgment of God: That because they
regard not the Truth, they will not receive it in the Love thereof, therefore
has God given them up to strong delusions to believe lies: That seeing they
will not believe the Truth, they shall believe Lies.

What Difference shall we think is there between these Men, The Quakers sin is
like the great sin of the hardened Jews.
the Teachers among the Quakers, who have delivered these Damnable Doctrines
aforementioned, (being the Doctrines of Devils;) and still maintain them? What
difference, I say between them and those Jews who Blaspemed the Holy Ghost, and
ran into that sin unto death? Those Jews Rejected Christ, his sayings and
Doctrine, which he Taught among them, and they told him that he had a Devil:
Christ tells them then, after that he had often spoken unto them, and Taught
them, and they would not hear him, nor regard his sayings, he then Declares
unto them their dreadful state: And surely the sin of these Men looks so like
unto the sin of those Jews, that I think it is hard for any Man to distinguish
them otherwise than by saying, That the sin of these Teachers does Exceed the
sin of those Jews: The sin of these Men seems to be much Aggravated, in that
they have not only heard all those Sayings, and Doctrines of Christ, which he
Preached among the Jews, but they have had the Truths of God Offered and
tendered to them by others also; the Apostles, Evangelists, and Disciples of
Christ have spoken to them in the Scriptures (which those Jews never had.) And
also, many of the Ministers, Messengers, and Ambassadors of Christ have spoken
to them, and tendered the very Truths of the Gospel to them; yea, many others of
his Faithful Saints and Servants, have from time to time spoken to them, and
Advised, Counseled, and Admonished them, and yet all in vain; they have
Rejected all, and despised all; and have (as Swine) Trampled Pearls under their
Feet, and turned again, and Rent those that brought them; they have Reviled
them, and Reproached them for so doing; so that to what purpose should any Man
go about to Teach these Teachers, who are not capable to Learn, as being
Blinded, and Hardened, and Sealed up (as is fea^ed) even to destruction, having
their Consciences seared with an hot Iron? Men of Corrupt Minds, Reprobate to
every good work, without Judgment, unfit either to Teach or Learn: For we know
there have been many such in former days, who were guilty of this great sin;
some such were contemporaries with the Prophet Isaiah, Chap. 6.10. Make the
Heart of this People fat, and make their Ears heavy, and shut their Eyes, etc,
So also many such were in the Time of our Lord and Savior, Mat. 13.15. This
Peoples Heart is waxed gross, and their Ears are dull of Hearing, and their
Eyes they have closed, lest at any time they should See with their Eyes, and
Hear with their Ears, and should Understand with their Heart, and should (...)
Converted, and I should heal them.

In this Generation there are just such a People (even those of whom we speak;)
they shut their Ears and their Eyes, and their Hearts against Christ, and the
Truths of the Gospel: All the Advice and Councels of Men, which are according
to the Truth, all are Rejected and Despised. The Inspirations of the spirit of
God are refused, but the Inspirations of the spirit of Delusion are readily
Received and Embraced. My Judgment is therefore, let them be Rejected as
Heretics, having been so often Admonished; as Men that are hardened to
Destruction.

And for the Hearers among the Quakers, Advice to the Hearers among the Quakers.
my Council unto you is, Separate your selves from the Congregations, and
Meetings of these ungodly Men, lest ye be Consumed in all their sin: Be as much
afraid of them, and of their Poisonous Doctrines, as ye would be afraid to eat
of a dish of Meat before you on the Table, that had rank Poison in it, of which
ye were told, and fully assured of it: Would ye eat of such a Dish? I know ye
would not; Remember and consider Eternity, it will be well or ill with you for
ever, according as ye Receive, or Refuse the Truths of the Gospel now. Beware
of False Prophets, which come to you in Sheeps clothing, but inwardly they are
Ravening Wolves; if ye be the Sheep of Christ, follow him, and know his Voice
in the Scriptures, in your hearts, and amongst his own People, and follow not
Strangers, that bring strange false Doctrines about the Light within; and in
many other things which have been mentioned, contrary to the Mind of Christ
Revealed in the Scriptures.

These People, the Quakers, The Quakers great Idol near falling.
have forsaken the Fountain of Living Waters, and have run to broken Cisterns:
And seeing they have forsaken the Living and true God, the Glory of his People,
and set up an Idol, a false Christ, the Light in every Man and Woman that
comes into the World:

I shall therefore bring against this their false Doctrine several Arguments
from Scripture, to prove the Vanity and falsehood of it, as so many Pieces of
Ordnance Planted against this great Idol, which the Quakers have set up and
Worship, that so it may fall, as Dagon, before the Ark of the Lord.

Whereas they say, That Christ the true Light is in every Man and Woman that
comes into the World: This is not a Truth; because in whomsoever Christ is and
dwells, he does enlighten that Soul with true Light, saving Light, supernatural
Light, even by himself, by his Spirit, and by the Scriptures.

It Is true, all wicked Men that come into the World have Lights of Christ's
making, he Created them, which Enlighten all Mankind, and that both Outwardly
and Inwardly.

1. They are Enlightened Outwardly, by Lights that God has Created, and set in
the Heavens, the Sun and the Moon, by which all are Enlightened.

2. And then Secondly, All Men and Women that come into the World, are
Enlightened with Inward Light also; Reason and Natural Conscience: So Christ the
true Light, Enlightneth all that come into the World, which is all that is
Intended and meant by that place, John 1.9. But Christ himself is the true
Light, the Light of Lights; who inlightneth his own People immediately by
himself, and by his Spirit, which the wicked of the World are not Partakers of;
they have only those common Lights aforementioned. As is fully and plainly
Proved by these Scripture Arguments.

Ten Propositions Proved by Scripture.
Those in whom Christ is, and and dwells, First Argument. Prop. 1.
he Inlightens them with spiritual Light.

But wicked Men and women are not Enlightened with spiritual Light; therefore
Christ is not in wicked Men and women.

For Proof of these Propositions, both Major and Minor (then the Conclusion
drawn from them must needs be granted by all Rational Men,) See Ephesians. 5.8. Ye
sometimes were Darkness, but now are ye Light in the Lord: walk as Children of
Light. And Paul was sent to turn Men from Darkness to Light, Acts 26.18. And we
see the Corinthians who sometimes were Darkness, and afterward Converted, Paul
says, 2 Cor. 4.6. God who commanded the Light to shine out of Darkness, has
shined in our Hearts, to give the Light of the knowledge of the glory of God in
the Face of Jesus Christ. But as for others who were Carnal and Unregenerate,
he tells us, they were in Darkness, and Darkness in them, v. 4. And the God of
this World had blinded the minds of those that believe not, lest the Light of
the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the Image of God, should shine unto them.

In whomsoever Christ is, The Second Argument. Prop. 2.
and dwells, he quickens them, and makes them spiritually Alive.

But unregenerate Men and Women are not Spiritually Alive, but Dead; Therefore
Christ is not in unregenerate Men and Women.

Proof. Ephesians. 2.1. You has he quickened, who were Dead in Trespasses and sins.
And Christ complains of the Jews, That they would not come unto him, that
they might have Life, John 5.40. plainly implying, that they were Dead, and
that they might have Life, if they had come unto him.

Christ is not in those who are not in him. The Third Argument. Prop. 3.


But the Unregenerate World are not in Christ.

Therefore Christ is not in the Unregenerate World.

For Proof hereof see Col. 1.21. You that were sometimes alienated, and Enemies
in your mind by wicked works, yet now has he Reconciled, 2 Cor. 5.17. If any
Man be in Christ, he is a New Creature.

Now, no Unregenerate Persons are New Creatures, therefore not in Christ. And
Christ says plainly that he is In his People, which implies (as we may
perceive, if we Observe the context) that he is not in the Unregenerate World,
John 17.23. I in them, and thou in me. And again, ver. 26. I in them: Those
that Christ means by Them, are in Opposition to the World; for he has chosen
them out of the world, v. 16. the words [I in them] are very Emphatical, and
full with this sense, clearly implying that he is not in the world of
Unregenerate persons, even as the words before, v. 9. do plainly express that
he prays not for the world, but for them, his people; so these words do as
plainly imply that he is in them, and not in the world, John 15.4, 5. we see
there at large, That such as abide in Christ, he also is in them, and not
otherwise.

Christ is not in those for whom he Prays not. The Fourth Proposition. Prop. 4.


But, Christ Prays not for the unbelieving World.

Ergo. Christ is not in the unbelieving World.

Our Savior tells us several times, that he is not of the world, v. 14. they
are not of the world, even as I am not of the world. And again, v. 16. They are
not of the world, even as I am not of the world; as if he had said, I am none
of their Company, I am not of them, nor in them; I have no such Fellowship, or
Familiarity with them, as to Live in them: I am not of the world, nor in the
world; I am in my People, even in those which thou Father have given me: I in
them, and thou in me.

And ver. 9. He positively and plainly tells us, That he Prays not for the
world, the wicked, unbelieving, unregenerate world; he neither Prays for them,
nor is in them.

5. Fifthly, Another Proposition, or Syllogism, proving that Christ is not in
all Men and women, as the Quakers assert, is this.

They to whom Christ does not Manifest himself by Teaching them his Mind and
Will, Prop. 5.
Christ is not in them.

But Christ does not manifest himself to wicked and ungodly Men and Women:
Therefore Christ is not in wicked and ungodly Men and Women.

For Proof of this Proposition in both parts, consider,

Wicked and ungodly Men and Women are destitute of true saving Knowledge and
Wisdom; they know not the things that belong to their Peace; and are destroyed
for lack of Knowledge: 2 Cor. 4.4. The Devil, the god of this unbelieving
World, has blinded their Minds, lest the Gospel of Christ should shine unto
them, Christ Discovers himself, his Mind, and Will, in and by the Gospel, his
Spirit opening Men's Minds and Understandings to receive it, but Christ suffers
this blindness of Mind to rest upon some Persons, and does not Manifest himself
unto them; therefore he is not in them: One asks Christ a Question, John
14.22. about this very thing; Lord, how is it that thou will Manifest thy self
unto Us, and not unto the World? He had heard Christ make such a distinction
between them and the World, in being in them, and not in the World, and in
Praying for them, and not for the World; that now he asks Christ a Reason of
this Difference and Distinction between them and the World, which is sufficient
for the Proof of the Proposition.

And elsewhere, telling his Disciples, That God had hid those things from the
Wise and Prudent of the World, and Revealed them unto Babes.

Sixthly, Another Argument. Prop. 6.
Christ is in none but those who dwell in Love.

But wicked Men and Women do not dwell in Love.

Therefore Christ is not in Wicked Men and Women.

For Proof of this Proposition, see 1 John 4.12. If we Love one another, God
dwells in us, and his Love is perfected in us: And ver. 16. God is Love, and
he that dwells in Love, dwells in God, and God in him.

Now, we know all wicked Men and women in the world they dwell not in Love, but
in Enmity and Hatred; and Enmity and Hatred dwells in them. They Love not God,
but Hate God, Psalm. 27. They Hated me without a Cause: They have Enmity in
their minds against God, his word, his ways, Ordinances, and People; Therefore
Christ is not in them.

7. The seventh Proposition, Proving that Christ is not in all Men and women
that come into the world, as the Quakers assert, is this.

Christ is not in those Persons where the Devil is, Prop. 7.
and dwells, Rules, and Reigns.

But the Devil is, Rules, and Reigns in the Wicked, unregenerate World.

Therefore Christ is not in the wicked, unregerate world.

For Proof hereof, See Ephesians. 2.2. In time past ye walked according to the course
of this world, according to the Prince of the power of the Air, the Spirit that
now works in the Children of Disobedience. And 2 Timothy 2.26. And that they may
recover themselves out of the Snare of the Devil, who are taken Captive by him
at his will.

This is also Manifest by that Comparison that our Lord Christ makes to Answer
the Blasphemous Jews, who charged him, that he cast out Devils by the power of
the Devil, Luke 11.21. when the strong Man Armed keeps the House, all is in
quiet, he Rules; but when a stronger than he comes, he casts him out, and
Divides the Spoils, v, 24. The unclean Spirit keeps House, and after a time
goes out, for a Season, and then Returns again into his House, and takes seven
other spirits as bad, or worse than himself, and they enter in, and dwell
there; and the last state of that Man is worse than the first. This is for
thee, James Jackson, Author of the strong Man Armed cast out. Thou say in
this thy Book, that the strong Man Armed (meaning the Devil) is cast out of
thee; and Christ, a stronger than he, is come in, and dwells in his stead: this
(by the way) plainly contradicts this Principle and great Doctrine of thy
Friends, the Quakers; That Christ is in every Man and woman. Thou confessest
the Devil was in thee, whilst thou Lived'st so wickedly as thou have told us;
but now, if Christ, a stronger than he, be come, and entered into thee, how was
he there before, according to this Scripture, which says, when a stronger than
he comes: which plainly implies he was not there before; but the Devil was
there before, and kept the House. But now consider this well, suppose it be so
indeed, That the Devil, this strong Man Armed, was cast out, or in policy went
out for a time, intending to come into his House again, and Fortify himself in
thee, his House, in a stronger hold; and with greater strength, bringing in
seven other Spirits worse than himself, more Subtle and Politic, Fortifying
themselves in a way of Hypocrisy and Religion; the other hold of Profaneness
not being so sure as this; for now thou art persuaded (as thou tellest us) all
is well with thee, thou art a New Man, a Converted Man, as we see, and Read thy
long story to that purpose.

I Advise thee, as thou love thy Soul, and Regardest thy Eternal Welfare,
take heed lest this Scripture be not fulfilled in thee, and upon thee, for thou
look as like one of those spoken of, and intended in this Scripture, as can
be: beware lest thy last state be not worse than thy first.

8. Another Argument proving that Christ is not in all Men and women, is this.

Christ is not in any Man or Woman who have not Faith: Prop. 8.


But the Wicked and ungodly have no Faith.

Therefore Christ is not in the wicked and ungodly.

The Apostle Prays to be delivered from unreasonable, and wicked Men, for all
Men have not Faith, 2 These. 3.2.

Now, Christ is, and dwells in those in whom he works Faith, for he is the
Author and Finisher of Faith in all his People, and he dwells in them by Faith,
Ephesians. 3.17. He Prays, That they may be strengthened with might by his Spirit, in
the inner Man, That Christ may dwell in your Hearts by Faith.

9. Another Argument Denying the Quakers Assertion, and Proving the Truth, is
this:

Christ is not in any Man or Woman, Prop. 9.
but in those to whom he does communicate his Nature and Image.

But Christ does not Communicate his Nature and Image to Impenitent and ungodly
Men and Women.

Therefore Christ is not in ungodly Men and Women.

It is impossible that Christ should dwell in any Soul, and not Manifest his
Presence there, by making Impressions of his own Nature, Image, and Likeness:
And therefore where he comes, he does Communicate his Image, more or less. 1
Cor. 15.48. As is the Heavenly, such are they also that are Heavenly: v. 49.
And as we have born the Image of the Earthly, we shall also bear the Image of
the Heavenly.

And 2 Pet. 1.4. There are given unto us exceeding great and precious Promises,
That by these you might be partakers of the Divine Nature.

10. Another Proposition confirming the same, is this:

Christ is in none but in those only who are joined to him, as Members of his
Body. Prop. 10.


But wicked Men and Women are not joined to him as Members of his Body.

Therefore Christ is not in wicked Men and women.

This Truth may be Illustrated, and shadowed out unto us by a plain Similitude
between Natural and Mystical Fruit Trees: Similitudes of things with which we
daily Converse, obvious to our Natural Senses, are very helpful unto us to
shadow out, and Illustrate Spiritural things, which are Dark, Abstruce, and
Difficult, as they lie in intricate Spiritual Notions; which without some plain
Similitude would be discerned but dimly, as in this particular. As Windows are
to a House, so are Similitudes to a Discourse: They both let in Light. We know
the Root, Body, Boughs, Branches, and Twiggs of a Fruit-tree are all joined
together, and do make but one Body or Substance: And that the Root gives no
Sap, Life, or Nourishment but only to those parts of the Tree that are United
to it; all those Boughs and Branches are Nourished from the Root; they Receive
Sap, Spirit, and Life; the Innate, Intrinsecal Form and Virtue of the Tree is
in all the parts: But the Virtue and Influence of the Root is not in any other
Branches or Boughs, which do not grow upon the Root, though they are never so
near this Tree, though they are contiguous, and mixed among, or hang among the
Living Branches, yet they have no Life in them, no Sap, no Virtue from the
Root, because they are no parts of it.

Even so it is here, in this Mystical Fruit-tree, Christ and his Members; his
People, who are Members of his Body, they Receive Life, Nourishment, and Virtue
from him; he is in them by his Effectual Operations: But as for others, who are
not of his Body. who are not joined to him by Faith wrought by the Spirit, he
is not in them, they receive no Virtue, Life, or Nourishment from him; he does
not Communicate himself to them, as he does to his own People, his Members; for
he is in them, and they in him, 1 Cor. 12.27. Ye are the Body of Christ, and
Members in particular, Col. 1.18. He is the Head of the Body the Church. And
Col. 2.19. From the Head, all the Body by Joints and Bands, having Nourishment
Ministered and knit together, increases with the Increase of God.

This is plain from Christ's own words, John 15.1, 2, etc. I am the Vine, and
my Father is the Husbandman: Every Branch in me that bears not Fruit be
t^keth away, and every Branch that bears Fruit he p^rgeth it, that it may
bring forth more Fruit.

Ver. 4. Abide in me, and I in you: Ver. 5. I am the V^ne, ye are the Branches;
he that abides in me, and I in him, the same brings forth much Fruit, for
without me ye can do nothing.

Thus have I drawn these Ten Pieces of Ordnance out of Gods own Magazine, and
levelled them against this Idol, this false Christ, the Light in every Man and
Woman; and it is sallen and broken, and Christ the true Light set up, and
Worshipped in its stead, by all that Worship God in Spirit, and in Truth.

How dreadful is the Case of these People (the Deceived ones among the
Quakers,) who set up an Idol instead of Christ, and Worship it, and Teach
others so to do; thereby forsaking the Fountain of Living waters, and digging
to themselves broken Cisterns that can hold no water. Well might the Apostle
Peter, and the Apostle Jude also, call them Wells without water, and Clouds
without water, 2 Pet. 2.17. Jude 12.

Seeing they have forsaken the Fountain of Living waters, Jesus Christ, and
trust to a broken Cistern, they shall return from it with their Pitchers empty,
and be ashamed; they shall find no water of Life to refresh them: They are now
empty Vessels, as all (who have the true Light in them) may perceive; They have
no Light, Wisdom, Knowledge, nor Understanding, as Christ gives to his People:
No Sanctification, no Justification, no Reconciliation, no Salvation. But it is
not so with true Believers, for they have chosen the Fountain of Living waters,
the Fountain of Gardens, the Well of Living waters, Cant. 4.15. The Springhead
of the River of water of Life, clear as Crystal, proceeding out of the Throne
of God, and of the Lamb, Rev. 22.1. Who also gives unto every one of them, to
have in themselves a Well of water springing up unto Eternal, John 4.14. so
that out of their Bellies shall flow Rivers of Living water, John 7.38. In so
much that they do therewith water others, and so obtain yet more waterings
themselves, Prove. 11.25. So that their Souls are like watered Gardens, and as
Springs of water, whose waters fail not, Isa. 58.11.

We see then what a vast difference there is between these Wells without water,
these Clouds without water aforementioned; who have set up their Idol, and
trust in it; and those that have chosen the Fountain of Living waters: The one
sort are continually dry, without any true Refreshings; as the dry and barren
wilderness without Fruit: But the other continually watered and refreshed, and
brings forth much good Fruit: As the Tree Planted by the Rivers of waters,
which brings forth his Fruit in due Season.

4. I shall now proceed, and show some other particulars wherein the Quakers
say they do Excel all other Professors in the World, having already mentioned
three particulars, (which James Jackson tells us of in his Book, p. 14. Strong
Man Armed cast out, viz. In the true Foundation, in Faith, and in Knowledge:
The Quakers Humility.
So Fourthly, in Humility, and Spiritual abasement, and subjection to the Power
and Kingdom of Jesus Christ; whereas other Professors are blown, swelled, and
puffed up with Airy Notions, vain boastings, and self-conceitedness, as he
there says.

Answ. In Answer to which, I say, I should be glad to see these good words and
Professions to have any thing of Reality in them, that they may not be, as the
Apostle says of the Love of some, which is in word, and in Tongue only, not in
deed, nor in Truth: For wherein does this Humility appear? I see nothing that
looks like Humility amongst them, except it be in an Outward Garb of Comely and
decent Apparel; and for that, they are (in good earnest) to be commended; I
wish others would take Example by them herein, and avoid all Foolish Garbs and
Fashions, unbecoming for Professors of the Gospel.

Yet this alone is but a show of Humility; it is not the Grace it self: But it
is plain and manifest by their Principles, Behavior, and Practice, they
Discover that which is Directly contrary and Opposite to Humility, i. e. much
Pride of Heart, and are lifted up in themselves, as the Proud Pharisee was; and
are persuaded, and profess, that they are not as other Men are; all are
Publicans and Harlots, in Ignorance, Blindness, and Darkness but themselves:
Yea, all Professors of all persuasions whatsoever, that are not one with them
in Judgment and Practice, they are all Deceived, and out of the way; out of the
Light, the Truth, and the Life.

Now, what greater Evidence of Pride can Men Discover than this? Little cause
therefore has this Author to boast of his and their Humility, and to accuse
other Professors as blown, swelled, and puffed up with Airy Notions, vain
boastings, and self-conceitedness; when they themselves are plainly seen and
known to be the Men, void of Humility, and swelled with Pride.

5. Fifthly, This Author of the strong Man Armed cast out, P. 14. The Quakers
Unity.
Commends the People with whom he now walks, for their Unity; not only in
Opinion and Judgment, but in Spirit: And their Love is as the soul, that has
its Influence into all the parts and Members of the Natural Body; so it is
among them, which (as he says) makes them in all their ways, Doctrine, and
Practice, to be but as one Man,

Answ. It is Answered; The Unity, Love, and Concord amongst the Quakers, is far
from the Unity that Christ Commands and requires to be amongst his People,
the Members of his Body, the Church: He commands Love, Unity, Peace,
Communion, and Fellowship to be between, and amongst all his People, his
Members: And there is so, in their Degrees and Measures, which is discovered as
Occasions and Opportunities are Offered.

But though there were (as there is not) that Unity of Judgment, Opinion, and
Practice amongst themselves, as he says there is; yet I say, it is far from
that Unity and Love that is in the true Church of Christ, for these People have
cut off, and separated themselves from the true Church, and from all the
particular Assemblies, Societies, and Congregations of the Church of Christ;
and do fansy themselves to be the only People of God upon Earth; excluding all
others, for so he has said. O Wonderful strong delusion! A Darkness, and
Blindness, not Natural only (as all Carnal Men are Blind) but surely, a
Judicial blindness is upon them, Blindness as a just Judgment from the Lord,
who has given leave to the god of this World to blind the Minds of them that
believe not. This Unity among themselves Dividing and Separating from all the
Saints better than themselves (if we should suppose that they are of the Body)
is the greatest Evidence of Enmity, strife, Schism, and Dissension that can be;
for out of his own Mouth he is Judged: He Alludes to the Union between the
Members of the Natural body, their Union and Love (he says) is such a Union:
Now consider, Were it not a strange and Monstrous thing in Nature, for some of
the Members of the Natural body to combine together against all the rest, to
Neglect, or disown the rest of the Members? Nay, the Members of the Natural
body we know, have mutual, and tender care of, and Love one to another, even so
it is in the Mystical body the Church: The true Members Love one another; and
as they have Union with the Head, so they have also one with another: And where
there is at any time any Dissension and External Separation, Corruption and
Satan are the Cause of it, which should Occasion Repentance and Humiliation,
and not boasting.

The Apostle Paul shows us plainly wherein the Unity of the true members of the
Church of Christ consists; which is another kind of Unity, The true Unity of
the true Church.
than that among these People: He Discovers it briefly in this sevenfold Bond
or Union; See Ephesians. 4.4. There is one body, and one spirit, one hope of your
Calling; one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all, etc.

First, one Body. 1. One Body.
All Believers in all Ages of the world past, present, and to come, in all
Nations, Kindreds, and People, Worshipping God in Spirit, and in Truth, under
all Forms, do make this one body.

And this one body has but one Spirit; 2. One Spirit.
as the Members of the Natural Body have but one Soul to Actuate and Enliven
them, so also in the Mystical body; they all are quickened, taught, moved, and
led by that one Spirit, which is the Promise of the Father, and of the Son.

Thirdly, The Members of this one body having one spirit, have also one hope;
even the hope and expectation of all the good things promised in the Gospel; 3.
One Hope.
Eternal Life, the enjoyment of God for ever.

Fourthly, Another Bond of Union in the true Church, 4. One Lord.
is One Lord, even our Lord Jesus Christ, unto whose Laws and Commands all his
People are Subject.

Fifthly, One Faith. That is, 5. One Faith.
the true Justifying Faith of Gods Elect, wrought by that one Spirit,
apprehending that one Lord, for Justification by him alone: Paul calls it the
Common Faith, Titus 1.4. Titus mine own Son, after the Common Faith.

Sixthly, Another Bond of Union in the true Church, 6. One Baptism.
is one Baptism, 1 Cor. 12.13. By one spirit we are all Baptized into one body;
whether we be Jews, or Greeks, whether we be bond or free, and have been all
made to drink into one Spirit. This one Baptism makes all Believers truly one.

Seventhly, The last bond of Unity of the true Church, 7. One God.
is, One God, and Father of all who is above all, and through all, and in you
all. All Believers are born of God, and are all Partakers of the Divine Nature
among the Lords People, none of them have a better Nature than another, as to
the Truth, but as it differs in the Degrees or Measures; to some God is pleased
to Communicate a greater measure, to some a lesser Measure of Gifts and Graces,
that one and the self-same Spirit Divides to every Man severally as he will, 1
Cor. 12.11.

We see here these seven Bonds are the true Bonds of the true Members of
Christ, his Body, the Church; and are here mentioned and laid down by the
Apostle as strong Reasons and Grounds why all the Members should endeavor to
keep the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace, and not Divide and Separate
one from another, seeing they are all Members of one Body, and have but one
Spirit among them all, and have all one hope, all of them but one Lord, one
Faith, one Baptism, all but one God and Father; here is good Reason then they
should be one among themselves, in Unity, Peace, Love, Fellowship and Communion
one with another, as Opportunity serves.

So that the Author above mentioned has little Reason to boast of that kind of
Unity that is among the Quakers, if he consider these things.

Sixthly, 6. The Quakers Patience.
The Author of the strong man Armed cast out, further tells us, That the
Patience and Faithfulness of these People in doing and suffering the Will of
God, is Remarkable; for the World is against them, though (as he says) they are
the only Innocent and harmless People upon the Earth; and because there is
more of God amongst these People (the Quakers) than others, therefore are they
hated of all Men, and every where amongst all Religions evil spoken of.

Answ. In Answer whereunto, I say, That Patient suffering for Well-doing is
very Acceptable with God, and shall certainly have a great Reward from God; the
Apostle Peter says, 1 Pet. 3.14. If ye Suffer for Righteousness sake, happy
are ye; But there is a Suffering sometimes for Evil doings, and Evil sayings:
And it is better if the Will of God be so, that we Suffer for well doing, than
for evil doing, v. 17.

Now, it is true, These People (the Quakers) have been Sufferers as well as
others; but for what have they Suffered? Has it been for well doing, for doing
the Will and Work of Christ? They will say Yea, for doing the Will of God; but
it follows not therefore that it is so: Christ will rather say unto them, who
Required these things at your Hands? Nay, he has forbidden them, your False
Doctrines and Opinions, your Disownings, Despisings, and Separations from the
Precious People of the Lord, in all the Societies, Assemblies, and
Congregations in the Land, your Disturbing of them, and Railing against them,
whilst they are about the work of the Lord, ye your selves being drawn, or
driven by the Seducing Spirit, have done his work, (and not the Lords work) and
have sometimes Suffered for it: And herein ye boast, and think your Patience is
great, and that ye suffer according to the Will of God: But know, That it is
not the Suffering, but the Cause that makes a Martyr: It is possible a Man may
give his body to be burned (and that is more than to be Imprisoned) and yet not
suffer for Righteousness-sake. 1 Cor. 13. Though I give my Body to be burned,
and have not Love, it profits me nothing. Jesuits and Papists have sometimes
suffered for their false Principles and Practices; and so may others, and so
have you. Therefore speak no more of your Patient sufferings, until ye know
that ye Suffer for a good Cause, for well doing; until ye Suffer for Christ,
and for Righteousness-sake.

Thus I have gone through the several particulars, wherein the Author of the
strong man Armed cast out, says, He and the People called Quakers, do Excel
all other Professing People in the World; wherein it appears to all Men that
have in them the Spirit of God, how grossly these People are Deluded and
blinded by seducing spirits, that they give heed unto; which making strong
Impressions in their Minds, they are Seduced, and carried away with them, never
Examining of them, and Trying of them by the Scriptures, and so are easily
Deceived. And it is a most dreadful Condition that they are in, and an Evidence
of the greatest, and sorest Judgment of God, that the Nature of Man is capable
of, on this side Hell; a Judicial blindness and hardness of heart, upon any
Man, or Men, is the greatest of all Judgments. And this is the punishment that
God often lays upon Men that will not hearken unto him, that Despise his Word
and Ordinances, his Worship, and his People: That will not Receive the Truth in
Love, that they might be saved. Therefore God does send them strong Delusions
that they should believe a Lie; that they all might be Damned who believe not
the Truth, but have pleasure in unrighteousness.

That which does confirm this man, James Jackson, A false Persuasion of
Conversion.
(Author of the strong man Armed cast out) that he is truly Converted by the
Light within, which he says, is Christ, is this; for that he finds such
wonderful Effects in himself, (as he Accounts them) he is now become a New Man,
he is turned from Darkness to Light, and from the power of Satan unto God; he
is turned from all his former Profane, Wicked, Debauched course of Life, as he
tells us, and also from being a Parish Priest, and not only so, but he is also
turned from being a Teacher among the Independents, and since come to join with
the Quakers: And now he tells us, he is where he would, and should be; and
concludes he is turned to the Lord: And counts it a Mavelous thing that any
should Deny the Light in every man to be Christ; Strong Man Armed, p. 14.
but say, it is the Devil, or at best but the Light of Nature: But (says he)
it was never known, that the Devil, or Nature did ever turn any to the Lord.

Answ. For Answer hereunto, I say it is true, it was never known, that the
Devil, or the Light of Nature did ever turn any to the Lord.

And here now is another Trial of thy state, (and all others that are of thy
Principles and Practices:) Ye take it for granted, that ye are turned to the
Lord by Harkening to, Obeying, and Believing in the Light within; for thy part,
James Jackson, thou have given no Proof, nor Evidence at all according to
Scripture, or the Experience of the People of God, that thou art yet Converted
to the Lord: whereby any Man that is Taught of God, should be persuaded, that
thou art truly Converted to the Lord: That which thou do Manifest to all, and
which thou think is a ground sufficient to persuade them to believe that
thou art a New Man, (and which it seems is enough to satisfy thy self) is
this, because thou art turned from Profaneness to a more Civil Life; and have
also left several sorts of Professors, and now closed with the most Holy,
Innocent People upon Earth; yea, the only People of God, for so thou have said
of them. But let us further Try these two things by a true Touchstone, and
Weigh them in the Balance of the Sanctuary: The one, The Light within, of what
sort it is: The other, the Effects of this Light, what it produces in men. And
for that Causes are often Difficult to be known and discerned, immediately, in
and by themselves, it is best to Try them by their Effects, that which they
produce and bring forth; by which we may come to know of what Nature the Cause
is.

So then; This Light within, thou say, The Light within Converts none to the
Lord.
(and would have all Men to Believe) has Converted Thee and many Thousands
to the Lord, of the People called Quakers; but we are wholly left without any
Proof, Sign, or Evidence, that you are Converted to the Lord: Nay, on the
contrary, we see many Proofs and Evidences, that thou and they are not yet
Converted to the Lord, as have been already (and more yet shall be) Discovered,
whereby it will be made plain and manifest, that thou and they that are of thy
mind, are utterly mistaken and deceived concerning both the Cause and the
Effect: That is, ye are mistaken utterly concerning the Light within, and the
Fruits and Effects of it, in, and amongst you. As for Thee, James Jackson
(Author of the strong Man Armed cast out) it is plain and manifest to a
Spiritual Eye, That thou art yet in the Gall of bitterness, and in the Bond of
Iniquity; for certainly, The Tree is known by its Fruits; a good Tree cannot
bring forth bad Fruits: By the Fruits of Trees we know of what Kind or Nature
the Tree is that brings them forth; do thou doubt of this? thou need'st not,
if thou do but remember who it was that said it; and all Agree, and know it
is a Truth. So then, Thy Fruits Discover thee to be a very Corrupt Tree,
bringing forth sower, bitter, poisonous, deadly Fruits; Thy Grapes are Grapes
of Gall, thy Clusters are bitter: And the like are the Fruits of the Leading
Quakers amongst you: Thou and they bring forth False Doctrines, Errors,
Heresies, and Blasphemies against God, his People, and his Truths; ye give heed
to Seducing Spirits and Doctrines of Devils, speaking Lies in Hypocrisy, which
I shall plainly Discover in several particulars.

First, Thou say of many thousands of the Lords peculiar People, Strong Man
Armed, p. 12.
That they Build not upon the true Foundation, Jesus Christ, but that the
Teachers of all other Sects, and sorts of Professors amongst the Presbiterians,
Independents, Baptists, and others, they ever Rejected, Disallowed, and set at
naught this stone, this true Foundation, which is Christ in us the hope of
Glory, and Build upon some other false Foundation.

Now, let me tell thee, thou false Tongue, set on fire of Hell, had thou the
true Light in thee indeed (as thou say of thy self) thou would sooner have
chosen to have had thy Tongue cut out, than to have spoken this Lie in
Hypocrisy: Or to have had thy Hand cut off, than to have wrote it: For if it
be better for a Man to have a Millstone hanged about his Neck, and to be cast
into the Sea, than to Offend one of those Little ones that believe in Christ;
what think thou will be the punishment of him that Offends many thousands of
those Little ones? Yea, when the Offense is so high, that he Reproacheth,
Slandreth, and Blasphemeth them, and their Lord and Savior in them; for he
has said, He that Despises you, Despises me: Inasmuch as ye did it to one of
these my Brethren, ye did it unto me: Thou Reproachest the true Light in many
others by the Real Darkness within thy self: And if the Light that is in thee
be Darkness, how great is that Darkness? O it is very great and gross Darkness.

Consider these words, Natural Light is Spiritual Darkness.
and who spoke them, it plainly appears from these words spoken by Christ's own
Mouth, that the Light in Men, all unregenerate Men, is but Darkness: It is Real
Natural Light, the Light of Reason, Understanding, and Conscience, which yet as
to the apprehending of Spiritual things, is but Darkness: for the Natural Man
(though never so Wise and Rational) cannot see, nor Discern the things of God,
in a Spiritual manner; and such a Light within thou have, and mistakest it, for
the true Light Jesus Christ, as is manifest by the Effects, as was said; for
Christ the true Light cannot Reproach his own People, nor the work he has
wrought in them, as thou do; therefore thy Light is Darkness.

Nay further, have we not good grounds to Believe, that the Darkness in thee,
and many others of your Leaders, is more than that Common, Natural Darkness,
that is, upon the Minds of all unregenerate Men. There is cause to believe that
it is a Judicial Darkness and Blindness, as was upon the Minds of many of the
unbelieving Jews who Rejected Christ and his Gospel, after all his Teachings
and Miracles among them: Such a Darkness as the Prophet Isaiah speaks of; Make
the Heart of this People fat, and blind their Eyes, that seeing they may see,
and not perceive: Not that God put in any more blindness into Men's minds, but
withholds his Grace, and denies his Spirit; but permits the Evil Spirit, the
god of this unregenerate World, to blind the Minds of them that believe not,
lest the Light of the Glorious Gospel of Christ should shine unto them. And
seeing that the Light of the Gospel does shine so Gloriously in this Day, and
ye Reject it, and Despise it, we have cause to be persuaded you have in you
this double Darkness and Blindness, notwithstanding all your Pleading for the
Light within: Ye know not what ye say, nor whereof ye Affirm.

Thou and thy Friends (as thou call them) do quite mistake that Scripture,
This Scripture, John 1.9. grossly Mistaken.
whereupon ye ground your Opinion and Persuasion concerning the Light within,
John 1.9. This is the true Light, that Lights every Man that comes into the
World. Thou and they put a meaning and sense upon it, though in other
Scriptures brought against you, ye disown all meanings; yet here ye make use of
a meaning, but it is a false one: For it is not said, that Christ the true
Light, is in every one that comes into the World, but that he Lights every
one that comes into the World. Take then the very words, and the genuine sense
is plainly this: That Christ the true Light, does Light every one that comes
into the World, and That in two Respects: First, by an Outward Light; and
Secondly, by an Inward Light. The Outward Light is by the Sun in the Firmament,
with the Moon and the Stars, this Outward Light all Men and Women have that
come into the World, in all Nations, Tongues, and People: Secondly, Christ
enlightneth them by an Inward light also; by the Light of Reason, Humane
Understanding, and Natural Conscience; by these Lights also he Lights every
one that comes into the World, according to that Scripture aforementioned: And
so much (and no more) is intended by it, as it concerns every one that comes
into the World: He is called the Father of Lights, having Created diverse Lights
of several kinds. But now, as it concerns Believers, the peculiar People of
God, the true Light Jesus Christ, enlightneth them with another Light, besides
the former, which none but they only are partakers of: The other Lights are
but Darkness to this Light; yea, the Scripture calls them Darkness, in
Comparison of this true Light, Jesus Christ himself, the Son of Righteousness,
when he arises upon the Soul he makes things manifest and clear, which before
were hid in Darkness, 2 Cor. 4.6. God, who Commanded the Light to shine out of
Darkness, has shined in our Hearts, to give the Light of the Knowledge of the
Glory of God in the Face of Jesus Christ. But as for the Wicked and Ungodly,
all Unbelievers, (which are the greatest part of the World) they have not this
Light in them (as thou, James Jackson, and the Teachers among the Quakers do
affirm, and contend earnestly for:) But they are of the Number of those which
the Holy Ghost says, by the Mouth of his Servant Paul, in 2 Cor. 4.4. The god
of this World has blinded the Minds of them that believe not, lest the Light
of the Glorious Gospel of Christ (who is the Image of God) should shine unto
them: Look well unto it, that ye be not of the Number of these blind ones,
blinded by the Seducing Spirit, which is got into your own blind Minds, and
which ye call, and Blasphemously say, is Christ the true Light in every Man.
And verily, this is one sad Sign, that ye are indeed of that very Number, even
because ye disown the Gospel of Christ, the Scriptures of Truth spoken by
Christ himself, and by the Holy Ghost: Saying and Affirming they are not the
Rule to Christians in Faith and Obedience; neither do ye submit to have your
Spirits Tried by them, but trust to the Light within, which is but Darkness, as
to Seeing and Discerning of Spiritual things: For Spiritual things are
Spiritually Discerned. And know, and consider this, That if the Gospel of
Christ be not Received, and submitted unto, but Neglected, or Rejected, then it
is hid from such: And in such a Case, the Apostle Paul says, 2 Cor. 4.3. If
our Gospel be hid, it is hid from them that are lost, whom Satan has blinded,
lest it should shine unto them.

Thou, The Quakers Doctrine is directly contrary to the Scriptures.
James Jackson, and other Teaching Quakers, teach that Christ, the true Light,
is in every Man and Woman in the World; But this is directly contrary to plain
and positive Scripture: For before Conversion and Regeneration, all Men and
Women are in Darkness, and Darkness in them; yea, are Darkness it self, in the
Abstract, Ephesians. 5.8. Ye sometimes were Darkness, but now are ye Light in the
Lord; Walk as Children of Light. And 1 John 2.8. Darkness is past, and the true
Light now shines: Heb. 10.32. After ye were Illuminated, ye endured a great
Fight of Afflictions. Paul knew that all Men were in Darkness, and Darkness in
them: And therefore his Preaching was to turn them from Darkness to Light, and
from the power of Satan (the Prince of Darkness) to the Living God: Yea, our
Lord Christ himself, the true Light, says, John 1.46. I am come a Light into
the World, that whosoever believes in me, should not abide in Darkness;
plainly implying, that before Men Believe they abide in Darkness.

And again, he says, John 12.35. Yet a little while is the Light with you,
Walk while ye have the Light. Now, if Christ had been the Light still remaining
in them, in every one, (as the Quakers Teach) Christ would not have used these
words, Yet a little while is the Light with you; walk while they have the
Light: It Is like these Quakers would have Answered him boldly, (and Ignorantly
enough) We have the Light within us; it is always in us, and with us, and
abides in us, and in all Men and Women in the World: Go whither thou will, for
we have the Light within us still continually: For certainly these Men would no
more have owned him, nor his Doctrine had they been contemporaries with him,
than they own him now in these Days: And we know they have Denied him, both in
his Person, and in his Doctrlne; as appears Manifestly in their Books and
Writings, besides Denying of him, in Denying his Members.

It is Evident then, That the Teaching Quakers do Deceive the Poor, Ignorant,
Simple People, their Hearers, with this Doctrine about the light within, and
speak concerning it directly contrary to the Doctrine of the Scriptures: And
these poor simple People (silly Women, as the Apostle calls them) 2 Timothy 3.6.
finding, and perceiving there is some Light within that Discerns some things to
be good, and moves unto it, and on the contrary, denies some evil things, and
will not consent to known Evils; They do hereupon conclude, that this is Christ
the true Light, according as they are Taught, not understanding the Difference
between Natural Light and Spiritual Light, no more than their Teachers, and so
it passes for a current Doctrine amongst them, though it be most Absurd and
false, and manifestly contrary to the Scriptures.

Do ye not know that there is a Conscience in every Man and Woman, Conscience
is a Natural Light.
and that it is a Light according to its Nature? it has so much Light, as not
only to see and know Earthly things, according to Reason and Humane
Understanding; but also some things according to the Law of God, Romans 1. to
see, and to reprove for some gross evils and sins; As Murder, Theft,
Drunkenness, Bestiality, Deceitful dealings, and such like things against the
Light of Nature; which also the Law of God forbids: And this Light within every
one does move unto some things that are Morally good and Honest, Reproving, and
Troubling for the one, and Excusing for the other: But this Light can never
lead to Christ without the Spirit of God, and the Word of the Gospel, which
Reveals Christ fully: Therefore give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's,
and unto God the things that are Gods. Ascribe unto Conscience the things that
belong to Conscience, and unto Christ that which is his own: Set not a Creature
in the Throne of the Creator; and by Worshipping an Idol, forsake the Living
and true God.

It is true, Christ the true Light, is really in Believers, and in none else.
and a glorious Truth indeed (a precious Privilege of the Saints, and peculiar
People of God,) that Christ dwells in them; and this is a great and Glorious
Mystery made known unto the Saints: (only Believers) as we see, Col. 1.16, 17.
Even the Mystery which has been hid from Ages, and from Generations; but now
is made manifest to his Saints, ver. 17. To whom God would make known what is
the Riches of the Glory of this Mystery, among the Gentiles, which is: Christ
in you the Hope of Glory.

Here is a glorious Mystery revealed to the Gentiles, that they should now come
in, and be of the Church of Christ, the poor Gentiles that never were called
before that time: the Gentiles, who were formerly Excluded (in all the
Generations before those days) they are now made fellow-heirs with the
Believing Jews: And this Rich and Glorious Privilege is also revealed to them:
Christ dwelling in them by Faith, by his Spirit, and all his graces, and
operations, communicating his Nature to them, that they are as really partakers
of the Image of the second Adam, in righteousness and true holiness, as they
were of the Image of the first Adam in sin and darkness.

But what is this Privilege to the wicked, and unregenerate world, that lie in
sin, and darkness? what Communion has light with darkness? what fellowship
has Christ with Belial? Will Christ Dwell in the Soul where the Devil Dwells,
and Reigns? Nay verily: If Christ come to dwell and abide in any Soul, and be a
light unto it, he will surely cast out Satan, that Strong man Armed, that
keeps the house (as Satan does in all wicked men) and Satan shall Reign, nor
keep house no longer but Christ will remove him, and come in his place, and
Reign, and Rule, and Dwell there; and by his Presence, and Dwelling in the
Soul, will give to such a believing Soul, sure grounds of hope of Eternal
Glory: according to this word; Christ in you the hope of Glory.

And seeing the Teachers among the Quakers, The Scriptures are the Word of God.
do slight and undervalue the Scriptures and deny them to be the Word of God,
and to be a Rule for Christians in Faith and Practice; and prefer their own
Fancies, and vain imaginations (moved often by seducing Spirits) before the
written Word of God, let us consider the tendency of this strong delusion.

The Apostle Paul writes to the Romans, Chap. 15.4. Whatsoever things were
written aforehand, were written for our Learning, that we through patience and
comfort of the Scriptures might have hope. The Church of God was for a long
time without the Scriptures, God teaching his People immediately by his Spirit,
or by Angels, mixed with some Providential dispensations, but when he had
gathered his Church and People out of Egypt, he was graciously pleased to
instruct them by a plain written Word, to be a perfect, standing Rule, both for
Faith and Practice; And required (upon diverse sore Penalties on the one hand,
and Rewards and Promises on the other) that they should observe them.

And those that were Godly amongst them, took diligent heed thereunto, and
great delight therein: How did the holy Prophet David (a man after Gods own
heart) prize and value the written Word of God; (though he had but a small part
of the Scriptures, to what we now have) as we see in all his Psalms, more
especially in the 119. Psalm. almost in every verse of that long Psalm, he
makes mention of the Law of God, his Statutes, Ordinances, Judgments, Precepts,
and Commandments, how he loved them, delighted in them, meditated in them; O
how I love thy Law; it is my meditation continually; he aimed at the keeping,
and practice of them, as at a mark; and tells us it is the nature, and property
of all good men so to do, Psalm. 1. The godly man meditates in the Law of God
Day and night.

But now these Teachers and Leaders of the Quakers, they express no love to the
Scriptures, but the quite contrary; they Slight, and Undervalue them, and teach
others to do so too; and deny them to be a Christians Rule of Faith and
Practice, though spoken by Christ himself in his own Person, (a great part of
them) who is truly God, as well as Man; and the rest inspired by the Holy
Ghost, who also is God. Yet these Unreasonable and Unthankful men, deny them to
be the Word of God, though spoken by God himself: We have much of the Scripture
spoken, by Christ's own mouth, and all was given by inspiration of God, Holy men
of God, spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, and is not the Holy Ghost
God? How then are not the Scriptures the Word of God? Are not these men
infatuated that will not own these things.

When the believing Thessalonians had heard the Word of God, spoken by Paul,
and received it effectually, he thanks God for it; for this cause thank we God
without ceasing, because when ye received the Word of God, which ye heard of
us, ye received it not as the word of men, but as it is in Truth the Word of
God.

And when any one would draw us to hearken to any Private Spirit, as of old
they did (and so now) we are commanded by God, not to hearken to them, Isaiah
8.20. but we are directed to the Scriptures: To the Law, and to the Testimony,
if they speak not according to this Word, it is because there is no light in
them: And Isa. 8.9. Lo they have rejected the word of the Lord, and what
wisdom is in them? So then; here we see plainly they that speak not, and write
not according to the Scriptures, they have neither wisdom, nor Light in them.

Consider this, ye deluded People among the Quakers, that give more heed to a
dim, natural light within (darkened also by deluding spirits) than to the Light
of the Scriptures, though the Sun of Righteousness shine Bright, and Gloriously
in them.

The Apostle John has marked out such men, for wicked men 1 John 4.6. We are
of God; he that knows God, hears us, he that is not of God hears not us;
hereby know we the Spirit of truth and the Spirit of Error.

What can be more plain? hereby then it is Evident, what sort of men these are
in this Generation, who will not hear the Prophets, and Apostles speaking by
the Spirit in the Scriptures: he that will not hear Us is not of God: but on
the contrary, he that hears us, that is, obeys us, and is ruled and guided
by that which we have spoken and written, he is of God, and is guided and
taught by the Spirit of God, which God has also given to them that believe.

And farther, This truth is also spoken by our blessed Lord and Savionr Christ
himself, even from his own mouth: Joh. 8.47. when the Proud unbelieving Jews
(such another proud, self-conceited People as are now in our days) would not
receive his doctrine, he tells them plainly what they are, ver. 47. he that is
of God, hears Gods words, ye therefore heard them not, because ye are not of
God.

Tremble, and Quake at this Dreadful word, ye seduced People of the Quakers,
who will not hear, nor be guided by the Scriptures, the written, and declared
word of God: Ye are here pronounced by Christ's own mouth, his Prophets, and
Apostles; that ye are not of God: That is, ye are not born of God, ye are not
born of the Spirit: for that which is born of the Spirit, is Spirit: ye are not
regenerate, ye are not believers; ye are no members of Christ: ye are not
taught of God, nor led by his Spirit, but by a false Spirit.

When Paul wrote to Timothy he commended him for that he had known the
Scriptures from a child, which were able to make him wise unto salvation; 2 Timothy 3.15. And says, that all Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is
profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in
Righteousness; ver. 17. That the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished
unto all good works.

But these men are so far from being furnished to all good works, that they
are reprobate to every good work: they having cast-aside the Scriptures, they
can never be furnished any other way, to any good Work.

Let us consider how great a favor it is from God that we have the Scriptures;
The Scriptures are Gods Love Letters to Mankind.
which are Gods Love Letters to Mankind; indicted by his own Spirit, and written
by his own servants, to woo them, and win them to accept of his own, and only
beloved Son in marriage: that there may be a Contract, and an everlasting Union
between them: and so they may become the Spouse of Christ, the Lambs Wife; And
that although they have no Beauty, nor Comeliness upon them, yet that he will
accept of them, notwithstanding their Deformity, if they will but but consent
to the motion.

And Oh who would not consent, to such a wonderful condiscension in the Great,
and Holy God, to such poor miserable creatures, as we are, blind and deaf,
deformed, foul, and filthy, poor, and needy, wanting all things that might make
us acceptable in his eyes! But though it be so, yet he has promised that he
will make us Comely, and Beautiful, and Rich, with Ornaments, and a Crown of
Glory, and no good thing shall be wanting to them that love him. Therefore (all
these things considered) let us have the Scriptures in high esteem; and walk by
them, for we shall be judged by them at the last day.

But what a sad case are they in then who deny them as a Rule to walk by, and
disown them? And if so great a curse shall be the portion of those who take
away any part of the Scriptures, as that God will take away their part out of
the Book of Life, and out of the holy City, and from the things that are
written therein, Rev. 22. what shall we think will be the Portion and
Punishment of those, who take away all the Scripture at once, and make it as a
void thing; and deny them to be a perfect Rule to Christians of Faith, and
Obedience; and do instead thereof direct men to a blind guide, that had need of
a guide it self; for that it sees nothing of the true way, the truth, and the
life, without the Scriptures?

Now because the spirit of God who indicted the Scriptures, Characters of false
Prophets whereby they are known.
and spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets and Apostles, and Christ himself
also in his own person, has told us, That false Prophets and Teachers should
be in the later days, and should seduce, and deceive many; And so subtle shall
their carriage and their Doctrine be (like their Teacher) that they shall
deceive (if it were possible) the very Elect; And because also we know that
these are the last times, the last days, even these days wherein we live, in
which days these false Teachers (foretold) should come; it is our duty
therefore, and it highly concerns every Christian to try the Spirits, because
even Now many false Prophets are in the world among us.

Let us consider and examine than, who these false Prophets and Teachers are;
how they may be known; What Marks and Characters there are set down in the
Scriptures whereby these men may be known: for the Spirit of God has marked
them out, whereby they may be discerned from other men; even whereby they may
be known to be the very men foretold, that should come in these last days. Our
Lord Christ has bid us take heed of them, Luke 13.23. Behold (says he) I have
foretold you of these things. Let us therefore consider some particulars, as
marks of these men.

First then, that in the Epistle of Paul to Tim. 1 Timothy 4.1. Now the spirit
speaks expressly, that in the later times some shall depart from the faith,
giving heed to seducing Spirits, and Doctrines of Devils.

1. Some shall depart from the Faith; 1. Departing from the Faith.
Now what kind of Faith is here meant; it is not a true and justifying faith,
for that none can depart from; but it is a Temporary Faith, some shaddows and
fancies resembling faith; such a faith as our Lord Christ speaks of, Mat. 10.
They believed for a while, but in time of Temptation fell away.

2. They also cast off, and departed from Historical Faith; for they regard not
what is written in the Scriptures, either concerning Faith or Practice. And it
is not so with these Men of whom we speak; consider, and Judge.

They give heed to Seducing Spirits, 2. Character: they give heed to Seducing
Spirits, and Doctrines of Devils.
and Doctrines of Devils. This Mark and Character is also seen conspicuously
and plainly upon the Teachers among the Quakers; yea, so Evident is it, as if
written with a Beam of the Sun.

Now, what Doctrines do the Devils Teach, when they are permitted of God, (for
his Secret ends) to use the Tongues of Wicked Men? we may be sure his Aim and
drift will be to Preach against Christ, 1. Against Christ.
to darken his Glory as much as he can; both in his Humane and Divine Natures;
and in his Merits, Works, Sufferings, Righteousness, Satisfaction,
Reconciliation, Benefits, and Privileges that he has wrought, and brought
unto his People. These things are manifest in several particulars, in their
Books and Pamphlets.

And Secondly, 2. Against the Scriptures.
Another particular of the Doctrine of Devils, which he will be sure to Teach
his Disciples, it is to weaken, or Destroy the Authority of his Word, the
Scriptures, the Gospel of Salvation; by which, Truth and Error may be known and
proved: For if he once Destroy the Rule and Measure of Doctrines, (so that Men
do not try them by a known, plain, fixed Rule) then he knows Men may Preach,
and pretend their Fancies, and vain Imaginations, and obtrude them upon others,
as most certain Truths. And has he not Taught the Men of this Generation this
point of his Devilish Doctrine? Do they not slight and Despise the Scriptures,
the Word of God; and Offer, and prefer their own vain, Idle Fancies, instead of
the Scriptures; even the Men of whom we are speaking, the Teachers among the
Quakers? This is evident and clear to the Eyes of all who are enlightened by
Christ, and by the Scriptures.

Thirdly, Thirdly, Against the Church.
As the Doctrines of Devils are against Christ, his word, and Gospel, so also
against his People, his Church, all his Members; they shall be sure to be Cried
down, Slandered, Despised, Reproached, and Condemned, as Hypocrites, in all
that they say, and do, in, and about the Worship of God, in his Ordinances
which he has appointed, for as the Devil has great spite and Malice against
the Head, so also against the Members.

Now, do not the Quakers deal thus with the Lords People at this day? This is
another particular point of the Doctrine of Devils, which the Seducing Spirits
have Taught those who give heed unto them; how have they cried down (with a
Blasphemous Noise every where) all the Congregations, Assemblies, and
particular Churches of the Saints, of all persuasions, without exception of
any; as being all in Darkness, in Babylon, and set up themselves as the most
Holy, Innocent People; yea, the only People of God upon Earth.

Fourthly, Another of the Doctrines of Devils, is this: 4. Resting upon their
own Righteousness.
When he has done all he can to darken, and hide from his Disciples the true
and only way of Salvation by Christ, Revealed in the Gospel, and weakened the
Authority of the Scriptures, and the Credit, and Esteem of his People: Then he
introduces and brings in something of a Man's own, instead thereof, (that he
knows is insufficient, and will fail) in Order to Salvation: That is to say,
Man's own Righteousness, Obedience, and works, and puts them upon trusting to
these, and so Return again to the Old Covenant of works, and to neglect the New
Covenant of Grace; which course he knows is the ready way to Destruction.

And he does this with the more Efficacy in the minds of Wicked Men, because it
is a Remnant of Corruption, even in the Minds of Good Men, of all by Nature;
there is something of this remaining in the best, a Secret esteeming; and
over-valuing of something of their own; which is seen in the clear Light of the
Spirit, and confessed by all but the Quakers, although they have it in them
most of any People, yet through the Darkness of their minds they see it not,
neither will own any such thing, but tell us, they own, and witness Perfection.

Having mentioned these four particulars, which are the Chief Points of
Doctrine which the Seducing Spirits do Teach those that give heed unto them: I
shall now proceed to he rest of the Characters, which the Apostle plainly sets
down by the Directions of the holy ghost, whereby false Teachers may be known;
as we see, ver. 2. Speaking lies in Hypocrisy; having their Consciences seared
with an hot Iron.

Now, The Third Character of false Teachers: Lies in Hypocrisy.
it is easy to mention many lies in Hypocrisy, which the Quakers are guilty
of: Whereby this Character is deeply stamped upon them, and made manifest to all.

This is one Lie in Hypocrisy; That Christ the true Light is in every Man and
Woman that comes into the World, First Lie in Hypocrisy.
and that if they give heed unto, and Obey the Light that is in them, it is a
sufficient Guide unto Salvation without the Scriptures.

I say, This is false Doctrine, and a Lie in Hypocrisy: Christ does not dwell
in Wicked, and Ungodly, Impenitent sinners; the Devil dwells in them, and
Rules, and Reigns in them; he Rules in the Children of Disobedience, Col. 1.
What Concord has Christ with Belial, Ephesians. 2.2?

Christ often stands at the Door, and Knocks, if any Man hear his Voice, and
open the Door, he will come in, Rev. 3. but not otherwise: See the Arguments
against this falsehood.

Secondly, 2. Strong Man Armed cast out, p. 12.
This also is another Lie in Hypocrisy; That the Quakers build upon the true
Foundation, Jesus Christ, and all other Professing People Build upon some other
false Foundation.

This is a double Lie in Hypocrisy, both as to themselves and other Professing
People; many of them (I will not say all) do professedly Build upon a false and
Sandy Foundation, which certainly will fail, i. e. the Light within every Man
and woman that come into the world; and that is not Christ, but a Creature:
There is a Natural Light we know in every Man and Woman, Reason and Conscience,
but it is not Christ; he Created it, as all things else in the World, but what
Comparison between the Creator and the Creature: This is at large spoken to
elsewhere.

And concerning other Professing People, though many of them (it is to be
feared) do Build upon false Foundations; yet sure we are, many thousands of
them do Build upon the true and only Foundation, Jesus Christ: This Lie then
is against those who Build upon the true Foundation.

Thirdly, The Third Lie in Hypocrisy.

Strong Man Armed, p. 13.


This is another Lie in Hypocrisy, That they, (the Quakers) have a true Faith;
that Faith whereof Christ is the Author and Finisher: but the Faith of all
others is an unholy, dead, Imperfect Faith, it Sanctifies but in part, and so
will never save to the utmost.

This is thus proved to be a Lie: There is no true Faith but it is known by its
Fruits, works, or Effects, it Purifies the Heart, and works by Love; Love to
God, Love to all his People, to his word and Gospel, to all that is of God, and
from God. Now, it is very Manifest by the Fruits that the Quakers bring forth
in their Doctrines and Conversations, that they have not the Faith of Gods
Elect; it is but presumption, a shadow of Faith, whereof the Devil is the
Author, their Instructor in other Doctrines also. And it is likewise (on the
other side) manifest, that Multitudes of other Professing Christians (whom they
Despise) have true, saving, Justifying Faith; by the Fruits and Effects of it,
in their Hearts, and in their Lives and Conversations.

Fourthly, The Fourth Lie in Hypocrisy.

Strong Man Armed, p. 13.


This is another Lie in Hypocrisy: They say the Knowledge that the Quakers
have is a Spiritual and experimental Knowledge, by Divine Revelation: But the
knowledge of the Priests and Pastors of all other Religions in the world, is
but Ignorance, they know not Christ, but call him Devil, or at best, the Light
of Nature.

This is thus proved to be a Lie, and that a double one: Many of the Teaching
Quakers are very Ignorant, even of the very Principles of the Doctrines of
Christ, they were never Taught of God, we perceive it plainly by their
Discourse and writings: O the wonderful Darkness and Blindness that is upon
their Minds! A thick vail of Ignorance, as all Natural, Unregenerate Men have:
but their Vail is double; Natural, and Judicial. The Natural Man has not the
knowledge of Christ, nor of the things of God, he cannot know them (in that
state) because they are Spiritually Discerned and known, 1 Cor. 3.

These People know not the true Light Jesus Christ, they know not the
difference between Natural Light and Spiritual light, but give and ascribe that
to the Creature, which properly belongs only to the Creator: They know not the
way of Justification by Christ, but Blasphemously slight it, as we find in
their Books: And Teach that Men are Justified by their own works, directly
contrary to the Scriptures, whereby at once, they deny Christ, and the whole
Gospel, and the whole Design of God in the Covenant of Grace.

They know not how to Distinguish or Discern between the Suggestions and
Inspirations of a Seducing Spirit, and the workings of the Spirit of God in
Men's Hearts; neither do they know, nor give to their Hearers any Directions how
they may Try the Spirits, whether they are of God or not, but plainly bid them
Hearken to the Light within, give heed unto it, and follow it, and it will lead
them to Salvation, which gives wonderful Advantage to Satan, the Seducing
Spirit, to work in their minds, even what he will, seeing they have no way to
Discover him, he being Transformed (at such a time) into an Angel of Light, and
in many things resembles the Spirit of God: And those Ignorant Teachers know no
way how to discern him, having slighted and laid aside the Scriptures, whereby
one Spirit is known from another, being destitute also of the Spirit of God: So
that (upon this very Account) both they, and their Ignorant, simple Hearers,
are under strong delusions, giving heed unto Seducing Spirits; and thence it is
that their Teachings, Books, and Pamphlets are so false, and so directly
contrary to the Truth of the Scriptures: And yet we see they boast of their
Knowledge, and esteem themselves more Wise and Knowing than all others.

Fifthly, The Fifth Lie in Hypocrisy.

Strong Man Armed, p. 14.


Another Lie in Hypocrisy is this: The Quakers say, their Humility does far
exceed all others; it is the emptying themselves of all their own
Righteousness, Wills, Wisdom, and self-exaltation; and is a Real, Inward,
Spiritual abasement, and subjection to the Life, Power, and Kingdom of Jesus
Christ.

But O how contrary to these words, (nothing but words) are all their Doctrines
and Declarings to the People, and in all their Pamphlets, if we compare one
thing with another! For they do but deceive their simple, unwary Hearers with a
flourish of some good words and expressions, now and then, that so they may the
more readily Receive the deadly Poison that is mixed therewith: They sometimes
Profess in words that they own Christ and the Scriptures, but in deed and
reality they deny both; as is abundantly proved against them, and made manifest
unto all.

And in this very particular Lie in Hypocrisy, this that I say appears
plainly: For whereas he here says, they are the most humble People, in that
they empty themselves of all their own Righteousness, Wisdom, and
Self-exaltation, and have in them a real, spiritual Abasement and Subjection to
Christ; whereas the quite contrary appears in the Substance of their Doctrines;
Witness Edw. Burrough's Works in Folio, p. 33. where he says plainly, God does
not Accept any, where there is any failing, or who do not fulfill the Law, and
Answer every Demand of Justice. So William Penn, Sandy Foundation, p. 29, 30.
Obedience to Justification (says he) ought to be as Personally extensive as
was Man's Disobedience to Condemnation: In which Real (not Imputative) sense
those various terms of Sanctification, Righteousness, Resurrection, Life,
Redemption, Justification, etc. are most Infallibly understood; for (says he
further) Impute, or Imputing signifies no more in Scripture, but to express Men
Really and Personally to be that which is Imputed to them, whether as guilty,
or remitted; for (says he) any to be Justified from the Imputation of another
Righteousness, is both Ridiculous and Dangerous, whence came that usual saying
amongst many Professors of Religion; That God looks not upon them, as they are
in themselves, but as they are in Christ.

We see now here plainly what Doctrines the Teaching Quakers bring forth; and
how much it savours of Humility and Self-abasement, according to this great Lie
in Hypocrisy aforementioned. This their Doctrine shows they are swelled with
Pride; to the very highest pitch of Pride, that Self-love (and Satan to blow it
up) can raise them: Here they Account themselves perfect, and able to Answer
every Demand of Justice, and will not be beholding to Christ for the Imputation
of his Righteousness; this is the Humility of the Quakers. But O Miserable
Creatures are they! and more Miserable are they yet like to be, whose Humility
is the height of Pride, and whose Righteousness is nothing but the grossest sin
and wickedness, and who have not the Righteousness of Christ Imputed to them,
which is the Righteousness of God, and perfect, as well as Inherent
Righteousness, Created of God, but yet imperfect.

This Doctrine of theirs is a gross Lie in Hypocrisy, and the Grand Doctrine
of Devils; and therefore let it be accursed; yea, I say again, let it be
accursed for ever. And as for the Teachers of it, they shall be accursed also,
except they Repent.

The Grace of Humility has the quite contrary Effects; it Teaches Men to have
a low esteem of themselves, and when they have done all they can in the ways of
Obedience, to account that yet they are but unprofitable Servants.

This Humble Spirit was seen in Paul, who, though he were a great Apostle, yet
he accounted himself less than the least of all Saints; yea, and teaches all
others to be of the same Mind: In lowliness of Mind, let each esteem other
better than themselves, Phil. 2.3. How far then are these Men from true
Humility?

Sixthly, The Sixth Lie in Hypocrisy.

Strong Man Armed, p. 15.


Another Lie in Hypocrisy, is this: They say, their Patience is Invincible, to
them is this Grace given, The World has been against them, not for their own
sakes, but for Christ's sake in them, though they are (he says) the most
Innocent and harmless People upon Earth.

Now, whether this papears to be Truth or a Lie in Hypocrisy, may appear by
their Speeches and Writings, wherein they express and manifest much Bitterness
of Spirit, Wrath, Anger, Malice, and Impatience, as is in their frequent foul,
harsh Language, that proceeds from them, both by their Tongues and Pens,
against those who do Converse with them, or ask them questions, Soberly, and
Modestly, with a real desire to be Resolved; or that ask them a Reason of the
hope that is in them, or of their persuasions about such or such things; Their
Answers ought to be given with Meekness and Love, That they may satisfy those
who ask them, according to Truth: But instead thereof they commonly pour out
harsh words and speeches, like those Enemies of David, Psalm. 64.4. They whet
their Tongues like a Sword, they bend their Bows, and shoot their Arrows, even
bitter words. Witness Edward Burrough's Works, p. 20, 21, etc. against a
Servant of Christ, asking him serious questions, he Answered in such Language
as this, (which others also of their Teachers do likewise own, and approve of.)

To all, or most of the questions he mixeth this Language, The Quakers Railing
Accusations.
(and many Expressions to the like purpose) in his Answers. Thou Reprobate, and
Child of Darkness; we witness thee to be in the Sorcery and Witchcraft, thou
Dragon; thy queries are Conjured in the Black Art, out of the Bottomless Pit;
thou Diviner, we witness thee to be the Beast; thou Antichrist, who looks at
Christ's Death at Jerusalem alone; thou Jesuit, art pleading for Christ afar
off thee, thou art Accursed; thou Beast, to whom the Plagues of God are due:
Thou Blind Hypocrite, thou Cain, thou full of Subtilty; with the Light thou art
seen, and with the Life thou art Judged and Condemned.

These words were poured out, with many more such like Invectives against him
the Querist, and others from time to time, as Men have conference with them.
But are these the Fruits and Evidences of Patience; which they boast of, which
they say they have attained above all other Professing People? Then what is
Impatience, Wrath, Bitterness, and Anger? Are not their Tongues set on fire of
Hell, and moved by the Devil, who brings the Fire from thence, and kindles it,
and blows it up to a great Flame?

Nay doubtless, they are not only Pinched, and vexed by serious Questions, and
sound Scripture Arguments, but also even cut to the Heart, as the Jews were
against Stephen, when he dealt truly and plainly with them, as we see, Acts
7.54. When they heard these things they were cut to the Heart, and they gnashed
on him with their Teeth: So these Men they are vexed and Angry, when they are
Opposed, and cannot Answer, they are Pinched, and cut to the very Heart, which
they show and manifest by such speeches as these aforementioned; for out of the
abundance of the Heart, the Mouth speaks.

These I say, are Lies in Hypocrisy: This then is another Character plainly
seen upon the Quakers; whereby compared with the rest of the Characters, spoken
by the Holy Ghost, they are manifested to be the false Prophets that should
come into the World in these last days.

In this day is this Scripture fulfilled: The false Teachers who were foretold
expressly by the Spirit of God, that they should come in these last days; even
now are they come in this Generation: They are Departed from the Faith, they
give heed to Seducing Spirits, and Doctrines of Devils; they speak Lies in
Hypocrisy, having their Consciences seared with an hot Iron; which is the next
Character to be Discovered.

Fourthly, The Fourth Character of false Teachers: Their Consciences are seared
with an hot Iron.
Another Character whereby false Prophets and Teachers are known, which the
Spirit of God tells us of, is this:

They have their Conscience seared with an hot Iron, 1 Timothy 4.2. This
Expression, seared with an hot Iron, taken properly, is a Similitude of what is
done Spiritually, in and upon the Consciences of some more than Ordinary
notorious sinners, under a Judicial, as well as Natural hardness of heart,
Blindness, and Reprobate sense; unto which Judgment God sometimes gives them
up, for refusing to Receive and Hearken to the Truth, often tendered, and
Discovered to them; with some other Notorious sins. For as Natural Flesh seared
with an hot Iron, is thereby made hard, dead, and insensible; so as it will not
receive any Impression, nor is sensible, as soft, tender, lively Flesh is; so
it is with the Consciences of some Men, which are seared, they have no
Spiritual sense, nor feeling of spiritual things; but are dead, and hardened,
blind and deaf, as concerning the things of God, of which those Christians that
have tender Consciences, and soft hearts, have a clear sight and sense of.

Men whose Consciences are seared with an hot Iron, they do think, apprehend,
and believe, (and that strongly too) many things that are quite contrary to the
Truth; both as to Reason and Faith: which things they speak and write
accordingly.

Secondly, Another Sign, or Evidence of those whose Consciences are seared with
an hot Iron, is this:

They will Reject and Despise all plain Truths in Scripture, as being contrary
to their Corrupt Natures, Principles, and Interests, though they are never so
much concerned therein, and though brought, and tendered to them with never so
much Love, and earnest desire for their good and welfare; yet these things take
no Impression upon their hearts, no more than upon a stone; they remain still
the same, and no good is done upon them by any means.

Nay, Thirdly, (as another Evidence of a seared Conscience) The means used to
Reform them, does the more harden them, and makes them the more Desperate in
sinning; which is seen in their many Imprecations, Revilings, Slanderings, and
bitter Reproachful speeches, which proceed from them, against those that would
do them good. Now, is it not hereby Evident and plain, That very many of the
Quakers are under this Judgment, of having their Consciences seared with an hot
Iron: So that this Character is also plainly seen upon them, as is made
manifest particularly by their Speeches, Books, and Practices.

Fifthly, Another Character of false Teachers, The Fifth Character of false
Teachers:

Denying the Lord that bought us, etc.


or rather their Names spelled out at length, with all the Letters that make up
their Names plain and Legible to all who have clear fight, and walk in the
Light: These are Named, and set down largely and plainly, both by the Apostle
Peter, 2 Epist. 2.1, 2, etc. and the Apostle Jude joins with him; see his whole
Epistle.

2 Pet. 2.1. But there were false Prophets among the People, even as there
shall be false Teachers among you; who privily shall bring in Damnable
Heresies, even Denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves
swift Destruction.

Ver. 2. And many shall follow their pernicious ways, by reason of whom the way
of Truth shall be evil spoken of.

And now before I speak to the particular Characters, The Apostles Peter and
Jude both agree in the same Characters of false Teachers.
or Letters, whereby (being joined together) we may spell out their Names; let
us consider this thing, which is of great weight and moment, to the Business in
hand, viz. That the Apostle Peter spends a whole Chapter in decyphering, and
marking out these false Teachers, which should come in these latter days: And
so does the Apostle Jude also spend his whole Epistle to the same purpose,
concerning the very same Men, both of them Agreeing in the self-same particular
Characters, Letters, or Marks, whereby they are known, as we may see in the
particulars following.

First then:

The Apostle Peter says, 2 Pet. 2.1. There shall be false Teachers among you,
who privily shall bring in Damnable heresies.

1. So Jude, to the same purpose, ver. 4. There are certain Men crept in
unawares, who were of Old Ordained to this condemnation, Ungodly men, etc.

2. Secondly, Both brand them with this Mark, or Character, ver. 1. Denying the
Lord that bought them.

2. So Jude, ver. 3. Denying the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ.

3. Thirdly, Both note their Pride and Presumption, in Despising Government,
and speaking evil of Dignities: The most Eminent, and chief Persons, both in
Church and State, Exalting themselves above them all.

3. 2 Pet. 2.10. They Despise Government, presumptuous are they, self-willed;
they are not afraid to speak evil of Dignities.

3. So Jude, ver. 8. They Despise Dominion, and speak evil of Dignities.

Fourthly, Both the Apostles note their height of Pride and Presumption, in
Despising Persons of greatest Worth and Eminency, both in Church and State, i.
e. Dignities. They both set out their Pride and excessive Ambition by way of
Aggravation, telling us, That even the Angels of God, which are far more
Excellent Creatures in Wisdom and Power than Men; yet even they do not bring
Railing accusation against men, in any case; no, nor against the Devil: But
these (with an Emphasis) as Natural Brute Beasts, speak evil of the things they
Understand not; so that hereby is the sin of these Men Aggravated and
heightened, who do frequently in their Pride and Displeasure bring Railing
accusations against good Men, that Oppose their false Doctrines, as is already
particularly showed.

4. 2 Pet. 2.11. Angels which are greater in Power and Might, bring not Railing
accusation against them before the Lord.

4. So Jude, ver. 9. Michael, the Archangel, when contending with the Devil
about the Body of Moses, durst not bring against him a Railing accusation; but
said, The Lord Rebuke thee.

5. Both the Apostles Mark them out by this Character, 2 Pet. 2.17. These are
Wells without Water; Clouds carried about with a Tempest.

5. So Jude, ver. 12. Clouds they are without Water, carried about with Winds.

They are Wells and Clouds without water, shows and shadows without Substance,
Husks and Shells without Kernels, having some Form or show of Religion,
Godliness, and Christianity, but not the Power, the Life; no Real, or true
Grace or holiness; no water of Life from the pure Fountain of Life; they have
not the Spirit of Life, which in Believers is a Well of water springing up to
Eternal Life; but these are as Clouds without water, carried about with the
winds of Temptations, i.e. Secret impulses of seducing spirits, that hurry them
to and fro, of their Errands and Business; and then they Cry, it is from the
Light within.

6. A Sixth Character. Both the Apostles say, They are in the way of Balaam: 2
Pet. 2.15. They have forsaken the right way, and are gone astray, following the
way of Balaam.

6. So Jude, ver. 11. Woe unto them, for they have gone in the way of Cain, and
ran greedily after the Error of Balaam for Reward, and perished in the
gainsaying of Core.

The Apostle says, They have gone in the way of Cain; it is true, Cain slew his
Brother: Now, these Men, though they rise not against any with Material
Weapons, yet their hearts rise against their Opposers, as appears in that they
whet their Tongues like a Sword, and shoot out their Arrows, even bitter words,
like David's Enemies, Psalm. 64.4. In that sense they have gone in the way of
Cain, and ran greedily after the Error of Balaam: And as the Apostle Peter also
says, they are gone astray, following the way of Balaam.

Now, what was the way of Balaam, the Error of Balaam? Was it not chiefly, in
that he went so contrary to the known Will and Word of God; the Will and Mind
of God was plainly, and often made known unto him; that he should not go to
Curse the People of Israel, the Lords People: It was plainly and manifestly
made known and Revealed unto him, and yet he would go, contrary to the plain
revealed Will of God; which was the most Desperate Madness and Folly that could
possibly be: The Apostle calls it Madness, 2 Pet. 2.16. The dumb Ass speaking
with Man's Voice forbad the Madness of the Prophet.

Now, these Men, the Teachers among the Quakers, have gone in the way of
Balaam, and do still go and run greedily, earnestly after the Error of Balaam:
In that the Mind and will of God is plainly and fully Revealed, and made known
unto them in the Scriptures; and which has been often, very often Declared,
and proved by the clear Light of the Gospel, by many of his true and Faithful
Messengers and Ambassadors, sent of God, and Taught of God, and have the mind
of Christ, and have made it known unto them, and yet so Blind, so Ignorant, so
Desperately mad are they, as that they go on still in the way of Balaam, after
the Error of Balaam in this Desperate Madness and wickedness, as Balaam did in
his, Directly against the plain and clear word of God Revealed in the
Scriptures; as has been fully proved in many particulars, by many that have
pleaded against them, and manifested their Errors: And it may well be supposed
also, that many of them run greedily after the Error of Balaam for Reward, or
Advantage, being Tradesmen, and great dealers in worldly affairs, they may have
Respect to the Recompense of Reward or Profit (in a quite contrary sense to
Moses's choice) in Trading one with another, and making Advantages that way;
for I am sure they have no true Spiritual inducements to go on in that way; but
all are to turn them out of this way of Balaam: But they blindly go on, or are
drawn, or driven, or carried as Clouds in a Storm or Tempest, as the Apostle
says.

The Apostle goes on further, and says, They shall perish in the gainsaying of
Core; for as Core, and his Company with him perished for Opposing, and
Despising Moses and the People of the Lord with him, and setting up themselves
against them (and in Opposing them, they di Oppose and Despise the Lord, in and
among them) even so do these People now, they set up themselves proudly, in
Opposition to all the Lords precious People in every place, and call themselves
the only holy people of the Lord upon the Earth; and herein they go beyond,
and above Core and his Company; for they did not deny but that Moses and others
were holy, but they took too much upon them: Core and his Company would be
Respected also, seeing all the Lords people were holy every one of them, and so
they Murmured, and chid with Moses and Aaron, and said Proudly and Stubbornly,
they would not come up, when Moses called them; they were very Obstinate, but
yet gave no such Language, neither fell upon them with Railing Accusations, as
these Men do against the Societies and Congregations of the Lords People: But
Observe the Issue of all this; the Text says, they Perished: Core and his
Company Perished for their Pride, Gain-sayings, and Resistance; and what can
these Men expect, but sooner or later, though not suddenly, or in that manner
as they? Yet has not our Lord said, That it were better for any that a
Millstone were hanged about their neck, and they cast with it into the Sea,
than that they should Offend one of his Little Ones that believe in him, Mat.
18.6. What Punishment then must be for him, or those who Offend so many
thousands of the Lords little Ones, and Peculiar ones, dear unto him as the
Apple of his Eye? Who can tell how sore a Punishment such shall be thought
worthy of, when the Lord comes with Vengeance against his implacable hardened
Enemies?

7. Seventhly, Both the Apostles Mark them out for Punishments when their sin
is come to its full measure and height; and do assure us, That as God has
Punished and Destroyed other great sinners in former Days, so he will do to
these also.

7. 2 Pet. 2.4. If God spared not the Angels that sinned, but cast them down to
hell.

And ver. 5. Spared not the old world, but destroyed it.

And ver. 6. And turned the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah into ashes, making
them Examples unto those that after should live ungodly. So these false
Teachers.

2 Pet. 2.1. They shall bring upon themselves, swift destruction. Their
Judgment lingreth not, and their damnation slumbreth not, ver. 3.

So also Jude notes their Punishment as others have been.

7. Ver. 5. He destroyed the people of Israel that believed not, and Verse. 6.
The Angels that kept not their first estate, but left their own habitation, he
has reserved in everlasting chains, under darkness, unto the Judgment of the
great day. Ver. 7. Even as Sodom and Gomorrah, and the Cities about them, etc.
are set forth for an Example suffering the vengeance of eternal fire. Woe unto
them, etc. ver. 11.

The Apostles both having instanced in these former great examples of God's
wrath upon great sinners, would have us to know and be assured, that as these
mentioned were punished, so also shall these false Prophets and Teachers, that
are marked out with these Characters, as they have both of them mentioned; for
they both intend, and set out the same men, as we see both agree, and mention
the same Characters or Letters, which being set together, a discerning eye will
read, and understand who they are when they appear in the world in these latter
days.

And as a further Assurance of their downfall and punishment, Enochs Prophecy
of these ungodly sinners.
besides what these two Apostles have told us; Enoch also the seventh from Adam
Prophesied of these, saying, Jude ver. 14. Behold the Lord comes with
thousands of his Saints, to execute Judgment upon all, and to convince all that
are ungodly among them, of all their ungodly deeds which they have ungodlily
committed, and of all their hard speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken
against him.

We see here these ungodly men shall be called to an Account for all their
ungodly deeds whatsoever: And in particular, for all their Erroneous and False
Doctrines, Books, Pamphlets, and Writings, which have proceeded from them,
wherein are so many hard speeches against Him, this great Him, even Jesus
Christ Himself; The Quakers have spoken Hard speeches against Christ.
who will shortly come to judge the world in righteousness. These men the false
Teachers among the Quakers, have spoken many hard speeches against him
immediately, and directly; and also against him mediately; that is, against his
Members, his People, for inasmuch as they did so against any of his Brethren,
they did it unto Him; But O how many hard speeches, blasphemous speeches have
these ungodly sinners spoken against him immediately, and directly, in denying,
and dis-owning of him, in his Person, in his Natures, in his Offices, in his
Precious Death, Blood, and Sufferings, in his All-sufficient Righteousness,
Satisfaction, and Justification, wrought for all believers; speaking slightly
of him, as a Christ afar off, and at a distance, despising those that speak of
a Personal Christ in Heaven; Owning no Christ but what they have within; and
that is nothing but a blind, natural, defiled Conscience; which it seems can
suffer them to blaspheme Christ now in Heaven, in glory, making intercession
for all believers.

Of many of these horrid, unheard of Blasphemies against Christ, see Edw.
Burrough's Works in Folio page 33. 34. etc.

Also Will. Penn, Sandy Foundation, page 29, 30. etc.

These many hard, and blasphemous speeches spoken directly against our precious
Lord Jesus Christ, he will shortly come to call them to an account for, and
punish them accordingly: Yea, and for all the hard speeches spoken also against
his people, who are dear unto him; it had been better for these men that a
Millstone had been tied about their necks, and that they had been cast into the
Sea, than to have offended them, and spoken so hardly and falsely of them, as
they have done. They make no difference among Professors; they separate not the
precious from the vile.

These things are fully and at large set forth in three Dialogues between a
Christian and a Quaker. By Tho. Hicks.

And further yet, he brands them with another plain, The Quakers separation
from Christ and his People proves they are no Christians.
and notorious Mark, or Character, which is conspicuous to every eye, that by
this Plain Character joined to all the rest, so visible also, these being
joined and set altogether, we may spell their Names and their Natures so
plainly, that we cannot mistake the men: for although there are other false
Prophets and Teachers in the world besides yet they are of another sort; we
must spell their Names, and know them by other Marks, Letters, and Characters.

Now, this Character which yet follows in this Epistle of Jude, is in the 19.
verse: These are they who separate themselves; sensual, having not the Spirit:
Now, let it be well considered who they are that separate, and from whom they
separate: There is a Separation indeed, that is not only good and Lawful, but
also a Duty: There is a Command for it; but what is that Separation? We see it
plainly, 2 Cor. 6.14, 15, 16, 17. Believers that were Converted by the Ministry
of the Gospel, were Commanded to come out from among the Heathenish Idolaters,
and not to be partakers with them any longer in their Heathenish, Idolatrous
Worship, in Worshipping Idols, Wood and Stone, the works of Men's Hands: But
what is that Separation to this Separation? This separation the Apostle takes
Notice of, as a very gross sin; and we see it is one of the Letters, or
Characters of these Men of whom they speak, the false Teachers; who being
guilty of all those great and gross sins, which these two Apostles ( Peter and
Jude) had newly mentioned; he now adds to them all another plain, broad,
conspicuous brand, and sets it on with an Emphasis, These are they that
Separate themselves; sensual, having not the Spirit.

As if the Apostle had said in more words, The false Prophets that I have been
now speaking of, and the many that follow their pernicious ways, ver. 2. These
are they, these are the People who separate themselves; and from whom shall
they separate? Even from the People of the Lord, the Churches, Congregations,
and Assemblies of the Saints.

Now, do not these Men so? Do not the Quakers separate themselves from all the
Saints, from all the particular Churches and Assemblies of the Lords People, in
all the Land, as if they were Heathens and Idolaters; and speak evil of them,
and Reproach them with many bitter words and slanders.

Witness James Jackson, (Author of the strong Man Armed cast out) in his
Separation from the Churches of the Independents, who Reproaches the Pastors,
and brings Railing Accusations against them, and many other of the precious
Saints, even as the Apostles, Peter and Jude, do Declare as one of the
Characters of these People, as has been showed: And yet he glories in this his
Separation, and Accounts it (as we see) as one special mark of his Conversion,
that he is turned from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan (that
strong Man Armed being now cast out) he is come to God, and to his People, who
(as he tells us,) are the most Holy, Innocent People upon the Earth: And this
his Conversion he ascribes to the Light within, which Light (as he also says)
has Converted Thousands in like manner unto God; (yea, as he himself is
Converted;) And counts it a Mavelous thing that those who think themselves
Christians, should not Acknowledge this Light within to be Christ, the true
Light, that has done such mavelous things for him, and many others: But that
they should call it Natural Light, or the Devil; he accounts this Blasphemy.

But now, if we do but Examine this his and others Separation according to the
Scriptures, and look upon it in the true Light indeed, we shall see and find,
that it is so far from being a Mark, or Sign of their true Conversion (as he
and they account it) that it is indeed a Mark and Evidence of their Carnal,
Dark, Unregenerate state: And so the Apostle Jude Accounts it to be; and a Note
or Character of the Ungodly Men, the false Teachers, which he had been speaking
of, throughout his whole Epistle; And sets it on as a plain Mark for all People
to see and take Notice of; These are they that Separate themselves, Jude 19.
Yea, and the Apostle John joins his Testimony with him, to the same purpose, 1
John 2.18, 19. The Apostle here speaks of some in his time, that were like
these very Men in our time; As we see, Little Children, it is the last time:
And as ye have heard that Antichrist shall come, even now are there many
Antichrists, whereby we know that it is the last time. And he makes their
Separation (as we see) a Character of their wickedness, ver. 19. They went out
from us, because they were not of us; for if they had been of us, they would no
doubt have continued with us; but they went out that they might be made
manifest that they were not all of us.

We see here what separation from the People of the Lord, and their Assemblies
is Accounted, by this Apostle also, he tells us plainly, it is a Mark or
Character of wicked Men; That such as so separate are none of the Number of
Gods People, they went out, or separated from us, because they were not of us;
they were none of Christ's Members, no Believers, as we are; they were not of
us: For (says he) if they had been of us, if they had been of the same Body
with us, whereof Christ is the Head, then no doubt they would have continued
with us, and not have separated from us; but it is so, they went out from us,
they forsook us, and separated from us, that it might be made manifest, that
such were not of us, that such were not joined to Christ, as we are.

So then, what grounds of boasting this James Jackson, or any other of his
Principles and Practice, have in their separations from the true Churches of
Christ, (and join with a deluded, Ignorant People that Fansy themselves the
only People of the Lord, as being Converted by the Light within) we leave to
those who are Taught of God to Consider and Judge.

Alas, Poor, Ignorant, A Lying Spirit is gone forth amongst the Quakers, which
Seduceth them.
Deluded Men! They Understand not, That a false, and Lying Spirit (or many) is
gone forth among them, and has Deceived them. If there were but this one Mark
or Character, (though there are many more mentioned) yet it were enough of it
self to Discover them, that they are led by a Lying, Seducing spirit, which
has persuaded them: That is, Their Disowning, and Reproaching so many
Thousands of the Lord's People; Ministers and Ambassadors sent of God, Pastors
of particular Churches and Congregations; all Professing People in the Land,
yea, in the World, without exception of any.

And although many that are called Ministers in the Land, and many Professors
are grossly guilty of sin, and deny Christ in their Works and Doings, which is
to be Lamented; Must therefore all the Saints and true Members of Christ be
Disowned, and Denied also, whereof there are many thousands? If these Men had
the Spirit of God, and were enlightened, and led by him, they would make a
Difference, and separate the precious from the vile; but they do not
Distinguish between the Righteous and the Wicked, but Condemn them together,
and so are Abomination to the Lord: So that thereby it is plainly seen, that
they are not of God; that they are not as his Mouth to the People (as they
pretend) Jer. 9. It is the Seducing Spirit, we may be sure, that does belly, and
Reproach the Lord's People, and his Works and Operations in them. By this, and
other Characters aforementioned, we may be as sure who the Men are, as if
their Proper Names (whereby the World knows them from other Men) were Recorded
in Scripture. For as the Lords People may certainly know that their Names are
in the Scriptures, and are Written in Heaven, in the Book of Life (Gods Eternal
Decree, and Secret Counsel) by Seeing and Reading their Natures, Properties
and Qualifications in the Scriptures, to which Eternal Life is promised: I say,
they may know thereby that they themselves are the Persons, as certainly as if
their Proper Names were there Recorded, whereby they are known amongst Men: So
on the contrary, of Wicked and Ungodly Men, they are also known, in like
manner, by their Natures, Properties, and Qualifications.

We know who has said, Births of the Spirit, and of the Flesh.
That which is Born of the flesh, is flesh; and that which is Born of the
spirit, is spirit: We may know of what it is Born by the Birth that is brought
forth: Satan he broods upon the Carnal Spirits of wicked Men, and begets false
Notions, Opinions, and Principles, we may know they are of his begetting by
their Form and shape, when they are brought forth: Principles of Pride,
self-love, false Notions, and other Deformed shapes, when they are Conceived,
then after a while they are brought forth, they are born, they are Published
and Declared; in Discourse, Preaching, Writing, or Printing; the Births of Men's
minds, their Fleshly, Carnal Minds are brought forth into the World; and they
are so like their Father the Devil, that thereby they may be known who was the
Father of them.

So on the contrary, That which is Born of the spirit, is spirit; the spirit of
God dwells in his People, and he daily works, and moves in them, he Inspires
them with Truths, according to the Mind of God, which the Spiritual Mind
Conceives, and brings forth in Prayer, Preaching, Discourse, and Writings; and
these Conceptions are Born and brought forth into the World; to the View and
Knowledge of all: And that which is thus born of the spirit, is spirit, or
spiritual; it is Truth: According to the Mind of the spirit; for he that is
joined to the Lord, is one spirit; one with him, of his Mind: The Saints are
Unanimous, of the same Mind with God, as Wicked and Unregenerate Men are
unanimous with the Devil; they are of his Mind, and he of theirs; for he Rules
in the Children of Disobedience.

The Devil speaks against Christ, and so do they; though they will own him in
Words, in Form, in Show, and Pretense, yet in Deed, in Works, really, they deny
him: The Devil will own the Scriptures in words, as he does Christ in words,
and say, Thou art the Holy one of God; so will those who are one spirit with
him, but will deny him really, and according to Truth.

The Devil will own the Scriptures, and Argue from them, to attain his ends,
but never to prove a Necessary Truth: So false Teachers are unanimous with him
in these things; for he that is joined to the Devil, is one Spirit, even as he
that is joined to the Lord, is one Spirit.

How great then is the sin of these Men, Spiritual sins are greater than
fleshly sins.
who Conceive in their Minds, and bring forth the Births of the Devil; as all
Doctrines of Devils are! Surely, These Spiritual sins are greater than fleshly
sins; as Drunkenness, Gluttony, Adultery, Murder, etc. (If Robbery, or Murder
of a Man be so great a sin, what is it to Rob God, and to Crucify, and be
guilty of the Blood of Christ.) Though for these, and such like, when Men will
not be reclaimed from them, God often gives them up to a Reprobate Mind, Romans
1. Even so he does also for these spiritual sins, false Opinions, Doctrines,
and Principles: Concerning Christ, his Natures, Righteousness, Merits, and the
things of God, when they will not be Instructed, but hate to be Reformed, and
change their Mind, when they will not hearken to the Truth, but still resist
it, disown it, contradict, and Blaspheme; when the Truths of the Gospel have
been often Offered, and tendered to them, yet they will not hear, nor regard,
but rather believe Lies, than the Truth, then God gives them up to strong
delusion, to believe Lies, and to hearken, and give heed to seducing spirits:
this is a very dreadful state indeed, they draw these spiritual Judgments upon
themselves by these spiritual sins.

The Quakers setting up this Idol, The Light within every Man and Woman, is a
greater sin in them, than for Jezebels false Prophets to set up Baal, and Pray
unto it, and trust in it, instead of the God of Israel. May it not (Ironically)
be said to them, as Elisha said to those false Prophets, Cry aloud, for he is a
god (as ye say) but he is but a Blind god, he has Eyes indeed, but he cannot
see; Ears, but he cannot hear; Hands and Feet, but he cannot move, to help, or
do any thing for those who Trust in him, without help from another.

If these Men will not be pleaded, nor persuaded out of their Vain, Ignorant,
sottish Opinion of the Light within every Man and Woman, being Christ; let Men
endeavor to Shame them out of it; for it has not so much as a show, or shadow
of Truth in it; but is plainly a most dreadful delusion of the Devil, and a
great Blasphemy against Christ.

This Opinion of theirs, The false Opinions of the Quakers spring from Pride
and Ignorance.
with other of their false Principles, springs from Pride and Ignorance: And
this the Apostle Observes concerning such Men, 1 Timothy 6.3, 4. If any Man teach
otherwise, and consent not to wholesome words, even the words of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and to the Doctrine which is according to Godliness. Ver. 4. He is
Proud, knowing nothing, but Doting about Questions, and strife of words,
whereof comes Envy, Strife, Railing, Evil surmisings. Ver. 5. Perverse
Disputings of Men of Corrupt Minds, and Destitute of the Truth, etc.

Such kind of men were also in the Apostle John's time, as we see Rev. 3.17.
They were Proud and Ignorant; They thought themselves Rich, and had need of
Nothing; whereas indeed they were poor and miserable, and blind and naked.

It is our duty to discover these kind of people, to try them, and to make them
manifest to the world as much as may be: for their false Opinions of God, of
Themselves, and of Others, is no less than Blasphemy, Rev. 2.9. I know the
blasphemy of them that say they are Jews, and are not, but are the Synagogue
of Satan, The Church of Ephesus is commended for this, That as they cannot
bear these false Teachers, so also to discover them, to try them, and make them
manifest to others, by Scripture Characters and Marks, by which they may be
known: Rev. 2.2. I know thy works, and thy labor, and thy patience, and how
thou can not bear them which are evil; And thou have tried them which say
they are Apostles, and are not, and have found them Liars.

The Apostle speaking of deceiving and deceived persons, The Quakers deceive,
weak and simple minds.
he tells us, they shall not long continue thus to deceive; for their folly
shall be made manifest to all men: 2 Timothy 3.8, 9. The Apostle by the Teachings,
and Inspirations of the Spirit of God, having in the former verses told us,
that in the last days perilous times shall come, That men shall be lovers of
themselves, proud, boasters, blasphemers, etc. in the next verse he shows us a
Token, and sets a Mark of distinction upon them: Of this sort (says he) are
they which creep into houses, and lead captive silly women, laden with sins,
led away with diverse lusts, ver. 7. ever learning and never able to come to the
knowledge of the Truth.

We see here, what sort of men are active to deceive; what they do privately,
creep into houses; and also the subjects they work upon; by their cunning
craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive (as the Apostle says) That is,
silly women, simple people, persons of weak understandings, and natural
faculties; of shallow capacities, easily led away, with diverse Lusts, and
Errors; such kind of weak and simple minds are easily deceived: They know not
how to distinguish between Truth and Errors; they are still Hearing and
Learning, but are never able to come to the knowledge of the Truth: at least
they are never able to come to the knowledge of some Truths, for some Truths
lie more deep than others. Some are more easy to be apprehended, than some
others: some Truths are hard to be understood, as the the Apostle observes;
which they that are unstable, pervert; yea, and they that are but weak, and
shallow of understanding, do also pervert, mistake, misapprehend, and misapply.

As for instance in this very thing; This Principle and Opinion of the Quakers,
concerning the Light within: We know how they apprehend it; Their Teachers, and
their hearers, they call it Christ: who lights every man and woman that
comes into the world; This Notion borders upon a Truth, and has some small
shaddowy resemblance of a Truth, but is not a Truth, as these weak people
apprehend it. For there is a light within which sees, and works, and moves
several ways, toward that which appears good, according as it apprehends it,
and against what it thinks to be evil; now this herein has some resemblance of
Christ; and his Spirit: and so weak minds, silly men, and women, may think it
to be so indeed; especially when they hear it positively, and plainly asserted,
affirmed, and contended for, by men who have gained their affections, by their
demure Countenances, modest behavior, and apparel, and many good words, and
fair speeches, with seeming zeal; they are thereby confirmed in this
persuasion, that surely it is Christ indeed.

But this persuasion comes not of him that calls us: Gal. 5.8. (as the
Apostle here says) but arises from weakness and ignorance; from the darkness
of the understanding, helped on, and strengthened by that deceiver of deceivers,
the seducing spirit; who is still ready, as to beget, so also to feed and
nourish false Opinions, in the minds of all; as God permits him.

Certain it is, Reason and Natural Conscience is a Light within, and discerns
many things, both good and evil; and acts toward, or against them,
accordingly; so far as it sees and discerns, according to the measure of Light
that is in the Conscience: This is clear from Romans 1. where the Apostle speaks
of the worst of men, who had this Light in them, and therefore were inexcusable
in going against it. This Light within, though it be not Christ, yet it was
created by Christ, as all things else were, but it cannot go beyond its bounds;
No more than Natural water can of it self, rise higher than the spring head,
the light within cannot see Christ, nor the way, and means of Salvation by him,
without the light of the Scriptures, and of the Spirit of God.

But the Quakers are strongly confirmed, That the Light within every man and
woman is Christ; let all men say what they will to the contrary: yet most
certain it is that this Opinion of theirs, was begotten by ignorance, and is
nourished and maintained by Pride: for they having asserted it, and so long
stood to it, in upholding it; they have not the humility to retract, and
acknowledge an Error, (though some may be secretly convinced that it is so)
for it is Natural to men to maintain, and stand to what they have once owned
and asserted; they are loath to stoop, and acknowledge ignorance, no not unto
God himself, much less to Men.

I am persuaded, There were never any Sect, or sort of People from the Creation
of the World to this day, that were more irrational, and less spiritual than
these People the Quakers are in all their Discourses, Principles, Books, and
Practices; nor greater Enemies to Christ, his Gospel, and his People. As the
Lord Lives, who has delivered me out of great Tribulations, and saved me from
the hand of the Enemy, I will contribute my utmost abilities to throw down the
Enemies of our Lord Jesus Christ, and these, and all Doctrines of Devils, and
Lies in Hypocrisy, and whatsoever else shall Oppose him, or his Interest in
the World.

Now, The Quakers shall not long continue to deceive.
this being manifest by all these Marks and Characters that have been
mentioned, That these Men, the false Teachers among the Quakers, are the false
Teachers spoken of in the Scriptures, that should come in these last days: The
Apostle also tells us, that they shall not long continue to deceive, they shall
be of no long standing, for their Folly shall be made manifest unto all men, 2 Timothy 3.9.

The Apostle here compares them to Jannes and Jambres, two of Pharaoh's
Magicians (whose Names are to be seen in some Ancient Authors) who withstood
Moses in his time; so do these resist the Truth, Men of Corrupt minds,
Reprobate concerning the Faith.

These Teachers (Men of Corrupt minds) resist the Truth, a most dreadful sign
of Reprobation; though the Truths of the Gospel are brought, and plainly laid
before them, to turn them from the Error of their way, in their false
unchristian Principles and Practices, yet they resist the Truth, they disown
it, and reject it, and they that Offer it to them; and that with many reviling
hard speeches against them for so doing: Like Swine they trample Pearls under
their Feet, and turn again and rent you: Being Men of Corrupt minds, and
Reprobate concerning the Faith; their minds are Corrupt, Carnal, Filthy,
Defiled with false Notions, Erroneous Opinions, and Conceptions of things,
according to their dark, carnal apprehensions, mixed also with Satan's false
glosses, and deceitful appearances in their minds; and so they become Reprobate
concerning the Faith: That is, without Judgment, or any true Understanding in
Matters of Faith, according as the Scriptures have revealed them.

But it follows, ver. 9. They shall proceed no further, for their folly shall
be made manifest unto all men, as theirs also was. After they have done their
work, and filled up the measure of their Iniquity, and fulfilled the
Scriptures, what was foretold of them; then they shall be Discovered and made
manifest, and that to all men, even to their own party also (as well as to
others) who have been long deceived and seduced by them: they shall then fall
off from them by degrees, and leave them, and forsake their meetings. They
shall be known to be deceitful workers, their folly shall be made manifest, as
theirs also was, that is as the folly of Jannes and Jambres, the Sorcerers or
Magicians which deceived the People for a while with false shows and
appearances of things which were not so in Reality and Truth; afterward they
were discovered to be but a Cheat, and deceitful workings.

So these men with all their Counterfeit Coin and Deceitful Wares, which they
expose and offer to People in the dark, and which they will not (by their good
will) bring unto the Light of the Scriptures, which would make things manifest
unto all; yet they shall in due time be brought to the Light; their folly shall
be made manifest unto all.

And is not this Scripture in a great measure fulfilled already, even at this
day? The Men, these false Teachers, their Opinions, Principles, and Practices
have been of late time, more than ever before, laid open, and their Folly, and
gross Ignorance, and Errors made manifest unto all, and so will be still more
and more.

See three Dialogues between a Christian and a Quaker, by Tho. Hicks, where
they are made Naked before all Men to their shame. God has (of late time more
especially) stirred up the Spirits of some of his People, to search into, and
Examine their Opinions and Doctrines, and to try them by the Scriptures, spoken
by God himself; and they find that these Men have spoken contrary to what God
has spoken: The Doctrine of these false Teachers is contrary to the Doctrine
of Christ made known to us in the Gospel, they are detected, discovered, and
made manifest to all, except some of their own Party, (Friends as they call
them) who it is like are so Charmed by them, as that they will not hear, nor
hearken to any thing that is said against them or their Principles, though
spoken according to truth: Nay, they will not hear God himself speak, for they
Neglect and Despise the Scriptures, and prefer their own simple Pamphlets
before them.

Now, Good Council to the Quakers.
seeing these things are so, I shall in sincere Love and Pity to the Souls of
these People, the Quakers, give them my Advice and Council according to Truth,
whether they will hear it, or whether they will reject it; I am persuaded there
are some amongst them who have true and real intentions and desires after the
truth, to hear it, and to do it; and therefore there is some hopes of such,
that if they would give themselves to search the Scriptures, concerning the
Principles of their Teachers, and be earnest with God to give them his Spirit
to Open their Understandings, they might clearly see the gross Folly and Errors
of these Men; and that they would read other men's Books (wherein they are
concerned) as well as their Friends Books: thereby also their Light within
would be the clearer: But whilst they Neglect or Decline the means of
knowledge, no marvel though they remain Ignorant, and are seduced.

My Advice and Council is further, Leave the Quakers Meetings.
That you would leave the Assemblies of these Men, separate your selves from
their Congregations and Meetings: Now is separation seasonable, according to
the Scriptures, separate from them, because they have separated from Christ,
and from his Church and People; they are gone from the truth, and are turned
unto Fables; and they give heed unto seducing spirits, and Doctrines of Devils,
speaking lies in Hypocrisy, having their Consciences seared with an hot Iron;
so that they will not hear, nor hearken to the Truth as it is in Jesus.

They slight and despise the Scriptures, and therefore what Light is in them,
what Wisdom is in them? Nothing but Darkness and Ignorance, improved also by
subtle seducing spirits, which (except they speedily Repent) will draw them
down into the Bottomless Pit.

And next I advise you, Come to the Assemblies of the Saints.
Come and join your selves to the Lord, and to his People; come into their
Assemblies, Societies, and Congregations; there ye shall hear Christ truly
Preached, and set forth according to the Gospel, whereby your minds may be
enlightened to see the Beauty of Christ indeed, with all his Benefits and
Privileges purchased for his People; and this may make you fall in Love with
him, and to choose him for your Lord and Husband. O take heed of forsaking, or
Neglecting the Assemblies of the People of the Lord, as the manner of some is;
it is a very Dangerous thing. See the Consequences of it, which the Apostle
tells us of in the 10. of the Hebrews, it is a Sign, or forerunner of that
great sin, the sin against the Holy Ghost, as it is there set forth. Come then
to the Assemblies of the Saints, for the Lord is among them, and in them, and
Communicates himself unto them; he reveals his Mind, his Secrets to them that
fear him. Ye are now in a dry and barren Wilderness, where there is no Water,
no Water of Life, your Souls will be lean, and starved for want of Food, for
want of the Bread and Water of Life, unless ye come unto him, that ye may have
Life; your teachers themselves want this, having forsaken the Fountain of
Living Waters, and run to broken Cisterns, which hold not a drop of Water. The
Light within is but Darkness to the true Light Jesus Christ. Your Teachers
themselves want water, being Wells without water, and Clouds without water,
carried about with winds. Therefore come to the Fountain of Living waters, to
the Fountain of Gardens, that waters all the Gardens, all his Churches, and
every particular soul; and their souls are as watered Gardens, and as springs of
water, whose waters fail not: For there is in them a Well of water, springing
up unto Eternal Life. Come then, and be partakers of these Privileges; be one
with Christ, and with his People; and ye shall be enlightened by Christ the true
Light indeed, and Life indeed, who will guide you, and lead you into Green
Pastures by the Rivers of waters; who will feed you with the Bread and Water of
Life, unto Eternal Life.

FINIS.
THere are lately Published Three Dialogues Between a Christian and a Quaker,
wherein are faithfully Represented some of the Chief and most Concerning
Opinions of the Quakers; together with their Method and Manner of Reasoning in
the Defense thereof. Also the Quakers Appeal Answered. All Written by Tho.
Hicks. Sold by Peter Parker at the Leg and Star in Cornhil, against the Royal
Exchange.


