AN Authentical Account OF THE FORMALITIES, AND Judicial Proceedings, Upon
ARRAIGNING, at WESTMINSTER, A Peer of the Realm Before A Lord High-Steward,

Funesta Securis, Regni Securitas. London, Printed for Y. H.

THE FORMALITIES, AND Judicial Proceedings, Upon Arraigning a Peer for Treason,
etc.
AS the Royal Power and Sovereignty of the King of England is a repleat
compacted Body, and impartible; even so the Attributes thereof are (as Jurists
speak) so indivisible in themselves, so naturally and intrinsecally inherent in
the Crown, that they cannot be made away, or in such manner communicated to the
Subject, as to divest himself of them, to the lessening Sovereign Majesty; yet
by Trust, and Delegate Power, the Executive Part may be transferred to others,
to ease him of a trouble some Burden.

Now among those several Ministers, or Officers of Law, that are by His Most
Excellent Majesty substituted to ease him of Labor, (but not to deprive him of
Power) the Lord High-Steward of England is one of the first Magnitude; the
Nature of whose Office will the better be understood, by insisting upon, (in my
way to a more direct Application to the substance of the Title, and Design in
hand) the Heads or Particulars following, viz 1. The Etymology of the words, (
Steward and Seneschallns.) 2. His Lordships Style, and the Antiquity of his
Office, 3. How this great Office was formerly holden, and how at this time? 4.
The Extent of his Jurisdiction and Power, and the Rules he ought to judge by.


For the derivation of the words Steward and Seneschallus, Cok. Litt. 61. a.
some say the first is derived of Stewe, i. e. a Place, and Ward which
signifies a Keeper Warden, or Governor.

Others say that it comes from Steda a Saxou word, which signifies a place
also, Lib. 9. Le Counter de Salop 's 48. b.
and Ward, as it were the Keeper or Governor of that place: it is a word
diversely used in this Kingdom; In the first acception, it is taken for the Lord
High-Steward, out of which Magistracy, lower Officers have their rise; Senechal
de l' Hostel de Roy, the Steward of the Kings most Honorable Household, Anno
24. H. 8. c. 13. whose Title was changed to that of Great Master, Plomd. Com.
f. 152
Anno 32 H. 8. c. 39. but this Stat. was repealed by that of 1 Mar. 2 Parl. c.
4. and the Office of the Lord Steward revived.

There is also a Steward of the Marshalsea, Anno 33 H. 8. c. 12. and likewise a
Steward of a Manor, whom Fleta fully describes. Lib. 2. c. 71.
To be short, this Word is of so great diversity, that there is no Corporation
of any Account, or House of any Honor, through the Realm, but it shall have an
Officer belonging to it of this Name.

But I proceed to the Word Seneschallus. Minshaeus.


Seneschal is a French Word, the Italians call it Seniscalco, dict. a Schalk,
i. e. Servus aut Officialis and gesind, i. e. familia; but here it is taken for
the High-Steward of England.

Some derive it of Scin, a House or Place, and Schale an Officer; others say
Sen is an ancient word for Justice, so that most naturally it signifies
Officiarius Justitia, and this agrees well with his Authority and Duty, to
proceed secundum Leges and consu^tudinis Angliae.

In the next place, I am to consider his Lordships Style, which in Latin is
Seneschallus Angliae, and his Court is Entitled, Placita Coronae coram
Seneschallo Angliae; and when he sits by force of his Office, he sits
under a Cloth of Estate, and such as direct themselves to him, say, Co. 4.
Inst. 59.
Please your Grace, my Lod High-Steward of England.

As to the Antiquity of the Office, it is very ancient, and was before the
Conquest: For Sir Ed. Coke tells us, that he himself has read an Authentical
Manuscript, entitled, Authoritas Seneschalli Anglia; which putting an Example
of his Authority, says, Sicut accidit Godwino, Comiti Kanciae, tempore Regis
Edwardi, Antecessoris Willielmi Ducis Normandiae, pro hujusmodi male gestis,
and consiliis suis, per Seneschallum Angliae adjudicatus, and fortis fecit
Comitivam suam. In the time of William the Conqueror, William Fitz-Eustace was
Steward of England.

Next come we to consider, how this Great Office was formerly holden, and how
at this time.

This Magistracy was formerly of Inheritance, and belonged to the Earldome of
Leicester, as appears by a Record produced by Sir Ed. Coke; Seneschalcia
Angliae pertinet ad Comitivam de Leicester, and pertinuit ab antiquo.

Other Records testify, that it belonged to the Barony of Hinckley; and my
Lord Coke tells us; that in the Reign of William Rufus, and H. 1. Hagh Grant
semenel, Baron of Hinckley, held that Barony by the said Office; so that there
seems a diversity between these Records; but we shall reconcile it thus:
Hinckley was parcel of the Possessions of the E. of Leicester; for Robert
Bellamont, E. of Leicester, in the Reign of H. 2. married with Petronil,
Daughter and Heir of the said Hugh Grantsemenel, Baron of Hinckley, and Lord
Steward of England; and so it continued, till by the forfeiture of Simon
Montford it came to King H. 3. who in the fiftieth year of his Reign created
Edmond his second Son Earl of Leicester, Baron of Hinckley, and High-Steward of
England; which continued in his Line, until Henry of Bullingbrook, Son and Heir
of John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, who was the last that had any Estate of
Inheritance in the Office of the Steward of England.

Since the time of H. of Bullingbrook, this great Office was never granted to
any Subject, but only hac Vice: and the reason was, for that the Power of this
Officer is so transcendent, that it was not holden fit to be in any Subjects
hands: For a Record says, Et sciendum est quod ej us Officium est supervidere
and regnare sub Rege, and immediate post Regem totum Regnum Angliae, and omnes
Ministros Legum infra idem Regnum, temporibus pacis and guerrarum, etc. and
proceeds particularly with diverse high Powers and Authorities.

It is a Place of that Transcendency and Height, Ephori (...) Magistratus
quidam Lacedemoniorum oppositi Regibus, qui inspiciebant ea quae ad Rempub.
pertinebant.
that it might in some sort march the Epheri among the Lacedaemonians: The
custom of our Commonwealth has upon great consideration and policy brought it
to pass, that this Officer is of no great duration, but only for the dispatch
of some special business, as the Arraignment of some Nobleman, in case of
Treason, etc. which once ended, his Commission expireth: so that we may
describe him thus; Magistratus est Excelsus, qui pro uno die, a Rege ordinatur,
cum-aliquis ex Proceribus Regni uno die, a Rege ordinatur, cum-aliquis ex
Proceribus Regni in Judicium vocatur de noxa Capitali.

Now we are to take a Prospect of the Extent of his Lordships Jurisdiction and
Power, and the Rules he ought to judge by.

Although the Power and Authority of the Lord High-Steward has been since the
Reign of King H. 4. but hac vice, yet is the hac Vice limited and appointed; as
when a lord of Parliament is Indicted of Treason or Felony, then the Grant of
this Office under the Great Seal of England, is to a Lord of Parliament,
reciting the Indictment: Nos considerantes quod Justitia est virtus Excellens,
and Altissimo complacens, eaque prae omnibus uti volentes, ac pro eo quod
Officium Seneschalli Angliae, cujus praesentia pro administratione Justitiae,
and Executione ejusdem in hac part faciend. Requiritur, ut accepimus jam
valeat: de fidelitate Strenuitate, provida Circumspectione and Industria
Vestris plurimum confidentes, Odinavimus and Constituimus Vos ex hac causa and
causis Seneschallum Nostrum Angliae ad Officium illud cum omnibus eidem Officio
in hac part debitis and pertinentibus hac vice gerend. accipiend. and
exercend. Dantes and concedentes vobis te nore praesentium plenam and
sufficientem Potestatem and Authoritatem ac Mandatum speciale Indictamentum
praedict. etc. So that this Great Officer is wholly restrained to proceed only
upon the recited Indictment.

At every Coronation he has a Commission under the Great Seal, hac Vice, Cok's
Litt. 79. a. b. 4 Inst. 59.
to hear and determine the Claims for Grand Serjeanties, and other Honorable
Services, to be done at the Coronation, for the solemnizing thereof; for which
purpose he holds his Court some convenient time before the Coronation.

The first Person that was created hac Vice for solemnizing the Coronation of
H. 4. was Thomas his second Son; and upon th eArraignment of Thomas Holland,
Earl of Huntingdon: the first that was created Steward of England, hac Vice,
was Edward Earl of Devon.

Lastly, The Order and manner of Arraigning a Peer of the Realm before this
Creat Officer is to be considered.

As the Peers of the Realm, who are Tryers, are not sworn, so the Lord
High-Steward, being Judge, is not sworn likewise; yet ought he to proceed
according to his Letters Patent, Secundum Legem and consuetuainem Angliae; Co.
Litt. 142. a. 4 Inst. f. 60.
for all Commissions and Charters for Execution of Justice, are facturi quod ad
Justitiam pertinet, secundum Legem and consuctudinem Angliae.

But admit the Commission should be, Secundum sanas Discretiones vestras: How
then?

I answer, Discretio est discernere per Legem quid sit Justum; that is, to
discern by the right Line or Law, and not the warpt measure of private Opinion:
Si a Jure discedas, vagus eris, and erunt omnia incerta: It Is certain he that
out-runs the Law, hastens to his own destruction. Commissions then that
Authorize proceeding secundum sanas discretiones, etc. in sense are secundum
Legem, etc.

The Earl of Hantingdon was Indicted of High Treason in London, 1 H. 4. f. 1. a.
by a Commission before the Mayor and Justices; for that he, with other
persons, agreed to go a Mumming (which the French call Ma querade) on the Night
of Epiphany, in which they intended to kill the King, then at Windser: And
after the King granted a Commission to the Earl of Derby, reciting, That
whereas George, E of H. was Indicted of High Treason, and that he would that
right should be done; and because the Office of the Steward of England is now
void, he grants it to the said E. of Derby, to do Justice to the said E. of
Huntingdon, commanding by the same Commission all the Lords to be attendant
upon him; and Precept was likewise given by the same to the Constable of the
Tower, to be attendant on him, and to bring the Prisoner (viz.) the E. of H.
before the said E. of D. on the day appointed: whereupon the E. of D. the same
day sat in Westminster Hall under a Cloth of Estate by himself, and the E. of
Westmerland, and other Earls and Barons, sat at a considerable distance, and
all the Justices and Barons of the Exchequer sat round a Table, and after three
O Yes's made, and the Commission read, the Justices delivered the Indictment to
the Lord Steward, which was delivered to the Clerk of the Crown, who read it to
the said E. of H. which he confessed; whereupon Hill the King's Sergeant prayed
Judgment, which the Lord Steward (after he had rehearsed the whole matter)
pronounced in this manner; That the E. of H. should be taken back to the Tower
of London, and from thence be drawn to the Gallows, and there hanged; and being
yet alive, cut down, and his Entrails drawn out of his body, and burnt; and
that he should be beheaded, and quartered, Et sic Deus propitiatur Animae suae.

The Justices then said, that if the E. of H. had denied the Treason, the Lord
Steward should have demanded of every Lord in open Court, what they thought in
their Consciences, beginning with the Pulisny Lord; and if the greater number
said Guilty, then the Judgment to be given as above.

I refer your Lordships to Cambden's Annals of Q. Eliz. for the manner of the
Trial of Tho. Howard, Duke of Norfolk, before George Talbot, E. of Shrewsbury,
Lord High-Steward upon that occasion.

Sir Ed. Coke describes the manner how a Peer is to be tried, in case of
Treason, etc. before the Lord High-Seward of England.

He Must be Indicted before Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer, or in the
King's Bench, if the Treason or misprision, Felony or misprision of Felony, be
committed in that County where the King's- Bench sit; when he is Indicted, then
the King, by his Commission under the Great Seal of England, constitutes some
Peer of the Realm to be, hac Vice, Steward of England, who is Judge in this
case. The Commission recites the Judgment generally as it is found, and Power
given to the Lord Steward to receive the Indictment, etc. and to proceed
secundum Legem and consuetudinem Angliae. A Commandment is also given by the
same to the Peers of the Realm to be attendant and obedient unto him; as also
to the Lieutenant of the Tower, to bring the Prisoner before his Lordship.

Then a Certiorari is awarded out of Chancery, to remove the Indictment it self
before the Lord Steward; which may either bear date the same day of the
Stewards Commission, or any day after. The Lord Steward directs his Precept
under his Seal to the Commissioners, to certify the Indictment such a day and
place. He also makes two other Precepts, one to the Constable or Lieutenant of
the Tower, to bring the Body of the Prisoner before him, at such a day and
place; as also to a Sergeant at Arms to summon, Tot and tales Dominos, Magnates
and Proceres hujus Regni Angliae praedicti R. Comitis E. Pares, per quos rei
veritas melius sciri poterit, quod ipsi personaliter compare ant coram
praedict. Seneschallo apud Westminster. tali die and hora ad faciend. ea quae ex
part Domini Regis forent facienda, etc.

In this Summons four things are observable.

1. That all these Precepts, most commonly, bear date in one day. 2. That no
number of Peers are named in the Precept, and yet there must be twelve, or
above. 3. That the Precept is awarded for the return of the Peers, before any
Arraignment or Plea pleaded by the Prisoner. 4. that the Lords are not de
Vicineto; and therefore the sitting and Trial may be in any County of England.
At the day, the Lord High-Steward, with six Sergeants at Arms before him,
takes his place under a Cloth of Estate, and then the Clerk of the Crown
delivers to him his Commission, who re-delivers it. After three O Yes's by a
Sergeant at Arms, and Commandment given in the Name of the Lord High-Steward of
England to keep silence, the Commission is read; then the Usher delivers to the
Steward a white Rod, who re-delivers the same, which he holds before the Lord
High-Steward. It was delivered, upon the like occasion, to the Earl of Shrews
bury, by Garter King at Arms.

O Yes being again made, Commandment is given in the Name of the H. Steward to
all Justices and Commissioners, to certify all Indictments and Records; which
being delivered into Court, the Clerk of the Crown reads the Return, and the
Sergeant at Arms is commanded to return his Precept, with the names of the E.
and Barons by him summoned, and the Return of that is also read; then are the
Peers summoned to answer to their Names, which are recorded.

When they have taken their places, and the Prisoner set to the Bar, then the
Lord High-Steward delcares unto them the cause of their Assembly, and persuades
the Prisoner to Answer without fear, assuring him, that he shall be heard with
patience, and that Justice shall be done to him.

After this, the Clerk of the Crown reads the Indictment, and proceeds to the
Arraignment of the Prisoner; and if he plead Not Guilty, the Entry is, Et de
hoc de bono and malo ponit se super Pares suos, etc. After which the Lord
High-Steward gives a Charge to the Peers, exhorting them to try the Prisoner
indifferently, according to their Evidence, which is opened by the King's
Learned Counsel, who produce their Proofs for the King against the Prisoner.
So, or all of the Judges, are ever attendant upon the Lord High-Seward, and
take their places at the feet of the Peers.

After the Evidence is given for the King, and the Prisoners Defense made, he
is withdrawn from the Bar, under the custody of the Lieutenant, whilst the
Tryers go to some place to consider of their Evidence; upon debate of which, if
they doubt of any matter, they cannot send to the High-Steward to ask the
Judges any Questions of Law, but in the hearing of the Prisoner, that he may
know whether the case be rightly put, for de facto jus Oritur; neither can they
send for the Judges to know their Opinion, but the H. Steward ought to demand
it in Court, in the presence of the Prisoner.

When the Lords are agreed, they return into Court, and the Lord H. S.
publicly in open Court, beginning with the Puisny Lod, says unto him, My Lord
A. is W. v. S. guilty of the Treasons whereof he has been iNdicted and
Arraigned, or any of them? And the Lord standing up says, Guilty, or Not
Guilty; and so upward of the rest serialim.

The Peers having given their Verdict in the absence of the Prisoner, the
Prisoner is brought to the Bar, whom the Lord High-Steward acquaints with the
Verdict of his Peers, and gives Judgment accordingly, either of Condemnation,
or Acquittal.

After the Service is performed, and O Yes made for dissolving the Commission,
the white Rod is taken by the Lord High-Steward in both his hands, and broken
in pieces.

Thus have I presented to your Lordships a Scheme of that solemn order and
manner, how a Peer of the Realm is Arraigned before the Lord High Steward of
England. I might amass several Presidents of like nature, wherein the Axe of
Death is born before the Prisoner, with the Edge from him; and after being
found Guilty, with the Edge to him. I wish your Lordships may never know more
of this Point by a fatal experience.

Now it remains that I give Solutions to those Queries your Lordships were
pleased to put concerning Trials, Treasons, etc. by which I wish you may arrive
at some reasonable satisfaction.

QUERY I.

How Ancient this Trial by Peers may be?

SOL.

Without doubt it is Coetaneous with the Office of the Lord High-Steward, and
how old that is, has been already shown: however, I shall present one
Authority, which proves, that Trial by the Peerage was in use in the Reign of
William the Conqueror, who in the beginning of his Reign created William Fitz
Osborne (Earl of Betrevil in Normandy) Earl of Hereford. His Son Roger
succeeded him, and was E. of Hereford, who under color of his Sisters
Marriage, near New Market in Camb. Shire, where many of the Nobility were
assembled, conspired with them to receive the Danes into England, and depose
William the Conqueror (who was then in Normandy) from his Kingdom of England;
to effect which, he with others rose. This Treason was revealed by Walter, E.
of Huntingdon, who was one of the Conspirators, and Son to the Great Syward,
Earl of Northumberland; for which Treason, Roger E. of Hereford was apprehended
by Urse Tiptof, then Sheriff of Worcestershire, A. 8. W. 1.
and after tried by his Peers, and found guilty of the Treason, per Judicium
Parium suorum. But he ended his days in Prison.

QUERY II.

Whether a Peer can wave his Trial by Peers?

SOL.

He cannot wave his Peers, and put himself upon the Trial of Twelve
Freeholders; for the Stat. of Mao. Shart. is, 26 H. 8.
that he must be ryed by his Peers; and so it was resolved in the Lord Dacre's
Case.

QUERY III.

What Lords shall be tried by Peers, in cases of Treason, etc?

SOL.

Every Lord of Parliament that has Voice therein, and called thereto by the
King's Writ, shall not be tried by Peers, but only such as sit Patron
Nobilitatis; as Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, and Barons, and not such
as are Lords of Parliament, by reason of their Baronies which they hold in
right of the Church, as Archbishops, and Bishops of this Realm; for though
they be Lords of Parliament, yet upon an Impeachment either of Treason or
Felony, they shall not be tried by the Peers of the Realm, but by a Jury of
Knights, and other substantial persons pon their Oaths; and one reason alleged
by some (how truly let others judge) is, forasmuch as Archbishops and Bishops
cannot pass in like cases upon the trial of any other of the Peers, their
Lordships being prohibited by the Common and Ecclesiastical Laws to be Judges
of Life and Death; and this Trial ought to be Mutual, since the performance of
it is upon their Honors, without any Oath taken.

And here, by the way, your Lordships may take notice, how great regard the Law
has to the word of a Peer, when spoken upon his Honor. I need say no more
upon this Topic, since your Lordships in that Excellent Poem, A PARADOX
against Liberty, have expressed your thoughts so extremely well.

No Temporal Lord, but only Lords of Parliament, shall have this kind of Trial;
and therefore the Eldest Son, and Heir Apparent of a Duke, in the life of his
Father, though he be called an Earl, is excluded: And this was the Case of
Henry Howard, Earl of Surrey, Son and Heir Apparent of Thomas Duke of Suffolk,
in the 38. of H. 8. Likewise the Son and Heir Apparent of an Earl, though he be
called Lord, or Baron; and all the younger Sons of Kings are Earls by Birth,
though they have no other Creation, yet shall they not be partakers of this, or
other Privileges, incident to the Lords of Parliament.

Those that are Barons of Ireland, or Scotland, Cok. Litt. 16. b. 3 Inst. f.
30. 2 Inst. f. 48.
committing Treason, etc. in England, shall not have their Trial by Peers,
though they were born in England, for they receive their Dignity from a King of
their Nations.

If a Duke, or other Nobleman of France, Co. L. 7. Calvin's Case.
Spain, etc. comes into England by the King's safe Conduct, in which the King
styles him Duke, according to his Creation, nevertheless in all proceedings in
the King's Courts he shall not be styled by his Name of Dignity, much less a
partker of the Privilege of this Trial by Peers.

But if the King of England at this day create one of his Subjects of Scotland
to be Viscount within England, or by ordinary Summons under his Great Seal call
him to the Upper House of Parliament, and assign him a Place, and to Vote there
in his Great Council, he shall be thereby a Peer of this Realm, and enjoy all
their Privileges.

QUERY IV.

What Witnesses are required in Indictments and Trials of Treason, or
misprision of Treason?

SOL.

By the Ancient Common Law, one Witness or Accuser was not sufficient to
Convict any person of High Treason, for, in that case, it was to be tried
before the Constable and Marshal by Combat; but they have no Jurisdiction to
hold Plea of any thing which may be determined by Common Law: And that two
Witnesses are requisite, appears by the Books of Law; and the Common Law herein
is grounded upon the Law of God, Mirr. cap. 3. Ordin. de Attaint. Brad. L. 5.
f. 354. 48 Ed. 3.30. 35 H. 6.46. Fortescue c. 32.
expressed both in the old and New Testament, Deuteronomy. 17. v. 6. Numb. 35. v. 30.
Deuteronomy. 19. v. 15. Matthew. 18. v. 16. 2 Cor. 13. v. 1. and this seems more clear
in the Trial by Peers, because they come not de aliquo Vicineto, whereby they
may take notice of the Fact, in respect of Vicinity, as other Jurors may do. By
the Stat. of 1 E. 6. c. 12. none shall be Indicted, Arraigned, Condemned, or
Convicted for any Treason, etc. for which the Offender shall suffer pains of
Death, Imprisonment, loss or forfeiture of his Goods, Chattels, Lands or
Tenements, unless he be accused by two sufficient and lawful Witnesses, or
shall willingly without violence confess the Fact. The same provision is made
by 5 E. 6. wherein I must observe to your Lordships, that two lawful Accusers,
in this Act, are taken for two lawful Witnesses; for by two lawful Accusers,
and accused by two lawful Witnesses (as it is in 1 E. 6.) are Identical; which
word (Accusers) was used, because two Witnesses ought directly to accuse, that
is, charge the Prisoner, for the Common Law respects none else; and therefore
lawful Accusers must be such as are allowed by Laws.

And thus 'twas resolved by the Justices in the Case of the Lord Lumley; Hill.
14. El.
for if they should not be taken according to the meaning aforesaid, then there
must be two Accusers, by 5 E. 6. and two Witnesses, Dyer f. 99. W. Thomas his
Case.
by 1 E. 6. and the strange conceit in 2 Mar. that one may be an Accuser by
Hearsay, was utterly denied in the Lord Lumley's Case.

And here, since your Lordships did not make it a Query, I shall not so
strictly consider it, whether the Testimony of a Forreigner may be admitted, in
case of Treason. The Duke of Norfolk at his Arraignment said, that nothing
which was yet produced was of any moment against him, save only the Bishop of
Ross his Testimony; and that (by Opinion of Bracton) was not to be admitted,
because he was a Forreigner; to which Callin, Lord Chief Justice answered, that
in such Causes as this, the Testimony of Foreigners is of force, and it lies
in the Peers to attribute to, Camb. El. A. 1572.
or derogate from such Testimony as they shall think fit.

Where Bract. says, tht an Alien born cannot be a Witness, it is to be
understood of an Alien Infidel; for the Bishop of Ross being a Scot born, was
admitted to be a Witness, and sworn 14 El. by Opinion of all the Justices
Assistants.

If a person be accused by one Witness touching one fact, and by another
concerning another fact, the one committed in Middlesex, the other in Surrey,
he that swears the fact done in London, joined to the other Witness that swears
to the fact done in Surrey, shall be esteemed two sufficient Witnesses, in case
of Treason; and so was it ruled by the Judges at the Old Bailey, upon the Trial
of the Five Jesuits ( Whitebread, Harcourt, Turner, Fenwick, and Gaven)
according to the Resolution in Sir H. Vane's Case, at the King's-B. Bar, where
one Witness proved the levying War in one County, and the other proved the
levying War in another County; and so though they were but single Witnesles of
single facts, yet both coming up to the Indictment, they were adjudged two
sufficient Witnesses to maintain it.

QUERY V.

Whether a Nobleman being Arraigned, can challenge his Peers?

SOL.

If the party arraigned (says Coke) be a Lord of Parliament, and a Peer of the
Realm, and is to be tried by his Peers, he shall not challenge any of them, for
they are not sworn as other Jurors be, but find the party guilty, or not
guilty, upon their Faith or Allegiance to the King; Cok 's Litt. 156. b.
and they are Judges of the fact, and every of them does separately give his
judgment, beginning at the lowest.

Again, Cok 's Litt. 294. a.
he tells us, that the four Knights, Electors of the Grand Assize, are not to
be challenged, for that in Law they be Judges to that purpose, and Judges
cannot be challenged; and that is the reason why Noblemen cannot be challenged,
for Mag. Charta says, Per Judicium Parium suorum, Cap. 29. and not Veredictum.


When the Peers (that were to be Tryers at the Arraignment of the Earl of Essex
and Southampton) were called by name, Camb. Eliz. A. 1601.
the Earl of Essex demanded whether it were not lawful for them (as the use is
to private men) to except against some of their Peers? The Judges answered,
that such was the Credit and Estimation of the Peers of England, that they are
neither compelled to an Oath in Arraignments, nor subjected to Exceptions.

QUERY IV.

Whether the Lord High-Steward can collect the Evidence against the Prisoner,
or confer with the Lords, touching the same, in the Prisoners absence?

SOL.

To this I answer negatively, for after the King's Learned Counsel have
produced all their Evidence, the Prisoner ought to be present at all
Conferences touching the same; and therefore it shall be necessary for all
Prisoners, after Evidence given against them, before departure from the Bar, to
require Justice of the Lord High-Steward, and of the other Lords; and that no
Question be demanded, or conference had by any with the Lords, but in open
Court in their own hearing, otherwise such Prisoners shall take no advantage
thereof after Verdict and Judgment given.

QUERY VII.

If the Lords be equally divided, between guilty and not guilty, whether the
party tried shall be acquitted or condemned?

SOL.

In an Information in the Court of Star Chamber, by the Attorney against Sir
Stephen Proctor, and others, for conspiracy against, and scandal of the Earl of
Northampton, Co. 4. Inst. f. 64.
and Edward Lord Wootten, two of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council;
at the hearing of which Cause there sat eight in Court, whereof four condemned
the Defendants, and the other four (viz.) the Lord Chancellor, two Bishops,
and the Chancellor of the Exchequer, acquitted them; the Question was,
according as your Lordships have proposed it, Whether the Defendants should be
condemned or not: And here it was moved by the King's Learned Counsel, that
when the Voices are equal, that in that case of which part the Lord Chancellor
was, on that side it should be determined, without regard either to Plaintiff
or Defendant: And it was resolved, that regularly and de communi Jure, in
respect of the equality of Voices, that no sentence could be given as it
holds in the High Court of Parliament, and all other Courts, according to the
old rule, Paribus sententiis Reus absolvitur: And sentence was never given
against Sir Stephen Proctor, agreeable to the general rule in other Courts. In
this point the Civil Law concurs with the Common. Inter Pares Numero Judices si
dissonae sententiae proferantur, in liberalibus quidem causis (secundum quod a
Divo Pio constitutum est) pro liberate statutum obtinet, in aliis autem causis
pro Reo, quod and in Judiciis publicis, obtinere oportet. Vid. Grot. lib. 2. c.
5. uu. 18. de Jure Belli, etc.


Reus sententiis paribus absolvitur, and semper quicquid dubium est, humanitas
milinat in melius.

Alter Judex damnat, alter absolvit, and inter dispares sententias milior
viniat.

I shall here take leave to make a little digression from the Query, and
consider if a person that is forthcoming, can by Parliament be attainted of
High Treason, and never called to answer? This seems as much worth the inquiry,
as other your Lordships Queries; and though omitted by you, I shall not let it
pass without some notice.

By the 2. of H. 6. we find a great Peer condemned without Arraignment or
Answer; Co. 4. Inst. f. 37, 38.
the like in 32 H. 8. one Attainted (though living and forthcoming) of
High Treason, without ever being called to Judgment: The legality whereof was
scrupled, and demanded of the Judges whether the Act were void or not: with
some pause, they adjudged it perilous, and of bad example to the Inferior
Courts; but 'twas agreed, if condemned by Parliament, to be indisputable,
though Cap. 29. 5 E. 3. c. 9. 28 E. 3. c. 5. of Mag. Char. affirms, that no man
ought to be condemned without Answer, without a Quid fecisti? and all due
proceedings at Law. Senec. in Loco.
Qui statuit aliquid part inaudita altera, licet aequum statuerit haud aequus
fuerit.

With the Municipal Laws agree those of the Romans.

Divi severi and Antonini Magni rescriptum est, D. 48.17.
ne quis absens primatur, and hoc jure utimur, ne Absentes damnentur, neque
enim inaudita causa quemquam damnari aequitatis ratio patitur. Acts 25. v. 16.
It is not the manner of the Romans to deliver any man to death, before the
accused have his accusers face to face, and license to answer for himself.

QUERY VIII.

Whether the King, and one of the Houses alone, or both without the King, can
declare a Treason within the Stat. of 25 E. 3. cap. 2?

SOL.

John Duke of Groyen and Lancaster, Steward of England, and Thomas Duke of
Gloucester, Constable of England, the King's Uncles, complained to the King,
that Thomas Talbot Knight, with others his Adherents, conspired the death of
the said Dukes, as the same was confessed, and well known, and prayed that the
Parliament might judge of the fault, (which Petition was just, and according to
the Branch of the Stat. of 25 E. 3.) but the Record says further, that the
King and Lords in Parliament adjudged the same fact to be High Treason, which
Judgment wanting the assent of the Commons, was no Declaration within the said
Stat. which is attended with this restriction.

That if any other case, supposed to be Treason, should happen before any
Justices, the Justices should tarry without going to judgment of the Treason,
till the Case be showed before the King, and his Parliament (consisting of
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons) whether it ought to be adjudged
Treason or Felony.

QUERY IX. Whether the Subjects of another Prince, Confederate with the King of
England, can be held for the King's Enemies?

SOL.

It was objected against the Duke of Norfolk, concerning his relieving of the
Scots, the Queens Enemies, which was proved by Letters, and Banister's
confession, etc. whereupon the Duke asked the Judges, Whether the Subjects of
another Prince, Camb. Eliz. A. 1572.
Confederate with the Queen of England, were to be holden for the Queens
Enemies? Calelin Chief Justice answered, that they were; and that the Queen of
England might make War with any Duke of France, and yet in the interim keep
peace with the French King. And here it is to be noted, that the Judges ought
not to deliver their Opinions beforehand, in any criminal case that may come
before them judicially. In the Case of Humphrey Stafford, that Arch-Traytor
Hussy, Chief Justice, besought King H. 7. that he would not desire to know
their Opinions beforehand for him, for they thought it should come before them
in the King's Bench judicially, and then they would do that which of right they
ought, which the King approved of. Besides the nature of their Oath requires
it, who are sworn that they shall well and lawfully serve our Sovereign Lord
the King, and his People, in the Office of a Justice; and that they shall do
equal Law and execution of Right to all his Subjects.

QUERY X.

Whether an Attainder of Treason may be falsified by the Plea of the Party?

SOL.

A. 1. Mar. A Commission of Oyer and Terminer in London was directed to Sir
Tho. White, Lord Mayor, and to diverse others, reciting, that where Sir Robert
Dudley, Knight, 9 Jan. 1. Mar. was Indicted of High Treason before Thomas Due
of Norfolk, and fourteen other Commissioners in the County of Norfolk, (where
in truth the Commission was directed to so many, but the Indictment was taken
before Eight of them only) granting to them, or any four of them, Authority to
receive the Indictment taken before fifteen Commissioners, and to proceed
thereupon as Special Justices of Oyer and Terminer; by pretext whereof they
proceeded, and upon confession of the said Sir Rob, Dudley, gave Judgment
against him.

In this Case it was adjudged, that Sir Rob. Dudley, then Earl of Leicester,
might falsify the said Attainder by Plea, because it was void, and coram non
Judice; for that the latter Commissioners had not power to proceed upon an
Indictment taken before Eight, but before Fifteen, and so void. The Party is
not driven to his Writ of Error, but may falsify the Attainder by Plea,
showing the special matter, which proves it void ut supra. In which case the
party forfeiteth neither Lands nor Goods.

It Is holden by some, that if a person be attainted of High Treason by the
Common Law, that no Writ of Error should be brought for the reversal of that
Attainder, by reason of these words in the Stat. 33 H. 8. cap. 20. And if any
person or persons shall be attainted of High Treason by the course of the
Common Law, etc. that every such Attainder by the Common Law, shall be of as
good strength, value, force and effect, as if it had been done by Authority of
Parliament. But the contrary hereof was resolved at a Parliament holden A. 25.
Eliz. that a Writ of Error should be maintained for the reversal of Erroneous
Attainders of High Treason by the Common Law; for that former Stat. is to be
intended of lawful Attainders, and not where there is any Error in the same:
for by that of the Queen it is provided, That no Record of Attainder of any
person or persons, of or for any High Treason, where the party so Attainted is
or has been executed for the same, shall be, etc. in any wise hereafter
reversed, undone, avoided, or Impeached by any Plea, or for any Error
whatsoever.

QUERY XI.

Whether torture, in case of Treason or Felony, may be used by our Law?

SOL.

Sir John Fortescue, Chief Justice of England, who wrote in commendation of our
Common Laws, prefers the same for Government before the Civil Law; and
particularly, that all tortures were against the Common Law expressly; and he
proceeds to show the inconveniences and mischiefs thereof, by fearful
examples; to which Learned Author I refer your Lordships. Cap. 22.


It is against Mag. Charta, Cap. 29.
which says, Nullus liber homo capiatur, vel Imprisonetur, etc. aut aliquo modo
destruatur, nec super eum ibimus nec super eum mittemus nisi per legale
Judicium Parium suorum vel per Legem Terrae. And accordingly all the Ancient
Authors are against the inflicting pains and tortures upon Prisoners, before or
after Attainder, Co. 3. Inst. f. 35.
but such as answer the Judgment.

John Holland, Earl of Huntingdon, was by King H. 6. created Duke of Exeter,
and A. 26. H. 6. the King granted to him the Office of the Constableship of the
Tower of London. He and William de la Poole, Duke of Suffolk, with some others,
intended to have brought in the Civil Laws; and for a beginning of the same,
the Duke of Exeter first brought into the Tower the Rack, or Brake, allowed in
many cases by the Civil Law; and for that reason it was called the Duke of
Exeter's Daughter.

QUERY XII.

Whether the King, under the Great Seal, may command all Process in Criminal
Causes to cease?

SOL.

We find (says Coke) a Discharge of further proceeding, directed to the Judges
of the Court, etc. (not by way of pardoning the offense) but by the King's
acknowledgment, under the Great Seal, of the Parties Innocence, with
Commandment to the Judges, that in the former proceedings they shall altogether
surcease; whereupon the Court will award, that the Party shall go sine Die, and
that there shall be no further proceedings against him. William de Melton,
Archbishop of York, was accused in the King's- Bench, coram Rege and Concilio
suo in Anno 3. Ed. 3. for adherency to Edmond Earl of Kent in his Treasons;
whereunto the Archbishop pleaded Not Guilty; and after two Writs of Venire
Facias awarded, the King directed his Writ under the Great Seal to the Judges
of the King's- Bench, to this effect.

Licet Venerabilis Pater Willielmus Archiepiscopus Ebor. Stephanus London
Episcopus per Diversa Brevia Nostra coram Nobis ad sectam Nostram Implacitentur
de eo, quod ipsi Edmundo Comiti Cantiae adhasisse debuerant, quia tamen
praedict. Archiepiscopus and Episcopus de adhaesione praedicta omnino Immunes
reputamus, Vobis Mandamus quod placitis praedictis coram Nobis ulterius tenend.
omnino supersedeatis Test meipso, etc. The Award of the Court hereupon is very
observable: Viz. Cujus Brevis praetextu, consideratum est, quod praedictus
Archiepiscopus eat inde sine die, etc. and ulterius non procedatur versus eum.

Stephen Gravesend, Pasch. 4. E. 3. Roll. 5.3.
Bishop of London, was charged with the same offense in Parliament, A. 3. E. 3.
whence, by Order of parliament, he was referred to the King's- Bench to be
tried, where he pleaded Not Guilty, and after was discharged, as the
Archbishop. It may be thought, that accepting the Pardon, might be an
implication of their fault, and therefore it run in a new strain; but no man
that is well advised, says the great Oracle of the Law, will refuse God's or
the King's Pardon; for in the King's displeasure there is death, says the Holy
Writ; and who knows how often he offends, and consequently stands in need of
it. But how far this Branch of the Prerogative may be extended, and what
qualifications it may admit, belongs not to a private man to determine.

QUERY XIII.

Whether a Person can be Attainted of High Treason by general words?

SOL.

Where by due course of Law a man cannot be Attainted of High Treason, unless
the Law fore-judge the offense such, he ought not to be Attainted by general
words, by Authority of Parliament, (as sometime has been used) but the Treason
ought to be specially expressed, seeing that the Court of Parliament is the
Highest and most Honorable Court of Justice, and ought to give Example to the
Inferior, Magis Exemplis quam praeceptis ducimur.

QUERY XIV.

Whether a Subject of one Kingdom guilty of Treason, flying into another
Kingdom, ought to be remitted to his own Sovereign?

SOL.

It is holden, and so it has been resolved, that divided Kingdoms, under
several Kings in League one with another, are Sanctuaries for Servants or
Subjects flying for safety; and upon demand, are not by the Laws and Liberties
of Kingdoms to be delivered: And this Opinion seems grounded upon the Law in
Deuteronomy. c. 23. v. 15. Thou shall not deliver unto his Master the Servant which is
escaped from his Master unto thee.

When the Lord Paget and Arundel came into France Sir Edward Stafford, Queen
Eliz. Ambassador there, Camb. El. 1584.
diligently observed them, yet could by no means discover what they attempted;
he desired nevertheless of the French King, that they, with Morgan, and other
English, who were practicing against their Prince and Country, might be removed
out of France: To which he received this answer, That if they attempted any
thing in Frence, the King would punish them according to Law, That all Kingdoms
were free for Fugitives; and that it was the great concernment of Kings to
maintain every one the Privileges of his own Kingdom: That Queen Eliz. had not
long since received into her Kingdom Montgomery, the Prince of Conde, and
others of the French Nation; and that Sagury, the King of Navarr's Ambassador,
was in England at this very time, practicing to move new troubles against the
French King.

King H. 8. in the 28th year of his Reign, being in League with the French
King, and in Enmity with the Pope, who was in League likewise with France, and
had sent Cardinal Poole Ambassador to the French King, of whom K. H. 8.
demanded the said Cardinal, being his Subject, and Attainted of Treason; and to
that end caused a Treatise to be published, that it ought to be done Jure
Gentium, sed non praevaluit.

Ferdinando, King of Spain, upon request made by H. 7. to have Edmond de la
Poole, Earl of Suffolk, Attainted of High Treason by Parliament, A. 19. H. 7.
at first intending to observe the Privilege and Liberty of Kings, in
protecting such as came to him for succor and protection, delivered him not;
yet in the end, upon the earnest request of the King, and his promise not to
put him to death, he caused the said Earl to be delivered up to the King, who
kept him in Prison, and construing his promise to be but personal, commanded
his Son Henry after his death to execute him; which he caused to be done in the
fifth year of his Reign.

I shall add one more Example of a Remission out of Zouch. Cum quidam Stywardus
Scotus, Treat. de Judicio inter Gentes.
qui Mariam Scotorum Reginam vneno tollere conatus est, in Anglia
deprehenderetur, Ed. Sextus Rex Angliae eum in manus Regis Galliae tradidit, ut
debito supplicio Remitteretur, quod Nonnullis displicuit, quia etsi ratio
suadeat, ut qui in Patria deliquit, in Patria Puniatur, aliter tamen de
consuetudine, quod Remissionem usurpatum est.

Having now run thorough the several Query's, which your Lordships have thought
fit to propose; I Shall venture to set one step further, and start Another of
my Own; with some Offers toward the Solution of which, I will make an end, Viz.

QUERY XV.

Whether in any Case it be Lawful for Subjects to Oppose their Prince?

SOL.

It must be resolved in the Negative: And that in any Case, or upon any
Pretense whatsoever, it is utterly unlawful for Subjects, jointly or singly;
collectively, or representatively, to make any violent Opposition against their
Sovereign; or to Resist him either in an Offensive or a defensive way. This
Assertion you will find to be a Truth, that is Consonant to Holy Writ, Reverend
Antiquity, Sound Reason, and to the Municipal Laws of the Land; all the
Sophistries and Argumentations, that Seditious and corrupted men are able to
produce to the contrary notwithstanding.

I. To begin with Holy Scripture. It is clear from Deuteronomy. c. 17. v. 12. which
commands the Israelites to put away evil from amongst them, by bringing to
Public Justice all such Mutinous and Presumptious persons, as refused to Obey
the High Priest and the Judge; that God imposed an Obligation, even upon his
own People, not to Resist the Supreme Magistrate. And v. 13. makes the Reason
of this Severity to be, to preserve the People from being Poisoned in their
Allegiance by the Malignity of such Examples: That all the People (under what
Notion or Qualification soever), may hear and fear, and do no more
presumptuously. The same express Warrant of the Word, (and to the self-same
purpose) there is in Joshua, C. 1. v. 18. Whosoever he be (says the Almighty
speaking to him) that does rebel against thy Commandment, and will not harken
to thy words, in all that thou command him, he shall be put to death. Saul
is generally condemned for persecuting David, and attempting upon his Life: And
yet though David had him twice at his mercy, he was not to be prevailed upon to
do him any Harm: 1 Samuel c. 24. v. 6. and C. 26. v. 11.
For who (says he) can lay his hand upon (who can touch, who can stretch forth
his hand against) the Lords Anointed, and be Guiltless? Now the Signification
of the Scripture Phrase [ Touch, or stretch forth the hand against the Lords
Anointed] is of a Large Extent: And the Guilt of this Horrid Crime may be
incurred either by lifting up our heels in scorn against our King; Psalm. 41. v
9.
By taking up Arms in our own defense, for whosoever Resists the Power,
Resists the Ordinance of God; Romans 13.
By not bringing to light such Traitorous Conspiracies as we know to be forming
against him; Lev. 5.
By not endeavoring to defend him, when we see him in danger, for Qui non
vetat peccare, cum possit, jubet; By striking at his Crown, usurping upon his
Prerogative, or depriving him of his Revenue; Jer. 18. v. 18
By Speaking or even Thinking evil of him; for as the Tongue can strike without
a Hand, so the Heart can curse without a Tongue: Or (in a Word) by any sort of
indignity or outrage offered either to his Authority, or Person. But to
proceed.

Does not Saint Paul enjoin that every Soul be Subject to the Higher Powers;
for there is no Power but of God; and they that Resist shall receive to
themselves Damnation? Nay, and does not Saint Peter also inculcate a Patient
Toleration of injuries, and recommend unto our imitation the Example of our
Blessed Savior, who when he was reviled, reviled not again, 1 Pet. 2. v.
19.20, 21, 22.
when he suffered he threatened not; but referred the Vengeance to him that
judges Righteously. If ever man had just Cause to Resist, then had he; yet
would he not do it, but checked Saint Peter's forwardness that way with a, Whosoever
takes up the Sword, Mat. 26. v. 52.
shall perish by the Sword. We find in the Creed that Pontius Pilate is
Recorded by the Holy Ghost (which influenced the Church in the composing of it)
this now was certainly done for our Edification, and to insinuate, that as we
tender our Salvation by our Faith in Christ, we must be careful of paying a
Cheerful Obedience to the Lawful Commands of the Magistrate, and to submit
humbly, and Suffering, to those that are otherwise. And this Obligation
continues, even though the Prinoe should be a Heathen, and the Cause we smart
for, Christ and his Church.

II. As to Reverend Antiquity Saint Ambrose upon the Point of Non-Resistance,
discourses to this effect; I have not so learned Christ, (says he) as to seek
by force to oppose Authority; I can mourn and Lament; but for Other Resistance
I neither will nor ought to make any. Saint Cyprian speaks to the same purpose;
It is out of a Principle of Conscience (says he) that none of us make any
Opposition, when we are unjustly Seized upon, or study a Revenge upon our
Tormentors; for the Numerousness of our Party were otherwise sufficient to bear
us out in such a Design. And so does Tertullian. We are not (says he) despoyl'd
of our Goods, they are only Sequestered for our benefit, and entrusted in safe
hands; God keeps them for our use, and will return them with ample Increase. If
you abstain from Fighting, he will Espouse your Quarrel; and question not but
your Enemies will have the worst on it, for your Wounds will Save you, and if
you fall Martyrs you will rise Saints. What cannot our sufferings bring about?
They make even God himself our Debtor; he owes us Heaven for our selves, and he
owes Hell for our Enemies: But yet we breath our Souls in prayer that he may be
entreated not to pay This.

What Example now can there be more Glorious or more Instructive, then that of
the Theban Legion, recorded in Ecclesiastical Story? The Emperor Maximinian
commanding his army to offer Sacrifice to False Gods, this Band (consisting of
about 7000 men) removed their Quarters, to the end that they might avoid giving
offense; but yet he presses them to bear a part in this Diabolical service, and
upon their humble refusal puts them forthwith to a Decimation, which they
cheerfully submit unto, praying fur their Murderers: The Tyrant would not yet
be sotisfied, but renewed his Commands to the Remainder of them, and finding
them still to continue Resolute rather to die than to disobey God, he butchered
them all, without the least Resistance on their part. This was truly to Confess
him that was led as a sheep to the Slaughter! Nay so very Fruitful are the
Ancient Fathers in Instances of this quality, that it would be but Superfluous
to recount any more of them; the General Practice of the Primitive Christians
being so evident in this point, that the greatest Sticklers for that sin of
Witchcraft, Rebellion, have not the Confidence to deny it.

III. That a Liberty to Resist those in whom the Law has placed the Power of
the Sword is Repugnant to Sound Reason, I shall endeavor to make out by the
following Arguments.

1. Such a License to Subjects against their Rulers, is destructive of the very
Nature of Government, and of Humane Society; for it dissolves the sinews of the
State, and splits it into as many. Factions as it has Enemies. And it is
impossible to conceive Two Equal Supremacies of Power in the Nation, and yet
the Kingdom to remain One. For this it is that distinguishes England, France,
Spain, and all other Independent Kingdoms one from another. But then it is
Childish to Fancy the Policy of any Monarchy (much less of our own) to be so
grossly defective, as to be the Author of its own ruin, by dividing the State
Legally against it self. So that to take up Arms without or against Authority,
is down right Rebellion, and the Consequence Murder and Rapine.

2. It is both Reasonable, and necessary, that all Governments should have a
Supereminent, Coercive Power over Particular Persons; for otherwise a City
would immediately be hurried into an Anarchy, and that which ought to be One
Entire Body, become so many Independnet men.

3. That which to One Private Person is due, as a Man, the same is also due to
Another; and if I may assume to my self a power of judging when to Resist my
Prince, every private man may do so too. Now what Peace, what Society can there
be hoped for, where every one is at freedom to discharge himself from the
Obligation of all Humane Laws, and to oppose them at pleasure? Or what
Obedience can consist with such Resistance? Nor will such Libertines know where
to stop; for it is usual for them to fall foul upon all such as have a deeper
sense of Honesty and Allegiance than themselves. And what Law of God or Man was
ever heard of, that approved of my Murdering, a Loyal man becuase I my self am
a Rebel? Beside that this Lewd Opinion Equally wounds the very Assertors of it;
for any body may be allowed to do That to Them, which they have done to their
Rightful Prince and his Faithful Subjects.

4. Now Touching the Muncipal Laws of the Land; that this Resistance is against
Them, I shall make it Evident. Bracton says, Si ab eo (scil. Rege) Petatur; cum
Breve non Currat contra Ipsum, locus erit supplicationi, Lib. 5. c. 8.
quod factum suum Corrigat and Emendat; quod quidem si non fecerit, satis
suffieit ei ad paenam, quod Dominum Expectet Vltorem: Nemo quidem de factis
suis presumat desputare, Multo fortius contra factum suum venire. If a Subject
find himself agriev'd by the King, he is put to his Petition (because no Writ
can lie against him) for Redress; which if he will not vouchsafe, it is a
sufficient Penalty, that he is to expect Punishment from the Almighty. No man
may presume to question what He does, much less to Oppose him. Fleta concurs
with Bracton in this point; Vid. Lib. 1. c. 17. And Lombard writes thus, Nemo
Dominum (says he) judicet, vel judicium proferat super eum cujus Ligius sit. So
likewise the Statute of 25. Ed. 3. c. 2. de proditionibus, makes it Treason to
compass the Death of the King. And to what end should these, or any other
Provisions against Treason have been established, if Resistance were in Any
Case Lawful? Or what does the Oath of Aliegiance signify, if the people may
take up Arms against their Prince at pleasure? The Form of it runs thus; You
shall swear that from this day sorward you shall be True and Faithful unto our
Sovereign Lord King Charles, and Truth and faith shall bear of Life and Member,
and Terrene Honor; and you shall neither know nor hear of any ill or Damage
intended unto him that you shall not defend etc. My Lord Coke comments upon it,
that the Subject and Effect, of this Oath is due by the Law of Nature, the Form
and Addition is, ex provisione Hominis. To Conclude, the Famous Bishop Marks is
Positive, That a King by Lineal Succession, being Lawfully invested, cannot
upon Imputation either of Negligence or Tyranny be Opposed, or Deposed by his
own Subjects.

Thus having given a dsecription of the Lord High-Stewards Office, and the
manner how a Peer is to be Arraigned before him, with such Solutions to several
Queries, as I have collected out of the Books of Law and History, I shall
conclude all with this Advertisement;

That the surest way to escape both the Guilt and Punishment of High Treason,
is to Fear God, and Honor the King. Eccles. 13. v. 28.
The Counsel given us by the wisest of Kings is worthy to be adverted to. Think
not evil of the King in thy Heart, neither utter it with thy lips, least a Bird
of the Air carry the voice, and that which has wings discover the matter. Let
us detest the Principles believed and practiced by those Audacious Violators of
Royal Majesty, the Spawn of Loyola, and keep fast to the Doctrine of our own
Church, which positively Asserts, That the sacred Bond of Subjects, in
Obedience to their sovereign, is inviolable, and cannot be dissolved, either
upon the account of supposed Crimes in the person of the Prince, as Tyranny,
Insidelity, Heresy, etc. Or by any Acts of the Bishops of Rome, as
Dispensations, Excommunications, etc.

It was once said in Vnlonger's Case, that he that is thoroughly Popish, may
easily be wrapped from his Loyalty.

FINIS.

