THE CHARACTER OF A QUAKER In his true and proper COLORS OR, The Clownish
Hypocrite Anatomized.

Sic oculos, sic Ille manus, sic ora movebat. Licensed and Entered according to
Order.

LONDON, Printed for T. Egglesfield. 1671.

To the Reader.
A Quaker with his dark Lantern light
Is here exposed to your sight,
Stripped of's nice Vizard and fair Paint,
Wherein he is wont to Ape a Saint,
So false Fires may delude our Eyes,
And seem like stars to guild the skies;
Till Reason proves they owe their birth
To the stinking vapors of the Earth.
This Hypocrite we here essay
In's proper colors to display,
Whose Yea and Nay in mischief goes
Beyond the Hectors damning oaths,
But if you think we represent
Not full enough each lineament,
Next sitting may that want supply
Provided still you this do buy.
R. H.

THE CHARACTER OF A QUAKER.
A Quaker is a Vessel of Phanaticisme drawn off to the Lees; a Common-Shore of
Heresy into which most extravagant Opinions at last disembogue themselves and
center, the fag-end of Reformation marked with a sullen meagre look, and this
Characteristick Thou; A Fox in a Lambskin Coat, that retains his subtlety
though not his color, a dough-baked piece of formality that decries
Superstition, yet idolizes Garbs and Phrases. You may know him by his
diminitive band, that looks like the Forlorne-hope of his Shirt crawling o(...)
his Collar; for his purity consists only in his dress, and his Religion is,
Not to speak like his Neighbors. His Original is as obscure as the head of
Nile; some refer it to Behmen the canting Philosophaster of Germany. Others run
his Pedigree higher, and say he was hatched when the degraded Seraphin first
took on him to counterfeit an Angel of Light. He is a mere composition of
Contradiction and Clownishness ana, with a few odd Scruples of Hypocrisy to
give it a Tincture. Should the Parliament make a Law for Eating, he would
starve rather then be guilty of obeying it; and if you would have him do a
thing, you need only forbid it on pain of death; He thinks that to be
religious one is obliged to be uncivil; and flings his Wits overboard to make
room for Inspirations. His Dreams he intitles Visions, and each Capricio of his
fancy must ^^ss for a divine Revelation, to which he blasphemously puts a
probatum est, The mouth of the Lord has spoken it. The first Article of his
Creed is to keep his Hat on, which he observes so religiously, as if he thought
vailing Bonnet to be the sin against the Holy Ghost; Titles of Honor he takes
for infallible marks of the Beast, and belives the Master of the Ceremonies to
be Antichrist; He would have done rarely in the old Chaos before Nature had
ranked things in their places, being a professed Enemy to all Order, that thinks
there is no pure walking unless it be with the heels upwards; He has a Pique
against Paul for saying most noble Festus, and hates the memory of Sarah
because she called her Husband Lord. His discourses are nothing but a Rhapsody
of often repeated Nonsense; and when he has darkened your understanding with a
cloud of insignificant Babble, he cries. Ah! friends mind the Light! He usually
begins with Raving like Mahomet in his Fallingfit, or the Devil of Delphose's
Priests, that never delivered their Lying Oracles, but with extravagant
gestures and odd distortions of body. Swear not at all, is his Motto, but Lies
he holds in many cases venial, and in two meritorious, when they make for the
Interest of the beloved Seed, or reflect Scandal* on the Government. He cheats
worse then a Long-lane Broker, by pretending to deal at a word, and the Hook
whereby he draws in his Customers, is a far-fetcht sigh, and plainly I tell
thee Friend.

This troublesome Insect (for all his demure looks) is deservedly suspected to
be part of the Vermin dropped from the Beast, a Puppet of Religion, contrived to
amuse the Rabble, that receives its motion from his Holinesses invisible hand
behind the Curtain; for though the Jesuit and he seem Antipodes, at long run
(like East and West) they prove the same, Equivocations being as common with
them both as Curses to a Gamester. Ask our trembling Saint if he believe the
Resurrection of the dead, he shall answer yea; but tell you another time, he
meant only an arising from sin; by Heaven and Hell he intends no more but
several Scenes transacted within us, and abuses holy Scripture into a mystical
Romance: Each of them averrs perfection attainable in this Life; but herein
they differ, the Papist acknowledges but one Pope in the World, the Quaker
sets up a Pope in every Individual Breast, to whom all Scripture and Reason
must truckle; so that refusing the Polestar of Gods Word and the Churches
Compass, he will needs steer by the wandering motion of a treacherous Ignis
fatuus within, subject to be blown any way, and often extinguished by the
Hurricanes of Passion.

He makes Self the Center whereunto the Lines of all his Actions tend, and like
a Hedgehog wrapped up in his own warm down, turns out Brisles to all the World
besides; you can come on no side of him but he pricks and bites, and all his
Coasts are craggy and inhospitable. He that deals with him has need of more
Eyes then Poets bestow on Argus, for he out-vies a Genoe's for subtlety, and a
Jew may come to be an Apprentice with him; he loves the Exchange though he hate
the Church, and admires no preaching so much as Foxes.

For, all his peaceable sheepish countenance, he delights in Contention, and
when he is Thou-ing a Court of Justice, thinks himself in his proper Element.
He bawls (like an Oysterwife) at other folks pride, and evidences his own
Humility only in defying the Pedlars Pack, Lace, Ribbons, and Bandstrings,
whilst he sawcily contemns his superiors, and prefers the Crotchets of his own
Giddy Brain before the Decrees of a General Council. He hates no whore so much
as her of Babylon, and ever and anon gratifies the Old man with a kind
Green-apron'd Friend, whom he picks up at a Conventicle by a leacherous touch
of the hand, under pretense of a purer salutation, and finding by her rampant
pulse, and tempting turning up the VVhites, (which she pretends to do in
devotion) that her desires are at flood, they retire together for mutual
Edification. He is often drunk, but not like his Neighbors temporally, for
sleep cannot cure him, but the fumes of his spiritual pride having intoxicated
his head, makes his very Soul reel, and put his Body into a fit of shivering;
yet will he not privately in the company of Friends refuse the refreshing
Bottle, provided it be not known in Gath, nor published amongst the wicked of
Askalon, for he confesses the use of the creature (especially when it comes on
free-cost) to be exceeding lawful. He is very curious to be in all things
contrary to the common Mode, that he may be taken notice of, for a singular
man, and having strewn his face into a Religious frame, and tuned his voice to
a puling sanctimonious key, he uses it as a Low-bell to catch Larks, or rather
such Owls as will be bubbled out of their money merely on the Repute of his
conscientious dealing; he abominates our Churches, and says very well, that
God must be worshipped every where in spirit, yet will rather be knocked of the
head then forsake Devonshire-house; here it is that he glories in tribulations,
and makes the Streets ring with persecutions and sufferings, when all the
business is, he is only shut out of doors, and kept by the Officers from
breaking a Law that would punish him; Then he ascends the Coblers-stall, flings
abroad the Light and the Truth, bears his testimony openly; and at last
retireing home, with a good Caudle concludes the work of the day. To this
sanctified assembling place they flock in droves, as to an Ark, but sure it is
none of Noah's, since here the Beasts come not in by pairs, for the she is are
far the more numerous party, and in spite of Paul's injunction, will often be
holding forth to the men.

In brief, a Quaker is a Cynick in Religion, one that would have Illnature
translated Grace; as if the Holy Spirit (that pure sweet gentle Dove*) did
inspire men with sullen humors and waspish dispositions: he hates both
Magistracy and Ministry, and never speaks well of Authority or Obedience, but
when he is going to lash his Maid or his Apprentices; for though himself have
shaken off all subjection to Superiors, yet to his Domestics he is worse then
an Egyptian Taskmaster, and speaks to his servants in a tone as imperious as
the Grand Seigniour to his Mutes; he cannot endure Ceremonies or Complements,
especially where his Belly is concerned, and therefore falls to all meat (as
Gallants do to a VVench or Oysters) without saying Grace; he is very diligent
in his Generation-worke, and may therefore have many children but no heirs; for
his issue comes into the World out-lawed, and can no more boast to be born in
lawful Wedlock, then the Kinchin-cove of a Gypsy got under a hedge by a
strauling Tinker; he bannes the Banes, and in this respect only refuses
License, consummating his Marriage before it is solemnized; for so soon as the
Spirit begins to yield to the rebellion of the flesh, and his Bowels yearn to
be multiplying, he and his willing Doxy never wait the Parsons leisure, but
take each others word and so to Bed. Yet of late (to show how far they dare
affront the Laws established) they have got a more solemn Knack of Fooling; A
Westminster Wedding must be kept at Merchant-Taylors Hall, and a Trumpet
sounded to publish the Nuptials between Diotrephes and Gomer the daughter of
Diblain, where Jews and Gentiles are jointly invited to a Feast, and Seven and
Twenty Venison Pasties saw their stately Walls in a moment levelled. A Freak so
wild and extravagant, that some of the invited Hebrews began to suspect their
Rabbis mistaken in their Cabalistick Learning; and that Antichrist is as like
to be hatched between such a mad Couple, as to be begot by an Incubus on a
Harlot of the Tribe of Dan.

The Devil that furnishes others with his Tares but by Retail, deals with the
Quaker by Whole sale, so many Heresies club to his Generation, that it is
impossible to say which he resembles most. Sure Satan had a fancy to present
the World with an Oglie, and therefore here has rendevouzed all his Hell-bred
Errors in Epicomie, and set down a Catalogue of them in Shorthand.

By his obstinate zeal to keep his Noddle covered, you may guess him a
Mahumetan, that resents nothing so dishonorable as a bare head; and indeed he
has no more Christianity in him than a Turk; His Good Friday Looks speak him a
superstitious Anchorite; his subtlety and equivocations would become a Jesuit;
he names his children with as little Ceremony as other Folks do their Whelps;
and so far keeps pace with the Anabaptists, but of a sudden he out-strips them,
and falls in with the Seekers to deny all Ordinances. From Socinus he steals
Arguments against the blessed Trinity, and learns to disown all Government,
from John of Leyden. At first he was much against the Carnal VVeapon, but now
begins to be reconciled to Fighting, and if you anger him will rather venture a
Rubbers at Fifty-Cuffs, then turn the other cheek to the Smiter.

It Is a prudent maxim in the Art Military, never to think too contemptibly of
an Enemy. Our Grandfathers saw that Scotch-mist Presbytery rising no bigger
then a man's hand, and yet how dismally did it in few years overspread our whole
Horizon.

Consider but this Quaking Gang in its true dimensions, and the Arts they have
to promote their Designs, and they will appear more formidable then most of the
other Factions.

For, First, They are a People generally subtle, frugal, industrious, and wary
in their dealing; by which and their large pretensions to a punctual Honesty,
they have engrossed a grand part of the Nations Trade.

Secondly, Whereas other Persuasions are divided into distinct Congregations,
and so have several particular TEACHERS, who frequently broaching different
whimseys, mince them into Subdivisions, whilst some dare not hear such an one,
and others scruple to communicate with such a one, though all of a PARTY.

The QUAKERS on the contrary, though no two of them scarce agree in all things,
do yet generally throughout England keep themselves up in one entire Body,
glewed together with a strict Unity, as to Affection, and Correspondence, as is
evident by their Weekly Collections in every County continually sent up to
London, where their common stock cannot but in so many years as they have
maintained it, be very vast. To which add the exact Account and Registry they
every where keep of all their Births and Burials (which are likewise duly
transmitted up) so that in an instant they are able to give a near estimate of
their number and strength in all the three Nations. These and some other
Import^^ts being duly weighed, render this shivering Sect not so
inconsiderable as the common Rabble deluded with their specious pretenses are
apt to think them. It Is a good Caution of a Minor Poet, As white Powder
discharges without noise,
So many Saint-seeming Hypocrites destroys.
Trust not too far, the soft hand sometimes smites,
And Larks are Birds of prey as well as Kites.


To conclude, a Quaker is a Canting thing that Cozens the world by the purity
of his Clothes, a few Close-stool faces and whineing expressions, his Life is
only a real Lie, his Doctrine contrary to all sober Religion, and withal so
troublesome that I am grown quite weary of drawing his Character, and cannot
but wish him and all his Trihe fairly Embarked for terra incognita, or the
late found Isle of Pines, underthe conduct of Penn their high Admiral.

FINIS.

