ATLAS UNDER OLYMPUS. An Heroic POEM.

By WILLIAM AUSTIN of Gray's Inn, Esquire.

An melius per te Virtutum exempla petemus? Ovid ad Liviam. -- Atlas
Axem humero tor quet stellis ardentibus aptum.
Virg. Aen. l. 6. -- Hunc ardens evexit ad aethera virtus. Ibid -- Quod Numen
in isto
Corpore sit dubito, sed corpore Numen in isto est.
Ovid Met. l. 3. fab. 8. LONDON, Printed for the Author, 1664.

To his Sacred Majesty, CHARLES II. King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
etc.
Ab Jove surgat opus. Ovid Fast. l. 5. Jupiter Ambrosia satur est and Nectare
vivit.
Nos tamen exta Iovi, Thura, merumque damus,
Omnia cum tibi sint dono concessa Deorum:
Si quod habes non vis; ergo quid accipies?
Mart. Lib. II. Epig. 58. -- Tu mente labantem
Dirige me, dubium certo tu robore firma.
Lucan. l. 2. -- VIctorque volentes
Per Populos dat Jura, viamque ^ffectat Olympo.
Virg. Georg. l. 4. p. ult. Non Caroli gratior ulla est
Quam sibi quae Monachi praescribit pagina nomen.
Virg. Ecl. 5. Honestius est Principi^ beneficium quam trophaeorum mem^riam
relinquere.
Stob. Ser. 46. The Epistle Dedicatory.
ROYAL SIR,
HAving humbly invoked your Majesty's most gracious inspiration Virg. Aeneid.
l. 10.
Namque aliud quid sit quod jam implorare queamus, Tu satis ad dandas quaevis
in carmina vires.
Luc. l. 1.
who are as well the Sic tibi nec docti desunt nec principis arts:
Mista sed est animo, cum Jove Musat^o.
Ibid.
Apollo of our Musoeum, as the Dii tibi sunt, Cae^ar juvenis: tua numina placa.
Hac certe non est notior ara tibi,
Ov. de Pont. l. 4. El. 8.
Jupiter of our State) to this expressive admiring your Restorers vast worth, I
am obliged I presume (how small soever the tribute of Loyalty be) with
submissive boldness to tender it to you, whose influence it is by which my poor
Muse subsists. In your happy Restoration, your Subjects love is not so much
our wonder, as your Majesty's Divine Virtue, who change the hellish hue of such
Negroes in wickedness as we, and persuade us, after so long an habit of
Rebellion, to our duty of Obedience. When that Plague had spread it self over
the body of the whole Kingdom, was possessed of its very heart and vitals, we
admire that an Arm, one single member of it, should be left untouched, and that
speedily to administer an effectual Remedy to an inveterate Disease of twenty
years continuance: but we are confounded to think that the Remedy should be a
Prescript of your bounteous Royal hand, since your Worship and Honor lay
rejected here, like the Carthage being taken, the wife of Asdrubal burned the
Temple of Aesculapius, that stood in the mids^ (...) the City, on the top of
the Castle Byrsa.
ruined Temple of Aesculapius in Carthage, who have experienced your Subjects
Insolence even to that height, as Ovid Met. lib. 8. fab. 1.
(O nostri infamia secli!) to be banished from them, like the The Romans, out
of a conceit that Physic was destructive to the body, banished the Physicians
many years together. v. Pensieri di Alessandro Tassoni. Lib. 7. Quesito 7.
Physicians of old from the fanatic Romans, and ( pro ne^andum scelus! O
monstra hominum ex scelere and immanitate concreta! to proscribe the
remembrance of your Majesty as far as was possible from our very thoughts)
whose return to repossess what the Usurpers matchless malice kept from You,
they ( horrendum dictu! a word of horror to think and write as well as speak)
made Vid. Civil Wars of Great Britain and Ireland, An. 1659. p. 375. l. ult.
Treason to mention. Our Victor George without force of Arms conquers all our
Dragons; but with the charm of Your Authority. They yield to Him in Obedience
to You. He as the Apresso i Lacedemoni fu una statua di Apollo con quattro
orechie e con altre tante mani. Why the Lacedaemonians made a Statue of Apollo
with four hands, and four ears. See Imagini dei Dei, Apollo con quattro ochi.
Lacedemonian Apollo, is strengthened with four hands to fight victoriously for
us: but two of these hands are those belong to your Most Sacred Person. His
Voice, as Alectryons, scares away the Bats and Screech-Owls of our Night; yet
no otherwise, but as he proclaims Your Coming, the approach of our Sun. Who can
see a Loyal Orator plead for the Subjects Hearts to their true Lawful
Sovereign, and not see withal their hearts (quite tired with the expensive,
ridiculous, cursed and bloody Changes of a tedious Civil War, and tormented
with the Remorse of their own most heinous -- Haec prima malorum
Causa fuit.
Virg. Aen. l. 7. Hoc caput, O Cives, haec belli summa nefandi. l. 12.

Impiety, the sole cause of it) were their Sovereigns wholly before he speaks a
word? And who can see lost hearts restored to their Royal owner by the kindness
and virtue of such an Orator, and not have so much gratitude as to give him his
suffrage? None certainly can more d^s (...) our applausi^e breath, than he that
opens our dumb mouths to speak. The least we can render Him, who raises us out
of the dust with three Kingdoms out of their ruins, is our Public
Acknowledgement of so matchless an Obligation. And none so fit to hear the
report of his merit (were the Seneca Epist. 79.
Laus, as Seneca says it should be umbra virtutis, could with equal proportion
be the shadow of it, and answer its vast dimentions) as your Sacred Majesty,
whose high goodness is the subject upon which his Virtue depends.

( Ovid de Pont. Lib. 1. Eleg. 3.
Haec animum possint audita movere,
Ovid de Pont. Lib. 1. Eleg. 1.
Et mihi tu faveas) May my presumption in what I dedicate here, I humbly beg,
be made pardonable upon this account,

Ovid de Pont. l. 1. Eleg. 9.
(Et tibi Rex ^vo detur fort^ssime, nost^o,
Semper honorata sceptra tene^e manu.
Ovid de Pont. Lib. 2. Eleg. 5.
Ut servus maneat tibi fidus
Comprecor ad vitae tempora summa tuae.)
Your Majesty's long happy Reign be ever benefited by this great Worthy's
service. Ovid de Pont. Lib. 4. Eleg. 2.
-- Laudataque Virtus Cr^scat. Et mecum populi vota pr^cantur idem. L. 2. El. 5.


Your Majesty's most loyal and obedient Subject, Will. Austin.

To the Bright Mirror of Loyal Duty, the admired Crown and Support of Royalty,
the George of Honor, Peace, Strength, and Security to these three Kingdoms,
The most Noble and most Illustrious George Duke of Albemarle, Earl of
Torrington, Baron Monk of Potheridge, Baucamp and Teys, Captain General and
Commander in chief of all his Majesty's Forces in his Kingdoms of England,
Scotland and Ireland; Master of his Majesty's Horse, Knight of the most Noble
Order of the Garter, and one of his Majesty's most honorable Privy Council.
-- Titulis omnia plena vides.
Ovid. ad Live. Sit licet hic titulus plenis tibi fructibus ingens,
Ipsa tamen virtus ordine major erit.
Ovid. de Pont. L. 4. Eleg. 7. -- Periclis
Servati facimus meritosque novamus honores.
Tu tanti mensuram nominis imples.
Vir. Ae. L. 8. Et geminas animi nobilitate genus.
Lib. 1. Eleg. 2. Tu claris nomen virtutibus aequas,
Nec sinis ingenium nobilitate premi.
Lib. 2. El. 3. -- Vigili date praemia vestro,
Et pro tot gravibus curis quas anxius egit,
Hunc titu lum meritis pensandum reddite.
Ovid. Met. Lib. 3. f. 1. MUnera vestra cano.
Virg. Georg. Lib. 1. -- Tuis hic omnia plena
Muneribus.
Virg. Georg. Lib. 2. -- Tu sceptra Jovemque
Concilias, tu das epulis accumbere Divum,
Virg. Aeneid. Lib. I. Haec eadem est hodie, quae pignora, quaeque penates
Reddat, and emerito faciat nos Mart colonos.
Lucan. Lib. 7. Nil Georgii non efficient manus;
Quas and benigno numine Jupiter,
Defendit, and curae sagaces,
Expediunt per acuta bella.
Hor. Lib. 4. Od. 4. Ille notas veteres and longi ded^cus aevi
Sustulit: agnorunt signa recepta suos.
Ovid. Fast. Lib. 5. -- Quae digna tibi pro talibus ausis,
Praemia posse rear solvi? pulcherrima primum
Dii moresque dabunt vestri: tum caetera reddet
Carolus.
Virg. Aeneid. Lib. 9. Da mihi, si quid ea est, hebitantem pectora Lethen,
Oblitus potero non tamen esse tui.
Idque sinas, oro, nec fastidita repel as
Verba, nec officio crimen inesse putes.
Et levis haec meritis referatur gratia tantis.
Sin minus, invito te quoque, gratus ero.
Ovid. de Pont. Lib. 4. Eleg. 1. May it please your Grace,
IF it was the opinion of an Anaxandridas.
Heathen, Qui contemnunt laudem, ut interim per ignaviam nihil gerant
laudabile, quum eximiam virtutem honesta fama comitetur ultro, ac generosis
animis amor laudum veluti stimulus ad praeclara facinora sit innatus, Nazianz.
apud Anton. and Max. Sermon. de laud.
A Fathers authority thus makes it authentic. Praecipuum est beneficium in
rebus honestis laudari. Laus enim parit emulat^onem, aemulatio virtutem, virtus
felicitatem, quae finis est omnium quae desiderantur, and quo omnis viri boni
motus refertur. Whatever then the duty of humility, or the temper of a well
governed mind may be judged to be, I hope, the mention of your worth here, need
not make me fear to incur your displeasure, or render me obnoxious to the
disgust of others for presenting it to your person, as if we were only
(according as Duplici ex causa utilius est homini memoriae la^dem dare quam
vit^. Q^ando nec laudantem adulatio movet nec laudatum tentat elatio. Amb. in
Natali. S. Eusebij.
some fancy) Hominis memoriae laudem dare non vitae. I may boldly and truly say
(to answer what they affirm not to be done while he whose merits indebt us,
survives) Nec laudantem adulatio movere potest, nec laudatum tentare elatio. (
Bernard, in Epist.
) If humility be contemptus propriae excellentiae, yet, Max. Lib. 8.
nulla tanta humilitas, quae dulcedine gloriae non tangatur. What if this
modest and low esteem of ones own worth Aug. Sup. 1 Reg.
Magna acta laudabiliter celat, this obliges -- Nomen
Non expectato dat mihi fama rogo.
Martial. Lib. 3. Epig. 95.
not others to conceal them too; since August. Lib. 10. Confessio. Cap. 37.
laus bonorum operum sit comes. Nay the great Arist. 2. Lib. Ethic.
Stagarite himself will witness for us, that, Virtus Matter est gloriae: Sola
enim est cui gloria justa debetur, and secura impenditur. Bern. in Sermon.
Virtuti debetur laus. I praise not your, In homine laudandum est quod ipsius
est. Familiam formosam habet and domum pulchram, m^ltum serit, multum faenerat?
Nihil horum in ipso est, sed citra ipsum. Laud^ in illo, quod nec eripi potest
nec dari. Sen. Epist. 41.
Family, Palace or Possessions, no such things as these, which may be esteemed
but Quot sunt flores coronarii sine odore, hoc mihi videntur honores quaesiti
ex stemmate, ambitione, aut opum multitudine. Plutarchi in Apoph. 156.
Garland-flowers without odor; but as Fam^ est fictilibus caenasse Agathoclea
Regem, (...) abacum Samio saepe onerasse luto. Aus. Ep. 8.
Agathocles his Earth among his golden Vessels, and your Virtues; that cross
Fate has power to divest you of with the Robes you wear ere you take your
rest: But what is Se^. Epist. 41.
proprium hominis, animus and ratio in anima perfect^. What drops more
naturally from the heart than ink from the pen that writes. That which has the
stamp of Divinity upon it. What is the Subject of Praise to those blessed
Angels that wait upon you, and will propagate the memory of you to all -- Quod
turbine nullo.
Excutiet fortuna tibi.
Lucan Lib. 2.
Eternity. Therefore Plut. in Lacon.
it having been the custom of the Lacedaemonians before they went to war, to
sacrifice to the Muses ( Licet Musis nihil videtur cum Mart esse commercii) ut
rebus fortiter gestis contingat honesta commemoratio, ut egregia gesta verbis
celebrarentur a Musis, eloquentiae praesidibus petendis. Let liberty be granted
us great Noble Sir, to sacrifice to the Muses too now our Wars be done, in
thankfulness to you our Victor Mars, whose prudent sweet conduct has seemed to
charm us to Peace with Music, and to make you Apollo, the great president over
them. Had I merit to be confident of your accepting and liking this Incense I
offer you, I might be excused for being Auctor enim tanti muneris ille mihi.
Mart. Lib. 7. Ep. 51.
ambitious of such favor from one, I am so highly to honor, and who has been
so loyal a Non mihi divitias dando majora dedisses.
Ovid. de Pont. Lib. 2. Eleg. 8.
Benefactor to my Sovereign. I shall remit my self to your Graces goodness, if
you vouchsafe to cast your eye here, knowing Anxaer. apud Plut. in Apophth.
Non minus est regium parva libenter ac prompte accipere, quam magna tribuere.
And shall only say, the utmost and sole end of this Muses Sacrifice (such as
it is, seeming now, at l^ast as an abrupt Argutos inter videor strepere anser
olores.
Virg. Egl. 9. F^^ctilibus nostris exonoratus eris.
Martial. Lib. 5. Epig. 60.
Echo to the perfect Encomii that have been every where already heard of you)
is to pay in part my debt of gratitude I owe, as a sharer in the heart-obliging
kind Services you have done these Kingdoms, and to offer up my votes for a
continuance and increase of all Ore ferant grates, quoniam non possumus ipsi
Dii tibi, qui referent, si pia facta vident.
Ovid. de Pont. Lib. 2. Eleg. 11. -- Haec ara tuebitur omnes.
Virg. Aeneid. Lib. 2.
Blessings and Honors to you, according to your just Merits and own just
Desires,

AS, My Lord, The most humble admirer of your Graces Virtues, The most
affectionate and faithful of your Servants, And the most truly zealous of your
Votaries. W. A.

To the READER,
THere be two Arts, says Duo sunt Arts; quae possunt homines locare in
amplissimo gradu dignitatis; Vna Imperatoris, altera Oratoris boni. Ab hac enim
Pacis ornamenta retinentur: Ab illa Belli pericula repelluntur. Cic. pro Mur.
Cicero, that are of great power to advance a man to a most high state of
Honor: The one* A good Commander; the other, A good He must needs be accounted
the best Orator, who persuades with the greatest facility, and the fewest words.
Orator. This of necessity in time of Peace, the other in War. These two
accomplishments we have most exquisitely Maximus ille armis, maximus ille toga.
Ovid. ad Liviam.
united in our great Worthy Duke: but so, that in our reconciliation to our
native Sovereign, after so long Rebellion, the power and Energy of his Speech
(sedating all our disturbances without any bloodshed or contrast) seemed to
have the winning chief command. And now we are at quiet, it is the virtue of his
Vimque parat, sed vi non est opus.
Ovid. Met. Lib. 14. Fab. 17.
Sword that seems most to secure us in the happy condition we are in. His
Oratory seemed then to have no need of other arms. Virg. Aeneid. Lib. 1.
Ille regit dictis animos and pectora mulcet.
-- Alciati Emblem. 180.
Quamvis durissima corda,
Eloquio pollens ad sua vota trahit.And his Arms now seem to have no need of
his Oratorie.

Homer (...). Iliados.
(...). In manibus enim finis belli.
Senecae in Hercule furente Tragaedia. 1.
Omnis in ferro est salus.
Yet as both then reality fortified one another, so do they now, by being as
Virtues divinely conjoined and so rarely intermixed in each other, that they
cannot be distinguished or consist asunder Mart. Lib. 5. Epig. 20.
Nulla ducis virtus dulcior esse potest. Both these Arts we may see together in
what Macrobius makes concur to the generation of True Valor, that is, says
he, a virtue, quae animum super pericli metum agit. Here is that spirit
insouls, our Heroes Sword, and compriseth Magnanimitatem, Fiduciam,
Securitatem, Magnificentiam, Tolerantiam, Firmitatem. These are the nervous
parts of his Eloquence, and the Thom. Aquin. secund* secund. q. 123. art. 2.
Schoolman defining true Valor, mixeth it in both Arts together, and says, It
is Firmitas animi in sustinendis and repellendis his in quibus maxim est
difficile firmitatem habere propter bonum virtutis. Who clearly perceives not
as well the Soldier as the Orator in this definition, may consider Agesilaus
his answer to one who asked him, What was requisite to make an accomplished
Commander Stob. Sermon. 12.
Adversus hosts audacia, says he, Et in oblata opportunitate ratio and
consilium. Here are Cicero's, Hercules Pillars, the ^uc usque licet of the most
renowned Champion. Can any pretend to greater Reason and Counsel, to more
Eloquence and Oratorie than he who persuades three bleeding Kingdoms, after
twenty years of civil discord, to shake hands together, bespeaks them to peace
without using other Power he has sufficient to force them to it? And where
shall we find worse enemies than our selves, or a greater courage than his who
wins us? Erasm. in similib.
Facilius, says Eras^^^s, insculpes gemmis quae voles, si terebra ferveat. Ita
magis movebit Orator, si non solum acriter dicat sed ferveat, and amet id quod
laudat, oderit quod vituperat. Our Heroic Orator had little less to do in our
Conversion from Rebellion than gemmis insculpere. We see in his brow and eyes
thunder and lightening threaten that stubborn vice he would break us from, and
the sphere again bespread with a smiling heart serenity to invite the
approaches of Loyalty and Peace, to welcome: the return of our long wanted Sun.
Amat id quod lauda^, odit quod vituperat, sic movet Orator. Though the pity of
his heart detesting bloodshed, makes him desirous to spare all, and so crown
Peace with a Crown of V. Imagini de Dei. p. 234. Lib. 9. in Mercu^io.
Roses; yet rather than suffer all to be lost in pity to some, rather than she
should want her Crown, he has thousands of armed hands ready after action in
triumph to make it of Laurel.

His -- Pacem armatus amavit.
Lucan. Lib. 9.
Sword attends him, while he woes the factious members to Union, and maintains
the long disputed prerogative of the Head. All he acts and says bears
authority from the candor of his Loyal Zeal. Terebra fervet, sic gemmis
insculpit. Thus our Noble George is the speech and action of our Government,
the hand and heart of our happiness. -- Memento
(Hae tibi sunt Arts) pacique imponere morem.
Virg. Aen. Lib. 6.
These are the two so powerful Ciceronian Arts advance that Worthy is the Tu
potes and patriae miles and esse decus.
Mart. Lib. 6. Epig. 25.
Honor of our Nation, are the Wings that carry his divine Soul to an height of
virtue we adore. Our good Orator persuades us, and our good Commander rules us
with such efficacy of speech and such incontroleable authority, that the Muse
who sings not his stupendous worth, must needs be senseless. Hor. Lib. 4. Ode.
8.
Si dignum laud virum Musa vetat mori. Ibidem.
Si coelum Musa beat. Hor l. 4. Od. 9.
Si virtus sine carminum open Oblivione deletur. Socr. dict. Stob. Ser. 1.
Si thus Diis, laus vero bonis viris tribuenda est, Our Defendendi sunt qui
imerentes accusantur injuriarum; land coronandi qui ob bonum aliquod caeteris
praestant excelluntqne. Stob. Sermon. 1.
duty then dictates to us our Generals Encomium, which duty in magnifying this
Subject, we know to be Laus a conscientia, non a vulgo aestimanda est.
Aug. Tract. sup. Epist. beat. Joan.
such as neither modesty nor ignorance can make apology for silence. When our
Clio sees all our discord reduced into harmony, who will not expect her
applausive voice to the Skilful kind Composer? Be our obligation to our General
never so great, the ingratitude of not acknowledging it, will make it much
greater. It can be no wonder to observe the sick heart upon recovery
transported with joy, that languished like ours before, so desperately and so
long under the pains of sorrow. There is none of us all, I presume, whose dear
Fortunes, Lives and Privileges at stake and hazard before, are by our Dukes
free goodness secured to us now, but (since he enjoyes from him so great a
purchase for a song, paying him only thanks) could wish (for the sutableness of
Verse for the purpose, and the most fit tender of his Grace-cup from a Muses
hand) that he had in his assistance the joined hands of the whole Maeonian
society, and would gladly drink up the Helicon if he were able to enlarg^ his
heart for the cordial sense of that happiness by which he lives.

If my Non opus est nobis nimium lectore guloso.
Hunc volo qui fiat non sine pane satur.
Mart. lib. 10. E. 59.
Reader Non omnes arbusta juvant, etc.
Vir. Ecl. 5
cannot fancy to gather a Posie here under the Pindus we behold, in our Quoties
in altos Nubium tractus: Ego apis
Matinae More modoque Carmina fingo.
Hor. lib. 4. ode. 2.
low shadie vale, Hor. Lib. 4. Ode. 2.
Pindarum quisquis studet aemulari, Ibidem.
Laurea donandus Appollonaii. If he be such and so qualified, there is nothing
at all in these few leaves (that while he looks they should advance, finds but
Hor. Lib. 3. Ode. 3.
Magna modis tenuare parvis) which can or is desired to delight him more than
the invitation he has to endeavor his best to make our Dukes fame rival his
soul. This ambition will be excusable here from the example set us by that
great Monarch Vide, Cyrum in Plut. vitis.
Cyrus, who never desired others to engage themselves in any exercise with him,
but such as he knew were better practiced in it than himself. His end and aim
you will easily conjecture was both their profit and his own; not to displease
them, while he sought pleasure from them, to allow them the prize and satisfy
both others and himself with the Delight and Benefit of their Virtue.

For this twofold satisfaction to you, Delight and Benefit, what could not be
afforded you from my own fancy, I have endeavored to supply, by swelling the
Margent with the allusions of some Authors, and those chiefly of the Poets,
which for being long since known, say, they lie dormant and unregarded in this
Age of Novelties, where they show nothing new, yet as some fashion* reviving
after a long time laid aside, you per adventure may welcome, now they appear
again. If not, for the small pains there can be lost, you will fully satisfy
me (who most devoted to their authority am so tender of their honor) if you
allow them (what many Ages has been their glory) power and ability to enrich
you with this double interest. Et prodesse solent, etc.

Descend coelo, and dic age tibia
Regina longum Calliope melos.
Seu voce nunc mavis acuta,!
Seu fidibus citharave Phaebi.
Hor. Lib. 3. Ode. 4. Atlas under Olympus.
HOw Et qwo te carmine dicam?
Virg. Georg. l. 2. -- O Fama ingens --
Quibus coelo tu laudibus aequem?
Virg. Aen. 1. 11. -- Utinam modo dicere possem
Carmina digna.
Ovid Met. l. 5. fab. 6. Et cupio and nequ^o. Quid agam?
Ovid Met. l. 8. f. 4.
shall Man speak thy Power, how write thy Praise,
Whose Godlike Sopitos ignes Carolo regniq* coronam
Cum sceptro tribuit.
Virg. Aen. 1. 8.
gifts are crowns and peaceful days?
While our weak eye deludes our The internal sense, that by its object of his
stupendous virtue is confounded.
tweaker sense,
That Is rectified by thy Intelligence.
Thy Person, and the Place of thy abode,
Speaks thee no more than man, thy Actions Mente Does adiit.
Ovid Met. l. 15. f, 2. Chara Deum soboles, magnum Jovis incrementum.
Virg. Ecl. 4. An Deus an homo sis nescio.
Cleveland in his Oration.
good.
The more we think on thee, the more abused
Our senses are, the more our thoughts confused.
How could thou when the Paulatim sese tollit mare, and altius undas
Erigit, inde imo consurgit ad aethera fundo.
Virg. Aen. 1. 7.
Waters had orespread
This Isle, Humor and ima petit, quicquid pendebat aquarum.
Tollere silva comas, stagnis emergere colles
Incipiunt, visoque die durescere valles.
Lucan. l. 4.
couch them in their own proper bed?
How could thou make a Paradise appear
Where Leviathan had before his sphere?
How make that -- Dicto citius tumida aequora placat,
Collectasque fugat nubes, solemque reducit.
Vir. Aen. l. l.
Sun and Moon shine t'us, whose light
Gives us Day now, and overrules our Night? beast
How could thou make each Isa. 6. 25. Cum canibus timidi veniunt ad pocula
dama.
Virg. Ecl. 8. Non lupus insidias explorat ovilia circum,
Ne^ gregibus nocturnus obambulat, etc.
Vir. Geor. l. 3. Ipse licet videas, cavea Fabulantur in una,
Et pariter socias carpit uterque dapes.
Mart. l. 9. ep. 72.
disagreeing Quietly -- Quem flagitat --
Vestra diem virtus, finis civilibus armis,
Quem quaes^is, adest.
Lucan. 1. 7.
repose in each others breast?
How could thou raging Clauduntur belli portae: Furor impius intus
Saeva sedit super arma and centum victus ahenis,
Post tergum nodis.
Ibid.
Discord overawe,
And calmly make it yield to Natures Law?
When Egyptian -- Caelum spissa caligine terras
Pressit, and ignavos inclusit nubibus astus.
Ovid. Met. l. 7. f. 22. -- Inducta pi^eis e nubibus umbra,
Omne latet coelum, duplicataque noctis imago.
l. 12. f. 10.
shades with numerous host
Did sorely plague us, and o'respread our coast;
When the -- Tibi Divum pater atque hominum Rex
Et mulcere dedit fluctus et tollere ventos.
Vir. Aen. l. 1. Aequora lenta jacent alto torpore ligata.
Pigrius immotis haesere paludibus unde.
Lucan. l. 5.
unconstant Floods ruling did keep
All the Extimuit Natura Chaos: rupisse videntur
Concordes Elementa moras, rursusque redire
Nox manes mistura Deis. Niger inficit horror
Terga maris: longo per multa volumina tractu
Aestuat unda minax: flatusque incerta futuri,
Turbida testantur conceptos aequora ventos.
Ibid.
Elements together in one heap;
When all things -- Inhorruit unda tenebris,
Continuo venti voluunt mare, magnaque surgunt
Aequora, dispersi jactamur gurgite vasto.
Involvere diem nimbi and nox humida coelum
Abstulit, etc.
Virg. Aen. l. 3.
jar'd and were at mortal strife,
And we, as dead, lay without sense and life;
Then to make Light, to inspire us, to renew
Old England, you then show what you can do.
When Beauty had no Form, and Form no Sire,
Nor Waters felt the quickening force of Fire;
That confused Mass was by the Almighties Word
Changed; And our Sic Chaos ex illa Naturae mole^ prioris
Digestum parts scimus habere suas.
Ovid. de Pont. l. 4. Ecl. 8.
Chaos by thy sheathed Sword,
Nothing opposed him. Your commanding Call
Wrought likewise here subjection upon all.
Your Sword hanging its head down, seemed to lowre,
And drooped to find your -- Signa ego --
-- Et arma
Militibus sine cade --
Direpta vidi.
Hor. lib. 3. ode 5.
Word of greater power.
His fancy must from all offense be free,
Ascribes thy Maker's Image unto -- Jovis inclita proles.
Ovid. Met. l. 9. f. 3.
Thee.
When the old Serpent had poisoned us with lies,
And made our hearts yield to our trat'rous eyes;
When curses thick had for our stubborn vice,
Spread thorns and briars ore our Paradise;
When O fortunatae gentes --
-- Quae nos fortuna quietos
Sollicitat, suadetque ignota lacessere bella?
Virg. Aen. l. 11. Tum vero and gemitus morientum, and sanguine in alto
Armaque corporaque, and permisti caede virorum
Semianimes volvuntur equi.
Ibid. -- Conjurataque undique pugnant
Agmina, pro causa meritum impugnante fidemque.
Ovid. Met. 1. 5. f. 1.
Rebellion Charons bo^t did take,
To drown our Souls in the Infernal Lake;
To pay our Debts then, to redress our Te Duce, siqua manent sceleris vestigia
nostri,
Irrita perpetua solvent formidine terras.
Virg. Enl. 4.
Woes,
And make us friends with Heaven, you interpose.
He cannot but must be -- Partim divine mentis and haustus
Aethereos dixere.
Verg. Geo^. l. 4.
divine, does prove
A Gospel of Truth, Loyalty and Love,
Suffers for others, Nunc sinitis sine Mart capi.
Ovid. Met. l. 3. f. 7. Eloquioque virum morbisque iraque furentem
Molliet.
Lib. 13. f. 1.
speaks their cures, and is
Mortalities Wonder, Delight and Bliss,
As when He came the Worlds great Ransom paid
Just such a Peace it had then, you here made.
His Fancy must from all offense be free,
Ascribes the Image of thy God to thee.
Herod's and Pilats witness will be good,
To prove Redemptions bond was draw with blood.
Our Cum status Vrbis erit, qualem nune auguror esse,
Et nullus populi contrahit ora dolor.
Ovid de Pont. l. 3. El. 1.
Freedom from you we receive, as though
Mars, with age weakened, could not strike a blow;
As if by Wars long exercise, our spite
Were blunted, and its fires H^^^nimis longo satiate ludo.
Hor. l. 1. I. ode 2. Per tot bella manus satiatae sanguine tandem
Destituere ducem: tum maesto calssica paulum
Intermissa sono, claususque and frigidus ensis
Expulerat belli furias: tum praemia miles
Dum meliora petit, damnat Causamque Ducemque.
Lucan. l. 5.
extinguish't quite.
Who made the Earth, was greater by it in show,
This Orb you have made, appears to lessen you.
We are confused at this strange Act from Thee,
Serve your Time out, then set your Master free.
Yo' express your Might and Worth to rule the Land,
And then quit both your Self and your Command.
What shall we say? By making of us free,
You have inthral'd us to an Ecstasy.
When we have Words, our lingering thoughts delay
In -- Dat Georgius Anglis
Merit is majora fideque
Munera.
Ovid. Met. lib. 13. fab. 4. Dat Carolo claras auro gemmisque coronas. f. 6, 7.
Jamque novum terrae stupeant lucescere solemn.
Virg. Ecl. 6.
admiration, and -- Mentem jam verba paratam
Destituunt, blandaeque juvat tua facta trahentem
Indulgere more.
Lucan. l. 5.
will not let us say.
Give us, Great Charles, free libert yt' admire.
This Diamond basis of thy Starry Spire.
Diamonds cannot rate his value down,
Whose head's not fitted with a triple Crown.
The glory of ten Earths is all too vain,
To guerdon him gives this his Sovereign.
As you are greatned by his yielding powers:
So's Humilitas est mons magnus, in cujus summitate lux est non modica, and
honestarum personarum, i. e. sanctarum virtutum pulcherrima turba: sed qui ad
hunc pervenire desiderat, necesse est ut per gradus quosdam ascendat, si hunc
m^^tem agnoscere and inhabitare affectat. Anshelmus. de similitudinibus 99.
he too by submitting unto yours.
Sicut species Aromaticae cum in pulverem rediguntur, vehementer redolent: lta
hominis bona, cum per humilitatem quasi comminuta fuerunt, Deo sunt gratiora.
Guilhelmi Paral. in summa vitiorum. l. 1.
Humility braying this Noble's worth,
What Odours does the bruised spice Sicut mel concordat in confectionibus
Medicine cum omnibus diversitatibus specierum; sic humilita^ is dulcedine
condiuntur omnia genera virtutum. Hug. de Claustro animae. 1. 3.
send forth?
His falls his rise, while the kind courted Earth,
Gives his force like Antaeus's new birth.
He, as the shot from great Artilery,
The lower let down, the higher scales the Quanto quisque sibi plura negaverit,
A Diis plura feres.
Hor. l. 3. ode 16.
sky.
Humility makes his great Fame and Worth,
The Widows Oil to increase by pouring forth.
Humility in Rebels broils that is
Magnanmous, and lowly falls in peace.
Humilitas torrenti similis est. Quemadmodum enim is
aestate tenuior, quasi serpit, hyeme vero atque vere inu^dat:
Sic etiam humilitas and^^ Bernardi Justiniani in vita Laurenti^,
Justiniani.

A Torrent thus in Winter that does flow
(...) Trees and Mounts, in Summer runs Sic ego torrentem, qua nil obstabat
eunti,
Lenius, and modico strepitu decurrere vidi.
Ov. Met. l. 3. f. 7.
below,
The higher Solcum est altissime provectus in Zodiaco tum tardis simi mot^^
est. It a quo Fortuna te subvexerit altius, hoc oportet (...) minusque ^eroci
esse, Roterodami de institutione Principle.
Sol climbes in the Zodiac,
The more in his swift motion grows s^ack.
The higher led by Fortune Great George gets,
The more is noble Soul to Charles remits.
But for our Allegiance we should deem
All Earthly Titles too profane for him.
But for your sake alone, whose breath and rays
M^ke the kind Air and Sun that spread his baies.
-- Non tam portas intrare patentes
Quam fregisse juvat: nec tam patiente colono
Arva premi, quam si ferro populetur and igni.
^oncissa pudetire via, civemque videri.
Lucan. l. 2.
Caesar and Alexander, Hi non implerunt cupientes omniamentes.
Ouicquid fodit Iber, quicquia Tagus expulit auri,
Quodque legit dives summis Arimaspus arenis.
Vt rapiant, parvo scelus hoc vaenisse putabunt.
Lucan l. 7. Fortunam Superosque suos in sanguine cernunt.
^bi.
both these were
To^ weak for Atlas's to bear his Sphere. (lamps,
Where shall we make the worlds bright shining
The renowned Heroes meet but in their camps?
Yet they are but glow-wormes here. Each Dux fugit and nullas ducentia signa
cohortes,
^bi. Quam seriem rerum long a praemittere pompa?
Qu^d potuit belli facies?
ibi.
General
Sees his enfeebled self and Standard -- Sperantes omnia dextras
Exarmare datur, quibus hic non sufficit Orbis. l. 5.

fall
Their Chariot steeds -- Sanguineo sequitur Bellona flagello.
Virg. Terror and Pavor are said to be the Horses draw Mars's Chariot.

Terror conjoined with Fear,
Bellons slasht along in full career.
To type the Warriers Wolves and Vulters among other things are said to be
^^crificed to Mars.
Wolves and Vultures stood
About their Altars swum with humane Caesar inarmafurens, nullas sine sanguine
fuso
(...) habere vias.
Lucan. l. 2.
blood.
The Furies set the aim to their commands,
While they Olympus clime with Harpies h^nds.
With flattering gloss of good but shows them high
The fairest color paints their dignity,
-- Threicio blandius Orpheo
Auditam moderere arboribus fidem.
Hor. l. 1. Ode 24. Tu potes Tygres comitesque siilvas
Ducere and rivos celeres morari.
l3. Ode 11. D^ctus and Ampbion Thebanae conditor arcis,
Saxa movere sono testudinis, and prece blanda
Ducere quo vellet.
Hor. art. po^t,
Amphions music Policy tunes here,
And -- Quid facundia posset
Tum patuit.
Ovid. Met. l. 13. fab. 1.
Charms obedien^e from each listening ear.
"Resist who ^an by any Martial skill,
"Valor or strength of a^mes that wants a will.
"Where three Realms with their whole associate
"Only oppose as they refuse to fight.
Monck conquers not to gain but give. His strife (Might,
T^n^s not to spoil or kill, but Non putat in victos saevum distringere ferrum.
Lucan l. 7. Hic victor vincit, victis ut parcere possit,
Clausit and aetern^ civiea bella sera.
Ov. de Pont. l. 1. El. 3.
force to life.
Y^u'd as his Lo^d from him thus Worlds receive,
Were all they had or wished for his to give.
They were enslaved to their own wishes. He
Subjects his wishes, while himself is free.
"Who hunger needs must be in want. Who seek,
"New wanted blood and spirits, must be weak.
T us we see them, while each great heart aspires
To power it had not, poor by their defires.
His stream runs to the spring, and pays its store
To the great Ocean that makes it more.
" An Empire is but as a -- Miratur limen Olympi,
Sub pedibusque videt nubes and sidera.
Virg. Fell. 5.
cloud to him,
" Templa Deis, mores populis dedit, otia ferio,
Astra suis, Coelo sidera, serta Jovi.
Herculeum tantis nomen non sufficit actis.
l. 9. ep. 303.
Bestows the Scepter and the Diadem.
Prince of his Soul, the soul of Princely Ipsees gloria Martis universi,
Ipse es omnia solus.
Mart. l. 5. Ep. 25. Quem chartis, famaque damus populisque loquendum.
Ep. 26.
might,
Joves heart, the guide of -- Quem genuit pacis amico quies.
l. 9. Ep. 100.
peace and life of right,
Here Is Zeales Church, Loyalty the Service says,
Heaven blesses, and our Charles the blessing has.
Here Piety with all the Graces, seems
To sing in Chorus to the Angels Hymns.
Charity with her children all in plate
Feast, and in rich attire sit all in state.
Electra signifies Serenity. Ab (...) Sol and (...) serenus; called, anima
Sphaerae Solis and the mother of the Rainbow. Nascitur enim Iris ex aqua and
serenitate^e refractione radiorum scilicet: Arist. in Meteorol.
Electra that so long from hence was fled,
Made Mithras sphere as Saturns look like lead
She returned now, th'orbe's quickened and ensoul'd,
And all his days road paved with bu^nisht gold.
Iris before in Melancholy shrouds,
Veiled in th'obscure attire of tattered Clouds,
In every sort of colored bravery,
Paints now gay scenes of Jam Cytherea Choros ducit Venus, imminente Luna:
Junctaeque Nymp^is Gratiae decentes,
Alterno terram quatiunt pede, etc.
Hor. l. 1. Ode 4.
triumph in the sky.
She wept in showers before, now cannot refrain
To bow't attend with smiles true Honors train.
" Honor is represented a young man clothed in purple with a Laurel-garland
on his head, Cupid leading him by the hand to the Goddess Virtue.
Honor for Robes wears but a Fustian suit,
" When Power Supreme must judge and Execute.
" Himself Vis consilii expers mole ruit su^,
Vim temperatam Dii quoque provehunt.
l. 3. Ode 4.
degrades when makes with his own hands
" Blood his purple, and does his own commands.
" As our Our State-power in the time of our late Rebellion.
false Jove from the true power revolts,
" And Cyclops-like makes his own Thunderbolts.
" As Mars with toil, pain and wounds made a God,
" And sits inshron'd within an Heaven of blood.
" Then only sits on Cushions and in state,
" When his mere breath gives the only force to Fate.
" Whose crone's stained with his friends blood, does defame
" The richest virtue can advance his name.
" Honor and Virtue then are fitly seen
" When no opposing forces hand between.
Thus Lightning to the very so^le does glance,
And from the Body finds no hinderance.
Thus the Sun sweetly opes the womb of the Prodiga divitias alimentaque mitia
tellus
Suggerit, atque epulas sine caede and sanguine p^^bet.
l. 15. f. 2
Earth,
To give the Infant- Spring its flowery Birth.
And thusth' Almighty with remorse and fears,
Martels flints, and makes stony hearts flow te^rs.
And thus George Qualis ubi oppositas nitiaissima Selis imago
Evincit nubes nullaque obstante reluxit.
Ov. Met. l. 14. f. 17
moves the people, and does still
Their Sacrifices docuit ritus, gentemque feroci
Adsueta^^ bello, pacis tra^uxit adartes.
l. 15. f. 44.
Factious rage by ways invisible.
He Israel forth the Desert brings, when they
In twenty years time seem but h^lf their way,
Withdraw's Nights sable Veil obscures our days,
And cheers our eyes with Sols long -- Sol qui t^ctus aquosis
Nubibus ante fuit, victis e nubibus exit.
Ov. Met. l. 5. f. 10.
hidden rays.
Blessed Hero of mysterious Desert,
Deny a Crown your hand, and give't your heart?
Homage to that you shun^ Fly Soveraigntie,
Yet follow it upon your bended knee^
When you had stilled the Antennaeque gemant; ac sine funibus
Vix durare carinae
Possint Imperiosius.
Aequor, etc.
Hor. l. 1. Ode 14. -- Omnique a part feroces
Bella gerunt venti, fretaque indignantia miscent.
l. 11. f. 10 -- Cum coel^stibus undis
Aequoreae miscentur aquae: carer ignibus ether,
Caecaque nox premitur tenebris hyemisque suisque.
Ibi.
tempest with your
And lulled each billow in each others arms;
Could not the sen^e of your own merits, keep charms
Ambition in you to command the ship?
When you would exorcis'd Devils out of men,
Could not you suffer themt' adore you then
Those that to peace through such great -- Vulgus ad armaruit.
Hinccruor and caedes.
Ov. fast. l. 6: Quod genus boc hominem? quaeque hunc tam barbara mor^m
Permittit patria? hospitio prohibemur arenae.
Bella cient, prim vetant consistere terra
Vir. Aeneid. l. 1. -- Prodit bellum quod pugnat utroque,
Sanguineaque manu crepitantia concutit arm^,
Vivitur ex rapto: fratrum quoque gratia ra^aest.
Imminet exitio vir conjugis, illa mariti:
Jurida terribiles, etc.
Ovid. Met. l. 1. f. 4. -- Propago
Contemptrix Superum, saevaeque avidissima caedis,
Et violenta fuit: scires e sanguine natam,
fab. 5. Impositaest sero tandem (...) ultima bello.
l. 13. f. 2.
bro^ls you would led,
Would not you then permit to make you Head^
Could not the Estates of such were forced to f^^e,
-- Vndique totis
Vsqu^ adeo turbatur agris.
Virg. Eclog. 1. -- Patriae fumantia tecta relinquunt.
ibi. Sea postquam leges bello siluere coactae,
Pellimur e patriis laribus.
Lucan. l. 1. Exilioque domos and dulcia limina mutant,
Atque alio patriam quaerunt sub sole jacentem.
Virg: Geor. l. 2.
Banished for what was called Malignancie?
The Riches of those great and noble Poor,
Might sequeste^d come begging to your door;
Dowries escheated by new Martial Laws,
Of such whose husbands stood not for the Cause;
The rights confi^cated of those whose Sites
Would not add fuel to the -- Pervenit ad aures
Belida nomen Palamedis and inclyta fama
Gloria; quem falsa sub proditione Pelasgi
Insontem, infando judicio, qui bella vetabat,
Demisere nesi.
Virg Aenid. l. 2.
Public fires?
Could none of these, nor the rule ore the Maine,
Nor yet all the Indian Ships tempt thee to gain?
Could not The Exchequer, all the banks of F^te,
Polite Privatus illis sensus erat br^vis,
Commune magnum.
Hor. l. 2. Ode 15.
slights to drain money from the State?
Could not that Silver-coyne whose Virtue moves
All humane hearts, and ciments fast their loves?
Could not illustrious Aurum per medios ire satellites,
Et perrumpere amat saxa, etc.
-- Subruit aemulos
Reges muneribus, etc.
l. 3. Ode 16. Dignus es argento, fulvo quoque dignior auro.
Ov. de P. l. 3. E. 8
Gold such wonder breeds,
As the full noon-sight of Sols glorious Steeds;
Nor all the Vsqueadeo solus ferrum mortemque timere
Auri nescit amor: tum pars vilissima rerum
Certamen movistes opes.
l. 3.
wealth three Kingdoms can disburse,
Move thee to adore the Idol of the purse?
Could not the applausive breath did so contest
To lift thee up higher then all the rest?
Delight of having thy Worth be in story
The sole Artificer of thine own glory?
Pleasure of being esteemed that regent Light
Alme Sol, curru nitido diem qui
Promis and celas.
Hor. carmen secular.
Opens and shuts to others day and night?
Could -- Pacemque tueris,
Incussaque tenens dubio vestigia mundo.
Lucan. 1. 2.
no magnificent or pompous thing
Fix on thy will the Title of a Illum non populi fasces nec purpura Regum,
Flexit, and infidos agitans discordia Fratres.
Vir. Geor. l. 2.
King;
But what thy Non tibi quid liceat sed quid fecisse decebit,
Occurrit, mentemque domat respectus honesti.
-- Non sic inflectere sensus
Humanos edicta valent, quam vita regentis.
Claudianus de quarto Honorii consulatu.
Conscience wisely dictates to thee,
Must be thy law and only serve to woo thee?
But that what was decreed above, you must
Resolve to execute and -- Stat sententia tradere regnum
Invicto Carolo, finemque imponere bello.
O. Met. l. 8. fab. 1.
right the just?
But that what ere opposed or tempted thee,
Must Acer and ad palmae per se cursurus honores;
Si tamen horteris fortius ibit equus.
Ov. de Pont. lib. 2. El. 11.
spur the faster to thy Primum argumentum compositae mentis existimo, posse
consistere and secum morari.
Seneca apud Lucil. Epist. 2. Justum and tenaeem propositi virum,
Non civium ardor prava jubentium,
Non vultus instantis tyranni,
Mente quatit solida
Hor. l. 3. Ode 3.
first decree?
Bright Seraphim of Love, each humane sense
Is ravished with thy Pulerum eminere est inter illustres viros.
Sen. Oct. Sed tantum virtus alios tua praeterit omnes:
Ante citos quantum Pegasus ibat equos.
Ov. de. Pont. l. 4: El. 7.
super- excellence.
Love, whose pure flames have so divine a Birth,
To Have nourishment from ought's allied to Earth.
Such love where goodness sweetly is impressed,
And whose free kindness makes all th'interest.
Excellence, where no higher worth can be,
But what is the sole just Ipse quoque aethereas meritis invectus es arees:
Quo non exiguo facta labor via est.
Ovid. 5. trist. 4. Quo nihil in terris ad finem Solis ab ortu.
Clarius, excepto Caesare, Mundus habet.
O. de Pont. l. 3. El. 1. -- Victorque viros supereminet omnes.
-- Nec Romula quondam
Virg. Aen. l. 6. Vllo se tantum tellus jactabi^^lumno.
ibi.
right of Sovereignty.
Such excellence where loyal duty reigns,
And captive Nature's kept in Golden chai^^.
Look from thy height and see how all things show,
At this great distance from thee here below.
See how this sordid Earth under thy tread;
Towers as our hearts false Heaven above our head.
See how strangely that patch transforms our nature,
Till 't hideous seem and frightful in each feature.
See how that crowd of atoms blinds our sight,
That all thy Videtur magnitudo animi quasi splendour quidem and ornamentum
virt^tum omnium. Arist. l. 4. Eth. c. 3.
glorys beams scarce lend us light.
How like Night or some gloomy Cloud, that lies
Between their splendid luster and our eyes.
How here like Mermidons w'appear, while they
Heighten that Sun spreads out our brightest day.
This high stupendous charge you have alone,
To give a greater power then you own.
Thy -- Cui tanta potestas
Concessa est?
Lucan. l. 4.
privilege had ever man before,
That may thy hearts Image make and adore?
With miracle you spread out Glorys wings,
To raie Imposuitque comae radios.
Ovid. Met. l. 2. f. i.
such beams give glory unto Kings,
Solely to have a power to thee given,
T'anoint on Earth one in the place of Heaven.
Those inspired with unknown Tristius haud illis monstrum, nec saevior ulla
Pestis, and ira Deum stygiis sese extulit undis.
Vir. Aen. l. 3.
new lights of grace,
Even to take the Lords Annointed's place:
Who howsoever large and wide thrones spread,
Rounding them all to model their own head,
New formed, new named them, made great Mountains plain,
And all but the own heights level as their brain.
Who while they acted what was just and meet,
Were power'd to set Justice under their Jura silent, muteque tacent sine
vindice leges.
Ovid ad Liviam.
feet.
Fully commanded her and with their word,
Made her give them the measure of her sword.
Who'd right to wrong like those great Princes rove
I'th'air, defying all the powers above.
Such Boanerges were our ages wonder,
Whose Swords stamped Laws their -- Supinus arenas.
Ejectat, flammamque fero vomit ore Typ^oeus.
Ov. Met. l. 5. fab. 6
fire mouths voic't with thunder.
Such great Salmonei would like Joves appear,
And speak us terror from their Brazen sphere.
Such the Caelitibus fecisse metum.
Ov. Met. l. 5 f 5.
Gods- overawing Fratresque tendentes opaeo
Pelion imposuisse Olympo.
Hor. l. 3. Ode 4.
Titans, strove
To win the prize of Heaven and conquer -- Manibus magnum rescindere coelum
Aggressi, superisque Jovem detrudere regnis, etc.
Virg. Aen. lib. 6.
Jove.
Could none of these sublime undaunted Spirits,
Invite thee to the example of their merits?
Blaze like them, and when you would have life's blaze out,
Command as Otho not being able to maintain the Empire against Vitellius,
killed himself. Et fodit certa pectore nuda manu, Mart. l. 6. Ep. 32.
Oath your own sword to do it?
Or as the Brazen head with your own breath,
And the Times in your mouth encounter Imperia male parta, male retenta
obruuntur.
Livius l. 9.
Death?
Worshipped you not their The Temple of Honor and Virtue stood close together.
honor, cause Virtue
Had with her Temple here lost all her due?
Was It your pity to see our Hectors slain,
And in their friends to torture Ter circum Iliacos, raptaverat Hectora muros.
Virg. Aen. l 1.
dragged again?
T^^ Amalthaeas plenty all poured out,
And made the daily surfeit of the rout?
To see the Devil steal our hearts with lies,
And say The mouth of Truth, La bocca della Verit^, was an Oracle in Rome
Truth's mouth gives out his Oracles?
Our floating Isle like the Tirrhenus stone,
S^e broken sink under Rebellion?
To see Mordorus spoiled Cerces Temple, and Epirus Neptunes.
Mordorus and Epirus turn
Gods -- Turres convellunt sacraque tecta,
Auratasque trabes.
Virg. Aen. l. 2. Stat eruor in templis: multaque rubentia caede
L^ b^ ica laxa madent,
Lucan. 1. 2.
Camps and Palaces into their Urne?
E^ch precious thing was sacred and divine,
Plunder with rage and cast as Pearl to swine?
See Piety bestuck with wounds all'ore,
And languishing lie weltring in her gore:
Like him so left by Thieves and dying lay,
While no Samaritan must pass the way?
To see Truth lie like Luke 10. ver. 30, 31, 32, 33. Luke 16. ver. 20, 21.
Lazarus diseased,
And Alba minus saevis lacerantur brachia cultris,
Cum furit ad Phrygios enthea turba modos.
Mart. l. 11, Ep. 85.
torn by Dogs by whom she should bin eased?
To see Vincit amor patriae.
Vir. Aen. l. 6.
England surrounded by the Sea,
Lie Quo quo scelesti ruitis? aut cur dexteris
Aptantur enses conditi?
Hor. Epod. 7.
bleeding in Nobilitas cum plebe perit, lateque vagatur
Ensis: and anullo revocatum est pectore ferrum.
Lucan. l. 2.
each vein like Seneca?
See Statesmen would as Nero Nero signifies Virtue and Fortitude.
V. Gellio. lib. 2. cap. 21.
virtuous seem,
In their hearts and acts bloody Eheu cicatricum est sceleris pudet
Fratrumque.
Hor. l. 1. ode 35. Pro curia inversique, mores
l. 3. ode 5. Faecunda culpae secula l.
1. ode 6. Impii nam quid potuere majus?
ode 11.
be as him:
And to their native Country prove no other,
Then did that Monster-Tyrant to his Mother?
To see our Sovereigns fires buried lie
Under th'Ashes, ere he be like to dye?
To see our Realms life, days light, At pater obductos luctu miserablis aegro
Condiderat vultus, and si modo credimus, unum
Esse diem sine sole ferunt.
Ovid. Met. l. 2. Fab. 2.
Phoebus run
So long about the Earth without the Sun?
See, while the Rusticks in the Vineyard rant,
The Caesareas spectate cruses, spectate catenas,
Lucan. l. 7. -- Vellus aquarum
Defluit in vultus Caesaris inque sinus.
Mart. l. 4. ep. 3. Perdiderant jam vota metum, securaque flebat
Tristitia, and lacrymis jamque peractus erat.
l. 7. ep. 46.
Royal Math. 21. ver. 37, 38, 39,
Heir in Pulsus ob invidiam solio sceptrisque paternis.
Vir. Aen. l. 10. Modo maximus ille,
Exul inops trahitur nunc,
l. 13. Fol. 2. -- Mitis in alto,
Jupiter occasu premitur, Venerisque salubre
Sidus hebet, motuque celer Cyllenius haeret,
Et calum Mars solus habet,
Lucan. l. 1. O grande Fati crimen! O gravem casum!
Mart. l. 2. Ep. 65.
Exile and in Want?
Such Amor patriae ratione valentior omni.
Ovid. de Pont l. 1. Ep. 3.
thoughts as these made thee breath thick with fears
And with thy Beams ray down a shower of Est honot and lacrymi^, nulloque
tacebitur ^ve,
Ovid. Met. l. 10. Fab. 9.
tears.
Breath thick with flames of love that from within
Thy breast, break and consume our World of Sin.
Made thy heart sink into each bended knee,
And vow to advance Heaven and his Rex h^bea^ noster similes tibi mill
ministros.
Mart. lib. 9. Epi^. 37.
Majesty,
To force all yield to thy -- Est animus tibi
Rerumque p^udens, and secun^is
Tempo^ibus dub^isque rectus.
Hor. l 4. Ode 9.
Comman^ing word,
Conquer thy Gentes barbaras impatientesque aliem arbitrii facilius est re^ere,
quam animum suum continere and sibi reddere. Cass. lib. 3. Epist.
self and then -- Melius sine caede moraque,
Impensaque sui poterit superare ^ruoris.
Ovid Met. lib. 8, fab. 1.
lay down thy Sword.
It was your greater courage thus to faint,
And quit your Conqu'rous name to triumph Saint.
As George before they only styled you
Their Champion but they will Ille Deum vitam accipiet, divisque videbit
Permistos heroas; and ipse videbitur illis.
Vir. Ecl. 4.
Canonize you now.
You safe within need now fear none without you,
Being -- Nobilitas posset te sola tueri.
Claudiamus de quarto Honoii consulatu. -- Te vel s^la tueri
^^ma po'est rerum, toto quas gessi it is orb,
Et nomen quod mundus amat.
lib. 8.
protected by your George about you.
Your Noble Virtue while your Sword hangs by,
Makes your foes mouths Te ducem laudant omnes, mirantur, adorant.
Mart. l. 4. (...) 49.
Canon your Victory.
The pleasure wounds of this their awed hearts feel,
-- Vtile unici
Victoris placidi fecit clementia multis.
Ovid. Met. lib. 8. b. 1
Turn them to your -- Velut ensibus ipsis
(...), invito moturus milite ferrum.
Lucan. l. 5.
Magnetic touch as fe^^
Wounds others Swords have made us -- Crescebat rabies moderaminaque ipsa
nocebant.
Ov. Met. l. 3. f. 7.
long endure,
Yours as the Weapon-salve untoucht can cure.
The while we have bin lost and did assay,
To conquer our selves that mistaken way,
If thou in stead had conquered us, and we
Been thus long Soldiers Disciplined by thee;
By this, you, being the Ark-Angel of the Host,
Would have made England the Triumphant Coast.
Angels with us had sojourned, to see
Heroic Acts above their Hierarchy
The Golden age had been but Dross to ours.
A Secon^ Charles and George with Thrones and Powers.
Ran^ ack the treasure of all Earthly pelf,
For Gemms can counte^^ (...) Charles and thy self.
You carry worth, if Edon had but two,
To prove our Eden's made by Vos duo turba estis.
Ovid Met. l. 1. fab. 7. -- Ille salutis
Est author, dux ille fuit. Sic pralia soli
Felices nullo spectant civilia voto.
Lucan, l. 4.
Charles and you.
Who can Hyperbolize come here and be
Wits Imagini di Hercule appo Francesi, etc. By the Image of Hercules, the
French understand as well the force of Eloquence as Military Discipline. v.
Imagini dei Dei. p. 251.
Hercules for Monk's Hyperbole.
If with words to set Worth forth, we may do it
By any thing that is inferior to it;
If what Nature makes the object of our love,
May value what so far transcends above;
If ought we know may be allowed to stand
A Cipher, to advance our Figure hand;
What on the powers of our Sense and Eye
Stamps no Idea but of Mystery,
Run over Virtues-rosary; and rehea^se
Each precious thing unites the Universe.
Whatere's on Earth that can of value be,
You Will find belongs to this rich Treasury.
Unite such Puissant Forces that they all
R^ndesvouze here under their General.
They Will serve as distance in Picture, to show
The most admired we have here to view.
-- Spacio majore canendum est.
N^s tamen adductos intus agemus equos.
Ovid. Fast. l. 6.
Monks worth can silence Oracles, then break
Speech from the Dumb, and make a Pibble speak.
Monk's Vices Antidote, Rue to all evil,
Herb Grace of Paradise and Cen. to Devil.
You, virtuous Sir, our A^nus castus in Gerards herb. p. 1288. D. in the
virtues.
Agnus Castus be
To our strange Frenzy and long Lethargy.
O^r (...), can hate diverse
From all without thy very touches force.
Onr Frumas ^. Capsicum p. 366. C. in virtues. ibi.
Capsicum. The evil you
Perfectly rid from King and Subjects too.
Your Serpillum. D. in virtues p. 572. ibi.
Serpillum's steeped in no Vinegar,
But with Rose Water ill effects the Cure.
From you we have our Mills Epithymum. F. in virtues, p. 574. ibi.
Epithymum,
Our States Poisons Alexipharmacum.
When Sol tramounts, and Vesta then presumes
TO infect the Air with Omnia languor habet: sylvis agrisque, viisque
Corpora foeda jacent: vitiantur odoribus auae.
-- Agunt contagia late.
Pervenit admiseros domno graviore colonos
Pestis, and in magnae dominatur maenibus urbis.
Ov. Met. l. 7. f. 22.
sick and noisome fumes,
v. Viola matronalis.
Gerards Herb. in the names. p. 463.
Hespcris then more freely does dispense
Her sweets, and you your Virtues Frankin cense.
When our Earth's hid in Night, then you display
Your brighter Beams as Nyctigretum, Lunaria, nyctil^ps.
v. Pli^y not. hist. l. 21. c. 1^. f.
Nyctilampada.
v. Pliny not. hist. lib. 25. c. 2. where he brings the authority ^ our
Zan^hus, an old W^^^er of Chronicles, to prove the virtue this herb has to
restore the dead to life again.
Balt^'s quickening power who now retrives,
See from yours here a Spring of Humane lives.
The virtue your V. Plin. not. hist. l. 22. c. 22.
Elaphoboscon brings,
Secu^es us from perfidious Serpents stings.
Our Mella fluuntilli, fert and rubus asper amomum.
Virg. Ecl. 3. -- Processit Caesaris astrum,
Astrum quo segites gauderent frugibus, and quo
Duceret apricis in collibus una colorem.
Ecl. 9. Huc summis liquuntur rupibus amnes,
Felicemque trahunt limum.
Virg. Georg. l. 2.
barren Figtrees and The ill qualities of these kind of Oaks,
See Plin. not. bist. l. 16 c. 6.
Haliphlaei,
You make fruit hearts as Anacardti.
The Subjects love you from Rebellion
As Honey draw from the Melanes stone.
You are our true Memphites, as you please,
Can give the Patient remedy and ease.
Our Red-seas Margarite transcends all price,
And shows the Counter-hue to bloody vice.
Makes peace and innocence appear, th^^ pr^^d
White pleasing colors for Wars frightful red,
Exterminates guilt with such pu^i^ie,
As turns a Crimson to a Crystal Sea.
You are our dear choice amulete of State,
Expels all poisonous and bewitching Fate.
Furies See it described Plin. not. hist. l. 37. c. 1c.
Androdamas Each Mithrax you
Before our Phoebus make to change his hue.
A Teuthidam in morem gladium quidem habetis; cor autem non habetis. v. Gesner.
de sepiis and loliginibus. l. 4. de Aquatilibus p. 497. h. 60.
Teuthis make as a Melagoflie
Out of civil broils waves and court the sky.
Labri pisces cauda placentes.
v. Gesner. de Aquatil. l. 4. p. 509. 30.
Labri pleased with their Tail and Rump, can bring
TO affect as Turbines S. Strombi Regem habent, cui se faciles ad obtemperandum
praebent. Gesner. lib. 4. de Frombis in Aquitil. p. 931.
Strombi do their Head and King.
You Are the That being no accid^nt or quality of the body.
Soul to the Body Politic:
In health and vigor when that is deadly sick.
Can in dead colors to the life present;
(...) Mulceat bic tygres agat hic quoque carmine quercus.
Vir. Geor lib 4.
Orphens on an ill-tun'd instrument.
(...) no^ on the humors of the State;
The body's joined to you not you to that.
The Powers and Spirits cherish it, are known
To be peculiar to you and your own.
In y^u are heaven'd a 1000 forms. Each there
Enjoyes the bl^sse of an Eternal Sphere.
Bedys Thus the Soul that comprehends all animate and inanimate parts of the
Universe, and abstracts the forms from their material substance.
you turn to spirits, and sublime,
The cordial good or peace from bloody crime
Abstract from such rank poison, what does prove
The quintessence of loyalty and love.
Insensibly you change the Rebell-creature,
Transform it into your own proper nature.
From diverse acts and accidents that fall,
You sacred power and civine Virtue call;
As the morn shedding bright beams every where,
Unite your self here to the public air.
When that with noise divided is and tossed,
You Are -- Sicut caelestia semper
Inconcussa su^ vol^untur sidere la^s^.
Fulminibus proprior terrae succendi^ur ae^,
Imaque telluris ventos, tractusque coruscos
Flammarum accipiunt: Nubes excedit Olympus
Lege Deum. Minimas re^um discordia turbat:
Pacem summa ten^nt.
Lucan. l. 2.
whole; and pure, when that is corr^p^ed most*
You from above your light derive and show,
As the Sun his though it he^e be s^en below.
The only end of the happy soul is yours,
To be unighted to the highest powers.
Yours its See Matthew. 5. 3.
perfection too. Your self cast down,
When merit calls you to a tripple Crown.
Those sense conveighing nerves that spreading go
To all our Organs, centered are in you.
You as that Sensus communis.
Common power what you retain,
Transmit to th'nighest Regio^ of the brain.
From you our vi^al spirits we require,
To make our Pulses beat, our Lungs re^pire.
Our sinews in your bridle, we turn, stand,
Retire, go, as you strain or ease your hand.
You Are the Origin that makes our Spirits move,
And all our Passions too emerge from love.
You Are policies Metaphisicks, whose soul
Effects your will and acts without control.
Your knowledge while it sits in Counsel for
The common good, your will as Emperor,
The Scepter swayes and over Justitiae cultor, rigidi servator honesti:
In commune bonus: nullo inque illius actus
Subrepit, partemque tulit sibi nata voluptas.
Lucan. l. 2.
passions reigns;
A numerous Realm made up of Sovereigns.
Thy Heaven's no As the Turks fancy Paradise to be.
place with -- Locus est, Furcas subiere columnae.
Ovid de Pont. l. 3. Eleg. 3. Stramina flavescunt, aurataque tecta videntur,
Caelataeque fores, adopertaque marmore tellus.
Ovid Met. l. ^. fab. 9. Regia solis erat sublimibus alta columnis,
Claramicante auro, etc.
Ovid Met. l. 2. fab. 1.
golden gates have bars
Of pearl, Jasper walls and floor paved with Stars.
But in thy m^nds state, such a blessed abode,
As gives thee near See John 17. v. 21, 22, 23.
communion with thy God.
Who thinks on what you have done, thinks your great Men's tua sublimis supra
genus eminet ipsum
Grandius ingenio nec tibi nomen inest.
Conveniens animo genus est tibi: No^ile namque
Pectus and Herculeae simplicitatis habes.
Ov. de Pont. l. 3. El. 3. Ingentes animos angusto in pectore versat.
Virg. Geor, lib. 4.
m^nd
Could never to a Body be confined.
Sees you above in complete notions tower,
And The nature of an Intelligence.
pass the Haec tibi vis magna est, haec mentis tanta potestus.
Mart. l. 2. Epig. 53.
height of the Souls motive power.
Your intellective virtue, has its sight
Bounded by nothing but what is infinite.
This Principle in you is winged to fly
Above all Matter, Figure, Quantity.
T'act every where at once: for every space
Provides as Governor of time and place.
Your soul fills every man, as if it were
The Sun that lends his light to every Star.
You seem to act without the bodies senses,
As though General of Intelligences.
Though you do nothing here but by your place,
Your soul yet acts by its own power and grace.
That Divine part, though it here in prison be,
Can all are round it set at Liberior Partho vivere Rege potes.
Mart. lib. 2. Ep. 53.
liberty.
The Senses are your Underofficers,
While Virtues make the Vilitas populi, Caroli illum sceptra moventque
-- Laudem ut sine sanguine penset.
Ovid Met. l. 13. f. 1.
bloodless conquest theirs.
You prove that The solid parts of a mixtum have their necessary supply of
moisture from a continual original or fouutaine, that they affirm either to be
intrinsecal or conjoined, viz. in some body joined to it. v. Peripatetic. de
natura mixti.
conjoynd Fountain or that flood,
That does maintain each mixed solid good.
Hence do we fear our States felicity,
Thy worths issue Hinc metuunt, cupiuntque dolent, gaudentque, l. 6.
bears date of life with thee.
The beams of all our loves, in thee do pass
To Tendimus buc omnes: Metam properamus ad unam.
Ovid. ad Liviam.
one sole point; as in a Burning-glasse.
Thou -- Casuros in quaelibet aequora sontes Accipit.
Lucan. l. 2.
gath'rest all our streams of Loyalty
And pou'rst them out into the Royal -- Vastos obliquent flumina fontes.
Rbipbaeas huc solue^ives, huc stagna, lacusque,
Et pigras, ubicunque jacent, effunde p^ludes,
Et miser as bellis civilibus eripe terras.
lib. 4.
Sea.
All our devotions in this Act become,
One sacrifice and solemn Hecatombe.
It Is Vni quippe vacat studiis odiisque carenti.
Lucan. lib. 2.
you act what we could -- Non pendere rerum
Nec momento sumus: nunquam felicibus armis
Vsa manus patriae primis a sedibus exul,
lib. 3.
but wish to have done,
And Maxima res effecta, viri, timor omnis abesto.
Virg. Aen. l, 11.
pay three Kingdoms Ante pererratis amborum finibus, exul
Aut Ararim Parthus bibet, aut Germania Tigrim,
Quam nostro illius labatur pectore null^.
Virg. Ecl. 1. lib. 11.
debts your self alone:
First you persuade our hearts what is fit to do,
Then our joynd strengths for force depend on you.
To you, who did our cruel Draco slay,
To you now do belong the ^ythia
The Monster As Menestratus the Dragon.
you destroy. Cleostratus
And the freed people mean Great? harles and us.
Unarmed-like Lysimachus you come
TO untongue and make our Discords Lion dumb.
Our Euthymus, whose free victorious might
Readily vindicates distressed right.
Noble Fabricius whose faith does unfold
Indies of wealth, while it contemnt its Ardua res haec est opibus non tradere
mores,
Mart. l. 11. Ep. 6.
Gold.
You our Proculeius do us all maintain,
Advancing your gifts far above your -- Sidera terra
Vt distant and flamma mari: Sic utile recto.
Lucan. lib. 8.
gain.
Marullus makes, taking off Caesar's Crown,
The Antipodes and foil to your Renown.
The Statue seems made so with wonder such
Your power is, Caesar's quickened by your touch.
Thine must be Regia, creed mihi, res est succurrere lapsis:
Convenit and tanto, quantus es ipse, viro.
Ov. de Pont* lib. 2. E. 9. Hoc tecum commune Deis.
ibi. Regum aequabat opes animis.
Virg. Geor. l. 4.
Royal blood, since' ^runs amain
To the Kings heart, and spirits every vein.
You Are Neptune to Apollo. Both employ
Your joined hands to rebuild our ruined Troy.
Our Fires and Waters Mesapes, while you
Escape them unhurt, nay do them both subdue.
That The S^n is said to be carried in a Ship upon a Crocadils back. To
signify that in the government of the Universe, next under God for the
generation of things, we are chiefly to consider the force of the Sun being
joined with humidity, whose ill qualities he corrects. v. Imagini dei Dei, p.
45.
Phoebus, may over the Ocean run,
You are the Ship that do imbarke the Sun.
The v. History of St. George, who is called by the Ethiopians Honoris Fell^.
abstract of Nobility, to disperse,
Duty and triumph through the Universe.
Thy bliss thou have in thine own heart and brain,
And art that Worthy rides in Charles's waine.
Thrice blessed now all our wishes and our hope;
The Egyptians to express the Sun, set up a Royal Scepter with an eye on the
top of it, calling it the eye of Jupiter, as being his that sees, and with his
Scepter of Justice governs all the World. V. Imagini dei Dei. p. 46.
Jove's Scepter's fixed with you Joves eye a top.
Considering all the Deities are blessed
Within the great Pantheon of thy breast;
Were we to thee a Sacrifice to pay,
We needs must call it Throxenia.
Thy Victor worth no rival Hector knows,
Who do overcome as well thy Summa est victoria amicos superare. The greatest
victory in the world is to overcome our friends: Whether they be real friends,
in out-doing them with courtesy, or counterfeit friends, by frustrating their
perfidious designs.
Friends as Foes.
Submitting to them gett'st the victory,
And when thou yieldest, make Populus superamur ab uno:
Ovid. Met. I. 12. fab. 4. 5.
all yield to thee.
Do peanance for a world that so you save,
And by preserving life conqur'st the Grave.
By making peace, thou do the Earth subdue,
And by averting judgments, win'st Heaven too.
We knew long since who Matthew. 8. 26.
rules the Sea Luctantes ventos tempestatesque sonor as
Imperio premit, ac Vinclis and carcere frenat,
-- Mollitque animos and temperat ira^.
Virg. Aen. l. 1.
and Wind.
Who Is power over him too now in thee we find.
Your Maker and your Vincendus tunc Caesar erat sed sanguine nullo,
Lucan. l. 10. p. vult. -- Decum victor, victor and ipse tui.
Mart. l. 8. Epig, 54,
King you win: thus can
Be Champion George Gen 32. 28,
both over -- O qui res bominumque Deumque
-- Regis! Ibi.
-- Quis Mart secundo
Quis tatum meruit populorum sanguine nomen?
Lucan. l, 9.
God and Man*
The Print shows us the Author, the aim the Gun,
The Speech the Person, and the Rays the Sun.
One never saw your face must needs adore,
Heroic worth he never heard before.
Let others build the Temple. Thou alone
To bless it, can instal the Solomon.
-- Non ullo secula dono
Nostra carent majore Deum.
Lucan. l. 5. Vis dare majus adhec and inenarr abile munus?
M^^t. l. 2. Ep. 10.
No gift like thine ere came from Mortals hand,
All others must obey, and thine command.
Strange donative we do and must adore,
Did ere thus Subject give a Dii tibi, siqua pios respectant numina siquid
Vsquam ju^itia est, and men's sibi conscia recti,
Praemia digna ferant.
Virg. Ae^eid. l. 1.
King before?
The bodies parts are all ruled by thy brain,
All sheaves must Genesis 37. 7.
bow to Dona ducis mirantur.
lib. 1. -- Admirandum e^t venerabile donum.
lib. 6.
thine as Sovereign.
Show they the best they can, they truly be
But Widows mites: thine is the Treasury.
Such charity you give, that with it you
Purchase bliss for your self, and others too.
Though he you gave was ours: since 'twas your might
That purchased our before Non insperata tandem tellure potiti.
Virg. Aen. l. 3.
despaired of right,
Your gifts the greater t'us, and from him we
In Paeans take new souls of Jubilee.
"Who 'as power to keep, yet freely gives a prize,
"To those that claim it, loves his enemies.
"Thus Enemies made Friends are fast in bands,
"Tied in their Nominis ante mei venient oblivia nobis,
Pectore quam pietas sit tua pulsa meo.
Et prius hane animam vacuas reddemus in auras,
Quam fiat meriti gratia vana tui.
Ovid de Pont. l. 2. Eleg. 11.
hearts despite with their own hands.
"Crosses, hurts, losses lay fair fortunes ground,
"Are steps that mount her to her highest round.
Who sees not after Winter how the Earth's glad,
And highly prides in what before she had.
Love meets our rights, where while it joys it is fill,
Past fears and dangers spread it farther still.
Three Realms embrace Thee with one single heart,
While God, Great Charles and Thee fill up each part.
A gift twice given us, first from above,
Then here, should b'entertain'd with double love
Heaven gives us Title to a King, then we
Must our possession -- Regenque dedit qui foedere certo
Et pre^ere and laxas s^iret dure ju ^us h^ben^s.
V. Aeneid. l. 1. An quicquam nobis tali sit munere majus?
Virg. Ecl. 5.
of him have from Thee.
Our wants to thy affection added, sum
Thy duty till it courtese become.
By paying what thou ought to pay, thou'^t sure
T'oblige Hic tibi quod solvat non habet ar^a Iovis.
Ma^t. l. 9. Ep. 4
to thee thy greatest Creditour.
But while we think on thee, and wonder thus:
Cross Fate had proved far more miraculous.
Was ever Champion George with Sword and Shield,
And the Enemy the Master of the Field?
Was ever Monck General, and not then,
God in the very Front of all his men?
It Was George and Monck that gave our freedom birth,
By Nulla tuis aberit titulis humana potetas.
Lucan. l. 5.
Name entitled both to -- Quae te jam laeta tulerunt
Saecula? quae tanti talem genuere parents?
Virg. Aeneid. l. 1.
Heaven and Earth.
G. Monck, yes, We often speak what ere we have given
As love pawns; so Gorgius assiduum nomen in ore meo.
Mart. l. 3. Ep. 5. Nomen nectare dulcius beato.
l. 9. Ep. 12. Nomen Erythraeis quod litera facta lapillis,
Gemma quod Heliadum pollice trita notet.
l. 9. Ep. 14.
repeat this -- Te Caeli Pacis Pignus habemus.
O. Met. l. 8. fab. 1.
gage of Heaven.
Our Prayers ranged Heavens Champion azure plain:
Found there and hither thence called George again.
Englands George here is returned. Who doubts of this,
Believe him here by Metempsychosis.
If he with the Triumphant host be there,
He Is seated in the highest Order here.
He Is here as there at Rest, but here does more,
Makes rest and Jam satis terris nivis at que dirae
Grandinis misit Pater.
Hor. l. 1. Ode. 2. Hic bellum lachrymosum --
-- A populo and principe Caesare --
-- Agit.
Hor. l. 1. Ode 21.
quiet where was none before.
He makes Heaven here, and without lance or hand,
Angel-like -- Nec ignibus ullis
Aut gladiis opus est.
Ovid. Met. l. 8. sab. 1.
wins by virtues sole command.
We Will now boast loud of this prerogative,
To have our Saint Protector still alive.
TO have our Alpheus did so long remain
Hid to the world, rise and appear again.
To have our Soul from our cold dismal urne,
As that to Aristaeus did, return.
What Stratagem, what politic devise
Need any fear, that are protected twice,
By Heavens virtue, Earths power? Et causaque valet, causamque tuentibus armis
Vt puto, vincetur.
Ov. Met. l. 8. f. 1.
That Enemy
Provokes such arms, must do it with pride to die.
Cite all the Nations in the world, to show
Their -- Patriam tutore carentem
Excipit.
Lucan. l. 9.
Garaian Angel with them as we do.
O never for an other Kingdom leave us,
Since all we are and do enjoy you give us.
For whom you have made a New World to dispense
Your ever loves Pendet in hac anima populorum vita salusque.
Lucan. l. 5. -- O rerum felix tutela, salusque.
Mart. l. 5. Ep. 1.
protecting providence.
Never leave us till our growing Palm dispands,
Above the d^ring reach of humane hands.
Until thou'st made Exodus 3. 8.
honey and milk to cream,
On every golden brook and silver stream.
If we must here want you then, all Earths bless
Mounts us to you in a flaming Sacrifice.
But what must you be less, because we know
It Is the height of your ambition to be low?
Must your humility and meanest grace,
Only, while the others wait on her, take place?
Thus must you rule and make us all obey,
When you have given your chief power away?
Shall we from whom we have our sole relief, (chief?
From Imminet armorum rab^es: Ferrique po^e ^as
Confundet ius om^em^nu* Scelerique ^efands
Nomen er^ vir^us: M^^^^sque ex^bit in annos
Hic furor.
Lucan. lib. 1. Sed satis e^t am posse mori: trahit ipse furoris
Impetus: and visum et lenti, quaesse ^centem.
In numerum pars magna pe^it, rapuit que cruentus
Victor ab i^not a vulus cervice recisos,
Dum vacua pudet ire man^
Lib. 2.
such long wars and broils, not make him
Shall your will then draw our obedience forth, (chief
When It usurpes on the glory of your worth?
Shall we because you will have it so to be,
Pinion your deserts while your desires flee?
Well, be it so. Thus in person though you are
Subject, you're Sovereign in your love and care.
We Will not submit to you Cedamus Phaebo and moniti meliora sequamur.
Vir. Aen. L. 3 -- Melior vacua ^ine regnet in aula.
V. Georg. L. 4. -- Alium nos quaerere Regem,
Hoc Fortuna placet.
Mart. L. 4. Ep. 40.
then, and so express
Our wills like yours, and love you never the less.
Where you with love and will submit, we must:
Or else deny your Divine genius just.
If we agree to make our loyal crew,
And follow Charles, we all are led by you.
Else most ingrate we should your worth repress,
And so making you greater, make you less.
We will proclaim thy worth a Royal thing,
That Is thus effluxed to you from a King.
Our Siredeant vet^res, ingent^a nomina, Patres,
Elys^un ^ceat si vacuare nemus.
Te du^e gaudebit Brutus: T. by Syl^a cruentus
Imperium tradt, cum positurus erit
Ipse quoque infernis re^ocatus Ditis ab umbris,
Si Cato redd^tur, Caes^rianus erit.
Ma^t. l. 11. Ep. 6.
Charles's goodness and his dignity,
Are those great Idols we adore in -- Pars magna e^t tu^ laudis in il^o.
Ovid. Met. l. 13. f. 1.
thee.
Thus a bright day w'admire, and when we have done,
We center all its splendour in the Sun.,
"Princes are Mountains, whose springs and hights show,
"In those clear brooks they make to run below.
How could thy Eagle Soul so lowly prove,
But that there was a Majesty above?
How could thou quit thy clouded Atlas-Tower,
But Tu quoque formidanimium sublimia semper,
Prepositique memor contrabe vela tui.
Ovid. Trist L. 3. Eleg. 4.
awed from thence by supreme August power?
His Majesty must be Praesens divus habebitur
Augutus.
Hor. l. 3. Ode. 5. Imago Rexei am na^a Dei.
Demost in Arg. Lib. Rex Dei habet imaginem. Aug. in
Quest. Vet. Test. q. 35. Caesar in Vrbe sua Deus est.
O^id. Met. Lib. 15. Fab. 51.
Divine, who can
Lower the highest state, and heart of man.
Make him forgo what ere worth may require,
And by his condiscending make him higher.
When he did us by worth and birth first own,
Could Adspiciunt oculis superi mortalia justis.
Ov. Met. l. 13. Fol. 1.
Heaven then give us to thy Vt non quaevis Corona quemvis decet Victorem: It a
non
quaevis laus aut quivis honos, quemcunque hominem.
Plutarchi in moral.
worth alone?
You that do diadems compose, it were
A strange unfightly mode to wear them here.
Your virtues to Celestial orbs aspire; (the higher.
And Crowns here Sicut hominibus Reges: It a dominandi desideria dominantur:
Hoc est regnum, nolle regnare cum possis. Vis ergo regnum tibi dari magnum?
Rege teipsum. Cass. l. 3. Epist.
from you make your Throne Cunctorum virtutes and potentias sua humilitate
superavit, fugiendo gloriam, gloriam merebatur. Hieronym in Epist. ad
Eustachium.

If your merits make any be at strife,
It may suffice, you are Crowned a Saint in life.
As Monk and Saint to the Sed tamen eventus ^esirae, fortissime, pugnae
Quis fuit? Hector abit violatus ^ulnere nullo.
Ovid. Met. l. 13. fol. 1.
holy war you go,
And gain Jerusalem without a blow.
This act's so absolutely Humilitas perfecta est subdere se majori, in quo est
omnis ju^titia.

Beat. Anselm. Glos. Sup. Math. c. 3. Pl^s est animum deposuisse quam culium.
Difficilius arrogantia quam auro caremus aut gemmis.

Hieronym Epist. 90.
perfect, we
May term all Heretics but Cathari.
Thy Sun such spotless splendour does display,
The clearest eye spies no Which are discernable in the Sun.
Phenomenon.
Here flowers of History are only sweet,
As they thy path spread, and embace thy feet.
Heroic Acts in Chronicles, may hence
See all their Science prove but accidence.
Thy -- Quaecunque per aevum
Exhibuit monimenta fides, servat aque ferro
Militiae pietas, transibit nostra juventus.
Lucan. l. 4.
lower Region they move in, and crowd
Under thy Triumphs Chariot as a cloud.
The Greek Champion whose presence in the field,
Sufficed to make all Troys huge Army yield.
Who Achilles.
leaves his Name, as Honors legasy,
To the highest Peers in Mars's cavalry.
What Poet is there can his virtue sing,
Who Hector.
whom he slays Exanimum que auro corpus vendebat Achilles.
Vir. Aen. l. 1.
sells basely to the King?
Thou giv'st him Men, all such who while they stand
Before him, act and live by his command.
That Greek after all his famed feats, must hear
Deaths summons from his fatal Paris.
Conqueror.
They whom thou savest, safely do immure
Thy Illum admirantur and omnes,
Circumstant fremitu denso, Stipantque frequentes.
Vir. Geor. l. 4.
person. Thus you are in Achiles's that was impenitrable.
his arms Heu pietas, hen prisca fides, invictaque bello
Dextera! Non i^'i quisquam se impune tulisset
Obvius armato.
Lib. 6.

Miltiades his foes were Persians. These (secure.
Yield to his Greeks not to Miltiades.
Yours weeds or Cadmus Spargit humi jussos mortalia semina, dentes:
Mox humeri, pectus, onerataque brachia telis
Existunt: Crescit seges clipeata virorum.
Ovid. Met. l. 3. f. 1. -- Sic semine Cadmi
Emicuit Dircaea cohors.
Lucan. l. 4.
teeth, spring in the field
They fight: yet all to your sole person yield.
Timoleon chased our Dyonisius,
From Chiliads of such thou'st delivered us.
Epaminondas daughters while they join
To tell his Victories, thou'st men for thine.
While in the head of all his Forces he
With sweat and blood toils for the Victory.
We see you with as much ease Cities get,
As those Timotheus caught in his Net.
Men swim as Fish to you, languish and faint
As they yield to you, and thus seem men in paint.
You do give your Darius As Sophyrus.
Cities, yet
Neither your self nor others smart for it;
Can policy devise a better slight,
To conquer so that Death get nothing by'^?
He sure deserves an everlasting Wreath,
Who uncrowns Victory and -- Hunc ipse Triumphum.
Duc^re maluerim, quam ter Capitolia curru
Scandere Pompeii, quam frangere colla.
Jugurthae Lucan. l. 9. Hunc volo, laudari qui sine morte potest.
Mart. l. 1. Epig. 9.
conquers Death.
Let Xerxes ride in his vast Armies Front,
Dry Rivers up, and fetter the Hell spont;
Then for his men with tears refil the Stream,
Thine ever live in thee, and thou in them.
What if by Hercules Aepalius be
Restored again to his lost dignity?
A little finger of thy Vosne, manus, validi pressi^lis Cornua Tauri?
Vestrum opus Elis habet. Vestrum Stymphalides undae.
Partheniumque nemus. Vestra virtute relatus
Thermodoontiaco caelatus baltheus auro.
Pomaque ab insomni non custodita Dracone, etc.
Ovid. Met. lib. 9. f. 3.
Colosses,
May serve to shadow over all Hercules.
Hillus his Son enjoying what he gave,
His Great Sires virtue vilely did enslave.
"Merits praise sinks to the earth; when it must stand
"By the assistance of another hand.
"The value of the Subjects dutie's lost,
"When It must be purchased with a Kingdoms cost.
Where Is See Jove represented with a bright body, and compared to the Sun,
Imagini dei Dei in Cupido, ^. 361. l. 12 and 30.
Joves so great Suns splendour, when'^ must
Under earths thick black Clouds of interest? (rest
What kind of bountie's that, which what it gives
With the right hand, back with the left receives?
Here his Apollodorus says, That Hercules was wont ordinarily to eat an Ox at
a meal: for which voracity of his, he had Sacrifices instituted, in which all
good words were forbidden, and none at all lawful to be spoken but what were
villainous and base. The occasion is related at large, by reason of a poor
Country man, whose Oxen he took violently away and eat, replying upon the
Country man's most tedious and better cursing him, That he never fed at any
time with sweeter content.
blamsphemous Rites are due t'him more,
Then when he did an Ox at once devour.
Thou did not hold Apollo's There was in Delphi (as Pausanias relates) two
Statues' one of Apollo, and another of Hercules, contrasting for a Tripus they
held between them. The occasion was, because Hercules once, not obtaining of
Apollo a clear and certain Oracle, took up the Tripus, and carried it away.
Tripus, he
Cannot have from him but by Victory.
Enter great Pompie on the Stage to stand,
Like Pigmy The Image of Peace held in her hand, infant Pluto, who is God of
Riches, that grow and are increased in Peace.
Pluto in fair Peaces hand.
Ere he restores Pompe^ though he would not lead Tygranes King of Pontus,
(according to the ^om^n custom) in Triumph, but restored him his Kingdom, yet
this was not done tell he had first brought him to a miserable condition, and
utterly defeated him in battle.
Tigranes to his own,
With Armed Force he pulls him from his Throne.
With deep wounds first tortures his Royal heart,
Then seeks his cure with Vtque Machaonis Paeantius artibus Heroes,
Lenito medicam vulnere sentit opem
Ovid. de Pont. l. 1. Eleg. 4.
Machaonian Art;
And while his Glories brightest Beams ray forth,
The public vain applause poiseth his worth.
When h'has enthroned the King, his courteous Grace
Must stately hand Him to the Nec quenqam jam far potest, Cae^arve priorem
Pompeiusve parem.
Lucan. l. 1.
highest place.
In Charles's Conquest George rides first, and h^
Is the chief Captive fames his Victory.
Charles is untoucht by aught, but what does prove
The pleasure anguish of the Wounds of Love.
George -- Regnare volenti
Non opus est bello.
Lucan. l. 2.
peaceably wins, and gives all, which done,
Yields Magnanimi est mediocria malle quam nimia.
Sen. Epist. 37. -- Caroli benefacta fatetur
Esse suis majora and vinci gaudet ab illo.
Ovid. Met. l. 15. f. 51. -- Iustissimus unus
-- Et servantissimus aequi.
Vir. Aen. l. 2.
the Glory of the day to the Sun.
The Ages Praise his Wisdom, but compares
To the See Pliny. Not. Hist. l. 4.
Excremental Fire drops from the Stars.
To the Clouds exhaled Vapors flashing Fire,
Does in the moment of its Birth expire.
The Elementary Fire like that does here,
Extend but to such bodies that are near.
Monks fame like Fire that is dispenst to all
Bodies remote, must be Celestial.
The Sicinius Dentatus, called Achilles Romanus, for his great valor. He
fought 120. Battles, triumphed nine times, and was regaled with Eight Golden
Crowns.
Achilles of the Romans, that Captain,
Who to their Honor gave both Heart and Brain;
His Battles in a Nutshel might confine,
^dmiring this strange -- Potuit tibi vulnere nullo,
Stare labor belli.
Lucan. lib. 7. Estu vincere nec ferire Doctus.
Mart. l. 5. Epist. 25.
bloodless one of thine.
^hou can make rotten Members sound, and yet
Not maim the body, or cut aught from it.
When raging frenzy has confused the Brain,
^ith thy sole touch, can set it right again.
-- Nequid victoria ferro.
Deberet, pavor attonitos confecerat hosts.
lib. 6. Perdidit ensis opus: Frangit sine vulnere membra.
Ac velut inclusum facundo in pectore Numen,
Et vivam magnae speciem virtutis adorant.
ibi.
Fright thy foes down, and all distempers cure,
^hile none loose Lauriferos nullo comitantur vulnere currus.
Lucan. l. 5.
blood or any pain endure.
^ide all his Crowns on him: for thy renown,
^ King while you are in Triumph bears thy Audiet hoc praesens vent ur aque
turba.
l. 7. Ep. L. 43.
Crown.
Anglis plus nunquam prae^iitit ulla Dies.
Mart. l. 3. Epig. 6. Hunc Aurora diem spectacula tanta ferentem
Quam primum croceis roscida portet equis.
Ovid. ad Liviam. Non alios prima crescentis origin mundi
Illuxisse dies, aliumve habuisse tenorem
Crediderim. Ver illud erat, ver magnus agebat
Orbis, etc. and exciperet caeli inclementia terras:
Vir. Georg. l. 2.
That day we Vrbs jams tot tibi debet haec triumphos,
Tot nascentia templa, tot renata,
Tot spectacula.
Mart. l. 6. Ep. 4.
dedicate to thee's begun
And height'd with all the Glories in the Sun.
Our great Apollo when we Celebrate,
The Quando magis dignos licuit spectare triumphos?
Quando Palatini plus meruere Dei?
Pulchrior and major quo sub duce Martia Ro^a?
Sub quo libertas Principe tanta fuit?
Mart. l. 5. Ep. 19.
Triumph of our Joy from Thee bears date,
When with hearts jubilee we cry There Is he,
We cant but must reflect our eyes on Thee.
His rays that make the day, to us are sent
Through thy kind air who make our Firmament.
When we speak him returned, of thee we say,
And there is the -- Quo justior alter.
Nec pietate fuit nec bello major and armis.
Vir. Aeneid. l. 1.
providence guides him the way.
To give thee time, we can none sit esteem,
But just that day is sacred unto Him.
And should a Gem does matchless worth display,
B'expos'd t'admire but in the brightest day?
Should Joves Bird doubles with his two sun'd sight
Noon day, appear but in the clearest light?
Should peace twixt man and man, twixt Heaven and us
Have less than Royal Pomp to attend it thus?
The Kings and Kingdoms Treasure needs must be
One Subject with him of Solemnity.
"What makes and shows the dignity of Kings,
"Extolled with them, their greater glory brings.
"Our Phoebus then in his best luster seems,
"When we behold him with his hightning beams.
When we our -- Tibi sic sint vota quotannis.
Virg. Ecl. 5.
votes to our great Victor pay,
Should we at any but the head-altar pray?
He Is now as well our Conduit as our Spring;
You Have virtues place, 'twixt Dignity and King.
You are the gold conveighance carry on
The Royal Crystal Streams from power to Throne.
While his Crown's on his head, who is present there,
Sees you with yours, and thinks your Crown your Sciendum hastae gestamen
haudquaquam inter vulgares honores habitum, tantaeque apud veteres venerationis
fuisse, ut loco diademitis pro insigni regio haberetur. Pier. Valor. lib. 42.
page 409. A.
spear.
You being his George and Honor, who will him view,
Must needs, as you're so near him, gaze on you.
If he is our King, your'r Quem Regem and dominum prius vocabam.
Mart. l. 2. Ep. 68.
King to him in heart,
Whose left side with thee there Est Regis alti spiritum Regi dare.
Ex Troade Senecae.
breaths thy desert.
Since you have given him the right hand, who
Can he expect the left now from but you?
You best know, best can his high merits tell,
And keep our eyes fixed on your Miracle.
Your person it is must be your -- Tibi cura magni.
Caesaris Fatis data.
Hor. lib. 1. Ode. 12.
Princes aid,
And -- Magni fidu^ia regni.
Ovid. Met. l. 8. fab. 1. -- Ipse tuebere Quercum.
Ovid. Met. l. 1. f. 9.
sustain this fair Fabric, here you have made.
We'll bless you all the while, and as one knee
Falls to him, the other Depositum genu humilitatis and superiorem agnoscentis
Hieroglyphicum est.
bows and stands for thee.
Our hearts are smothered in our joys, as though
The great effect of happiness were woe.
Thy goodness flows so high, that we who should
Live by it, are almost deluged in the flood.
Our hearts like Liquitur, ut quandam zephyris and solibus ictae
Solvuntur tenerae, vere repent,nives.
Ovid. ad Live. Liquitur ut glacies incerto saucia sole.
O. Met. l. 2. f. 12. Calido non ocyus Austro
Nix resoluta cadet, nec Solemn cera sequetur.
Lucan. l. 9.
Snow are melted as they meet
Thy noon beams, and run down to wash thy feet.
Our blood's all -- Aliter non uritur --
Quam cum spinosis ignis supponitur herbis,
Quae neque dant flammas lenique tepor^ cremantur.
ibi.
feavour'd, let it out or we
Keep it for Charles, and his commands from thee.
All feavour'd, yes, and when our grief's well scanned,
We find it comes from our Physicians hand.
Physicians. Thus we live, for our wounds be
Made by thy steel, leaves healing simpathy.
You give us strength, -- Patriam tutore carentem
Excipit.
Ecce parens verus patriae.
Lucan. l. 9.
keep us we cannot fall;
As well our spirits, as Estates General.
While the fair Apollo is made leading the four Hours, who are said to be the
parts of the year, and he the Sun that changes them. They are called also, Dee
Del^'amicitia, Bellezza, Venusta, Amabilita, Allegrezza, Giuoco e Piacere.
Goddesses of Mirth, Pleasure, Rejoicing, Comeliness, Love, Friendship, beauty,
etc.
Hours to Heaven do swiftly fly,
They turn their heads and all Facta Ducis vivent, operosaque gloria rerum,
Haec manet: haec avidos effugit una rogos.
Pars erit historiae, totoque legetur in aevo.
Seque opus ingeniis carminibusque dabit.
O. ad Liviam.
look back on thee.
Thy Haec ipsum sublime ferent.
ibi.
Exploits serve as presidents to men,
And thy life only fits a He wrote the life of Antonius, the first Monck.
Jeroms Pen.
None but an Hesiod deserves to be
Recorder of your Genealogy.
Thy -- Tua sectus orbis
Nomina ducet.
l. 3. Ode. 27. -- Monumentum aere perennius
Regalique situ Pyramidum altius.
l. 3. Ode. 30.
History, Great George, will keep alive,
Like Dictys's, and in the grave Illum aget penna metuenti solui
Fama superstes.
Hor. l. 2. Ode. 2. Effugiunt strut os nomen honosque rogos.
Ov. de Pont. l. 3. E. 2.
Survive.
What wants voice for thy fame, will cryt' express
Fame not confined towords or sillables.
Thus In freta dum fluvii current, dum montibus umbra
Lustrabunt convexa. Polus, dum sidera pascet,
Semper honos nomenque tuum laude^que manebunt.
Virg. Aen. l. 1.
boundless in its self, up and down fly
The splendid Orb of thy -- Fama super aethera notus.
Virg. Aen. l. 1. -- Secli decus admirabile nostri.
-- Vir immenso major vertutibus orb.
Ov. de Pont. l. 2. E. 8.
immensity.
Well may thou with He being desirous (as Plutarch says) to leave to
posterity no other issue but his Books, would not suffer any one (of those many
that desired him) to make his Effigies, saying that as by this rich men; So by
those good men were best remembered.
Agesilaus deny,
Art should delineate thy Phisnomy.
For it is thy Nature, Person and Cassibus hic nullis, nullis delebilis annis
Vivet.
Mart. l. 7. Epig. 83. -- In aeterna vivere, digne, rosa.
l. 8. Ep. 77.
Desert,
Can only tell us truly who thou art.
The more we with Ideas frame out these,
The more we are puzzled like Simonides.
Phidias and Pyrgoteles may try,
Who Idols made so many Cubits high,
If they can find room for thy Statue here,
Being limited to this straight Hemisphere.
Where Is one who for a rude design now can,
Carve Athos out into the shape of man?
Who footes thee on earth, must advance thy Head
T^ll it prop Heaven, and stand in -- Vertice (...)
Ovid. Met. l. 7. fab. 1. -- Omne
C^n tot s^d^ ibus caelum requiesit in illo.
l. 4, fab. 17.
Atlas stead.
B^ Memnons Statue thine, that praise thee can,
T^^l the next coming of the Son of man.
^ Pyramid well Figures thee, whose Spire
Points thy Seraphick flame sets Heaven on fire.
Thy Obelisk should be eternal: thus
It Will only stand for Thee and speak for us.
Who Will present thee at the exit of our Wars,
Must diaper thy Cloth of Worth with Stars.
Embroider it with Suns, till it appear
An Element of Light to every Sphere.
Praise cannot profane on thee. Cannot be profane
TO adore one power'd to make a Sovereign?
Cannot be profane if we him Deifie,
^^ly creates a R^yal Majesty?
No, no. Who makes a doubt thus dangerous,
Quit our Blessed Orb, and never be saved with us.
Did ever Subject like mine merit praise,
That is the Sovereigns Laudari meruit sacrato Caesaris ore.
Ovid. ad Liviam. -- Nec, quae magis haereat, ulla
Pectore res nostro est, inter bellique domusque
Acta tot.
Ovid. Met. lib. 12. fab. 4. 5. Ille quidem majora fide quoque gessit, and orbem
Impleuit meritis.
l. 12. f. 6.
Subject, Text and Bays?
Our Arts, Arms, Muses, all to thee we owe,
While the Heavens themselves bow on each side of you
Our -- Templa refeceris,
Aedesque labentes Deorum and
Faeda nigro simulachra fume.
Hor. l. 3. Ode. 6. Sic priscis servatur honos, te preside, templis,
Mart. l. 7. Ep. 80.
Churches, our Tribunals, and State join
To say they are all, and all with Charles is thine.
We cannot make thee greater, unless we
Fight God, and Charles, with cursed Apostacy.
To make thee greater, there is no power or skill
In Illius virtus gentem Regemque subegit.
Ovid. Met. l. 11. f. 8.
Kings to do it, since such obey thy will.
Nor can the power above do it, unless he
Would make thee Ruler of his Hierarchy.
Nor can Teque sinus omnis, te manus omnis habet.
Mart. l. 6. Ep. 61.
hearts love thee more, unless't were meet*
They die, and loose your due by paying it.
The more our fancy ruminates thy worth,
The more dilicious sweetness issues forth.
The oftener we limbick our thoughts of you,
The purer your spirituous virtues flow.
The fairest flower in our paradise,
Does it from thy care as thy plant take rise!
Does our new Kingdoms happiness, proceed
From thy judicious policy and meed!
Are all the beauteous Ornaments we see
Adorn our state, Nunc Pater omnipotens faecundis imbribus ether
Conjugis in gremium laetae descendit, and omnes
Magnis alit magno commistus corpore faetus.
Parturit omnis ager Zophyrique tepentibus auris
L^xant arua sinus, etc.
Virg. Georg. l. 2.
fruits of thy Georgius (...) agrum colere, messem facen^^ fructum capere.
husbandry!
Can Aristophanes, Pausanias, and Silio Italico, make these three
several Goddesses, giving them many different Discriptions or
Characters in Discourses at large.

Concord, Peace, and Faith, here only claim,
Their rights and honors from thy bounteous fame!
Do the most high I am te nulla movet tantarum gloria rerum.
Ver. Aen. l. 4.
applauses of the Times,
^ound to thee but as some Quemadmodum Sol non expect at preces ut exoriatur,
sed
Ilico fulget and salutatur ab omnibus: It a nec expectaverit
Princeps plausus and strepitus and lauds ut been faciat, sed
Sponte confer at beneficia and aeque cc Sol amabitur.
Arist. Eth. 5.
ill-tuned Chimes!
Have pomp and Sedte, cum donas ista juvare solent.
Ovid. de Pont. l. 3. El. 8.
wealth with thee, but there abode,
Till thou can find where they shall be bestowed!
^'you fancy nothing but what man cannot give,
Or else what you as -- Non est mortale quod opt as.
Ovid. Met. l. 2. f. 1.
Mortal cannot receive!
Like no Crown but whose glory does surprise,
Dazzle and wonder-strike all humane eyes!
No honor please thee, but what does thee bring,
Some signal service to thy God and King!
Will you Triumph with no Crown, but what rays
From the bright head of the Antientest of days!
Then let us Satis laudat qui tacet.
In Hist. Sax. Laus est non facere quod facere non possumus.
Lactan. l. 3.
Muse on thee, while we Magna laus non abest ab admiratione: Admiratio autem
quae maxima est, non parit verba sed silentium.
Gell. l. 4.
suppress
Our words: For speaking will but make thee -- Grates persoluere dignas
Non opis est nostrae.
Virg. Aen. l. 1.
less.
As if thy Merits towers whose hights stand
Above our sight, we would reach to with our hand.
Fathom the Oceani fluctus me numer are jubes.
Mart. l. 6. Ep. 34.
Ocean, and what we find
Boundless, we'd have by measures be confind.
If as Moors in the Suns Beams we dare show
Our blackness, we know your fires made it so.
Extolling your high-noon, we none invite
To Da veniam scriptis, quorum non gloria nobis
Causa, sed utilit as officiumque fuit.
Ov. de Pont. l. 3. E. 9.
match it with your Judicium tamen hoc nostrum non decipit error,
Nec quicquid genui protinus illud amo.
ibi. Magna hic me tanti reverentia turbat, et aures
Non auditoris, judicis esse puto.
Mart. l. 7. Ep. 51.
glim'ring candlelight.
Though after you with Meeters feet we run,
We never presume to Sunt mihi quae valiant in talia ponder a vires?
Et animus certe vestros sensurus honores?
lib. 13. fab. 1.
overtake the Sun
While with your light you open your eyes thus,
The Part sui meliore viget, major que videri
Caepit, and augusta fieri gravitate verendus.
Ovid. Met. l. 9. f. 4.
brightness as we view you, Mut at nocte diem, radiisque potentibus astra
Solvetat ire.
Lucan. l. 10.
dazels us.
We chatter but as Swallows, while to blaze
Thy worth, we'd make a consort of thy praise.
We do to this effect in our best lines,
But as Plura quidem fecit quam quae comprendere dictis
In promptu mihi est.
Ovid. Met. l. 13. f. 1. Eheu quam pingui macer est mihi taurus in arvo!
Virg. Ecl. 3.
dumb silly creatures, speak by Signs.
When we have thus named thee and thy acts, we see
The rest of right belongs to Invicta quicquid condidit manus, caelum est.
Mart. l. 9. Ep. 2.
Eternity.
From the Heaven's here with you we need never fear
To loose you, since you cannot change your Sphere.
That Dii (siqua es^ caelo pietas quae talia curet)
Persolvant grates dignas and praemia reddant
Debita.
Virg. Aen. l. 2.
Heavens Quid mirum lectis exhausto floribus horto,
Si duce non facta est digna corona suo?
Ovid. de Pont. l. 3. Eleg. 4. Obruit audentem rerum gravitasque nitorque,
Nec potui capti po^dera far mei.
O^de Pont. 1. 2. El. 5. Non potuit mea men's, esset quin grata, teneri.
l. 4. E. 1. Cogetur nemo munus habere meum,
l. 3. E. 6. Haec, si displicui, fuerint solatia nobis:
Haec fuerint nobis praemia, si placui.
Mart. l. 2. Ep. 91.
only able and fit to cry
Your Jo's with its loud Artillery.
No Trump but Dooms can be of service here,
To sound your great Fame out to every ear.
And to give you your place, who rightly sings
Your worth, must seat you with the King of Kings.
FINIS.
Imprimatur

May 23. 1664. THO. GRIGG, Episcop. Sac.


