THE Way to be Rich, According to the Practice OF THE GREAT AUDLEY, Who begun
with two hundred Pound, in the Year 1605, and dyed worth four hundred thousand
Pound this instant November, 1662.

Rem, quocunque modo, Rem.

PSALM. 49. 13. Yet their Posterity approve their sayings.

LONDON, Printed for E. Davis, 1662.

THE WAY to be RICH, According to the Practice OF THE GREAT AUDLEY.
Sect. 1. His carriage as a Servant.
THere is no way useful for Man for profit or pleasure, but has been by
prudence and experience reduced to rules and method, which have been either
published to the World for the benefit of mankind in general, or reserved in
some Men's breasts for their own advantage in particular; the great way of
ordering the several parts of our lives to such advantages as may arise to a
competent estate, was peculiar to this Person, whose way and practice (as far
as it conduced to the gaining of that vast estate) we shall set down for
public good.

In the Mone^h of September 1597. being admitted Clark (to a Person that for
some reasons shall be namelesse) he allowed him, besides other accommodations,
six shillings a week toward his diet; of this six shillings, he for a twelve
Month together saved three and six pence thus: He usually appointed his
Masters Clients to meet him at the Golden Lion in Bell-yard in the morning,
where it cost him little or nothing, and thence to his Master till Dinner time,
and then with the same Clients he went to an Ordinary, where he would never
allow himself above a groat; he would usually say of himself that since he came
from his Uncle, one Williams with whom he was inured to this closeness and
partimony, he never spent a penny idely upon any occasion, but either upon his
own absolute necessities, or else in such Company where he was in actual
pursuit of gain and advantage; for this seemed to be a maxim with him.

1 That whosoever gave himself to spend his money idely should find that
thereby he disordered the method of his affairs, he weakened the strength of
his mind, he lost those happy hours and opportunities of gaining more, he
disappointed those that dealt with him, so that he had better give away six
pence, then spend two pence; and this likewise he laid down for a rule, that
that Man was open to ruin and destruction that was given to lay out money upon
any Company or any other account upon hope without a clear insight into that
emolument he might have by it, and as much assurance as can be made within
humane probability; and therefore he used to say that Men of a sanguine
complexion, much given to hope, could never be rich, there being (as he
observed) so much uncertainty in affairs, and so much deceitfulness in Men,
that he would say, distrust or beg.

In some time (the Person we mention got by his care and good Husbandry) great
credit with his Host in Fetter-lane, a very rich and thriving old Man, who
admitted him to so much familiarity with him, and put so much trust in him,
that he committed to him his accounts, and allowed him his diet, with other
fair advantages for his pains and care while he lived, and made him one of
his Executors when he dyed; In that Will there was passed to the Executors for
uses therein expressed, a certain House in Mile end Green cum pertinentijs; now
one Killigrew laid claim to two Acres of Land, which these Executors reckoned
among the pertinentia, but in Law Land never pushed with these words cum
pertinentijs, but such things which properly may be pertaining, otherwise it
had if it had been cum terris pertinentibus, then that which was used to it
would have passed, but by the ba^e words cum pertinentijs; without other
circumstances to declare his intent, they could never pass, Plowd. Hill et
Granges Case, 23 Hen. 8. 6.

But Mr. Audley (though a young, yet an able Person) finding that Mr. Killigrew
claimed this estate as Brother to the Person to whom the foresaid Testator had
devised his Land, defeated him of the said message, because there appeared no
intent to make it an estate -- tail, but a fee-simple; -- and besides Mr.
Killigrew's evidence for other Lands depended so much upon the evidence that
the Executors had in custody concerning the other House and Lands, that for
fear of loosing the whole, he was forced to part with this part.

In that (...) difficulty, the Testator had Lands of forty pounds a year
mortgaged to him for seven years for four hundred pounds, to be paid him 24
April 1609 or he to re-enter, when he dyed, Audley at that time upon failure of
the payment of the money, would have entered upon the Land, but the other
pleaded that he had to do only with good Chattles, but Audley said by the Will
he had all mortgages, yes said the other all the money upon the mortgage, yes
replied Audley and the Land it self, in case the money be not paid; for it was
the opinion of the Judges, Trin. primus Car. Roll. 1932. that these words all my
mortgages made a good devise of the Lands mortgaged.

Sect. 2.
BEsides his thrift in Diet, he was very close in Apparel; for as the fashion
of those times went, he wore a Trunk Hose with Drawyers upon all occasions,
with a leather Doublet, and plate Buttons; and his special care was to buy good
Cloth, Linen and Woolen, the best being best cheap, and to keep them neat and
clean, for he observed that did and dirt did clothes more harm then wearing;
and since when his clothes were misplaced, he would say to his servants, I
wear clothes enough, you need not wear them too; he observed that the best
husbandry was to have variety of all sorts of clothes, whereby he might have
his choice for wear, and all his clothes might be kept neat and handsome.

Besides what he did for his Master for dispatch and convenience; his Masters
Cliants allowed him several small gratuities which he thriftily improved to a
considerable sum, besides that he filled up his vacant hours with foreign
employments especially from the Court of the Exchequer, that in four years time
he gained five hundred pounds, besides he let his weekly allowance of six
shillings a week for three score pounds until his time should be out, which six
hundred pounds, which he every way made up, he let out to an indigent Person of
Quality, (who must not be mentioned) for an Annuity of fourscore and sixteen
pounds for 19 years, which Annuity was charged upon eight hundred a year, to
be paid at two payments, the one upon the Feast of St. Michael then next
ensuing, and the other upon our Lady day, and so from time to time until the
expiring of the 19 years; the Person of Quality dies, and his Heir failed in
the payment of the money, he (I mean Audley) had execution upon the eight
hundred a year, and so for 600 l. in 19 years in forfeitures, and one way or
other he gained four thousand pounds; aiming at the study of the Law, he
resolved with himself to lay aside some leisure time for that purpose, the
time was from ten a clock at night, to one of the clock in the morning, which
was his constant hour for nine years together, and then from six till eight
when he gave himself to his usual affairs, he had an excellent way of
contriving his study, without any expense, (as he learned, so he taught) he
contrived the notes he gathered as he read, so that they might be useful for
public good, and so by writing several things then seasonable but now lost, he
purchased a fair Library of Law, and got money to boot, for he seldom read a
book for his own advantage, but he contrived a design for his own advantage.

His Master being one of the Clarks of the Counter, he had this way of
improving himself, viz. when Persons were sued, he found Bayl ready upon all
occasions, and withal usually compounded for desperate Debts, and so made an
extraordinary advantage of his Place particularly.

One William Miller a Linnen-Draper owed one Jo. White Merchant two hundred
pound, he sueth Miller, he breaks, Audley buys off Whites two hundred pound
for forty pound, and agrees with Miller for fifty pound to be paid upon a
formal contract drawn betwixt them thus, That the said Miller (if ever he were
able) should pay within twenty years after he set up, upon twenty days, viz.
the first day of 20 Months after he set up; a penny doubled, viz. a penny the
first day, two pence the next, and so on until the twentyeth day, and then he
was discharged; this Miller having compounded with all his Creditors, sets up
again and thrives; Audley within two years comes upon him for the Debt; he
pays him a penny the 1 of October, 1608. and two pence the 1 of November, and
a groat the 1 of December, and so on doubling until the first of February; and
the said Miller perceiving the trick forfeited his Bond, which was five hundred
pound, rather then he would pay on; for the penny doubled (within twenty days)
would come to two thousand pound.

Another time there was a Debt made over to him of this nature, a Bookseller in
the Country owed another in the City fifty pound, he breaks, but had a good
estate enough to satisfy his Debts, this estate he makes over to his Brother by
suffering a judgment to pass upon it; the Citizen despairing of his Debt,
comes to Audley, makes his Case known to him, he undertakes the debt, finds
that the judgment was not passed bona fide, but to defraud Creditors; discovers
the deceit, and got an hundred pound by it.

Sect. 3. How he ventured with a Merchant.
HAving furnished himself with a considerable sum of money, he resolved to
venture 200. l. in four Ships, 50. l. in each; One whereof failed, the other
three returned happily with his thrice fifty pounds, made thrice two hundred;
and really there is not a nobler way of disposing money either for honor or
advantage then in the public way of Trade and commerce, where with a little
observation a man may make such advantage of the contingency in several Nations
as may quickly raise a man to an estate, which he may live on hansomely and
comfortably, and at death bequeath honorably; what advantages this Gentleman
(by the Bie out of his profession) made of the Wares with Spain and Holland in
reference to the commodities that have relation to those Countries, was only
known to himself, he being very reserved in that which he gained out of the
reach of his profession, only this is well known that Ship of Currance ariving
a little before Christmas, wherein he had a share; upon a sudden Embarge was
raised by him and some Partners to an incredible sum of money by intelligence
held with some Factors they had abroad.

Sect. 4. How he came to buy Lands.
WHen by these and other means he had raised a considerable sum of money, he
bethought himself of laying it out upon an Estate that might be both certain
and improveable; the L. of B. had 9^0. l. a year engaged upon mortgages which
he must needs sell, he imployes one Warner of Lawrence Lane to find him a
Chapman, he meets with Audley, and offers it him with the particulars, Audley
finds that the Wood and Timber upon it was worth 4000. l. he bids 1200^ and
has it for thirtten thousand two hundred pounds, and two hundred pound to
Warner, he buyeth it and felleth 3000. l. three hundred and thirty pounds worth
of Wood and Timber; parcells the Estate into two and thirty parts, and gains
within the compass of a twelvemoneth by his 13000. l. 8000. l. for he sold the
Estate for above 17000. l. besides the Wood that he felled from it: Another
time he was acquainted with a Steward that belong to a needy Gentleman, which
Gentleman was to let some 11. hundred a year for 7. years, Audley and the
Steward foreseeing that he must sell that which he now let within an year or
two join heads together, and let the Land below the value of it, so that when
the Gentleman came to sell and deliver in particulars, he had but 900. l. a
year in present rent, to show whereby they gained 4000. l. pounds among them,
but they made him amends again when being to sell another part of his Estate,
they had Tenants that paid 550. l. a year for that which was scarce worth 425.
and according to that counterfeit rent sold the Estate, gaining for themselves
or their Lord 2000. l.

Sect. 5. How he managed his calling at the Counter when he was his own man.
WHen he set up for himself, the repute of his care, industry, and ability
drew him a world of Customers, his advice was so ready for their money, and his
purse for their Estates; that there was none whose occasions were great, or
care, perplexed, but they repaired to Audley, his advices were brief and
weighty, his management of affairs was subtle and close, his own behavior
retired and reserved, his privadoes and companions were rich, prudent, and
industrious, his correspondence was general and useful, there being very few
within his acquaintance but such as were subservient to his thriving way, his
friends were choice, his hours were certain, his vigilance was observable,
his condescension to the meanest was obliging, his garb was grave and decent,
his expenses improved and useful, so that he laid out the very money he spent,
and was as it were a Broker in his very Meat, Drink and necessaries, his
actions and discourse were intricate and dark, a man had much a do to find out
the sense of the one, or the design of the other, his pleasure was private,
and discreet wherein it might cost him least, and where he might be least
discovered, passing through the street near her corner, and going the blindest
way to her house, in the twilight in the Evening in the black and dark night,
ct behold there met him a Woman with the allayne of an Harlot, and subtle of
heart, and she caught him and kissed him, and with an imputent face said unto
him, Come let us take our fill of love until the morning, let us solace our
selves with love, for the good man is not at home, he is gone a long journey,
he has taken a Bag of Money with him, and will come home at the day appointed,
with much fair speech she, causes him to yield with the flattering of her
lips, she forces him, he goes after her straight way, as one goes to the
slaughter, or as a fool to the correction of the stocks, till a Dartstricke
through his Liver, as a Bird hastes to the snare, and knows not that it is
for his life: But to return to his calling, He made it his business to be
acquainted with the Stewards and Dependants of Grandees, by whose means he
might insinuate himself into great men's wants and occasions, and so get within
their Estates, particularly he was acquainted with the great Tilseley Steward
to the Dr. B. with whom he agreed to go half in half for all the Estates that
they should meet with, who dying about 1628. left some 1200. l. a year behind
him, whereof our Audley had the evidences, which with a little money he secured
to himself for ever; He made use of two Scriveners from one whereof to the
other, he used to turn his money not without considerable advantages upon each
alteration, He made more use of his Clients in order to his designs then they
made of him for their cause, for upon first acquaintance with them finding
which way they dealt, he plied them with questions and demands concerning
persons and things which might conduce to his end, -- and engaged them upon
such particulars as he found them most likely to serve him in, so vigilant was
he upon his advantages that there hardly passed any thing, or words out of
which he could not pick out something of profit, so that what ever happened his
Mill was still going, if there were any houses to be sold, any Commodities to
be vented, he was sure to be a Customer, but seldom approving himself, having
others at his command for that service, whereof one serves him a trick thus,
Audley having bought a Tenement of 45. l. 10. d. a year in one Mickle Thwaits
name, this Mickle Thwait dies, and his Wife finding these Deeds claims her
thirds, and had it for her life, notwithstanding all Audleys care to the
contrary -- their cunning was outwited, and for pelf meets with one subtler
then himself, he employes one once to take a bond in his name for two hundred
and fifty pounds, and it happened through the neglect of him that he employed
that these words were left out, et ad eandem solutionem faciendam obligo me et
harredes meos; the party bound dies, Audley sueth the Heir, he pleades he is
not bound, Audley replied that it was a mere default of the Clark, and so might
be amended and so procured, an order whereby it was to be amended by consent,
and then went on in his suit and recovered the money; there was an action upon
the case brought against this Audley for receiving fourscore pounds twice, but
he avoided it with this quirk that they should have brought an action of
acount, Trin. 4. Cor. roll. 305. -- Hill. 3. Caroli Roll. 43. there was a case
between our Audley and one Halsey thus, action surtrover of goods, on the 25.
day of Novem. Anno tertio Caroli, upon not guilty a special Verdict was found
that one John Hill and Alice Squire was possessed of these goods, and used the
Trade of Merchandise, and being so possessed were bound unto the Defendant Ao
20.mo 1. Iac. In a Statute acknowledged according to Law for a true and just
debt, and that being forfeited, he sued an extent upon that Statute 34. mo
Octobrij 3. Cor. directed to the Sheriffs of London, and they by virtue of
that extent tricesimo primo Oct. 3. Cor. extended those goods, the writ being
returnable (incrastino animorum) and returned the writ and enquisition into the
Chancery, that the 3. of Nov. 3. 3. Cor. the said John Hill and Alice Squire
became Bankrups being indebted to our Audley, and to diverse others for true
just debt, upon the 6. day of Nov. 3. Cor. the Defendant showed a liberate upon
that extent, and those goods the same day were delivered by the Sheriffs
according to the apprisement in the extent; and afterward upon the 8. day of
Nov. Audley sued out a Commission of Bankrupts against the said Hill and
Squire, and the Commissioners by virtue of their commission, sold those goods
to the Plaintiff, Audley upon the three and twentieth of Nov. aforesaid, and
the Defendants afterward converted them to other uses, -- this was argued
several days at the Bar, and the sole question was, whether John Hill and
Alice Squire becoming Bankrupts, after the extent and before the Liberate the
sale of the goods by the Commissioners to the Plaintiff, viz. Audley were good
enough, it was argued that this sale was good thus, viz. for not withstanding
this extent the property of the goods remained in the conusor, and by the King
are only seized into the Kings hands, but that shall not divest any property
from the Conusors, for they be but as it were in protection of the King; and
then when the Conusors became Bankrupt before the Liberate, those goods are in
the power of the commissioners to sell and destribute among the Creditors; but
all the Court resolved against Audley that these goods extended before they
became Bankrupts* and delivered by the Liberate after they became Bankrupts,
could not be sold by the Commissioners, because they being extend were quali in
custodia legis, so as the Conusors have not any power to give, sell, or dispose
of them, and it was therefore with much a do adjudged for the Defendant.

These intricate Cases make up Audleys life, a life of intricacies and
mysteries, wherein he walked as in amaze; and went on as in a labyrinth with
the clue of a resolved mind, which made plain to him all the rough passages he
met with; he with a round and solid mind fashioned his own fate, fixed and
unmovable in the great tumults and stir of business, the hard Rock in the
midst of Waves.

He took care to accompany himself with some Grave and reverend Divine to his
dying day; from whom if he gained not piety, he gained the reputation of it,
you should have in his Chamber upon the Table a large Bible, and Bishop
Andrews Sermons, and if you surprised him not you might find him busy with
one of these Books; but if you come suddenly he was in his Closet, -- he was a
great frequenter of the Church in the time of Divine Service; but for Sermons
he cared not for them, and he was something concerned to see Religion (as he
used to say) made a mere Preach; he would usually say that we might very well
content our selves to go to Heaven the old and good way which our forefathers
went in; what (says he) are we wiser then our forefathers? -- seek wisdom
among the Ancient and in length of days understanding, yea in all matters as
well Religious as Civil this was his rule; that the judgments of men
experienced, aged, and wise, yea though they speak without any proof or
demonstration, are no less to be hearkened unto, then as being demonstrations in
themselves, because such men's long observation is as an eye, wherewith they
presently and plainly behold those principles that sway over all actions; that
which makes men wise is the gathering of principles out of their own particular
experiments; and the framing of our particular experiments according to the
rule of their principles will make us such as they are; -- the times will never
be well (he said) until we had Queen Elizabeth's Protestants again in fashion,
-- here is now one says one thing, and another says another, so that a man
cannot tell what Religion to be of; he observed that the great scandal of our
Religion is the great covetousness of our Clergy men; they must have their
hundreds and thousands a year when as foam fifty or threescore might satisfy
an honest man to buy him a few Books, and meat, and drink, and clothing,
wherewith he should be contented; for he allowed not marriage in a Clergy man,
for said he their Children never thrived; and their Wives were usually left in
a poor condition, when the Parson is alive, they lead a merry life; but when
the Parson is dead and gone, where then is the Parsons Wife; truly he wondered
what the Papist meant when he affirmed that the poor sinner should be saved by
his works; I rest said he often in this, that salvation is not of works but
of grace; for if of works then we should have something to boast, but when we
have done all, we are but unprofitable servants; he would much complain of the
uncomfortable preaching of the late times, when he could hear of nothing but of
Hell and damnation, whereas they are preachers of the Gospel, -- the glad
tidings of Salvation; he looked upon the Lords Prayer as an absolute form of
Prayer to which none can add by any their new inventions, which he would
constantly say morning and evening; -- Virginity he looked upon as meritorious,
and therefore he would say to an old Maid of his, I like thee the better
because thou art unmarryed, to which she replied, In troth master I like you
the worse because you are unmarryed; he thought all Religion consisted in this,
Do unto others as thou would have others do unto thee; this is the Law and
the Prophets.

SECT. VI. Of his obtaining that profitable place in the Court of Wards.
WHen he had settled himself in a very good Estate, he resolved to quit his
small gains at Guild Hall and to fly; at some greater ones at Court, he buyeth
an excellent place at the Court of Wards for 3000. l. where he got this vast
Estate, of which place being asked what was the value of it by the year, he
answered (as another in the like case) that it might be worth some thousands of
pounds to him, who after his death would go instantly to Heaven, twice as much
to him who would go to Purgatory; and no body knows what to him who would
adventure to go to Hell; one asked our old man how he made a shift to live so
long? -- he answered I have a good place at Court, and seldom does a man die
in a good place there; in the Court of Wards he gained money by doing a good
Office, viz. in hindering some great persons to make a prey of young Heirs, for
some fees allowed him by the Heirs relations, and therefore he was the father
of the fatherless: Although the three Honorable persons under whom he lived,
looked upon the livings that fell into their hands by wordships as theirs to
dispose of, and not to make profit by; in so much that one of them when two
rich Parsons endeavored to outvie one another in offering great sums of
money for a great place; asked a third Parson who stood by looking for a small
living but of great worth, what will you Sir give for this great place? not a
penny answered he, for it is against my conscience; then says the Honorable
person, you Sir deserve the place best, you shall have it, though I say they
were so just that they were deaf to all importunity, besides that of a known
worth, joined with piety and industry, yet this Gentleman under them made great
advantages of such things, that in vain did those masters throw away the
bribes when this servant might catch them up at the first rebound, yea before
ever they come to the ground; as we know what Lord Keeper it was in the later
days of Queen Elizabeth, who thought himself an upright man, was spoken of for
the business of his servants in the sale of Ecclesiastical livings; he had the
best way for the clean conveyance of symoney of any man in England; so that
old ways of Symoney which were used in the Ancients times (as appears by the
Counsels prohibiting them) were but bungling to the cunning contrivance of the
Symony engineeres in our times; as if they cared not to go to Hell, so it were
not the nearest way, bnt that they might fetch a far compass round.

1 He would tie the Clarke to give him a Bond of so much money to resign at
within 8. or 10. months after institution and induction; the forfeiture of
which Bond was his money for the living.

2 He would take a Lease of a Parsonage under value for three years, and so
gain his wished for sum, in so much that he was called the Parsons Tenant;
being asked how he thought to be saved? he answered he hoped his Landlords
would pray for him; -- and being asked whether he was not afraid of a curse
upon his Estate from Church livings so sacrilegiously obtained? he answered
that he thought that Church goods blessed him; for said he a little that a man
has of a righteous man's, is better then if he had all the riches of the
ungodly; and withal he added that if the Clergy could in conscience allow
money for their benefices, he could in conscience receive it, etc.

He was observed very successful, insinuating with the master of the Court of
Wards and Liveries, in so much as William of Nassan that popular Prince of
Aurange, is said to wine a Subject from the King of Spain to his own party
every time he put off his Hat; so it was said that as often as Audley put off
his Hat to the master of the Court of Wards and Liveries; he gained a young
Heir; It Is discoursed of him (though I do not believe it) that he joined with
another in all causes in the Court of Wards and Liveries, that one should be
for the Plaintiff, whom charity presumed always injured; the other for the
Defendant who was to be pittyed as compelled to Law, with this condition to
restore the money to the party against whom the cause went, to give him his
due, he was a good advocate, for he would not only hear, but examine his
client, and pinch his cause where he found it was foundred, for he observed
that many clients in telling their case, rather plead then relate it, so that
the Advocate hears not the true state of it, till opened by the adverse
party; those men who understood more then all before the client has told half
run without their errand, and will return without their answer, if the
matter were doubtful, he would only warrant his own diligence, yet some keep
an assurance office in the Chamber, and will warrant any cause brought unto
them, as knowing that if they fail, they loose nothing but what was lost long
since their credit; when his name was up, his industry was not down: for he
said he could not live by his credit but his labor; -- there was an Heir
belonged to the Court of Wards, about whose Lands this was a controversy where
his Lands lay, says Audley if you cannot find his Lands in the Country, how
can we find them here.

A Lord borrowing money of our Audley when he was of the Court of Wards, finds
him very exacting; So said he, What do not you intend to use a Conscience? Ye^
said he, I intend hereafter to use it, why Sir, we Monied-men must balance
Accounts, if you do not pay me, you Cheat me; but if you do, then I Cheat your
Lordship.

In his place he kept Servants long: being asked the Reason, I keep them
awhile, because I have need of them; and I will keep them awhile, because they
have need of me. Bnt indeed he knew that there was nothing better than an old
Servant, as who had made his Masters Interest his own, with whom he would live
and dye; and as one who understood his Masters business by long acquaintance
and experience. He had once fallen out with a Gentleman, who showed him some
B^gs he would spend against him; he asked, Whether they had any bottom? Yes,
said the Gentleman: Nay, then I care not; for here I have a constant Spring,
and I cannot spend in other Courts more than I gain in this Court.

During his continuance in his Office at the Wards, he would complain that
there were so many Knights who were so poor; Nay (said a Gentleman of a free
Speech and Behavior) I hope you Mr. Audley will build Almes-houses for all
these poor Knights. He persuaded a Gentleman to enclose some Ground with Posts
and Rails, and as he was casting up the Charge what it would come to, a
Familiar standing by, said upon the sudden, Come Mr. Audley, methinks you do
not go the cheapest way to work; Why, said he? In truth (Mr. Audley) said the
Gentleman, Count you but (...) the Posts, and the poor People of the Country
will find R^^^ing.

In the Court of Wards he watched the Encumbrances that lay upon the Estates
that came thither, and he undertook them, complying with the Necessities of the
Owners, insomuch that he had at one time an Hundred and Fourteen Mortgages,
Statutes, and Judgments. An ingenious man saying of him, That his Papers would
make a good Map of England; and he would say, The Gentlemen of England were
great Usurers; for they turned all their Estates into Obligations.

It was his usual Observation in his business, That the next and nearest way is
commonly the foulest; and that if a man will go the fairest way, he must go
somewhat about.

There was a common Talk that the King was poor and necessitous, and many
Projects were thought on to supply: Nay (says Audley) let us help this King to
some good Office* for all his Officers were very nigh. There was some Proposal
to the old man to buy a more honorable, though a less profitable place than
his own; Why, says Audley? Says his Friend, That as all this while he had
grown in Breadth, now you must needs grow in Height, or else you would be a
Monster! Truly, said Audley, I am loath to rise higher, for I foresee my Fall;
which happened accordingly, just before the late War, when the Court of Wards
was put down; whereby, with other Accidents, he lost above an Hundred thousand
Pounds. He would say, That his ordinary Losses, were as the shaving of his
Beard, which would grow the faster thereby. The losing of this place, was like
the losing of a Member, which was irrecoverable.

About that time he would needs be discoursing of the Vanity and Trouble of
this World, and of his Intention to retire to a private Life; whereupon a merry
Friend of his, told him a Story of an old Rat, That would needs leave the
World, and therewith acquainted the young Rats, that he would retire into his
Hole, and spend his days solitarily, and would enjoy no more Comfort,
Commanding them upon his High Displeasure, not to come in unto him. In
Obedience to his Command, they forbear two or three days; at last, one was
more hardy than the rest, incited some of his Fellows to go in with him, and
he would venture to see how his Father did, for he might be dead. They
accordingly went in, and found the old Rat sitting in the midst of a rich
Parmezan Chief, gnawing with all its Might. He encouraged them underhand, and
would solemnly say of them openly, That they were Horse-leeches, that only
sucked the corrupted blood of the Law: He trades only in Quirks and Tricks, his
Highway is in Bypath, and he loves a Cavil, better than an Argument; an
Evasion, than an Answer. He had this property of an honest man, That his Word
was as good as his Bond; or he could pick the Lock of the strongest Conveyance,
or creep out at the Lattice of a word; therefore he counted, to enter common
with other, as good as his own several; for he would so vex his Partners, That
they had rather forego their Right, than undergo a Suit with him; he would fall
in usually with those Persons that he saw fell out.

SECT. VII. How he entered himself of the Temple.
FInding House rent pretty smart in the City, and the inconvenience of Ingresse
and Egresse and dependence upon other people considerable, he contrives to have
a Chamber in the Temple in a bargain he bought, where he might have Law at his
command, which he had so much occasion to use: that in his old age, when a man
undertook to follow his business* you may, said he, but let me, said he, have
some six or seven Suits for my recreation: he would keep company with the
Benchers and other Gentlemen at their fires, where when it was proposed that
they should Club for Wine, or Ale and Tobacco, he would say (Gentlemen) I will
go along with you as far as a penny goes; when they replied, what can a penny
do? he would say more then you imagine: for there is not a penny you spend but
will buy a foot of Land: he would say to young men, fie, fie, why are you so
Idle? there is not an hour in the day, but you might gain six pence in, and
sure two pence: It Is a sad thing he would say, to see Gentlemen, under pretense
to learn Law, here learn to be lawless: not knowing by their study so much as
what an Execution means, till they Learn it by their own dear experience: By
his Scriveners means he grew acquainted with most of these young gallants; nor
were the youngsters so needy, as the other was ready to feed them with money,
sometimes with a courteous violence, forcing upon them more then they desired,
provided the security were good, or the advantage great: sometimes he would
adventure to trust, if his estate in hope were over measure, though he himself
were under age; he advises them to be good husbands* and sell first the
straggling part of their Estates, persuading them that they should not be
sensible of such Sales, which would make their means more entire, as counting
the gathering of such scattering rents, rather burdensome than profitable: this
he would have at half the value, so that the feathers would buy the goose, and
the wood pay for the ground: and when the poor Gentleman had with his money
stopped one gap by prodigality, he would open another: O how the Principal, the
Use, the Use upon Use swell the debt to an incredible sum, until half the
Estate was sold, and then the old man knew, that when half the Estate was gone,
the Gentleman would live as if he enjoyed the whole; and though he abated in
Possessions, he abated not in Expenses: how cunningly would he put his decoying
Gentleman upon such projects as in hope of recovery would ruin them, or it may
be, which is worst, he would engage two decaying Gentlemen together, until they
both miscarried: how subtly would he let his debts grow on until they became
to a considerable sum: Gentlemen could not be more careless to pay then he
was willing to continue the debt, knowing his Bonds, like Infants, battle best
with sleeping.

SECT. VIII. What a Master he was.
TO give him his due, he had a courage as a Master extraordinary that made him
Overseer of all his business, either in person or providence, so that a thrifty
Fellow that served him, gained not above 400 pound under him, in the space of
thirty years: He was very careful in his Accounts: This being a Rule with him,
If the Master makes no Account of his servant, the Servant will make small
Account of the Master, and cares not what he spends or does, who is never
brought to an Audit and Reckoning: He would say, That the dust that fell from
the Masters shoes, was the best Compost to manure ground.

He allowed his Servant board-wages, whereby they might provide for themselves
what was wholesome, sufficient and necessary: The Wages he contracted for, he
duly and truly paid his Servants. If he finds a servant utterly unuseful, so
that he cannot fairly prevail with him to do him any good or himself, he rid
his hands of him, and fairly put him away; neither discomposing himself in
fretting at him, nor troubling himself in correcting him: such things being
neither fit for him, nor useful for his servant, which might torment him, but
not reform him, and so make him keep his faults, and forsake his Master: -- He
loved dearly those servants that continued with their Masters: Therefore he
allowed at his death ten pound apeece to forty Maids that had continued three
years together with their Masters. He said, he desired not a wise servant who
would not do, but dispute: and he observed, that simple servants (understand
such, whose capacity is bare measure without surplusage equal to the business
he is used in) are more useful, because more managable then other men,
especially in matters wherein not their brains, but hands are required* yet if
a Master out of want of experience enjoins him to do what is hurtful or
prejudicial to his own State, Duty herein makes him undutiful, if not to deny,
to demur in his performance, and choosing rather to displease then hurt his
Master, he humbly represents his reasons to the contrary: he desired that a
servant should make true, direct and dutiful Answers to his Master, and he
liked the servant that industriously endeavored to provide something for
himself whereby he may be maintained in his old age.

SECT. IX. How he kept Company.
COmpany is the greatest pleasure of the nature of man: yet he reckoned
solitariness better then a debauched company, for the wildness of the place is
only uncheerful while the wildness of loose persons is dangerous: he would not
avoid miscarriages only, but the very occasions of them: among which bad
company (the limetwigs of the Devil) is the chiefest especially to catch those
natures, which like the good fellow Planet Mercury are most swayed by others:
in all company he stood upon his guard, and though with them, yet he was not of
them: the company he kept was the comment whereby he discovered the closest
man: Let other men study Books, he for his part would study Men.

He liked that Proverb very well: He that eats Cherries with Noble men, shall
have his eyes spirred out with the stones; for he observed that they who live
constantly with men above their Estates, shall reap shame and loss thereby: if
thou payest nothing, says he, thou art their scorn and contempt: if thou
payest along with them, thou will be thine own ruin: although he was very
welcome to his betters, as being such a one as though he paid not a penny of
the shot, he spends enough in lending them his time and discourse; and he would
say he might lose, but could not gain by inferiors company: he liked men of a
communicative nature, remote discourses, were as full, as fluent, and their
judgments were as right as their tongues ready: -- His friends were few, but
choice: his great friends used to wait upon him in great state to gain credit
and repute: one among the rest came always attended with a large retinue, who
it seems were only hired for the time, and so dismissed when the complement
was over; this was observed by the old man: and one time the Grandee taking his
leave of him with extraordinary Complements, spare your Complement, said he,
for I believe I shall shortly see you again, but let me, I pray you, salute
your servants whom I shall never see again: he loved serious men, and would say
that a wanton jest make fools laugh, and wise men frown; Its good to make a
jest that is harmless mirth, but it is naught to make a trade of jesting, that
is weak folly: he could not endure to hear any abused who were dead; for to
wrong their memories, is to wrong their ghost of their winding sheet: he could
not endute any should scoff at their defects who are not able to amend them;
nor to have any flouted for his profession if it were honest and painful: he
would say, He that loses his friend for a jest, deserves to die a beggar in
the bargain: yet some think their conceit like mustard, not good except they
bite: Friend, friend, such let thy jests be that they may not grind the credit
of thy friend, and make not jest; so long, until thou becomest one: he desired
to enjoy his company in his Chamber, without the charge or trouble of going
abroad.

SECT. X. What a Landlord he was.
HE would say that a man had best let his Land on a reasonable rate, so that
the tenant by employing his stock, and using his industry, may make an honest
livelihood, thereby to maintain himself and his children: he would not be too
easy, because under an easy Landlord a Tenant seldom thrives, contenting
himself to make the just measure of his rent, and not laboring for any
surplusage of Estate, nor yet too hard, least the Tenant revenge himself upon
his Land, and run away with the Rent; yet he would raise his Rents to the
present price of all commodities: he would say, if we should let our Lands as
other men have done before us: now other wares daily go on in price, we should
fall backed in our Estates: he rejoiced to see his Tenants thrive, yea, looks
upon it as a great honor to himself, when he perceived that God blesses their
endeavors, and that they come forward in the world; as it was his honor, so
it was his advantage too: he had one Tenant, that when he came made great
provision for him still: and died worth five thousand pounds: and when it was
told him that he died, and left but five thousand pounds behind him* I thought
(said he) he would die no rich man who made such needless expenses.

SECT. XI. His Discourse, and memorable Sayings.
I. OF men that would not thrive: 1. They would never thrive that observed not
Time and Opportunity. 2. They cannot thrive that are not punctual; that by
failing, loses his friend, loses his advantage of Thriving. 3. They cannot
thrive, who are of too light, voluble and wandering minds. 4. They cannot
thrive, who are of too narrow, fixed, peremptory and resolute, and slow, and
not able to meet with the great variety of Occasions. 5. They cannot thrive,
that are too credulous, easy and hasty. 6. They cannot thrive, that are too
anxious, diffident and zealous. 7. They cannot thrive, that are not resolved
and well weighd. 8. They cannot trive, who take no care of their little
Expenses. 9. They cannot thrive* who have not an exact Account of their
Expenses and Incoms. 10. They cannot thrive, who meddle with more, then they
are well able to manage, etc.

II. His Rules of Thriving, which I cannot better express, then in these words:

1.
Fly Idleness, which yet thou can not fly,
By dressing, misdressing, and complement,
If those take up thy day, the Sun will cry
Against these, for his light only was lent.
God gave thy soul brave wings, put not those feathers
Into a bed to sleep out all ill-weathers.
2.
-- fool not, for all may have,
If they dare try a glorious life or grave.
3.
When thou do purpose ought within thy power,
Be sure to do it, though it be but small,
Constancy knits the bones, and makes us stowre,
When wanton pleasures beckon us to thrall:
Who breaks his own Bond, forfeiteth himself,
What nature made a ship, he makes a shelf.
4.
Do all things like a man, not sneakingly.
Think the King sees thee still, for his king does:
Simpring is but a lay Hypocrisy:
Give it a corner, and the Chi undoes:
Who fears to do ill, sets himself to task:
Who fears to do well, sure should wear a mask.
5.
Slight those that say, amidst their sickly healths
Thou live by rule, what does not so, but man?
Houses are built by rule, and Commonwealths:
Entice the crusty Sun, if that you can
From his Ecliptic line: becken the sky:
Who lives by rule then, keeps good Company.
6.
Who keeps no guard upon himself, is slack,
And rots to any thing at the next great thou:
Man is shop of Rules, a well trusted back:
Whose every parcel under-writes a Law.
Loose not thy self, nor give thy humors way,
God gave them to thee under lock and key.
7.
Be thrifty, but not covetous, therefore give
Thy need, thine honor, and thy friend his due:
Never was Scraper brave man: get to live,
Then live and use it, else its not true
That thou have gotten* surely Use alone
Makes money not a contemptible stone.
8.
Never exceed thy Income; Youth may make
Even with the year* but age if it well hit,
Shoots a bow short, and lessens still his state
As the day lessens, and his life with it.
Thy Children, Kindred, Friends upon thee call
Before thy jorney, fairly part with all.
9.
By no means run in debt, take thy own measure,
Who cannot live on twenty pound a year,
Cannot on forty, he is a man of pleasure:
A kind of thing that's for it self too dear.
The curious Untrift makes his cloth too wide,
And spans himself, but would the Tailor chide,
10.
Spend not on hopes, they that by pleading clothes,
Do fortunes seek, when worth and service fail
Would have their tale believed for their oaths,
And are like empty vessels under sail:
Old Courtiert know this: therefore set out so,
As all the day thou may hold out to go.
11.
In Cloths, cheap handsomness does bear the bell,
Wisdoms a Trimmer-thing then shop ere gave;
Say not then, this with that Lace will do well,
But this with my discretion will be brave:
Much curiousness is a peppetu^ll woing,
Nothing with labor: folly long a doing,
12.
Play not for gain, but sport; who plays for more
Then he can loose with pleasure, stakes his heart,
Perhaps his wives too, and whom she has bore
Servants and Churches also play their part,
Only a Herald who that way does pass,
Finds his cracked name at length in the Church-glass.
13.
If yet thou love games at so dear a rate;
Learn this that has old Gamesters dearly cost:
Do loose, rise up, do win, rise in that state,
Who strive to sit out looking hands are lost:
Game is a civil Gunpowder in peace,
Blowing up houses with their whole increase.
14.
Wholly abstain or wed: thy bounteous Lord
Allows thee choice of Paths, take no by-ways,
But gladly welcome that he does afford:
Not gruding, that thy lust has bounds and stays;
Continence has its joy: weigh both, and so,
If Rottenness have more, lee heaven go.
15.
Drink not the third glass, which thou can not tame:
When once it is within thee, hut before
May rule as thou list, and pour the shame*
Which it would pour on thee upon the floor.
He that is drunken, may his Mother kill,
Big with his sister: he has lost the Reins,
Is outlawed by himself: all kind of ill
Does with his liquor slider into his veins.
The Drunkard forfeits men, and does divest.
All worldly right, save what he has by the beast.
If Reason move not gallantly, quit the Room,
Call in a Shipwreck shift there several way,
Let not a common ruin thee intomb.
Be not a beast in Courtesy, but slay
Stay at the third glass, or forego the place,
Wine above all things does Gods stamp deface.
16.
Lie not: but let thy heart be true to God,
Thy mouth to it, thy actions to them both.
Cowards tell lies, and those that fear the rod,
The stormy working soul spits lies and froth:
Dare to be true; nothing can need a lie,
A fault which needs it most, grows two thereby.
17.
Be sweet to all, is thy complexion sour,
Then keep such company, make them thy allay:
Command thy self in chief, he life's war knows,
Whom all his passions follow as he goes.
18.
Think not thy fame at every twitch shall break
By great deeds show that thou can little do,
And do them not: that shall thy wisdom be,
And change thy temperance into bravery.
19.
Wisdom picks friends, Civility plays the rest,
A toy shunned clearly, passes with the best.
20.
Toward great persons use respective boldness,
That temper gives them theirs, and yet does take,
Nothing from them, in service, care or coldness,
Does calably thy fortunes more, or make
21.
Envy, not greatness* for thou make thereby
Thy self the worse, and so the distance greater
Be not thine own worm: yet such jealousy
As hurts not others, but may make thee better:
Is a good spur, correct thy passions spite,
Then may the beast draw thee to happy light.
22.
Thy friend put in thy bosom, wear his eyes
Still in thy heart, that he may see what is there.
23.
Yet be not hasty if thou be a father,
Love is a personal debt I cannot give.
My Childrens right; nor ought he take it,
Rather both Friends should dye, than hinder them to live;
Fathers first enter Bonds to Natures ends,
And are her Sureties, ere they are Friends.
24.
Calmness is great advantage; he that lets
Another Chafe, may warm him at his Fire;
Mark all his wanderings, and enjoy his Frets,
As cunning Fencers suffer hence to Tire.
25.
Mark what another says; for many are
Full of themselves, and answer their own Notion,
Take all unto thee; then with equal Care,
Balance each dram of Reason like a Potion.
26.
Pitch thy Behavior low, thy Progress high,
So shall thou Humble, and Magnanimous be.
Sink not in spirit; who aims at the Sky,
Shoots higher far than he that means a Tree.
27.
Let thy mind still be bent, still plotting where
And when, and how the business may be done,
Slackness breeds Worms; the sure Traveller
Though he alight sometimes, still goes on.
Active and stirring Spirits live alone,
Write on the others, Here lives such a one.
28.
Who say I care not, those I give for lost,
And to instruct them, 'twill not quit the cost.
29.
Scorn no man's love, though of a mean degree,
Love is a present for a mighty King.
Much less make any one thine Enemy,
As Guns destroy, so may a little thing.
The cunning Workman never does refuse
The meanest Tool that he may chance to use.
30.
All Foreign Wisdom does account to this,
To take all that is given; whether Wealth
Or Love, or Language nothing comes amiss,
A good digestion turns all to health.
And then as for our fair Behavior may
Strike off all Scores, none are so clear as they.
31.
Affect in things about thee cleanliness,
That all may gladly board thee as a flower;
Slovens take up their stock of noysomness
Beforehand, and anticipate the last hour:
Let thy mind, sweetness have its operation,
Upon thy Body, Clothes, and Habitation.
32.
In Alms regard thy means, and others merit,
Think Heaven a better bargain, than to give
Only the single Market-penny for it,
Join hands with God to make a man to live.
33.
Sum up at Night what thon have done by day,
And in the morning, what thou have to do,
Dress and undress thy soul: Mark the decay
And growth of it; if with thy Watch that too
Be down, then wind up both; since we shall be
Most surely judged, make thy Accounts agree.
34.
In brief, Acquit thee bravely, play the man,
Look not on pleasures as they come, but go,
De^er not the least virtue: Life's poor span
Make not an (...) by trifling in thy Woe:
If thou do ill, the joy fades not the pains:
If well, the pain does fade, the joy remains.
Bishop Saunderson of Usury.
AND now methinks I see the Usurer hugging himself, and clapping his sides,
that he has come off so fairly; surely his Calling is absolute good, whereon
none of these Rules could fasten, But indeed it is with the Usurer in this
Case, as with the Drunkard. If the Drunkard should ask me against which of the
ten Commandments he offended, I confess I could not readily give him a direct
punctual Answer: Not that he sins not against any, but because he sins
against so many of them, that it is hard to say against which most. He sins
against the sixth Commandment, by distempering his Body; he sins against the
seventh, by enflaming his lust; he sins against the eighth, by making waste
of the good Creatures of God. Right so is it with our Usurer in this Case: He
would pose me, that should ask me the Question, Which of these three Rules
fetches in the Usurer, and his Calling. Verily I cannot tell which most, I
think every one of the three may; howsoever, among the three, I am sure I have
him* If Usury be simply unlawful (as most of the Learned have concluded) then
the first Rule has him. I should be very tender to condemn any thing as simply
unlawful, which any even imaginary conjuncture of Citcumstances would render
lawful; and would choose rather by an over-liberal Charity to cover a multitmde
of sins (if I may abuse the Apostles phrase to that sense) than by a too
superstitious Restraint make one. Yet the Texts of Scripture are so express,
and the grounds of Reason brought by learned Men, seem so strong against Usury,
That I have much ado to find so much Charity in my self, as to absolve any kind
of Usury (properly so called) with what Cautions or Circumstances soever
qualified, from being a sin. But I will suspect mine own, and the common
Judgment herein, and admit for this once, (dato non concesso) That Usury be in
some Case lawful, and so our Usurer escape the first Rule, which yet cannot be,
till his Teeth be knocked out for biting: But you must knock out his Brains
too, before he escape our second Rule. I dare say, the most learned Usurer that
lives (and they say some learned Ones are Usurers) will never be able to
prove, That Usury (if it be at all lawful) is so lawful, as to be made a
Calling. Here all his Doctors, and his Proctors, and his Advocates leave him.
For can it possibly enter into any reasonable man's Head to think, That a man
should be born for nothing else, bnt to tell out Money, and take in Paper?
which if a man had many Millions of gold and silver, could take up but a small
portion of that precious time which God would have spent in some honest and
fruitful Employment. But what do I speak of the Judgment of reasonable men in
so plain a matter, wherein I dare appeal to the Conscience, even of the Usurer
himself; and it had need be a very plain matter, that a man would refer to the
Conscience of an Usurer. No honest man need be ashamed of an honest Calling; if
then the Usurers Calling be such, what need he care who knows, or why should
he shame with it? If that be his Trade, why does he not in his Bills and Bonds,
and Noverints, make it known to all men by those Presents that he is an Usurer,
rather than write himself Gentleman or Yeoman, or by some other style? But say
yet our Usurer should escape, at least in the Judgment of his own hardened
Conscience, from both these Rules, as from the Sword of Jehu and Hazael: There
is yet a third Rule, like the Sword of Elisha, to strike him stone-dead, and he
shall never be able to escape that. Let him show wherein his Calling is
profitable to humane Society; he keeps no Hospitality; if he have but a barred
Chest, and a strong Lock to keep hi^ God and his Scriptures (his Mammon and his
Parchments in) he has House-room enough. He fleeceth many, but cloatheth none.
He biteth and devoureth; but eats all his Morsels alone. He gives not so
much as a Crumb, no no^ to his dearest Broker or Scrivener; only, where he
biteth, he allows them to scratch what they can for themselves. The King, the
Church, the Poor, are all wronged by him, and so are all that live near him; in
every common charge he slippeth the Collar, and leaves the burden upon those
that are less able. It were not possible Usurers should be so bitterly
inveighed against by sober Heathen Writers; so severely Censured by the Civil,
and Canon Laws; so uniformly condemned by godly Fathers and Councils; so
universally hated by men of all sorts, and in all Ages and Countries, as
Histories and Experience manifest they ever have been, and are: if their
Practice and Calling had been any way profitable, and not indeed every way
hurtful, and incommodious both to private men and public Societies. If any
thing can make a Calling unlawful, certainly the Usurers Calling cannot be
lawful.

Sands Relat. 248. of Rich Antonio.
IN King Henry the 8th. days, there was one Mr. Gresham, a Merchant of London,
setting Sail homewards from Palirno, where dwelt at that time one Antonio,
called the Rich, who had at one time two Kingdoms mortgaged to him by the King
of Spain; and being crossed by contrary Wind, Mr. Gresham was constrained to
Anchor under the Lee of the Island off from Bulo, where was a burning Mountain.
Now about the Midday, when for a certain space the Mountain forbore to send
forth flames, Mr. Gresham, with eight of the Sailors, ascended the Mountain,
approaching as near the vent as they durst, where, amongst other noise, they
heard a voice cry abroad, saying, Dispatch, dispatch, the Rich Antonio is a
coming. Terrified herewith, they hasted their return, and the Mountain
presently broke out in a flame. But from so dismal a place they made all the
haste they could, and desiring to know more of this matter, (the winds still
thwarting their course) they returned to Palmerino, and forthwith enquiring for
Antonio, they found that he was dead about the very instant, so near as they
could guess, when that voice was heard by them. Mr. Gresham at his return to
London, reported this to the King, and the Mariners (being called before him)
confirmed the same. Upon Gresham this wrought so deep an impression, that he
gave over all his Merchandising, distributed his Estate, partly to his
Kinsfolk, and partly to good Uses, retaining only a Competency for himself; and
so spent the rest of his days in solitary Devotion.

Cromerus of a rich Polonian.
A Rich Polonian was very Covetous, much given to Rapine and Oppression, who
falling sick, and being like to dye, was admonished by his Friends to sue to
God for mercy, which he refused to do, saying, That there was no hope of
Salvation for him; no place of pardon left. No sooner had he spoken this, but
immediately there was heard of the standers by most vehement stripes and blows,
which appeared manifestly upon the body of this dying Wretch, who presently
gave up the ghost, to the great Terror and amazement of all who were present
eyewitnesses of this sad and dismal Story.

Spotswood Hist. of Chapter of Scotland. of the Rich Bishop of Glascow.
JOhn Cameron Bishop of Glascow, was a very Covetous man, given to Violence and
Oppression, especially toward his Poor Tenants and Vassals: but God suffered
it not long to go unpunished: for the Night before Christmas day, as he lay
asleep in his House at Lockwood seven Miles from the City of Glascow, he heard
a voice summoning him to appear before the Tribunal of Christ, and give an
account of his doings: whereupon he awaked, and being greatly terrified, he
called to his Servants to bring light, and sit by him: he himself also took a
Book in his hand and began to read: but the Voice calling the second time,
struck all the Servants to an amazement: the same Voice calling the third time
far Louder and more Fearfully, the Bishop, after a heavy groan, was found dead
in his Bed: his Tongue hanging out of his Mouth: A fearful Example of Gods
Judgment against the Sin of Covetousness and Oppression.

Strada of the rich Cardinal Granvell.
Cardinal Granvell (a great favorite of the King of Spain) being placed under
the Duchess of Parma, as a chief director of all the affairs in the Low
Countries, when he was discharged of his office, and saw all forsaking him: he
said that he had long enough waited upon other men's occasions: that a man
broken with Continual toil he could not but wish for rest; and that to one
besieged with Petitioners Liberty was not to be refused: especially when he
knew that petitioners and Letter-Carriers met like Pitcher-Carriers at a spring
which they draine and trouble: That favor at Court had a better face then
inside, and that all humane things are found to be far less in our possession
then they are fancied in our hope: and that all was vanity and vexation of
spirit:

Mr. Latimer of a Rich man.
A Rich man when he lay on his sick bed, was told by one that in all
probability he was not a man for this world: as he heard it (what, says he,
must I die? send for a Physician, wounds, side, heart, must I dye? wounds,
side, heart, must I dye? and thus he continued, and nothing could be got from
him: but wounds, side, heart must I die, and go from my Riches.

Mr. Buroughs speaks of a Rich man who lived near him, who when he heard his
sickness was mortal, sends for his Bags of money and hugged them in his arms
saying: O must I leave you, O must I leave you.

He relates of another who when he lay upon his sick bed, called for his
Bags, and laid a Bag of Gold upon his heart: and after a while bid them
take it away, saying it will not do, it will not do.

Mr. Rogers tells of one that being near unto Death, clapped a Twenty shilling
Piece of Gold in his Mouth, saying: Some Wiser than some, I will take this
along with me howsoever.

Sophronius Bishop of Jerusalem (Prat. spir. c. 195. referente Baronio ad an.
411.) delivers this History following to posterity, as a most certain thing:
THat Leontius Apamiensis a most faithful religious man that had lived many
years at Cyrene assured them, that Synesius (who of a Philosopher became a Bp.)
found at Syrene one Evagrius a Philosopher, who had bin his old acquaintance,
fellow student and intimate friend, but an obstinate Heathen: and Synesius was
earnest with him to become a Christian, but all in vain: yet did he still
follow him with those Arguments that might satisfy him of the Christian
verity; and at last the Philosopher told him, that to him it seemed but a mere
fable and deceit that the Christian Religion teaches men, that this world
shall have an end, and that all men shall rise again in these bodies, and their
flesh be made immortal and incorruptible, and that they shall so live for ever,
and receive the Reward of all that they have done in the body, and that he that
has pity on the poor, lends to the Lord, and he that gives to the poor and
needy shall have Treasures in heaven, and shall receive an hundredfold from
Christ, together with eternal life. These things he derided. Synesius by many
arguments assured him that all these things were certainly true: and at last
the Philosopher and his children were Baptized. A while after he comes to
Synesius, and brings him three hundred pound of Gold for the poor, and bid him
Take it, but give him a Bill under his hand that Christ should repay it him in
another world. Synesius took the money for the poor, and gave him under his hand
such a Bill as he desired. Not long after the Philosopher being near to death,
commanded his sons that when they buried him, they should put Synesius Bill in
his hand in the Grave; which they did: And the third day after, the Philosopher
seemed to appear to Synesius in the night, and said to him, (Come to my
Sepulcher where I lie, and take thy Bill, for I have received the Debt and am
satisfied; which for thy assurance I have subscribed with my own hand.) The
Bishop knew not that the Bill was buried with him, but sent to his sons who
told him all; and taking them and the chief men of the City, he went to the
grave, and found the Paper in the hands of the Corpse, thus subscribed, (EGO
EVAGRIVS PHILOSOPHUS, TIBI SANCTISSIMO DOMINO SYNESIO EPISCOPO SALUTEM: ACCEPI
DEBITUM IN HIS LITERIS MANU TUA CONSCRIPTUM, SATISFACTUMQUE MIHI EST; ET NULLUM
CONTRA TE HABEOJUS PROPTER AURUM QUOD DEDI TIBI ET PER TE CHRISTO DEO ET
SALVATORI NOSTRO) that is, I Evagrius the Philosopher, to thee most Holy Sir,
Bishop Synesius greeting: I have received the Debt which in this Paper is
written with thy hands, and I am satisfied, and I have no Law (or Action)
against thee for the Gold which I gave to thee, and by thee to Christ our God
and Savior.) They that see the thing admired, and glorified God that gave such
wonderful evidence of his promises to his servants: And says, Leontius, this
Bill subscribed thus by the Philosopher, is kept at Cyrene most carefully in
the Church to this day, to be seen of such as do desire it.

FINIS.

