A PANEGYRIC ON HIS Sacred Majesty's Royal Person, CHARLES the IId, By the
Grace of God, KING OF England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defender of the
Faith, etc. and Corronation.

Aut Caesar, aut nullus.

By Samuel Austin Jun. B. A. Com. W. C. Oxon.

LONDON, Printed for William Miller at the Acron in Saint Paul's Churchyard.
1661.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Reader,
I Have nothing here of my own to present you with, that can in the least merit
an acceptance from you, but the Royal Subject of my Poem: A Subject no less
then a King, and a King of that choice Eminence, and Virtue, that I fear (as
the Painter being not able to quicken a Beam into its native liveliness, does
soil the Sun in the attempt of Drawing its resemblance) least I should (not
sensing this so great a Majesty) decline from, or lessen his glory. If so, in
all submissivenesse I crave our Gracious Sovereigns pardon (not yours,) who in
this only may be taxed as Criminal, that His overheight, and beaming luster
has occasioned my default. It Is not for every one to lay a color on Majesty,
and Majesty such as his is; (graced with the confluence of all perfections,
that humane nature can aspire unto, or be capable of, is enough to impoverish
Learning, and to reduce the very Eucrasie of man's wit unto a distress in the
description thereof. And therefore none can justly blame me, if I am not exact
therein.

Reader, I shall not flatter you into the Reading of my broken Numbers, only
tell you, that the Subject deserves your Worship, and choice respect, though I
do not. And if there is any thing that may be accounted worthy of your
Commendation, impute it to the sense of so full a Majesty, that has overborn
my Muse, and ravished my spirit unto that daring height, that I fear the issue
may prove dangerous. However: I Will adventure. Be Candid, Read it out, and so
farewell.

Samuel Austin Jun. B. A. Com. W. C. Oxon.

The Author according as these find acceptance, intends a larger Book of Poems:
The Subjects of which are these following.
KIng Charles the first his disguise.
King Charles the second his flight from Worcester.
Pair Royal of strength and beauty: The Duke of York and his Duchess.
An Elegy on the Duke of Glocesters Death.
Christ's love to his Church, shadowed out in Joseph and Potiphars Daughter, in
a familiar Dialogue betwixt them.
The Drones Indictment of the Be.
The Mystery of God in the World.
The unusefulnesse of the five Senses.
The Common Fire.
Two Lovers in one Heart.
The sensual Lover, or an Old Man Courting a Young Woman, in a Dialogue.
The highway to a Throne, and Establishment of Kingdoms.
Every Faction humored, or the Humourous Sectary.
The Authors descant thereon.
Mr Clevelands Encomium, by the Author styled, the Poet Laureate.
A Copy on Mr Abraham Cowley, and his excellent faculty in Poesy.
The young Man's speech to a silent Woman.
The Answer with the true Symptoms of Love.
Directions for a Maids Choice.
Upon the Oracle.
Upon Death procured by a sent or smell.
The Authors Answer to Mr Randolphs Poem styled, Love fondly refused for
Conscience sake etc.
As also Letters in Prose upon several occasions compiled by the said Author.
And the Authors Plea for old Philosophical principles against those that would
obtrude Novelties, or new uncertainties upon us, under a kind of a humble
affected Ignorance, etc.
A Panegyric on his Sacred Majesty's Royal Person, (Charles the IId by the
Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defender of the
Faith, etc.) and Corronation.
Pindarique Ode.
The Authors humble Address to his Majesty.
GReat Sir! may you be free
To read your self by me.
The Sun is always seen most trim and fit,
By Glasses, which are useless without it.
You find the King, and Saint,
I the Pencil, and Paint.
You make the Sun, and light,
But I the sense, and sight.
I give virtue the face, or ey,
You its temper, and gravity:
I alone, the skin
You all within.
You Majesty include,
I its similitude.
You glory Antidate,
I only do it state.
Rise then my Muse made Royal, sing
Thy new Relation to a King:
A King to whom, thy all is due,
Who is both Great, and perfect too.
THey that divinests objects would descry,
Must void their eye sight, and through blindness try;
He that most Sacred things would find,
Must study ignorance to be blind:
Thus of a King to have a sight
Requires the blotting out of light.
Aelian gainsaid those Authors that allowed
Their clearest exposition in a Cloud;
But I them like; that truth alone bears spice
That does exact Interpretation twice.
Thick darkness there does best expound,
Where the mystery is profound.
Had Scripture but one single gloss,
That might be questioned for dross.
Was Truth at first clear to the eye,
All might suspect it for a lie.
They which will buy things of great price
Must offer moneys for them twice.
A King is deep, he that would sound
His Grace must more then once expound.
Truest Divinity runs high to mark
Its clearest revelation in the dark.
Faiths problem streams the soundest evidence,
And yet must not be cloyed by humane sense.
Divines Preach plainest Truths, whilst he that hears
Is blind, and deaf, concealed eyes, and ears.
Of hallowed things they deem too light,
That place them in the vulgar sight.
He that with reverence would mark
A King must fold him up in the dark.
The Prophets, which things highest did dispense
First spoke the words, and then contrived their sense.
Thus must I do in Writing of my Theme,
First speak It out, then think what It does mean.
Words uttered without knowledge, date
Matters, that do hold most of state:
But when chained up to one known sense
They point out common excellence.
To Scan a King, that is perfect good
Is to speak words not understood.
Kings walk like Saints in the notion of sense
As Angels skill the finest influence.
Mortals they are, congealed of spirit, and blood
But in the flesh may not be understood.
A King beyond sense safe does ly:
The Persian State holds Majesty.
Spirits trade not with Bodies, Angels sway
By inward thoughts, and never sense their way.
Thus Scepters do Intelligences find,
Master the body, while they rule the mind.
Princes distill their Influences such,
Which are not plain perceived although they touch:
Their Power is hid by which they sway,
And ^or^^ their Subjects to obey.
Rise Charles! Your grace maintains that right
Of living far above our fight.
Majesti's by Your Scepter blown:
You have known all, and are not known.
A secret Virtue do you find,
To conquer both our heart and mind.
Your Scarlet was not died at the first cast,
But after many a color laid in wast,
The perfect ruling Dye sprang up at last.
You did not hastily Your Scepter catch,
But as those Kings, whom none could match,
And had great matters to dispatch.
By an inter Regnum did You come,
To be established in the Throne;
And what was that but a shadow spun,
Or a waste night unto Your Sun?
Its Issues as void Colors spent,
To settle deep Your Government*
Those things, whose Virtues are most seen,
Move by an intervall between
The two Poles crosier active Powers,
Make various season, time, and hours,
By whose Virtue about are whirled
The motions of the upper world;
Naught ever their Scepter withstood,
Yet they maintain no Neighborhood:
The vastness of the space betwixt
Heightens their Power, and states it fixed.
The Sun It self, whose flames are hurled
Int' every corner of the world.
Each days past Scepter of Light
Receives an interpose by night.
And if it should all shadow shun,
'Twould be reputed common Sun.
The greatest glories are not seen
Without the help of mask, or skreen.
But the least shade does blind the sight,
From a clear view of lesser Light.
Small Lamps are best beheld, when near
Packt up together in one Sphere;
While bigger Lights being thronged too nigh
Do wrong themselves, and eke the eye.
Distance preserves the state of Kings,
And proves them to be special things.
Partition of time and space,
Does only state the Royal Race.
Your Royal Father at first span'd
The peaceful Scepter in his hand;
Then did You step upon the Throne,
And now rule by Your self alone.
Your glories not together seen,
But by alittle age between:
And this it is that does fully try
The greatness of Your Majesty.
Even as from Archimedes dust
Demonstrations came into Trust;
And as from Hyacinthus Blood
Letters were made good.
Whose sanguine shower
Produced a flower,
And as the wounds did flow
A kind of Alphabet did blow,
And Letters distinct grow;
Which did record the fame
Of Ajax's living name:
How his untamed Spirit, and Power
At length did sink into a flower;
(Shrunk valor, if a flower must maintain
The credit of an Ajax slain)
Which saved Hyacinthus dying breath,
With the sighs made at his death.
Which in Characters fine, and trim
Showed that Apollo loved him.
Thus from Your Fathers Blood, and Dust
Knowledge and Learning sprang up first.
Instance the Book made at His death,
Compiled by His later breath.
Oh! may the Name, of such a King as He,
With Great Ones amongst the gods recorded be?
May Apollo be put in trust,
To beautify his dust.
To make His blood
Immortal good.
To Write His Name not in a flower;
But in some Star, or higher Power:
For his precious gore
Letters are multiplied to more:
His very Death,
Has given to Learning birth and breath.
But you alone have perfect made,
And ransomed ^^tters from the shade.
By you they are fully ripe and good,
And may be understood.
You Have given us sense and sight,
And unto Learning all its light.
The Heavens above not all over fair,
Dark in, and out as if there were
Betwixt earch Star, both earth and air.
But all Your Graces are true light,
In them no likelihood of night.
Your Virtues are both fresh and green,
No common Herb or Weed between.
Damn Antichrist by virtues Kings are meant,
Dissolve the Pope, and You the Innocent,
Under whose Rule I may more truly say,
That Lance and Nails do keep a Holiday,
Religion rose, and did by you revive,
Who only keep'st our Liberty alive.
Amphyction complete;
But far more great.
The old Arithmetician Zealots mount
The common age of the World on Faiths account. 5199
Their sense is seen: cause in it coucht dothly,
The holy-Trin, in a safe Unity: 1236.
Make the World younger, give the Mystery light,
Take out those figures, so the Reckning's right. 3960 vel 63
(That Sacred Number, a confused lie,
Unless It be drawn up by Unity)
Kings make such Sums, he that would stake them bigger,
Than other men must multiply by figure,
And cast up mysteries above sense alost:
He that counts Princes plain, accounts them naught.
Crowns cypher'd are by Arithmetic ^n trust,
Mystical Number, things in secret nursed.
Thus does our Sacred Prince most piercing try
Age, Number, in divinest Mystery.
By His Return the Ancient face of Time
Looks young again, and our World's at its prime.
He 'bandond falsehood, and has Truth begot,
In faiths defense, preserved the holy knot.
To speak things seen, and known is for to miss
What the perfection of a True king is.
He only reached my Theme, that did account
The holy Temple bigger then the Mount.
Thou do excel thy self alone
And can surpassed be by none.
Thy Virtues in their perfect sense
Cannot dwell in that circumference.
More room, more room, thy swelling grace
Exacts a larger breast and face:
I know It not, as soon I sound
Good Enochs Prophecies near found.
And thus my own blindness I see
Remain great to Thy self, not me.
Gods to the Enstalment now come down
Arise then, and receive the Crown.
Heavens lend it Jewels, and beset
It round with your starry Coronet.
Let all the Elements conspire,
Earth, Air, Water, and Fire,
As ravished with a choice desire
To make Charles his glory higher;
That he that would their pureness find,
May know th^^^ to his Crown resigned,
And only there confined.
[1]
Earth, Earth, unbowel all thy store,
Thy Silver and thy Golden ore,
Pearl, Diamonds, and thy shining Clay,
To make him a new fashioned ray:
We all the bright require,
Keep Thou the dust and mire.
Let both the Indies Mines appear,
And settle in his Spheat.
[2]
Air be thou quiet, temperate, serene:
May no molesting breath once move between:
Forget all mists, unvcile thy clear,
May not one cobweb-cloud appear:
Turn, turn into thy ancient mould,
Produce no over-heats or cold;
And with thy best Array,
Attend the Coronation Day.
[3]
Seas be ye smooth, let your disturbed brow
Unwrinckle now.
Confess his Scepter may your watery plains
Acknowledge by their rest, that our Charles Reigns.
Let the Inmates, that in you swim
Be subject unto Him.
Your Neptune is decayed, and old,
Shrunk into another mould.
Behold his furrowed form,
Which has buried many a storm.
Where tempests, and winds do fix,
And with each other mix.
Even as a man, who by the Seas
Has visited our Antipodees,
That returns from that nether world
With his forehead, trac't and curled.
As if the shipwreck had mistook,
And sunk into His look;
Leaving him all forlorn
With His countenance cleft and torn.
Let Neptune as a fiction die
With Eolus his posterity.
Holding no memory,
Amongst the muses Fry.
Seas and Winds be no more found
By such old Liars to be bound;
Don't henceforth stand,
At their command.
Whose Godhead's only from the will,
And pleasure of the Poets Quill.
Storms from Charles his forehead flee,
He shall your Neptune and your Eolus be.
[4]
Fire flame, and in bright streams arise,
Preserve your smokes for sacrifice;
Lay them up 'till the Heavens them need,
And the reconciling victims bleed;
Till offerings for atonement burn,
While the earth for its sins does mourn;
These may then serve the gods to please,
And their angry powers to appease.
What will either choke, or blind
Leave quite behind;
Appear in all your Zeales, and Light
To make Charles glorious in our sight:
That when the Work is done
He may turn Rival to the Sun.
Neither shall we neglect to do,
And contribute our small mite too.
Our duty and Allegiance due
(Great Sir I) to You.
By Your return Heavens meant,
The healing of our breach and rent.
Rebellion to the shades is fled,
The powers of darkness to wed:
There let It ever remain
Confined, whence it first came,
And where it once did reign.
By You confusion's finished.
You Have put a stop to all Disputes,
Before whom the strifes of tongues turn mutes.
High time then to fall down,
And submit to Your Crown.
Shall we hate the true way,
Because we have long went astray?
Shall we Heavens food have in derision*
Because we sense not its provision?
What shall our disposition still
Be hardy, stiff, unpliable?
What shall not true affection
Work our subjection?
What shall not providence hand, or stroke
Make our necks limber to his yoke?
Yes sure (Great King) we bend, we bow,
Our stubborn necks turn tender now,
And submit to You, alone to You,
To whom we life, and all things ow.
We You receive with greater signs of love,
Than once the Earth did mighty Jove.
View the Towers that arise
In Emulation with the skies,
Your Name for to eternalize;
As if they did You newly bring
From Heaven, whence You at first did spring.
As if when You Have shone out Your day
You might return safe the same way.
They strive each other to excel;
Which no Age yet can parallel.
As if (while absent) You Would victorious been,
And now are in your triumphs seen.
With well tuned voice, and melody,
We wait Your passing by.
Joy is the only ditty
Throughout Your triumphall City.
In every street
Concording hearts do meet
And Loyal Subjects do You greet.
At every Arch they feed Your eye
With delights variety;
And strait they do dispense
Objects, that ravish every sense.
Your Soldiers ride before,
Not stained with wounds or gore.
They are arrai'd for sight, and not to fight*
Their arms made for delight, not to affright.
Blood displaies only in the paint,
Great Mars this day looks thin, and faint:
His sinews trembling fall asunder,
Guns, Drums have quite forgot their Thunder.
Swords do with their Scabbards wed,
And war by it self is conquered.
All jars at His appearance cease
Confessing Charles the King of Peace.
And that which does the sight amend
See what Dignities Him attend.
All rankt in order with much state, and grace,
And none out of his proper place.
Observing distance, time, and leisure,
That we might in them view Earths treasure.
Or as if Heaven this day to make a show,
Would bring up its lights from below:
And to breed our great delight
Would by these of them make a sight,
Each singly here
For to appear.
Some clothed are with the golden Ore,
Others with the Silver Store.
As if both the Indies did pack
Their treasures on their back.
As if earth by 'ts own native ray
Would have tempted to make a day.
Some enrob'd in a cloth of Gold,
Another in a Silver mould.
As if England instead of Greece
Had possessed the golden fleece.
As if each back had a design,
To paraphrase a silver Mine,
And to abreviate
Things of great state
Some garments duskish, as if reez'd,
Others with frost work, as 'twere freez'd.
Some arraid
With a declining shade;
As if an artificial smoke
Their brightness would attempt to choke.
Others again put into light
To dazzle the clearest sight.
All for to amount the glory
Of Charles His Corronation story.
As if in this illustrious sight
Day was mixed even with the night,
Until his Majesty
Does draw nigh.
Thus by degrees more lights appear;
Every star does shine more clear,
The nearer placed unto His Sphere.
Each worthy made some show of day
By an artificial ray.
Their Lacquies by their side:
Some more, some less
Their greatness to express.
To 'enstate their glory large, and wide.
Even as many stars confine
Their beams to wait upon one sign.
All which reflect upon, and mind
The glory that does stream behind.
At length Charles comes with Light oppressed,
Who gives a luster to the rest;
Which are quickly lost, and done
Being but blinks to Him the Sun;
One who could even form a day
Should Heaven it self deny its ray.
His very eye
Does clear our Sky,
And in effect do more,
Than the Sun could do before.
By virtue of his Grace,
Sorrow has no place,
And smiles are seen in every face.
His quick presence soon Passes by,
That pleasant Vision,
Is lost, and gone,
But still perceive Majesty.
His Majesty which never does fly:
But on earth holds Ubiquity,
Being here, and there,
And every where,
Where ever his Power is senst,
There Is Majesty dispenst.
The Sun goes out of sight,
But we do'nt loose its Light:
It Is seen in a plain stream,
By every lesser beam.
Thus in the Palace, whence Charles rose,
At length He does Himself repose:
Shining still upon us
With beams superfluous.
Even as the Suns lightsome foyls, and scars
Are visible in the lesser stars.
Changed glories as with His beam refresht,
Attend Him to His rest.
Shades post apace, the morn invites
Unto more amorous delights.
They that yesterday were found
Upon their steeds, now walk on the ground.
And as the stars do run,
All bare before the Sun.
To Charles a Constellation.
Each Worthy bears his ray, and weight
But Charles alone the Orb of Light,
Each holds his Coronet
But the Crown for Charles is set.
Thus to the Chapel they go on
To attend the new beaming of their Sun
By the sacred Unction.
Where He with reverence stooping down
Receives the Scepter, Robe and Crown.
Even as a Star untrim and rude
Falls under us to be renewed.
He shone before, but as that Light
Before there was a day or night.
In an unready beam
Or wandering stream:
Not perfect made,
Or quite arrai'd:
Being (as 'twere) unprepared,
And not for vision squared.
But now His rays are all combined
Throughout calcined,
And unto Him alone confined:
Settled in one center, in's Orb fixed,
To shine more distinct and unmixt.
The fire by a new address of Oil,
Blazes with a cleaner foyl.
Even so Charles looks more clear,
When the Unction on Him does appear.
Oh! may He Heavens favor win,
And be anointed within.
Let Him obtain a lasting Spirit,
Of grace, and merit,
So shall His unction, and persume
(Like that of Rhemes) never consume,
And by an unknown supply
Never fail or dye,
But still multiply,
Ever increase,
And never cease:
So shall his Crown sit fast,
And Scepter ever last.
After all Ceremonies done,
Charles turns back a furnished Sun.
In Scarlet Robes He does return,
As if his Garments all did burn.
His head wears no dull Earth, or Clay,
But a burnisht ray;
A Crown of Gold, and Mineral Lights commixt
Shone here, and there betwixt,
As if the Earth did resign
Its choicest Jewels there to shine,
Or as if Heaven did pick,
And choose out its stars there to stick.
Or as if both combined in one
To make Charles equal with the Sun.
And so he does appear
In this our Hemisphear.
He comes with Scepter in His hand
All at his Sole command.
Under a Canopy
Moving (as 'twere) insensibly:
Even as the Sun, His motion's such
That seeming runs on the Earth, but does not touch:
And when it sets does (as 'twere) fall on the ground,
But never is there found.
I but a corner had to try,
And view His Majesty.
And this such glory does befit
Stars are best seen through chinks, or in a pit.
Thus Charles he states it to the Hall,
Where let each sense turn Festival.
May every dish promp acute delight,
Unto his appetite.
There let him sit and feed,
And think upon a Royal seed.
Great Sir! You are not one,
That Is made great for Your self alone.
A King should still be seen
In a Relation to a Queen.
It Is no offense, or trouble
For great ones to lie double*
Nor for Astronomers, but for Kings to pry
Into the Wed lock sense of Gemini.
Oh! may Your Sun full soon
Confess a Moon.
And own a Queen,
Whose grace by Your beam may be seen.
That what you give to us by day of light,
May be alone to Her confined by night.
To Us Your Majesty, and Grace,
To Her Your special Love, and Face.
Thus you will be a Sun generous,
While You enlighten Her and Us.
And may She Crowned be
With Noble Birth and chastity.
And may Her living fame,
Be as well known, as is Her Name,
And Her Grace,
As glorious as Her Face,
And Her soul within,
As beauteous, as Her Flesh or Skin*
May She be Virtuous and True,
And only fit for You,
Fruitful in Soul, and Body too:
And bring forth to You, and Us
An offspring numerous.
One that may in Grace and Fame
Still bear up Your Royal Name.
Majesty turned grave too soon in You
Unless an Offspring does ensue.
The Sun when that it sets
New Stars begets,
And fills them with its light
To shine by night
When it is out of sight.
The Phoenix having its life resigned,
Leaves always one behind,
And does his nest, and spices give,
That the young One may live.
That is a Spirit cold, and crude,
Which stamps not its similitude.
Your Light is scant, and poor,
If it does not engender more.
Sit fast (Great Sir) study to sway,
While we do learn for to obey.
Sit fast, you're Heaven's powers attended,
And by a Champion defended.
It Is published now that Charles is Crowned,
Hark, hark, how Ecchos do go round,
And Voices in the Air are drowned.
As if Earth to make this day a wonder
Had stolen from Heaven Lighning and Thunder.
Behold the Canons rore,
Which were all mutes before.
Guns, Trumpets, Drums, into their proper speech do break,
And in a Warlike language speak
And that Heavens concords may be found
In the like tones they do rebound.
All these for to confess
Our joys, which neither does express.
Unruly in this one affection,
That our joy knows no subjection:
Your proper, and peculiar due,
And yet not to be ruled by You.
Conduits the juice of the Grape do vent
Instead of the watery Element.
Founts change their source, and show to Him
In what Liquor Baechus was wont to swim.
As if Heaven to Charles such power did resign,
To turn Water into Wine.
The night draws on, while the Heavens bemoane
His so long absence from the Throne.
They clouded are, but the friendly Earth,
Presents their wonted Jollity and Mirth,
In kindling Flames, and making them arise
To enlighten the neighboring Skies.
And so (as 'twere) aspires
To new-star them by its fires.
To make them bright
By its new fangled light,
Or change their Theme,
By a Chimney beam.
As if it meant Heavens kindness to repay,
By 'ts innate rays, to make them day:
Or as if in exchange for one night
They Would taken up shades, and thrown down Light,
Or prodigally hurled
Their flames upon this nether world;
While the earth that favor to requite
Resigned up all its proper right,
Made them look dark as night,
So that He that the Heavens does view
Finds them turned sad of a earthly hue:
While that the Earth does now appear
A starry, or enlightening Sphere,
Its fires shining here, and there.
None but our Charles, it is none but He
Could make this strange Apostrophe.
Flames in the open Air do fly,
Like Lights erroneous in the Sky,
Which still do multiply,
As if the world would see, now on another score,
And be behold'n to Heaven for light no more.
As if now Charles his Reign's begun,
The Earth would need no other Sun.
Thus Heaven and Earth together meet,
And His Scepter greet,
Casting themselves down at His feet:
Whilst His Sovereign Virtue does
Move, and govern both:
Being the only Prince, that can
Rule the whole Globe of Earth, and Man*
Sic vos, non vobis sceptra tenete Jovis.
Sic vos, non vobis tesqua parate boves.
Nocte fucum radij lucis gradiendo striata
Sic testudo struit, sibi tecta, focosque reponens.
Sic Sol non tibi lux jubara fusa moves:
Sic vos non vobis stig mata fert is oves.
Ye for Your selves don't Scepters weild;
So patient Oxen Plow the Field.
Snails move by night a Silver trace,
Carrying their houses in the race.
Light to it self is still in dark.
Sheep for themselves do bear no mark*
Then let your Scepter never fail,
You are the Sun, and I the Snail.
FINIS.

