A ZEALOVS SERMON, Preached at AMSTERDAM, By a Jew, Whose Name is NOT-RVB, It
being a Hebrew Word, you must read his Name backward.

Cancros Imitare Legendo. Text, He that has Ears to hear, let him hear. By
John Austin.



Printed at Amsterdam. Anno Dom. 1642.

A ZEALOVS SFARMON PREAEHEDAT AT AMSTERdam bya Jew whose name is N ot-rub.
Text, He that has ears to hear let him hear.
DEarly beloved not to make any long preamble, or to use many circumlocutions
but to fall aboard with my text, these words are not literally to be understood
but typically for this is a prophetique saying of our Mr. that their shall be
many in the latter days that shall have no ears but loose them for the
testimony of a good conscience, and for the Gospels sake, of which sort I and
my other brethren which suffered with me are three, distempred and dismembered
members. Yet beloved sister mistake me not I do not mean dismembered in my
principal member, the virge of generation, no this might well have gotten a
loathing in you toward me, but is the loss of the tips of my ears.

There are many have ears to hear beastly and prophaine tails, songs, and
ballads with a great deal of contentation, and think not this time long or ill
spent, but they have no ears to hear of piety and godliness, they thinkean
hour a day, and a day 7 years yea they lock up the doors of their ears, you
may see their long lock hang over them, they have no ears to hear of the
four Cardinal virtues. And here I cry the Lord hearty mercy, and it would
have made my ears to tingle (if I had them) that I should so far over-shoot
my self, to approve virtues to be Cardinals, when I will by no means allow
men to be Bishops, as Fortitude, Temperance, etc. And here again I cry the
Lord hearty mercy, that I should once name or mention that brand of the Beast
on the near Buttock, that etc. which we so solemnly condemned, and damned
with their new Synodokical Canons by the Common hangman; but here we see,
though the spirit is willing, the flesh is weak.

He that has ears to hear, let him hear, is meant by the ears of the new
man, for there are many walk altogether after the flesh, the new man is hardly
yet in the Embrio, it has neither form nor ears, to these as yet it is not
given to hear or understand the hid mysteries, etc. and here also Idolatry is
utterly abolished; Those must be prayed unto, that have ears to hear our
prayers, but Idols have no ears to hear, ergo they must not be prayed unto,
the Minor is proved by another infallible and undeniable text, they have ears,
and hear not, eyes and see not, and these Glosses I take to be the true and
genuine sense of the text.

1 Use. From whence I may raise many uses of Comfort and Consolation, of
Comfort, Dearly beloved, is this, I take and reap a great deal of
Contentation, that when I preach, you (I say) dearly beloved Brethren and
sisters will come 9. or 10. miles to lend the your ears, thus as the lopping
off the top of a tree, the cutting off of one head begets many, even so, not
only the Saints themselves, but their very limbs also do increase by loss.

2 Use. Of Comfort, dearly beloved brethren and sisters, that I reap from
hence, is this, That although I have lost my ears, yet through your bountiful
liberality, as pledges of your most affectionate love toward me, I have their
weight in gold, yea doubled and trebled, that if my adversaries knew all, they
would loose theirs for half the moneys, this then in the second place must
needs be a great rejoicing to my heart to have my ears tipped with gold, and
both my pockets lined with the same.

3 Use. Of Comfort that I raise is this, from the mildness of my censure and
punishment, for these wolves in Sheeps clothing, these fat bulls of Basan,
might as well have plucked out my tongue by the roots, as to have cropped my
ears for then the staff was in their own hand, they wanted not ability to
do it, but my God would not suffer it, but mollifi'd the hearts of the Lions,
that they should not thereby stop my mouth for ever, and to have made me, as I
often called them, a dumb dog.

4 Use. Of comfort, dearly beloved, that I make, is this, from the not making
away, or burying of my ears (and indeed I had intreted them, but that the
wicked should not think I did mourn and make a funeral for the loss of my
ears) and therefore I say, I have preserved them, and have made open rejoicing
for the loss thereof, and since God has endowed them with great virtue, that
I have miraculously done many cures with them, especially they are a present
and Sovereign balsome (being imbalmed) for sore throars and to tell you the
truth truly I am a Jew, a very Sabaterian so that they are perfect Jews ears
and hearin I may glory with the best of the Catholic Relics.

5. Use. Of comfort dearly beloved brethren and sisters, I reaped from the
effusion of my blood on^ the pillory, that you would not suffer a drop to fall
on the ground, but licked it up with your hand-kerchif^s and do keep it in
greater esteem then Jewels or Diamonds, and I am persuaded that you may find
accult virtues even in that blood also if you would make experiments hence I
say I have taken great joy, that you keep and have it in so high honor, yet I
must needs confess ever and anon I receive a check from my conscience that I
should so much inveigh against popish Relics, and yet so contrarily suffer my
own to be kept, here we se that the best of the brethren play ship wrack of
salvation on the rocks of vain glory.

6. Use. Of Comfort, dearly beloved brethren is this, do you remember the
humble humble humble Be (I know you do) that gave me a vis^^^ the pillory,
and when the s^^ffing Jews and Ishmalites spit their poysen in mocks and
scoffs to season their wormwood word, she shit honey in my mouth; and her Bom
Bom was a little bow bell, yet big enough to ring the passing peale for the
little tips of my prick ears, thus you see to our further comfort when men are
silent, God makes beasts to celebrate the funeral obsoquies of his Saints or
the loss of any member of them.

7. Use. Of Comfort that I reaped is this, when I returned from banishment to
make amends for my disgraceful departure from this metropolitan City thousands
of you came forth to mete me with rosemary and ribonds in your hatts to bring
me in with allollity to my long sequestered and widdowed wife, and gave us a
large offering of three thousand pound as if our nuptuall day were again to be
solemnized neither should I have bin against it to have bin married again to
leave out those superstitions and Idolatrous ceremonies especially these two
with this ring I thee wed, and with my body I the worship although I love my
wife well yet I would be loath to make a God of her, but out alas this our
glorious and triumphant return was much ecclipsed the other day by those Irish
Rebels that had 2000 for our one, and thouh they did not go and ride forth
with rosemary in their hats, yet by reason of their forwardnes of the spring,
thousands ushered them in with palms in their hands this I say beloved a great
damp to our glory that we should be brought in like men, and such number their
Rebels.

Now a word or two of one or two observe:

1 ob. The loss dearly beloved of our ears is a Infillable symptomy of a true
child of God, and I should not be sorry, yea I could heartily wish that every
sheep of this fold had thy ear mark, and then the wicked mouths were stopped
to call us prick-eares.

2. Object. This is the shortest and sweetest Sermon that ever I made, but the
time was over-shot before I began, and Mr. Gaudy-dinner in a great forwardness
that I cannot proceed to application, reasons and motives to stir you up not
to be backward to loose your ^ase for the holy Cause, but if you can relish
this, I will proceed with the rest, and for this time, to wind up all in two
lines, Thus, thus you see, for all the wicked fears,
Man may, and not hear, that has, and has not ears.


FINIS.

