The Duty of Daily frequenting the Public Service of the Church. Recommended
in a SERMON Preached in a CHAPEL At Wragby in Lincolnshire, Erected to that
Purpose by Sir EDMUND TURNOR, Knight. And Consecrated by the Lord Bishop of Lincoln
the 18th. Day of July, 1697.

By John Adamson, M. A. Rector of Burton-Coggles in Lincolnshire.

Published at the desire of several Persons then present.

LONDON, Printed by Ben. Griffin for Sam. Keble, at the Turk's-Head, over
against Fetter-lane, in Fleet Street. School.

TO Sir Edmund Turnor, Knight.
SIR,
AS by manifold great Favors You have a Right to all the Services I am capable
of paying You, You have yet a more peculiar one to the Dedication of this
Sermon, in that it was first Preached, and is now Published by Your Commands.
This, I hope, will in part excuse me to the World for troubling it with so
plain a Discourse; and the Pious cogent Reason, with which You was pleased to
enforce Your Commands, I cannot doubt will do the rest, (viz.) That You might
thereby have Copies of it for those several Parishes, where Your exemplary
Piety has effectually provided for the daily Performance of public Prayer.

Whilst, Sir, Your pious Zeal thus worthily Encourages and Promotes the Service
of God, (of which I could give many and great Instances, but that I well know
Your singular Humility will not permit me,) I could not; I think, I ought not,
decline any thing in my Power, which in Your Opinion may contribute something
(though but a little) to so excellent an End.

If this plain Discourse, adapted to a plain but honest People, may (by the
blessing of God) work upon any such, a greater Reverence for the Houses of
Prayer, and a greater Diligence and Seriousness in frequenting them, I shall
not regard what Opinion the Nice and Censorious may have of it, or of me for
Publishing it. My first aim therein being to promote the Honor of our Lord, the
Interest of our Religion, and the Good of Souls; and a secondary, Sir, to
testify to the World my ready Obedience and great Obligations to Your self. In
a deep Sense of which, and the much Good You daily do, I must ever pray (as I
am sure great Numbers are obliged) that it may please God long to continue so
great a Blessing, as You are, to our Religion, to our Church, to the worthy
Clergy of it, to Your Family, to the Poor, to Your Friends, even to all who are
any ways deserving and capable of Receiving Advantage from such a Fountain of
Exemplary Piety, true Goodness, and diffusive Charity: And that in the other
World You may largely receive a Glorious Recompense for all the Good You have
so liberally done in this; particularly to,

Honored SIR, Your most Obliged, and most Faithful humble Servant, John
Adamson.

St. Matthew XXI. part of the 13th. Verse. My House shall be called the House
of Prayer.
THESE Words represent unto us our Blessed Savior restoring the Temple of God
to the Holy Uses, to which it had been dedicated, and express his Zeal for the
Honor due to such Places, and his just Indignation against all Prophanations
and Abuses of them.

The Temple at Jerusalem, was solemnly dedicated to the Service and Worship of
God; a practice which has obtained in all the Ages of Christianity, at
leastwise ever since the Reign of Constantine, as Eusebius acquaints us, Hist.
Eccles. l. 10. c. 3.
in reference to our Churches and Places of Religious Worship.

But the corrupt Priests amongst the Jews had grossly perverted it to other
purposes, subservient to their carnal and secular designs. The occasion which
they took for so doing, was this: Against the Feast of the Passover, the Jews
from all Countries resorted to Jerusalem, to keep that Solemn Feast there. To
supply them with Sacrifices (which many of them who came from Far, could not
possibly bring with them;) a great number of Cattle were slain for that purpose
by the Priests, which they sold to the Rich (no doubt, at a great Advantage;)
and for the Poorer sort of People, they provided (as the Law directed) Turtle
Doves and Young Pigeons. And because many Strangers could not be provided with
those half Shekels (in value about 15d. of English Coin) which by the Law were
required to be Yearly offered Exodus 30. 15, 16.
; nor with smaller pieces of Money to make their payments for those Sacrifices
which they wanted; they therefore set up Money Changers to supply them in both
Cases by way of Exchange, either for other Money, or (with the Poorer sort of
People) for other things in lieu of Money Godwyn's Jewish Antiq l. 6. c. 10.
And Pool's Synopsis in loc.
; but in doing this, they used great Exaction, and are therefore sharply
rebuked by our Savior (in the words following the Text) under that heinous
Character of a Den of Thieves; and so they plainly appear guilty of a double
crime, profaning the Temple by their Merchandise, and grinding the Poor by
their Oppression.

Of these their wicked Practices, they had long before been admonished by the
Prophets So some interpret Ier. 11. 5. and Isa. 26. 10.
; and by our Blessed Savior himself, soon after his entrance upon his
Prophetic Office, and that in a very mild and gentle manner: Joh. 2. 16.
Take these things hence, make not my Father's House an House of Merchandise.
But still they persisted in their Wickedness, as even Christians too often do,
against all admonitions and persuasions to the contrary; and therefore in this
place of the Text, our Blessed Savior, a little before his Death, finding them
incorrigible under more gentle Methods; he, as he was the Son of that God,
whose Temple was thus profaned, and in a just Zeal for the Honor of his
Father, Matt. a 1. 12.
Cast the Buyers and Sellers out of the Temple, overthrew the Tables of the
Money Changers, and the Seats of them that sold Doves: Reminding them of what
before they had often heard, but now either had forgotten, or else wilfully
neglected, in the words of the Text, My House shall be called (i. e. shall be,
according to the frequent signification of that Phrase in holy Scripture, So it
is to be understood in Isa. 9. 6. Matt. 5. 19. Luke 1. 32, 35, 36. Rev. 19. 13.
See Dr. Hammond on Matt. 2. 23. note l.
) a House of Prayer.

But how could this be, may some say, A single Person, despised, rejected, and
probably designed by them in a few days to be crucified, be able to drive out
so great a number of obstinate Men, backed by the Powers then in being, wedded
to their Interest, and much exasperated to see it so obstructed and defeated by
the so much by them vilified Jesus? Whence was it that none of them had Courage
enough to resist him, or so much as open a Mouth (as far as appears to us) in
their Justification, but tamely submitted to his Rebuke, and suffered
themselves to be driven out?

This must be resolved into the Divine Power of our Lord, and was one of the
miraculous Effects of it. Such a Majesty at that time appeared in his
Countenance, and such an Awe and Dread it wrought upon his most spiteful
Adversaries, as brought them to an absolute Compliance with his Will, and
perfect Submission to his Commands.

Which shows how utterly unable the most daring sinners are to withstand our
Lord, when he comes in good earnest (as sometime he certainly will) to execute
Vengeance upon them. None of them durst oppose one word, when our Blessed Lord
with an Authority becoming his Station, and his Zeal for his Father's Honor,
urged upon them the words of the Text, My House shall be called (or shall be)
the House of Prayer.

Having as briefly as I well could, shown you the Occasion and Design of these
words, every one will easily discern that they instruct us in this great Truth,
that Places dedicated to God and his Worship are to be treated with Reverence,
and not to be employed in any profane or common Uses, but only in Religious
Duties; particularly that of Prayer, which is the principal of them: So has God
declared by his Prophet Isaiah (c. 56. v. 7.) and so our Blessed Savior from
him in the Text, My House shall be called the House of Prayer.

Prayer is the Duty, which God in the Old Testament, and our Blessed Savior in
the New were pleased to make Choice of to represent the others by which are to
be performed in Places set apart for Religious Worship. And Prayer is the
especial Duty for the performance of which the Place this day Consecrated was
Erected by your pious Benefactor; and therefore of this Duty only I shall
Discourse unto you at this time.

And here I might usefully enlarge on the more general parts of Prayer; as,

1. Supplication, When we ask of God any Blessing we want either for our Souls
or Bodies.

2. Intercession, When we Pray for others, even all Mankind; but more
especially for our Governors and the Household of Faith.

3. Thanksgiving, When we recount with grateful Hearts the many Blessings both
Spiritual and Temporal which we enjoy; give God the Glory of them, and our
selves to him in gratitude for them.

All these general Parts of Prayer we are directed to by the Apostle 1 Timothy 2.
1, 2.
, and are all of them sufficiently provided for in our excellent Liturgy, which
highly recommends it to our great Esteem and constant Use.

I might also seasonably enlarge on the most needful, and yet too commonly
neglected, Qualifications of Prayer; as,

1. Purity and Holiness, Since we know that God hears not Sinners St. Joh. 9.
31.
(i. e. wilful and impenitent Ones); that the Apostle requires that when we
Pray we lift up Holy Hands; 1 Timothy 2. 8.
and that the Sacrifice of the wicked is an Abomination to the Lord; but the
Prayer of the Upright is his delight. Prove. 15. 8.


2. Serious Attention to our Prayers; for, then only we can be said to Pray,
and then only expect to be heard: Inasmuch as our Blessed Savior has set the
Mark of Hypocrisy upon such Prayers as are not accompanied with the Heart, and
plainly tells us they are all in vain, Matthew. 15. 7, 8, 9. Ye Hypocrites, ye
draw nigh unto me with your mouth, and honor me with your lips, but your heart
is far from me; but in vain do you worship me.

3. Fervor and Earnestness; with all the Affection and Devotion of our Souls,
such as may testify we really desire the things we Pray for. This is required
of us by the Apostle, that we be fervent in Spirit, serving the Lord Romans 12.
11.
, This is that which makes our Prayers very prevalent with God, James 5. 16.
The fervent Prayer of a righteous man avails much. Even amongst the Jews, the
Talmudists taxing the Peoples negligence in Prayer, one of the three faulty
sorts of their Amen recounted by them is, a faint Amen God win's Jewish
Antiquit. l. 2. c. 2.
, when they prayed without Fervency.

4. Humility, both in our Souls and Bodies. In our Souls, acknowledging our
unworthiness to appear before so great a Majesty, to receive from him any of
those Blessings we ask, but only upon the account of his Bounty and Mercy, and
the Merits of his Son. And Humility in our Bodies, expressing this Humility of
our Souls; putting up our Petitions to the Majesty of Heaven for the greatest
Blessings we can receive upon our Knees, according to the Example of Holy Men
in Scripture David, Psalm. 95. 6. Solomon, 2 Chronicles. 6. 13. Daniel, c. 6. v. 10.
, of the blessed Apostles St. Stephen, Acts 7. 60. St. Peter, Acts 9. 40. St
Paul, Acts 20 36. and 21. 5.
, and even of Christ himself, who kneeled down when he prayed to his heavenly
Father, St. Luke 22. 41. Accordingly we read of the Primitive Christians, That
to Sit at Prayers was ever held by them a posture of great Rudeness and
Irreverence Dr. Cave's Prim. Christ. part. 1. c. 9.
. And Tertullian falls heavy upon some that used it in his time (about two
hundred years after Christ) telling them, They acted contrary to Scripture
Tertull. de Orat. c. 12. p. 134. Contra Scripturam fecerit, fi quis in Cathedra
aut subsellio sederit; factum isthud irreligiosum est, nisi exprobramus Deo
quod nos Ordtio fatigaverit, etc.
and were Irreligious in so doing; and represents them as if they had a mind to
reproach God to his face, and tell him that they are weary of the Duty of
Praying to him. If it be an irrevent thing (as he goes on in arguing with them)
to sit down before one for whom thou have a great Reverence and Veneration; how
much more does it savor of Irreligion to do so in the Presence of the Living
God, even while the Angel is yet standing by thee to carry up the Prayer to
Heaven.

These, together with a true Faith and a Dependence upon the alone Merits of
Christ (which I presume I need not mention in this place) are the chief of
those Qualifications (and yet too commonly neglected) with which we must take
care we put up our Prayers to God, if we hope to have them accepted by him; and
these I might usefully have enlarged upon. But it must suffice thus briefly to
have hinted them, that I may the more largely recommend unto you.

5. In the Fifth place, Frequency in this Duty of Prayer, and that in Public,
as often as you have Opportunities; as you of this place will now daily have.

This I would earnestly recommend to your serious Practice upon these three
Accounts. In that

I. It is much for the Honor of God and our Religion. II. Very Advantageous to
our selves in reference to this World. III. It greatly promotes a good Life (in
reference to the Happiness of the next) in all those that sincerely make use of
it.
1. We ought to be frequent in this Duty of Public Prayer, because it is much
for the Honor of God and our Religion. As often as we Pray unto him with
Seriousness, we acknowledge and adore the Sovereignty, Wisdom, Justice, and
Power, and Mercy of God; and in doing all this, we must needs be granted to
Honor him, and perform a Service highly acceptable to him.

When we Pray unto him, we evidently declare that we own his Dominion over us,
and that he has a Right to govern us, and that all our Services are his due,
though we too often unworthily alienate them to profane and wicked Purposes.

We also acknowledge his Wisdom to be infinite, that as he thoroughly
understands all the Actions of our Lives and secrets of our Hearts, all our
Wants and Necessities, so he best knows how to make the most suitable Provision
for them.

We likewise hereby magnify the Justice of God, particularly in our
Confessions and Deprecations; knowing him ready to pass an impartial Sentence
upon us for our Sins.

Again, in all our Prayers to God, we must be supposed to acknowledge his Power
to be infinitely great to punish our Sins; to reward our Welldoing; and to
supply all our Wants.

Lastly, We hereby acknowledge the Mercy of God to be infinite; without a great
Sense of which, it would be both Folly and Arrogance, for us to approach unto
him, particularly to lay open before him all the miscarriages of our Life,
which generally ('it is to be feared) are so many and so heinous, that we could
never hope for any Pardon to them, but that we believe God to be very ready to
embrace every true repenting Sinner. This should strongly engage us to
Frequency in our Prayers, which you see do so much magnify the glorious
Attributes of God, which he loves to see acknowledged by the Sons of Men. And
surely the more Public this Acknowledgment is, the more Honor it gives to
God, and is consequently the more acceptable to him.

So very acceptable to him is this Duty of pubblick Prayer; that when David had
but a thought to build an House for this purpose, God told him that he did
well, even when he had done nothing, neither might do any thing, only had the
Design of doing it in his heart and purpose. 2 Chronicles. 6. 8.


The like gracious. Acceptance of such Acts of Piety our Blessed Savior
himself assures us of, under the Gospel, in that he was effectually prevailed
with to heal the Servant of the Centurion, being recommended to him under this
Character, That he had built them a Synagoguge St. Luke 7. 5.
; a place for the better Convenience of their Religious Worship. May this
Chapel this day Consecrated to the like use, and for the same reason, find the
like gracious Acceptance with our Lord!



It Is also much for the Honor of our Religion, and tends to gain Proselytes to
it, (which also is another way of giving Honor to God.) This is so universally
acknowledged, That even all Religions (however false or Superstitious) will
have their Daily Public Offices; thus it is amongst the Jews, Mahometans, and
Papists. And is not this a great reproach to Us, whose Worship is much more
Pure, to fall so very short of them in the Exercise of it? Where is our Zeal
for the Honor of our excellent Religion, to suffer them so much to out-doe Us
in the Frequency of Religious Offices; which gains a mighty Reputation to them,
but casts a reproach upon us?

2. Frequency in Public Prayers is very advantageous to our selves in
reference to this World, being the likeliest way to obtain any Blessings we
desire or stand in need of, either for our selves or others.

St. James tells us St. Jam. 5. 16.
, That the single Prayer of a righteous Man avails much; and gives us a Proof
of it in Ver. 17, 18.
Elias, by this means shutting and opening Heaven, first against and then for
Rain. And if Prayer be thus powerful when single, what is it when Social, when
in Public, in a whole Congregation, in a whole Nation? When there is a pious
Conspiracy of fervent Prayers from Consenting Hearts, and concurring Lips, all
at once making (as it were) an Assault upon the Almighty, with the Holy
violence of a strong importunity to extort a Blessing from him. God delights to
be thus wrestled with; and is not able, because not willing to deny any thing,
convenient for his People, that is thus requested of him.

Thus speaks Tertullian Apol. 39. A.
Coimus ad Deum, quasi manu facta precationibus ambiamns, Haec vis Deo grata
est. We come (says he) by Troops to the place of Assembly, that being banded
(as it were) together into an Army, we may besiege God with our Prayers and
Petitions; this kind of violence is very pleasing and grateful to him.

Our Savior himself says St. Matt. 18. 19.
, If two of you shall agree on Earth as touching any thing that they shall ask,
it shall be done for them of my Father which is in Heaven. Hereupon (...).
Epist. ad Ephesians. p. 122.
St. Ignatius argues, If the Prayer of one or two be of so great prevalence,
how much more will the Prayer of the whole Church be prevalent. And no wonder
is it that they should be so, when they have one amongst them, concurring with
them in their Petitions, whom God always hears, even his only Son, the Lord
Jesus Christ.

And indeed his Presence with them, himself Assigns for the reason of their
Prevalency with his Father; For (says he) where two or three are gathered
together in my Name, there am I in the midst of them St. Matt. 18. 20.
.

And as Public Prayer is thus advantageous to us in respect to our Personal
Wants, so is it no less in respect to the Community, to the Church of God, to
our Governors, to our Relations and Friends, even to all Mankind, for whom our
excellent Liturgy has furnished us with suitable Prayers, even for all sorts
and Conditions of Men.

(Hic (sc. Deus) bellum Lachrymosum, hic miser am famam Pestemque a populo and
Principe Caesare

Vestra motus agetprece. Horat. l. 1. Od. 21.)

Which Prayers, when a whole Nation about the same time and in the same words
of our Liturgy, duly puts up to God in the Name of his dear Son, surely they
may expect to prevail much more, than when put up by single Persons in private;
especially if we add God's gracious Promise to hear those Prayers more
especially which are made to him in his own House, in 2 Chronicles. 7. 12, 15, 16.
The Lord appeared to Solomon, and said unto him, I have chosen this place to my
self for an house of Sacrifice; now mine Eyes shall be open, and mine Ears
attent unto the Prayer that is made in this Place. For now have I chosen and
sanctified this House, that my Name may be there for ever: And mine Eyes and
mine Heart shall be there perpetually.

3. Frequency in Public Prayer greatly promotes a good Life in all those that
sincerely make use of it. And that both by it is natural Tendency, and by the
Blessing of God.

1. By it is natural Tendency. Can Men that consider any thing, daily Confess
their Sins unto God in his own House, and in the Presence of the Holy Angels
and a public Congregation, and yet dare to continue in them, and boldly commit
them again at the next Temptation? Can such easily there daily Pray, (as we do
in our excellent Liturgy,) that they may hereafter live a Godly, Righteous and
Sober Life; and yet allow themselves in gross Acts of Impiety against God; in
deliberate Acts of Injustice or Oppression against Man; or in the heinous Acts
of Intemperance and Uncleanness (so directly opposite to that Sobriety they
daily Pray for, and thereby acknowledge they ought to Practice,) or in any
other notorious scandalous Sin?

Can it be imagined, that when they so frequently repeat that pious Petition
with their own Lips, their Consciences should not sometimes, nay often severely
rebuke them for such gross Violations of it, and give an effectual Check to
such Practices; which the Customary Neglecters of Public Prayer, easily may,
and too often do pursue, without any Sense of their Guilt or Danger.

Further, by daily Reading or hearing read at the Public Service of our
Church, a Portion of the I salms of David, so full of Piety and Devotion; and
some Chapters in the Bible (too generally, I fear, neglected by Christians in
private) where we have excellent Rules and Examples of Holy Living, and
powerful Motives to it, This must needs be granted to conduce very much to the
directing and reforming our Lives.

If this blessed Effect be not wrought upon all who come daily to the Public
Prayers of our Church, more is the Pity! But the Fault is in themselves and not
in our Prayers. If some frequent them only in Formality and Hypocrisy, it is no
wonder they are never the better for them. Do thou frequent them with
Sincerity, Devotion, and Attention, and be assured thou shall receive great
spiritual Improvement by them; as I doubt not but thousands of the sincere
Members of our Church, to their inexpressible Comfort, do find.

2. This advantage of a good Life by Frequency in Public Prayer is also (and
that chiefly) to be ascribed to the Blessing of God, and the powerful working
of his Grace upon us; which Blessing is promised to us, and to be obtained by
us only in the serious Use of the Duty of Prayer, so qualified as I before
hinted. Thus our Blessed Savior instructs us, St. Luk 11. ver. 9.
Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find: Knock and it shall
opened unto you; where that he refers particularly to this Blessing of his
Grace and Holy Spirit, appears from these following words Ver. 13.
, If ye being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your Children, how much
more shall your Father which is in Heaven give the Holy Spirit to them that ask
him? This I acknowledge is spoken of Prayer in in general; but it holds true of
Public Prayer with a great advantage, as you have already heard.

If then Frequency in Public Prayer does thus promote the Honor of God and
our Religion; if it procures those Blessings we want either for our selves or
others, and greatly tends to promote a good Life; if we have any regard to the
Honor of God and our Religion, if any real desire to be Happy here or
hereafter, we shall rejoice in all Opportunities of Public Prayer, and
heartily endeavor so to Order our Affairs, that nothing may hinder our
constant Attendance at them.

And if Frequency in Public Prayer be so needful a Duty, as you have seen,
the like Frequency (and that with the greatest Seriousness) in receiving the
Holy Sacrament of the Lord's Supper (which is the highest Solemnity of Prayer)
is, upon the Account of the same and greater Reasons, as needful a Duty, where
there are the happy Opportunities of it. And in this also the worthy Founder of
your Chapel has very piously provided for you.

And as I understand many of you purpose (very commendably) to Communicate on
this day, so I hope, and earnestly exhort, you will do it with that Sincerity
in a hearty Repentance for your Sins, and serious Resolutions of a Holy Life,
that you may receive much spiritual Comfort and Improvement by it; and then you
will even rejoice in the frequent Opportunities of this Holy Sacrament in this
place, and make it your constant Care, as it is your certain Duty, to dispose
your selves for a worthy partaking of them. Consider well, and always bear it
in mind, how great your Guilt will be, how heavy your Condemnation, if ye shall
slight and neglect, or any ways abuse such powerful means of Salvation.

But I must not insist upon this copious Subject. I only crave your Patience
whilst I observe unto you three or four practical Inferences from what has been
discoursed.

INFERENCES.
1. If these Places be Houses of Prayer, and, by our Savior's own direction,
not to be employed in common Uses, then let us always treat them with Respect
and Reverence; considering they are God's Houses, Consecrated to his more
immediate Service, and in which he is pleased to vouchsafe his more peculiar
Presence.

In respect of this his Presence, God declares that the Place where he appeared
to Moses was Consecrated, and therefore required him to show Reverence to it
Exodus 3. 5.
, Put off thy shoes from off thy feet, for the place whereon thou stand is
Holy Ground. The like was commanded to Joshua upon the same account Joshua 5.
15.
, and this as a Token of Respect, Obedience, and Humility. The Custom being
taken (as some V. Pool's Synopsis on Exodus
Conjecture) from Captives or Bondslaves, who used to go barefoot in token of
their Subjection.

Hence arose that Custom amongst the Jews for the Priests to enter into the
Temple barefoot Aynsworth on Exodus 30. 19.
. The like was observed amongst the very Heathen, who had their Nudipedalia
Sacra, and put off their Shoes when they entered the Temple of Apollo Mr.
Pcole, ut prius. Id. ib.
. So some have observed, That even amongst the Turks and Aethiopick Christians,
they go not into their Sacred Assemblies but with their Feet naked. That was
the ancient way amongst them of expressing their Reverence, as uncovering the
Head is now amongst us. And will not all these rise up in Judgment against us,
and condemn us, if we permit them to show more Respect and Honor to the Places
of their false Worship, than we to those of the True.

Thus we find St. Paul requiring Decency in the Church (particularly that Men
be uncovered, and Women covered there) 1 Cor. 11. 10.
Because of the Angels; they being supposed both under the Old and New
Testament, to be present in the places of God's Public Service, observing the
Behavior of all Dr. Hammond in loc. note, d.
there present, and accusing every Indeceney and Disrespect to God.

And from this their presence it is, that God is said to be peculiarly present
in Churches (whose presence in one place more than in another, in respect of
himself is not easily conceivable) and so to fit them to be the Houses of God;
according to the Explication of Jacob, Genesis 18. v. 16, 17.
who upon the Vision of Angels at Luz, awakes and says, How venerable is this
Place, the Lord is in it, this is none other but the House of God.

Upon this Account we read that the Primitive Christians were wont to show very
great Respect and Reverence in the Church, as being the solemn Place of
Worship, and where God did more peculiarly manifest his Presence; and are told
by a learned Author, Dr. Cave's Frim. Christianity, part 1. cap. 6.
That they came into the Church as into the Palace of the Great King, with Fear
and Trembling; and that the Emperors themselves, who otherwise never went
without their Guard about them, yet when they came to go into the Church, used
to lay down their Arms, to leave their Guard behind them, and to put off their
Crowns, all as Tokens of that high Respect they bare to those Religious Places.

Let them always then be esteemed Holy by us, as being set a part for holy
Uses, and in relation to God and to their End (I mean not otherwise,) and let
them accordingly be always treated by us.

2. If they be Houses of Prayer, than we may hence infer the great Error of
those who think Preaching to be the Chief, if not the only Duty needful to be
performed in these Places: And accordingly if they be but present at the
Sermon, think they have done their Duty very well, although they wholly neglect
the Prayers, and think it not worth their while to come to Church when only
Prayers are there performed; and so this Error of their Judgment is the more
dangerous, in that it engages them in so great an Error in their Practice also.

But had our Blessed Savior been of the same Opinion with these Men, surely he
would have called these Houses of God, Houses of Preaching, and not (as in the
Text) Houses of Prayer.

We may observe to this purpose, that in King Solomon's excellent Prayer at the
Dedication of the Temple, 1 Kings 8.
All his Petitions are, That God would hear the Prayers which upon any occasion
his People should put up to Heaven in or toward that his House: Not one
Petition for a Blessing upon any other Duty, as if no other but that of Prayer
(at leastwise none comparable to it) was to be performed in that place.

I speak not this to vilify Preaching (far be that from me,) it is an
excellent Ordinance, and very needful even in this knowing Age. But yet I would
not have it thrust out Prayer, nor indeed be exalted above it; which all that
are Judicious and Serious must grant to be an Act of Worship directed
immediately to God, and a means to sanctify Preaching, which is immediately
directed to Men.

3. At all times when we approach to the House of God for Religious Worship,
let us remember it is a House of Prayer; and then beware we no ways profane it,
as the Jews did, whom our Blessed Savior here Rebukes. And yet this I fear is
too often done by too many Christians.

When we customarily neglect it, we then are Thieves (out of the Temple, though
not properly in it) by robbing God of his Glory, our Religion of its
Reputation, our Christian Brethren of the Assistance of our Prayers, and our
own Souls of their proper Food and Nourishment.

And when we frequent these places of Worship purely to be thought Religious,
in order to some secular Ends, we plainly make the House of God an House of
Merchandise. And they do the same in some sort, who amidst the holy Offices of
Religion employ their Thoughts upon their worldly Affairs, which ought to be
wholly intent upon the weighty Duties there performed: Such make the House of
God an House of Merchandise.

But if we be not Guilty of this sort of Profanation, there are others too
common amongst us, which ought no less to be avoided by us Read the Rules for
our more Devout Behavior in the time of Divine Service in the Church of
England. Printed in 1695.
. The unseemly and rude Behavior of many in our Churches, and that even in the
time of Divine Service does too loudly testify how little of Devotion brings
them thither, and at how mean a rate they value that sacred Place, and all
those holy Offices that are there performed. The Impiety and Danger of which I
shall choose to represent unto you in the Words of an excellent Author of our
own. The Causes of the Decay of Christian Piety: By the Author of the Whole
Duty of Man, c. 8.
Such variety (says he) of rude Behavior is there too often used in the House
of God, that should an Unbeliever come into our Assemblies, he must surely (as
St. Paul supposes in another Case, 1 Cor. 14. 23.) say, We are mad; to see some
Gazing, some Whispering, some Laughing, others Sleeping, and perhaps the far
fewer number Praying, is such a Medly, as the most brutish Idolaters never
admitted in their Worship. And then he goes on to expostulate with Christians,
as (I fear) we have too much reason to do at this Day: When (alas!) will the
Church recover its ancient Title, and become The House of Prayer? It Is certain
that according to the present appearance it may have many more proper Names,
that being the least part of Business done in it. But surely God will not
always be patient of such Profanation; but will, as the Scripture speaks, Repay
them to their Face, who who thus contemn him to his. We know among Men, every
one counts his House his Fortress; and an affront offered him there doubles the
Injury, and is not only a Contempt but an Invasion: And shall it not be a
proportionable Enhauncement with God also, thus to defy him within his own
Doors, and approach his Presence in an impious Bravery, the more fully to show
him how little we regard him? (So that excellent Author.)

4. And lastly. If it be so much for the Honor of God, and our own Advantage,
as you have seen, to frequent our public Prayers, then every one may easily
infer how much it is both his Duty and his Interest to be present at them, as
much as possible.

You of this Place are now very happy in having daily Opportunities of public
Prayer; (and it is much to be wished by all serious Christians, that every
Parish of this Nation could enjoy, and would make a right Use of the like
Advantage.) Think then, I beseech ye, how heinous your Guilt will be, if you
customarily and unnecessarily neglect these blessed Opportunities. How will ye
answer it at the last and great Account to your Lord and Judge, who put it into
the Heart of your pious Benefactor to provide thus conveniently for your daily
Performance of this great Duty, if ye shall slight it, despise it, and turn
your backs upon it.

Whilst many of you (I fear) spend more time every Day than would be required
to this Duty, in Vanities and Impertinencies: Others, it may be, in doing
nothing; and others in such Business as might easily be contrived so, as not to
hinder your frequenting these public Prayers, and is of infinitely less
Importance: ye will discover a great Disregard to God, the Honor of your
Religion, and the Care of your own Souls, if you customarily neglect these
desirable Opportunities.

The Primitive Christians set us a much better Example, and very worthy our
diligent Imitation, who, we are told by a learned Author of our Church; Dr.
Cave in his Prim. Christianity, Part 1. c. 9.
Were wont to flock to the Religious Solemnities, as to their Spiritual Meals
and Banquets. And then he recounts what St. Chrysostom Hom. 56. tom. 1. p. 623.
reports of the Church at Antioch; That they would set aside all Affairs at
home to come to Church; and how he tells them that it was the great Honor of
the City, not so much that it had large Suburbs and vast numbers of People, or
brave Houses with gilded Dining-Rooms, as that it had a diligent and attentive
People, Churches so thronged and crowded, and all Persons inflamed with such an
insatiable desire of the public Offices of Religion; and that the commonness
of them did not (with them as I fear it too often does with us) breed a
Contempt.

Thus did true Piety prevail amongst Christians then: But (alas!) with Grief we
see it infinitely decayed with us now; when in stead of Crying out with the
Psalmist, Psalm. 42. v. 2.
When shall I come to appear in the presence of God? we like those in Malachi,
Mal. 1. 13.
Snuff at his Service, and say, What a weariness is it?

But certainly that All-seeing Eye which discerns what Multitudes carelessly
absent themselves from his Worship, cannot but adjudge us most profane
Despisers of his Mercy in giving and continuing to us the happy Opportunities
of it.

1. Obj. But perhaps some may here object and say, What need these daily
public Prayers? We are careful to worship God at his House on the Lord's Day,
and this seems to be all that is required of us in the Fourth Commandment;
which allows us the other six Days for Labor and our own Business; and
therefore thus to require us to attend the daily public Worship, seems to be
an unnecessary Service, and an infringement of that Liberty which God has
graciously indulged to us. But,

Ans. Let such consider, That this Objection is of equal Force against all
occasional Days of Fasting and Thansgiving, which yet (I presume) themselves
will allow of, and acknowledge they are obliged sometimes to observe.

Let them consider again, That the same God who gave the Fourth Commandment to
the Jews, did also enjoin them other Days for solemn Worship, which were to be
observed even upon any of those Six Days of Labor, though they required strict
Rest, as the Day of Atonement did, Lev. 23. 27, 28. And that they had their
daily Worship notwithstanding the Fourth Commandment, at which our Blessed
Savior was frequently present, and thereby gave his Approbation of it.

And that this is no Violence to Christian Liberty, but rather a Duty
recommended by Christianity appears, in that it is recorded by St. Luke in
commendation of Anna, That she departed not from the Temple, but served God
with Prayers and Fastings Night and Day St. Luke 2. v. 37.
. And of the first Converts of Christianity, That they continued daily with one
accord in the Temple Acts 2. 45.
. And of the Disciples of Christ, that after his Ascension They returned to
Jerusalem, and were continually in the Temple, praising and blessing God St.
Luke 24. v. 53.
That is, the Temple was the place (not of their continual abode, but) of their
constant daily Performance of their Devotions; as the learned Paraphrast Dr.
Hammond Annot. on Acts 1. note, d.
glosses upon those Words.

2. Obj. Others perhaps may say, They are very careful to perform this Duty in
private; they pray at home every Morning and Night, and perhaps sometimes may
read a Chapter in the Bible with their Families at the close of the Day: And
this, they hope, is sufficient for them who have much Business on their Hands,
and perhaps Families to provide for by their Labors, and they trust their
gracious God will accept of what they do, and expect no more from them. To this
I Answer,

1. Ans. It Is much to be wished, they are so well employed, as they pretend, at
Home; but as much to be feared that they are not; for did they make a real
Conscience of performing this Duty at their own Houses, the same Conscience
would bring 'em frequently to God's (unless they labor under some unhappy
Prejudices against it,) where (I Am sure) they might perform it better. For,

2. Suppose they do pray and read at Home, yet how can this excuse their
neglecting the public Service in the Church, where the same Duties are
performed with greater Advantage. There thou find many Fires to kindle thy
Zeal, the Example of others for Reverence and Order, the Decency and
Suitableness of the Place, the more peculiar Presence of God, and his gracious
Promise, that he will have a more especial Regard to those Prayers which are
put up to him in his own House, in that forequoted place, 2 Chronicles. 7. 15, 16.

Does it become us to be our own Carvers, and when our gracious God calls us to
worship him in his House, to tell him in effect, he must excuse us, we will do it
as we can at our own, and that must serve his turn?

3. Consider, That although thou perhaps may duly perform these Duties at
Home, yet others from thy Example may think it needless to come to public
Prayers, and wholly omit them in private also; and so thou fall under the Guilt
of Scandal, in its proper Sense, against which a Woe is denounced by our Lord,
St. Matthew. 18. 7. Woe be to that Man by whom Offenses come.

4. Consider, That the Apostles and Primitive Christians (who surely knew how
to pray at Home as well as any of us, yet) were very constant at the public
Places of Worship, though to the great hazard of their Lives or Liberties for so
doing; and left this express Command behind them to all Christians, Heb. 10. v.
25.
Not to forsake the Assembling of themselves together. Not to forsake the
public Religious Assemblies, though to avoid Persecution (as was the unhappy
Case of the Christians at that time,) much less to avoid some small and very
tolerable Inconveniency to our secular Affairs (as is generally the worst of
the Case with us now,) which that God whom we serve can (and certainly will)
abundantly Recompense to us. -- But then let me add,

5. In the last place, If any well disposed Christians be so engaged in some
needful Business, or have such urgent Necessities to provide for by their
Labors, that they cannot attend the daily public Service of our Church,
without great Inconveniency; and yet have really a due Esteem for it, and would
with all their Hearts be daily present at it, did their indispensable Occasions
permit them; such, I will presume to say, shall be excused by our gracious
Lord, who has declared He will have Mercy (Mercy to our selves, as well as to
others) rather than Sacrifice, St. Matthew. 9. 13. Such shall undoubtedly be
accepted on the Account of their Wills and real Desires; and (by the Goodness
of our God) in a good measure partake of the benefit of our public Prayers, as
if themselves had actually been present at them.

But for all others, who have not this Necessity to plead for their Absence;
who easily might have been present at the daily Service, had they been really
willing, such must not expect to be so excused; and therefore, I hope and pray,
they will be prevailed with, so to acquit themselves in reference to this Duty,
that God may be duly Honored by them; true Piety and Devotion encouraged and
advanced; their own Comfort and Prosperity promoted in this World; and their
eternal Happiness (by the Mercies of God, and the Merits of his Son) secured to
them in the next.

One word, in the close of all, To you The Widows of the Almshouse, adjoining
to the Chapel.
in particular, for whose sakes more immediately your worthy Benefact or has
erected this House of Prayer.

You, by his great Bounty, are in a more especial manner devoted to, and
engaged in the Service of God; you have not the Necessities of this Life to
provide for by your Labors, nor the anxious Cares of it to perplex and
distract your Thoughts; you have a comfortable Provision made you, by his Piety
and Charity, both for your Souls and Bodies.

Remember always how much you are obliged both to God and him, to answer the
great End of this his Bounty to you, by living to the Honor of God and your
Religion; particularly by a constant and devout attendance at the Prayers and
Sacraments which will be performed in this Place.

Be very careful, I beseech you, to approve your selves Widows indeed, that so
you may be worthy of' that Honor (i. e. Relief and Maintenance, as the Original
Word (...) v. Dr. Hammond on 1 Timothy c. 5. note, d.
often signifies in Scripture) which the Apostle would have to be given to
such, in 1 Timothy 5. 3. Honor (i. e. Relieve) Widows that are Widows indeed.

And who are such, he tells us, v. 5, 7, 10. (And such I hope, and heartily
pray, All you may be,) She trusts in God, and continues in Supplications and
Prayers night and day; She is blameless, and well reported of for good Works,
and has diligently followed every good Work.

This is the sum of what your Blessed Savior, and (I presume to say) your
pious Benefactor also, expects from you, (viz.) That you be Constant and
Serious at Prayers and Sacraments; That your Conversation be Blameless, and of
good Report (particularly, for Humility, Gravity, Sobriety, Contentedness,
Weanedness from the World, Love and Peaceableness amongst your selves and
toward all Men, Graces which more especially adorn your Station;) and that you
be diligent Followers of every good Work.

Then shall you approve your selves Widows indeed, in the Apostles Sense, to
the Honor of your Lord, the Reputation of your Religion, the great Satisfaction
of your Benefactor, and the mighty Encouragement of such Pious and Charitable
Acts; to your own great Comforts whilst you live in this World, and to your
eternal Happiness in the World to come.

Which eternal Happiness God, in his due time, make you, and all of us
Partakers of, for the sake of his dear Son Jesus Christ our Savior: To whom,
with the Father and Blessed Spirit be ascribed all Obedience, Adoration and
Praise, now and for evermore. Amen.

For the Direction and Assistance of the more Ignorant, let me here add,

It Is very Advisable that all Persons, when they intend to partake of our
public Prayers, hasten to the House of Prayer as soon as the Bell begins to
call to it, that so they may have some little time, before Prayers begin, to
raise their Devotions, and fix their Thoughts upon the Duties before them, by
considering the Weightiness of them, and the Presence of God; humbly and
earnestly Begging his Assistance in the Performance of them; which may be done,
by those who are not better provided, in this, or the like short Prayer
following.

Let thy merciful Ears, O Lord, be open to the Prayers of thy humble Servants:
And grant that we may now, and at all times, ask faithfully, and obtain
effectually through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Or this.

Most gracious God, who have commanded us to pray without ceasing, Incline my
Heart to this Duty; and so assist me with thy holy Spirit now and at all times
in the Performance of it, that I may so ask that I may receive; and so hear thy
Word that I may practice it; and by these Opportunities (for which I bless thy
Name) I may daily more and more improve in Righteousness and true Holiness,
until I come to thine everlasting Kingdom, through Jesus Christ my Lord and
only Savior. Amen.

At the Conclusion of Divine Service, and before thou risest from thy Knees,
say to thy self this, or the like short Prayer.

Lord in Mercy hear our Prayers, and relieve all our Wants. Continue unto us
these means of Grace; make me, and all that profess thy Name to delight in
them, with Reverence and godly Fear to approach unto them, and always to become
better by them, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Or this.

Blessed be thy Name, O God, for this Opportunity of waiting upon thee in thine
House; Lord, pardon the Iniquity of my holy Things, and make me a partaker of
the Benefit of those Prayers which have been put up unto thee at this time. In
Mercy continue unto me these Opportunities, and fit me more and more for thy
Service here, and for thy Kingdom hereafter, for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

FINIS.

