GOD'S ANGER, AND MAN'S COMFORT.

TWO SERMONS, Preached and Published BY THO. ADAMS



LONDON, Printed by Tho Maxey, for SAMUEL MAN, at the sign of the SWAN in
Paul's Churchyard, 1652.

TO The Most HONORABLE, and CHARITABLE BENEFACTORS,
Whom God has honored for his Almoners, And, Sanctified to be his Dispensers
of the fruits of Charity and Mercy To Me, In this my necessitous and decrepit
Old age, I humbly PRESENT This Testimony of my Thankfulness: WITH My incessant
Apprecations to the Father of all Mercies, to reward them for it in this life,
and to crown their Souls with everlasting Joy and Glory, in the life to come,
Through JESUS CHRIST our Lord.

Amen.
THO. ADAMS.

GOD'S ANGER.
PSALM 80. ver. 4. O Lord God of hosts, how long will thou be angry with thy
people that prays?


IT has been said of War, that it is Malum, an evil, but it may be
Necessarium, a necessary evil. It is good sometimes to hunt the Wolf, though
it is better to fodder the Sheep. They speak of a drowning man, Etiam ad
Novaculam, that he will rather take hold of a knife, then of nothing. A very
coward will catch the edge of a naked sword, to save his life; though it cut
his fingers. Man being cast out of Paradise, and that Paradise guarded with a
sword in the hand of a Cherub, durst not attempt a re-entry, because he was
guilty. But Commonwealths that have lost any part of their Territories, or just
Privileges, by foreign invasion, and hostile violence, may justly venture
upon the sword, and fairly hope for a recovery, because they are innocent; and
hanc picem amolire gladio. Irene signifies Peace; Yet the Turk could sacrifice
his beuteous Irene to the God of War. If War in it self were utterly
unlawful, God would never have accepted this Title, The Lord of hosts. Yet in
this style he takes such delight, that he is oftener called the God of hoasts in
the former Testament, then by any other Title. In those two prophesies of
Isaiah and Jeremiah, it is given him no less then an hundred and thirty times.

All creatures are mustered, and trained, put into garrison, or brought forth
into the field by his command. Which way can we look besides his Armies? If
upward into heaven, there is a band of Soldiers; even a Luke 2. 13.
multitude of the heavenly host praising God. If to the lower heavens, there
are a band of Soldiers: it Genesis 2. 1.
was universa militia coeli, to which those Idolaters burnt incense. On the
earth, not only men are martialled to his service; so Israel was called the
host of the living God: but even the brute Creatures are ranged in arrayes. So
God did levy a band of flies against the Egyptians; and a band of frogs that
marched into their bedchambers. He Pro. 30. 37.
has troops of locusts, and armies of caterpillars. Not only the chariots and
horsemen of heaven, to defend his Prophet, but even the basest, the most
indocible, and despicable creatures, wherewith to confound his enemies. If
Goliath stalk forth to defile the God of Israel, he shall be confuted with a
pebble. If Herod swells up to a God, God will set his vermin upon him, and all
the Kings guard cannot save him from them. You have heard of r^^s that could
not be beaten off, till they had destroyed that covetous Prelate, and of a fly
that killed Pope Adrian. God has more ways to punish, then he has creatures.

This Lord God of hosts is not properly a title of Creation, but of
providence. All creatures have their existence from God, as their Maker: and so
have they also their order from him, as their Governor. It referrs not so much
to their being, as to their martialling; not to their natural, but militant
estate: Nor only as creatures do they owe him for their making, but as they are
soldiers, for their managing. Their order is Warlike, and they serve under the
colors of the Almighty. So that here, God would be respected, not as a
Creator; but as a General. His anger therefore seems so much the more
fearful, as it is presented to us under so great a Title; The Lord God of
hosts is angry. They talk of Tamberlain, that he could daunt his enemies,
with the very look of his countenance: oh then what terror dwells in the
countenance of an offended God? The reprobates shall call to the rocks to hide
them Rev. 6. 16.
from the wrath of the Lamb: If Ira Agni, the wrath of the Lamb does so
affright them, how terrible is Ira Leonis, the wrath of the Lion? It may justly
trouble us all to hear, that the Lord God of hosts is angry: in the sense
whereof the Prophet breaks forth here into this expostulation; O Lord God of
hosts, how long will thou be angry with thy people that prays? Wherein we
have these five propositions, or inferencies naturally arising out of the text.

1. That God may be angry; for that is manifestly employed in the Text; He is
angry.

2. That his anger may last a great while: O Lord, how long will thou be angry?

3. That his anger may extend to the whole nation: how long will thou be angry
with the people, all the people

4. That his anger may fall upon his own people, even his peculiar and chosen
flock; How long will thou be angry with thy people?

5. That his anger may dwell upon them in their devotions, and not be removed by
their very prayers. How long will thou be angry with the people that prays?
Yea, against their prayer?

Now God is never angry without a cause: he is no froward God, of no techy and
pettish nature: a cause there must be, or he would neverbe angry. There can be
no cause but sin; we never read that God was angry for any thing else. Some he
has corrected without respect unto sin, as he did Job: but he was never angry
with any man, but for the sin of that man. It is the sin of the people that
has thus grieved God, and it is the anger of God that has thus grieved the
people. Sin must be supposed to run along with his anger throughout the text,
as the eclyptick line does through the Zodiake.

1. If it were not for sin, God would not be angry.

2. If it were not for the continuance of sin, he would not be so long angry.

3. If it were not for the universality of sin, he would not be angry with
the whole people.

4. If it were not for the unnatural ingratitude of sin, he would not be
angry with his own people.

5. If it were not for the base hypocrisy of sin, he would not be angry with
his people that prays.

Thus then the argument lies fair and plain before us.

1 It is sin that makes God angry.

2 It is the continuance of sin that makes him long angry.

3 It is the generalty of sin that makes him angry with the whole people.

4. It is the unthankfulness of sin, or the sin of unthankfulness, that makes
him angry with his own people.

5. Lastly, it is the hypocrisy of sin, or the sin of hypocrisy, that makes
him so long angry with his people that prays.

1. We provoke him by our rebellions, and he is angry.

2. We continue our provocations against him, and he is long angry.

3. We provoke him universally, and so he is angry with us all; not with some
offenders here and there, but with the whole people.

4. We provoke him by our un kindness; for whom he has done so much good, and
upon whom he has heaped so many blessings; and so he is angry with his own
people.

5. Lastly, we provoke him by our dissimulations; approaching to him with our
lips, and keeping back our hearts: we pray un to him, and yet live against him:
we call upon his Name, and rebel against his will: and so he is angry, and
long angry, and long angry with the whole people, and long angry with his own
people, and long angry with his people that prays.

1. God may be angry, and sin is the cause of his anger; that's the first
Proposition. Man may be angry without sin, not without perturbation: God is
angry without either preturbation or sin. His anger is in his nature, not by
anthropopathie, but properly; being his corrective Justice, or vindicative
Justice. Iratus videtur, quia tunquam iratus operatur. Our anger is an impotent
passion: His a most clear, free, and just operation. By this affection in our
selves, we may guess at the perfection that is in God. The dissolute
securitans think that God does but smile at the absurdities of men; that ludit
in humanis: that their drunkenness and adulteries rather make him merry then
angry. Like some carnal father, that laughs at the ridiculous behavior of his
children (...) to whom their wanton speeches and actions are but a pleasure;
and in which he rather encourages, then chides. Psalm. 2. 4.
Indeed, God is said to Laugh; He that sits in heaven laughs them to scorn: but
woe be to the men at whose fooleries God laughs. It is a dissembling falsehood
in man, to smile and betray, as Judas began his treachery with a kiss: Such are
likened to those bottled windy drinks, that laugh in a man's face, and cut his
throat. But this laughter in God, argues not so much what he does, as what they
suffer; when by frustrating their sinful purposes, he exposes them to
contempt and scorn. Dei ridere, est hominem ludibrio exponere. If a little ant
creeping out of a molehill, should march forth, and proffer to wrestle a fall
with a giant, there were yet some proportion in this challenge: but there is
none of a finite power to an infinite. Audacious sinners, that dare provoke the
Lord of hosts! What are all the Armies and Forces of Tyrants, to oppose the
omnipotent God? Rev. 19. 18.
He will make a feast of them, for the fowls of the Air, whom he invites to
the flesh of Captains, and to the flesh of Kings. Let earth and hell conspire,
let there be a confederate band of men and devils; how easily can he command
the one to their dust, the other to their chains? What power have they of
either motion or being, but from him against whom they fight? Our God is a
consuming fire; and he will consume them not only in anger, but in laughter.
The Catastrophe of all rebellion is but the Sarcasmos or bitter scorn of God.

There is no less difference between Gods anger and his favor, then between
death and life; death in the most dismal horror; and life in the most
comfortable sweetness of it. Psa 30. 5.
In his favor there is life: death in his anger; Ps. 90. 9.
for when thou art angry, all our days are gone. There is great light given to
contraries by their comparison: look first a little upon the favor of God: Ps.
36. 7.
Oh how excellent is thy loving kindness, O Lord? Thy Saints shall be
abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house, and thou will make them to
drink of the river of thy pleasures. What follows upon his favor, but
satisfaction, and peace, and joy, and eternal life? When the deluge of water
had defaced that great book of Nature, Noah had a copy of every kind of
Creature with him in that famous Library, the Arc: out of which they were
reprinted to the world. So he that has the favor of God in the Arc of the
Covenant, has the Original copy of all blessings: if they could all have
perished, yet so they might be restored. God is the best Storehouse, the best
treasury: O happy men that have their estates laid up there! Though friends,
goods, and life forsake us, yet if Gods gracious countenance shine upon us,
that will be life, and goods, and friends unto us. These benefits and comforts
flow from his favor.

But alas, how terrible is his anger? He has scourged some in very mercy, till
they have smarted under his rod. Job complains, that the terrors of God do
fight against him. And David says, Job. 6. 4. Ps. 88. 15. 16.
From my youth up thy terrors have I suffered with a troubled mind. If he will
do thus much in love, what shall be the judgments of his wrath! If he has
drawn blood of his dear ones, what shall be the plague of wilful sinners! If
this be the rod of his children, what are the scorpions provided for his
enemies! what comfort can any find in all the prosperous fortunes upon earth,
with whom God is angry in Heaven? If that mighty Pagan could apprehend this, he
would find small safety in his guard of Janisaries, and less pleasure in his
brutish Seraglio's. It is a vain conceit of that Potentate, who refusing the
name of Pius, would be called Foelix; Happy, not Godly. But there can be no
felicity without Gods blessing, and he will not bless, where he is not
blessed. But Sylla, surnamed Foelix, accounted it not the least part of his
fortunes, that Metellus surnamed Pius was his friend. Piety is the best friend
to Felicity, though Felicity does not always befriend Piety.

That is but a wretched prosperity, upon which God looks in anger. If the Sun
were wanting, it would be night, for all the Stars: If God frown upon a man;
for all the glittering honors of this world, he sits, in the shadow of death.
Let him be never so rich in lands and waters; yet his springs have lost their
sweetness, his vines their fruitfulness, his gold has lost the color, his
precious stones their value and luster: I mean, the virtue and comfort of all
these are gone away with the favor of God. If our house were paved with a
floor of gold, and walled with pearls and Diamonds, and yet the roof wide open
to the violence of heaven, would these shelter us from storms and tempest?
Would we be so lodged in cold winter nights? Or were our house roofed with
Cedar, and the walls hung with arras, yet if the floor be rotten, and under it
a bottomless pit, could we sleep in quiet? There can be no safety when God is
angry: his wrath may come thundering from heaven, and suddenly sink rebellious
sinners into hell; and then where is all their honor? When their mortal part
lies in the dishonorable dust, and their immortal part suffers in
unextinguishable fire.

Thus terrible is the anger of God: now what is he angry withal, but sin?
That is the perpetual makebate betwixt God and us; the fuel of the fire of
his indignation. Your iniquities have separated between you and your God. For
this cause Isa. 59. 2.
he looks upon us as a stranger, yea as an enemy. But they rebelled, and vexed
his holy spirit: therefore Isa. 63. 10,
he was turned to be their Enemy, and he fought against them. But they
rebelled: man's occasion of offending God, is but a But, a nothing, no cause at
all: Gods occasion of being angry with men, is a therefore, a cause sufficient,
and that cause is sin. Search the holy Book all over, and you shall never find
God angry but for sin. Nor does the flame of his wrath break out upon every
sin; but when sin grows impudent and past shame. We were wont to say, that
veritas non quae rit angulos: but now, vit^um non quaerit angulos: It does that
in a bravery, with which the false Prophet was threatened, that he should do in
fear; 1 King. 22. 25*
it runs from Chamber to Chamber, from house to house, not to hide it self, but
to boast it self. We so provoke the Lord, that we do not only anger him, but
are angry with him. If the winds do not blow, and the rain fall, as we would
have it; if any thing falls out cross to our desires, we even vex at God
himself; as if he were bound to wait upon our humors. No marvel if God be
angry with us, when we dare be angry with him: by murmuring at his actions, and
calling his providence into question. Jon. 4. 4.
Do thou well to be angry, O man? No, it is exceeding ill, and dangerous. We
may tremble to think that the pot should fall out with the potter, and man be
angry with his Maker. It is the meretricious and shameless forehead of sin
that angers God: And in this anger we here find him, but let us not so leave
him: and yet the next point tells us that his wrath is not suddenly pacified:

2. He may be long angry: that is the second Proposition. Usque quo Domine? It
is not for a fit, like some flash of powder, but may burn long. Psalm. 79 5.
How long, O Lord, will thou be angry? for ever? And shall thy Jealousy burn
like fire? 2 Samuel 21. 1.
He visits his own Israel with a long dearth: During all those three years of
drought and scarctiy, Gods Altar smoaked with daily sacrifices, and Heaven was
solicited with continual prayers; yet still he was angry: and why may not
David complain, in this Psalm, of that famine? We are not at the first
sensible of common evils: in War, Dearth, or Pestilence, we think only of
shifting for our selves, or finding out convenient refuges, (like Foxes in a
storm, that run to the next buroughs) and study not how to remove the
public Judgments. But the continuance of an affliction sends us to God, and
calls upon us to ask for a reckoning. An evil that is suddenly gone, is as
suddenly forgotten: as men stricken in their sleep, cannot quickly find
themselves: so the blow does rather astoinsh us, then teach us. But when the
burden lies long upon us, we will at last complain of the weight, and seek to
ease our selves.

Indeed, there be some sinners more insensible, more insensate then beasts: if
we find the hungryest ox feeding in the meddow, and cannot with many pricks of
the goad make him remove from his place, we wonder at his stupiditie. Yet the
insatiate world-affecters, though God not only affright them with menaces, but
even afflict them with many scourges, cannot be gotten from their covetous
practices. So long as they can by any means grow wealthy, they will not believe
that God is angry with them. As if there were none Psa. 73. 7.
that have more then heart could wish; yet live all this while in the sphere of
Gods Indignation. We can read Gods wrath in a storm, not in a calm yet (...)
may be most angry, when he least expresses it. Ezekiel. 16. 42.
My Jealousy shall depart from thee, and I will be no more angry with thee: Oh
that is the height of his displeasure (...) Jer. 14. 13.
The Prophet speaks of a true Peace: True, were a needless epithet, if there
were not a false peace in carnal hearts. How fondly does the secure sinner
flatter himself, in the conceit of his own happiness? All is well at home: he
quarrels not with himself, for he denies himself no sensual pleasure. God
quarrels not with him, he feels no checks of a chiding conscience, he sees no
frowns of an angry Judge: nothing but prosperity shines upon him. He sees no
difference in the face of heaven, whatsoever he does, or says: the same
entertainment is given to his blasphemies, as to his prayers. Sure, he thinks
himself in Gods books above other men. And so he is indeed; in Gods book of
debts, in Gods book of arrerages, in his book of Judgments: so he is far in
Gods books. He owes such men a payment, and they shall have it. Alas, this is
not the sinners peace, but stupidity: not the Makers favor, but his fury. All
this while he is very angry, though he suspends the execution of his wrath.
Thus long sin lies like a sleeping bandog at the door of their hearts: They
look upon the cur as if he would never wake: or if he did, yet as if hewere so
chained, and clogged, and muzled, that he could never hurt them. But when once
God rowzeth him, then have at their throats: then they shall feel what it is to
have lived so long in the anger of a God: When the Almighty shall put himself
into the fearful forms of vengeance, and the everlasting gulf of fire shall
open to receive them into intolerable burnings; the merciless devils seizing
on their guilty souls, and afflicting them with incessant torments.

It is some favor, when we have the respite to cry, How long, Lord, will thou
be angry with us? He is not thoroughly angry with us, when he suffers us to
breath forth this expostulation. There is some hope of remedy, when we once
complain of our sickness. It is not change of climate, but change of diet,
that recovers us: when we grow to forbear the surfets of sin, there is a fair
possibility of comfort. Yet God may be long angry, and long continue sensible
testimonies of his anger. Ps 92. 10.
Forty years long was I grieved with this Generation. He had smitten Israel
with diverse punishments, and threatened them with with more grievous calamities;
that Ps. 9. 17. 21.
every man should eat the flesh of his own arm; Manasseh, Ephraim; and
Ephraim, Manasseh; and they both against Judah: And yet he had not done with
them, his anger was not turned away, but his hand was stretched out still.
David's pestilence of three days, was a storm soon blown over, though it were
bitter for the time: Gods displeasure has dwelt longer upon us.

But how then does the Prophet say, that he retains not anger? Well enough:
for he never retains it on^ moment longer, then we retain the cause of it:
So soon as ever we cease sinning against him, he cease to be angry with us.
After David's humiliation and sacrifice, the Angel struck not one blow more
with the sword of pestilence. He measures out the length of his anger by the
continuance of our rebellions. So that if we expostulate with him, Lord how
long will thou be angry with us? He replies, O ye sons of men, how long will
you be rebellious against me? Let us not look that the Lord should begin first;
that his pardon should prevent our repentance. There is great reason, he that
has done the offense, should be first in making the peace. Every day we expect
comfort from God, and every day God expects conversion from us. Every week we
look for some abatement in the bills, and every week God looks for some
abatement of our sins, for some amendment of our lives. So long as we continue
guilty, it is in vain to cry, O Lord, how long will thou be angry? Our hard
hearts are not yet broken with remorse: alas, what should be done to break
them? Psa. 29. 5.
The voice of the Lord breaks the Cedars: he Psa. 18. 7.
breaks the mountains: he breaks Isa 64. 1.
the heavens, he 1 Kin. 19. 11.
breaks the stones; and yet his word cannot break our hearts. But if he
cannot break us with the rod of Affliction, he will break us with a rod of
iron, and Psa. 2 9.
dash us in pieces like a Potters vessel.

God is long patient before he grows angry; why should he not be long angry
before he be appeased? He is not easily provoked, why should he be so easily
pacified? yet so propense to mercy is our gracious Father, that the fire which
was long a kindling, is soon quenched: His anger, that is not blown into a
flame without many and long continued sins, is yet put out with a few penitent
tears. When our houses are burning, it were but foolish to cry out, we are
undone, alas the fire rages; and we all the while forbear to cast on water.
The Usque quo of Gods anger waits for the Quousque of our repentance. He will
not give over-striking, till we fall a weeping: and we may do well to weep
before him, for (sure) we did ill to sin against him. His anger does now long
offend us, but our wickednesses did far longer offend him. We have provoked
him many years; and shall not his wrath burn many days? Still it flameth: let
us make have to bring our buckets of water, filled at the cisternes of our
eyes, and derived from the fountain of our hearts, to quench it. Let no hands
be wanting to this business: for if some bring in the water of tears, whiles
others cast in the fuel of sins, this fire will burn still. But from the
higehst to the lowest let us come in with repentance: and that all of us, even
the whole people: for so far Gods wrath extends.

3. He may be angry with the whole people; which is the third proposition. He
has been angry with a whole family, with a whole Army, with a whole City, with
a whole Country, with the whole earth. With a whole family: so he cursed the
house of 1 Kin. 14. 10. 11
Jeroboam: that him that dies in the City, the dogs shall eat, and him that
dies in the field, shall the fowls of the air eat. Ps. 37. 36.
With a whole army; so he slew of Sennacheribi host in one night 185 thousand.
With a whole city; so the city of Jericho was cursed with an universal
desolation, never to be reedified without the ruin of the builder. Josh. 6.
17. 21.
With a whole country; So Saul was charged to destroy Amalek; man and woman,
infant and suckling, 1 Samuel 15 3.
sheep and oxen, and all that belonged to them. With the whole earth; whenit
was become corrupt, Genesis 6. 12.
he drowned it with a flood. Yet observe how God has qualified his wrath; with
his hand of favor snatching some out of his hand of anger. When he 1 Kin. 14.
13. Josh. 6. 17.
cursed the whole Family of Jeroboam, he excepted Abijah. When he doomed to
death, the whole City of Jericho, he excepted the family of Rahab. When his
wrath burned Sodom, he excepted the family of Lot. When his anger drowned the
whole world in a deluge, yet his mercy excepted Noah, and his octonary
household. But his anger is very grievous, when it extends to the whole people.
Throught he Isa. 9. 19.
wrath of the Lord of hosts, the land is darkened, etc.

What makes him thus universally angry with us, but the universalitie of our
sins against him? when the passengers ask: Wherefore has the Lord done thus to
this great City? Answer is made, Because Jer. 22. 8. 9.
they forsook the Covenant of the Lord, and worshipped other Gods. To such a
fearful height may the sins of the children bring the mother, that that Church
which now enjoyes such abundance of truth and peace, may be poisoned with
heresy, and wounded with schism, and suffer an utter direliction. The whole
people is guilty of sin, and why for their sins may not God be angry with the
whole people? Yea, and long angry too: for it will be very long before that
fault will be amended, which has so long been committed.

God came to low conditions in the behalf of Sodom: Abraham brought him down
to ten. He came to lower conditions in the behalf of Genesis 18. 32.
Jerusalem; he brought himself down to one: See Jer. 5. 1.
if you can find a man, if there be any that seeks the truth in the whole
City, and I will pardon it. O how epidemicall is that wickedness, where not
one escapes the corruption? We have found the Lord angry enough with a whole
people, for the sin of one man. Lord, has one man sinned, and will thou be
wroth with the whole Congregation? Number. 16. 22.
No, Gods vengeance, when it is the hottest, makes difference of offenders: and
knows to distinguish betwixt the heads of a faction, and the train. Though
neither be faultlesse, yet the one is plagued, the other pardoned. Depart from
the tents of these wicked men, lest you be consumed in their sins. So soon as
the innocent are severed, the guilty perish. One Achan sins, all Israel
suffers. One David sins in pride, seventy thousand Josh 7. 11.
of his subjects suffer in the plague. One Saul slew the Gibeonites, three
years dearth lies upon the 2 Samuel 21. 1.
Israelites for it. The blood of those Canaanites shed against Covenant, almost
forty years before, by the then King, is now called for of the whole people.
They had all sins enough, but God fixes his eye of anger upon this. Every sin
has a tongue, but that of blood outcryes them all: And if Justice do not
revenge the murder of one, God will require it of the whole nation. When seven
of Saul's sons were hanged up, God was entreated 2 Samuel 21 14
for the land. Then shall the clouds drop fatness, and the earth run forth
into plenty: Then do the valleys stand thick with corn, land the Psa. 65. 12.
little hills rejoice on every side. Some drops of blood shed in Justice,
procure large showers from heaven. A few carcases laid in their graves, are a
rich compost to the earth. There can be no peace, where blood cries unheard,
unregarded: but when it is expiated by the blood of the offenders, there will
be a cessation of Judgments. Phinehas executed judgment, and the pl^gue Pal.
106 30.
ceased. One contrary is ever cured by another: take away the cause, and the
effect will cease. Prayer is very powerful, but doing of Justice more
availeable. The whole Congregation were at their prayers, and those prayers
were steeped in tears; yet still the plague raged, and Gods anger continued.
But when Phinehas had run those two adulterers through with his Javelin, in the
Nam. 25. 8.
act of their sin; the plague was stayed. So blessed a thing is it for any
nation, that Justice is impartially executed.

Thus the universality of sin calls for the universality of repentance, or else
it will provoke Gods anger to strike us with universal judgments. If the
whole people be guilty, the whole people must fall to deprecation. Such was the
Nivites repentance, every man turning from Jon. 3. 8.
his evil ways. We have sinned, even the whole nation: and as if we had not
sins enough of our own, we borrow of our neighbors. What nation under heaven
do we trade withal, from whom the sins of that Nation are not brought
hither? And those are merchandises that might be well spared. Are we all in the
transgression, and do we lay the burden of repentance upon some few? If we
expostulate with God, Lord has one man sinned, and will thou be wrath with the
whole Congregation? May he not more Number. 16. 22.
justly expostulate with us; Has the whole Congregation sinned, and is it
enough for one man to repent? Is the whole garment foul, and must only the
skirts be washed? Is the whole building ruinous, and do we think it a
sufficient reparation to patch up one corner of it? No, the plaster of our
repentance must be fully as large as the orifice of our wickedness; or we
cannot be healed. But still God will be angry with us, yea though we were his own
people: For,

4. God may be angry with his own people; which is the fourth proposition. Psa.
89. 33
I will visit their sins with a rod, and their iniquity with scourges; but my
mercy I will not utterly take from them. Though he do not take his mercy from
them, yet he may be angry with them. He is our father, and never did Father in
sweeter terms entertain the dearest treasures of his blood, then God does us,
when he vouchsafes to call us His people: yet did you never see a father angry
with his child? Indeed there is great difference between that wrath of God
which is toward his own people, and that which Col. 3. 6.
comes upon the children of disobedience. They differ three ways.

1. In respect of continuance: his anger upon reprobates is eternal; not
extinguished with their bloods, but pursuing them from earth to hell. To his
people it is but temporary, it lasts but a moment: Psalm. 30. 5.
weeping may endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning. Psalm: 103. 9.
He will not always chide, nor will he keep his anger for ever. When he was
very angry with his Idolatrous Israel, Exo. 32. 11.
Moses does but put him in mind that they were his own people, and he was
pacified. Isa. 54. 8.
For a moment in a little wrath, he hides his face from us. Mic. 7. 8.
Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy; for though I fall, I shall rise again.
But for the wicked, John 3. 36.
his wrath abides on them.

2. In respect of the measure: It is milder toward his own people, then to
others. For the unrighteous, he proportions his Judgments, not to their
strengths, but to their deserts: For his own people, he proportions his
corrections, not to their deserts, but to their strengths. For the former, he
minds not what they can bear by their powers, but what they have deserved by
their sins. For the other, he considers not what their sins deserve, but
what their Spirits can sustain. His most bitter wrath to his own people, is
always sweetened with his mercy. Pia 99. 8.
Thou wast a God that forgavest them, though thou tookest vengeance of their
inventions. He brings a scourge in one hand, and a pardon in the other: and
while he draws blood of the flesh, he forgives the soul.

3. In regard of the end. Romans 9. 22.
The wicked are the vessels of wrath: and as their sin makes them fit for Gods
anger, so his anger makes them sit for destruction. But for his own people; 1
Cor. 11. 32
They are chastened of the Lord, that they might not be condemned with the
world. Whether he inflict upon them punishments for sin, or suffer them to
fall into sin for punishments, yet all shall work to their good. Heb. 12. 11.
his corrections are but medicines, bringing forth the quiet fruit of
righteousness. He lets them fall into some heinous crime, but it is to waken
their repentance. Small spots upon a garment are not minded; we seldom are so
curious as to wash out them. But when a great spot comes, a foul stain, we
then scower and elense it, to get out that; and so we get out all the little
spots too. Sins of a lesser size never trouble us; we mind not the washing
out of them with our sorrowful tears: But when a great sin comes, and
disquiets the conscience, then repentance, that old landresse is called for:
and in that lardar we wash out both the great offense, and all the rest. So God
suffers us to fall into some gross and grievous sin, as a father suffers his
little child to burn his finger in the flame, that his whole body may not fall
into the fire.

All these differences are expressed by the Prophet, Isaiah. 1. Forth time* Isa.
28. 24
Does the ploughman plough all the day to sow? God does not continue ploughing
all day long furrows upon our backs, but when he has broken up the fallow
grounds of our hearts, he thensowes in the seed of his comforts. 2. For the
measure; Isa. 27 7.
Has he plagued Israel, as he has plagued the enemies of Israel? He sinites
his Israel in the branches, and in the bunches; cuts down some of her
superfluous boughs, and plucks off clusters of her rotten grapes: But the
wicked he smites at the very root. 3. For the end; Isa. 27. 9.
The furnace of his wrath shall but purge away our dross, and make us pure
metal, fit for the stamp of his own Image.

Yet for all this, God has been grievously angry with his own people: Yea,
their sins anger him most of all; because together with wickedness, there is
unkindnesse. As dearly as he loves them, their sins may provoke him. Our
interest in God is so far from excusing our iniquities, that it aggravates
them. Of all others, the transgression of his own people shall not pass
unpunished. The nearer we are to him, the nearer do our offenses touch him; as
a man more takes to heart a discourtesie done by a friend, then a great injury
by a stranger. Pagans may blaspheme, and bezzle, and defile the marriage bed,
and yet God let them alone: but he will not endure these sins in his own
people. The more he loves us, the greater should our love be to him: now love
and unkindnesse cannot stand together. If we revolt from our Maker, as Absalom
thought Hushai had renounced David, may he not justly expostulate with us, Is
this thy Kindness to thy friend? there is no such irksome disobedience, as
where God looks for service. John 1. 11.
He came unto his own, and his own received him not: O, that could not choose
but trouble him. As Demades said to Philip King of Macedon, and at a time when
he well deserved it; Cum fortuna tibi Agamemnonis personam imposuerit, nonne
pudet te Thirsitem agere? When fortune has made thee an Agamemnon, art thou
not ashamed to play Thirsites? When God has honored us for his own people,
with the noble name of Christians is it not a shame for us to play the Pagans?
u Happy are the people that be in such a case, yea blessed are the people that
have the Lord for their God. Yet that people may so far anger him, that he
will take away not only their temporal, but even their spiritual happiness.
Those seven Churches of Asia were Gods own people: yet the Gospel was not
fastened to their territories; as the old Romans pinnioned their goddess
Victoria, or their apish posterity do the Catholic faith, to their own
infallible Chair. But as they had a time to breathe, so a time to expire: and
so has my fourth proposition. There is but one gradation more.

5. God may be angry with his people that prays. Wherein we have two main
observations. First, The wonder, that God will be angry at our prayers.
Secondly, the answer, which resolves the wonder; showing why our very prayers
may anger him. Either of these is backed with three circumstances. 1. For the
wonder, that God is angry with his people that prays.

1. All the other conclusions are easily granted: God may be angry, and angry
very long, and angry with the whole people, and angry with his own people; all
this because of their sins: But that he should be angry at their prayers, this
is the wonder. He has commanded us to pray, and will he be offended with us
for doing his command? Angry against our prayer! He has commended to us
Prayer, as the only means to assuage his anger: and yet is he angry at our
Prayer? Psa. 106. 30.
Phinehas prayed, and his anger was pacified: Number. 16. 15.
Aaron prayed, and the plague ceased: and will he now be angry with the people
that prays? He is a God that hears prayer: Psalm. 65. 2.
O thou that hear prayer, to thee shall all all flesh come: and does he now
reject prayer? He has so styled his own house; Oratorium, the house of prayer:
and to them that pray unto him in his house, he has promised peace; Hag. 2. 9.
In this house will I give peace, says the Lord of hosts. Peace and wrath are
contraries: how should prayer procure peace, when God is angry at prayer?
Prayer is so noble, that under it is comprehended the whole worship of God:
Romans 10. 13.
Whosoever calls on the name of the Lord, shall be saved: and yet will God be
angry at the prayer of his people? It is a great honor that God will vouchsafe
to speak unto man: but a far greater honor, that man is allowed to speak unto
God: the very Angels stand in admiration of it: and yet what comfort is there
in that, when God is angry at the prayer of his people? What blessing is there,
which our prayers cannot infeoffe us in? We send up Prayer to God with the
same confidence, that Adoniah sent Bathsheba to Solomon, 1 Kin. 2. 17.
the King will deny thee nothing: and will God be angry at prayer? It is the
only means we have to pacify him, Prayer: and shall our Prayer anger him?
Alas, what hope is left us, when God is angry at Prayer? This has often turned
away his wrath, and does it now incense his wrath? If we should not pray, he
would then be angry: and when we do pray, is he angry too? What, neither way
pleased? What is the reason why there is so much empty cask in Gods cellar, but
for want of prayer? Jam. 4. 2.
Ye have not, because ye ask not: and shall not prayer obtain favor? Josh. 7.
8.
Oh Lord, what shall I say (it was the complaint of Joshua) when Israel turns
their backs before their enemies? So, what shall we say, what shall we do, when
God turns back our prayers? Why is it called the throne of Grace, before
which we present our prayers; if that throne send forth nothing but beams of
wrath? We look for grace, and a favorable audience of our petitions; but alas,
what shall become of us, when God is angry at our very prayers?

2. How wonderful is the power of prayer? Exo. 32. 10.
Let me alone, says God to Moses: who would look for such a word from God to
man, as let me alone? As yet Moses had said nothing: before he opens his mouth,
God prevents his importunity, as foreseeing the holy violence of prayer* Moses
stood trembling before the Majesty of his Maker, as fearing his dire revenge:
and, yet that Maker does (after a sort) solicit Moses for leave to revenge;
let me alone. As it was afterward said of Christ, concerning some places, that
he could do no miracles there, because of their unbelief: So one would think,
that God could do no Judgments here, because of Moses his faith. Let me alone;
why, what can resist God? Yes, Prayer can resist him. Such is his mercy, that
he has (as it were) obliged his power, to the faith of our Prayer. He enables
us to resist himself: Seipsum vincit. The servent prayer of the faithful, can
bind the hands of the Almighty. What is there that God can do, which Prayer
cannot do? O mighty, I had almost said, Almighty Prayer! What a hand is that
which can hold omnipotence? What wings are those that can overtake
infiniteness* Yet alas, we may now mourn over Prayer, as David did over
Jonathan; 2 Samuel 1. 25.
How are the mighty fallen! Prayer has lost her force with God, when God is
angry with prayer. Her wings are clipped, that she cannot mount: Her bow is
broken; she cannot shoot an arrow that reaches the mark. Lam. 1. 1.
She is become a widow, as it was lamented over Jerusalem, desolate and
solitary, that was a Princess among the Provinces, and a Queen among the
nations. She sits weeping in the dust, and has almost forgot the use of
speech. She mournes not so much for Mary's abstulerunt Dominum, for she knows
where to find him; as that our sins Abstulerunt Domini favorem, and she knows
not how to pacify him: And how should she, when God is angry with his people
that prays? Where is the strength of this Samson? What is become of that
power, which was wont to command heaven and earth? The visible heavens have
been opened by prayer: Jam. 5. 18.
so Elias brought down rain. The invisible heavens have been opened by prayer*
so the penitent malefactor got from the Cross into Paradise. Act. 7. 56.
So stephen saw the heavens opened, and the Son of man standing at the right
hand of God, Omnia vincentem vincit. It was wont to be an especial favorite
of God; but now (alas) it is cast out of favor, for God is angry with prayer.
Lam. 3. 44.
Thou have covered thy self with a thick cloud, that our prayer should not
pass through. This is a woeful condition of our souls, when the Lord is angry
at our prayers: when he will not hear them, not answer them, it is a cause of
sadness in us; but much more, when he is angry with them. Eze. 8. 18.
Therefore will I deal in fury: though they cry in mine ears with a loud
voice, yet will I not hear them. This is fury indeed: Before, the ancients of
Israel had said, The Lord sees us not, he has forsaken the earth: There they
deny God eyes, and here he denies them ears. A burning wrath; as the Original
has it; How long will thou smoke against the prayer of thy people?

3. And of thy people: this increases the wonder. For God to stopp his ears
against the prayers of the Heathen, to reject the petitions of Idolaters, to
despise a devotion done before painted blocks and Images, is no marvel. For
they dishonor him in their prayers; and God will be angry with any thing that
eclipseth his glory. But he does not use to slight those that serve him, and
continue in his holy worship. It is strange that he should be angry at the
prayer of his own people: Angry with them whom he has chosen; angry with them
long, and angry with them at their very prayers. This must be some
extraordinary wrath: and so you have all the circumstances that may advance the
wonder.

Now for the Answer that takes off this admiration; and satisfies us with some
reasons, why God may be angry with his people that prays. God is never angry
at his people without a cause: and it must be a great cause that makes him
angry with them in their devotions: whereof we have three considerations.

1. There may be infirmities enough in our very Prayers, to make them
unacceptable. As if they be, 1. Exanimes, without life and soul: when the
heart knows not what the tongue utters. 2. Or Perfunctorie; for God will none
of those prayers, that come out of fained lips. 3. Or Tentativae; for they that
will petere tentando, tempt God in prayer, shall go without. 4. Or fluctuantes,
of a wild and wandering discourse, ranging up and down; which the Apostle calls,
beating the air: as huntsmen beat the bushes, or Saul sought his fathers
asses. Such prayers will not stumble upon the Kingdom of Heaven. 5. Or if they
be Praeproperae, run over in have: as some use to choppe up their prayers, and
think long till they have done. But they that pray in such have, shall be
heard at leisure. 6. Or sine fiducia: the faithless man had as good hold his
peace, as pray. He may babble, but prays not: he prays infectually, and
receives not. He may lift up his hands, but he does not lift up his heart.
Only the prayer of the righteous avails, and only the believer is
righteous. But the formal devotion of a faithless man, is not worth that
crust of bread which he asks. 7. Or sine humilitate: so the Pharisees prayer
was not properly Supplicatio, but superlatio. A presumptuous Prayer profanes
the Name of God, in stead of Adoring it. All, or any of these defects may mar
the success of our Prayers.

2. But such is the mercy of our God, that he will wink at many infirmities in
our devotions: and does not reject the Prayer of an honest heart, because of
some weakness in the petitioner. It must be a greater cause then all this,
that makes God angry at our prayers. In general, it is sin. Joh. 9. 31.
We know that God hears not sinners: but if a man does his will, him he
hears. Ps. 66. 18.
If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear my prayer. They be
our sins that block up the passage of our prayers. It is not the vast distance
between Heaven and earth, not the thick clouds, not the threefold regions, nor
the sevenfold Orbs, nor the firmament of stars, but only our sins, that
hinder the ascent of our prayers. When you make many prayers, I will not hear
you; Why? Isa. 5. 15.
Because your hands are full of blood. God will none of those petitions, that
are presented to him with bloody hands. Our prayers are our bills of exchange;
and they are allowed in Heaven, when they come from pious and humble hearts:
But if we be broken in our religion, and bankrouts of grace, God will protest
our bills, he will not be won with our prayers. Thus sin is the general
cause.

3. In particular, it is the hypocrisy of sin, or the sin of hypocrisy,
that makes God so angry with our prayers. When we honor him with the
prostration of our bodies, and solicit him with the petitions of our lips,
and yet still dishonor him in our sinful lives, is not this hypocrisy? When
we speak before him in the Temple as suppliants, and sin against him abroad
like rebels, is not this hypocrisy? Like the outlaw, that sues to the King
for a pardon, and yet resolves to live in rebellion. We will not part with our
beloved sins, and yet beg the removal of Judgments; will not this
dissimulation make God angry with our very prayers? If we shall, Judas-like,
kiss his Throne with the Devotion of our lips, and betray his Honor with the
wicked works of our hands, should he not be angry at our prayers? We make as
if we did lift up our hands unto him, but indeed we stretch out our hands
against him: if this be prayer, it is such a one as deserves anger. Fear can
make the Devil himself fall to his prayers; Lu. 8. 28.
I beseech thee, torment me not. Another request he made, which Christ
granted; but it was in wrath, not in favor. The pride of our hearts, the
covetousness of our hands, the blasphemy of our mouths, the uncleanness of
our lusts, the wickedness of our lives; these make God angry with our prayers.
If we could be thoroughly angry at our sins, God would cease to be angry at
our prayers. But so long as we run on in those sinful courses upon earth, let
us look for no favorable audience from heaven. Do good, and continue it: then
pray for good, and have it. It has been said, loquere ut te videam, speak that
I may see thee: so says God to man; Operare ut te audiam, work that I may
hear thee. If we dishonor Gods Name by our oaths and blasphemies, and upon
every trivial occasion toss it in our profane mouths; in vain we pray,
Sanctificetur Nomen tuum, Hallowed be thy Name. If we hear the Gospel
preached, and receive no instruction by it, nor give any regard or obedience to
it; in vain we pray, Adveniat regnum tuum, thy Kingdom come. If the current
of our affections and actions runs cross to the will of God; in vain we pray,
Fiat voluntas tua, Thy will be done. If we extort the bread of the poor out of
their hands, or seek to live by violence or oppression; in vain we pray, Panem
nostrum da nobis quotidianum, Give us this day our daily bread: For this is to
attempt to have it whether God will or no: he does not give it, but we snatch
it. Whiles we are indulgent to our darling sins, and will not part with the
dear delight of our bloods, in vain we pray, Dimitte nobis debita nostra,
Forgive us our trespasses. Whiles we seek to revenge our wrongs upon others,
and bear malice in our hears; our Sicut nos dimittimus, As we forgive them
that trespass against us, does but beg for vengeance upon our own heads. All
the while that we listen to the suggestions of Satan, and like the allurements
of the world, and awaken our own lusts to tempt our selves; it is but a
mockery to pray, In tentationem ne nos inducas, lead us not into temptation.
While we seek that which is evil, and study that which is evil, and run
with greediness into evil; in vain we pray, Liber a nos a malo, Deliver us
from evil. We do but flatter God, and complement with him, when we conclude
with Tuum est regnam, potentia, and gloria; Thine is the Kingdom, the power,
and the glory; for it is our own glory we seeks after, not his. All this cannot
keep him from being angry with our prayers. So long as his people rebelleth, he
will be angry with his people that prays. For some Use.

If God be angry with them that pray, what will he be with them that do not
pray? With them that break his laws, and never cry him mercy, with them that
live in wickedness, and never ask him forgiveness? The ungodly call not Psa.
14 4.
upon the Lord: will he not be much more angry with them? God is not in all
their thoughts: but Psalm. 10. 4.
they are in the thoughts of God. He thinks on them with indignation, and will
remember them to their cost. Remember, O Lord, the children of Edom, in the day
of Jerusalem: yes, he will Psa. 1 37. 7.
remember them in the day of their destruction.

If God be sometimes angry at our prayers, how will he brook our curses? If he
beat back our petitions, how will he take vengeance on our blasphemies? Out of
the same mouth proceeds blessing Jam. 3. 10.
and cursing: but God will not accept of a blessing, from a mouth that is so
used to cursing. If he may be so angry with a people that prays, what will
his wrath do to a people that swears? Think this, ye that (if it were
possible) would swear God out of his Throne, and the Judge of all the world out
of his Tribunal: your very prayers are abominable: your blasphemous breaths
have put a stink into all your sacrifices. That tongue is fit for nothing but
flames, which so flameth with oaths and execrations. Your prayers cannot be
heard, by reason of your sins: but your blasphemies shall be heard and plagued,
notwithstanding your prayers. If the Instrument gives a harsh sound, there is
trouble in stead of inusick: a jarring organ grates the ears, rather then
delights them. Our sinues have put all our Instruments out of tune, and for
them God is angry at our very prayers.

There is no way to take off his anger, but by turning from our wickedness. If
we break off our sins, he will leave a blessing behind Joel 2. 14.
him, even a meat offering, and a drink offering to the Lord: he will both
give, and take our sacrifice. Let us do thus, and prove him, whether Mal. 3. 10.
he will not open the windows of heaven. Our repentance and righteousness
shall open heaven, so that our prayers may go up for a blessing, and a
blessing shall come down upon our prayers. Prayer is vox fidei, as John Baptist
was vox Christi: if we mourn, and do not pray, our faith has lost her voice:
and prayer without faith, is John without Christ, a voice without a word. Faith
is the soul, and repentance is the life of Prayer; and a prayer without them,
has neither life nor soul. If we believe not, we are yet in our sins: if we
repent not, our sins are yet in us: and so long as this state continues, no
wonder if God be angry with his People that prays. But first will I wash mine
hands in innocence, and Psalm. 26. 6.
then will I compass thine Altar. Then shall my Prayer be set before thee as
incense; and the Ps. 141. 2.
lifting up of my hands like the Evening sacrifice. When with the sword of
severe and impartial repentance, we have cut the throat of our sins, and
done execution upon our own lusts: then let us solicit heaven with our
Prayers: then Pray, and speed: then come, and welcome: no Anger, but all mercy
then. Then the Courtiers about the King in Heaven, make room for prayer. Then
the Prince himself will take prayer into his own hand, and with a gracious
mediation present it to his Father. Then mittimus preces and lacrymas ad Deum
legatos. Then is that Court of Audience ready to receive and answer Cypr.
our Ambassadors, which be our Prayers and Tears. Then Saint John sees twelve
gates in heaven, all open, and all day open, to entertain such suitors.

This is our refuge, and that a sure one. Although the Enemy begirts a City
with never so straight a siege, and stop up all the passages; yet he cannot
block up the passage to Heaven: So long as that is open, and God in league with
us, there may be relief and succor had from thence by prayer. Faith is a
better engineer then was Dadalus; and yet he could make a shift to frame wings;
with which he made an escape over those high walls, wherein he was imprisoned.
Restat iter coelo, tentabimus ire. Let Pharaoh be behind, the red sea before,
the high rocks and mountains on every side; yet Israel can find a way for all
that. When there is no other way to escape danger, a Christian can go by
heaven, and avoid all by prayer. As it is the heaviest malediction, Let his
prayer be turned into sin: so it is a happy blessing, when our sin Psalm. 109.
7.
is turned into prayer; when sin is so done away, that prayer may take place.
Then shall Jacobs ladder be never empty of Angels; our prayers ascending to
heaven, and Gods blessings descending upon us. Then shall prayer disburden our
hearts of all sorrows, and God shall fill them with his sweet comforts. Then
shall we sing with cheerful voices; Blessed be the Lord, that has not turned
away our prayer from him, nor his mercy Psalm. 66. 20.
from us. Amen.

FINIS.
MAN'S COMFORT.
PSALM 94. 19. In the multitude of my thoughts within me, thy comforts delight
my soul.


HEaven is a place of infinite glory and joy; yet is there little joy or glory
in the way thither. The passage rather lies through much tribulation: Act. 14.
22.
so trouble some a gallery leads to so happy a bedchamber. There is not a soul
in the cluster of mankind exempted from sorrow; much less shall those grapes
escape pressing, which God has reserved for his own cup. All that will live
godly in Christ, shall suffer persecution. Not all that 2 Timothy 3. 12.
live, but all that live godly: nor all that live godly in respect of outward
form, but th it live godly in Christ. Paul, his Attorney, pleads their
afflictions with an Oportet: and lest some should look for a dispensation, he
backs it with an Omnis. The Saints that have overcome the hill, be singing
above: we that are climbing up, must be groaning all the way. The Anthems
in-the up per Quire, the Church Triumphant, are all Hymns of joy: the militant
part must be content with sad tunes in this valley of tears. Not that the
blessedness of Immortality is no more perfect, but that it needs a foil of
perplexity to set it off. Not that the joy of heaven is no more sweet, but that
it needs the sowreness of the world to give it a taste. Not that the peace and
plenty of Canaan, required the wants and molestations of this wilderness to
commend it. But so it pleases the Almighty King, who of his own free grace
does give the preferment, to interpose the conditions: that the sorrow and
ingloriousnesse of this world, should be the throughfare to the glories and
joys of his Kingdom. For if it pleased him to consecrate the Prince and
Captain of our salvation through sufferings; what priveledg can the common
soldiers and subjects expect? Deus Filium habuit unum sine peccato, nullum
sine flagell^. We that hold our inheritance in Capite, have no other title to
it then Christ had before us; by suffering.

When we consider David and his troubles, we say. Ecce dolores viri, behold the
sorrows of a man. But when we consider the Son of David, and his passion; we
say, Ecce vir dolorum, Behold the man of sorrows. Indeed, if the one balance
were full of sorrows, and the other quite empty of comforts, there were an
unequal poise. They that do not find some joy in their sorrows, some comfort
in their dejections, in this world, are in a fearful danger of missing both in
the next. But as it is said in case of bodily sickness; If the patient and the
disease join, then in vain is the Physician: if the disease and the Physician
conspire, then woe be to the patient: but if the patient and the Physician
accord, then vanishes the disease. So we may observe in spiritual distempers:
if the soul and sorrow desperately combine, then the Spirit departs, the
Physician is grieved: if God and sorrow join* in anger, in anguish; the former
justly, the other sharply, then woe to the soul, for that cannot be comforted:
but if the soul by faith, and God by grace, unite themselves, then away flies
sorrow, for that is expelled. Here David's soul joins it self with the spirit
of consolation; and sorrow loses the day, the end is comfort. In the multitude
of my thoughts within me, thy comforts delight my soul.

Here is a twofold Army, one marching against another: Seditio, and Sedatio: an
insurrection, and a debellation; a tumult, and the appeasing of it: a band of
thoughts assaulting, and an Host of comforts repelling, resisting, protecting.
There is a multitude of those thoughts, and no less is the number of these
comforts. Those troublous thoughts have got into the citadel of the heart, Apud
me, within me: and these consolatory forces have entered as far, even into the
soul; They delight my soul. Those thoughts fight under the colors of flesh and
blood, but these comforts under the Banner of God; They are My thoughts, but
Thy comforts: the cogitations of man, the consolations of Jesus Christ.

1. Look upon the adversary power; In the multitude of my thoughts within me.
1. O that they were some external grievances, a foreign war, no domestic,
intestine, civil broiles; not turbulent thoughts. 2. Or if they be thoughts,
rebellious, heartbreaking cogitations; yet that there were but some few of
them, that they might be sooner suppressed; not so numerous, not a multitude of
thoughts. 3. Or if they must be thoughts, and a multitude; yet that they had
chosen some other place to rise in, not my Heart, the Fort, or Court, or
Bedchamber of my spirit; that they had not presumed unto so bold approaches, as
to mutine Apud me, within my heart, nearer and closer to me then mine own
bowels. But now, to be Thoughts, of so tumultuous a nature: Multitudes, of so
mighty a number: Within me, of so fearful a danger; without vent, composition,
or quiet; here is a full anxiety.

2. View the defensive forces; and in the midst of this conspiracy make room
for preservation; Thy comforts delight my soul. 1. They are comforts: against
litigions and unquiet thoughts, a work of peace; Comforts. 2. They are not
scant and niggardly; but against amultitude of thoughts, many Comforts; and
every one able to quell a whole rout of distractions. 3. They are thy comforts;
not proceeding men or Angels, but immediately from the Spirit of consolation:
against My sorrows, Thy comforts. 4. They do not only pitch then tents about
me, or like a subsidiary guard, environ me: but they take up their residence in
the heart of my heart, In my soul. These refresh more then the other can
offend: against the thoughts in my heart, thy comforts delight my soul.

Thus if we be not entered into Aceldama, a field of blood; yet we are got into
Meribah, a field of strife; or the mountains of ^ether, a field of division:
not unlike that of Rebecca's womb, where Cant. 2. 17.
Jacob strove with Esau for the victory. We have seen both the Armies; now let
us martial them into their proper ranks, setting both the squadrons in their
due stations and postures; and then observe the success or event of the
battle. And because the malignant Host is first entered into the ground of my
text, consider with me, 1. The rebels or mutiners, Thoughts. 2. The number of
them; no less then a multitude, many thoughts. 3. The Captain, whose colors
they bear; a disquieted mind; My thoughts. 4. The field where the battle is
fought; in the heart; Apud me, within me.

In the other Army we find. 1. Quanta, how puissant they are; Comforts. 2.
Quota, how many they are, indefinitely set down; Abundant comfort. 3. Cujus,
whose they are* The Lords, he is their general; Thy comforts. 4. Quid
operantur, what they do: they delight the soul. In the nature of them; being
Comforts, there is tranquillity: in the number of them, being many comforts,
there is sufficiency: in the owner of them, being Thy comforts, there is
omnipotency: in the effect of them, delighting the soul, there is security.
There is no fear in them, for they come for peace; they are Comforts. There is
no weakness in them, for they come in troops, they are many comforts. There
is no disorder in them, for the God of wisdom is their Captain, and leads
their forces, they are Thy comforts. There is no trouble in them, for they
evangelize joy, They delight the soul.

1. The Rebels are thoughts. Man is an abridgment of the world, and is not
exceeded by it, but in quantity, his pieces be not pauciora, sed minora. If all
the veins of our bodies were extended to rivers, our sinews to mines, our
muscles to mountains, our bones to quarries of stone, our eyes to the bigness
of the Sun and Moon, and all other parts to the proportion of such things as
correspond to them in the world; man might stride over the sea, as the Hebrews
fained of Adam; the air would be too little for him to move in, and the whole
firmament but enough for this Star; yea indeed, this little world would be
the great one, and that great world appear but the little one. There is nothing
in the world for which we may not find some answerable part in man: but there
is something in man for which we can find no answerable part in the world: I
need not say Part; for the whole world is not able to give any representation.
Man has a soul, made after the Image of God: of this the world can yield no
resemblance. The world produces innumerable creatures; man yet in more
abundance. Our creatures are our thoughts, creatures that are borne Giants;
that can reach from east to west, from earth to heaven. These can survey the
whole earth, bestride the ocean, comprehend the vast air, and span the very
firmament.

How capable, how active is the soul of man! It is even comprehensive of
universality, and has virtutem ad infinita: nature has set no limits to the
thoughts of the soul. It can pass by her nimble wings from earth to heaven in
a moment it can be all things, comprehend all things, know that which is, and
conceive of that which never was, never shall be. The heart is but a little
house, and has but three chambers, yet there is room enough for a world of
guests. God, the Creator of all, made this soul in a Cottage of clay, and this
soul is a kind of Creator too: for though it dwell in a close prison, it can
produce creatures, Thoughts: and any one of these creatures can move with the
Heavens, move faster then the Heavens; over take the Sun, and overgoe the Sun;
contemplate that which the Sun never saw, even the dreadful abyss of hell,
and a glimpse of the glory of Heaven. So various and innumerable are the
thoughts of man, that he had need of an astrolobe, to mark in what height and
elevation they are; and so either to advance them, or stoop them, as they
deserve.

There be three sorts of actions proceeding from the soul: some internal and
imma^eriall, as the pure acts of our wits and wills; some external and
material, as the mere acts of our sense others mixed, between both, and
bordering upon both the former; which Saint Augustine says, the Greeks call
(...), the Latins Perturbationes. As the heart inspireth one and the same
strength and life into all the parts of the body, for the better discharge of
their diverse functions; though all the parts do not receive it in the same
degree. The stomach by the virtue it receives, is made able to digest: the
liver, to concoct the nutriment into blood: the spleen like a sponge, by
sucking up the melancholy spirits, to purge the vital parts. So the soul breeds
all these creatures, gives life to all these thoughts; yet according to their
several acts and offices, they have several names. If they be sensitive, we
call them passions: if sensual, lusts: if fantastical, Imaginations: if
reasonable, arguments: if reflective, conscience: as they are evil, the
suggestions of Satan: as good, the motions of the holy Ghost. As the world
produces vipers, and serpents, and venomous creatures, worms and
caterpillars, that would devour their parent: so the soul breeds noxious and
mutinous thoughts, that are like an earthquake in her bowels; and whiles they
maintain civil broiles and factions, one against another, she feels the smart
of all.

Some thoughts be the darts of Satan; and these Non nocent, sinon placent: we
cannot keep thieves from looking in at our widows, we need not give them
entertainment with open doors. As the Hermit said, he could not hinder the
birds from flying over his head; but he could keep them from building their
nests in his hair. Wash thy heart from iniquity, that thou may be saved:
how long shall thy vain thoughts lodge within Jer. 4. 14.
thee? They may be passengers, they must not be sojourners: God has made a
Statute against such inmates: it is an unblest hospitality that gives them
lodging: he is no friend to the King that harbors these Seminaries. Other
thoughts are the motions of Gods spirit; and these must not only be guests, but
familiar friends: salutation is not here enough, but glad entertainment,
welcome, and indulgence. Let no man like himself the better for some good
thoughts: the praise and benefit of these motions is not in the receipt, but in
the retention. Easy occasions will fright away good thoughts from a carnal
heart: like children, which if a bird do but fly in their way, cast their eye
from their book. But David's thoughts here were anxious, commotive thoughts;
otherwise they stood not in such need of comforts. It is likely that they were
either Timoris, fearful thoughts; or Doloris, sorrowful thoughts: Thoughts of
fear for what might be, or thoughts of sorrow for what already was.

The thoughts of fear are troublesome enough as the ill affections of the
spleen do mingle themselves with every infirmity of the body: no less does
fear infinuate it self into every passion of the mind. David might find this
complication in his thoughts: I will please Saul with my harp: but then fear
replies, he will strike me through with his Javelin. He will give me his own
daughter in marriage: but fear says again, How if this prove a fatal dowry, if
this match be my snare! I will refuge my self with Achish at Gath: yet what
trust is there in Infidels? I will lie hidden in Keilah, or Hachilah; but fear
suggests, How if the Ziphites discover me? What shall I do? whither shall I go?
where shall I rest? These were thoughts that stood in great need of comfort.

The thoughts of sorrow are yet more distractive; and such were this royal
Prophets: as our vulgar reads; In the multitude of the sorrows that I had in
my heart. What was the cause of those griefs: The slipping of his foot, his
errors, his deviations, his sins. Other sorrows may disquiet the soul: none
but these have the promise to be comforted. As in martyrdom, it is not the
sword or torture; not what we suffer, but why, that makes us martyrs. So in our
sorrows, it is not how deep they penetrate, or how sharply they cruciate, but
wherefore, that approves their goodness. If our sins be the why of our
sorrows, we are blessed. Blessed are they that thus mourn, for they shall be
comforted. Vain Mat. 5. 4.
are the sighs and groans that proceed only from the thought of worldly
losses. A medicine that cures the eyes, we say, was made for the eyes, and for
nothing else. We lose our wealth, and sorrow for it; will sorrow recover it?
Chrysostom.
we are despised or abused, and grieve for it I: will grief right us? We bury
our friends, and mourn for them; will mourning restore them to us? we are
crossed by our unruly children, and weep for it: will weeping rectify them? We
are anguished in our bodies with pains and sickness, and are sorry for it:
will sorrow heal us, nay will it not rather hurt us? All our thoughts, and
cares, and griefs, and tears can do us no good, no relief in these calamities:
sorrow was not made for these things. But we sin, and offend the Lord; and we
are sorrowful for it; here is the disease for which sorrow is the proper
remedy: penitent sorrow shall take away sin. Quamvis peccavit David, quod
silent reges: tamen poenitentiam egit, Chrysostom. Hom. 2. Ad pop. Antioch
flevit, jejunavit, quod non solent reges: says Saint Ambrose, who wrote him
an apology. While the ground of our lesson is our sin, the choicest descant
on it must be our sorrow. Our thoughts and griefs may be many; but if they
be not spent upon our sins, we shall not be comforted.

2. The number of them is a multitude: we may say of sorrows, as it is said of
shrewd turns; they seldom come single. Like a volley of folding waves, one
tumbling upon the neck of another; all threatening to overwhelme us: Undae super
advenit unda. It is too scant a name which Leah gave her son, calling him Gad,
a troop comes: Genesis 30. 11.
and but enough, what the demoniacke answered Christ: My name is Legion, for we
are many. If they were a multitude, and not sorrows; Mark 5. 9.
the more the merryer: if they were sorrows, and not a multitude, then the
fewer the better cheer. But to be disquieting thoughts, and a multitude,
makes up a terrible agony. Many are the troubles of the righteous: great or
many, Psalm. 34. 19.
a great many, a great deal too many; but for the comfort of the deliverance.
When Jobs afflictions began, they came in troops and hurries. so thick that he
could scarce take breath: one messenger pressing in with his-wofull relation,
before the other could have ended his sad tale: While he was yet speaking. How
did that fugitive Prophet amplify and aggravate his dangers? Job 1. 16.
Thou had cast me into the deep, in the midst of the seas, and the floods
compassed me about: all thy waves and billows passed over me. Jonah 2. 3.
It was no shallow river, but the sea: not near the shore, but in the midst of
the sea: nor was he floting on the waves, but plunged into the deep or bottom;
the floods compassing, the billows overwhelming, to keep him down. I need not
travel for exemplifications.

Let him be our instance, that spoke what he felt, and felt what he spoke;
sorrows enough to break any heart, but that which God had framed according to
his own. His son Amnon ravisheth his own sister, and is murdered by his own
brother: that murder is seconded with Treason, that Treason with an incestuous
constupration: the insurrection of his own son has driven him from his house,
from his throne, from the Ark of God all this went near him: that son is slain
by his servant, and that went nearer him. In what a miserable perplexity may
we think the heart of this good King all the while? Here was thought upon
thought, thought against thought; how at once to spare the son of David, and
to save the Father of Absalom: fear against hope, north against south, wind
against tide, Arma armis contraria, fluctibus undae; a multitude of thoughts,
able to rend the heart in pieces, but for that recollection of mercy, Thy
comforts delight my soul.

Not seldom fares it thus with us; Thought calls to thought, jealousy to
fear, fear to sorrow, sorrow to despair; and these furies leap upon the heart
as a stage, beginning to act their tragical parts. Man has more wheels moving
in him then a clock: only the difference is, that the wheels of a clock move
all one way; whereas his faculties, like the epicycles, have a rapt motion: his
sensitive appetite gives him one motion, his fantasy another, his reason a
third, and his imperious, impetuons will crosses them all, driving the chariot
of his affections with the fury of Jehu: he desires, and thinks, and chooses,
argues, consents, and dislikes, and makes more business then time it self.
There are not so many hours in a year, as there may be thoughts in an hour.
The Philosopher that Plura machinatur cor meum uno momento, quam in omnes
homines perficere possunt uno anno Hugo l. 3 de Anima.
had shamed himself by weakly disputing with Adrian the Emperor, thus excused
himself to his friend; Would you have me contend with him, that commands thirty
Legions? Alas, what can quiet that soul, which is distracted with such legions
and multitudes of thoughts, and throngs of sorrows?

3. The Captain of this troublesome rout is himself; My thoughts. From what
suggestion soever our thoughts come, we call them our own: Whosoever begot the
babe, the mother calls it her own child. Indeed, the praise and propriety of
good motions we ascribe only to God, without whom we cannot so much as think
a good thought: as the channel may gather filth of it self, but it cannot
have a drop of pure water but from the fountain. Bad suggestions, though they
proceed from Satan, we call them our own, because they are bred in the womb of
our natural corruption: stubble is blown by the wind into the fire, and being
inflamed, it becomes fire. The Devil tempted David to sin; yet he calls it his
sin; not Satan's, but his own; I will be sorry for my sin. However Epictetus
could say, when evil happens to a man, one of the vulgar would blame others, a
young Philosopher would blame himself; but one that had dived into the depth of
nature, would blame neither the one, nor the other: Yet a Christian has
learned to blame himself; as knowing that all his sorrows proceed from his
sins.

My thoughts: thus easy is it with God to make a man become his own punisher.
Under whose regiment are all these troubles? Under my self, My thoughts. As
God threatens Tire, that ancient and glorious City; that her own feet shall
carry her a far off to sojourne: Our own Isa. 23. 7.
feet shall carry us, our own creatures torment us: like diamonds, we are cut
with our own dust. When David had numbered the people, his own heart smote him:
God finds the rod within us, wherewith to scourge us. As some vapor engendered
in the cavernes of the earth, struggles for vent; and being barred of free
passage, causes an earthquake in the foundations that bred it. Or as some
fiery exhalation wrapped up in the bowels of a thick cloud, breaks through
that watery resistance, and del^^ers it self to the world with a dreadful noise.
So the griefs and perturbations begotten by our own lusts, become terrors
within us, and rend our very hearts, till they get vent by confession and
repentance: thus do we muster up forces against our own peace. We pray, Lord
deliver us from our enemies; and in that number we do wrap up our unthought of
selves: for we are our own enemies. Turn thine hand upon mine enemies: for thou
can do it with the turning of an hand: Deliver me from the evil man: who is
that? says S. Psalm. 81. 14.
Augustine: he is not far to seek: libera me ab homine malo, that is, a meipso:
deliver me from the evil man, that is, from my self: I am the aptestto beget
destruction upon mine own soul: no enemy could hurt us, if we were our own
friends.

But we must not extend it so far upon this holy King: they were thoughts
indeed, and thoughts of sorrow, but of godly sorrow: and he calls them his own,
to show his near acquaintance with them, My sorrows. He was not a stranger to
his own soul, his heart was not dead flesh. Satan had given him a fall, and he
felt not that: sin had given him diverse falls, and he felt not them, neither:
at last God undertakes him, wrastles with him, and he gives him a fall too: he
felt that, yea and that made him feel all the rest. Now is he sensible of every
pang and stitch: the least thorn makes him smart, and he cries out of the
multitude of his sorrows. There be some that can drown their griefs in wine
and music, as they did in Hinnom, the cry of the Infants with the noise of the
Instruments: as if they would forget that they are the owners of their own
thoughts, because they trouble them. Many deal with their souls, as some old
women do with looking glasses: they turn the wrong side toward them, that they
might not see the furrows of their own faces. They are loath to think of a
reckoning, least they should despair of making even the arrerages. Men have
the courage to dare to sin, but they dare not look on their souls as they are
polluted with sin. I have heard of a melancholy man, that would not believe he
had a head, till his Physician made him a hat of lead, and put it on: which
with the weight enforced him to cry, O his head. So men lost in sensual
pleasures, scarce remember that they have a soul within them, until miseries,
like talents of lead, or quarries of stone, with their heavy pressure squeese
out a confession.

Nothings be so near as a man and his soul: Tot a domus duo sunt; the whole
household is but two: yea, why should they be called two? we may say in a right
sense, Men's cujusque is est quisque: every man's soul is himself. If there be
any division, sin made it: a just punishment, at qui nollet cum Deo uniri, non
pos^it in semetipso non dividi. All these quarrels and brawles may thank
sin: that is the makebate betwixt God and us, betwixt us and our selves. But
that man and his soul be grievously fallen out, that will not speak one to
another: when he shall pass a whole day, and not ask his soul how she does?
this were too much betwixt man and wife: when he shall he down in his bed, as
the beast does in his litter, without bidding his soul goodnight: when he
shall have fowled and besmeared his soul with the nasty aspersions of lusts,
and not sweep out the dust before he shut the door, not wash his soul with
tears, before his eyelids be closed down with slumber: yea, when he shall have
wounded his soul with blasphemies and uncharitable injuries, and then throw it
down in a deluge of drink, as it were weltring in the own gore, without
calling for repentance, the Surgeon to dress it. What madness and
selfe-hatred is this? When the soul may not have leave to think over her own
thoughts; to reflect upon her self, to search her own bruises, to survey the
multitude of her sorrows, and feel in what need she stands of comforts? That,
Plerisque notus, ignotus moriatur sibi? But the children of God have learned to
commune with their own hearts, to examine every thought, and to weigh every
desire in the balance of the Sanctuary. Whether they find themselves pensive or
joyful, they will search the cause: As Rebecca said, when she felt the children
struggle in her womb, Why am I thus? Whether fear or hope, joy or pain have
invaded Genesis 25. 22.
my thoughts, let me ask my soul the reason, Why am I thus? The Fathers were
excellent good at this: they had their confessions and Soliloquies, familiar
conferences with their own hearts; that when a man reads them, he would think
they kept no other company but themselves. Conference with others may make us
wise or learned, but conference with our selves is the way to make us holy.
Tell thy conscience of all suggestions, as the chaste wife (after some
peremptory denyalls to her impudent Tempter) professed to tell her husband of
those solicitations: such and such be my thoughts, thus and thus they haunt
me, what shall I do with them? Indifferency is no less then selfetreachery, in
matters of such consequence, that come so near me, as to be Apud me.

4. Within me, for this is the field where the skirmish is fought; within me.
It is unhappy when soldiers march over the palaces of peace and seats of
Justice, where the Senators of counsel use to sit. If there must be war, yet
let it be in foreign Countries: or if it will be in our own land, yet let it
proceed no further then the borders: but when it is gotten into the chief
City, though it be subdued, it will cost a dear victory. As Pyrrhus, when his
friends congratulated his victory over the Romans, with a great loss of his
own side; replied; yes, but if we have such another victory, we are undone.
There is no penitent heart, that has felt the bitterness of these combats,
remembering what sighs and sorrows, what groans and tears it cost him to make
his peace, but would be loath to be put to the charges of such another conquest.
Durius ejicitur, quam non admittitur hostis: sin may be kept out with ease,
but will not be driven out save with woeful expenses.

Within me: not before me, as the host of the Philistims lay before Saul; not
behind me, as the chariots of Egypt came thundering behind Israel: nor above me,
as Fabius Maximus on the mountain above Hanibal; Imminet nubes, a cloud hangs
over me: not round about me, as the Syrians compassed Dothan to take Elisha:
but within me. Without were fightings, within 2 Cor. 7. 5.
were fears: and those fears within, were worse then those fightings without.
There are external calamities able enough to shake the most fortified soul:
but Summus dolor ab intus. Saint Paul reckons up twelve of his inflicted
sufferings, nine dangers, eight continued passions: yet as if all these were
scarce worth putting into the catalogue, he adds; Besides the things that are
without, 2 Cor. 11. 28
he had an inward trouble: the care of the Churches, seeking the lost, rebuking
the proud, comforting the dejected: here was the pain.

Within me. There may be Bellum intestinum, a kind of unkind battle; where
victi victoresque invicem dolent: the soul bespeaking her affections, as
Jocasta did her quarrelling sons,

Bellageri placuit, nullos habitura triumphos.

According to our Saviors prediction; A man's foes shall be they of his own
household. Intra me Matthew. 10. 36. Aug.
est, quod contra me est: that is within me, which is against me. We say, he
wants an enemy that fights with himself: and because he fights with himself,
he wants no enemy: Sibi pessimus hostis. With external assaults we may
grapple, threatened mischiefs we may prevent; from persecutours too potent for
us, we may hide us: but who shall keep us from our selves? Nescis temeraria,
nescis quem fugias, ideoque fugis: Whithersoever we remove, we carry our
sorrows with us. Outward afflictions are a war, turbulent affections a worse
war: both against us, but this later is within us. He needs no other misery,
that is troubled within himself. Ask not the anger of heaven, nor the trouble
of earth, nor the dangers of the sea, nor the malice of hell, against him whom
the anguish of his own thoughts have beaten down. He will say to all other
miserable complainers, you are happy. Outward things may go cross with us, and
yet the peace of the soul remain sound: but a wounded spirit who can bear?
who can cure? As man's heart is the first that lives, and the last that die s:
so it is the first that Satan assaults, and the last that he gives over. Yea,
were there never a devil, the heart has an ill spirit of its own to vex it. As
some Boroughs of this Land plead a privilege, that they can hang and draw
within themselves: Man's heart is such a corporation; it can execute it self
within it self, without any foreign Judge or executioner. If we look no
further then among the multitude of our thoughts; might we not make a shift to
think our selves to hell? If we had neither hands, nor eyes, nor feet, would
not our hearts find the way thither!

Within me. The proper seat and lodging of these troublesome inmates, the
thoughts of sorrow, is the heart: whithersoever they wander, there they center.
Vagabonds taken roguing out of their own precincts, are sent with a pasport to
the Town where they were borne* there they must be kept. Extravagant thoughts
may rove up and down, but back again they must to the heart: the house that
hatched them, must harbor them, must answer for them. As all faculties of
sense have their several seats: seeing is confined to the the eyes, hearing to
the ears, feeling to the flesh and sinews: so these perturbations are limited
to the heart. The local seat of the sensitive apprehension is the brain; of
the sensitive affection, the heart. In the former is softness and moisture,
fit to receive intelligible forms: in the other are fiery spirits, fittest for
passionate and affectionate thoughts. My spirit is overwhelmed, and my heart
within me is disolate: In such a distress, let sense Psalm 143. 4.
inform reason, reason speak to will, will to conscience, conscience to faith,
faith to Christ, and Christ to his Father; and they will both send the holy
Ghost to comfort us. If there be a fire in the heart of a City, all the
suburbs will come in to quench it. This fire may burn within, but it will
break out. It is as easy to stifle thunder in the cloud, or fire in powder,
as sorrow in the heart. It will have eruption, either by the voice in cries, or
by the eyes in tears, or by the speaking silence of the look in a dejected
heaviness. The seat of sorrow is the soul; but it will overflow the
boundaries. Why art thou cast down, O my soul? None ask their eyes why they
weep, or their voices Psalm 43. 5.
why they lament, or their hands why they wring themselves: but Anima, quare
tam tristis? O my soul, why art thou disquieted within me?

We see now the full advancement of the misery; The thoughts of sorrow, an Army
of those thoughts, the combination of that army, the terror of that
combination: how miserably must the Country suffer where these rebels march?
who can tell the taking of that heart, which feels this combustion within it
self? These be our enemies, where are our friends? The day is like to be
fatally disastrous, if we have no defensive forces. Yes, the Lord shall fight
for us, and Exo. 14. 4.
we will hold our peace: as Moses comforted Israel when the choice was hard;
whether to trust the fury of the sea before them, or of the Egyptians behind
them; Fear not, stand still, and see the salvation of the Lord; Thy comforts
delight my soul. Now are the white ensigns of mercy displayed against these
bloody streamers: never to a handful of men almost famished in a fort, did the
tidings of fresh aid to raise the siege, arrive more welcome. Lord, if thou
had been here, John 11. 21.
my brother had not dyed. Though this multitude of oppressors overlay my
heart, yet Lord, if thou come, my soul shall not perish. Let your patience
sit out the success of the battle; and though I wish you not such conflicts;
yet if they do come, may you never fail of such comforts. Thy comforts delight
my soul.

1. Quanta, They are no less then comforts: not presumptions, nor promises,
nor mere hopes, but solid and sensible comforts. God made comfort on purpose
for sorrow: as mercy would want a subject to exercise upon, but for misery. The
blessed Angels are not said to be comforted (as we use the word) because they
never knew what heaviness meant: they are conserved, they are confirmed, not
(properly) comforted. There may be joy without any antecedent sorrow; as the
Angelical spirits ever were, and ever shall be filled with unspeakable joy.
But comfort is the proper physic for trouble; this happy nature was not
ordained but for sorrow. There be some that ducunt in bonis dies suos, that
have their ways strawed with roses and violets; who move only the paces of
pleasure: these have no need of Comfort. What Physician ministers cordialls to
the strong and healthful constitution? It is the broad throughfare of the
world, which the Devil is so studious to smooth, that he leaves not a pebble
in the way to offend them: as if he were that tutelar Angel, who has a charge
to look to them, that they dash not their foot against a stone. If they sigh,
he sings to them: if they sleep, he sits Psalm. 91. 12.
by them; whispering to all troubles, (as the the Spouse to the daughters of
Jerusalem) I charge you, O ye transgressions of his heart, waken Cant. 8. 4.
him not till he please: Let there be no noise of fear, no alarm of
repentance, no susurration of conscience to molest him: peace, peace, lie down
in peace, with thy warm sins cleaving to thy bosom. The Prophet gives you
their character; They lie upon beds of ivory, and eat the lambs out of the
flock, and calves out of Amos 6. 4.
the stall; they chant to the sound of viols, and dance to Instruments, and
drink wine in bowls; what should these men do with comforts? Joy, and nothing
else but the voice of joy resounds in their habitations. It is poor afflicted
Joseph, not they, that needs comfort.

Consolation then is made for sorrow; and not for every sorrow neither. Some is
produced by no other cause but temporal losses, pains or injuries: so Esau
may mourn long enough without recovery of his Fathers blessing. Worldly sorrow
brings death, not delight to the soul. Many weep, as Rachel did in Ramah, for
her children, Matthew. 2. 18.
because they were not: but they neither are, nor ever will be comforted. There
are tears that got sinful Esau nothing, and there be tears that got sinful
Mary salvation. If the sorrow that swells our bosom with sighs, and is ready
to burst our hearts, be spent upon our sins, it shall be sure of comforts. Are
we full of grief within, and find no vent but by the groans and tears of
repentance? God may let us bleed for a while, till we be thoroughly humbled: but
then, like the woman, the pangs of whose travel be over, the son of joy
shall be borne in our souls, even that son which the blessed Virgin bore from
her womb; Filius dilectionis, Filius delectationis, Jesus Christ.

2. Quota, there is a plurality of them; many Comforts. What should encounter
with sorrow, but comfort? Comfort therefore it is for the nature. What should
oppose a multitude, but a multitude? Many comforts therefore they are for their
number. Are we troubled with the wants and miseries of this life? we have a
comfort for that: The Lord is my portion: He is my shepherd, I shall lack
nothing. Do we sink under the burden of our transgressions? we have a comfort
for that: Mary Magdalen heard it, to quiet all her storms; Thy sins are
forgiven thee. Are we haunted with temptations, hurried with persecutions? we
have a comfort for this; I will be with thee in trouble, says the Lord. Let
your Christian experience supply here my defects of remonstance: I will sum
up these comforts in a word: The Lord is gracious, and merciful, slow to
anger, and of great kindness, and repents him of the evil. Joel 2. 13.
We read of certain Fair havens near Candie: here be five fountains of
comfort, like Acts 27 8.
those fair havens; as welcome for harbor and rode of a sea-beaten
conscience, as ever the bosom of mother was to the tender Infant. Drink at the
first fountain, The Lord is gracious, free in his favors: if your thirst be
not satisfied, go to the second; He is merciful, he has bowels of
commiseration: if not yet, press to the next; He is slow to anger, hard to
conceive it, not willing to retain it: wish we more? He is of great
kindness, in the number and measure of his blessings: There is yet another
well of comfort behind; Repenting him of the evil: full often does he turn
aside his blows, and is easily entreated to have the rod pulled out of his
hands. David, to encounter with the Giant, took five smooth stones out of the
brook: here is the 1 Samuel 17. 40.
brook, and these the five smooth stones: let them not lie in the channel
unused, but put them in your vessels, bear them in your hearts: whenever you
are defied and assaulted by that monstrous Philistim, Satan; one of these
comforts, like David's stone, shall sink into his forehead, and confound him.

How happily do these comforts meet with those sorrows! we are troubled with
the sense of our sins, and of Gods Judgment upon them: how should his Justice
acquit us? yet there is comfort; the Lord is gracious, and cannot deny himself.
But we are unworthy of this grace, because we have turned it into wantonness:
yet there is comfort: he is merciful, and shows most pity where is most
need. But we have multiplied offenses, and continued in our sins to our gray
hairs: yet there is comfort: He is slow to anger, evermore blessed for his long
sufferance. But our iniquities be not of an ordinary quality, they are heinous
and intolerable: yet there is comfort, for he is of great kindness; our
wickedness cannot be so great as his kindness: of that there is no
comprehension. But we are out of his favor, because he has smitten us, our
bodies with sore diseases, our souls with agonies, our families with
privations: yet their is comfort, he will repent of the evil. In the hour of
death, when the senses are past working, the understanding asleep, the body in
a cold and benumbed sweat, these comforts never leave us, Return unto thy rest,
O my soul. Psalm 1. 16. 7.


Our comforts vie number with our sorrows, and win the game. The mercies of
God passed over in a gross sum, breed no admiration; but cast up the
particulars, and then Arithmetic is too dull an art to number them. As many
dusts as a man's hand can hold, is but his handful of so many dusts: but tell
them one by one, and they exceed all numeration. It was but a crown which King
Solomon wore: but weigh the gold, tell the precious stones, value the richness
of it; what was it then? Jerusalem was but a city: but go round about it,
mark the towers, tell the bulwarks, observe the magnificent buildings: so
consider the infinite variety of these comforts! Come, and I will tell you what
God has done for Psalm. 66. 76.
my soul: I never felt that sorrow, for which he gave me not a sovereign
comfort. Sennacherib invaded 2 Chronicles. 32. 8.
Israel with a mighty host; yet the undaunted courage of Hezekiah found more
with him, then could be against him: and Sennacherib found it so too, to his
cost, when he lost almost two hundred thousand of his army in one night. The
Prophets servant rising early in the morning, sees the City besieged with a
fearful host of foot, horse, chariots: his eyes could meet with nothing but
woods of pikes, walls of harness, and luster of metalls, and he runs in with
this affrighting news to his Master, Alas, what shall we do? Quiet Elisha
sits in his 2 Kings 6. 16.
chamber as secure, as if all these had been the guard of Israel, sent for his
safe protection; Fear not. This was an hard precept: as well might he have
bidden him not to see what he saw, as not to fear seeing so dreadful a
spectacle. But the task is easy, if the next words find belief; They that be
with us, are more then they that be with them. If the eyes of our faith be as
open as those of our sense, to see Angels as well as Syrians, to perceive
comforts as well as sorrows, we cannot be appalled with the most unequal
number of enemies. Many, O Lord, are thy wonderful works which thou have done
for us, they cannot be reckoned. O God, what is man, that then Psalm 40. 5.
art so mindful of him? Yea, O man, what is God; that thou art so unmindfull
of him? All the works of God are excellent, and ought to be had in
remembrance: alas, that we should ever forget any of these works, that are of
mercy and comfort which he has done for our souls: For he alone has done
them: that is the next point.

3. Cujus, whose they are; Thy comforts. Troubles may be of our own begetting:
but true comforts come only from that infinite fountain, the God of
consolation; for so he has styled himself. The eagle at her highest flight
will not lose the sight of her young ones: if she perceive any danger
approaching, down she comes amain to their defense. Christ is indeed ascended
up on high; yet he has a favorable eye to his servants below: no Saul can
breath out threataings against them, without a Quid me perfequeris? Nec timeas
hostem fortem, qui Ducem habes fortiorem: Let God arise, and let his enemies be
scattered: There is none that fights for us, but only thou O God. Cujusquam
est rem publicam movere, Psalm 68. 1.
Dei solius quietare. Our own hearts can distract themselves, there is nothing
to settle them, but what the God of peace puts in. Who can reconcile a man
fallen out with himself? yea, fallen from himself? None but the God of comfort:
who when the earth was void, without form, darkness on the face of the deep;
day and night, land and water undistinguished, could reduce all this misshapen
chaos of the world to form and order: when father, mother, brethren, kindred,
friends, neghbours, and a man's own heart forsakes him, then God takes him up.
The structure of Jericho was not more pleasant, then the waters were
unwholesome, and thereby the soil corrupt: Elisha cures them with a cruse-full
of salt: Our hearts are full of thoughts, but they be noxious: yet if God throw
into those fountains a handful of saving grace, we shall be whole. Our
sorrows too often would break our hearts, but (O God) for thy comforts: it is
thou only that can make these weak vessels hold such scalding liquours, and
not burst.

There is combustion of these thoughts within us, til God part the fray, and
pacify the tumult: as when scholars are loud in brawls, the very sight of
their master husheth them. When my heart, like the sea in a storm, is troubled;
the winds raging, the waves roaring; Thy comforts, like Christ's command, turns
all into a calm. I thought on thee in the night season, and received comfort.
In the night, the region of fear: in darkness, the opportunity of despair: in
solitariness, the full advantage of sorrow: upon an unsleeping bed, the field
of troublous thoughts: yet I did but think on thee, and before I came to
meditate, to pray, to send up my soul unto thee, in that first thought I
received comfort. O how short do all worldly things come of this sufficiency?
If the heart be wounded with sorrow, in vain is all the Surgery of nature.
Gold is no restorative, riches no cordial, yea they may be a corrosive: we say
to wine, thy spirits are dull; to laughter, thou art mad: music grates the
ear, and physic loathes the palate: company is tedious, and solitude
dangerous: alas, what hope can there be, till the God of comfort comes? Saul's
evil spirit will not leave him, til he be dispossessed by David's harp: we
find as much ease, when we rest our hearts upon temporal things, as he that
laid him down to rest upon the cold earth, with a pitcher under his head: and
finding the pillow too hard, he rose and stopped it with feathers, thinking
that then it would be wondrous easy. So be all temporary things to the soul,
even when they are filled with the choicest mirth, nothing but vanity and
vexation of spirit: not only vanity in their entertainment, but vexation in
their farewell. Yet, O Lord, Thy comforts

4. Delight the soul; which is the last circumstance, the effect of all. All
Gods war is for peace: Pacem habet voluntas, bellum necessitas. We should
never have felt such a conflict, if God had not intended us such a conquest.
Sin disquiets the heart; yet through his grace, this disquiet breeds
repentance, repentance procures forgiveness, forgiveness restores peace, and
peace delights the soul. The sharpness of the trouble advances the
sweetness of the joy: as Christ's sufferings abound, so his comforts
superabound. Every penitent tear that falls from the eye, springs up a flower
of comfort. Look how full the vessels were of water, so full does our Savior
render John 2. 7.
them of wine. In hell are all sorrows without any comforts: in heaven are all
comforts, without any sorrows: on earth, good and bad, sweet and sour,
miseries and mercies, sorrows and comforts are blended together. If here were
nothing but sorrows, earth would be thought hell; if nothing but comforts, it
would be thought heaven. But that we may know it to be, as indeed it is,
neither heaven nor hell, but between both, and the way to either; we have a
vicissitude of troubles and delights. That as of old they painted King Solomon;
because learned men were divided in their opinions of him; some casting him to
hell, others advancing him to heaven: therefore a third moderate sort painted
him half in heaven, and half in hell: so the Christian, in regard of his
sorrows, seems half confounded; and in respect of his comforts, half saved.
But as indeed, Solomon after all his errors found mercy; so the Christian after
all his sorrows shall find comfort. His beginning may seem troublesome, his
proceeding not delightsome, but his later end is peace. Mark the perfect man,
and behold the upright; for the end Psalm 47. 37.
of that man is peace. His heart was troubled, his soul shall be delighted.

As the grievances of the soul be most dangerous in respect of their nature,
so they are also abundant in their number. Therefore let our care be to seek
out that great Elixar, that most sovereign and universal Antidote and Cordial.

One soul complains; I have obloquies, reproaches, calamniations cast upon me;
which 1.
render me contemptible to good societies. Morality would thus argue with the
heart. Be these imputations, thus charged upon me, true or false? If true, let
the integrity of thy future conversation so convince thy associates, that they
shall both suspect those reports, and rest assured of thy constant goodness.

But the Divine grace applies a more virtuall medicine to thy conscience, which
shall revive, either thy patience, or thy repentance. The soul shall argue with
it self: If these imputations be true, here is work for my repentance; I will
weep in secret for my sins. If false, let them not trouble me: It is the
slanderers sin, not mine: neither am I bound to father another bastard. But
still upon this calumny, the world condemns me: but thy faith and patience
assures thee, that thou shall not be condemned with the world. Yea, there is
yet a higher degree of honor belonging to thy patience. Have not the best men
been traduced? Was not the best of men, God and man blasphemed? yea even upon
the Cross, he was jeered when he dyed, by some of them for whom he dyed. Thus
do the comforts of God requite thee; that in all this thou art (in thy measure)
conformable to the sufferings of Christ. So do thou allay all these furious
tempests with one breath of faithful ejaculation; Thy comforts delight my soul.

Another complains; I am fallen from an affluent estate, to deep indigence. I
have kept 2.
hospitality, to entertain friends: and made charity the Porch of my house, to
relieve the needy ones. The vessel of my means is now drawn out to the
bottom, there is not sufficient provision left for my own family.

Inquire of thy heart, whether this decay did not come by thy own riot, or
through the vainglorious affectation of an abundant hospitality. If this, or
that, or any other habitual sin, were the cause of it, begin with
mortification there. First, mourn for thy sins: then faithfully depend upon
thy Creators providence, and thou can not fail of convenient sustenance.

But it may be, that this is not the complainants case: he is not taken with a
tabe or wasting of his substance; like a scarce sensible consumption of his
bodily vitalls. But his fall is with a precipice; from a sublime Pinnacle of
honor, to a deep puddle of penury. Such was Jobs condition, so did he fall;
from being rich and happy in the Adverb, to be poor and miserable even to a
Proverb. He had not only abundance of good about him; but Omnia been, all went
well with him. Yet how suddenly did he fall from this abundant prosperity, to
the depth of miserable poverty! Did he now follow the suggestions of that
corrupt nature, which lay in his bosom, and whispered to him on his pillow;
Curse God and die? No, but he apprehended the inspiration of grace; Bless God,
and live. So his last days were better then his first. That infinite mercy did
so crown his patience with triumph, that his temporal estate was doubled. Yea,
but what posterity had he left to enjoy it after him? Yes, for even the number
of his children was doubled too. For besides those seven Sons and three
Daughters, which were now with his Father in Heaven; he had also seven Sons and
three Daughters with himself upon Earth. Piety and Patience cannot be cast
down so low, but that the hand of mercy can raise it up again. In the
multitude of all my losses and crosses, O Lord thy Comforts have delighted my
soul.

But another, that has heard all this sad Story, and seen the comfortable end
sent 3
of the Lord, is not satisfied, because himself is not redressed. Like a coward
in wars that looks for the victory, before he gives one stroke in the battle.
What merchant looks to be landed in the place of traffic, before he has past
his adventure upon the seas? Still says such a repiner; I am in distress, and
want even necessaries. But still, thou, and we all, must suffer much more,
before it can be said of us, Here is the faith and patience of the Saints.
Still O my soul, wait thou upon the Lord, thy most faithful Creator: he will
in his good pleasure, open his hand, and fill thee with plenteousnesse. Be thou
penitent before him, patient under him, confident in him, and thou shall have a
bundant cause to be thankful to him: Thy end shall be peace, and comfort in
Jesus Christ.

Yea, even now, in this dead low waters of fugitive fortunes, my soul
confesses, that I have the highest wealth. For Christ's righteousness is my
riches, his merits is my inexhaustible exchequer, his blood has filld my veins
with most lively vigor. My treasure is in heaven, where no violence can take
it from me. Still and for ever, O God, thy comforts delight my soul.

It is another complaint; I am shut up in a close prison, where I can neither
converse with others 4.
abroad, nor let in others to communicate with me, in this my confined home.
The sparrow on the housetop has more freedom then I; For that, though
wanting a mate, has an open air to fly in, and may so invite company to
solace her, I have no society, but my disconsolate thoughts: no friend, to ask
me so much, as how I do?

Yet is thy soul at liberty: no barricadoed walls, no iron-gates or grates, no
dark dungeons can imprison that. The Jail is a strong prison to thy body, and
thy body is but (in a metaphorical phrase) a prison to thy soul; Thy body may
not walk abroad, thy soul can. Spite of all thy cruel creditors, and some
unmercifull Jailors; she can break Prison: She has wings that can mount her
through clouds and mountains, through orbs and constellations, and (like to
Enoch) walk with God, in a heavenly contemplation of his infinite goodness.
My ears cannot hear those airy Choristers, singing their Creators praise in the
groves: my soul, in speculation, can hear the Anthems of Angels in heaven. I
may not hear the Hosanna's of the Church militant in our material Temples
below: I may conceive, that my soul hears the Halleluiahs of the Church
triumphant above. I may not walk in the green pastures, and flowery medows on
earth: my soul may move in the glorious and melodious galleries of heaven. Thus
O Lord, though in my strictest confinement here below, thou have given me large
liberty above. Still I will glorify thee for all thy mercies, for thy comforts
delight my soul.

Another complaint is; I am vexed with a 5.
multitude of troubles. Not the law of the sword, but the sword of the law has
disquieted me. Let thy soul ask thy conscience this question: who did first
break the peace? If thou have first overwhelmed that truth, which should be
apparent, thou art thine own enemy: For truth smothered in wet straw, will at
length overcome the danknesse of that suppression, and set on fire the
smotherers. Thou have forsaken the truth, and art therefore forsaken of peace.

There be two chief preservers of the soul, under the Almighty Creator of it;
Truth and Peace. How invaluable are they together; Parted, how miserable! truth
is the precious stone: Peace, the gold, wherein it is both set and preserved.
Truth is the glorious light of the Sun; Peace, a clear and serene heaven. Peace
is a most beautiful body, whilst it contains Truth, that more lovely soul.
Truth brings down heaven to us, Peace bears us up to heaven. Both are sisters,
the daughters of one Father, God himself.

Do thou first recover truth: by continual labor seek it, with prayers and
tears beg it, with the expense of much sorrow buy it, and then peace will
come in to the bargain: Gods comfort shall again delight thy soul.

Another complains; I am cast out of 6.
doors: I have no harbor but the hedges; nor lodging, but the fruitless
ground. Poverty has sent out her excommunication against me: all that have an
estate, are forewarned to shun my company.

Consider, when had Jacob so sweet a nights rest, as when the pillow he laid
his head upon was a hard stone? Then was that ladder set by him, by which his
soul might climb up to heaven in a vision, whereof before he had but the
speculation. The Angels were dancing those measures, and singing those raptures
about him, which did in a manner angelifie him. His body lay on the bare earth,
his soul with those spiritual wings of faith and love, was mounted above the
clouds, above the orbs, even conversant in the highest heavens.

When had Elias more excellent provision then when his breakfast was brought
him in the morning, and his supper in the evening, by a raven? The messenger
was homely, but the diet was heavenly. It came from the table of that great
King, whose hospitality feeds, not only men; but even the fouls of the air, the
beasts upon earth, and the fishes in the sea. The Prophets lodging was but a
Field-bed, yet even then and there, the Lions were a guard about him, the
tutelar Angels did round him, and the Divine providence preserved him.

If we be destitute of other lodging, and be driven to the common earth, yet we
have a house over our heads, not made with hands, but an eternal mansion in
the heavens. There is also a canopy for us, a roof arched over with the two
Poles, and set with innumerable glistering stars. Yea; there is an omnipotent
love that protects us; a material heaven encompassing us, and a spiritual
heaven within us, the peace of a good conscience, assuring us, of our eternal
salvation through Christ Jesus. This is a softer lodging then the cabbins of
merchants, or the Hamachs of sea-farers; yea then the most curious beds that
the harbengers can provide for Princes. O how sweetly does the Christian rest,
when he hears that voice from the Oracle of goodness; My grace is sufficient
for thee, My comforts shall delight thy soul.

But another complaint is; I am perplexed 7.
with sickness: I am a mark against which pain shoots his arrows: I wast
away with languishments, as ice is dissolved by heat into water. Rest patient;
this consumption shall be consumed. Death, that universal executioner of
mankind, shall be executed. Time shall cut off Death, and Eternity shall make
an end of Time. Death shall have no grave left for his monument, or trophee of
his victories: and the Angel has sworn, that time shall be no more. Thy
sickness may outlast thy Physician, but thy soul shall outlive thy sickness,
and nothing shall outlive thy soul.

But the pangs of my body are so violent, that they assault me with
distraction. Fear not: they may beleaguer thee with distrust, but never
overcome that faith, which thou put in this God of consolation. He is a
most faithful Creator, and will servare depositum, keep that soul safe, with
which the believer has instrusted him. The breaches of the body are the souls
windows, and afford her a more clear prospect into heaven, inkindling her with
an ardent desire to be with God in glory. Jobs abundant sores would have bred
in him a continuity of sorrows; but for that antidote of faith, and saving
cordial of hope, that his eyes should see his Redeemer in blessedness.

The smiling Sun flatters the traveller out of his cloak, whereas the
robustious wind causes him to wrap it the closer about him. God forbid that
Christian Religion should be but a cloak: yet the outward profession of it is
somewhat loosned by wanton healths; and sickness wins it more inwardly to the
heart. Experienced merchants tell us, that in the hottest Countries, they find
most comfort in the hottest drinks. A wonder to us that live in the cold
climates: but that the Suns adventitions heat so sucks out the radical
moisture and spirits, that it leaves the heart feeble, and destitute of the
natural comforts. It is a maxim in Philosophy, that one heat avocates
another: the greater, the less. The heat of the Sun draws forth the heat of
the heart, and leaves it fainting. Poor Lazarus with his scraps and scabs, was
yet in a better condition then the rich man with his Princely Wardrobe, and his
costly Viands. Continued health has maintained wanton desires and delights
upon earth: but sickness has sent many souls up to Heaven. Yea Lord, even
with sickness afflict my body, so that thy Heavenly Comforts do delight my
soul.

It is a general complaint; Afflictions environ me. In my short pilgrimage,
through the sharp 8.
wilderness of this world, on the one side the Thorns wound me, the Briers and
Brambles scratch me on the other. This is not only the deserved penalty of
sinful nature; Man is born to trouble as the sparks fly upwards, But even a
kind of fatality inseparable to militant grace; All that will live godly in
Christ, shall suffer persecution. 2 Timothy 3. 12
That is a rare path upon earth, which has never a rub: and a calm passage by
water, that escapes all molestation. But more,

Be there not some Afflictions, that conduce much to our preservation? We have
found, that the falling into one grievous sin, the worst of all dangers, has
brought us to repentance, one of the best preservatives. I have heard some
Seamen report by experience, that in a tempest, some raging billow has swept a
man from off the Decks into the maine Ocean: yet another wave on the other
side, has tossed him up into the ship again: so that he was only drenched; but
not drowned. The violent pressure of one Affliction has sunk a man to distrust
in God: another with a more furious Storm has left him destitute of all
earthly succor: He now resolves, the world has forsaken me, I will never look
for relief from it. But my God has not forsaken me, he never will forsake them
that trust in him through Jesus Christ. To him I fly, upon him I rely: he will
not suffer me to perish. Still, O Lord, in all my extremities Thy comforts
delight my soul.

Not offering to number man's grievances, which be innumerable; there is yet the
last, and it may prove the best, complaint remaining.

I am perplexed with the woeful consideration 9
of my sins; those bitter things which God writes against me, the irksome
recollection of my transgressions. I can argue with Philosophers, consult with
Politicians, hear the ingenious fancies of Poets, reason in domestic
concernments, enjoy the company of moral and harmless friends with delight. I
can pray with confidence to be heard, and satisfied; I do hope with some
assurance of salvation; I sleep upon a peaceful pillow, Thus far I am in a
calm and serene hemisphere, and quiet be all my thoughts.

But after all this Sunshine, there arises a tempest. When I do recollect, or
be represented unto my conscience, my innumerable, incomparable, intolerable
sins; the remembrance of them is so frightfull, the burden of them is so
unsupportable, that I dare not even look up unto Heaven. Faith lies fainting,
hope is in a swoon, fear stands by the bed side, despair lies gaping at the
chamber door, my soul is in an ecstasy. I am weary of all company, but those
that speak of mercy. I sit mourning all the day long: Sorrow and solitude are
my associates: I do shed some tears, and would weep tears of blood for my sins.
I lament because my sorrows are not greater for offending my God.

Well, yet hear the Physician of souls speaks to thee from Heaven. Weep on,
bleed on, this bleeding shall not be unto death. Jesus Christ has a Balsome,
that shall not only stanch thy bleeding, but fill the veins of thy soul with
comfort. His blood is an Antidote for thine. One drop of that shall satisfy
for more sins, then ever thou have committed.

Weep on for thy Transgressions: Those floods of tears shall not drown thee.
Yea rather, like the waters of that universal Deluge, in that saving Arc
Christ Jesus, they shall bear up thy soul higher toward Heaven. They shall not
drown thee, yea they shall rather save thee from being drowned. This is that
Secunda Tabula, after shipwreck; the main plank that shall preserve thee from
perishing, emergent repentance.

There be two most Valiant and Puissant soldiers, that are the Souls
Champions, Faith and Repentance. They fight not only against lust and sin,
those Giants of the world: but even against Principalities and Powers, those
infernal spirits of darkness. Faith has her weapons and Forces, but
Repentance has many disadvantages.

1. Other Soldiers fight standing, she kneeling: They in a posture confronting
their enemies, she in humiliation, though not tergiversation from her
opposites. They send forth their messengers of death in thundering ordnance: all
her thunder is sighs and groans sent up to Heaven for mercies. They let fly
their fiery Engines of destruction: she has only her ejaculations: Her most
piercing darts, be broken hearts. Their shafts are winged with fire, her arrows
are feathered with water, her own soft tears. They swallow up the hope of
victory with insulation: she in an humble prostration expects pity. Yet the God
of all power and mercy, whom she beleaguers in Heaven, yields her the conquest.
He comes from his inpregnable Throne by his most gracious favor, and instead
of confounding her as a Rebel, he uses her as a Friend, or Daughter. He takes
her up from her knees, he wipes away all her tears, he folds her in his arms,
he seals her a pardon of all sins, and assures her of an everlasting Kingdom in
Heaven. O victorious Repentance! yea rather, O triumphant Goodness! O God,
Teipsum vincis, thou even overcomest thy self, that thy Comforts may delight
our souls.

It is reported of Alexander, that when he thought (and did but think so) he
had conquered all this world, he fell a weeping, that there were no more worlds
to conquer. But there was remaining another world, a better then ever Alexander
discovered. But this was not for an Alexander by force of Arms, but for a Mary
Magdalen by force of tears, to overcome.

It is true, that the Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence: but the way of
Conquest is not through the blood of bodies, but through a flood of tears,
gushing out for our sins. This is such a stratagem of war, such a policy of
Conquest, as the great Monarchs of the world never understood: Yet even this
through faith overcomes the world.

Faith has a plot, which she has taught her daughter Repentance, Concedendo
superare, to overcome by yiedling. It is a stratagem among Wrastlers, that if a
man can get himself under his antagonist, he lifts him up, the sooner to cast
him down; yea, to give him the greater fall. Repentance stoops as low as she
can: she lies, like Joshuah, upon the bare earth, yea wollowes in dust and
ashes. She holds her self not worthy to be Gods footstool: let him trample
upon her, and tread her under his feet, she still holds him by the feet,
washes them with her tears, and wipeth them with the hairs of her head, and
kisseth them, though she be spurned by them. Does this humble prostration
provoke fury? No, it rather invites mercy. Parcere prostratis scit nobilis ira
Leonis: The Lion of the Tribe of Judah, will spare such Lambs of humiliation;
and in the pastures of consolation; he will both feed and preserve them. That
thunder which dissolves the stubborn metal, yet spares the yiedling purse:
When power and policy have spent their spirits, submission is found the only
way of Conquest. The feafull thunder of vengeance is resisted by the soft wool
of repentance.

2. Yet has this blessed grace another disadvantage. Faith, the chief of all
the Forces, may be sometimes benighted, through the conglomeration of the clouds
condensed by our sins. Hope may be eclipsed, by the interposition of the earth,
our worldly imaginations, betwixt us and that great luminary of heaven, the Sun
of righteousness; The century of watchful conscience, may be overcome with
security. Sin is a subtle enemy, and his father, the Devil will show him the
opportunity. Now is the time of invasion: seize on them, and cut all their
throats. What shall repentance now do, when faith, the great Lady general
droops; and Hope, her Lieutenant general is fainting? when the whole century is
overcome with slumber?

Yes, there is a watchman in the tower of the soul, that does seldom sleep;
holy Fear. He wakens conscience, conscience calls up faith, faith rouzeth hope,
hope cries aloud to repentance, repentance troops all the spiritual forces, the
martial music gives the alarm, the soldiers are in battel-array, the enemies
fly, the mind is at peace, because Gods comforts have delighted the soul.

3. One disadvantage more makes dangerous work for repentance. The troops of
faith are routed, one wing of hope is cut off. Yet this conquering Queen of the
Viragines, or maiden-graces, always bears up the Rear, and never appears till
the day be almost lost. When those great Commanders, Innocence and
Righteousness are foiled, and beaten, and have their Queen the soul, in danger
to be taken and slain by sin and Satan, her old adversaries; Then this Virgo,
Virago, that all this while lay in expectation of the event; this martial
Maid, victorious Repentance comes in with her Reserve, sets upon the conquerors
with her fresh forces, rescues the Queen, our soul, puts the great general
Satan to flight, and does impartial execution upon all his soldiers, which be
our sins.

Thus one grace begets another, by a supernatural generation, til they increase
in number and measure, by the Divine inspiration. Faith calls up repentance,
repentance brings in pardon and forgiveness, pardon leads in comfort, and
thus, O my God, Thy comforts delight my soul.

4. When God, by the preaching of his law, has broken up the fallow ground of
our hearts, and by the applying of his Gospel has sown the seed of eternal
life in those furrows, he looks that we should bestow our labor in the
watering of this plantation. The ground is his, for he made it: the seed is
his, for he gives it: the harvest is his, and he owns it. Yet such is the
bounty of his goodness, that he gives his farmers the fruits of it. The rent of
that great Landlords glory being truly paid, the product is ours, even the
comfort and salvation of our poor souls. All our pains is, but to hook up the
weeds, that would hinder the growth of the corn, and dew the furrows with our
tears, that it may spring up with cheerfulness. But when the reaping-time
comes, the whole crop is ours: and we come home singing with joy and
thankfulness; Thy comforts have delighted our souls. When those glorious
reapers, the Angels shall bear up our souls to heaven, like sheaves into the
barn, we shall sing harvest-home, and glorify our infinite good God, and our
sweetSaviour JesusChrist.

To conclude, crosses are but the pursuivants to fetch in repentance: and
afflictions, but Gods letters, missive formortification. When we are fallen
into some heinous transgressions, we may better say then in our other trouble,
this will cost hot water: For so it will indeed: it will cost the hot waters of
our tears from our eyes, or it will cost the warm blood of our hearts. Our
godly sorrow for our sins, is like the Pool of Bethesda: when that Angel from
heaven, gracious repentance has troubled the waters, the lazarous soul does
but step into them, and is cured. For all our spiritual diseases, this is the
remedy, upon which we may safely write, Probatum est.

We have made our selves sick by sinning: God is the Physician, and he
prescribes: Affliction is the Apothecary, and he prepares: the Medicine is
Repentance, and that infallibly cures. It is a broken heart that makes us
whole. God loves a true heart, and a clean heart, and an honest heart, and an
humble heart: yea and he loves a broken heart too. The broken and contrite
heart, O God thou will not despise. It is true, that we Psa. 54. 17
are bound to love him with our whole heart: but if it be broken with
penitential sorrow for sin, he will heal the fracture, redintegrate the heart,
and reaccept it wholly to himself. A contrite heart, broken in pieces with
sorrow, and pickled up in brinish tears, is a sacrifice that God will not
reject.

Whosoever has such a heart, let him make much of it: It is a dish for the
king of kings. Sin, Repentance and Pardon, are like to the three vernall months
of the year, March, April, and May. Sin comes in like March blustering, stormy,
and full of bold violence. Repentance succeeds like April, showring, weeping,
and full of tears. Pardon follows like May, springing, singing, full of joys,
and flowers. If our hands have been full of March, with the tempests of
unrighteousness: our eyes must be full of April, with the sorrow of repentance:
and then our hearts shall be full of May, in the true joy of forgiveness.

His soul; as there be no comforts like those of God; so there is nothing to
which comforts are so welcome, as to the soul. The pleasure which the body
takes, is but the body, yea scarce the very shadow of pleasure: the soul of
pleasure is the pleasure of the soul. There be many things pleasing to the
body, wherein the sanctified soul takes no delight, especially in the day of
trouble. In calamity, good nourishments are confortable, good words are
comfortable, good friends are comfortable, the Physician is comfortable, the
Divine comfortable, a good spouse specially comfortable: but in respect of
these comforts, which pass all understanding, we may say of the rest, as Job
did to his visitant friends, Miserable comforters are ye all. But blessed are
the souls upon whom this Sun of comfort shines: and happy are those showers of
fears and sorrows, that shall be dried up with such beams of comforts: and
blessed be God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies, and
the God of all comfort. To whom, with the Son, and Holy Ghost, 2 Cor. 1. 3.
be all praise and glory, for ever and ever.

Amen.
FINIS.

