(...).

The EARTHLY AND HEAVENLY Building, Opened in a SERMON ON 2d. Corinthians,
Chap. v. Verse 1. AT THE FUNERAL OF THE Late Reverend Minister of Jesus Christ,
Henry Hurst, M. A. Sometime Fellow of Merton College in Oxon.

Preached and published at the earnest Desires of his Relatives and People.

By Richard Adams, M. A. sometimes Fellow of Brazen-Nose College in Oxon

LONDON, Printed for John Weld at the Crown between the Temple-Gates in Fleet
Street, MDCIC.

ERRATA.
PAge 2 line 21. r. Mutable. p. 3. l. 2. after, as r. in. l. 6. in Marg. r. ^.
p. 9. l. 24. after of r. a. p. 12. l. 24. r. may. p. 13. l. 12. after Disciples
r. with this; in my Fathers House (says he) there are many. p. 14 l. 24. r.
preserved. p. 16. Marg. r scibilis. p. 17. Marg. r. Emanare.

To the much respected Mrs. DOROTHY HVRST, the sorrowful Widow of Mr. HENRY
HVRST, late Minister of the Gospel, together with his People, who desired the
Preaching and publishing of this ensuing Sermon.
THO I am sensible of several Failures in this Discourse, which Second Thoughts
might have somewhat amended, by expunging, altering, or adding somewhat which
came to the Ear: Yet, that I might not incur more Censures, by varying much
from what was preached; I have altered, added, or omitted nothing material,
further than what is requisite betwixt the Pulpit and the Press: That what you
have made current, by your Approbation and Desires, may hopefully pass with
fewer censorious Remarks.

To you the disconsolate Relict of the Deceased: I heartily wish, for the allay
of your Grief, and composure of your Spirit, That you would seriously
deliberate upon what that excellent young Gentlewoman, in her Day, Mrs.
Katherine Stubbs, said to her Husband on her Deathbed, desiring him not to
mourn for her, upon this strong Reason: That she was not in a Case to be
mourned for, but rather to be rejoiced of, for that she should pass from Earth
to Heaven, from Men to holy Angels, Cherubims, and Seraphims; to holy Saints,
Patriarchs and Fathers, yea, to God himself. Changing Persons. I doubt not, but
upon the departure of your most pious Son Arthur, you have heard your own dear
Husband, that Righteous Abel (as I may allude) comforting of you his Wife, from
the same unanswerable Reason. And being Dead he yet speaks Heb. 11.4.
: I pray you hear his Voice. Now is the time you should hear his Voice from
God: As you know the Day before he was summoned hence, in his last Sermon, He
was pressing the People, to Day to hear God's Voice. If you now stop your Ears,
and do not mind it; his surviving Son and Daughter, your dear Children, who
will yet a while be more led by their Mothers Example, than by her Directions,
will heardly believe their Fathers present Joys. I question not, but their
Father said to You, at your last great Mourning, as Elkanah said to his Wife
Hannah 2 Samuel 1.8.
, Dorothy, Why weepest thou? Why eatest thou not? And why is thy Heart grieved?
Am not I better to thee than Sons? Thy Maker is thy Husband, (the Lord of Host
is his Name. Is. 54.5.
Does not he say unto you now? Am not I better than Ten Husbands? Let these
dearest young ones know, that you really believe it, by your cheerful Carriage,
that when Nature has had its Course with decency, and they begin to consider
what it is to want such an earthly Father, as they had, they may begin to hope
and say, Our Heavenly Father will be better to us than Ten earthly Fathers. Add
not therefore to your sweet Childrens Loss, by casting your self into their
Father's Grave; which you are likely to do, if you immoderately mourn over it.
You know what your excellent Husband's last Lecture at High-gare was, as if it
sounded his own Knell, from Luke 2.29. Lord now let thou thy Servant depart
in peace, for mine Eyes have seen thy Salvation.

To you that were of his Congregation and special Charge, having in the close
of the Sermon urged a steady Practice of what your worthy Pastor did deliver
and recommend to you, I shall add little more: Yet I would be your Remembrancer
of what he recorded in his Sermon, at the Funeral of Mr. Cawton, as his Words
spoken to his People, viz. Prize a Guide that will be faithful to your Souls;
keep the Unity of the Spirit into which you are called by the Gospel; and seek
God earnestly for both. I shall add no more, but heartily beg of God, That he
would take care of the mournful Widow and hers; and of the Widowed People. And
supply all your Wants, upon the departure of so obliging a Relative, through
Jesus Christ, the best Husband, and chief Shepherd. In his Hands He leaves
you, who looking to Jesus, does commend you all to God, and to the Word of his
Grace, which is able to build you up, and give you an Inheritance among all
them which are Sanctified Act 20.30.
.

Your Souls Friend and Servant, in our dear Lord Christ, Richard Adams.
April 24. 1690.
2. Cor. Chap. v. Verse the 1st. For we know, that if our earthly House of this
Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a Building of God, an House not made with
Hands, eternal in the Heavens.


THE very First Particle in my Text, does introduce it as a Confirmation of
that the Apostle had last asserted, in the precedent Chapter; wherein he shows
how far the Reward of the sincere Ministers and Members of Christ, does surpass
their Suffering: Having premised a distinction of the inward and outward Man,
which last, when adorned with a Saints Eye, aims not at the things which are
seen, they are but temporary, and so lie under a disparagement, but at the
things which are not seen, they are eternal, and so most desirable, as may by a
due comparing of Circumstances further appear, from that Twofold Prospect,
which the quick sighted Apostle does present to our View in the Words read:
Wherein we have The STATE and ACT
of a Believer. Cognitum and Cognitio.


State or Thing known of a true Believer, who has a double Residence, one at
Present, another Future; one here, another hereafter; one above, another below:
One visible, which is the Object of the bodily Eye, and seen by it; the other
invisible, which is the Object of the spiritual Eye, not seen by the Eye of
Sense, but only by the Eye of Faith. And therefore by a Metaphor drawn from
Architecture, the believing Soul comes under our Consideration.

As in her LOWER and UPPER
Habitation.

In the Text, (...).
the Former is called an House, of the same Nature and Structure with that of
Unbeleevers.

The Latter, (...).
a Building of another nature, a more stately Structure, proper to the Saints.

First is no other than the organized Body, unto which the Soul is at present
united: As e're while the Corpse of our deceased Friend and Brother (which we
have now brought, to be shortly deposed in the Lap of our common Mother the
Earth) was the House wherein his great Soul did for a time reside; even as ours
do, whilst we live in these Bodies we bear about; and this House of ours, or
State of Life is presented to our View more distinctly in its Corruptible
Foundation, Immutable Station, Inevitable Dissolution.


1. Corruptible Foundation: The material Principle is but of a terrene Quality,
(...).
earthly in its Original, and Composition: The first Man is of the Earth
earthly 1. Cor. 15.47.
, so frail be sure since the Fall that there is no soundness in it, whose
Foundation is in the Dust crushed before the Moth Job 4.19.
, more easily mouldering away, when God does but lay his Hand on it, than a
Moth is bruised betwixt a Man's Fingers; yet that little Animal, weaker than a
Worm, may, when disposed of at the Pleasure of the Almighty, overthrew this
Foundation. Neither is the Foundation frail, but also it has,

2. A mutable Station: The State of the Soul in this Life is not fixed, but in
a perpetual Motion; and therefore the Apostle appositely compares this earthly
Body, wherein we sojourn a little, as an Inn, unto a Tabernacle; (...).
Hypallage.
[Earthly House of this Tabernacle] or as Beza would render it by a Figure,
[the Tabernacle of our earthly House] it being as moveable an Habitation, as
it is a frail Foundation. Some would derive the Word from an Hebrew Root, which
signifies he dwelt. (...).
Others from a Greek, signifying a Shadow: Since a Tabernacle at the first was
composed of Boughs and Leaves for the shading of Persons from the Heat and Wet:
But not to be curious about the Name, our Body may be aptly enough compared to
the thing called a Tabernacle, or Tent, which was very obvious to St. Paul who
had exercised himself in Tentmaking Act. 18.3. (...).
: For,

erecting of a Tent or Tabernacle, whether we consider it under a Civil, or
Military Notion, does import the brevity of the Inhabitants stay in it: When
the Apostle Peter writes 2 Pet. 1.13.
I think it meet as long as I am in this Tabernacle, to stir you up, by putting
you in remembrance. He intimates, That he had not long to live, and was willing
to live to the best purpose, by doing the most good during his short stay: As
when the Israelites built themselves Tents, being in a traveling Posture, not
having any certain Habitations. And as they were upon the way Sojourners and
Strangers, so are all of us in the Body, for here have we no continuing City
Heb. 13: 14.
, Though alas! we may see some such Fools, in their own practical Judgments,
feathering their Nests with the silly Birds, that think not how soon it may be
removed. Yet even an Heathen Gorgias Leon^ih: in Stobaeus, (...).
(who neither considered the Cause, nor knew the Remedy) could by the Eye of a
natural Understanding call it, A rotten fleeting little Cottage of short
duration; wherein the Soul must not stay long, before the bodily frame of
Nature will soon be taken in pieces by Death.

The carrying of Tents and Tabernacles about, does further note the state of
Pilgrims and Travelers, that pass from place to place, as we do move without
rest, whilst in the Body. So the Prophet elegantly makes use of the Comparison
Isay. 38.12.
, Mine Age is departed, and is removed from me as a Shepherds Tent: Which is
set up a little while for Shelter, and removed to another Pasture at pleasure.
As it is reported of the Nomades in Scythia, (as well as Numidia) that they
always remove their Tents with their Cattle; which plainly sets forth our State
here to be no less Transitory than Temporary; and therefore the Apostle might
well liken it to a Tabernacle, especially if we consider further what he opens
to our View, and that is.

The inevitable Dissclution of this earthly Tabernacle, which is so temporary
and transitory, (...).
[if it were dissolved.] Which Supposition, with reference to the Consequent,
does evince, that without all dispute it will be dissolved, or taken down, as a
Tent that is loosed and laid up when the Siege is raised, the City obtained,
and the War ceased. It may be as a Tent is sometimes cut asunder, and trod
underfoot, or burnt up: So the Body by some violent Death, may be sooner
demolished, than otherwise in the ordinary course of Nature, it would be: But
tho it escape that Violence, it cannot be long before it fall in pieces of its
own accord; For dust thou art, and unto dust thou shall return Genesis 3.19.
, Though thy Constitution, thy Care and Labor, with timely Advice of
Physicians, may help a little; yet here is no stay long for the Life of thy
hand, to allude to that Expression of the Prophet, Is. 57.10.
It is appointed unto all Men once to die; and then this Tabernacle will
unavoidably give way for true Believers to go into that Receptacle which is
nextly described in my Text, viz.

II. A Building of a more noble Structure, peculiar to the Saints, who do
immediately pass into it, upon the Dissolution of their earthly Tabernacles;
even a State of Glory provided by God, for the separate Souls to enter into,
and abide in immediately after Death: (...).
[ We have a Building of God, an House not made with Hands, eternal in the
Heavens. When a Period is put unto the Scene of this Life, (much the same Word
radically, with this that signifys a Tabernacle) then the Saints Souls, who
have acted their parts therein, shall forthwith pass into those Mansions, which
our Savior went before, to make ready for the Reception and Entertainment of
his Followers John 14.2.
. I know some do expound this Building to be only the glorified Body: But if we
well consider this description in my Text (which I shall presently open) with
reference to the 7th. and 8th. Verses in this Chapter, noting the Souls
immediate Passage out of the Body into this Building, we may nextly; and most
fitly take it for the Glory, with which the sanctified Soul, upon its departure
is forthwith clothed, and afterward wherewith the Body shall be adorned at
the Resurrection. The Building, we see is set forth to our View from Four
Circumstances.

Architect, the Founder, and Builder; It Is a Building of God. (...).
This Mansion Seat of Glory is no other than the Paradise of God Rev. 2.7.
; a rare Work, where all due Proportions are observed, and all Ornaments
rightly chosen and placed, ravishing the Eye of the Beholder. Not only is it in
a general Way the Paradise of God, as he is the Author of the whole Creation,
but as he has appointed it for his more peculiar Palace, to be more glorious
than the rest, for his more especial Residence. This he has ordained for the
chief Seat of his Kingdom, which no Soul enslaved to Satan, shall ever see, or
enter into, until he be regenerated by the Holy Spirit. Into this Holy of
Holies, which the glorious God did design for his own Chamber of Presence, no
unclean thing can be admitted. Again, as it is described from the Author, so
from

2. The Nature and Composure of the Fabric which is [not made with Hands] of
no humane Artifice, (...).
but of a transcendent spiritual Nature, infinitely surpassing in the framing
of it; the rarest Mysteries that all the most skillful handi-crafts Men in the
World can devise, being like that other Work of Gods immediate Power, for
Christ Tabernacling here below Heb. 9.11.
. As the Subject which is made fit for it, is to be circumcised with the
Circumcision made without Hands Coll. 2.11.
, i. e. spiritual, and not seen; so was this goodly Fabric framed and modeled
by God himself, in a most spiritual and glorious way, far above the reach of
our finite Apprehensions, according to the Counsel of Gods own Will. Again it
is described from

3. The duration, or strength and lastingness of it. The stability and firmness
of a building, does exceedingly commend the excellency of it; (...).
now this is a Building made to last for ever. It Is without end, as well as
without hand. It was prepared from the Foundation of the World Matt. 25.34.
, and it will last when this World is ended. 'Twill never go to decay or ruin:
when all tears are wiped away from our Eyes, we shall see this Prospect will
never grow less Glorious throughout the days of Eternity; which may more easily
be conceived, if we consider how it is described from,

4. Situation aloft, far above the narrow sight of any mortal Eye [in the
Heavens] which do much surmount, (...).
in dignity, the Sky ennamel'd with the Stars that we cast our Eye upon; even
there where the Empyrean seat of glory, the Chair of State, and Throne of the
most high God is. Thus having viewed the Twofold State of a Believing Soul, so
far as the Text makes a discovery, which was, The thing Known of a Believer. I
am now briefly to unfold,

Secondly, The Knowing act of a Believer [we know] St. Paul was not dubious
about his future blessed State, (...).
but he and other believers, excercising of their Faith on sure grounds, were
fully persuaded of possessing that building they had an interest in: Here Is a
prospect excells all other, here is the Royalty of sight. He does not say our
Opinion is, we shall have; but noting the certainty, considering the Principles
of Faith, on which He did proceed; taking in others with himself, says He, as
confidently as if it had been a thing known by a Mathematical demonstration,
[we know we have] which is as certain, as if we were in posession of, an
Heavenly habitation. Our Apostle also has the same word Originaly, refering to
future retribution, concerning Servants as well as Masters Col. 3.24. (...).
Knowing that of the Lord ye shall receive the reward of the inheritance: and
that ye also have a Master in Heaven. Here He asserts Believers assurance of an
interest in that state, by the earnest desires after it, which are wrought in
their Hearts, by the Holy Spirit.

Having (with what convenient brevity I could) Explained the words, I might
easily from the Context, the Contexture of the words themselves, and the
Particular Materials merion'd under each part, commend unto you very many
Observations. But I shall only pitch upon Three. viz. Two from the Twofold
State, and one from the Act of St Paul and other Believers.

Our estate in the Body, is Corruptable, Mutable and Dissolvable.

Even believers here in this life, do stay but a while in an earthly
tabernacle, which must be pulled in pieces; We see this is evident from the
first Prospect, that the Apostle gives us of his own, and others Condition in
this present World, being common with all Men: David would have it very
seriously thought on by us, that, Verily every Man at his best State is
altogether Vanity; and therefore He prays for himself, as every one of us
should do, not in impatiency, but with piety, Lord make me to know mine end,
and the Measure of my days, what it is: that I may know how frail I am Ps^. 9.
. i.e. Practically to Consider the days of our Pilgrimage, and our fleeting
condition, as good old Jacob did; and Eliphaz told Job, that these houses of
Clay are destroyed, or beaten to pieces, from Morning to Evening, and so perish
without any regarding Job 4.19, 20
. Oh! that we were persuaded now to regard it. But I am afraid too many even
whiles I am treating upon this Theme, are saying in their Hearts, this is
nothing but an old beaten Subject, we have often heard of: and slight the
benefit they might gain by a Practical Consideration of this necessary point.

Which is so clearly evident from Experience, and the Epithets given to Man's
life,

1. From most ample Experience, for above 5000 years published by all sorts of
Men who have Complained of their weak Constitution, and Helpless Condition, And
no Contribution of Creatures could free them from Disolution

1. Their meak Constitution, we have had Scriptural Experience already
attesting; and might produce many more insances, that in our whole frame, and
every bodily part, ve are Corruptible, Variable, and Disolvable. The Building
cannot be stable and durable, if all the Materials be roten and perishable: and
therefore says Job Job 6.11.
, What is my strength that I should hope? and what is mine end, that I should
prolong my Life? And elsewhere (...) 17.1^
, I have said to Corruption, Thou art my father: to the Worm, Thou art my
mother, and my sister. And where is now my hope. Alas! Man is but a piece of
brittle Earth nearly made up, Terra fri^ bilis.
that is ready continually to crumble in pieces and moulder away. Yea and by
reason of the union, since the poison of Sin has spread it self into every
part and faculty, even the Soul and Spirit suffers whilst it stays in this
House, by reason of it is Crasiness: and when the Soul has left this House,
then the strewing of the most Fragrant Flowers, will not long countervail the
noisome scent of its Corruption, and notwithstanding the sweetest Embalmings,
the Coffin wherein it is laid, is lined with an unsavory Corpse.

2. Experience further acquaints us with Men's Complaints of their Helpless
Condition, showing that they have no strength to support their Tottering House;
but every little thing does not only trouble them in it, but also turn them out
of it. Man that is born of a Woman is of few days and full of Trouble (...).
14.1.
. Every thing disturbs him, and dissorders him. The Fire, the Air, the Wind,
the Lightning, the Water, the Smoke, the Dust of the Earth, a Fly, a little
Stone generated within our own Bowels, our Meat, our Drink, our Physic, our
Passions, our Griet, our Joy, our Fear, etc. May introduce Death and lead us to
our Graves, as they have done many before they were aware. Two fits of an Ague
could dissolve Tamerlane, when they shak'd him to Death in the midst of his
great hopes and greatest Power, when he was preparing for the utter rooting out
of the Ottoman family, and the Conquest of the Grecian Empire. The most Jolly
and sprightful Commander is soon sent away, if God do but change his
Countenance Job. 14.20.
. Again

3. no Contribution of Creatures could free Men from their Dissolution; No
shift can secure us from Deaths Arrest unto Judgment. The Confluence of all
those things, we are apt so much to desire, yield but small comfort, nay some
times they prove Crosses. Alas! What can all the Profits, Preferments,
Pleasures, Privileges of this World avail to the support of this Earthly
House, one day beyond it is appointed time? All they who run Toyling, Sweating,
Contriving, and wearing out their Life, with Labor, in their grand Inquest
after these things: and so making themselves more Miserable out of fear of
Misery, will one day Subscribe to the truth on the Tomb of Sardanapalus, who is
said to have one hand in posture of Filliping, reaching forth with this Motto,
Omnia nec tanti. All is not worth a Fillip. What profit has a Man of all his
Labor which he takes under the Sun Eccles. 1.3.
. Thus we see the evidence of the point from Experience.

From the Epithets given to Man's Life, both in Scripture and Humane Story, the
point is further evident. In Scripture, What is your Life, but a Vapor that
appears a little time and Vanishes away, Jam. 4.4.
look in other places, and what is it? But a Shadow, a Flood, a Flower, a Watch
in the Night, a Race, a Cloud, a Tale that is told, a Bird flying, a Ship
sailing, a Pilgrimage, (...).
a Fight, a Smoke, a Sleep, (Yea) a Dream, a Vain-Shew. In Humane Story, says
Pindar, Man is but the dream of Shadow, and Ulisses in Sophocles, While we
live, we are but mere Images, or a vain, inconstant shadow. says Lipsuis in
his own Epitaph, shall I deal plainly with you; All Humane things (not Learning
Excepted) are mere Smoke, shaddows, Vanity, or in short Nothings. I need not
add any more for Evidence, only a little for Inference.

To see what mistaken apprehensions they have, who look for full Content in the
Body. Thereby misplacing their affections, in suffering them to run out most,
upon those things which appertain to this tabernacle. Alas! how many, even
Professors of Godliness, who say they have here no Continuing City: yet since
their Conversation is so much below their Profession, they show that it is
plain in their Practical judgments, they are Terrae filij, Sons of the Earth,
Citizens of the World, and Terrae Filiae, Daughters of the Earth, now raising
Puffie Pyramids on their heads, after the manner of Egypt. They mind Earthly
things, They set their affections chiefly, if not only, upon their house of
this Tabernacle. They really prefer the Material, to the Spiritual Building.
They indeed (with the Sensual Israelites) prefer Egypt to Canaan, And in their
heart approve that Profane Cardinals saying, who affirmed, He would not give
his part in Paris, for his part in Paradise. I may appeal to what is written
with legible Characters in many of your own Consciences for the proof of this
Inference. But let the Heathen Moralist, Seneca Major sum and ad majora
genitus, quam ut mancipium sim corporis mei.
take us off saying. I am greater, and born to far greater things, than to be a
Slave to my Body. Let us I beseech you, for the Future, If we may be here any
longer, not dote upon this perishing state: But remember always, whiles we
blame Esau for prefering a Mess of Pottag above his Birthright; we do Condemn
our selves, in setting our hearts upon these Earthly Tabernacles, and prefering
of them to the Heavenly. And therefore Learn

2. To deaden our affections to the very best of these Transitory things.
Let Us not be discontented and immoderately afflicted, when we see any of our
Friends Tabernacles are loosed and taken down. Lay no claim to an abiding place
in this present World: Neither we nor our Friends have here any settled
Mansions; but only fleeting Tabernacles. And therefore, (though we ought to be
sensible of the departure of our Friends) Let Us not think our selves undon,
when we see them taken in pieces. And as we should not place our Contentment in
our present state; So neither should we be discontented, when we find our
Friends to be removed out of it. Let Us therefore change our opinion concerning
these outward things, which we are apt to over rate, see them as indeed they
are, Empty, Unsatissing, and Changeable; and then we shall not cry and whine
like Children without understanding; or as Heathens without hopes; either when
we loose them, or when we must leave them; If then we be true Believers, who
pass out of this Changeable, into an Unchangeable state. which leads me to

A Second Observation. That a future State of a Believer is of God, Excellent,
and Eternal in the Heavens.

When the Soul of a Sincere Servant of God, is loosed from this frail
Tabernacle, it enters into the Palace of Glory, there to remain in that
Blessed State for ever. Holy Saints leaving the Body, they do in a Spiritual
sense, take the Wings of a Dove, sly away and are at rest. No sooner
unclothed, but clothed upon, Mortality being swallowed of Life, Rev. 19.8.
with v. 3, 4.
In the beauties of Holiness, the Souls of the Saints departed, are Gloriously
clothed with long white Robes, which is the righteousness of the Saints here
in their Pilgrimage, God guides them with his Counsel and afterward receives
them to Glory. Psalm 73.24.


The time will not permit me (so far as the Scripture reveals) to give you a
Prospect of this fair Building in its several parts: otherwise I might in
several particulars Illustrate the nature of this Blessed State, which is a
very large and a pleasant Subject. For I might show (1) How this Building is
most Commodiously seated, in the Continent of Complete Hapiness, the Kingdom of
Heaven, which was before the Earth was framed, in a City that has Foundations,
whose builder and maker is God. Heb. 11.10.
(2) How the Lord Jesus Christ does receive the Spirit of the Believer as he
did Stephens, upon the dissolution of this Earthly Tabernacle. (3) How He does
not only dissintangle it from all bodily infirmities, but free it from all
Clouds of Errors and misshapprehensions. And then (4) How He does actually
possess it of that Mansion, where there is the absence of all Evil, and the
presence of all good, the Cessation of Misery, and the Collation of Felicity, a
Glorious Harmony of Proportions, which take all that see it, and enter into it.
Then (5) How He does lead and conjoyn the Soul to the Blessed Society, of an
Innumerble Company of Holy Angels and the Spirits of just Men made perfect Heb.
12.22, 23.
. And then (6) How He does with that Glorious Society, in this most bright and
beautiful Posession give it the enjoyment of the Beatificat Vision. And lastly,
which is the completing Glory of these Glories, How He will reunite it again,
to its own Body Spiritualized and Glorified, and own it as a King at the great
Coronation Day, before all the World. But I must content my self only to name
things, that thereby I may quicken your Souls, when you retire into your
Closets this Evening, to contemplate upon them. Believe it! This is a most
suitable Exercise after a Discourse at a Funeral: And if you neglect Meditation
upon such things as these, when you have been bringing your beloved Friend to
his long Home; I fear, the next day, if God should call you to a Reckoning, you
will be able to give but a poor account of the Lesson that God reads to you
from the Spectacle before your Eyes, nor from the Sermon that comes to your
Ears, tho it should have been preached to you by an Angel.

For the Confirmation of the Point, That the believing Soul passes out of the
Body into Glory, I might produce several Arguments, yet I shall but briefly
suggest these Three. From the Verity of the Promise, Dignity of the Purchase,
Excellency of the Preparation and Provision.


1. Verity of the Promise, made by God who cannot lie. This is the Promise that
he has promised us, even eternal Life 1 John 2.25. Tit. 1.2.
, He assures his Servants, who sincerely follow him, That they shall be no
losers by their Change: An eternal weight of Glory will infinitely overweigh
all their Afflictions, and that they must be sure of upon his Word. Verily
(says he Matt. 19.28, 29.
every one of you who have followed me in the regeneration; that have forsaken
Houses, or Brethren, or Sisters, or Father, or Mother, or Wife, or Children, or
Lands, for my Name Sake, shall receive an hundred Fold, and shall inherit
eternal Life. When they have parted with all they had, then they shall be
received to him to possess all things. Again,

2. From the Dignity of the Purchase. This heavenly Edifice was paid for, with
a Price of no less worth than the Blood of God. This Inheritance of the Saints
in light is incorruptible, and that fades not away, being it is a purchased
Possession Ephesians. 1.14. 1 Pet. 1.4, 19.
, procured by the precious Blood of Christ, (that is the most valuable
Consideration) who being God-Man in one Person, because no other Creature was
able, undertook to be Mediator of the New Testament, that by means of his
Death, for the Redemption of Transgression they which are called might receive
the Inheritance promised Heb. 9.15.
, which is presently, forthwith upon their dissolution Rev. 14.13. (...).
.

3. From the excellency of the preparation and provision which Christ makes
ready against our Dissolution. He orders his Purchase so that People may enjoy
the benefit both by preparing, It for them, and Them for it.


1. By preparing this Building in the New Jerusalem for his Servants. He chears
up his Disciples Mansions, or abiding rooms of rest. If it were not so, I would
have told you (and not have drawn you on with vain Hopes, had not this been
certain) thither I go to prepare a place for you John 14.2, 3.
. Mahomet gulls his silly Followers, who give Credit to him, that they shall
enjoy a Paradise of sensual Pleasures: but Christ is a true Prophet and no
Imposter. The way, the truth and the life. And he is now making this stately
upper Room ready. He is our Advocate with the Father putting in his Plea for
Possession according to the purchase for all those whose Names are put into the
Bill of Sale; so that when they are warned out of these clayie Houses, or
Mud-wall Cottages, wherein they sojourn as Tenants at Will, they may enter into
the Joy of their Lord, who is also providing it for them.

2. By preparing them for this dwelling in his Heavenly Court. For we find the
Apostle Blessing God, that he made those to whom he had designed to give a
Kingdom, meet for the Inheritance of the Saints in light Colos. 1.12.
Christ does not only procure them a Title, but trim them up, and make them
ready with suitable Ornaments of Holiness, for such an heavenly Habitation. He
takes care that they should believe who are ordained to eternal Life Act. 13.48.
and that there be real Grace wrought within their Hearts to fit them for this
Glory in Heaven. For as the learned Davenant in Colos. 1.12.
has well observed from Parisiensis. The Soul of Man how completely soever
enabled with natural Endowments, till it be sanctified with Grace, is not
capable of being received into Glory. But because Christ suits the Soul by
Sanctification thereof, it is evident that the prepared Spirit shall enter into
Glory prepared for it. Thus for Confirmation.

Two Words for Application, The One of Sharpness, Other of Mildness.


1. Of Sharpness, and indeed sadness to those who practically slight this
heavenly Building, prepared for the believing Soul. Oh! foolish People and
unwise. How many are there even in the Church Roll, who never think of, or make
preparation for the fruition of this Blessed State. They do so much employ
their Souls about other Matters, whilst in their Earthly Tabernacles; that they
regard not those Mansions of Bliss, wherein they may abide comfortably in their
State of Separation. Oh! How few do (as they should) consider their future
State, when their Bodies must be Meat for the Worms: they can sit plodding how
they may keep this Shell of the Body whole, but alas! when this is broken and
becomes useless to their Souls for a time, they regard not, how the precious
Pearl, the Soul, may be safely laid up; how the Jewel may be preferred, when
the Carkess of the Body is broken in pieces and trod under foot. They are much
like that Great Lord (of whom likely, on such an occasion we have more than
once been put in mind) who used to go yearly to several Houses he had; but on a
time falling Sick, one of his Servants (whom belike he had accounted none of
the wisest) said to him, Sir, How do you? The Lord answered, Woe is me! Woe is
me! I must go hence. Pray Sir! Said the Servant, Whether go you? his Lord said,
Into another W rld. And will you return? Said the Servant, will you stay there
any long time? Ah! said the Lord, I shall never return again. Said the Servant,
have not you sent your Harbingers before you, to provide you of things
necessary against the time you come there? Then his Lord was silent: whereupon
the Servant said, You have not done wisely. For when you went but a short time
to any of your Country Houses, you used to send before to provide things meet
for your Entertainment: Wherefore it is an unwise part in you, not to make
preparation for that place where you must abide always. Oh! How many lie under
the same guilt that this great Lord did, in laying aside thoughts of this
Heavenly Building, till they come to lie upon their Death Beds. But I beseech
you now we have warning, let none of us be found negligent of an Habitation for
our Souls, eternal in the Heavens; which will be worthy our greatest diligence
to take care of, hence

A word of Mildness, Comfort, Sweetness and Encouragement unto true Believers,
who are making ready; Both in regard of their own Souls; and the Souls of their
Christian Friends.

In regard of themselves, they need not fear but they shall better their state
by death: When the worser part is in the Grave; the better, the Soul, will be
there where it cannot but delight to dwell: The Spirit shall return to God that
gave it. As the Historian I. Florus ut consanguinea civitas, etc.
said of Alba, that the Walls of the City were Demolished; but the Inhabitants
carried to Rome, that a City of the same Blood might not be altogether
extinguished, but be reimbodyed into that State, from which it had its
Original: So we may say of the Saints; though their Tabernacles be dissolved:
Yet their Souls, shall be enstated in Glory, that they may not be extinct, but
received unto Christ, by whose Spirit they are begotten to this lively hope.
Upon which consideration it was, that Jubentius and Maximinus, called Death the
laying off the Garments of their Flesh; but a kind of undressing them for sleep.

In regard of their Christian Friends; Believers when they see any of their
near Relatives, depart from this Tabernacle, wherein they served their
Generation according to the Will of God, they have no reason to sorrow as those
without hope, for their Souls are only gone to dwell with Jesus in the Building
of God not made with hands. Death does but carry the Souls of your Friends, who
are espoused here by faith unto their Bridgroom Christ, into the Bride Chamber
in Heaven: Where the Nuptial Feast is solemnized. And therefore Bishop Ridley
(when he was to dye by suffering of Martyrdoom) said to some of his Friends,
that he would have them come to see him, the next day, to rejoice with him, for
he was going to his Wedding. Be not dejected then that any of your godly
Friends have left you; since their Souls are gone into the embraces of Christ.
But rather make you sure of an interest there, where they are: for

Observation arising from the Text, (which I crave your leave to touch upon) is
this.

That a Believer may be assured his Soul shall go to Heaven, when he departs
hence. He may know when his Soul and Body are dissolved, his Soul shall dwell
with Christ in a Mansion of Glory. [We know] faith beleving Paul, that [ we
have a Building, etc. He and other Believers with him were certain of it. I did
clear this in the Explication, to be the meaning of the Expressions [we know we
have.]

Many Proofs might be alleged, I shall only name one; and that is in the
Epistle to the Hebrews Heb. 10.34.
Believers are there brought in yiedling to suffering, upon this very Ground,
they are in my Text strengthened to bear the Cross, viz. Knowing in your
selves, that ye have in Heaven a better and an enduring substance, i. e. Having
assurance of fullness of joy at Gods right hand, they joyfully parted with all
that did appertain to their Earthly House of this Tabernacle. They know that as
Persecution did bring Death in one hand, so it did bring Life in the other. The
Doctrine is naturally deducible from my Text, and others parallel to it, by an
Argument Ab Esse; ad Posse. Many Believers have been assured of their Souls
welfare in Heaven, in a state of separation upon their dissolution; upon their
absence from the Body, that they should be present with the Lord. And therefore
Believers may come to know certainly they shall be saved. Certitudo scribilis
scientis.

And that not only with the certainty of the Object; but of the Subject: By a
reflex Act of the Soul, the Believer may attain to such a full persuasion, that
his Soul in particular, shall undoubtedly pass out of the Body, into this
Building of God not made with hands eternal in the Heavens.

The very Reasons of the former Doctrine drawn from Christ's promise, his
purchase, and preparation of Heaven for Believers, may also be a Ground of
this. So that a Believer may by the Testimony of the holy Spirit, and internal
Sense, be able to assume, that he is a Believer: And so to infer, that he has
a sure Title, and evidence to the eternal inheritance, he shall be possessed of
at death. I might produce other Arguments from the comforts of the Spirit,
especially in sealing Ordinances; as also from the Prayer of Christ, that
Believers may be where he is: And from the precepts to examine our selves, and
to give all diligence to get assurance; as also from the nature of truly
Christian hope, which lies in the expectation of a certain good: For in that it
does transcend all the hope mere Moralists do talk of; the imutability of Gods
promise as confirmed by his Oath, that we might heave strong consolation who
have fled for Refuge unto the Hope-set before us, which hope we have as an
Anchor of the Soul, both sure and steadfast, and which enters into that within
the Vail Heb. 6.18, 19.
But your patience (I fear) already wearyed, forbids me the Enlargement of
these particulars, more fully to confirm this point.

Whence, by way of Improvement I might take occasion to refute the Opposers of
this Doctrine. And also infer some Corollaries; but I shall conclude only with
A short Information, and Exhortation.


Information of the judgment, to prevent practical mistakes, give me leave in
two Words.

Though a sincere Believer may know his future happy state: Yet we must not
thence conclude the formal nature of saving faith abstrastly considered lies in
Assurance. Faith indeed requires Consent, as well as Assent? Yet Assurance is
not the first vital Act of the Believing Soul: But that (as a judicious Writer
Notes Dr. Ames exfide Emana^e.
) which does flow forth from that faith; when the Soul does by a noble
Operation reflect upon it self, Faith that's the root, and this certain
knowledge (as one says Culver^ w^ll Flos fi^e^.
is the Flower, the very iustro, and eminency of Faith. Assurance is the top
Branch, the flourishing of Faith, Faith with a gloss upon it. Again.

2. Though a true Believer may; yet every Believer does not actually attain a
certain knowledge of his Souls safety in a state of glory. Some sincere
Converts walk in the dark, and see no light. The Sun of Righteousness is
Eclypsed from them: They are so far from an undoubted knowledge, that as to
their own sense, they may look upon themselves as lost; though God knows all
this while that they are his, and that he will infallibly bring them to dwell
for ever with him, in this stately Building in the new Jerusalem; however for
ends best known to himself, he may at present hide the steadfast sight of joy
and comfort from them, and not let them know their Privilege, till they be
possessed of Glory. Here for a better understanding of this matter we might
distinguish of, A double certainty, of Adherence Evidence.


(1.) Of Adherence, or affiance; which is when the Soul does by a more direct
Act of Faith, divolve or throw it self on God, and by self resignation
adventure on him, as the only helper, able to save to the uttermost. Resolving
to fix there, saying if I perish, I perish.

(2.) Of Evidence, or undoubted stedfastness, arising from a certain Spiritual
Sense; whereby the Soul in reflecting on it self, comes not only to stay it
self on God, but from sweet Supplies of Peace and Comfort, to be fully
persuaded of a real Union to Christ. We may find Holy Job in both these several
degrees, at several times, one time in the dark, yet then he adheres to God
with humble Confidence. Though he slay me yet will I trust in him. Another time
he has Evidence I know my Redeemer lives, and with these Eyes I shall see him.
In the former direct act of Faith, he overcomes the Temptation; in the latter
reflex Act, he is more than a Conqueror, in the former he was so certain that
he resolved to trust God; in the latter he could Triumph in him. So that though
he was discouraged, yet he saw he was not disinherited; but his Title was
confirmed. Thus for Information of the Judgment to prevent mistakes.

For Exhortation, to persuade and stir us up first to get a sure Title to the
Inheritance of the Saints in Light; and then to get it sealed. First, to get a
Fiat or Grant, then an Obsignation. Oh! Christians adhere to Christ, and then
give all diligence to get an assurance of his Purchase, upon good grounds.
Alas! How many in our Times, have built upon cracked Titles in Temporals, as if
all had been sure, that proved otherwise. But I fear more build upon Sandy
Foundations in Spirituals. They apply themselves to such keepers of the Seal,
as the King of Righteousness has not awarranted, taking Presumptions for
Evidences. And if so, when these Tabernacles are dissolved they shall not have
their Souls received into the King of Heavens Mansions, made without hands. No
Key will open this Door into this heavenly Building, but one of Gods own making.

It would be proper here to propose some Marks, Motives and Means.

1. Marks to try our Titles; for the Heart is very deceitful. But if the
Tabernacles of our Bodies be dissolved, and we have only pleased our selves,
with shadows of an imaginary Happiness: what will become of us? Wherefore to be
short and plain with thee, who would indeed come to a certainty. If thy Gospel
Obedience (which is not perfect, nor can be in this Life) be not sincere,
universal and constant, I dare not sav thou have a good Title to the building
of God, not made with hands, if thou be not dead (at least in thy predominant
desire) to Sin, I dare not assure thee (how Godly soever thou art reputed to
be) that thou have a Life hid with Christ in God. It has been argued amongst
some, whether Land did belong to England or Ireland by putting Toads and Addors
into it; If they dyed then it was held to belong to Ireland (whose Men be sure
are of a more viporous and biting Brood) if they lived then to England: so if
Sin be alive and reign in thy Soul, then it is a Native, arguing a Child of
Wrath: but if it be dead, then it argues thou art a Child of Light, and that
thou art an Inhabitant belonging to Heaven.

2. For Motives to quicken us up to get evidence of our spiritual Title,
consider the future good Estate of thy Soul, is far to be valued above
assurance of an Estate for thy Body: and yet thou can scarce trust part of
that at Sea, for fear of a Storm, without some Evidence for Security sealed at
the Ensurance Office. Yet assurance of Heaven would free us, as from many
distracting worldly Cares; so from many Jars and Divisions here. It would
compose us to a Settlement, were our Hearts established with Grace: It would
sweeten our present Conditions to us, secure us from the Worlds Frowns, convert
our Crosses into Comforts. It would work that which the most Artificial
Operator in Chemistry cannot do: else why should Noy the Martyr say when he
kissed the Stake, Blessed be the time that ever I was born for this day. Then
turning to his fellow Martyrs, we shall not lose our Lives in this Fire; but
change them for a better, and have Pearls for Coals, etc.

3. For means or helps to get assurance, take a few Directions, which I must
crowd together and cast amongst you, some Memories may catch one Sentence and
some another. Consider seriously the worth of thine immortal Soul, surpassing
the whole World; Trade first and most for that precious Jewel, with a diligent
Enquiry after the safety of it. Be frequent in Heart-examination and
Self-reflection. Review often the Experiences thou have had of God, yet not
resting in them, but still putting forth direct Acts of Faith. Vigorously exert
thy Faith in fervent Supplications and Praises. Study Self-denial; and get a
willing resignation of thy self and Concerns to the will God, who dispenses
these Royal Favors of Assurance for the most part only to some of his Eminent
Servants. Observe carefully the Seasons of the Spirits Motions for Sealing, and
defer not to close with them. Keep thy self clean from gross Pollutions. Shun
the appearance of Evil. And Lastly, follow hard after Communion with God in all
his Ordinances.

The careful observance of such Directions as these and the like, was the usual
Course of our Learned, Prudent, and Godly Brother deceased, Mr. Henry Hurst;
for whose Funeral Solemnity we are here met at this time. I have been
importuned to entertain you with a Discourse (such an one as I can) on this
mournful Occasion: And you are come, I know, with greedy Ears, (as well as some
of you) with weeping Eyes, as from the Word of God; which I have hitherto
treated on for your Edification; so to hear somewhat upon this doleful Subject,
this faithful Minister of Christ, whose Remains we are about to lay up for a
blessed Resurrection. The little I am able to say at this time shall be upon
good Grounds, having been not less than Thirty Years familiarly acquainted with
him, near half the time of his stay in this Tabernacle. Aged about Eighty five
Years.
He was the Son of the Reverend and Learned Mr. Henry Hurst, Minister of the
Gospel, at Mickleton in Gloucestershire, where he lived to a good old Age,
laboring in the Lords Vineyard there, with great Success, not many Years
since, about Five or Six. This hopeful, and everyway obedient Son, of so
careful and tender a Father, when well ripened for the University in
School-learning, (wherein he did excel the ordinary Rate) was placed in Oxford,
under the inspection of his pious and diligent Tutor, Dr. Henry Wilkinson; who
finding him to make a quick, yet happy, Progress in Philological and
Philosophical Studies, adorned with the real practice of Piety, was heartily
ready to help him to a Fellowship in Merton College; where, being elected into
that Society, as it were tinctured with the Virtues of invincible Ocham,
profound Bradwardin, and Evangelical Wickliff, (all of that Foundation) He soon
became a very notable Disputant. How have I known him, whilst Bachelor of
Arts, with great modesty, yet with equal Dexterrity and Strength, to brandish
his keen Arguments in the Schools, when an Opponent; and to answer with
Judgment quickly and distinctly, when Respondent, with much Applause, at the
coursing Exercises, as they were then called. In a while after (now somewhat
above Thirty Years ago) he was singularly noted for his Solid and Orthodox
Sermons before the whole University; Three of which (from Romans Chap. 7. verse
7. the latter part) cutting the very Sinews of Pelagius and Socinus in some of
their Doctrines; He was desired to Print under the Title of [The Natural Man's
Blindness.] Oxford 1659.
In an Epistle to the Reader of which, the Doctor his Tutor writes there, That
the Author ( viz. our deceased Friend, who has grown much since in Learning,
and all that is really Praiseworthy) was sufficiently known to him, and many
others, to be a Godly, Learned, and Orthodox Divine; who through his Modesty,
and low Opinion of himself, denied, for a long time, his Consent to the making
of those Sermons of public use, and had suppressed them altogether; but that
through importunity he was prevailed with. This, with the great Esteem he had
in the University; the freedom of Speech he used in preaching, and his holy and
exemplary Life, occasioned his being chosen by the majority of the Parishoners
Votes, to be Rector of Matthew's, Friday-street London, notwithstanding the
Fame of the then Candidates, one of which was the present Bishop of
Londonderry. There it was, being in the Neighborhood to the place where I was
then employed, that I renewed mine Acquaintance with him; whom I ever found to
be one of very great Humility and Affability, of an excellent natural Temper,
and great Moderation, very Ingenuous and Judicious, most ready to communicate
his Thoughts upon due Deliberation in a friendly way whenever desired, being
acted by an unfeigned Principle of Love to Christ and Christians, affording
Relief and prudent Advice to some, in some pusling, yet practical Cases,
wherein several of our Brethren in the Ministry have often met with pertinent
and solid Resolutions; the consideration of loosing an Advantage in the like,
for future, may now sadly accent our Griess. One Case he was called to state
and resolve publicly, in the Morning Exercise at Cripple-Gate 1661. Whether
well composed Religious Vows do not exceedingly promote Religion? from Psalm.
116.12, 14. But the Year after, notwithstanding his Moderation, (after solemn
seeking of God by Prayer, with Fasting) because he could not declare his Assent
and Consent to all and every thing contained in the Liturgy, he was,
Bartholomew-tide ejected (with Two thousand more of his Brethren) from his
Benefice, and the Exercise of his public Ministry; which latter, yet he would
tell his Friends, he lived in Hopes some time again, in some Respects to be
restored to. In the mean time he took all Opportunities, because a Necessity
was laid upon him to preach the Gospel; to do what he could for the good of
Souls, both more privately and publicly. For to say nothing of his Treatise
afterward printed, called The Revival of Grace, with the Vigor and Fragrancy
of it. Showing the Benefit of Sacramental Communion, April 1678.
dedicated to the very Learned, the Right Honorable Arthur Earl of Anlglesey,
in whose Family he had an opportunity of exercising his Ministry, as being then
his well esteemed Chaplain. He had several Invitations amongst them, who well
knew his moderation and Worth, to preach several times publicly in his Native
Country (where none informed against him) as well as at Ashford in Kent, when
he went thither to visit the Relations of his former Wife. And when there was
an Indulgence of Liberty, Popery, very learnedly, after his usual manner, show
from Acts 26.2. That Kings and Emperors are not rightful Subjects to the Pope.
After that, he being one not likeing to flatter, or be flattered, we find him
better enabled to give a Satisfactory Answer to that practical Question. How
may we best cure the Love of being flattered? October 1682.
which he did well perform at the continuation of the morning Exercise, * in
his Sermon upon Proverbs 26.28. Since in October last, resolving practically:
How may we enquire after News, not as Athenians, but as Christians, for the
better managing our Prayers and our Praises for the Church of God? From Acts.
17.21. In his Funeral Discourse in this Month Thirteen Years ago, upon the
departure of that useful Minister Mr. Thomas Cawton (who had done much work in
a little time) may be seen, what a Pattern he set before his Hearers, from Luke
12.43. Besure he was ever ready to do good, and unwilling to decline any
Service that lay in his Power, when invited to it. His judicious Annotations
upon Exekiel and the Twelve lesser Prophets (in the Continuation of Mr.
Poole's) were so well approved, That he was desired since, to take some further
pains of that Nature, about some other parts of the Holy Writ: But God has
eased him of that Work he was almost prevailed with to undertake, as well as of
what he was urged to perform at Oxford, you who were his constant hearers, will
all bear witness, he was in Labors more abundant. 2. Cor. 11.23.
Besides his weekly Lectures at High-gate, you can very well tell in all his
Ministerial Offices, what pains he took amongst you, and how affectionately
solicitous he was to bring your young Ones to the knowledge of God, by his
diligent Catechizing of them, and in a most clear and profitable Method,
explaining to them the main Principles of Christianity. Till the last Lords Day
April. 13. 1690. Heb. 11.6.
God who is a Rewarder of those who diligently seek him (n) was pleased to give
him a Quietus est, the next morning taking him from his Work to receive his
Wages, advancing him from the Pulpit to the Throne, April. 14.
as he did the laborious Bishop Jewel (who was first of the same Merton
College in Oxford) in somewhat alike manner; from preaching at Lacock in
Wilshire; (now near an hundred and twenty Years since) who had said to a
Gentleman diswading him from Preaching then, It did best become a Bishop to dye
Preaching (or standing) in the Pulpit, seriously thinking of that comfortable
Elogy of his Lord and Master (which you heard our Preacher chose for his Text
at the interment of Mr. Cawton) Happy art thou my Servant if when I come I find
thee doing. An Ingenious Poet of our own, said in his Jambicks of the excellent
Mr. Vines, who went to his eternal Rest the Night after his Preaching and
Administering the Lords Supper. Abit, The beginning of Mar. 1655.
(beata Mors!) Modis oper^et hisce Episcopum mori. And another then, to the
same purpose, in our Mother Tongue wrote also.

Our English Luther, Such Poetry was in fashion then, in memory of Eminent
Persons of all Persuasions. Pray bear with it now.
Vines (whose Death I weep)
Stole away (and said nothing) in a sleep:
Sweet like a Swan, he Preached that day he went,
And for his Cordial, took a Sacrament.
Had it but been suspected -- he would dye,
His People sure had stopped him with a cry.
But his Hour was then come; and so was that of the famous Mr. Hollingworth at
Manchester, who when at a Fast in Praying and Preaching he had as far outdone
himself that day as he used to out do other Ministers, changed his Habitation
here, for a better (having done his Work) upon the irresistible struck of a
deadly Apoplexy. So was that (as I have heard) of the holy Mr. Ambrose. So that
of the laborious and much followed Mr. Watson, and we know lately of our
Brother Mr. Oaks, carried out of the Pulpit: As was the Learned and Pious
Professor Dr. Joshua Hoyl out of the University Pulpit in Oxford; And so was
that of this our lamented Brother. Else. When upon the warning given by his
faltering in his Discourse; The Sun (in Solomon's Phrase) Eccles. 12.2.
began to be darkened toward five of the Clock the last Lords Day Afternoon,
in his Sermon after his long and excellent Catechizing, and he was carried in a
Chair to the House of his tender and hospitable Entertainer, where his other
faithful Friends and Physician shortly gave their attendance, and with the
greatest Diligence and Art used the various Means that are accounted most
proper and successful in such Symptoms: Yet the darkness so increased, that by
Nine of the Clock that Night it brought a Total Eclipse, an Universal Paralysis
or Dead Palsy. And (as it is thought) the Pia matter, as the Ancients did
reverentially call that inmost Membrane or Skin, which as Leaf-gold does
enclose the Brain and Animal Spirits, snapp'd asunder: this Golden Bowl was
broken Eccles. 12.6.
being overfil'd (it should seem) upon Convulsive Motions with the remaining
gouty Matter (he had before been troubled with) which flowed into it and showed
it self in a Remediles deadly Apoplexy, (...) 9 and 10 in the Morning, Apr. 14.
whereof he expired. If the very utmost and heartiest Endeavors of his skilful
and tenderly affected Doctor of Physic, the most fervent Prayers of his
Reverend and Affectionate Brother in the Ministry Mr. Burges, expressing the
sincere and deep groans of his own, and the Hearts of his loving and sorrowful
People, especially those of his dear Relatives, and his dearly beloved and
compassionate Friends, who with freedom did most kindly entertain him, [as
Gaius did Paul, and the Church] Romans 16.23. Heb. 13.2.
as often before, by friendly receiving him and his; so now, when this good
Angel of the Church left all here below, to be like the Angels of God in Glory,
had prevailed in kind, we had not yet been called to attend his Funeral Pile.

But the will of the Lord is done, and he that e're while went about doing good
in imitation of his and our Lord, walking in the Comforts of the Holy Ghost,
and much assurance of being ever with the Lord: whom he did daily bless for it,
as much as any one I did ever Converse with, has upon little warning (being
ever ready) left his Clayey Tabernacle, and has a glorious Mansion in the
building not made with hands eternal in the Heavens.

What does more concern us all, than that his dear Relatives, we Ministers, and
People, should follow him as close as we can, wherein he was an Eminent
Follower of Christ, who comes at an hour we know not of and bids us therefore
to be ready Mat. 24.44.
.

1. disconsolate Widow and dear Children (so far as capable, and he that's gone
used to say, God best knows the Religion of Children) with other Relatives of
this rare Husband, Father and Friend: I would subjoyn a few words with all
tenderness, to entreat you to moderate your passions. They that are Christ's do
crucify the Flesh and all disorderly affections, Gal. 5.24.
especially when feelingly engaged to be mindful of their own mortality. You
find the Tabernacle of your dearest Relative quickly taken down, but you are
satisfied he has a firm and glorious Building instead of it, which can never
be taken down, where you desire to be. Mourn not then as those who are without
hope 1 These. 4.13.
Though he is gone out of your sight, yet he is but gone to the blessed sight
of God, who would have it so. And therefore you should submit your Wills, to
the Will of his, and your Father. And quietly say, it is the Lord, let him do
what seems him good 1 Samuel 3.18.
When you are apt to fall into excessive sorrow for his dissolution, and
changing his Habitation. I would advise you to think you heard him say, as
Christ did upon his going away to his Disciples John 14.28.
If ye loved me, ye would rejoice, because I said I go to the Father: For my
Father is greater than I. He who has most dignity has most right to chose.
Let not Self-love be so prevalent as to disparage your love to him that is
gone. True love to whom should teach you to submit to that which does advance
and honor him, how cross soever it be to your selves: Call to mind a fresh I
beseech you such directions as he himself whiles he staid here, did give you to
allay immoderate grief in former instances. Be you more Christian now, he whom
you loved most is gone to Christ. The better he was to you, the better be you
to his great Friend, who has locked him up in his Closet with him till the
Resurrection.

2. Ministers in the service of the same Lord, I would say. As the Deceased
whiles here in his Earthly House abounded in the Work of the Lord; so should we
work the work of him that has sent us into his Vineyard while it is day; since
the night comes when no Man can Work Joh. 9.4.
our great business (especially now that we have liberty) is to Preach the
Word, to be instant in Season, and out of Season, Reprove, Rebuke, Exhort, with
all long suffering and Doctrine 2 Timothy 4.2.
Wherein he was both sound and steadfast. A faithful Steward and deligent
Watchman he was, a careful Shepherd, who did truly love Christ, Feed his
Sheep, and feed his Lambs John 21.
which did thrive and grow under the charge of him, Britan. Kent. p. 33.8.
who (according to what Camden said of Whitgist) had devoutly consecrated his
whole Life to God, and all his painful labors to the Church. All of us
Brethren under this Solemn Dedication should be prudent and active, as our
Deceased Brother was in his day, when we are called. (...). But our sufficiency
is of God even as the Lord gives to every Man 2 Cor. 2.16.36. 1 Cor. 3.5, 6, 8
to plant or water in the Vineyard of God, who gave and gives the increase,
and the reward, Lets do what we can prudently, and peaceably, and fervently,
that the Church may thrive under our care. As our dear Brother did; neither
overloving this Life, nor distrusting a better, but freely resign up our selves
and concerns to the disposal of him, in whom we Believe, and whom we Preach,
that our Faith also may be found unto Praise, and Honor and Glory at the
appearing of Jesus Christ. 1 Pet. 1.7.


3. People especially those who were under his peculiar care, I would say. Let
his memory live in you, his sound Doctrine abide with you, his Exemplary
Holiness be Copied out by you, let his edifying discourses, his friendly visits
his goings out, and comings in be much upon your hearts. Be not carried away
with Errors, fall not from your stedfastness. Be perfect, be of good comfort,
be of one mind, live in peace, and the God of Peace shall be with you 2 Cor. 13
11.
. Let it be seen he did not spend his Labor in vain amongst you. When you come
to consider of one to succeed him, to whom you would commit the care of your
Souls, lay aside those animosities that have broken other Congregations, and
endeavor with unanimity in due circumstances, to pitch upon such an one, as
you are persuaded your late worthily Beloved Pastor would have recommended to
you. Let none of you disparage his Reverend Colleague in the Ministry, to whom
he paid a Deference. Give check to dividing Principles; Delay not your
Determination longer than is necessary. As you are to seek God, so you are to
search his Word, and make that the Rule of your Proceedings. I am not well
enough acquainted with your Circumstances to be particular; and have already
staid too long: Only do all as becomes the Gospel of Christ Phil. 1:27.
. Now you are concerned very singularly in this great Affair, to imprint and
publish the Sermons of your deceased Pastor in your Lives, for as Bishop
Reynolds wrote appositely under his own Effigies placed before his Works,
Sermons take not from Men's Applause, Renown,
The Peoples Practice, is the Preachers Crown.


FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
1. AN Historical Account of making the Penal Laws by the Papists against the
Protestants, and by the Protestants against the Papists. Wherein the true
Ground and Reason of making the Laws is given, the Papists most barbarous Usage
of the Protestants here in England, under a Color of Law, set forth; and the
Reformation vindicated from the Imputation of being Cruel and Bloody, unjustly
cast upon it by those of the Romish Communion. By Samuel Black^^ (...)
Barrister of Gray's Inn. Folio.

2. The Lives of (...) Written in Latin by Corn. Nepos: And (...) English by
several Gentlemen in the University ^^^^xon. Large Octavo.

3. The First Fruits of Reason: Or, A Discourse, showing the necessity of
applying our selves betimes to the serious Practice of Religion. By Anthony
Horneck D.D. Preacher at the Savoy. Twelves.

4. A Discourse of Wit. By David Abercromby, M. D. (Twelves.

All Four Printed for John Weld at the Crown between the Two Temple-Gates in
Fleet Street.


