A WARNING TO THE INHABITANTS OF ENGLAND, AND LONDON In particular: For so it
rise often in my Heart to write, even a WARNING, that the Inhabitants might
hear and fear the Judgments of the Lord, that are ready to fall upon this
Nation speedily, unless they Repent of the Evil of their Doings, and Return
from their Iniquities, that God may yet show Mercy upon this poor Nation.

By M. A

Printed in the Year, 1676.

A WARNING to the Inhabitants of England, and London in particular.
OH! consider, I beseech you, how long the Lord has waited upon you in his
Tender Mercy, because he would not have you perish in your Sins, and so your
Souls come to perish eternally. Consider how many Warnings he has sent, and
yet you have not taken Warning; but run on in Sin, Drunkenness, Whoredoms,
Swearing, Cursing, Lying and all manner of Sports and Plays, and spending your
precious Time in Vanity, not considering your End, and the Preciousness of your
Never dying Souls, that must live to all Eternity, either in eternal Bliss and
Happiness, or in Eternal Woe and Misery.

Oh! how has the Lord signified his sore Displeasure against this Nation and
London, in sending forth his Plagues and Pestilence, Sword, Fire (and Famine
has been also threatened) in which Judgments Thousands were cut off? Oh! what
little notice is taken of these things, so as to amend your Lives? Oh! consider
what will be the End of this, if you do not Repent with Speed: Do you not know
your Lives are compared to very small things, even a Bubble in the Water, which
is soon up and soon down; and to a Weaver's Shuttle, that soon is shut; to a
Thread, that is soon snapped assunder. When the Sense of the Shortness of Man
and Woman's Life have been set before me, it has made me tremble, and with
Pity have I beheld what a great Busle Men make to get a little perishing Things
in this World; when all is done, it is but Vanity and a Lie, even all your
Pride, Pomp and Vainglory; and your Souls in this state stand in Danger of
Everlasting Ruin: Oh! that you would consider it well, before the Thread of your
Lives be snapt assunder; and consider the many Sins that are committed in one
day, and such as are of a scarlet dye, as, grievous Oaths, Blasphemies and
Lying is very frequent with many people in their Buying and Selling, which none
can do who abide in the true Fear of God; and it is plainly said in the
Scriptures of Truth. Those who love and make a Lie, shall not enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven: Then what do you think will become of your poor Immortal
Souls, when this Life is ended, and all your Jollatry is at an End? Oh! that
you would but enter into a serious Consideration, and think within your selves,
If God should take away my Life this Night, or this Hour, what will become of
my Soul? We see daily how that many pass away, and do not return again: so it
must be with us, and we cannot resist the Messenger of the Lord. Therefore
hearken to the Voice of the Lord, for thus says the Lord of Hosts, Consider
your Ways; ask, and you shall have; seek, and you shall find; knock, and it
shall be opened unto you: for every one that seeks truly and sincerely,
finds; he that asks, receives; and him that knocks, it shall be opened
unto him: for the Lord gives liberally, and upbraideth not, if thou will but
Repent, and forsake thy Sins, that would ruin thy Soul. Therefore good is the
Lord, who would not have any to perish, but would have all to come unto him,
and be saved: For this End he has sent forth his Servants to preach the
Everlasting Gospel, which is the Power of God, to preserve thee from Sin, if
thou will obey the Motions of his Grace, even in thy Heart, which shows thee
thou should not be drunk, Swear, Lie nor Defraud any, but do to all as thou
would they should do to thee: So this is the Will of the Lord, even our
Sanctification, to be washed in the Water of Regeneration; and he has
promised, They who Repent, and forsake Sin, shall find Mercy. And the Blood of
Christ cleanses from all Sin those who do obey his spiritual Light, which
shi^es in their Hearts, and reproves them for Sin; for without him we can do
nothing. So Life and Death is set before all people, that they may choose Life,
and forsake vain Pleasures and Death; and my Soul's Desire is, that People may
choose Holiness, and live. For, without Holiness none can see the Lord; and if
we cannot see him, how shall we live with him forever? for No Unclean thing can
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: And so, as we turn to the Lord, he will turn
his Judgments from this Nation, which otherwise he has determined to bring
upon this Nation and London, by reason of Sin: For, often I have been waked out
of Sleep with Sorrow and Pain upon my Heart, my Spirit being under a Sense and
Burden because of these things; it lay upon me to declare the Judgments of the
Lord, as it has been signified to me by Visions; and it has laid with very
much weight upon my Spirit, Night and Day concerning these things, That unless
you Repent, the Lord will send yet more Plagues, Sudden Deaths, and other
Miseries, and Great Mortalities. When Jonah warned the King and People of
Nineveh, they did not Beat him, and put him in Prison; but they Repented, and
the Lord beheld it, and he had Mercy, and turned away his Judgments: And so he
will do to this Nation, if you will Repent, and Turn from your Sins, and do the
things that be Just; for the Lord is an All seeing God, you cannot do any Sin
in the secret place but he sees it, whether it be in Thought, Word or Deed. And
thus in Mercy he first sends his Warnings before his Judgments, and if ye will
take Warning, he will send Mercy, and not Judgment; for to that End he sent
forth his Servants, to turn People from Darkness to Light, and from the Power
of Satan to the Power of the Living God.

This by one who has felt great Affliction, but now has obtained Mercy, as I
am brought into the Obedience of the Will of God, M. A.

OH LONDON I once more to thee do speak,
Because thy Pride has made my Heart to ache,
To see thy Pride and eke Abomination,
Which causes the Lord to send such Visitations,
As Plague and Pestilence, Fire and Sword,
Because thou will not hearken to his Word,
Which cut off Thousands in a little time,
Methinks it should not so soon be out of mind;
Also the great Fire, which raged up and down
Throughout the City, till 'twas almost consumed,
That Thousands were left without Habitations;
Oh! do not forget the Lord in such great Visitations:
I must confess the Judgments were very great,
But to what End I to you must relate,
That you should see by those his Visitations
Your horrid Sins and great Abominations.
What Pride and Pleasures are found in this great City,
With Oaths and other great Abominations, which make me pity
To see the Sad and Deplorable State thou art in,
Which will cause the Lord more Plagues on thee to send.
What Sins were found in Sodom and Gomorrah,
Also the Great Cruelty of Pharaoh,
That is not found in this Wicked Generation?
Therefore Repent with speed, lest it prove your Damnation.
M. A.


