A POEM TO HIS MAJESTY. Presented to the LORD KEEPER.

By Mr. ADDISON, of Mag. Coll. Oxon.

LONDON: Printed for Jacob Tonson, at the Judge's-Head near the
Inner-Temple-Gate in Fleetstreet, M DC XCV.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sir John Summers, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal.
IF yet Your Thoughts are loose from State Affairs,
Nor feel the Burden of a Kingdom's Cares;
If yet Your Time and Actions are Your own:
Receive the Present of a Muse unknown.
A Muse that, in Adventurous Numbers, Sings
The Rout of Armies, and the Fall of Kings,
Britain Advanced, and Europe's Peace Restored,
By Sommer's Counsels, and by NASSAU's Sword.
To You, my Lord, these daring Thoughts belong,
Who helped to Raise the Subject of my Song;
To You the Hero of my Verse Reveals
His Great Designs, to You in Council tells
His Inmost Thoughts, determining the Doom
Of Towns Unstorm'd, and Battles yet to come.
And well could You, in Your Immortal Strains,
Describe his Conduct, and Reward his Pains:
But since the State has all Your Cares engrost,
And Poetry in Higher Thoughts is lost,
Attend to what a lesser Muse Indites,
Pardon her Faults, and Countenance her Flights.
On You, my Lord, with anxious Fear I wait,
And from Your Judgment must expect my Fate,
Who, free from Vulgar Passions, are above
Degrading Envy, or Misguided Love;
If You, well-pleased, shall Smile upon my Lays,
Secure of Fame, my Voice I Will boldly Raise,
For next to what You Write, is what You Praise.
To the King.
WHen now the Business of the Field is over,
The Trumpets sleep, and Cannons cease to Roar,
When every dismal Echo is decayed,
And all the Thunder of the Battle laid;
Attend, Auspicious Prince, and let the Muse,
In humble Accents, milder Thoughts infuse.
Others, in bold Prophetic Numbers skilled,
Set Thee in Arms, and led Thee to the Field,
My Muse expecting on the British Strand,
Waits Thy Return, and welcomes Thee to Land:
She often has seen Thee Pressing on the Foe,
When Europe was concerned in every Blow;
But durst not in Heroic Strains rejoice;
The Trumpets, Drums, and Cannons drowned her Voice:
She saw the Boyn run thick with Humane Gore,
And floating Corpse lie beating on the Shore;
She saw Thee climb the Banks, but tried in vain
To Trace her Hero through the dusty Plain,
When through the thick Embattel'd Lines He broke,
Now plunged amidst the Foes, now lost in Clouds of Smoke.
O that some Muse, Renowned sor lofty Verse,
In daring Numbers would Thy Toils rehearse!
Draw Thee Beloved in Peace, and Feared in Wars,
Inured to Noonday Sweats, and Midnight Cares!
But still the God-like Man by some hard Fate,
Receives the Glory of his Toils too late;
Too late the Verse the Mighty Act succeeds,
One Age the Hero, one the Poet breeds.
A Thousand Years in full Succession ran,
E're Virgil raised his Voice, and sung the Man
Who, driven by stress of Fate, such Dangers bore
On stormy Seas, and a disastrous Shore,
Before he settled in the Promised Earth,
And gave the Empire of the World its Birth.
Troy long had found the Grecians bold and fierce,
E're Homer Mustered up their Troops in Verse;
Long had Achilles quelled the Trojans Lust,
And laid the Labor of the Gods in Dust,
Before the Towering Muse began her Flight,
And drew the Hero Raging in the Fight;
Engaged in tented Fields, and rolling Floods,
Or Slaught'ring Mortals, or a Match for Gods.
And here, perhaps, by Fate's unerring Doom,
Some Mighty Bard lies hid in Years to come,
That shall in WILLIAM's God-like Acts engage,
And, with his Battles, warm a Future Age:
Hibernian Fields shall here thy Conquests show,
And Boyn be Sung, when it has ceased to flow;
Here Gallick Labors shall advance Thy Fame,
And here Seneff shall wear another Name.
Our late Posterity, with secret dread,
Shall view thy Battles, and with Pleasure read
How, in the bloody Field, too near advanced,
The guiltless Bullet on Thy Shoulder glanced.
The Race of NASS AUS was by Heaven designed,
To curb the proud Oppressors of Mankind,
To bind the Tyrants of the Earth with Laws,
And Fight in every Injured Nation's Cause;
The World's Great Patriots; they for Justice call,
And as They Favor, Kingdoms Rise or Fall.
Our British Youth, unused to Rough Alarms,
Careless of Fame, and negligent of Arms,
Had long forgot to Meditate the Foe,
And heard unwarm'd the Martial Trumpet blow;
But now, inspired by Thee, with fresh delight,
Their Swords they brandish, and require the Fight,
Renew their Ancient Conquests on the Main,
And Act their Fathers Triumphs over again;
Fire'd, when they hear how Agincourt was strow'd
With Gallic Corpse, and Cressy swam in Blood.
With eager warmth they Fight, Ambitious all
Who first shall storm the Breach, or mount the Wall;
In vain the thronging Enemy by force
Would clear the Ramparts, and repel their course;
They break through all, for WILLIAM leads the way,
Where Fires rage most, and loudest Engines play.
Namure's late Terrors and Destruction show,
What WILLIAM, warmed with just Revenge, can do:
Where once a thousand Turrets raised on high
Their gilded Spires, and glittered in the Sky,
An undistinguished heap of Dust is found,
And all the Pile lies smoking on the ground.
His Toils for no Ignoble Ends designed,
Promote the common Welfare of Mankind;
No wild Ambition moves, but Europe's Fears,
The Cries of Orphans, and the Widows Tears;
Oppressed Religion gives the first Alarms,
And Injured Justice sets him in his Arms;
His Conquests Freedom to the World afford,
And Nations Bless the Labors of His Sword.
Thus when the forming Muse would Copy forth
A perfect Pattern of Heroic Worth,
She sets a Man Triumphant in the Field,
Over Giants cloven down, and Monsters killed,
Reeking in Blood, and smeer'd with dust and sweat,
Whilst Angry Gods conspire to make him Great.
Thy Navy Rides on Seas before unprest,
And strikes a Terror through the Haughty East;
Algiers and Tunis from their sultry shore
With horror heat the British Engines Roar,
Fain from the neighboring dangers would they run,
And wish themselves still nearer to the Sun.
The Gallick Ships are in their Ports confined,
Denied the common use of Sea and Wind,
Nor dare again the British Strength Engage;
Still they remember that destructive Rage
Which lately made their trembling Host retire,
Stunned with the Noise, and wrapped in Smoke and Fire;
The Waves with wide unnumber'd Wrecks were strow'd,
And Planks, and Arms, and Men, promiscuous flowed.
Spain's numerous Fleet that perished on our Coast,
Could scarce a longer Line of Battle boast,
The Winds could hardly drive 'em to their Fate,
And all the Ocean labored with the weight.
Where-e're the Waves in restless Errors roll,
The Sea lies open now to either Pole:
Now may we safely use the Northern Gales,
And in the Polar Circle spread our Sails;
Or deep in Southern Climes, secure from Wars,
New Lands explore, and sail by other Stars;
Fetch uncontrolled each Labor of the Sun,
And make the Product of the World our own.
At length, Proud Prince, Ambitious Lewis, cease
To plague Mankind, and trouble Europe's Peace;
Think on the Structures which thy Pride has rase't,
On Towns unpeopled, and on Fields laid waste;
Think on the heaps of Corpse, and streams of Blood,
On every guilty Plain, and purple Flood
Thy Arms have made, and cease an impious War,
Nor waste the Lives entrusted to thy Care:
Or if no milder Thought can calm thy Mind,
Behold the great Avenger of Mankind,
See mighty NASSAU through the Battle ride,
And see thy Subjects gasping by his side:
Fain would the pious Prince refuse the Allarm,
Fain would he check the Fury of his Arm;
But when thy Cruelties his Thoughts engage,
The Hero kindles with becoming Rage,
Then Countries stolen, and Captives unrestor'd,
Give strength to every Blow, and edge his Sword;
Behold with what resistless Force he falls
On Towns besieged, and thunders at thy Walls!
Ask Villeroy, for Villeroy beheld
The Town surrendered, and the Treaty sealed;
With what amazing strength the Forts were won,
Whilst the whole Power of France stood looking on.
But stop not here, behold where Berkley stands,
And executes his injured King's Commands;
Around thy Coast his bursting Bombs he pours
On flaming Cittadels, and falling Towers;
With hizzing streams of Fire the Air they streak,
And hurl Destruction round 'em where they break;
The Skies with long ascending Flames are bright,
And all the Sea reflects a quivering Light.
Thus Aetna, when in fierce Eruptions broke,
Fills Heaven with Ashes, and the Earth with Smoke;
Here Crags of broken Rocks are twirl'd on high,
Here molten Stones and scattered Cindars fly,
Its Fury reaches the remotest Coast,
And strows the Asiatick Shore with Dust.
Now does the Sailor from the neighboring Main
Look after Gallick Towns and Forts in vain,
No more his wonted Marks he can descry,
But sees a long unmeasured Ruin lie;
Whilst, pointing to the naked Coast, he shows
His wondering Mates where Towns and Steeples rose,
Where crowded Citizens he lately viewed,
And singles out the place where once St. Maloes stood.
Here Russel's Actions should my Muse require;
And would my strength but second my desire,
I Would all his boundless Bravery rehearse,
And draw his Cannons thundering in my Verse:
High on the Deck should the Great Leader stand,
Wrath in his Look, and Lightning in his Hand;
Like Homer's Hector when he flung his Fire
Amidst a thousand Ships, and made all Greece retire.
But who can run the British Triumphs over,
And count the Flames dispersed on every Shore?
Who can describe the scattered Victory,
And draw the Reader on from Sea to Sea?
Else who could Ormond's God-like Acts refuse,
Ormond the Theme of every Oxford Muse?
Fain would I here his Mighty Worth Proclaim;
Attend him in the Noble Chase of Fame,
Through all the Noise and Hurry of the Fight;
Observe each blow, and keep him still in sight.
Oh, did our British Peers thus Court Renown,
And Grace the Coats, their Great Forefathers won!
Our Arms would then Triumphantly advance,
Nor Henry be the Last that Conquered France.
What might not England hope if such abroad,
Purchased their Country's Honor with their Blood:
When such, detained at home, support our State
In WILLIAM's stead, and bear a Kingdom's Weight,
The Schemes of Gallick Policy o're-throw,
And blast the Councils of the common Foe;
Direct our Armies, and distribute Right,
And render our MARIA's loss more light.
But stop, my Muse, the ungrateful Sound forbear,
MARIA's Name still wounds each British Ear:
Each British Heart MARIA still does Wound,
And Tears burst out unbidden at the Sound;
MARIA still our rising Mirth destroys,
Darkens our Triumphs, and forbids our Joys.
But see, at length, the British Ships appear!
Our NASSAU comes! And as his Fleet draws near,
The rising Masts advance, the Sails grow white,
And all the Pompous Navy floats in sight.
Come, mighty Prince, desired of Britain, come!
May Heaven's Propitious Gales attend Thee home!
Come, and let longing Crowds behold that look,
Which such Confusion and Amazement struck
Through Gallick Hosts: But, Oh! let us descrie
Mirth in thy Brow, and Pleasure in thy Eye;
Let nothing dreadful in thy Face be found,
But for a while forget the Trumpet's Sound;
Well-pleased, thy Peoples Loyalty approve,
Accept their Duty, and Enjoy their Love.
For as when lately moved with fierce delight,
You plunged amidst the Tumult of the Fight,
Whole heaps of Death encompas'd you around,
And Steeds o're-turn'd lay Foaming on the Ground:
So Crowned with Laurels now, where-e're you go,
Around you Blooming Joys, and peaceful Blessings flow.
FINIS.

