Dr. ABBADIE's PANEGYRIC On the QUEEN.

A PANEGYRIC On our late Sovereign Lady MARY QUEEN of ENGLAND, SCOTLAND,
FRANCE, and IRELAND, Of Glorious and Immortal MEMORY.

Who Died at Kensington, on the 28th. of December, 1694.

By JAMES ABBADIE, D. D. Minister of the Savoy.

LONDON, Printed for Hugh Newman, at the Grasshopper in the Poultry, MDCXCV.

A PANEGYRIC On our late Sovereign Lady MARY QUEEN of ENGLAND, etc.
IN vain the grateful World strives to eternize the Memory of Heroes, in vain
their Names and Titles are entrusted to Marble and Brass, which Time will
quickly deface, in vain are all the artful Endeavors of Painters and Sculptors
to give them a shadow of Life in spite of Death, by a lasting Representation of
that which is no more, if we do not labor to revive the Spirit that animated
them, and to immortalize their Glory by a careful imitation of their Actions.

Such an Elogy as this is only worthy of MARY, a Princess in whom all the
Virtues were united, and yet seemed to contend, which should most embellish
their lovely Habitation; a Queen the Examplar of Her Subjects; a Heroin the
Model of Queens; elevated above Her Rank by Her Virtues, and even, in some
measure raised above Her Virtues by Her Modesty, which could not bear Praise,
and would not suffer us to do justice, but in secret, during Her Life, to that
Merit which has been celebrated, in so glorious a manner, by the Public Grief
after her Death.

The Sorrow of England; the Lamentations of the State; the Tears of the Church;
the early Acknowledgments of that August Senate, which, by regulating the
Affairs of one Nation, governs the Fate of all others; the King's sinking under
a load of Grief, the weakness of that Hero, on this occasion, whose Courage was
never before shocked by Dangers or Misfortunes; the silence of Envy; and the
United Groans of so many Nations, who resent this Loss as an Universal Blow to
Mankind, praise Her aloud, and leave so much the less to be said by me, that,
in making the Elogy either of Her Immortal Virtues, or of the unexampl'd
Wonders of Her Life, I cannot preserve the likeness of Truth without lessening
the Truth it self.

I shall say nothing of Her Glorious Ancestors, but that the Luster which She
reflected back upon them was greater than that She received from them; and that
She honored Her Birth more than that honored Her. And it must be
acknowledged, that never any Woman could with so much Justice be called the
Ornament of Her Nation, and Glory of Her Sex.

I will neither imitate the Malice of some, who despise, nor the flattering
complaisance of others, who magnify a Sex which Nature has made little
different from ours; though Education does commonly make a distinction between
them, that is wholly to the advantage of the latter. Yet I cannot but observe,
that the Greatness of the Obstacles that bar the Ascent to the most Shining
Glory, serves only to heighten the Honor of the Person that surmounts them;
and that as there is nothing more rare than to find the Character of a Hero in
a Woman, so there is nothing that more imperiously commands our Admiration.

History, that preserves the Memory of so many famous Names, has transmitted to
us but a very small number of Illustrious Women, who deserved to be mentioned
with particular Marks of Honor. Yet every Nation boasts of some; and it may be
said that the Spirits of all those Heroins were combined together to animate
our Queen, and that England has engrossed the Glories of all other Nations.

She was Mistress of all the Sublime Characters that enter the Composition of
an extraordinary Person. Her Beauty, which might have been the brightest
Ornament of another, was always reckoned the meanest of Her Endowments. And
even the perfections of Her Judgment which was naturally steady, solid, and
piercing, besides those Excellent Improvements with which She took care to
enrich it, in conjunction with all the Charms of Her Person, were but the least
part of that Merit for which the World admired Her.

Never was so much Greatness and Majesty accompanied with so much Modesty and
Sweetness. Never could so easy and natural a Carriage command so much respect,
and so admirably well become the sublimest Dignity. How low soever She might
condescend to stoop, and endeavor to conceal the Heroin under the disguise of
an ordinary Woman, that commanding Air, which was spread over all Her Person,
that Mien, and Natural Majesty, which She could not hide, discovered Her
Greatness, and betrayed Her Humility.

Her Soul was inseparably united to that of Her August Husband. She considered
His Glory as Her own dearest Interest. She studied His Sentiments, to follow
them, and His Actions, to imitate them; and set His Will before Her, as the
Rule of Her Life.

Her Love and Admiration of Him made Her Submission delightful to her. When She
enjoyed His Presence, She examined His Eyes to know whether She should rejoice
or grieve. When He left Her, She was not sensible of any Trouble, but what was
caused by Her separation from Him, She feared nothing but to lose Him, and Her
only Care was to execute His Orders, and, during the Absence of His Person, to
preserve at least His Will upon the Throne. She breathed not but for Him, and
seemed not to live but in Him.

She was not capable of the least Weakness. Never Wife loved Her Husband more
tenderly; and never Princess bore Misfortunes with greater constancy.

Her Courage raised Her above had success, and Her Modesty set Her above happy
Events. Prosperity and Adversity were equally unable either to puff Her up, or
to cast Her down. She was above them both; and it will for ever remain an
undecided controversy whether She bore with more Temper the Smiles, or the
Frowns of Fortune.

She had at once the highest and most regular Merit that ever was She joined
the Courage and Strength that are peculiar to our Sex, with all the Virtues and
Graces of Her own. Heaven seemed to have endowed Her with the Perfections of
both Sexes, to instruct them both in their several Duties, or to correct their
Vices by the Opposition of so many Virtues; as if it designed to propose one
Person for the Standard and Censure of all the rest of the World.

She was equally admirable, when in Her Council She vied with the ablest
Statesmen; and when after the King's return, She retired to the Innocent
Pleasure of Working with Her Women. She was Wise and Courageous in Her
Government, Humble and Modest in Her Retirement. Her Virtue set before us, in
Her Illustrious Life, a continual Revolution of Advancement and Humiliation,
more wonderful than the most stupendous Turns of Fortune.

She dreaded the return of the Season that obliged Her to assume the
Government, and, besides the Glory of the State, made Her Mistress of the Fate
of the People. She would never have desired to draw upon Her self the Eyes of
all the Universe, if She could have still enjoyed him whom She loved: and gave
us a yearly and memorable Instance that Authority may be received with Tears,
and laid aside with Raptures of Joy.

Yet it would have seemed that Authority had been Natural to Her, so well She
knew how to use it. She was capable of the greatest, and exact in the smallest
things. She acquired the Art of managing the Business of State by an unwearied
Application, She had the dexterity to extend Her Empire over the Minds of Her
People, and reigned in their Hearts by Her Clemency. She commanded in such a
manner as to make Obedience a Pleasure; and She obeyed in Her turn, as if She
had never commanded.

She was always ready to yield to Reason and Truth: but would never be
persuaded to bestow on Recommendations the Reward of Merit and Virtue.

She was prepared for all Events by Her Resolution, and She provided for them
all by Her Wisdom. She enjoyed an undisturbed serenity of Mind in the midst of
Troubles and Dangers; She was secret in Her Designs, steady in Her Maxims, and
of an invincible Constancy under Difficulties. And it may be said without
Flattery that She reigned without a Fault, as Her Life was without a Blemish.

It seemed that the King, by entrusting her with the Administration of Affairs,
inspired her with all his Wisdom; and that the Queen, for the Heart she gave
him, had in exchange received his Judgment.

It Is not impossible for a common Person to live without Reproach, but we find
no faultless Heroes. And even the Greatest Virtues seem to be usually
accompanied with the greatest Imperfections; as if that which raises us above
our selves, was apt to disorder our Souls, by putting them out of their Natural
Posture. But here we find an Eminent Merit, without the least Fault or
Weakness, in an admirable Person, who was as free from blame, as if she had
been saved from it by the Meanness of her Condition. The Greatness of her
Fortune might have exposed her to all the Shafts of Malice, if her Virtues had
not imposed Silence on Malice it self: And even her Virtues might have exposed
her to Envy, if they had been mixed with any Faults. But who could blame such a
complete Merit, such high Perfection, and such Spotless Glory, without
renouncing his Judgment, and exposing his Reputation.

But after all it must be acknowledged, that it was neither the Dignity of her
Rank, nor the Luster of her Heroical Perfections, that rendered her Condition
worthy of Envy. All that which made the World admire her could not have
hindered her from being an Object of Compassion in her own Eyes.

Heroes are mortal, as well as other men; and neither all their Glory nor our
Tears can preserve them from that fatal Necessity. We are charmed with that
which is no more to us than a bare Idea of Perfection: We begin late to admire
a Virtue that has ceased to appear, and complain in vain of the cruelty of
Death that has robbed us of our dear Protectors. They have taken an eternal
Leave of us: Their Great Names serve only to adorn their Epitaphs, and embelish
their Tombs, and those Virtues which the World admired, are like the Funeral
Torches that signalize the Pomp of their Obsequies whose Splendor serves only
to increase our Affliction.

And who was better acquainted with these Truths than the Queen? She made the
Meditation of Death a continual Support to her Virtue: She loved to discourse
on that Subject with others, and to entertain her self with the Thoughts of it.
Thus, forsaking Vanity long before she was forsaken by it* and banishing the
World out of her Mind, even whilst she lived in the midst of it, She prevented,
by a voluntary Separation from it, that forced Exile to which all Mankind is
condemned; and it may be said, that in this Respect, her Humility had left
little or no Work for Death.

How rare is that Virtue, and how becoming a Companion to Greatness! Humility
is most advantagiously placed in the Heart of a Sovereign, for there it makes
great Restitutions to God; there it opposes the Flattery of the People, who are
wont to idolize Grandeur, and teaches the Prince to despise himself in the
midst of that Crowd of flattering Admirers, who adore his Faults, and prostrate
themselves before his Fortune.

But how much more admirable is that Virtue in those Great Souls, who are more
truly elevated above Kings by their Virtue, than Kings are raised above other
men by their Rank and Dignity! It Is a shame to be Proud when such excellent
Persons as these are Humble. It Is an Honor to renounce Vainglory, when the
most eminent Heroes are eminent also for their Humility.

That was the Character of our Queen; Her Life, her Conversation and her
Carriage were but one continued expression of that Virtue. Her Palace was a
Temple of Modesty, so diligent She was to free it from Vanity and Luxury. She
decked her self with her own Virtues, and neglected the Ornaments of Dressing;
She appeared rather Neat than Magnificent in her Train and Furniture. She was
an exact Observer of the Rules of Decency, without injuring her Humility; and
bestowed no more on the Pomp of a Court, than what the Dignity of her Rank did
absolutely require. And yet she seemed to grudge her own necessary Expenses, as
if she had stolen them from the Funds of her Charity.

Never any hid their Faults with more care than she took to conceal her
Virtues. This is the only Fault that she could ever be accused of. Wonders are
made to be seen, and to make a strong Impression upon us; and how many Wonders
did she hinder us from seeing, by hiding from us the Noblest parts of so
beautiful a Life.

She loved to edify, but not to be admired, as if she could have purchased
Humility at the rate of her Glory. She condemned Thankfulness to silence, and
made this seeming Ingratitude the Condition of her Favors.

With one Hand she dried the Tears of the Afflicted, and with the other drew a
Veil over their Misery. She was no less charitable in her way of relieving
them, than in the Relief she gave them. With equal care she sought Occasions to
exercise her Virtue, and avoided every Temptation to vain Glory. She always
concealed the Good that she did, and has been seen to weep for that which she
could not do.

But in vain she imposed a silence, which sooner or later would certainly be
broken. The whole Universe that was a Witness of her Virtues, the World that is
filled with her Charity, which she scattered through all Nations, and all
Climates, such an infinite number of Persons that felt the comfortable
Influences of her Bounty, cry so much the louder after her Death, as they were
forced to be silent during her Life. Imprisoned Gratitude shakes off its
Fetters and breaks out impetuously. We send forth our Complaints and
Lamentations, the expressions of our Grief and her Glory, because we are not
able to retain them longer; and tho that bright Soul could, from the Heavens
whither she is ascended, renew those Orders which her Modesty imposed on Earth,
Sorrow and Gratitude would not suffer us to obey them.

Death, which puts a period to the Glory of others, seems only to begin hers.
How vast is the difference between her and the nameless Great, those vulgar
Princes, who cease to be known as soon as they cease to live! Her Works came out
of the Grave, when she entered into it: Her Life hid her from us; and her Death
exposes her in all her Glory to our ravished Eyes.

Why cannot we do as much honor to her Memory, as she was always ready to do
to Merit and Virtue? What do I say? She made it her Pleasure to consider all
sorts of Persons; none were despicable in her sight. She never spoke ill of any
person, nor ever suffered any person to be ill spoken of in her presence. She
esteemed the Reputations of all mankind sacred; and if ever the Serenity of her
Mind, was disturbed by any motion of anger, to which she was almost always a
Stranger, it was when any one had the confidence to speak ill of her Enemies in
her presence.

She was so incredulous of the faults of others, as if humane Nature had been
faultless; and so universally indulgent, as if all mankind had belonged to her.
What a noble Example has she set before Sovereigns, who being the common
Parents of their People, are concerned in the Reputation of all sorts of
persons, and ought no more to encourage Railing against their Subjects, than
they would against their own Children.

The Persons are usually despised, whose Praises and Flatteries are esteemed;
which is an Effect of Pride. But MARY despised Praise, and had an universal
Charity for all sorts of persons. This was the peculiar character of her Virtue.

Her Condescension and Bounty kept pace with the Advancement of her Fortune, as
if she had intended to comfort others, and make amends for her surpassing them
in Quality and Virtues. She was easy of access to the unhappy, she despised no
Complaint, and rejected no Request. Her generous and magnanimous Temper would
not suffer her to overcome Hatred and Envy, any other way than by Kindness and
good Offices. She exceeded all other Women in Frugality, but she was frugal
only that she might be charitable; and she was even more Charitable than
Frugal, reducing her self often to Poverty by her profuse Beneficency.

This is not an Idea of imaginary perfection. It has been observed, that after
she had consumed the regulated Fund of her Charity in extraordinary Bounties,
she distributed that which was appointed for her own necessary Charges, to
supply the Wants of the Poor. And she felt a pleasure in this virtuous Poverty,
which they whose minds are addicted to the World, shall never find in all their
proud Abundance, and cruel Superfluities.

It Is certain that Self-love and Interest gained no ground in her Heart by her
Advancement. Her Greatness was for the benefit of others, rather than for her
own good. She rejected the Pomp of it by her Humility; and of all that Plenty
of which she was Mistress, she reserved nothing to her self, but the pleasure
of giving it away.

But what do I say? She was also obliged to her Dignity for a thousand
occasions to display her Clemency, at a time when Severity might have seemed
not only pardonable, but necessary, to a Heart less heroical than hers.

Princes that regard their Safety more than their Honor, content themselves
with being praised for their rigorous Justice, by which they serve the
Interests of their own Preservation. But Souls of the first form are not
satisfied with the Empire that ^ear gives them over others, but rather choose to
maintain their Authority by inspiring their Subjects with a Veneration for
their Virtues. They judge with reason, that it is nobler (when possible) to
preserve the public Peace by Mercy, than by Justice; that it is more honorable
to conquer Hearts, than to subdue Persons; and that the State is doubly saved,
when the inclinations of its Enemies are disarmed, and they become its Friends
and Servants.

Clemency is a Virtue that deserves to be more highly esteemed, for the
greatness of the Dangers to which it exposes its Owners. It Is even more
generous than Charity: for the charitable man only gives away his Riches; but
he that is merciful hazards his very Life. It Is braver than Valor it self, for
it exposes it self to secret Foes, which are more dangerous than those open
Enemies whom Courage opposes. And it is greater than Moderation, which finds its
own security in forgetting private injuries, whereas Clemency neglects the care
of its own Preservation by pardoning the Enemies of the Public.

If Mercy had been to appear in a humane Form, it would have certainly borrowed
that of the Queen. It was sufficient to be unhappy to be esteemed innocent by
her: She imitated God, who exhorts Sinners to accept his Favors, and adds
Benefits to the Pardon that he gives them, with a design to make them better;
she forced her greatest Enemies to be capable of Gratitude. Her Clemency, by an
admirable Privilege, produced all the effects of Severity; It delivered her
every day from some new Enemy, or crushed some brooding Conspiracy. The
benefits that she bestowed were Spies to discover the Plots of her Enemies, and
Guards to secure her against them; and the Pardons which she granted so often,
and in so obliging a manner to those that had conspired against her Life,
furnished her with means to acquire new Glory, and additional securities in
every Attempt of her Enemies.

Blasphemy was the only crime that she would never forgive. She was still
struck with horror at the hearing of an impious Expression: Yet she would not
suffer her Indignation to transport her, or make her forget that Calmness with
which she administered Justice, by depriving instantly of all Offices, and
banishing from her presence, those that had dared to brave the Majesty of that
God, whom she served with so much Fear* By which she clearly showed, that it
was not she that reigned, but God that reigned by her.

Let the World admire, as much as it pleases, those humane Virtues, which,
under great Names and venerable Outsides, hide our most real imperfections, or
rather those sacrilegious Virtues which rob God of our best Actions to ascribe
them to our selves, and are in some respect more criminal than the grossest
Vices, as being more injurious to God. Piety alone deserves the name of Virtue,
because it seeks God in all things, and refers all things to his Glory. And
Piety was the great business of the Queen's Life.

Her public and private Devotions, from which no Trouble of State, nor Danger
that threatened her person could ever once divert her; that Commerce of Piety
which she held with God, and the Commerce of Charity between her and her
Brethren; her Meditations and Reading of pious Books employed all her Mornings,
and consecrated to God the half of her Life, those first Hours of the Day,
which she sometimes stole from her ordinary rest, and took from Nature to
bestow them on Grace, which made a far better use of them. Her Devotions were
succeeded by her Charity, her Contemplations by Practice, and her Prayers by
good Works; so that she had no time left from these Holy Occupations that was
not devoted to God, nor almost a Thought that did not ascend up to Heaven.
While she sustained the Load of an infinite number of Affairs and Persons that
depended on her, she still found leisure to serve God without distraction; and
in the midst of so many different Occupations she established, in her
well-ordered Life, a Lasting Worship, and a perpetual and uninterrupted Course
of Religion.

Her days began, as the Days of Glory shall begin, with the Adoration of her
Creator; and ended like the Life of man, with Meditations on the Vanity of the
World. Casting her Eyes sometimes on those things which perish, to wean her
Love and Inclinations from them, and sometimes on that which perishes not, to
make it the Object of all her Hopes and Affections; she lived like one that
knew she should shortly die; her Christian Prudence producing the same effect
in her, that might have been expected from a distinct Revelation of her End,
and of the Measure of her Days.

Her Piety was Universal; she practiced all the Virtues, because she knew they
were all acceptable to God. It had been impossible to determine which of all
the Duties of Morality she observed most carefully, and it might have been
doubted which of her Virtues had the advantage over the rest; if it had not
been known that they were all happily united and blended together in her Piety.

Such was the Foundation of her Virtue, which in other respects, was so
variously diversified, and still found new occasions to make it self be
esteemed, by that happy mixture of Elevation and Humility, Firmness and Mercy,
Courage and Charity, Prudence and a holy Resignation to the Providence of God,
Sweetness and Resolution, that produced an Effect on the Minds of those who
heedfully considered her, not unlike to that Impression which the Flowers of a
beautiful Garden, or the Stars of Heaven, by their Variety and Order, make on
the Eyes of an attentive Beholder.

The Merit of our Illustrious MARY was Great; but it was not greater than her
Destiny. She stood in need of no less Virtue and Perfection to fulfill the
Design of God and the Expectations of Men; being called by Providence to edify
a vicious World, to comfort the drooping Church, and to save her sinking
Country.

Men may celebrate the Virtues of Great Princes, but God himself endites the
Praises of Great Deliverers. He calls Cyrus his Anointed, He proclaims him, He
promises him to the World a hundred years before he came inro it; not because
he was to be the Conqueror of Asia, but because he was designed to be the
Restorer of the Jewish Liberties. Yet how much more glorious had he been, if at
the same time that he freed them from Slavery, he had also delivered them from
Superstition? And tho God does not think sit to speak to us by the Mouth of a
Prophet, does he not declare his Mind sufficiently by the Voice of his
Providence?

We have not yet forgot those sad times, when the State was divided into two
Parties, one of which endeavored to destroy it by introducing Error, and the
other to preserve it by defending the Truth: When England, like a disconsolate
Rebecca, felt two Children, an Esau and a Jacob, struggling and contending
together with a Secret, but implacable Animosity, in her wretehed Bowels,
without being able to foresee the Success of those Intestine Broils that
threatened to rend her Entrals to pieces?

Superstition, that active and subtle Mistress; inspired her Followers with a
Zeal that prompted them to carry on their designs, without losing a minute,
even during the life of the late King. Never were Projects better contrived,
never Intrigues deeper laid or more cunningly managed, and never was there more
promising Hopes than those of that Party. In what a sad condition had we been,
if God had delivered us up to that Violence, and to that so well known and
often experienced Cruelty, which is so much the more dangerous as acting under
a Sacred Disguise, and usurping the Name of Religion? Who would not have
thought, that England was just ready to be made a Prey to remediless Disorders,
and to be turned to a bloody Theater of endless Divisions, Revenge, and
horrible Massacres?

But these Mischiefs could not be effected without gaining a Princess, on whom,
as being the presumptive Heiress of the Crown, they foresaw that the Fate of
the State would in time depend. And it was on this occasion, that God exalted
the strength of his Arm above all the power of men.

This wonderful Princess seemed, even almost as soon as she was born, to know
what she was called to by the Providence of God; so firm and well grounded she
appeared in her heavenly Vocation. And even at that time she was so fixed in her
Religion, so constant to her Duty, and so unmovable under all Tentations, and
in all other respects of so sweet a temper, so wise, moderate and resigned,
that it may be said, that she had already all those Perf^ctions, that we could
have wished to see her afterward adorned with, and that the most illustrious
Lives had scarce any advantage over the Beginning of Hers, or could exceed the
glory of so heroical an Infancy.

It was at the same time that there arose a Difference worthy of eternal
Memory. The State demanded our Princess as its Sure Refuge, and the Source of
all its Comforts; and Superstition courted her for a Support and Foundation of
its Hopes. They contended for her Education with an eagerness that produced a
contest, the success of which was expected with a concern that held the World
in suspense, that filled the Reformed part of it with Fears, and Great Britain,
particularly, with Anxiety and Disquiet.

But, in vain had both Church and State interposed in the Quarrel between
Religion and Superstition, in vain had been all the Care and Courage of our
Magnanimous Prelates, and in vain had the Parliament, that Council empower*d
both by the Crown and by the Nation, that Sage and (by the Regal Authority)
Legislative Assembly, that perpetual Guardian of the Rights and Privileges of
the Kingdom, that honorable and respected Mouth of the People, Interpreter
both of its Wants and of its Will, in vain, I say, had the Parliament it self
resolved to determine the difference brought before its August Tribunal, if
Grace had not already decided the Controversy in the Heart of that young
Princess.

She believed that she owed her self to God and to the State; and that she
could not answer the Call of Heaven, but by devoting herself entirely to her
Country and her Religion. Being only willing to live, and ready to die for them
both; it may be said that from that very time she accepted the Crown, and Death
together; being prepared to receive either Fortune for so precious and sacred
an Interest.

In vain to tempt the Piety of that Heroical Soul, they propose a Match to her,
able, as they think, to shake constancy it self; In vain they speak of uniting
her to a Prince, who, besides the amiable qualifications of his Person, could
boast the Expectation of a Throne, and the Hopes of one of the most glorious
Successions of the Universe, but whose Alliance is equally opposite to the
Interest of England, and to the Conscience of that Princess. She hears the
Proposal with Horror, and rejects it with Indignation, and with a Resolution
that could not be conquer*d.

Thus, for her Countries sake, she despises a Dignity, which the Interest of
that Nation alone shall one day make her accept; and even then she showed her
self incapable of receiving a Scepter but for the same Reasons, for which she
had already refused one. Happy had she been, if she had not found the Sacrifice
of her natural Affections, which she was afterward obliged to offer up to God,
a harder Task than the Sacrifice of her Ambition which she offered then; and if
the Crown that she accepted had not more sensibly afflicted her than that which
she rejected.

Thus, with an unshaken Constancy, she reserved her self for that important and
necessary Marriage, to which the Church and the State, the Parliament and
Council, and God and the King had appointed her.

Never was the public Joy better grounded, than on this occasion; and never
any Festival was more worthy to be solemnized than this. For, then it was that
Providence laid the Foundations of the Public Liberty: And to this happy
Marriage we owe the succeeding Union of England and Holland, and the general
Confederacy of their Allies.

When the Prince went to England, accompanied with the Prayers and Acclamations
of the whole World that was concerned in the Success of his Voyage, he seemed
to ask the Princess in the name of all those Nations that were one day to owe
their liberty to this Blessed Match. And (if I might be allowed to join the
present Events with the Occurrences of those times) I would not scruple to
affirm, that their Contract of Marriage was a Treaty, which God by his
Providence negotiated with all the Nations of Europe, for their common Defense
and Preservation.

After her arrival in Holland, where Providence detained her several years, as
in a safe Retreat, far from the Allurements and Hurry of the World; where she
employed her self in the exercise of all those Virtues, that might fit her to
serve the Great Designs of God. There, she did not cease to be useful to the
Country which she had left, by terrifyng Popery that disturbed its Peace, and
by over-awing even those who seemed not capable of being restrained by Fear. In
Holland she continues to be the Hope of England. Her Life is a dear Pledge of
the love of God to that Nation; and so long as that lasts, they fear not that
he will forsake them.

But she was not only made for the Good of that Country that had the honor to
give her Birth: She was also eminently useful to others, and above all she was
the Joy and Admiration of that, where Providence was pleased to fix her. In
less time than seems necessary to view that happy Climate, she conformed her
self exactly to its Manners and Customs. She became a Pattern to its Women,
even in their own peculiar Virtues. She gave them an illustrious example not
only of Modesty and Chastity, but also of Frugality and Moderation. The
sweetness of her Temper, and the winning mildness of her Deportment took away
that haughty Air from Greatness with which it is usually armed. She never
suffered any Persons to depart unsatisfied from her presence; and taught even
those to love a Court who before esteemed nothing but Liberty and an Equality
of Conditions. And it may be said that among all the Parties and Divisions that
disturbed the State, the most opposite Factions were still united in the love
and Admiration of her Virtues.

It was there that her Judgment, besides all those great and early improvements
with which it was already adorned, became larger and more extensive by the help
of a second Education. There, her Mind was polished and brightened by continual
Reading, and the Conversation of Ingenious Persons whom she always honored
with her Protection. And there she acquired that comprehensive Knowledge, and
those sublime Perfections which would have shone with greater luster, if they
had not been covered with the veil of her Humility.

There, in pious solitudes, she acted the part of a Moses upon the Mount, while
her Illustrious Husband performed the Office of a Joshua at the Head of his
Armies, where his Valor and Conduct were equally admired in good and bad
Fortune; and while, by making the best use of both he advanced apace to that
Height of Merit and Honor that was necessary to deserve those glorious Favors
that Heaven intended to bestow upon him.

We may easily remember that Time which our latest Posterity shall never
forget, for they also are concerned in it. A Time, in which God set bounds to
the Oppression of the people, and to the Affliction of his Church; In which by
one sudden stroke he stopped the progress of that Power which threatened to
devour all the World; in which he preserved the Earth from the over-bearing
Inundations of that raging Sea, by writing on the Sand Hitherto shall thou
come, and no further. We saw, and still have before our Eyes that important
Juncture of Affairs, when the All-wise Governor of the World, who disposes
second Causes according to his pleasure, thought fit to chain the preservation
of England, and of so many other Countries to the Resolution of one Man; when
the Laws, Rights, Liberty, and Religion of so many Nations were entrusted by
Providence to the inconstancy of the Waves; when even the Tempests served in so
admirable a manner to advance the Work of our Deliverance; when unbloody
Victories executed the designs of the God of Mercy; when the Armies of the
wicked were subdued by the Harmony and Union of our Minds; when the Deliverer
appeared, and the Terrors of God seized on our Enemies; and when by the
miraculous Blessing of God on the noblest and most necessary undertaking of our
Age, England is still suffered to enjoy her Laws, the Church to serve God, and
we to live and breath.

'Twas then that England became the Field of Battle, where that surprising
Contest was decided, between God who assisted us so visibly, and Men that
opposed the designs of his Wisdom. But could the Almighty be defeated by his
Creatures, or could his Providence be resisted by his Enemies? At at the same
time the heart of the Princess was made the Scene of a no less extraordinary
but more secret Engagement between Nature and Grace: and here also God obtained
the Victory by his spirit. Both these Victories were justified, and made
unquestionable, one by its Consequences, and the other by its Effects. The
Victory of Providence, by the Events which followed it; and that of Grace by
the Virtues with which it was accompanied.

If such a numerous Train of the Consequences of that Event, which are either
so necessary for our Preservation, or so honorable to England, the progress of
Popery stopped, our holy Religion supported, our Laws restored, the Discipline
and Order of the Church secured, the Universities those Eyes of the Church and
State happily preserved, Arbitrary Power for ever banished, the Right of our
Elections reestablished, our Estates assured to us, our Privileges made
henceforth inviolable, Ireland freed from Pillage, from Desolution and Burning,
our Allies defended by our Arms; a formidable and potent Enemy, that has
threatened so long to rob us of our Liberty, now scarce able to defend himself,
his Ships cooped up in a Harbor, and his Coasts exposed to the terrible
effects of our just Vengeance; the Conqueror of Europe ready to be confined
within his proper and narrower Bounds; and all the World obliged to England for
its Quiet and Liberty. If, I say all these Glorious Consequences of our
Deliverance do not speak loud enough to convince us that Providence consulted
our happiness when it sent the Deliverer to England; let us be persuaded by the
virtues of MARY, who was her self an Apology for the Revolution.

Let us not look for any other Mark of the Approbation of Heaven, than the rare
Piety of that Princess. Let the virtue of our two Illustrious Sovereigns
magnify the Wisdom of the People that called them to the Throne; and let the
Prosperity of the people display the wonderful Goodness of God.

With how much luster did their virtue shine forth on that Glorious Day, when
they accepted a Crown that they had never sued for; a Crown that was offered
them by a Nation that loves Liberty too well, that is too jealous of its
Rights, too powerful and magnanimous to suffer it self to be forced on an
occasion of so great importance for its Preservation and Safety; and filled a
Throne to which it may be more properly said that they were carried by the
people, than that they willingly mounted it?

The united Interest of God and the People augmented the Union of their
Generous Souls. After their arrival in England they seemed to have contracted a
new Alliance which was both stronger and more sacred than the first. The King
did nothing without the Queens consent: and the Queen never attempted any
thing, even during the time of her Administration, but by the inspiration of
her absent Lord. It Is impossible to praise either of them, without giving the
Elogies of both. The Absence of their Persons, could never break the Union of
their Souls: and that pitiless Death which has separated them for ever, is not
able to divide their Glories.

Nor is it less impossible to shed* Tears for one of them, without mourning at
the same time for the other. All, the splendour that surrounds the Throne of
WILLIAM serves equally to Illustrate the Tomb of MARY; and the Groans that are
heard in all places for the Death of that August Deceased, are as so many
Illustrious Commendations and unsuspected Elogies of her Glorious Half, whom
God continues still to preserve to us* Some affectionate Spouses and passionate
Lovers have wished that their Dust might be mingled in their Tombs: but how
much greater is the Happiness of our Royal Pair, who are sure that their
virtues shall be eternally united, and that they shall possess the same place,
if not in the Grave, yet at least in the Temple of Memory.

Our grateful Posterity will read with delight the Annals of our Age, which
shall for ever preserve the memory of those immortal Obligations that England
received from both her Defenders. How ravished will the future Readers of our
History be to learn that our admrable Princes so soon after their Accession to
the Throne began to divide the Cares of the Government between them, that while
one conquered his Enemies, the other defended her Subjects; that WILLIAM the
Conqueror and MARY the Deliverer resembled so perfectly the two bright Stars
that govern our Nights and Days; and that while the former blessed Ireland with
glorious and happy Days, the latter comforted and supported England during the
gloomy Night of Trouble and Adversity.

Her second Regency was signaliz*d by the entire Reduction of the Kingdom of
Ireland, as the first was, by Victories that will certainly seem incredible to
those that shall hear 'em related with all their Circumstances. A Great River
passed in the Sight of the Enemy, a Considerably City carried by Storm, though
attacked on a side where the Water that surrounded it, seemed to render it
impregnable; The Enemies Army braved by that famous passage of our Troops, and
by so important a Conquest, which they beheld but could not hinder, are Events,
that have sometimes been seen to happen severally and at a great distance, but
were then all united in one amazing Action; while the astonished World, beheld
both Men and Elements subdu*d before us, and doubted which of our Victories was
most glorious. And then, Agrim died with the Blood of our routed Enemies whom
we assaulted in their Entrenchments, and in the midst of the unaccessible Bogs
where they were posted; and so many Cities, the Retreats of Rebellion, reduced
either by the Force or Terror of our Arms; so many glorious Advantages which we
owed not so much to the Conduct of our Generals and the invincible Valor of
our Soldiers, as to the Care and Piety of MARY, whom God took pleasure to
favor, and Men esteemed it their honor to obey; All these I say were Miracles
of Providence, that were indeed rare and surprising, but would have been much
more so, if they had been wrought for any other than Her.

It would be hard for us to divert our Thoughts from the Contemplation of these
wonderful Subjects, if a greater Event did not command our Attention, in which
the Queen was more nearly concerned, and had a more immediate Title to the
Glory with which it Crowned Her. France, having learned by an experience of
many years, how necessary it was for the Advancement of her ambitious Grandeur,
to enslave that Nation, which alone could prevent the execution of her unjust
Designs upon the rest of Europe, took the advantage of a specious pretext of
re-inthroning a King that was her Allie, to set forth a Fleet and an Army,
which were indeed designed for the Conquest of Great Britain. The Number of the
Forces that were employed on this Expedition, while our Troops were engaged
abroad in a foreign War, the secret Contrivances of our Enemies at home, the
Disaffection of some Members of the State, and the Surprisal and Astonishment
of the Loyal Party, the cunning and closeness of our Enemies Counsels which
they had not forgot on this occasion, and above all the King's Absence who was
hazarding his Life in the Defense of his Neighbors, and for our common
Preservation; I say, The Conjunction of so many threatening Circumstances filled
all the Nations of Europe with the same Apprehensions for us, that we were wont
to be sensible of for them.

The Queen was not ignorant of these Dangers; she saw them such as they were in
themselves and even greater than they appeared to others. But her Great Soul
was not daunted: And while she was ready to expose her Sacred Person to those
Dangers that threatened her Country; she appeared to her Subjects with her
wonted Tranquillity; and showed them that serene Countenance, and that
unconcerned and Majestic Air which commanded Respect from all that saw her, and
at the same time inspired them with Courage.

She forgot nothing that the most active exact Prudence could suggest, as sit
to be done in such a juncture, without noise or a too visible Concern. She
secured the Peace of the Nation, by seizing on those that might have disturbed
it. She took care to put the Militia in a Condition to second the Army, and at
the same time she put the Army in a condition to resist the Enemy. She
entertained Eyes and Ears through all the parts of the Kingdom, to observe all
that occurred. The most secret Cabals of the disaffected ^arty, nor their best
conceal*d Magazines could escape her diligence. She seemed to be the universal
Genius of the Kingdom, which encouraged the Soldiers, animated the Officers,
enlivened the Magistrates, and filled them all with a noble Resolution to spend
their Blood in the defense of their Country. But her principal Care was to
engage the Officers of the Fleet to a vigorous performance of their Duty: She
bound them to her service with the Ties of Gratitude and Virtue; She entrusted
the safety of the Nation to their Honor: And they received both her Messages
and Letters with Transports of Zeal and Affection that they could not hide.
They we were filled with a brave Emulation to outstrip one another in
Faithfulness and Courage; and their Loyalty was quickly recompensed with
immortal Laurels that were died with Blood, and crowned their Valor.

How delightful is the Remembrance of those glorious and happy Days, when the
dreaded news of our Enemies Descent was prevented by the welcome Account of
their Defeat; when they found a Kingdom, which they expected would have yielded
it self up to their ambition, guarded by floating Forts, from whose brazen
mouths they received a terrible salutation by those fiery Messengers of Death
that were sent to bid them welcome. We have not forgot the time when our
Enemies who, at their setting out to invade us, expected with so much
impatience the appointed signal of their Departure, were forced to content
themselves with the light of their own burning Ships instead of a Signal of
Retreat; when they who had already disposed of England and of all its Riches,
its Fleets and its Armies, by whose assistance they they hoped to hasten the
Destruction of Europe, found their own Funeral Piles and the end of all their
hopes in their flaming Vessels; when being environed by two hostile Elements,
they knew not to which of them they should surrenrender themselves, or whether
to choose Burning or Ship wrack, and at last died uncertain whether they
perished by Fire or by Water.

This single success was designed by Providence to usher in a succeeding Course
of Victories, and to make way for the Glories of the last Campaign, in which we
saw a potent Enemy that was wont to prescribe Laws to others, yield without
resistance the Empire of the Sea to England, whose commanding Flags fly over
all the World, and secure the Trade of our Merchants, the Power and Credit of
the Nation, the Provinces of our Allies, and the Honor and Reputation of our
Arms.

There was a time when England felt the miseries of a raging War in her own
Bowels, while her Neighbors were in peace: now she enjoys all the Blessings of
a profound peace in the midst of a War that fills other Nations with Desolation
and Ruin. We enjoy without disturbance the product of our Fields, and of our
labors; The Arts and Sciences flourish among us without Interruption. No man
is exempted by the Law of the Sword from yielding Obedience to the Laws of the
State. Every man is Master at home, and fears not to be punished by military
Execution for his honest Desire to preserve what belongs to him.

Who could have believed, and yet who can deny, that the same Person whose Mind
was ravished with an attentive Contemplation of that Great Spectacle of our
Deliverance and Preservation, which were also the continual Objects of her
Care, who was continually occupied in that glorious Ministry under the Orders
of that providence that protected her, could at the same time be a pattern to
all other Women in the Simplicity of Domestic Affairs?

She ordered the Affairs of her Household with as much Care and Exactness, as if
she had not been entrusted with the Government of so many Nations; and she
managed the Affairs of the Crown with so much Application and Success as if she
had never thought on any thing else. Nothing was either too great, or too
little for a mind like Hers.

She seemed to be the Mother as well as the Mistress of all those Women that
Served her: She rewarded the Services that she received from them by the Care
that she took of them, and by the Examples of Virtue that she set before them.
They that entered into her Service were Consecrated to God; and in opposition
to the Custom of almost all Ages and Nations, they that desired to become
Courtiers were obliged in some sense to renounce the World.

By the luster of her merit, she appeared worthy of the Empire of the World:
And by the Extensiveness of her Bounty, she seemed to be the Mother of all the
Families in the Kingdom.

She labored earnestly to make England a Divine Monarchy, or the Kingdom of
God, and to imprint the Image of Heaven on these Fortunate Islands, where
nothing can be wanting, if they be not destitute of Piety and Truth.

The Laws which she made, and the Examples which she gave, seemed to contend
which of them should most effectually recommend Virtue. But why should we make
a distinction between them; since the Orders that she established to promote
the Service of God are Examples worthy to be imitated by all Sovereigns; and
the Examples which she gave have the force of Laws to all those that have any
sense of Piety or Virtue.

Princes may be said in some sense to command every thing that they do, and to
forbid every thing that they do not. Their Example has an attractive Power to
draw others after them. Both their Vices and their Virtues spread themselves
over all their Dominions; and are in some measure eternized by Imitation. The
least Crime that they commit renders them guilty of a thousand others; and all
the Virtues with which they are adorned are incessantly reproduced in the
Hearts of an infinite number of persons that are ambitious of resembling them.

It Is certainly a great Blessing to a Nation to have a Sovereign that never
gives a bad Example; but this was but the least Advantage of Great Britain,
that had the happiness to see the privileges of Chastity and Virtue restored
together with her Liberty, and the Laws of Honor and Decency reestablished as
well as those of the State and of Society.

MARY scattered the Seeds of Almsgiving by her diffusive Charity, and of all
other Virtues by her edifying Example. She reformed her Subjects by the care
which she took to regulate her own Life, and enured even those to honest Labor
who look upon Idleness and Sloth as an Appendix of their Greatness. She allured
a thousand Benefactors to the Poor by an ever-active Charity, which more
industrious than Interest it self invented new Methods for their Subsistence.
She performed by the Ministry of those who imitated her Virtue, what God did by
hers. The Poor were obliged to her for the Good they received from others, as
they owed to God the Good that she did and caused to be done.

By her Care Piety was restored if not to all its Privileges, yet at least to
a new degree of Reputation. Devotion was no longer esteemed a Weakness, and the
World was constrained to pay some Respect to Religion.

Religion was her peculiar care. She was no sooner seated on the Throne, but
she began to make it her Business and her Pleasure to defend it, and to
preserve it in its purity. How careful was she to bestow the Dignities of the
Church on deserving Persons? When were these Sacred Sources of the Edification
and Instruction of the People more pure and undefiled? Never did a tender and
loving Mother employ greater care and circumspection in the choice of fit
Persons to be entrusted with the Education of her Children, than she used in
the Choice of the Spiritual Fathers of her People; and never Sovereign
consecrated his Subjects to God with a purer and more Holy Intention* I appeal
to the Testimony of all the World and of almost all Ages, whose
unacquaintedness with this virtue is a clear proof of its Worth. How many
Princes are there, who, on such occasions, are swayed by Unjust and
Sacrilegious Motives, and favor Recommendation to the prejudice of Virtue, who
recompense Secular Services without regard to the Edification of Souls, and
make the Salvation of Mankind and the Glory of God depend on the meanest
Interests, and even sometimes on the most guilty Passions.

't would have been esteemed the Glory of any other Prince, to have been able
to avoid so general a Fault, as that of a criminal Complaisance in the choice
of the Ministers of the Altar; but this was not enough for MARY. She recalled
those blessed Times, those happy Ages of the Church, when Dignities courted
Merit, when Humility and Modesty were drawn out of their Retirements, and
compelled to accept those great Charges which they refused; and when Virtue
thus forcibly recompensed had a Right to preach Disinterestedness and
Resignation to others.

By advancing every one according to his Merit, his Gifts and his Virtue, and
the Advantage which the People might receive from him; and by ranking those
shining Lights in the Mystical Heaven of the Church, she imitated that Order
and variety, that pleasant and useful Subordination, with which an Omniscient
and Eternal Hand has placed the Stars in the Firmament.

With how much delight and satisfaction did good Men behold that happy Turn of
Affairs in England. How did they rejoice to see those whom Persecution had
marked out for the Objects of its Fury, honored with the noblest Recompenses
of their Merit and Virtue? To see our most Illustrious Sufferers made our chief
Prelates, and to contemplate in this blessed Change, as in a lively Figure, the
future Happiness of the Universal Church, when it shall be advanced from a
State of Warfare to a State of Glory and Triumph?

But why do we speak of Triumph and Glory? Have we forgot that MARY is in her
Grave. A fatal and cruel Disease, and more cruel to us than to her, has forced
her away from the Prayers and Desires of her Subjects, from the Hopes of the
whole World, from the Bosom of a passionately loved and loving Husband, and,
above all, from the Great Designs of her Piety and Beneficence.

She was prepared to leave us, but we were not prepared to lose her. The Dismal
Tidings of her Sickness filled every Heart with Woe, and every Mouth with
Lamentations: Every one begs God to shorten his Days and to add them to so
precious a Life. An Universal Cry was heard through the whole Nation, or rather
through all those Nations who depended on her by the dearest and most Sacred Ties
of Religion and Gratitude, a Cry of Mourning and of Supplication, which
doubtless would have reached to the Throne of God, if our Sins had not been
stronger than our Prayers.

Yet all endeavor to flatter themselves with some hopes. None are willing to
deny themselves the pleasure of believing what they desire; and even, after all
hopes were taken away, we durst not think of her Death.

Nevertheless it approached, that inexorable Death, which by one Blow pierced
the Hearts of an infinite number of persons. It was the Terror of all the
World; but MARY was prepared to receive it.

Already her tender Heart had bore the shock of a sharp Conflict between Nature
and Grace; and the first triumphed over the latter, tho it was forced to
struggle hard for the Victory, when she beheld her dear and despairing Lord
ready to expire before her, and just sinking under the weight of his Sorrow.
Forgive, great God, this last Effort of her Tenderness, these Remainders of a
Passion that will be quickly extinguished. Thou know the closeness of the
Union that linked these two Illustrious Hearts, nor could they possibly consent
without pain to so killing a separation.

After she had offered up to God this last Sacrifice of her Love, which was the
hardest but a necessary part of her dying Task, she hears without disturbance
the fatal Message, which they who brought it could not deliver without
trembling.

She thanks the Author of her Salvation that she was not now to prepare for her
end; she gives the Glory to God that had inspired her with a sense of better
things; she declares with joy that her Religion had taught her not to trust her
Great Interest to the Uncertainties of a late Repentance; and can cheerfully
cry, with the great Exemplar of Submission, Lo I come to thy Will O God!

She fears to lose the remaining Moments of her Life; she employs them in
hearkening to seasonable Instructions concerning her God, and approaching
Passage to Glory, and takes care that the continual Reading of pious Books may
supply the place of an uninterrupted Exhortation.

She expresses her Piety more by Actions than by Words; but those few Words
that she uses are full of the Spirit of Christianity and Holiness. She does
nothing out of Ostentation, and omits nothing that may serve for the public
Edification.

Twice she communicated with Christ, at the beginning of her Sickness by Works
of Charity, and toward the end of it in the Sacrament of the Eucharist: First,
with the Members of Christ, by a cheerful distribution of Alms, and then, with
Christ himself, who repaid in Grace and spiritual Consolations, what he had
received from her in temporal Assistance, and after he had comforted on her
Deathbed, received her into the Mansions of his Glory.

Thus ended that Life which was so useful to the World, and so dear to the
Church of God; which she, or we rather, lost, in the Height of its Glory, in a
flourishing Age, and at a time when her Affairs were in a very prosperous
state. Thus were those charitable Eyes forever shut, that were always wont to
be Messengers of Good Tidings to the Poor, those Ears that were always
attentive to their Cry, and that Mouth which seemed never to open but to do
them good, to promise them relief, or to interceed for them. MARY shall hear no
more the Groans of the afflicted, that were wont to pierce her tender Soul; and
they shall see her no more, who was always ready to assist and comfort them:
She is now in a place where there are no Objects of Compassion. MARY is dead to
live again; she has left her Throne here to ascend to one above the Stars: She
is now raising the Joys of Heaven, and has filled the Earth with Mourning and
Desolation.

Scarce had she vanished from our sight, when her Merit appearing in all its
splender to the Eyes of the Universe, was celebrated by the Tears or Praises of
all sorts of Persons, and publicly extolled in all languages, because she was
a Benefactress to all Nations. She has left no man the liberty to speak or be
silent: Every one praises her according to his ability; and they who relate her
Words and Actions with the greatest simplicity give the highest Idea of her
Virtue.

A thousand Eloquent Mouths praise her, or are silent only because they are
conscious to themselves that they cannot praise her worthily. Others having
begun to write her Character, are interrupted by Sighs and Tears, which will
not suffer them to finish their Undertaking. Orators, scarce able to follow at
a distance the sublime Flights of her Virtues, seem to have recourse to Fiction
in their descriptions of them; and Poets, to paint forth so real and sacred a
merit, are forced for the first time, to borrow the natural and unaffected
Language of Truth. The Poet without Fiction, and the Orator without Disguise,
in their ordinary discourse, speak things of her now at her Death which they
neither durst, nor could without Flattery have prefag'd at her Birth.

How vain, yet commendable are all our Endeavors to adorn her Tomb? In vain
Crowds of her Subjects, grateful to their deceast Benefactress, and just to her
Memory, run to see, and to augment by their Presence the Pomp of her Funeral.

There are no Obsequies worthy of MARY, or if there are; they most only consist
in the Works of her Piety, and in Sghts that we owe to her Virtue: the Poor
watering her Tomb with their Tears, the Virtues weeping round her Monument, our
restored Laws supplying the place of her Titles and of the marks of her
Dignity, the numerous and magnificent Train of all those that were either
relieved by her Bounty, protected by her Authority, or defended by her Wisdom,
the great Examples of her Life exposed to the Eyes of the World, her Country
and Religion following their dear Preserver, and Liberty carried as in triumph,
in a Chariot, without the wretched Attendance of miserable Captives, or oppressed
Nations. What can there be in all this Pomp, that strikes the Eyes of a
wondering Nation with a more agreeable splendour, than the Nation it self freed
from the Yoke that was to be imposed upon it? Is there any thing more Glorious
in the Funeral Oration which the Chief Minister of our Religion pronounced
before his listening Auditory, than the Liberty that he has to speak, and we to
hear him, in that place. And among all that Assembly of mourning Sages, who ar^
no less distinguished by their Gravity and Wisdom, than by the honor they have
to represent the Nation, is there any thin^ more Noble and Magnificent in the
eyes of those who remember former times, than that we have a Parliament. May ye
la^ for ever, ye noble Objects of MARY's Care, and precious Reli^ of your
deceast Queen, ye Liberty, Church, and People of Britain, living Monuments of
her true Grandeur, perpetual Orn^ments of her Tomb, and Immortal Pomp of her
Funeral; m^^ ye last for ever for her Glory, and may her Memory endure
^ternally for your Consolation.

Fear not that she shall be subject to the Fate of perishab^^ Things* MARY
shall live; MARY shall never dye. Her (...) example shall pass from Age to Age;
and her Virtues, immo^taliz'd by a happy imitation, shall make her the
profitable (...) light of the World, and the Benefactress of Mankind, till the
final Consummation of all Things. But the Grief that is occasioned by her Death
shall not be eternal: She that is a source of mourning to us, shall be the Joy
of succeeding Ages, who will forget that she died to remember only that she was
born: and will change the Cypress of her Funeral into Nosegays and Garlands,
which they will strew upon her Tomb.

But whether are we carried by a Zeal that loses it self equally both in Joy
and Grief. Can we forget that MARY rejected those vain Applauses during her
Life, and condemns them yet more afher Death; that on the Throne she gave us
Lessons of Humility, and in her Tomb preaches to us the vanity of the World;
that in the dark apartments of the Grave she imposes silence one Pride, and
reigning with God in the Heavens commands our Grief to be silent; and that
pointing sometimes to her Tomb, and sometimes to the Throne where she is
seated, she does by turns comfort us, and exhort us to Humility.

In the midst of that multitude of melancholic, d^mb, and lifeless Monarchs,
those venerable C^rkasses, those mould^ing Majesty's and wormeaten Gods of the
Earth, whose Darkness illuminates, our minds, whose solitude discourses to us,
and even whose silence is eloquent, MARY proclaims aloud the meanness of humane
Grandeur with a mightier voice than ever yet struck our Ears: She exhorts us to
approach and behold those who governed this Kingdom and her who preserved it,
that we may may see the poor remainders of all their ancient splendour, and of
the vain Applause of Men. But she is still more humbl*d in the Heavens by the
presence of God, than in the Grave amidst the dismal Pomp of Death; she
surrenders all the Glories of her Life and the Honors that she receiv*d at her
Death, to that God to whom all Honor and Glory belongs.

GOD, she cries, is your only Benefactor, the only Deliverer of Nations,
Protector of Empires, and Comforter of the afflicted; He alone is Good,
Merciful, Wise, Great, and Wonderful: He is All in himself, and I was nothing
but by him. Go to my Grave, and see there what I am; Come to Heaven, and see
here what He is. O ye admirers of Dust, or rather of that which is nothing, do
not persist longer in your injustice to the Glory of the Almighty, Cease to
praise me, and begin to serve him* Carry your Incense to his Altars, and leave
my Body to the Worms, Open his Temples, and shut my Tomb.

THE END

