Additional Prayers To be Used Together with those Appointed in the Service for
the Fifth of November.
The Collect for Morning Service, to be added unto the other.
O God, whose Name is Excellent in all the Earth, and thy Glory above the
Heavens; who, on this Day, did mixaculously preserve our Church and State
from the secret Contrivance, and hellish Malice of Popish Couspirators; and on
this Day also did begin to give us a mighty Deliverance from the open Tyranny
and Oppression of the same Cruel and Bloodthirsty Enemies: We bless and adore
thy glorious Majesty, as for the Former, so for this thy Late marvelous Loving
kindness to our Church and Nation in the Preservation of our Religion and
Liberties. And we humbly Pray, that the devant Sense of this thy repeated Mercy
may renew and increase in us a Spirit of Love and Thankfulness to thee its only
Author; a Suirit of peaceable Subinission and Obedience to our Gracious
Sovereign, whom thou made the blessed Iustrument of it; and a Spirit of
servent zeal for our holy Religion, which now again, thou have so wonderfully
Re^^^^^ and Established a Blessing to us, and our Posse^^^^ (...) this we beg
for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

After the Collect for the Day in the Litany.

ACcept also, most Gracious God, of our unfeigned Thanks for filling our Hearts
again with Joy and Gladness, after the Time that thou have efflicted us, and
putting a New Song into our Mouths, by bringing His Majesty who now Reigns over
us, upon this Day, for the Deliverance of our Church and Nation from Popish
Tyranny and Arbitrary Power. We Adore the Wisdom and Justice of thy Providence,
which so timely Interposed in our extreme Danger, and Disappointed all the
Designs of our Enemies. We beseech thee give us such a lively and lasting Sense
of what thou did then, and have, since that Time, done for us, that we may
not grow secute and careless in our Obedience, by presuming upon thy great and
undeserved Goodness; but that it may lead us to Repentance, and move us to be
the more diligent and zealous in all the Duties of our Religion, which thou
have, in a marvelous manner preserved to us: Let Truth and Justice, Brotherly
kindness and Charity, Devotion and Piety, Concord and Unity, with all other
Virtues, so flourish among us, that they may be the Stability of our Times, and
make this Church a Praise in the Earth. All which we humbly beg, together with
thy continued Blessing upon all Orders and Degrees of Men amongst us, and the
perfect Deliverance of our Brethren in Ireland, that they may Rejoice together
with us, and Triumph in thy Praise, for the sake of our Blessed Lord and
Savior Christ Jesus; To whom with thee, O Father of Mercies, and the Holy
Ghost be eternal Praises. Amen.

In the Communion Service instead of the Collect for the Day.

ETernal God, and our most mighty Protector, we thy unworthy Servants do humbly
present our selves before thy Majesty, acknowledging thy Power, Wisdom and
Goodness in Preserving the King, and the Three Estates of this Realm assembled
in Parliament, from the Destruction this Day intended against them. Make us, we
beseech thee, truly thankful for this, and for all other thy great Mercies
toward us; particularly for making this Day again Memorable, by a fresh
Iustance of thy Loving Kindness toward us. We bless thee for giving His
Majesty, that now is, a safe Arrival here, and for making all Opposition fall
before him, till he became our King and Governor. Continue we beseech thee to
Protect and Defend Him, the Queen, and all the Royal Family, from all Treasons
and Conspiracies; Preserve them in thy Faith, Fear and Love; Prosper their
Reign with long Happiness here on Earth, and Crown them with everlasting Glory
hereafter, through Jesus Christ our only Savior and Redeemer. Amen.

The Gospel. St. Luke 9.51.

ANd it came to pass, when the time was come that he should be received up, he
steadfastly set his face to go to Jerusalem, And sent messengers before his
face: and they went and entered into a village of the Samaritanes, to make ready
for him. And they did not receive him, because his face was as though he would
go to Jerusalem. And when his disciples James and John saw this, they said,
Lord, will thou that we command fire to come down from heaven, and consume
them, even as Elias did? But he turned and rebuked them, and said, Ye know not
what manner of Spirit ye are of. For the Son of man is not come to destroy men's
lives, but to save them. And they went to another village.

Whitehall, October 30. 1689.
IT is His Majesty's Pleasure, That on the Fifth of November, in the Morning
Prayer and in the Litany, these Two Additional Prayers be Used, together with
those Appointed in the Service for that Day; And that instead of the Collect
and the Gospel in the Communion Service, these here Appointed be Used.

Shrewsbury.

LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the King and
Queens most Excellent Majesty's. 1689.


