THE ADDRESS OF SOME Ministers of Christ IN THE Isle of Wight, and County of
Southampton, To the People of their respective Charges, by way of EXHORTATION,
to Discharge their parts of those two Great and Necessary DUTIES Private
Conference AND CATECHIZING.

Prove. 22. 6. Train up (or Catechize) a child in the way he should go, and when
he is old, he will not depart from it.

Genesis 18. 19. I know Abraham, that he will command his children and his
household after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord.

London, Printed by J. H. for J. Rothwell at the Fountain in Goldsmiths-row in
Cheapside. 1658.

The ADDRESS of some Ministers of Christ in the Isle of Wight, and County of
Southampton, to the People of their respective Charges, by way of Exhortation,
to discharge their parts of those two great and necessary Duties, Private
Conference and Catechizing.
Dearly Beloved,
THat the good tidings which the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ brings to
sinners, was first heard at Jerusalem, was a mercy, Luc. 24 47.
a great mercy to the Jews: That it was not confined to them alone, but ordered
to pass among all other Nations, was a gracious, a very exceeding gracious
dispensation to us sinners of the Gentiles. That it found out this obscure
Angle of the world, where we live, so early, that our priority before many
Countries in the enjoyment of so invaluable a blessing, is justly accounted
amongst the highest of our Prerogatives, was an evidence of the Lords peculiar
goodness to our Progenitors; and we are not so regardlesse of the Land of our
Nativity, nor so forgetful of the Rock from whence we were hew'n, and the
hole of the Pit from whence we were dug, as not to think our selves enough
concerned in their mercies, to bless God for them.

And as the God of our mercies did so seasonably prevent us, so has his
goodness and mercy all along followed us in affording means of light and life
to us, from one generation to another. If we remember the days of old, Deuteronomy.
32. 7, 10.
and consider the years of many generations: if we ask our fathers they will
show us, and our Elders they will teach us, in what a deplorable condition of
Ignorance, Idolatry, and Atheism, and how deeply plunged in all Imaginable
Abominations, the Lord found us, when he sent us by his Gospel Jesus Christ the
Light of the world, with means enough to direct us out of darkness and the
shadow of Death, and to guide our feet into the ways of peace. And though the
interposition of our sins betwixt heaven and us has not suffered the Sun of
the Gospel for many ages to break out upon us, in its full glory, yet has it
not at any time been able totally to eclipse it, since first it arose upon the
Nation. And this we mention upon no other account than to remember you of our
being brought forth in a Land of Blessings, which we think it our duty to look
back upon as a providence too full of goodness to be despised.

But (as in which our own concernments are more specially wrapped up) we desire
most of all to spend our serious considerations upon the Lords gracious
dealing, as to Gospel mercies, with this Nation, in our days. That holy arm
which scattered among us means of Conversion and life in former times, clothed,
is now made bare, those compassions that did then flow from divine bowels, but
at an ordinary rate, are now advanced. God that commanded the clouds from above
to let fall drops then, has now opened the windows of Heaven, and raineth down
large and plentiful showers of his Gospel into our bosoms* our blessings have
prevailed above the blessings of our progenitors. When, or where did the King
of Saints ever ride up and down, in his ordinance of preaching the Gospel in so
much Glory and Triumph, as in this Age and Nation! This blessing is doubled, is
multiplied upon us, in respect of other times and places, whether we look
backward or round about us, we are presented with a necessity of acknowledging
that the light of the Moon, with us, is as the light of the Sun, Isa. 30. 26.
and the light of the Sun, as the light of seven days.

And as we desire to look upon these gracious outgoings of the Lord toward us
with thankful and glad hearts, as they are a plentiful provision of means to
bring us to the great ends we ought to aim at, the service and eternal
enjoyment of himself, who is alone the creatures best and greatest both master
and wages; so when we do on the other hand consider how disproportionable we
are in our returns, how unanswerable in our principles and practices to such
mercies, how few attain the ends but now mentioned, how many are grossly
ignorant even of the Principles of that Religion they think to be saved by, how
many who have the droppings, the rain of the Sanctuary, coming often upon
them, do bring forth nothing but thorns and briars, and what a lamentable
propensity too many do discover to be led away by the error of the wicked, our
hearts begin to gather blackness, and are seized upon with fear, lest these
sweet mercies should be swift witnesses against us, and in stead of converting
us to Jesus Christ, our deliverer from the wrath to come, should be converted
by us into such aggravations of our sins, as will leave us in a less tolerable
condition than Sodom and Gomorrah, at the day of Judgment; and we are very well
assured, it is every good man's duty, to prevent (as much as in him lies) so sad
an issue of such invaluable blessings.

The Duty, we say, of all good men, but specially of Ministers, whose office i^
is to lay out themselves in a constant attendance upon the good of Souls: upon
which accoun^ we the unworthy Ministers of Christ, whose Names are
underwritten, having through mercy been stirred up to improve our Talents, to
the uttermost, for the advancement of the Kingdom and Interest of our dear
Redeemer, and the eternal welfare of you^ immortal Souls, who are
respectively committed to our Charge, and having waited upon God in a way of
earnest prayer, and solemn humiliation, for directions to that purpose, have
jointly agreed to communicate our thoughts, desires, and purposes unto you, by
this Paper, hoping that we shall find it a very good expedient to ^^^^itate so
great a work.

Brethren! we have seriously considered, not so much the necessity of Knowledge
to salvation, (for who is not convinced of this, that is convinced of any
thing?) but, how little, or no ac^^aintance many of our people have with the
things of God, how unhappy a qualification this is for any thing that is evil,
and what unavoidable advantages the Devil has against those poor souls, whom
he is sure to set upon in the dark. Though we are constrained to believe, that
some are very well able to digest their convictions, and have light enough to
see themselves wallowing in the pollutions of the world; yet can we not but be
persuaded of very many, that both the Mother and Nurse of their miscariages is
their ignorance, being never yet possessed of so much illumination, as
thoroughly to perceive the filthy and damnable nature of sin, Romans 6. 23 Acts 4.
12. Heb. 12. 14.
the necessity of an interest in Christ, and of that work of grace by his
Spirit upon their souls, without which no man shall see the Lord. Our Charity
prevailing with us, at least to think that if the generality of men were able
to see the wrath of God, and the torments of hell in every sin, Acts 5. 31.
they would not dote upon it; and to see Christ exalted to be a Prince, to give
repentance and remission of sins, they would not by their wilful impieties
send so many messages to him every day that they will not have this man to
reign over them. If they knew more, Luke 19. 14.
they would live better, if they did not see so little, they would not sin so
much; they would not so constantly go out of their way, did they not go in the
dark.

Your selves, Brethren, are our witnesses, that in the course of our Ministry,
we have made it much of our business to inform men's judgments, being very
sure of this, that unless we could have a knowing people, we should never have
a gracious people; as we are to bless God for any the least success of his
Gospel to this purpose, we are also deeply to be humbled that it has been no
more, that very many are ignorant still, and not able to evidence themselves
owners of so much knowledge, as may be presumed to let in Christ by Faith into
their souls; our deep sense of which has brought us together, put us upon our
prayers to God, and a mutual contribution of advice and council to one
another, what further course to take, that by the blessing of God, might
promote your edification at a better rate, be a way to a speedier implantation
of Light and Grace in your souls, and make room in your heads and hearts for
the Gospel of Jesus Christ in our public preaching.

To which end and purpose, for every one of us to revive and constantly to
practice the too long neglected duties of Private Conference and Catechizing in
our respective Charges, is a course which we have apprehended to promise us the
most comfortable success. We have therefore unanimously agreed and resolved,
to add to our more public ministerial labors, the faithful serious and
constant discharge of these duties, that by laying out our talents as many ways
as they may possibly be improveable, for the good of all, we may, by the grace
of Christ going along with us, be isntrumental in saving some. Now our
endeavors shall be to instruct By 1. Chatechizing, all within our respective
Charges that are under the Government of others. 2. Private Conference, all the
rest.


Not that we would be understood to exclude any that are reducible to either of
these ranks from the benefit of both, or (so much as an intimation) to mean it,
not to be the duty of all, to submit to both; but have thus propounded it, out
of a condescension to that weakness (of too much force upon most men's Spirits)
which suggesteth it to be a matter of shame, for persons that are aged to be
Catechized; but never inclines them to so much as the least blushing that they
have need of it. So your selves being able to testify, that we are in a manner
necessitated to this method, we shall beg the conjunction of your prayers with
ours, for a blessing from Heaven upon it, and (in as few words as we
conveniently may) bespeak your compliance with us in it. And

First as to the Catechizing of all that are under the Government (we mean the
domestical Government) of others. We have a request to make To 1 The Governing
party. 2 The Governed.


1. To Masters, Mistresses, and such as have the care of others in their
families committed to them; our earnest desire is, that no neglect of yours may
bring upon you the guilt of accessaries to the obstruction of so good a work,
which you will by no means be able to prevent, but by contributing what you can
to the promotion of it, by teaching your children and servants the grounds and
principles of Religion at home, that they may at least remember them; and by
causing them to come under our public examination at the Church, that we may
see whether they do, and give them further instructions that they may
profitably understand them. That the means of bringing persons to Christ and
heaven is to bring them to the knowledge of the Truth, 1 Timothy 2. 4.
or that its your duty to endeavor the bringing of your families by the same
way, to the same end. We will not be so uncharitable as to think you have any
need to have it proved, and what fitter way can you attempt the discharge of
this duty in, then by Catechizing them? If you were to fill, (it is an old, a
common, but very pertinent similitude, and perhaps may stick by you) a company
of exceeding narrow mouthed Glasses, the likeliest way to do it, is by taking
them singly in your hands, and dropping into each by little and little, as it
will go down, and not by setting them altogether, and throwing great
quantities of water upon them But, this together with your duty about it, and
the many arguments you have to discharge it, we shall offer you more at large
in these following Considerations, which we shall crave leave to press, as the
Duty concerns your 1. Whole family. 2. Children. 3. Servants.


1. In relation to your whole family.
1. Consider. Whether God has not committed unto you a guardianship over the
souls of your families, and it be not upon that account your duty to take care
for the discharge of theirs? It Is a comprehensive instance which you have in
Exodus Exodus 20. 10.
20 10. That your sons, daughters, men and maidservants keep the Sabbath holy,
is an injunction laid immediately upon you; you must remember that they do
Sanctify it, and this is not done, but by spending the whole time in the
private and public exercises of Gods worship and service. And how many
principles of Religion must be known, before this can be done? and we cannot
doubt of your easy grant of this consequence, that if you must see your
families do those duties, which they can never do except they be instructed,
then must you be their instructors, unless you can suppose, there may lie a
strict obligation upon you to accomplish such an end, which leaves you under no
engagement at all to use the means.

2 Consider. How special an eye of favor God carries toward those Heads of
families, who lay out their care that all under their roof may know and serve
him. Friendship with God is the choicest evidence of his favor, communication
of secrets the highest declaration of friendship, and this will the Lord bestow
upon Abraham a peculiar share in, being a person that would command his
household to keep the way of the Lord, Genesis 18. 19. And from hence do learned
men collect, that it was, in that age, the holy practice of such as feared God
to Catechize their families, and instruct them, concerning the Creation of the
world, fall of man, destruction of the old world, Gods providence, the Messiah
to be revealed, everlasting life to come, and such like. If you neglect
Abraham's practice, you are never like to come to Abraham's Honor, who was
called The friend of God, James 2. 23.

3 Consider. What care the Spirit of God takes to keep alive their memories to
all generations, who have planted religion in their families. Aquila and
Priscilla had a Church in their house, 1 Cor. 16. 19. Nymphas and Philemon had
Churches in their houses, Coloss. 4. 15. Philem. 2. not only in that they were
hospitable to the Believers, and entertained them in their houses, or that the
meetings of Christians for the worship of God was wont to be in their houses,
but also in regard of the piety of their families, each household might be
called a Church, a company taught to know God, and to serve him. And Cornelius,
was a man that feared God with all his house, Act. 10. 2. These are mentioned
with Honor, and have been so near sixteen hundred years already, and shall
be so as long as the Sun and Moon endures.

4 Consider. The pronenesse of youth to every thing that is evil. If you doubt
what the inexperience, rashness, heat, pride, ignorance, and confidence, which
most in their youth have a sufficient stock of, may put them upon, look back
upon what you were your selves. When David asks wherewithal shall a young
man cleanse his way? Psalm. 119. 9. is it not an intimation that his way is
ordinarily through the pollutions of the world? And when David prays, Remember
not the sins of my youth, Psalm. 25. 7. do ye think there be very many in the
world, that in their age, have no need to go to the Throne of Grace, in the
same errand? And when Job complains, Thou make me to possess the sins of my
youth, Job 13. 26. we think twill follow that Jobs youthful time was his
worst time. It Is reported of Bellarmine, that when the Priest came to absolve
him, he could not remember any particular sin to confess, till he went back in
his thoughts as far as his youth; either the Cardinals memory failed him, or
youth will be sinful, though no age else be; it is doubtless the worst season
of the best men, and for gross and scandalous miscarriages, most commonly, of
the worst too.

Now, wherewithal shall these young ones cleanse their ways? what means must
be pitched upon to mortify youthful lusts, but the word of God? Psalm. 119. 9.
and what fitter expedient for the application of that remedy to this disease,
then to let it into their Heads and Hearts by Catechizing? by infusing those
Scriptures that do assert the damnable nature of sin, the necessity of
regeneration, the Tendency of the course they are in, to their everlasting
destruction, etc.

5 Consider. On the other Hand, that if ever you mean, your families shall
learn the ways of God, you lose (at least) the fairest probability of
success, if you fall not upon teaching them in their younger years. Let us
crave liberty to lay, and leave before you, but these Observations.

1 Observe the fitness of that season to receive instruction; that (besides our
original pollution) we are very early capable of sinning, may be discovered
even in little children every day. I know not (says Augustine) the sins I
committed in my infancy, yet I know that then I sinned, and he knew it from
hence, that he had observed anger and envy in sucking children; he was (he
confesses) a little child, and a great-sinner: and Gregory gives us an account
of horrid blasphemies by a child of five years old: we will not say that
goodness has so timely, or so easy an entertainment as sin has, we know
reasons to the contrary; you will how ever receive no damage by beginning
seasonably, you were better lose some labor than any Time. We have read of
some that have been ordained to the office of public Readers in the Church at
eight years old, of some suffering Martyrdom at thirteen, of others
discovering a capacity of learning what ever you would take the pains to teach
them very betime. We beseech you not to pretend such a disproportion between
the Intellectualls of these, and of the young ones in your families, as is
enough to excuse a neglect of Catechizing them, till you have tried; and when
you have, let it not serve your turn, for a neglect of this duty to the rest
that are of understanding enough to learn other things in their younger years
(as we said) you have hopes of fastening upon them the Things of God.
Prepossession is a great matter; the more time you give sin and vanity to grow
upon them, the less hopes you have of planting in them the mysteries of
Religion.

2 Observe, How few there be, whose youth has been suffered to pass in
ignorance, that are brought to the saving knowledge of God in Christ in their
elder days. Habits are difficultly removed, and how long will a vessel savor
of the first liquor you season it with? If ever you mean to meet your families
in Heaven, guide them thitherward at their first setting out.

6 Consider. How much Religion is concerned in this duty of Catechizing; set it
up, you provide abundantly for the welfare of it, you go the way to supply her
with professors, knowing, solid, settled, such as do espouse her because they
love her, and love her because they know her; neglect it, and you contribute to
the ruin of it, if she have any other followers, then such as are profane,
ignorant, ungrounded, unstable, carried about with every wind of Doctrine,
such as she will be ashamed to own for her children, and who had not owned her,
but that it was the first they lighted upon, she will have no cause in the
world to thank you for it. This is so necessary a course to settle people in
what they first take in, that the Jesuits boast themselves the Grand
Conservators of the Romish Religion, in that they are Catechizers, and they
have formerly stirred up one another to all possible diligence in this work by
the example of the Protestants. We are sorry and ashamed, that if for diverse
years last past the Jesuits had wanted a provocation to Catechizing from the
example of Protestants, they would not have been able to have fetched it hence.
We beseech you Brethren, let not our Religion have occasion to complain from
any neglect of yours, that she cannot take up this confessed advantage against
her enemy, nor profaneness, ignorance, popery, errors, heresies, and
blasphemies, to acknowledge, that they owe their planting, watering and
increase, amongst us, to nothing more, then that we have not seasoned the
younger years of our respective families, with better things. Now

2. In relation to your Children.
Though what we have said of Catechizing, as a duty to your whole family, we
know you will conclude, does concern the fruit of your own bodies, the
choicest part of it, yet we shall crave leave to press it more particularly,
and to beseech you again to lay it to Heart.

1. How expressly God lays it upon you as a duty.

2. How many Engagements there be upon you, conscientiously to discharge it.

For the former, because what we are desiring of you, is a duty consisting of
two branches. 1. To Catechize them your selves. 2. To send them being thus
prepared, to be further instructed and taught to understand the grounds of
Religion, unto us; we are willing to let you see both parts of the duty.

1. For your Catechizing them at home, we shall add to what has been said
already,

1. Those precepts of the Scripture, where this charge is laid upon parents in
express Terms; we shall but name the places, and leave them to your
meditation, and practice, Deuteronomy. 4. 9, 10. and Chap. 6. 6, 7. and Chap. 11. 19.
Exodus 12. 24, 26, 27. Exodus 13. 8, 14, 15. Josh. 4. 6, 7, 21, 22. Psalm. 78. 5,
6. Joel 1. 3. Ephesians. 6 4. Pro. 22. 6.

2. The Example of parents fearing God, whose practice of this duty is upon
record; as Abraham, Genesis 18. 19. David, 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. which we hope you will
believe, was written for your Instruction. And lest you that are Mothers should
think your selves excused, we beseech you to consider, that as a child must
receive the instruction of his father, so he must not forsake the Law of his
mother, Pro. 1. 8. She is described to be a virtuous woman, that opens her
mouth with wisdom, Mercer. and Jansen. in Pro. 31. 26.
Pro. 31. 26. that teaches her children their duty both to God and man. Not
only did Solomon's father teach him, Pro. 4. 4. but we have the Prophecy also
that his mother taught him, Pro. 31. 1. Timothy knew the holy Scripture from a
child, 2 Timothy 3. 15. and you cannot doubt of the contribution, his mother, yea
and his Grandmother afforded to this Timely acquaintance of his with the Things
of God, when you read the Character you have of them ( Chap. 1. 5.) under the
hand of an Apostle. 2 John 1. 4.
And that John the Evangelist found of her children walking in Truth, had not
so much redounded to the praise of that Elect Lady, to whom he writes his
Second Epistle, if she had not instructed them in the way. Augustine writes of
his mother Monica, that she planted precepts of life in his mind, by her
words, watered them with her tears, and nourished them by her example. You
will, we doubt not, look upon these holy women who Trusted in God, as very
worthy to be imitated, in so great a duty.

2. For sending your children to us, we shall briefly offer you the duty of it,
in these particulars.

1. We are to feed the Lambs of Christ, Joh. 21. 15.
as well as his sheep, they are part of our charge, who are to watch over their
souls as well as yours.

2. That the Sabbath be sanctified by the children, is by an express Law of
God charged as a duty upon the parent, of which already from Exodus 20. 10.

3. A great part of the sanctification of this day is in coming solemnly
together to wait upon God in the duties of his worship, and particularly to
hear his word, and to be instructed by it, What we ought to believe
concerning God, and what duties God requires of us. This your Christianity will
not give you leave to doubt of.

4. This duty you cannot discharge as to your children, but by causing them to
bear a part in all the public duties of that day which they are capable of,
and particularly to be that way instructed, both as to faith and manners, in
which they are likeliest to receive most benefit, and we need not tell you
again, that this is to be Catechized.

For the Second; How many Engagements there be upon you to perform this duty?
have we any need to say a jot more then this, that they are our children; how
many motives does this dear and tender relation wrap up in it? we had no
intention to leave a volumne with you, and so shall but consider,

1. The need they have to have this course taken with them; Do they not come
into the world with souls, altogether as naked as their bodies? nothing but
filth upon the one, Joh. 3. 6.
nothing but sin upon the other; Job 25. 4.
and the wages even of this sin, is eternal death, Romans 6. 23. What should not
we do, that they may be borne again? Joh. 3. 3, 5.


2. As our children are borne in sin, so it is by our means, we are instruments
of it; sin is conveyed to them through our Loins, being sinful our selves, we
beget them (as Adam did Seth) in our own likeness, Genesis 5. 3.
after our Image. How prevailingly should this move us to be instrumental in
their cure, as we have been in their disease! to direct them to the
righteousness of the Second Adam, as we derived unto them the sin of the
first; that having begotten them after our own, they may be begotten and borne
again, Coloss. 3. 10.
after the Image of God, and how great a part of that consists in knowledge!
and without which Righteousness and True Holiness, Ephesians. 4. 24.
the other parts of it, are hoped for in vain, as long as it is life eternal
to know God and Jesus Christ whom he has sent. Joh. 17. 3.

3. The Ardency and strength of our affections toward our children, and how
many other ways we are wont to express it, by our longing for them before we
have them ( Genesis 15. 2. Genesis 30. 1. 1 Samuel 1. 10, 11.) our joy and contentment
afterward ( Joh. 16. 21.) the inestimable value we set upon them (2 Kings 4.
13, 14, 15, 16) our industrious care to keep them ( Gen 42. 36, 38. 2 Kings 4.
22, 24, 27, 30. Luc. 8. 41, 42. Joh. 7. 47, 49. 1 Kings 14. 4.) our extreme
grief when we lose them ( Genesis 37. 33, 34, 35. 2 Samuel 18. 33. and Chap. 19. 2,
4 Mat 2. 18.) our Sympathizing with them in all conditions, smarting under
their pain, ( Mark 9. 22. Mat. 15. 22.) and feeling the comfort of their
welfare, ( Genesis 45. 27, 28.) Look, Beloved, into your bowels, or if you cannot
find them there, look into the Scriptures, we have here brought you, and see
if these be not the affections of parents toward their children, and if these
express themselves at such a rate, so many other ways, Can there be a
stronger motive to lay them out the best way? upon their souls? by taking care
that they may be instructed unto the Kingdom of God?

Let us pause a while, and argue the case with our selves a little, or if you
will let us catechize our selves upon this point, and ask such Questions as
these; Did we long to have children, and shall we now suffer them to perish?
Shall we contentedly see them in such a condition, that (if they continue in
it) it had been good for them they had never been born? If their souls be not
filled with good, Eccles. 6. 3.
is not an untimely birth better then they? If our children be not brought to
the knowledge of God, and have no provision made them for eternity; will not
David's Imprecations concerning wicked men, serve us for wishes concerning them?
As a snaile which melts, oh that every one of them had passed away, Psalm. 58.
8.
or like the untimely birth of a woman, that they had never seen the Sun. Shall
we provide our selves a Temptation, to curse our childrens day, as Job cursed
his own, Job 3. V. 3, 5, 11, 12.
Let the day perish wherein they were born, and the night in which it was said,
they are conceived; Let darkness and the shadow of death stain it; let a
cloud dwell upon it; let the blackness of the day terrify it; why died they
not from the womb? why did they not give up the ghost, when they came out of
the belly? why did the knees prevent them? or why the breasts that they should
suck? To suffer them to perish for lack of knowledge, may it not put us upon
all this?

Were we so joyful when we had them, and shall we not tremble to think, that
when we shall have them no more the Devil will? and can any thing else be their
lot, if for want of instruction they die in no better a condition than they were
born? Did the Mother forget all the anguish of her travail for joy that they
were borne into this world? and will she not endeavor to provide against the
swallowing up of all this joy, by a just fear lest they should die eternally in
the next? And for what but a land of darkness, can a condition of darkness
qualify them?

Do we set so invaluable a rate upon them, and shall not their immortal part
be considered in the account?

Are we so careful to keep them, that we think no pain, trouble, cost, too
much to save their lives? and shall we lay out none of all this to save their
souls?

Do we grieve at such a rate when we lose them, and shall we not strive to make
our loss as easy as we can? that when God does take them from us, he may take
them to himself? And have we any warrant to believe that God will take whom he
does not know? or know those that were never taught to know him?

Can we Lament over every misery of theirs else, and not be troubled at the
misery of their Souls? weep, and pray, and advise, when they are sick, and
not afford them a tear, a prayer, an instruction as they are sinful? Do we
well to feel the pain of their bodies, which they feel themselves, and to be
insensible of the blindness of their souls, which they feel not?

Can we rejoice at all other good that betides them, and endeavor the
procurement of it, and have we no affections to bestow upon their best good?
Are we glad that they have health, and indifferent whether they have Grace?
glad they have an interest in the world, indifferent whether they have an
interest in Christ? If we seriously Catechize our selves at some such rate as
this, and find how unable we are to answer that sin and folly which carries all
our love to our children, only to their outward concernments, God might bless
it into a diversion of much of it toward their Souls, and if the flame once
break out at any rate this way, we will not doubt, but 'twill sufficiently
light and warm you in this great duty.

4. The promise you made when your children were baptized, was it not to
instruct them in the knowledge of Christ to whom you dedicated them in that
ordinance? breach of promise, specially breach of promise, where the interest
of Christ, and of precious Souls is so much concerned, is not a sin of an
ordinary magnitude. We hope we shall not find one amongst you all that is
incorrigibly guilty, and so shall not upon the offer of any child to Baptism
hereafter be necessitated to demurre whether it be not our duty to deny it you,
or at least to defer it.

3. In relation to your servants.
All that we have said already of the duty you owe to your whole Families, as
we have remembered you, how special an interest your children have in it, so we
think it expedient to add a little in particular reference to your servants,
to prevent any temptation you may have of supposing the care of their souls to
be none at all of your concernment. We shall lay what we have here to add,
before you in a very few words.

1. It Is not for nothing that the title of father is bestowed upon Heads of
Families in relation to more persons, than the children of their bodies: they
are fathers to their servants, 2 King. 5. 13. you can never make that title
good, unless you exercise a fatherly care over them, nor does any care so
well deserve this honorable appellation, as a care of their souls, which you
can no way better express, than by causing them to be instructed in the way to
Heaven.

2. They are advantageous members of your Families, and in the sweat of their
Brows do ye eat much of your bread. In the Inventory of men's estates are
servants reckoned as a part of their riches, Genesis 12. 16. and 24. 35. and 26.
14. and 30. 43. and 32. 5. 2 Kings 5. 26. Eccles. 2. 7. Shall they serve you,
and can you be careless whether they serve God or no? that you pay them the
wages of their work, what will it profit them, if you endeavor not to bring
them to Christ, that they may not receive the wages of their sins?

3. Very much of your interest is wrapped up in their Piety, we mean your
interest as to outward things, your affairs will prosper the better in their
hands; even wicked masters have found godly servants a great blessing, pray
read Genesis 39. 2. 3. and Chap. 30. 27. Philemon Ver. 10, 11. and see if all that
you have at home and abroad, your Tillage, your Cattle, your Trading, will not
fare the better in case you teach your servants how to serve the Lord Christ as
well as your selves.

4. Set before your eyes the practice of the Saints; Abraham had in his Family
318 Servants, Junius in loc.
and they are all said to be his trained, or instructed servants, instructed
and catechized in matters of Religion, what ever you do for them if you leave
out this, do not even Publicans and sinners, yea do not the Heathen which know
not God, the very same? yea

5. Set the Catechizing of your servants in the things of God aside, and do ye
more for them than ye do for your beasts? have they victuals from you? so have
all your Cattle: have they Clothing? so have your Horses if they want it: have
they Lodging? so have your Oxen, yea your very Dogs? do ye endeavor to procure
them Remedies when they are sick? so you do for your Swine: and are servants
indeed of no more value than these? have they not souls capable of blessedness
as well as you? you differ not in stuff but in use, Basil. Doron. l. 2. p. 95.
and that only by Gods ordinance, from the poorest servant in your Family.

Ob. Our servants will not submit, and what then shall we do?

Sol. 1. We hope they will; we cannot think that any persons will be so base
and low as to serve you, that will by no means be persuaded to serve God, or
will submit to learn a Trade to live by, but not to be saved by: we hope at
least better things.

Sol. 2. Have you Tried? have you set it before them, and pressed it seriously,
frequently, earnestly upon them as a duty? if you have not, we beseech you now
to begin, let them see what they owe to God, Matthew. 8. 9. Ephesians. 6. 5. Coloss. 3.
22. 1 Timothy 6. 1, 2. Titus 2. 9.
to their own souls, yea what obedience they owe to you. Take the Scriptures in
the margin, and lay them home upon their consciences, and in a way of prayer,
from God expect the issue.

Sol. 3. What are you wont to do, to make your servants comply in other
things? use the same authority in this, if any will tell you, though you have a
coercive power over your servants in other matters, yet you have none in this,
that you may compel them to learn how you may be served, but not how
themselves may be saved, pray take Time to believe them, Genesis 18. 19.
till they have told you by what authority Abraham commanded his household to
keep the way of the Lord, and whether a Civil authority to command without a
power to cause obedience, be of any signification? What commission Jacob had to
reform his whole family, Genesis 35. 2, 3, 4.
or how Josua will be excused from rashness in that resolute undertaking,
Josh. 24. 15.
that He and his House would serve the Lord? Exodus 20. 10.
And until they have offered you an expedient how you shall observe that Law
of seeing the Sabbath sanctified by your men servants and maid servants, if God
that has made it your duty, shall account it your sin, to cause it to be put
in execution. -- But we hope (as we said) you will find no such difficulty in
a work of so much consequence; and that you may not, we have a request,

2. To all in our respective Parishes that are under the family-Government of
others, children and servants of both sexes, of what age soever, if capable of
being instructed; and our request is, for the Lords sake, for your souls sake,
and as you will answer the contrary at your peril, when the dead both small
and great shall stand before God; Apoc. 20. 12.
2 These. 1. 8.
and Christ shall come in flaming fire to take vengeance on them that do not
know him. Isa. 27. 11.
When He that made you will have no mercy on you, and He that formed you will
show you no favor; in case he find you a people of no understanding: Pro. 13.
13.
when every despiser of knowledge shall be eternally destroyed, that you would
constantly use all Helps at home, and present your selves in the method and
order we shall appoint you to us your respective Ministers in the Congregation,
to be Catechized and instructed in the necessary Grounds of Religion. Consider.

1. We are not setting up a New way of Teaching you, but reviving an old one, a
way that the Church of God has walked in, many ages before we were borne, the
Church of God both Jewish and Christian: and in the Christian Church, men of
the choicest Character for learning and piety, have discharged the office of
Catechizers, as, Clemens Alexandrinus, Origin, Optatus, Basil, Augustine,
Ambrose, Cyrill, etc. whose names we believe, many of you have heard of, as of
men famous in their generations.

2. Its a way of Teaching that Christ himself in his childhood was pleased to
Honor with his presence; when he was Twelve years old, his parents found him
in the Temple sitting in the midst of the Doctors, Chemnit. Har. Evang. 6. 15.
Zanch. Vol. 3. Tom. 8. p. 580.
both hearing them and asking them Questions, Luc. 2. 46. This, as Learned men
observe, was a meeting for Catechizing; and we will but offer it to your
observation, whether the 47 verse ( and all that heard him were astonished at
his understanding and answers) affords not ground enough to believe that
Christ himself was Catechized, and gave answers to the Questions that were
propounded to him. Dare you entertain so much as a d^eame of salvation by this
Christ, and yet despise that ordinance which he has Honored?

E^cles. 12. 1.
3. How Honorable it is to remember your Creator in the days of your youth, to
know God betimes. It is mentioned to the great credit of Mnason, Acts 21. 16.
that he was an old Disciple, one that had known and followed Christ a long
time; 1 King. 18. 12.
of Obadiah, that he feared the Lord from his youth; 2 Timothy 3. 15.
of Timothy, that he had known the holy Scriptures from a child; Psalm. 119.
60.
of David, that he made have and delayed not to keep Gods Commandments; Romans
16. 7.
of Andronicus and Junia, that they were in Christ before Paul; and it will be
your Honor and happiness, to be instructed in the ways of God betimes.

Ob. But some of us are very young, and we may stay a while; it will be Time
enough to learn what belongs to Relig^on, and the ways of God hereafter.

Sol. 1. A child is to be Trained up in the way that he should walk, P^o. 22. 6.

Sol. 2. If you that can make this objection be not too young to be damned, you
cannot be too young to be Catechized; those that are old enough to sin, are old
enough to perish; and there is no life eternal, but to know God, and Jesus
Christ whom he has sent, Joh 17. 3.

Ob. Some of us are at men and women's estate, ready to be married, and we are
ashamed to come and stand among the little children to be Catechized.

Sol. 1. If you are ashamed that you have at this age need to be Catechized,
it is a good sign, it proceeds (we hope) from a sense of your ignorance, and a
conviction of your sin, in neglecting this means of instruction all this
while, and we shall look upon it as an Argument, that you will not go on to
sin against your consciences in neglecting it any longer.

2. If you be ashamed to own, and learn the Doctrine of Christ, see what
impressions will be upon your spirits after you have laid to heart, that
resolution of Christ, which you find recorded, Luke 9. 26. Whosoever shall be
ashamed of me, and of my words, of him shall the Son of man be ashamed, when he
shall come in his own glory, and in his Fathers, and of the holy Angels.

3. Whether do you think it more advisable to go to Hell with graver company,
or to Heaven, with children? or do ye believe you shall ever meet them at the
end, with whom you are ashamed to be seen in the way?

4. That you are ready to be married, is an Argument that we would borrow of
you to persuade you to be the readier to be Catechized; will you enter into
that relation, and not learn the duties of it? 1 Pet. 3. 7.
How will you that are to be a Husband, dwell with your wife according unto
knowledge, if you suffer nothing to dwell with your self but ignorance? And
how will you that are to be a wife, Coloss. 3. 18.
submit your self to your own husband, as it is fit in the Lord, if you do
not know the Lord? And how will both of you live together, as Heirs of the
grace of life, when through the ignorance that is in you, you are mere
strangers to a life of Grace? Ephesians. 4. 18.
Or how will you teach your children and servants, what you would never be
persuaded to learn your selves? Marriage we know is common to mankind, and
Heathens may enter into it, but this we are constrained to let you know, that
if persons professing Christianity, expect that we should have any hand in the
celebration of it, between such among them as neither know their duty to God,
nor to one another, nor will be persuaded to learn it, whether it be a duty
incumbent upon us to do it, we must, at least, take Time to consider.

Qu. What if we understand the principles of Religion well enough already?

Sol. Yet you ought by your Example to encourage others, to let us that are
your Ministers know it, that we may bless God for you, propound you as
patterns to the rest, and receive from you an Evidence of your fitness for the
Lords Supper, which if duly qualified you ought to partake of, and we to
administer. We hope we need not use more arguments, with persons that know they
have souls, to prevail with them for a compliance with us in those things
that so apparently tend to their salvation.

Secondly, For private Conference with the Heads and Governors of families,
we have seriously and sadly considered the ignorance of many under a long
enjoyment of the means of knowledge, and the profaneness of more under as
long an enjoyment of the means of Grace. And having nothing to add to our
public ministerial labors, as a further means of your proficiency in grace
and knowledge, but a more familiar way of personal instruction by Private
Conference, we do hereby offer our selves also to this service of your
souls, and in the name of Christ (whose Messengers we are in this errand)
beseech you to accept of it, and that it may reach the end that both we and
you ought to aim at, we desire,

1. That we may meet you, either at your houses asunder, or a greater number
of you together at such Times and places, as we shall appoint for that
purpose; or if any inconvenience be found in what we shall offer, you would be
pleased to propound a better method your selves, and we shall readily comply
with you in it.

ance) shall refuse to be persuaded to the duties we have mentioned, assure
your selves that even this paper shall be a witness against you at the day of
Judgment, which is sent you (the Lord knows) to no such purpose, by

Yours in the service of the Gospel, Robert Tuchin Minister of Newport. John
Barnes Minister of Whippingham. Edward Buckler Minister at Calbourne. Robert
Dingley Minister of Brixton. James Creswick Minister of Fresh Water. John
Martyn Minister of the Gospel at Yarmouth. Vincent Spark Minister of
Shalfleete. Josh: Tompkins Minister at Brook. Simon Pole Minister at West
Cowes. Tho: Clarke Minister of Gods-hill. William Harby Minister of Shanklin.
Martin Wells Minister of Yaverland. William Bicknell Minister of the Gospel at
Newport. Richard Beminster Minister of Wotton. Matthew Hearne Minister of
Lawrence.



