THE ADDRESS OF The Freeholders OF The County of Middlesex, Made and Delivered
in Writing the Third day of this instant March, 1680. at Hamstead-Heath, unto
Sir William Roberts Knight and Baronet, and William Ranton Esquire; after they were
declared to be Elected Knights to Represent the said County of Middlesex in the
next Parliament to be holden at Oxford the One and twentieth of this Instant.
Gentlemen,
WE the Freeholders of this County, have (in great Confidence of Your
Integrity, Wisdom and Courage,) now chosen You, to Represent Us in the next
Parliament, to be holden at Oxford, on the 21st. day of this present March. And
although we do not in the least question Your Faithfulness, to the True
interest of this Nation; nor Your Prudence in the Management thereof. Yet
esteeming it greatly our Duty, in this unhappy juncture, wherein our Religion,
Lives, Liberties, Properties, and all that is dear unto us, are in such Eminent
danger, to signify our pressing Dangers unto You. And accordingly we do
request, That in the next Parliament, wherein we have Chosen You to Sit, and
Act, That You will with the greatest Integrity, and most undaunted Resolution,
Join with, and Assist the other Worthy Representatives, and Patriots of this
Nation, in the searching into, and preventing the Horrid and Hellish Villainies,
Plots and Designs, of that wicked, and restless sort of People, the Papists,
both in this, and the Neighboring Kingdoms. And making some Honorable
Provision for the Discoverers thereof;

In securing to Us, the Enjoyment of the True Protestant Religion, and the well
Established Government of this Kingdom,

In Promoting the happy, and long Prayed-for Union, among all His Majesty's
Protestant Subjects.

In Repealing the 35th. of Elizabeth, The Corporation Act, and all other Acts,
which upon Experience have proved Injurious to the True Protestant Interest.

In Asserting the Peoples unquestionable Rights of Petitioning.

In removing our just Fears, by Reason of the great Forces in this Kingdom,
under the Name of Guards, which the Law has no knowledge of.

In preventing the Misery, Ruin, and utter Destruction, which unavoidably must
come upon This, and the Neighboring Nations, if James Duke of York, or any
other Papist, shall Ascend the Royal Throne of this Kingdom.

And lastly, in securing to us, our Legal Right of Annual Parliaments; which
(under God) will unquestionably, prove the Highest security of all that is
good, and desirable to us, and our Posterity after us.

Always assuring our Selves, that You will not in any Wise, consent unto any
Money-Supply, until we are Effectually secured against Popery, and Arbitrary
Power.

And Particularly we desire You, to give the most hearty Thanks of this County,
to that Noble Peer, the Earl of Essex, and by Him to the rest of those Noble
and Renowned Peers, who were pleased lately and so seasonably, to offer their
Petition, and Advice to his Majesty.

In the Pursuance of all which Needful, Worthy, and Excellent Ends, we shall,
as in duty bound, stand by You, with our Lives and Fortunes.

This Address was very gratefully Accepted, by both the Elected Members. And
their Answer returned to the great Content of the Freeholders.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Smith, at the Elephant and Castle in Cornhill,
near the Royal Exchange. 1680.


