A ^rue and Terrible Rela^h from MALETRAVIS in ALIGO, an Island belonging to
the ^ing of Spain, of a sad Accident that ^efell the whole City, it
consisting of seven and thirty thousand Families, and how they were destroyed
all in one night by a Fog or Damp that rose upon them, which destroyed both
Men, Women, and Children, except five persons, which by accident got down into
a Vault, and so escaped.

This Relation was sent to a Merchant in this City, who lives in Creed-Church
Parish in Leaden Hall London.

Published as a Warning for all people to repent of their Sins, and to be
prepared against sudden death.

Printed at London by E. P. for Francis Coals, dwelling in the Old-Bayley. 1648.

woodcut

woodcut

A True and terrible Relation from Maletravis in MALIGO.
THe Sins of Man are so great, and cry to the Lord so loud for vengeance upon
all Mankind, that God must be infinitely merciful to spare us crawling
worms.

O England, take thou warning from this Judgment of Gods; look to thy self,
God sees thy Iniquities, and records thy Transgressions, and will be avenged on
thee for thy sins; he h^ offered thee much of his Mercies, a^ has spared
thee in the height of t^ Rebellion against him; beware tho^ and repent, and
amend thy wickedness. Let not the Custom of sin take away the Conscience of
sin; for God has bent his Bow like an Enemy, and stands with his right hand
like an Adversary, and will slay all that is pleasant to the eye, and will
pour out his Fury like fire. God threatens all impenitent sinners, and will
not spare them if they long continue in their sins: How many years has God
spared this Nation, who has lived under the blessed means of the Gospel of
Jesus Christ, when we have not brought forth any thing but sins and
misdeeds, he has with patience waited the spring and growth of grace in us,
but we have proved barren and dry Trees, broken Cesternes which have held no
water: and may not God justly deal with us as with Sodom and Gomorrah? Nay,
with us as with Maletravis, consume us with Fire and Brimstone as he did these?
Nay, with the least breath of his nosthrills; and if one sin divided amongst
ten thousand be able to damn them all, how shall this Nation ever be able to
answer all those abominable sins that it has committed? No sin but
deserves punishment, and man was never punished but for sinning; therefore
remember, O England, how wilful thou have been in despising the Mercies of
God from time to time, he would have gathered thee as a Hen would have gathered
her Chickens, and thou would not: Woe to thee England, thou have destroyed thy
self; if thou defer thy repentance, God will be sure to be avenged on thee;
God will bruise thee with an Iron Rod, and break thee in pieces like a Potters
Vessel; But if thou call upon him in the day of trouble, he will have mercy on
thee; If thou call on him in the day of trouble he will hear thee, and
divert those Judgments which hang over thy head from thee. Had Sodom
repented, God had not punished; had Comorrah considered her Iniquities, God had
not destroyed her; and had Maletravis remembered her Transgressions, and
sorrowed for them, God had nor punished her Iniquites. God has destroyed those
Cities and many more for sin, and undoubtedly will destroy thee (London) if
thou return not to the Lord thy God with speed, lay hold on those things which
concern thy everlasting peace and comfort whilst it is to day, least God take
this opportunity from thee.

Ah, but some will say, That Sodom sinned against God, and in a larger measure
then we: But O thou mistaken Soul; compare the sins of Sodom and Gomorrah,
with the finnes of London and England, and see whether the sins of London
were not greater then the sins of Sodom; Have we not carried our selves
proudly against our God? Despised his Ordinance? Contemned is Goodness? Abused
his Patience, and turned our backs upon his Mercies? Have we not poluted our
Land with Blood, Blasphemy, and Oppression? And may not God as justly destroy
us as he did them?

Ah, but some will say, This Maletravis were all Papists and Idolaters: ^t is
true, they were, so much the worse for us; they worshipped God with more
fervencie of spirit in their way then we, considering the measure of knowledge
they had; God expects no more from a man then what he has received. Had the
Gospel of Jesus Christ been so purely preached amongst them as us, undoubtedly
they would have brought forth better fruits.

But now to come to the Story, which is both Lamentable and true; It is a great
mercy that God has given us of this Nation, so long and large a time of our
repentance; God has showed himself a loving God, a merciful God, a
long-suffering God, otherwise we had been consumed as the stubble upon the
earth, and have caused the earth to open and swallow us up, as he did Korah,
Dathan, and Abiram. It is not our fighting for Reformation that God is taken
with, it must be our practical parts of duty which must establish us in the
favor of our God; It not going twice a day to the Church that will make God in
love with us; no, it must be a Charitable and Pious Conversation that must make
Gods face to shine upon us; It is not our Fasting-dayes from victuals that
will gage God to be reconciled with us; no, it must be a true and lively faith
in Christ, and an obstaining from Envy, Oppression, Covetousness, Pride,
Murder, Drunkenness, Blasphemy and Profaneness, which must engage God to be
at peace with us. If any of these sins predominate in our Land, we must
look for the Vialls of Gods Wrath, and be sure to drink the dregs of his
Indignation for them. And now let us turn to the Lord our God with all our
hearts and souls, and seek him whilst it is yet time; which if we do, we
may find mercy and acceptance in the sight of our God, and quit our Land from
desolation, which will inevitably fall upon us. It is good to take warning by
such Judgments, and make our peace with God, that he may turn his wrath from
us, and take us into his favor. Let us prize these golden opportunities, and
not think those of Maletra^is were greater finners then we; for assuredly, if
we do not repent and amend, we shall all likewise perish. This Story is
unparalleled, the Judgment of God has appeared as much upon this poor City
of Maletravis, as upon any we read on in any History, if we look but at what a
sudden God appeared against them, it will make us all tremble to go to our
beds with the guilt of sin upon us, least God appear in wrath as upon them.
Was it not a Judgment unparalleled, when above two hundred and fifrie thousand
Souls had their lives taken out of the Land of the living in one night,
besides all manner of living creatures; as well Horses, Cattle, Sheep, Dogs,
Cats, Rabbets, Mice and Rats? Thus you see, God did not spare the senseless,
but destroyed them for the sakes of the sinful.

Once more I say, O England, consider the things which belongs to thy
happiness, and turn to the Lord thy God, for he can as easily destroy thee as
he did this Maletravis.

And now to the truth of the Story, I shall refer thee to a Letter, sent by a
Merchant in Maligo, to a Merchant in Creed-Church Parish London, which here I
give you verbatim.

SIR,
UPon the second day of September, God did show the wonderfullest Judgment
upon the Town of Maletravis that any ears has heard; for there was not a
man, woman, or child, that escaped the anger of God: Nay, the very Cattle,
and all the living creatures in the Town were not exempted from death, five
men only excepted; which feeling the Dampe come so violently, got down into a
Vault, which was made from the Cathedral up to a Nunerie, which is some two
miles or thereabouts from the Town: They thinking themselves in danger, seeing
the little childrens breath taken from them as they lay at their mothers
breasts, got down, and so escaped. This Damp or Fog, began at twelve of the
clock at night, and continued till betwixt one and two in the morning; In which
time were destroyed above two hundred and fifty thousand Souls, besides
brutts. The next morning, being Market day, these five men came near the City
to see who went in, and whether any were left alive to buy of them; but the
Countrey-people coming in, and seeing all the streets lying full of dead men,
women, and children, were much astoxished, and ran away and left them, with
what speed they could; But these five men, seeing them go in and out with
safety, and without danger, went in, and found all dead, and their own wives
and children lying in the streets and gardens, breathless and life-lesse. And
when they had seen this sad Spectacle, they went as fast as they could to the
Governor of this Country, and told him of it, and he commodiously summoned a
Court of Council, and they immediately commanded in the Country to bury
them, and sent a considerable party of Soldiers to keep the Country from
Sacking their houses. This being done, Proclamation was made, That if any one
had any kindred in that Town, they should come and make it appear by some of
the neighbors upon Oath, and then they should go in and take possession of
their deceased Friends Goods. Likewise to Merchants, they were to make Oath,
and produce Letters, and then they should go in and receive the like. And then
they commanded all the poor to go in and to be set at work, at such things
as they could do. Thus have I given you as full a Relation as I can touching
the business, and shall remain,

Sanderstons. Dear Sir, your friend and servant RICHARD ADAMS.

FINIS.

