Moonshine: OR THE RESTORATION OF JEWS-TRUMPS AND BAGPIPES.

Being an Answer to Dr. R. Wild's Letter etc. and his Poetica Licentia, etc.

Cynthius aurem vellit. Ephesians. 5. 4.

LONDON, Printed for R. C. sold in Little Britain against the Globe. 1672.

AN ANSWER TO Dr Wild's LETTER, etc.
Doctor,
WIth as many faces, and as much pain as ever tooth was drawn, I made shift a
while ago to wade through a most vile and dirty pamphlet of yours with this
Title: A Letter from Dr. Robert Wild upon occasion of his Majesty's Declaration
for Liberty of Conscience, together with his Poetica Licentia, etc. Which
pamphlet I found all the way pretending to most extraordinary joy and thanks;
but of such a witless and slovenly kind, that could his Majesty have possibly
imagined that his Clemency could have been so saucily abused, and his kindness
so nastily and Sirreverentially received, most certainly Robert had been as
particularly excepted from the benefit of the Declaration as Hugh and some
others were, from the Act of Oblivion. And my business, Dr. at present is only
to acquaint you, that though Poetica Licentia jingles very prettily with
Liberty of Conscience, yet that Poetiea is never Latin for Conscience, nor
Licentia for any such ill manners as you at large show, both in your Letter and
Poem. And that I may in your own style convey my meaning the easier into your
belly, I am to tell you, that when you went about to confound the one with the
other, you were as absolutely mistaken, as he that took a glister pipe for a
flageolet, or the intestinum rectum for the great artery.

And in the first place I observe, that before you signify your receiving the
news of the Declaration, you would fain delude the friend you write to, into a
fit of laughter; by the mere dull jest of telling him that you are a merry
fellow. For when you go about to tickle him up to a belief of it, with such
deadly old and small provocations as of hanging your harp upon the Willows and
singing lachrymae, in stead of the songs of Sion; of laughing at a feather,
especially, O especially if it be upon a fools cap; of being as merry as the
old sect of Crickets, though after a baking, yea verily though after a baking;
or as the chimney men themselves, who are a new sect of Crickets, at some
certain times of the year; nay, though for the better disguise you split an
ancient abuse, and call the Bishop of Bristol, Cock in one line, and comb in
another; yet I durst boldly say that if your friend has but the least share of
wit, or any sense of conscience, he can no more laugh at such overworn and
tattered stuff, than if he should find his house all in flames, and his Wife
and Children hung up in seniority.

And as thou set forth with such a niggardliness of wit, that it is great
impudence in thee to presume, that the most easy of thy Nonconforming friends
should smile at it: so thou as saucily proceedest, comparing the grave and
solemn Music of our Church, to a whistle, bagpipe and jewstrump. Which, if
thou had done with wit answerable to its insolence, much time and long
repentance might perhaps have brought thee off: but to say that the whistling
of a bodies-maker is every whit as good and elevating as a Salisbury Anthem,
and that a bag-pipe does far excel the Organ at Hackney, and to give no better
reason but only that thy sowses are not made of silk, is so very rude and
unpardonable, that seeing thou were not excepted, thou do now deserve to be
excommunicated out of the Toleration it self. For let us a little consider,
Doctor; is there not an Organ in the Kings Chapel, as well as at Hackney? and
are not Anthems sung there, as well as at Salisbury? and has not his Majesty
told thee in his Declaration, that it is his express resolution and intention
that the Church of England be preserved in its Doctrine, Discipline and
Government: and whoever preaches seditiously or to the derogation thereof, must
expect severely to be punished? Suppose such a thing as this should be objected
to thee: I am confident thou have nothing in the world to say, but only what
thou would have impos*d upon thy friend in the beginning, viz. That Robin is
a merry fellow, an absolute Cricket, a mere wagg, a droole and a most accurate
splitter of a prelatical Coxcomb. But, thou that pretendest to dance on the
high rope, to soar aloft, and clip Clouds, thou must not cheat thy self and
think that such crawling bumours as these will excuse thy rudeness. For
although his Majesty of tenderness and compassion to such weakly subjects as
thy self, has graciously condescended, that answerably to your style and
matter, you should be indulged either the liberty of a pair of tongs, to play
you to perch upon a Plum-tree, and from thence to distribute; or to be squeak'd
up the Hay-lost with a comb and paper, and there to float and spread it over a
beam; yet I suppose he never did design to give over the Musicians of his
Chapel, either to Dutch or Devil, in compliance with thy elegant advice from
the two D's, nor to send for thy blind Piper, jews-trumper or neighboring
bodies-maker, to whistle up his Bishops and Chaplains when they preach before
him: upon my word, Dr. Robert Wild, if one of you three will but read over the
Declaration, you will find you are all most vilely mistaken.

The small feathered and cricket-like preface being thus finished, and the
Doctor having made therewith no creature in the world merry, besides himself:
it is high time for him now to leave the frying pan, and the four herrings, and
to attend the Post-boy, who blew his Horn and Toleration. But why in such have,
good Doctor? what, listen to a Horn before the orthodox exercise of eating and
drinking? especially at an hour when the maw stretches and yawns, and makes
humble request for victuals? how, so cruel as to forsake four pensive
disconsolate herrings; when your own conscience flew on your face, and told you
that they had lately been in very great distress, and in as sad a pickle as the
Dutch Fleet the week before? How so careless of your family, as to give over
your wife and maid to the cruelty of four hissing sputtering outrageous
Herrings? Suppose one of the stoutest and discontented of them had made a
violent digression out of the frying pan, and struck up you maids heels, and in
your absence had swallowed your wife, head, shoulders and all. (As the great
Pike at Bosco, that on a sudden ran away from the Pound and his Keepers, and in
a trice devoured a whole flock of Sheep.) Suppose, I say, any such calamity had
happened in the family by your neglect: would it not have pricked you sorely to
have left the house in such tumult and disorder? I, I, you, you are the men
that have got the Conscience of the whole Nation: that pretend to such
curiosity and neatness of Conscience, and yet make nothing to leave a poor
helpless wife and but one maid to the fury and insolence of four dissatisfied
and devouring Herrings: and only upon that quibling pretense, forsooth, that
you had other fish to fry. Come come, Doctor, deceive not your self with such
loose principles. You may pretend to as much tenderness of Conscience as you
will; but I am afraid that if you had had four Cormorants, or four Eagles for
dinner, the case would have been the same; for you would either have had other
Birds to look after, or other Fish to fry, or some such Conscience-palliating
excuse.

But I shall leave you to consider of this unanswerable neglect at your
Leisure: and we'll go on, if you please, to the very Declaration it self. But
before we read it, that our joy may be gradual and solemn; and that not the
least expression of thanks and mirth may be wanting to so great an occasion,
let us droll, flash, and be a little phansiful upon the very paper it self:
which being clipped for the better lying in the Letter, affords four absolute new
merry conceits. First, the Declaration thus shorn is like a Roundhead: the
reason of that is plain because of Aquarius. Secondly, it is like an Amsterdam
Divine: that also is as plain because of Sagittarius. Thirdly, it is like an
officiating Friar; upon the account of the Bulls right Eye. Fourthly, it is
unlike clipping of money; upon some other account.

Having thus bedabbld the outside of the Declaration with four such dewy
delicate phansies: now, Dr, we'll set on, and fall to reading. But not rudely
and unsanctifyedly, but with that short ejaculation of S. Paul, S. George for
England. Or as one of the Latins renders it, Cynthius aurem vellit, Ephesians
the 5th and the 4th And the Grace being ended, we venture now upon the Title of
the Book. His Majesty's Declaration to all his Loving Subjects, March 15.
1671/2. What, to all his Loving Subjects? this is joy indeed! However I am sure
his Majesty means me in a most special manner: for I have a soul as white and
spotless toward the King, as any Lawn in England; and I do and will love the
King with any Churchman of them all, for a thousand pounds. A Prelatical man
love the King! that is a frolic indeed. Where Is any one of them that in
obedience to the Act of Uniformity, presently laid down a plump Parsonage, as I
did, and suffered ever since for his Majesty. And (if I may be so bold) how
came his Majesty, I pray, into England? who was it that invited him hither, and
settled him in his Throne? did not George and I do all that business? He and
his forces undertaking for the prose part of his restoration: and I, with my
Muses, undertaking for the Poetic? I tell thee, Doctor, thou swaggerest much,
what a loyal, white, spotless, lawn-soul thou have toward his Majesty: but he
that shall torture himself so much as to look over thy late letter and poem,
will presently perceive so much of courseness, greasiness and nastiness, that
he will think thy soul much more like that same Prebyterian horse-cloth, thou
speak of, than any Lawn or Tiffany.

The Title being thus dispatched, and the clemency of his Majesty being justly
compared to that of Cyrus to the Jews, or Constantine to the oppressed
Christians, or as the welcome Dove to the water-beaten Ark: (as if the Doctor
and two or three of his Crickets were the only people of God, and had bespoaken
all Christianity, and taken up every inch of the Ark:) we go next to the date
of the Declaration; which happening to be upon the fifteenth of March, ought to
be most solemnly commemorated; partly by way of panegyric, and partly by way
of wonderment. In panegyric thus: O thou fifteenth of March! be thou and the
four salt herrings for ever Chronicled and extolled. It is a thousand pitties
that thou art already engaged to be the fifteenth of March; for if thou had
thy right and due, thou do as certainly deserve to be the first day of
January, as a quart of milk is worth a penny. It is my request and wish that
thou be acquainted with the twenty ninth of May: and seeing thou art decreed to
be the fifteenth of March, be thou however kind to the fifth of November: for
five and ten make fifteen. But as for the twenty fourth of August and the
thirtieth of January, hold no correspondence with them; for upon the one I lost
my living; and upon the other the King his head: which by all the people of
God, good Christians and Ark-holders ought to be utterly forgotten. Now for
Wonderment. How! what, the fifteenth of March bring forth such news as this?
can mercy, truth and peace, long preaching and praying be restored again in
March? can such heavenly and elevating music as bagpipes and whistles and
jews-trumps be brought home to an unsettled Nation in the month of March? can
such a big-bellied, Dutch-bellied, blundering, blunderbuz month as March, that
feeds wholly upon white pease pottage and dumplings* afford any such blessing
to the Israel of God? Gray pease indeed have somewhat of fatherliness, clemency
and compassion for a distressed Church and a persecuted people: but white
pease, backed with perverse, obstinate, and hard hearted dumplings -- surely it
cannot be! nor ever would have been, had it not (as the Doctor well observes)
so handsomely jumped with the Jewish feast of Purim on their fourteenth and
fifteenth of March.

The date of the Declaration being thus sufficiently wondered at: in the next
place we proceed to the great benefits and advantages of this Liberty of
Conscience: which are of such a kind, that neither King nor Council could
possibly ever ghess at, or hope for. For whereas his Majesty expects nothing
else, but that silly stubborn people may hereby perceive their folly and error,
and in time be reduced to a sober mind, and the Church of England: the Doctor
holds forth, and declares that this same Toleration (if rightly understood)
notwithstanding it came out in the blustering Month of March, will have such a
vast influence and power over Holland, that all the fish now at Amsterdam
(excepting the small fry) will forth with skip out of the water, and run all
away to London: and that now, upon Liberty of Conscience, 'twill be as common a
thing to meet with Carp, Pike, Tench, and Eel walking about the streets, as in
the days of Uniformity to meet with a Dog or a Porter. But because this looks
like too great an alteration on a sudden; therefore it is to be noted that by
Carp we mean soft and smoothmouth'd Presbyterians: by Pike, bouncing and
devouring Prelatists and Pluralists: and by Tench and Eel, muddy and slimy
Opinionists: and well we may: both because of the feast of Purim, and that the
Evening and the Morning were the fifth day.

And now we are talking of Ponds and Rivers, of Prelates, Presbyterians,
Opinionists and Fish: and there being a certain River here in England called
Trent, affording only a small quibble (as small as the remaining fry at
Amsterdam) it may be not amiss to observe, that of all waters the Papists
delight most in Trent. For take a Papist and tie him head and heels together,
and fling him with a good lusty stone about his neck into the Thames or any
other River, besides Trent; and he presently sinks to the bottom, lies sullenly
there, and will not feed nor fatten himself at all. But stroke him softly upon
the back, and put him gently into the River Trent, and he is as brisk and
frolic as a mouse in June, and in a very short time proves as fat as a Lamprey
with nine eyes. For, as the Doctor well observes, a Papist is nothing else but
a Lamprey with nine eyes. For as Rome standing upon seven hills was called
Septicollis: so the Papists have just nine eyes, neither more nor less, and may
be thence called Lampreys.

Thus far, Dr, you are very aerie, smooth and delightful; but, in my opinion,
toward the latter end of this Section, you are a little too deep and somewhat
reserved. Where you leave frying of Fish, and fall to telling the Pope, what a
great loss he had (upon the Reformation) of the English Shambles, of the
English Muttons and English Veals: and of the lusty chines of noble
Fornicators, which he used to torture, as severely, as when they fell into the
cruel clutches of King Lues or Morbus Gallicus. Now, Dr, that which I am
horribly puzl'd at, is this same King Lues. For searching very carefully my
French History, I can hear no more news of any King Lues, than of King
Scorbutus, or King Catarrhus. If you had committed these same Fornicationers
into the clutches of King Pharamond, King Dagobert, or King Pippin; I had
almost understood you: for, I know, that any of those would have clawed the
rogues away: especially King Pippin, for a certain reason that I know: which I
shall not now stand to tell you, but instead thereof tell you a short story out
of one of your own Classical Authors.

There was a man in the West, who being to be tried for his life, was asked by
the Recorder his name; who answered Spillman. Say you so, quoth the Recorder,
Spillman? 'twill go hard with you, upon my word, friend: for take away S. P.
and what is your name then, Sirrah? Even what your Worship please, quoth
Spillman. Come, come, Sirrah, you are an old cunning Rogue: you have been of
the trade, ever since you were born, and you know it well enough: for take away
S. P. and it is Illman: and then Sirrrah, Sirrah, put but K to it, and it is
Killman. Take him away Jaylotn, we need no witnesses in the case: he is a born
Rogue, for his name has hanged him.

It Is good thus far; but what follows is much better and as Classical. A while
after there came one to be tried before the Mayor, who having learned of the
Recorder, how to hang in his absence, asked the fellow his name; who answered
Wilson. How now, Sirrah! Wilson? take away S. P. and then it is Illman, and put
K to it and then it is Killman, away with him Jaylour.

And let thus much serve for King Lues. Now we go to the Minister of the
Doctor's Parish: upon whom he has two admirable remarks. First, his
Parishioners don't grunt at him. And why? because he takes no Tythe-pigs.
Secondly, his Church is constantly very full of Ears, because his barn has
none. Admirably good indeed! have a care Dr. of going into the West, for if the
Mayor meet you, he will take away S. P. for your wit sake. This is Robin the
Cricket! this is the fruits of Milk Pottage, crumm'd thick, and eat hot! oh how
it flushes the cheeks, and makes the fancy to glow again! Surely the young
Scholar that put that handsome abuse upon Mr. Eaton, had got a flush from some
such inspiring Soupe: for he being at Mr. Eaton's house, where there was a
Goose for dinner, Mr. Eaton asked him if he would not eat some goose. The young
Scholar being a little flushed, laid upon catch, till all was eaten and took
away; then says he, I thank you for my good cheer, good Mr. Eaton, for I
perceive the goose is Eaten. This, Dr, as I well remember, happened in the
reign of your King Lues, or immediately after.

And now Dr, I have very little more to say to your Letter; only I cannot but a
little delight my self to see what great pains you take to excuse your self to
your grave friend for being so merry and witty. Whereas I Will undertake to fetch
an ordinary Waterman, and the Rogue shall not be assisted at all with any
extraordinary flush; who (setting aside your Lachrymae, adusum Sarum, and two
or three such Latin smallnesses) shall void as many passing and lusty jests
between Temple-stairs and Westminster as are to be found in your whole Letter:
and I Will not so much as except the Herrings tail hanging out of your wifes
mouth. Neither, Dr, must you hope to be pardoned for overcharging such a very
small measure of wit, with such a vast proportion of rudeness and arrogance; by
saying that you were infected by reading a late Dialogue against Mr. Hobbs. For
what if a young conceited coxcomb shall be so pert and confident as to try to
invent any thing against Mr. Hobbs after so many grave and learned confutations
of him: or be so idle and pragmatical as to crack a few lice upon his head,
make a few trivial jests about his staff, and most philosophically confute his
Boots: cannot you see such a Jackanapes on horseback, but presently you must
call for a pillion and get up behind him; or rather take a fresh Hobbyhorse
(that now is a kind of a King Lues or a Robinism) and ride his Jackanapeship
quite out of sight? Truly, Dr, although all the world (as you say) is so very
big with jest, yet this will not at all serve your turn, neither must you ever
expect to see your intolerable dullness excused, by saying that we
Nonconformists don't go to plays, and therefore we cannot match their cocks. For
there is a very worthy person that frequents Plays no more than thy self; whose
Friendly Debates thou take thy common rudeness to compare to the sputtering
of Fish, or the scolding at Billingsgate: whereas it is known to all the world,
that the same learned Author has given more proof of sense and wit in any six
lines of his writings, than thy punning abilities will ever give thee lieve so
much as to understand thy whole life.

And so farewell, Doctor, as to thy prose. Now for Poetica Licentia! now for
liberty of Conscience in Rhyme! now stand by gout and sense, wit and good
manners: and let the Doctor and his Muse Mopsa have a brush at pro and con. Now
stretch forth thy self my dear one, and be thou transported above all the
pedantick Laws of Poetry and Modesty. Don't sneak now, and like a Conformist,
utter things that are mean and despicable: but speak fire and lightning, fury
and raptures, and let the first mount be within a spit and a stride of the
Moon. Thou know, my Girl, that thou have been clipped and shortened; thou have
been in bonds and fetters, since that accursed twenty fourth of August. But the
fifteenth of March is now come, my pretty witty slut: Liberty of Conscience is
now come: Poetica Licentia is come: and the joy is great, the King is great,
and the Bible (by Grandsire Hierarchy's leave) is now again great. And
therefore pluck out the half herring out of thy mouth forthwith, and call
together all the flowers and phansies, puns, and quibbles, and clinches in to
thy assistance.

M. Truly, Dr, this cup of his Majesty's favor is so strong and heady that I
cannot at present find my feet; and to go about to make Verses without feet, is
next unto going to Football with ones Shoulders.


Dr. Away, away, with such Vniformity-excuses: for seeing there is Liberty of
Conscience, if thou have no Feet, then fly, my Girl, I say fly into some
loftiness and mightiness of Gratulation.


M. We would make Bonefires, Sir, but that we fear
Name of Incendiaries we may hear.

Dr. That Is most admirably said my dainty Mouze, let King Lues with all his
Corneilles, Scuderys, and the rest of his morbify'd wits produce such a
distich: it is short, clean and smart. Bonefires and Incendiaries; Powder and
Peace; Treason and Glory. Amen. And now, my fine Wench, for one strain more:
let it be seasonable and brisk and gripe the Church men for their tooting
Organs and tingtang Preaching.


M. We would have Music too, but 'twill not do,
For all the Fiddlers are Conformists too.

I pray, Dr, now let me say a word or two to your Muse: and you shall come in
again by and by. Have the Conformists taken up all the Music and Fidles, my
Dear? I am sorry that thou should be so disappointed: for if thou had sent
to me, I could have furnished thee with great variety: either with grave
slow-paced Nonconforming Pavins, concerning flowing-gushing-full with
self-emptiness: or with Sarabrand of glittering and glaring glories: or with
querpo-friscade, jigs of jests and jingles. And indeed, Muse, thou ought to
take it very ill, that the Doctor himself was so unkind as not to offer thee
out of his own rich treasure. For he could have shownthee a certain Letter,
which he writ upon the great fright and confusion that his Books were in, upon
the receiving of Dr. Reynold's Works into his study: where in my opinion he
doesfar out-fiddle the very famous Sweed himself. For Justin Martyr, he feared
he should again be a Martyr; Tertullian began to make Apologies, S. Aust in
Retractations; and poor devout Bid got into a corner and fell to his Beeds.
Jee Bald! Then for the Schoolmen, they all looked like Schoolboys: the
Fathers having before looked all like Children. And Aquinas himself wished with
all his heart he had not had such Sums to reckon for; and Dr. Preston's
All Sufficiency pleaded Insufficiency. And which I had like to have forgotten,
Cambden's Britannia ran quite away into the further parts of Germany, and was
never heard of to this very day. And I don't at all question, but that let the
Doctor have but his common flush; and his hand is every whit as good at a
Sermon, as it is at a Letter. And now, I prithee go on, Muse; for I perceive by
thy lip that thou have one strain of Gratulation still left.

M. Nor can we Ring, the angry Churchman swears,
By the Kings leave the Bells and Ropes are theirs.
And let them take them. Yet our Tongues shall sing
Your Honor louder than their Clappers Ring.

Now, Dr; I desire to speak one word or so to your self: beseeching you out of
all love, that you would take off, and tie up your Muse; for most certainly, if
she goes on thus, I shall either bepiss my self or go to the Groom of the Robe:
for she slags so horribly and grows so deadly dull and jadish, that she is even
forced to steal from our own self. For with Bells and Changes, with Ringing and
Clappers, with Seeeples and Ropes you brought in his Majesty in your Iter
Boreale. And now with the very same instruments you congratulate the
Toleration. And besides all this, about 40 years agon, (as you may find it in a
most faithful Historian) there was one John Hall who, being both a Cap-maker
and a Sexton, died and lived again with just the very same sort of fancy. He
died thus.

Here lies John Hall the Vniversity-capper:
Who lived by the Bell and died by the Clapper.
And being cruelly mad, that he should be so bespattered after his death; he
starts up again, after this manner.

John Hall lives still,
And lives in hope,
That he shall live by the Bell,
And you shall die by the Rope.
But if after all this, your Muse has any thing new, I pray speak to her, and
let us have it.

Dr. What do think, Muse, of his Majesty's Declaration being a Trojane Mare
with soal of Popery? Thou know it is but a little way from Rome to Troy; and
if the Pope should break pasture -- Besides, the other day, I overheard the
Gridiron most horribly grumbling at the Drying Pan.


M. As for the Popes Supremacy, alack!
It Is but the Bunch upon the Camels back.
The Lions skin cannot hide the Asses Luggs;
We stamp Popes Faces on our bearded Juggs;
And make no more confuting Bellarmine,
Than taking off the lusty Ale or Wine.

Dr. This Muse of mine is both the most waggish, and most argumentative Stit,
that I ever met withal in my whole life. Six such keen and compacted lines as
these, shall most effectually keep out the Pope; when he shall make nothing to
lean over a thousand dull pages of your learned Chillingsworths, grave Stilling
fleets, and Tillotsons. For most plain it is, and most demonstrative, that so
long as the Pope continues to be a Camel, he can never with his Supremacy-bunch
get into the low and narrow gate of Reformation. In like manner so long as we
keep to our Bibles, and neglect not to paint Popes faces; plentifully and
largely upon our bearded juggs; the Pope will be hanged a thousand times over,
before ever he will come hither, to see himself so apparently vilified and
affronted. Nay, if he were just now about landing, and any body were but there
in readiness to hoise up against him, one of the best sort of these bearded
juggs; he would presently turn tail, and run roaring home to Rome, as if you
had a design to get away his Maidenhead. And in the last place, so long as we
be careful to keep Ale or Wine in the Kingdom; and have spirit and valor
enough to send for a vast pitcher, and say thereunto, oh thou Dragon, Bell or
Bellarmine, be thou for ever confounded and as utterly run down, as this drink
runs down my throat, so long I say as this care be taken, it will be impossible
for any of the Defenders of the Church of Rome, ever to spread their Doctrine
in this nation.

And therefore as to this, my Muse, thou art certainly in the right. But what
do think of their Images and Music; of their Pixes and Fixes, and such fine
tempting things.

We all know Pope's Head Alley trades in Toys,
Our Merchants come not thither* but our Boys.

Dr. Most Divine and Politic! O Lachrymae, O Miserere! O the dullness and
stupidity of Prelates and Churchmen, that should go about to suspect the
increase of Popery, and not study to understand the concern and intrigue of
Pope's Head Alley! Ye Brethren and Sisters, and all that have Bibles: keep but
the Roman Noses to the grindstone of your Bibles, and examine your own
Consciences, and the History and traffic of Pope's Head Alley, and if ever
Clement or any other Pope get footing in England, I Will give him, and all his
successors leave to kiss --

But do hear me once more, my girl; there are some parlous acute men among
them; and without doubt they will now take all occarion to write.

Then I Will sh -- against them.
The other day into a place I went,
Where Mortals use to go that want a vent;
There by the mouth of Purgatory hole,
Where many groan and their hard case condole:
Saul Cressy's sacred legend I did find,
One leaf whereof gave ease by breaking wind,
And wiped Aspersions from Rome behind.
Rare man (cried I) worthy to be no less,
Than Groom of the stool unto his Holiness.

Dr. A most easy and compendious way of withstanding, confuting and
suppressing Popery! For the Pope himself, he is to be faced down: Bellarmine to
be drunk down: and Cressy to be wiped down. And therefore I say once again,
(and I wish it would enter into the hearts of all cowardly and jealous
Churchmen) that if his Majesty will be pleased not to confine me to set forms
and fashions, but still to allow me the free me of my whole Bible; and that
Costive Saturn does not seize upon my fundament, and bung up those hindmost
faculties, if ever Popery get one inch further into England, let not Officious
Robin ever go to stool again.

But now, Dr, if I were sure that thy Muse had wiped her tail, and that she
would not bedung me; I would venture to come a little closer to thee, and ask
thee. Do thou think when his Majesty was pleased to suspend the execution of
penal laws upon such offenders as thy self, that he did then indulge such
simplicity, such rudeness and slovenliness as thine? do think that he
intended therein to encourage such boyish, barbers, highway jests as Bonfires
and Incendiaries, Music and Fiddlers, bells and ropes; as cups of Roman
wormwood, Trojane Mares, Pope-fac'd juggs, Pope's Head Alley and the like? such
nasty, Kitching, Kennel phansies as Clements Podex, Purgatory hole, Aspersions
from Rome behind, and Groom of the close stool? I prithee, Robin, by what
figure, or (to speak in thy own style) by what Constellation, did thou take
out an O that should have been in the Rome behind, and two lines after, put it
into the close stool? did thou do it by Aquarius or Sagittarius? It is pity
that besides the Groom of the Robe or Stole, that there were not such a
preferment, as little children think there is, that thy Muse Mopsa might have
the Ell of Holland to make clean her nasty mouth. But to go on, Doctor; suppose
thy Doctorship had so much childishness, as to think it witty, to call the
Papists Hobgoblings, Hobby-horses, Huntingdon Sturgeons, etc. and to tell the
world they need not be afraid of Popery; for there being a Capitol at Rome, the
Papists are but mere gagling Ganders: and if some of them by great study should
improve themselves into Geese, yet those Geese could never prove Swans: I say,
suppose thy Doctorship was thus weak; what had thou done with thy Bible and
Divinity, when thou sendest them to wrestle a fall with Tiburn, for the price
of thy cow (which phanfie, I know as well as can be, thou had from the fellow
that dwells at the corner of Hide-Park) and when thou wishest them beside, all
headlong orucifyed? Nay, I Will suppose further, that this also was only
trickish and frolic some: but then I would earnestly know, Dr, where was thy
good manners and modesty; where was the loyalty, whiteness, and lawness of thy
soul, when thou commendest also the Bishops and Reverend Clergy of his
Majesty's Church to the Gallows: (for he is no Fanatic, nor ever intends to be
one, as he tells thee in his Declaration) when thou call our Curates
Loggerheads, and the generality of our Priests, Fiddlers, Jackdaws, Sots and
Judas's: when thou tellest them that they wet themselves too much between
meals, to fear any Smithfield persecution; and that they are good for nothing
but to drink up the Wine and the Milk; and to take the beast of Rome by the
Tail: (is this a frolic too?) but, that it is you, and such as you, that live
wholly upon Scripture, and Rock water ten times distilled, who are to feed and
watch, to dig and preach, and to assail Antichrist, and take him by the Horns.
Yes, yes, we may ghess, Dr, what an Assailant thou art likely to be, and what a
dreadful Horn-taker! it is five to one, if thou should meet that same beast
in a narrow lane* but that thou would either untruss at him, or bid King Lues
and the Devil take him, or else threaten to speak to thy Bodies-maker, to
whistle for Sagittarius to come away and shoot him; as he lately did Durham and
Gloucester. A most sad cause indeed, Dr! that wit should be so extraordinary low
with thee, that thou should be able to devise nothing else to reproach the
best Church in the world, than to abuse a couple of its Learned and Reverend
Prelates for that common absurdity of dying at fourscore years of age.

I might, Doctor, had I patience, take notice also that as thy scurrility it
self is so weak and languid, that a very Cock-sparrow if offended would bristle
up and defy thee: so thy Encomiums and good words are so abominably mean and
tedious, that one had better live ten fathom under ground, than be known, and
so vilely quibbl'd on. Thus after a most doggrel prayer for the Duke of
Lauderdale's good journey into Scotland (which, had he gone by Sea, was almost
doggrel enough to have cast him away) O thou do not question but the Scots
will find his Grace, and his blew ribband, true blew. My Lord Clifford's soul
is to be as white as his staff: The Chancelour of the Exchequer's word is to go
for current money: and the Duke of Buckingham is to keep the saddle, because of
the Horse. Now I profess, in my opinion, Doctor, it would almost tempt a man,
neither to have name, nor office, money nor clothes; neither to do well, nor
intend well, rather than be obnoxious to such a lewd and ill-favored commender.

And now, Doctor, I have to desire of you, that you would not put your self to
so much trouble, as to endeavor, to excuse the meanness of what you have
lately written; either by saying that since the days of prosperous Presbytery
you wanted a gloss of wine after Dinner, or that you were out of humor, or
that your parts are much shattered with these ten last years persecution: but
rather that you and your friends would submit to the common report and opinion;
and believe that you never had any, nor possibly ever can have any wit at all;
notwithstanding you have a whole book full of printed poems, and that there can
scarce be a bull-baiting, but you begin presently to muster: I say
(notwithstanding all this great readiness to rhyme) before we parted, I thought
fit plainly to acquaint you, that he that shall either look into the history of
your life (which is very near ready for the press) or into the History of your
Poetry, (which also will be shortly out) will easily perceive that your wit is
not at all wasted by gout, old age, tribulation for Conscience sake, or the
like; but that you never had any in your whole life, neither did any body ever
think so, but such as ran the hazard of printing your doggrels. And therefore
I desire Doctor, you would consider that it is not a sufficient stock for a
Poet, to set up only with the Latin names of the days of the week, and of 3 or
4 of the famous Nine: and to be able to call to one and say, here Melp, creep
you into the shoe-hole and lie close there; till the other Girl goes to Breda and
fetch over the King: but there is good learning, good judgment, good converse,
and good manners too required; which, all the world know, you never took care
of any further, than to be acquainted with the mere Titles of Books, and to
make Tertullian to Apologize, Origin to Allegorize, Chrysosthom to Homilize,
and the like. Nor ever had thou wit sufficient to venture into any company,
for which thou might be the better: but only to get into some Farrier's or
some soft yielding Gentleman's house, and there to quibble over the birth or
death of some child. And as for thy acquaintance with Cleaveland (of which thou
art so very proud, that thou can scarce meet a boy in the street, but thou
runnest him up in a corner, and give him the witty adventures of it) I
understood his humor as well, as if I had held upon my knee the frying pan for
him, or ran for mustard: and thereupon I know, that he never took thee abroad
with him, for any archness or pleasantness that was to be had in thy company;
but only, not certainly knowing how the Country might be provided for his
purpose, he used to carry some game along with him, that he might be always
sure of one to be abused. And upon that account it was, that he would permit
thee sometimes to lie at his beds feet; that, if he should chance to wake
before the Chamberlain came up, he might fall presently upon thee, and lose no
time: and sometimes he would suffer thee to ride behind him, upon the same
Horse; not that he admired thee, as an ingenious Mistress, but only that thou
might be in a constant readiness to be made ridiculous.

And as, by what I have now said, and by thy late Essay upon the Declaration,
it is very plain that thou want the very first materials and fundamentals of
being a Wit; so is it as plain from the whole History of thy Poetry, that thou
did always want them. For suppose one fhould be so overkind, as to suffer
thee to pick out the very masterpieces of thy fancy: such as the Norfolk and
Wisbich Cock fight: the Bottles of Sack and Claret laid in sand and covered
with a sheet: the Imprisonment of Mr. Calamy, and the famous Iter Boreale it
self: I can easily tell, how these possibly might please some people, without
having the least grain of wit in them. As for the Cock fighting; it is most
tediously quibling about Peacocks, Weathercocks, Woodcocks and fighting cocks;
and besides to wards the latter end, most abominably baudy. As for that Poem
upon the buried wine; I shall say no more but this: it is most villanously
profane from top to bottom, with expressions alluding to the Grave and
Resurrection. I pray, Dr, do so much as look upon those verses at your leisure;
and see if your tender, spotless, and mealy-mouthed Nonconformity can sanctify
such baudery and profaneness. As for the third, it is so ridiculous that I know
nothing like it but the song of the Blacksmith that common Fiddlers use to
sing. For there you show that Mr. Calamy's being put into Prison by the Bishop
of London was much more tolerable, than your being imprisoned by Bishop Gout.
For the Bishop of London put him only into Newgate, and that lately: but the
lordly and proud Bishop Gout had put you twenty years ago, not into Newgate, or
Ludgate, or Aldersgate, but into Cripplegate. Oh the unsufferable pride and
lordliness of some tyrannical Prelates! Besides, this Bishop Gout makes your
body his Diocese; and there he keeps Courts, and there he has a visitation for
every Limb; and urges every Joint to conform, and those that will not, he
articles against And when the Gout is in the hand, then my Lord Gout has you in
hand, and when it is in your toes, he has you by the toes. And now, can you and
your friends think this Wit? don't you fear every day that you rise, that his
Majesty should call in again his Mandate, and send for that same Doctorship he
gave thee, and bestow it upon some honest merry Porter? And lastly, as for thy
famous Iter Boreale it self: I know it was much bought up, and read by many.
But don't gull your self, Dr; for it was not because there was any good humor,
wit or Poetry in it; but because any thing upon that Subject would have been
admired, after such sad and dismal times. Nay, so it was that the very word
King was amongst us so great a rarity, that he that could but get into a verse,
God save the King, or the like, should be as much flocked about, as if he were
the Author of that famous distichupon the louvre.

And I must tell you besides, Dr, that though our Nation was wonderfully glad
to hear of his Majesty being restored; yet such as could receive such welcome
news, without losing their senses, did at that very time, look upon all that
poem to be very sad, and lamentable. So that the whole of the matter, Dr, is
come to this: if you do stubbornly persist in the opinion of your having now,
or ever having any wit at all; and that you do resolve to continue this vile
trade of rhiming; then do it decently and becomingly: and lay aside your
Doctorship, your Gown, your Profession and your looking gravely, and do you and
your Bodies-maker set up under St. Andrews wall, and there practice upon your
own works.

I should now, Dr* say a word or two to your friends of the Toleration: but I
suppose it would be needless, because by what I have already said to your self,
they will fully comprehend your worth, and perceive howmuch they undervalue and
disparage themselves, by continuing any further acquaintancewith you. And I
hope they will nowsee it is high time, not only to banish from their houses* and*
company, such a baudy, profane, nasty and witless scribler, but not suffer thee
ever to say so much again, as We Nonconformists. And, if any of them have a
longing desire to see the little gridiron of England, and the huge frying pan
of Rome utterly thrown down, I hope also that they will think it their concern and
interest, not to trust to such a Ballad-maker as thy self, to take the Beast by
the Horns. Faremell.


FINIS.

