AN ADDRESS FROM EARTH TO HEAVEN; OR, A Defensative against the portentous
Significations of the late COMETS and BLAZING-STARS; That may concern either
LONDON or OXFORD.

EZEKIEL 9. 4. And the Lord said unto him, go through the midst of the City,
through the midst of Jerusalem, and set a mark upon the Foreheads of the men
that sigh, and that cry for all the abominations that be done in the midst
thereof. London: Printed in the year MDCLXXXI.

TO THE READER.
HAving long observed that ever since we escaped being blown up by the
POWDER PLOT, we have never wanted Plots (by Fears and Jealousies) to blow up
our selves; And in stead of keeping out Popery from abroad, we have lost our
Charity at home; and when that is gone, what will come in place thereof is a
sad and dismal thing to consider? Or what will at last become of Christianity
it self? I did resolve in the shades of solitude, (when a man is either Deus
aut Demon) to offer to the vulgar part of the world (so much now courted at
this time, and taught new methods of mutiny and murmur) An Address to Almighty
God to be made use of by them, as their hearts may be moved to it, which God
grant.

And I hope, as is said of Manna, it may be fitted to every man's taste, so
especially to such as are seasoned with the precious Balm of true Christian
love, which is accompanied always with Peace, Gentleness, Meekness, Temperance,
and all other Christian Graces; which I pray God may fill the hearts of all men.

AN ADDRESS FROM EARTH TO HEAVEN.
O ALMIGHTY and Everlasting Lord God, the Father of the Faithful, and of their
Seed, who look down from Heaven thy dwelling place, and have seen the
travels of Jacob, and the wearisome toil of the stock of Israel; Take pity of
the Sons of men, and let not the wickedness of their ways call longer for
Vengeance from thy Justice; But let thy mercy, Holy and Merciful Lord God,
breath forth upon the remnant that is left.

Let it be known to the World it has a Savior, for whose sake thou will spare
it, and not for the sake of those that dwell therein. Cause the fierce waves of
advers;ity and persecution to cease from overwhelming thy Church; and let the
calm still voice of thy most gracious and holy Spirit inspire all thy people to
embrace the tenor of thy most holy and peaceable Gospel, in loving thee above
all things, and their Neighbor as themselves.

Lord thou delightest not in Sacrifices nor with thousands of Rams, or Ten
thousand of Rivers of Oil, art thou pleased: Will I eat the Flesh of Bulls,
says the Lord? or drink the Blood of Goats? But thou requirest of us to do
justly, to love mercy, and to walk humbly. This is thy Law which we have all
transgresled, and we have given thee in stead thereof the Services of strange
Fires, the Fruits of untempered Zeal, and uncharitable Persuasions.

We all cry out, We are thy Children and thy Servants; and yet by our
unbrotherly Affections it cannot appear we are the Children of one Father; nor
by strange and different Duties that we are the Servants of one Lord. What
shall then become of us, if thou (O Lord) deal with us according to our
deservings? The whole Earth is corrupt before thee.

There is none that does good, no not one. Nation rises up against Nation, and
Kingdom against Kingdom; and the love of all men is waxed cold.

The Rulers are not ruled by thy most Holy Law: The Sun is gone down over the
Prophets, who make the People to err, biting with their lips, and cry Peace,
Peace, when War is in their hearts.

Thy Houses are laid waste as a plowed Field, and the holy places of thy
worship polluted with the sins of men: The Son dishonors the Father, and the
Daughter rises up against her Mother; and a man's Enemies are those of his own
House.

Lord into what a Deluge of sin are we cast by our vile corruptions, which cry
every day (like one deep upon another) for a Deluge of thy Judgments, if in the
Days of Vengeance thou did not remember Mercy!

Wherefore (O most gracious and merciful Lord God, who did preserve the Ark
amongst the mighty waters, and had compassion upon Lot and his Family in the
midst of Sodom)

Look down, we beseech thee, on the Troubles and Afflictions of thy Church,
lying under thy most heavy Rod.

Have mercy upon her, and suffer not her great and powerful Enemies, the
World, the Flesh and the Devil, to distract or divide her Members from her
head Christ Jesus; But let the Doctrine and Example of thy Son, reconcile all
differences, arising among all Christian People.

Let not the variety of men's Minds and Opinions, any more than the variety of
their Languages, Customs and Manners, break the Bonds of Charity and brotherly
Love among Members of the same Body, Subjects of the same Kingdom, and Brethren
of the same Household of Faith.

It is true, O Lord, that thou have said, Offenses shall come; but thou have
pronounced a woe to those by whom they do come.

Thou have foretold thy Church of her calamities; and that one effect of thy
coming should be to send a Sword, and not Peace.

But we acknowledge, O Lord, (and with confusion of Face do we acknowledge and
confess,) That all these, even all these great Evils are come upon us from the
Principle of our most vile and corrupt Natures, perverting thy most holy word,
to serve the variable ends of Humane Interests and Passions.

Forgive, Lord, all those from whom Offenses do come; as also, all those to
whom they come; and blot out the Handwriting that is against us, for all our
mutual and reciprocal Offenses and Gainsayings whatsoever.

Let there be an end of all Envyings, Strifes and Divisions, and Whatsoever is
corrupt and carnal among all that profess thy Name: Teach all Congregations to
know the bond of Evangelical Peace, that whether it be of Paul, or Apollo, or
Cephas, that we are all Christ's, and Christ is thine.

Lastly, we beseech thee, O Lord, to give us Grace to add to Faith Virtue, and
to Virtue Knowledge; to Knowledge Temperance, and to Temperance Patience; to
Patience Godliness, and to Godliness Brotherly-kindness, and to
Brotherly-kindness Charity, which is the bond of all perfection, Amen.

FINIS.

