ACTS OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE CLERGY OF FRANCE.

Anno Domini. 1682.

CONCERNING RELIGION.

Translated into English for the satisfaction of Curious Inquisitors into the
present French Persecution of Protestants,

LONDON, Printed By J. R. An. Dom. 1682.

To the Reader.
THere have been of late, strange Clamors and Out cries, of horrid, bloody, and
almost inexpressible Cruelties practiced by the Papists in France, against the
Protestants (that is to say the Calvinists) there. The chief Incendiaries to
which Cruelties (they say) are the Roman Clergy. The Bishops, Priests and
Jesuits (if we will believe our own weekly Mercuries) incessantly press that
Popish Prince, to redouble his already outrageous Fury, and Tyranny against the
Lord's People; Racks and Tortures are their daily Exercise; deep and hideous
Dungeons their constant Habitation; and happy is he, that can escape into
England with burning Match between his Fingers or red hot Iron Plates fixed to
the Soals of his Feet.

There is none per adventure more scrupulous of obstructing Acts of Charity, or
more compassionate to Persons in misery, (especially on the score of Religion,)
then my self; we can hardly do too much for those who suffer for God and
Heaven; yet withal I confess, I am loath our Nation should be imposed upon, by
Shams, and Cheats, on Religious pretexts; I am loath, I say, the Town and
Country should be encumbered; our own Poor deprived of Alms; the Bread eaten out
of honest Tradesmens mouths; and we made, as it were, the Sink of France by
countenancing, and entertaining from thence, swarms of Vagabonds, amongst whom
some are Papists in Masquerade, and others at best, such Protestants as hate
Episcopacy, worse than Popery, and come hither upon no other Persecution then
what Idleness, beggary, or some misdemeanor has laid upon them.

I would not here be misunderstood; it is most certain that the french Clergy
have made several late Efforts, and desired herein the Concurrence of their
King, to bring back the Hugonets (so (...) [as the taking away the public use
of some Churches, above what were granted by former Edicts: The disenabling of
Ministers front promotions in one, or two Universities; the taking inspection,
that the said Ministers (being apt to it) should not in their Sermons affront
or asperse the Church and Government; The discharging some of Public Trusts;
the encouraging of others that turn to Popery. The forbidding Parents to hinder
their Children from becoming Papists when they have a mind to it; The allowing
of Priests and Divines to visit the sick without leave of their Friends] Being
Aggrievances odious and burdensome to tender Consciences made several
(doubtless) Godly People come, with their Families into England, where the Zeal
and Piety of our gracious Sovereign; and other worthy Magistrates, both
assisted them, and recommended them to common Benevolence; Notwithstanding all
this, I hope I may, without offense, take the Liberty at least to enquire
whether the Persecution of Dissenters in France be so really dreadful, and the
motive of the flocking over of such vast Numbers of them hither, be so purely
spiritual as is pretended.

Indeed they arrived here in a nick of time favorable for their purpose, and
found us so actuated against Popery, as that we easily believed all whatever
either they themselves avouched, or true Protestant News-mungers invented for
them. We were then in an hott pursuit of a Popish conspiracy, and it was not to
be thought, that the Papists who (as it was said and sworn) had both the
Conscience, and boldness, to raise Armies; To pistol, poison, and stabb the
King; To cut the Protestants throats; To fire Cities, burn Navies, etc. And
all this in the midst of a well peopled Protestant Country; would ever stick
to commit the like, or worse Barbarisms, in a place where the King, the People,
the Law, and the Government, were wholly on their side. In a word our Domestic
Plots much advanced the credit of foreign Fables; and our Irish Witnesses
proved no small friends to French beggars. Nor is it a wonder, diverse
well-meaning persons should peradventure be a little transported beyond the due
measures of impartiality, in passing their censure upon Popish Guilt, both at
home, and abroad; The very Name of Popery is so obnoxious to prejudice, that
many without thoroughly examining (...) that is bad enough of it, and nothing
probable that is said in its Defense.

Yet verily I am apt to believe, the Protestant interest may often suffer
Damage, by this precipitant way of proceeding. Men though in some things evil,
may nevertheless in others, be falsely* accused; and methinks we should be
cautions, not to give the Papists an occasion to say that the reformed Religion
has its chief support, from Imposture and Calumny; and that by frightful
Storys, and Fictions of Popish cruelties, we only seek to incite the Mobile to
outrage; to encourage bloody Perjuries; to foment sedition; to abet violence;
and drive on the Destruction of Innocent Persons. For my part, as I was always
persuaded, a good cause needed not any sinister Machine or Artifice to promote
its Interest; so was I resolved to give even the Devil his due: And seeing I
could neither search into the Hearts of the Papists; nor dive into the secret
Thoughts of Dr. Oats, Mr. Dugdale, Mr. Prance etc. Where alone the bottom of
the English Plott can certainly be found: I determined to make inquiry into
the French pretended Cruelties, which consisting of overt, public Acts, the
certainty as to the Truth or Falsehood of them, might easily be known. And
herein I promised my self a kind of satisfaction, that the right Knowledge of
these Cruelties might bring me, as it were indirectly, to a right Knowledge
also of the Plot; and that a circumstantial Conjecture might rationally be
made, of the one, by the other. For if the Malice, and Impudence of many
seemingly honest Men, could possibly be such, as to concur in devising,
telling* printing, and publishing downright Lies and Fables of Racks, Tortures
and Outrages, supposed to be openly acted (and by consequence not to be denied)
by French Papists, in the Face of the whole World. It might well be, that the
strange and monstrous Stories alleged against English Papists [of vast Armies,
huge Magazines (the Lord knows where, or from whence) numberless Patents,
Letters, Bulls, and Briefs, bloody Massacres, execrable Treasons recommended as
secrets, yet daily imparted to thousands of both Sexes, of all sorts, and
conditions, for diverse years together; not any the least appearance or
footsteps of all which ever came to light; attested only by a few, and those
profligate* Wretches, of lost Consciences, and desperate Fortunes, allured by
Gain, and encouraged by Indempnities, contradicting themselves, and perjuring
each others, in their Evidence] are nothing else then groundless, (though
fatal) Forgeries,

For this Reason I made a most sedulous, and exact Scrutiny, into the French
Persecution. I sent Letters to several Friends in France, who I knew both
could, and would give me true Information. I discoursed with several Persons of
unquestionable credit, who had been upon the very place where these Tragedies
were said to be acted. Besides, I was really ashamed of the Kings Evidence (as
they call them) against the Papists, the Infamy of their Lives, The
Exorbitance, the Nonsense, the Inconsistency of their Oaths, The Severities
used on their sole Testimony, the Reflections hereupon made by other Nations;
gave me some trouble; and I almost wished for the Vindication of my Native
Country, to find a solid Proof of any thing done by the Papists, in other
places, might seem to counterpoize our late Transactions, and look like the sad
Catastrophes practiced by us, against them here; but I labored in vain; the
more I sought, the less I found of truth in these pretended dismal French
Cruelties; nothing appeared to me, (abating the forementioned efforts) could
give the least vmbrage of ground for such rueful Stories.

Yet I would not (though well I might) rest here; I heard there had been a
general Assembly of the Clergy of France, convened at Paris. I knew very well
the said Clergy lay under no restraint, which could hinder them from venting
their malice, (if they had any) against Protestants; on the contrary, the
rigours and cruelties which they should express, might seem the only means to
ingratiate them into the Favor of the King and Pope (according to the usual
Idea, and Character we have of both.) They had now a fit opportunity, (if their
Principles led them to it) to establish, or promote sanguinary Laws, and
retaliate the Wrongs done (as they conceive) to their fellow Members the
Roman Catholics of England.

Wherefore now, (thought I) now, if ever, is the time for me to find out the
springhead and original of these French Persecutions. So then, I immediately
sent to Paris for all the Resolves made, and Directions given, by that Assembly
in matters relating to Protestants. And in this I succeeded very fortunately;
for just as my Letters arrived, there were printed, and published by the
express Authority, and Command of the King and Clergy, the Acts of the said
general Assembly, concerning Religion. These Acts therefore coming to my hands,
I not only read them for my own satisfaction, but have here rendered them into
English, for the use of others, who not understanding the Latin and French
Tongues, might yet have the same thoughts, and curiosity with me.

If to the more literate, the Original (...), by this Translation, to have lost
much of its Luster, and Eloquence in point of style. It must be imputed, partly
to my acknowledged Inability of doing better; and partly also to the precise
Exactness, and even nicety I observed, in keeping close, not only to the
substance, but to the very words, and manner of expression, as near as I could
bring our English to the Propriety of these Languages. Thus much for a preface;
now to the work.

TO ALL THE Bishops in France
The Assembly of the GALLICAN-CHURCH congregated at PARIS
by Authority Royal GREETING.
WHat was long since by the Fathers in the first Council of Arles, well and
wisely ordained, and accomplished; That the business, for the performing of
which they chiefly convened, being completed, they should then apply their
minds to other things which they might understand to be advantageous to the
good of the Christian Republic. The same also we, in the Name of the
Gallican-Church, and and by Authority Royal congregated at Paris, have
determined to practice, and in this to adhere to the footsteps of our
Ancestors. Wherefore the affairs for which we judged it necessary to meet,
being constituted, and transacted, we thought good that those things should be
next procured, which might seem beneficial to the increase and defense of the
Christian Name. And because in these three heads, as solid foundations, are
wholly contained the peace, and strength of the Church. Faith, Manners,
Discipline; And in establishing of them, the Father's of the Council of Arles
placed their endeavors; We therefore to the same end, have bent all our study,
that we might contribute our care and solicitude in illustrating of Faith,
regulating of Manners, and corroborating the force of sacred Discipline in
France; least by any Contrivance hereafter, that triple Cord, by the firm and
wonderful context of which the Catholic verity is consistent, may, by any one,
be weakened or dissolved. And seeing amongst these: Faith is the chief; and
nothing brings a greater help to the defense of it, then if by the light of
Truth, Heresies, and by the Ardor of Charity, Schisms, be overcome; we esteemed
it worthy our labor presently to set upon Calvin's heresy, and to impugn it,
as the main, and strongest fortress of Schism. In this truly, the Charity of
Christ inclined, and urged us. 2 Cor. v. 14
For when we beheld, not without a most sharp sense of grief, there was of one
Church of Christ by the Schismatics made two, contrary to what Christ himself
taught by his Example, who of Two had made One; we begun wholly to burn Ephesians.
2. v. 14
with desire of Unity; especially seeing every one of us was daily more and
more enflamed with these voices of Christ. Other sheep I have which are not of
this fold, and them must I John 10. v. 16
bring; and there shall be made one fold, and one shepherd. Moreover, the life
and manners of Innocent the 11th. Bishop of Rome excited us, which are so
composed to the Form of the Ancient, and more austere Discipline, that the
Adversaries of our Faith, ought not to refuse to agree with him in Judgment,
whose deeds they confess, if they will speak true, they must wish to imitate.
Lastly, Lewis the Great man his daily Merits toward the Church, yea rather his
wonders of Royal Fortitude, and Christian piety has stirred up, and augumented
our courage, who as many Heretical Cities as within the Limits of France, he
has reduced to the ancient Faith of our Forefathers, so many unbloody
Victories has he purchased to his Mother Church, a Son, as well in Birth, as
Virtue, the Greatest, his Brethren after a long divorse being partly by
entreaty, partly by good deeds, reconciled to the common Parent of all. Moved
by these Examples, and only not conscious to our selves of negligence, in
performing our pastoral Charge, we have at length applied our selves to the
impugning of Heresy. But seeing we understood this War to be such, as ought to
be waged with the weapons of charity; to be managed in the sole Peace of Christ
our Lord; we determined not to use Threats; not to cast Terrors; not to strive
with Contumelies, but by Exhortations, Wishes, Prayers, to invite our
Adversaries, and bring them to concord. For although we are not ignorant, it
has sometimes happened that those who had refused to be drawn by the Lenity of
Mercy, were compelled, as it were, by the wholesome Rigor of Charity; yet we
thought it both more proper, and agreeable to the Christian Society which is
amongst us; and to the Affection of our Catholic Mother, that those who have
fled from the Bosom of Apostolical Peace, should by Paternal admonitions be
recalled. And truly hitherto the unwilling, and above what what can be
expressed, sorrowful Church of Christ by a severe, but yet legitimate Judgment
had ( viz.) By spiritual Excommunications Ecclesiastical Censures, etc.
dissinherited, exauthorized, proscribed, voluntary Exiles, as degenerate Sons,
renegade Soldiers, rebellious Citizens; but now at last by our voice it speaks
to the dissinherited, the exauthorized, the proscribed; and lovingly sollicits
them who have already too long sustained the Punishment of a bitter Through
Schism.
Exile; and with a Maternal affection and desire treats with them of
correction, of Return, of Concord, which if they would have retained, then when
they departed from us, she, for her common Piety to all her Children, would
never have broken. Wherefore we admonish and exhort, with all the weight of
Charity inclining to the Reconciliation of Peace, that they return to us. We
ask again and again, why they have departed? why they have forsaken Catholic
unity? we give them to understand how easy it will be, the wound of Schism
once healed, to cure the rest, which shall seem to want a Medicine. And we
farther promise, if they will seriously grow wise again, they shall be received
by us, even with some, as it were, inconvenience to our Mother the Church. And
least peradventure they may take an occasion of flattering themselves, and
their adherents, with a vain Hope of future Dissunion amongst us, for that
there have lately risen some Differences between the Roman and Gallican Church,
we thought fit to advertise them; first, That it is not about the Doctrine of
Faith, which ever was one, and the same in both places; nor about the
institutions of manners, which both Churches in each place will have most pure
and refined; but about some Matters of Discipline, alterable by time,
concerning which we contend with the Ministers of the chief Bishop, the Peace
of fraternal Charity still remaining. Besides, things may be disputed by
Catholics against Catholics without danger of harm, so it be done after a
Christian way, and manner, within the Bowels of the Church, and not renting her
Womb. And lastly this very 1 Cor. 12 v. 25
dispute which we have undertaken, ought to be a Motive ^o them, of flying
Schism, by our Example, and to us, of inveighing against the same. For by how
much the more moderate and amicable our Contest shall be, with so much the more
confidence may we reprove Schismatics, and denounce them guilty of breaking
Unity, throughout the whole Church; Because seeing we are often, though
unwillingly, brought to that exigence, that we must act, sometimes in making
complaints to the Roman Bishop, sometimes in vindicating the Rights of the
Kingdom, or Privileges of our Church; we have hitherto comported our selves
with that Moderation, Reverence, Religion, in debating, and deciding any
matter; that we have not caused even the least suspicion of infringing Charity;
much less have we afforded a place for deceit, or given Occasion for divorce.
And this is the whole Model of our Design for recalling of Schismatics to
Concord, and the same drawn according to the Pattern of the Affrican Church:
For as those Fathers received from our Ancestors the means whereby they more
easily overthrew the Hersies of old, growing up amongst them; so we by their
Example, at this time reassume the means whereby we may defend our Sanctions
against the Heretics of these Days; which that it may be perfected, according
to our, as well as your desire, we again and again beseech you, and for that
Ardor of Charity wherewith, together with us, you are enflamed toward the
Church of Christ, we expect you will, as soon as you shall receive these
Letters, and a Copy of this Admonition to Schismatics, As in the next Page.
take care immediately to have it notified to all and singular the Consistories
of Calvin's Sect, which are any where in your Diocesses; and public Fasts,
Almesdeeds, Supplications, being appointed, you will furthermore ordain
Catechyzings, Sermons, Exhortations, pacifick Discourses, and other things of
this sort, proper for uniting the differences of minds. And thus we hope it
will be effected, that God by his infinite Goodness assisting our Counsels for
the Peace and Reconciliation of the whole Christian world, there may at length
be made, as formerly, one fold, and one shepherd.

Given at Paris in the General Assembly of the Gallican Clergy the First of
July 1682. Franciscus Archiepiscopus Parisiensis Praeses.
By the Command of the most Illustrious and most Reverend Archbishops,
Bishops, and whole Ecclesiastical Synod in the General Assembly of the Gallican
Clergy congregated at Paris.

Courcier Theol. Eccl. Paris asecretis.
Mancroix Canonicus Rhemensis asecretis



The GALLICAN-CHURCH by the Kings Authority congregated at PARIS. To the
BRETHREN of CALVIN'S Departure, wishes CORRECTION, RETURN, CONCORD.
THe Universal Church of Christ, (Brethren,) does continually lament, and with
most intense grief, a Parent full of holy, and sincere Piety, beholds you by a
Voluntary divorse abstracted from her Womb, from her Breasts, from her Bosom,
and still wandering in a Wilderness. For can a Isa. 49. V. 15.
Mother forget the Children of her Womb, or the Church not remember her Charity
toward you, unmindful though you are, yet still her Children, whom the
contagion of Error, from Catholic verity, and the Tempest of Calvin's
defection, has drawn from the Sanctity of the ancient Faith, and torn from the
Head of Christian Unity.

Hence it is Brethren, that she groaneth, and as well most heavily, as
lovingly, complains of her divided Bowels: Lam. 2. V. 11.
She seeks her lost Children: She calls as a Partridge; She is busy to
gather as an Hen; She provokes to fly as an Eagle; Math, 23. V. 37. Dout. 32.
V. 11.
And anxious with maternal Pangs, she labors, O little Children, to bring you
forth again, till truly, and Catholickly, Christ may be reformed in you.

We then the whole Gallican Clergy whom the Holy Ghost has placed to govern
the Church, in which you were born, and who, by an uninterrupted Inheritance,
hold the same Faith, and the same Chair which the holy Bishops held, who
brought the Christian Religion into France, do summon you, and in virtue of the
Embassage which for Christ we exercise, as God exhorting by us,) we enquire of
you, why you have made a Schism?

For verily as your Affairs stand, whether you will or no, you are our
Brethren, whom formerly one Father of us all, who is Heaven had received into
the Adoption of Sons, and whom one Mother the Church, had brought up unto the
hope of an eternal Heritage. Yea even he himself who first bewitched you not to
obey the Gospel of Truth; Gall. 3. V. 1, Psalm. 55. V. 13. etc.
The Ringleader of your Profession, did he not formerly live with us a Brother
of one mind? did he not converse in the same House? did he not eat the same
spiritual Meat? did he not practice the mutual Offices of Christian fraternity
with us; Excuse if you can, to your Father, to your Mother, to your Brethren,
the infamy of so flagitious, so abrupt, and precipitate a flight. The dividing
of Christ the Rescinding the Sacraments of Christ, the impious War against the
Members of Christ, the criminating the Spouse of Christ, the denying the
Promises of Christ, excuse, wash off if you can; And because you are not able,
confess your selves condemned by the Oracle of the Scripture. The evil Son
calls himself just, but his departure he does not wash off. Apul 5. August:
Lib 1. contr. Crescon: cap. 66.


Why therefore brethren, have you not, with the whole World, remained in the
stock? why have you, together with the Altars, violated the Vows, and desires
of the Faithful? why have you cut off the way to Mediation; There was the The
Sacrifice of Mass.
Ascert to God; why have you labored to take away, and by a sacrilegious Hand,
to withdraw the Genesis 28. V. 12.
Ladder from the Stone, least after the accustomed manner Prayer might be made
to God? The other Sectarys hitherto had attempted, not to subvert the Altar of
Christ, but to erect their own (such as it was) against the same Altar. You,
that there might be no more a Christian Sacrifice, have dared, by a Wickedness
unheard off, till these times, to pull down the Altars of the Lord of Hosts,
wherein Christ the Sparrow had chosen himself a Dewlling Place, and the Turtle
the Church a Nest to herself, where she might place her young ones. Psalm. 84.
V. 3.


But these last, and whatever afterward ensued, either of Outrage against the
Church, or of Error against the ancient Belief, was an effect of Schismatical
Fury. We desire it may be attributed, not so much to your Will, as to the
genious of Schism. This one thing we particularly expostulate with you; this we
incessantly demand of you; why have youmade a Schism? 1 Cor. 1. V. 10
Unless you shall answer to this, whatsoever you say, or write in other things,
your Talk is superfluous.

Nor do we doubt but against these things, you will use that old, and wonted
Plea of all Schismatics; Having learnt by Experience, it is no wise possible
to shake the Doctrine of our Faith, you make it your Business to carp at the
Manners of all those amongst us, with whom pious Men, and Lovers of exact
Discipline, have esteemed it neither consonant to Fame, nor safe in Conscience,
to converse.

Are these then the things, Brethren, for which the Unity of Christ is rent
asunder by you? Fraternal Inheritance slandered? the Virtue, and truth of the
Sacraments of the Church divided? See how much you have erred from the Gospel.
These things which you object, and which were by much, either fewer, and less
important, or peradventure unkown, or indeed not all; had they been true, and
manifest, and worse, yet Christians ought to spare Cockle of this sort, for the
wheat's sake; to wit, because the Vices of Evil Men are to be tolerated for
the society of the good. Moses endured so many thousands of men murmuriug
against God. Exodus 16. V. 7. etc.
Samuel endured the Sons of Hely, and his own, wickedly acting; 1 Samuel 3. etc.
Christ our Lord himself, endured Judas, and the Devil, and the Thief, and him
that sold him. The Apostles endured false Brethren, false Apostles, who
resisted them and their Doctrine; 2 Cor. 11. V. 13.
Lastly Paul not seeking his own, but the things of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 12. V.
14.
conversed with an exceeding patience amongst men that sought their own, and
not the things of Jesus Christ. Phil. 2. V. 21.
Yet you, beloved Brethren, not only have not endured the Church your Mother,
the Spouse of Christ, but have rent, but have torn, but have violated her
Unity. And that you might rend, that yon might tear, that you might violate,
you have laid the Blemishes of private Men, Ephesians. 5. V. 26.
to the charge of her, whom Christ washed by the Laver of Water in the word of
life, that he might present her to himself, glorious, not having spot or
wrinckle or any such thing. Math. 5. V. 9.


What remains now Brethren but that for your sakes we obey the Council of the
Holy Ghost. Blessed are the Peacemakers, for they shall be called the Sons of
God. And that by the Bowels of Mercy which you have hitherto rent; By the Womb
of your Mother the Church, which you have torn; By the Charity of Brotherhood,
which you have so often violated; By the Sacraments of God which you have
contemned; By the Altars of God which you have demolished; By whatever Holy,
and Divine, is worshipped either in Heaven, or in Earth; we exhort you with
fraternal minds, to Correction, to Return, to Concord. Yea verily, what now
remains, but that forgetful of Schism, and mindful of plenty, Luke 15. V. 17.
etc.
you return home, where so many hired Servants abound with Bread, whilst now
wandering in an arid and desert Land, you gather not, so much as crumbs even to
sustain your spiritual Famine? why do you demurr? why do you resist? What then!
do you blush at the Name of Sons, amongst whom the first born Lewis daily
erects new Trophys to the Church, the best Mother? Lewis in this thing alone
through your obstinacy, not happy enough. That although he daily establish many
things religiously and piously for Defense of the Christian Name, yet he see's
some of his own Subjects, who have wilfully fallen from theit Countries worship,
and apostatized to strange rites, Renegadoes of Religion, and Deserters of the
ancient Warfair, still persisting in their contracted Error.

This most Christian Prince, who in our hearing, lately said, he desired with
so much earnestness, the dispersed and fallen parts, might be recalled to the
Unity of the Church, that he should esteem it glorious to deserve the same,
even with the effusion of his Royal Blood, and the very loss of that most
redoubted Arm wherewith he has happily accomplished so many Wars. Will you
then Brethren; To a Prince most august, to your King, To the Vanquisher of
many, and most potent Enemies, to the Conqueror of most strong Cittys, To the
Subduer of mighty Provinces, To one renowned in all kind of Triumphs, Envy that
Palm which he prefers before all the rest.

But, Brethren, whilst we thus speak to you, and exhort to thoughts of Peace,
do not say; Seek us not. For this, Iniquity suggests, by which we are divided,
not Charity by which we are Christians. Remember we are so commanded by the
Prophet from the Spirit of Truth, and Peace, that we do not desist to tell them
who deny they are our Brethren, You are our Brethren. Isa. 65. V. 2.


Now what time more opportune, can be offered unto us, of recalling you to the
Roman Communion, then when Innocent the Bishop Govern's the Roman Church whose
Life, and Manners regulated according to the Form of ancient, and exact
Discipline; exhibit a perfect Pattern of Sanctity to the Christian World? That
to adjoyne your selves to him so worthy a Professor of all virtue, will be in
you a grand work of virtue, redounding as well to safety, as glory.

Wherefore you, who need a Physician, the Members, and truly noble Members of
Christ, redeemed with the same Price, but by the wicked Fraud of the Common
Enemy of us all, divorced from the Head and Body of the Church, suffer your
selves for the immortal God's sake, to be healed; Admit the address of our
Admonition, yea, we may confidently say (such is our Benignity and Compassion
toward you) of our Supplication, and at length brotherly accept this occasion
offered by us, with fraternal Charity; That so at last, by the help of our
Lord, the darkness of dull Error being dissipated, the 2 Cor. 4. V. 6^
Light of divine Truth, may farther daily shine out. Do not commit, that for
suspicions rashly entertained by you against our Faith, the weak, and ignorant
Part of Christ's flock, most miserably perish. Think it not unseemly to lay
open your Disease to the Physician: Give way to penance and remedy. Finally,
account it a chief and only glorious thing, especially for Christian men to be
Suppliants to God.

Which if, we exhorting, you refuse with a Pertinaceous mind to perform; If you
will neither be won by Prayers, nor softened by Charity; nor drawn by
Admonitions to concord; The Isa. 33. V. 7.
Angels of Peace will indeed bitterly weep; yet we shall notforthwith (as
justly might be done toward too obstinate Persons) leave you to your selves;
But through Hedges and Briars we will not cease to seek the Sheep of Christ;
Luke. 13. V. 23
And when we have done all for which your minds ought to be reconciled unto us,
at length our Peace, you rejecting it (so lovingly, so sincerely offered) Math.
10. v. 13 Ezec 3. V. 19.
will return to us; Nor will God farther require your Souls at our Hands; And
as this your last* Error will be worse than the former, so shall your last
Punishments be also worse. But we hope, Brethren, better things and more
agreeable to Salvation.

Given at Paris in the General Assembly of the Gallican Clergy. Call. July An.
1682. Signed by 8. Archbishops, 26. Bishops, and other Prelates and Divines
convened in the same Assembly.

MEMOIRES Containing the different Methods which may very profitably be used
for the Conversion of those who profess the pretended Reformed RELIGION.
1, Method.
THe first Method is that which Cardinal Richlieu made use of to reduce by way
of dispute, or conference those of the pretended reformed Religion, and to
oblige them to reunite themselves to the Church.

This Method is to regain them by their own Decree of the Synod of Chareaton --
1631. By which they received to their Communion those of the Confession of
Ausbourg, who hold the Real Presence of Christ's Body in the Eucharist, and many
other Articles, much different from the Confession of Faith of the pretended
Reformed: Whereupon the Minister Daillie says, in his Apology, that if the
Church of Rome held no other Error, than this, they should have no sufficient
Subject of seperating from it.

But it is certain that all the other Points of our Belief which are in
controversy, are not more important, nor more hard to believe than this, which
has always been esteemed by themselves one of the Principal Grounds of their
separation, and that at which the People take greatest offense. For that which
Daille, to elude the force of this instance, says, that the Lutherans admit
not the Adoration of Jesus Christ in the Eucharist, is altogether unreasonable,
since Calvin himself herein reprehendeth the Lutherans, And is obliged to
acknowledge, that Adoration is a necessary sequel of the Real Presence; What is
more strange, says he, then to place him in Bread; and yet not to Adore him
there? And if Jesus Christ be in the Bread, it is then under the Bread he ought
to be adored. Calvin de vera participatione corporis Christi* in caena.


Seeing then according to the Calvinists in that Synod, the Fundamentals of
Salvation are not destroyed in believing the Real Presence, and other points of
their Confession of Faith which are in dispute with them. This Cardinal would
convince them, that it is unjust, they should separate themselves from the
Communion of the Roman Church, in which according to their own Principles they
may be saved.

By a like suitable reasoning it is, That the Fathers of Afric convinced the
Donatists, and Primianists, that they most unjustly separated from the
Catholic Church which communicated with Cecilian, seeing they had made a Decree
Con. Carth. sub Anast. Can 36. Juxta collellionem Can. Concilii vulge di^^i
Affricani and 69. in Grec. Cod. Affrican. Can.
of Union with the Maximianists, whom they had formerly condemned. It was at
the Council of Carthage held under Anastasius; That the Fathers used this way
of arguing in regard of those Heretics: And the 36. Canon made it appear to
them, if they would but never so little have opend their Eyes to the divine
light, that they as unjustly divorced themselves from the Unity of the Church,
as the Maxiamanists according to them, separated from their Communion.

2. Method.
2. The second Method is to suggest to them, what the Light of Nature dictate's,
and what they themselves allow, That in matters whereon depends Salvation,
which is the only thing necessary; we ought always to take the safest course;
But it is evident by the Decree of the Synod of Charenton, that, according to
them, it is indifferent to believe, or not believe the Real Presence: According
to us it is necessary to believe it; Therefore it is safest to believe it; And
in case they would divest themselves of their prejudices, they would follow
this course. And so also in all the other Articles controverted. For according
to the Minister Mestrezat, in his Treatise of the Scripture; Points necessary
to Salvation are only those; which are so clear in Scripture, that none can
doubt of them, as are the Articles of the Creed. If there be any thing obscure
Mesirerat. ^
(says he) I maintain that it is not within the Degree of Necessity, and that
without it one may be a very good Christian and have Faith, Hope, and Charity.

But it is evident that the Articles in Question, which they maintain against
us, are not so clearly expres'd in Scripture, as that none can doubt of them,
seeing we have good grounds to maintain they are not there at all. One may
therefore according to themselves, disbelieve the said Articles without
incurring the hazard of Salvation; we say it is necessary under pain of
Damnation to believe those Articles which are opposite to them. They must then
submit herein, if they will take the safest course.

The 3d. Method.
The third Method is amicably to confer with them in showing them our Articles
out of Scripture, and Tradition, as the Fathers of the primitive times,
understood the one, and the other; without recourse to arguments, and
consequences drawn by Syllogisms, as did Cardinal Bellermin and Du Perron,
Gretser, and other controvertists; a thing which ordinarily begets disputes
which will never have an end. This was the Method by which they proceeded in
General Councels, and which St. Austin observed against Julian to prove
original Sin: Lib. 2. cont. Julian Cap. 1.
To the end (says he) I may subvert thy Machines and Artifices, by the
Sentiments of those Bishops who with so much Renown have interpreted the
Scriptures. After which he cites Passages of Scripture, as they were
understood by St. Ambrose, St. Cyprian, St. Gregory Nazianzen, and others.

The 4th. Method.
The fourth Method is, to evince, that the Ministers can never do this same, nor
show in the Scripture any of their Articles controverted: And this is most
true, for example, they will never produce any one formal Text which says that
original Sin, as to the Guilt, remains still after Baptism: That we receive the
Body of Jesus Christ only by Faith; That after Consecration it is still Bread:
That there is no Purgatory; That we merit nothing by our good works: And it may
be added, that of all the passages which they set down in the margent of their
confession of Faith; There is not so much as one, which avers either in express
or equivalent terms, or in the same sense, the thing which they would have
believed. This is the Method of Monsieur Veron, which he took from St. Austin,
who says to the Maniches, Contra Epist Fundamenti Lib de Unit. Ecclesiae Cap.
13.
Show me that this is in the Scripture: And in another place, Let them show me
that this is to be found in the holy Scripture. We may therefore confidently
assert, that, they can neither prove any of their Articles contested, nor
oppugn any of ours, by Scripture, either in express terms, or by consequences
sufficient to make their Doctrine be received as of Faith, and ours rejected as
an Error.

The 5th. Method.
The fifth is a Method pacifick, and without dispute, grounded on the Synod of
Dort, which all the pretended reformed Churches of France, have received, and
which has defined by the holy Scipture, that, when their is a contest
concerning any Atricle controverted between two Parties, who are of the true
Church, they ought to refer themselves to the Judgment of it, under penalty to
him, who therein refuses submission, of being guilty of Schism, and Heresy.
But now recurring to the time when the Dispute about some Article; For example
concerning the Real Presence, first begun, the two contesting Parties who were
the Ancestors of those of the pretended reformed Religion, and of us, were both
of the same Church, which was the true, because it was the only one, before the
separation, which was not as yet made; Their Ancestors therefore who would not
submit to its Judgment, and who did not separate from it but because it
condemned their Tenants, were Schismatics and Heretics; and so by consequence
are these also, because they follow their Sentiments: To which they can answer
nothing, but what might have been answered by all Heretics who have been
condemned in all Ages. This Method is made good, as to all its parts, in the
small Treatise composed for that End.

The 6th. Method.
The sixth Method, is to show them, that the Roman Church, or that which
throughout the Earth acknowledges the Pope or Bishop of Rome, Successor of St.
Peter for Head, is the true Church, because there is none but that which has
the unquestionable mark of it ( viz.) A visible continuance without
interruption from Christ's time, to this present day. This is a Method common to
all Catholics, and is very well and briefly explained in the little Treatise
of the true Church, annexed to that of the pacifick Method. It Is the same which
St. Austin frequently make's use of against the Donatists, and chiefly in his
Book of the Unity of the Church, From 151 to 174.
and in his Epistles, whereof the prime passages, relating to this Subject are
alleged by Monsieur Archbishop of Roan, in the first Book of his Apology De
l'Evangile where he excellently treats of this matter.

To this Method may be added the Maxims of which Tertallian, serves himself
in his Treatise of Prescriptions against Heretics and Vincentius Lyrinensis in
his Advertisements. It may suffice here to advertise, that those two Treatises
are enough to any one, that will read them without Prejudice, rightly to
discern the true Church of Jesus Christ, from all Societies which would usurp
that Name.

The 7th. Method.
The seventh Method is to let them see, that those who first pretended to reform
the Church in which they were with us, had not, nor could have, any Mission,
neither ordinary, nor extraordinary, to convey to us another Doctrine, than what
was there taught, and by consequence none was obliged to believe them, seeing
they had not any Authority to preach as they did. Romans 10. 15.
How shall they preach unless they be sent? This is the usual Method which puts
the Ministers on a necessity to prove their Mission. A thing they will never be
able to do. This cuts of all disputes, and is also one of the Methods of
Monsieur the Cardinal de Richelieu.

The 8th. Method.
The eighth Method is to tell them; You do not know, that such, and such a Book
of Scripture, is the word of God, otherwise than by the Church, wherein you
were before your Schism: You cannot then likewise know which is the true sense
of controverted passages, otherwise then by the same Church which delivers it
to us. This is the Method of St. Austin in many places: In his Book de Vtilit.
Credendi throughout; And in his Book Contra Epistolam Fundamenti, Cap. 5.
where he says, I would not believe the Ghospel, unless the Authority of the
Church obliged me to it, this Method is handsomely laid open in the Treatise of
the true word of God, annexed to the pacifick Method.

The 9th. Method.
The ninth Method is to show them, that the Church, wherein they were before
their separation from it, being the true One, because it was the only One, they
could not reform it, in its Doctrine, so as to frame another; for then it must
have fallen into Error, and consequently the Gates of Hell must have prevailed
against it; which is directly opposite to the promise of Jesus Christ which
cannot fail: Math. 16. v. 18
The Gates of Hell shall never prevail against it.

The 10th Method.
The tenth Method is that of Monsieur the Bishop of Meaux formerly Bishop of
Condom, in his Book entitled, An exposition of the Doctrine of the Catholic
Church: Whereby distinguishing in every Article that which is precisely of
Faith, from that which is not so; He makes it appear, There is nothing in our
Belief which may stagger a rational Judgment, unless by taking for our Belief
the Abuse of some particulars, which we condemn, or some Errors, which they
most falsely impute to us, or the Explications of some Doctors which are neither
received, nor authorized by the Church. This method is drawn from St. Hillary
in his Book of Synods: Page 394 and 396.
Let us (says he) jointly condemn vicious interpretations, but let us not
destroy the certainty of Faith: The word consubstantial may be ill understood,
let us determine how it may be well understood: we may settle amongst our
selves the true State of Faith, yet so, as what has been well established may
not be abolished; And false conceptions may be retrenched.

The 11th. Method.
The eleventh Method is taken from general arguments, which Divines call motives
of credibility. It is of Tertullian, in his book of prescriptions, and of St.
Austin, Cont Ep Fund Cap 4. and 5.
who reckens up the motives which kept him in the Catholic Church,

The 12th. Method.
The twelfth Method most brief, and most easy, is to press them with this
Dilemma. Before Wicleff, Luther, and Calvin, and as much may be said of the
Waldenses who were in the Twelfth Century: The Church of those of the pretended
reformed Religion was in a small Number of the Faithful, or it was not at all.
If it was not at all, then is it a false one, because it was not perpetual as
the true Church ought to be, according to the promise of Jesus Christ. The
forces of Hell shall not prevail against it; I am with you even to the end of
the World. Math. 16 v. 18 Chap 28. v. 30
If their Church was; It must, according to themselves, have been corrupted,
and impious; Seeing they cannot Point out to us, this small Number of their
pretended Faithful, who before their Reformers, had condemned, as they do now,
The 31 Article of their Confession of Faith.
the Assemblys of the Papacy as that from whence all Superstitions and
Idolatrys gained vogue. They comported themselves at least outwardly as others;
So then, their Church made up of this little unkown Flock, was not Holy, nor
consequently the true Church.

The. 13th. Method.
The thirteenth Method is drawn from the quality of Schism, which ought never to
be made, for any reasons whatever can be alleged: For according to the
Ministers themselves, nothing else can be produced but Errors, which they
pretend to be crept into the Church, from which they separated themselves by
Schism; But those who were there, as well as they, before their Separation, did
firmly maintain, as we do still maintain, to this day, that those, are not
Errors, but Verity's; And it is certain that of these so different Sentiments,
the one is true Doctrine, the other Error, and falsehood: consequently the one
good Grain, the other Tares: Math. 13. v. 25. Verse 28.
But it belongs not to particular persons, to Root up by their private
Authority, what they pretend to be Tares. There is none but God, who is the
true Father of the Family, who has this Authority, and who can communicate it
to others. It is he who appoints his Reapers, namely the Pope and Bishops who
are represented by the Angels, Verse 41.
to separate the Darnel from the good Grain; and to Root up the one, without
touching the other, at the time of Harvest, that is to say, in a Council, or by
common consent of the whole Church: And in that Case there is no need of a
Council: Will thou that we go and pluck them up? Verse 29.
Do not so, for fear least you root up the wheat together with the Cockle;
suffer both the one, and the other to grow till the Harvest; we ought therefore
never to separate our selves under what pretense soever it may be, but must
tolerare that which we believe to be an abuse and Error, and expect till the
Church pluch up the Tares.

This also is one of St. Austins Methods, in his Treatise against the
Donatists, where he shows, by the Examples of Moses, Aaron, Samuel, David,
Isaiah, Jeremy; and of St. Paul who himself tolerated the false Apostles, that
none should ever separate from their Brethren before a solemn condemnation of
the Church. Thereupon he says that Epis. 162.
The Donatists were intolerably wicked, For having made a Schism; For having
erested Altar against Altar; For their having separated themselves from the
Heritage of Jesus Christ spread throughout the whole Earth, according to the
promise which he made unto it. He adds, That if they think this a small matter
they need only see what the Scripture teaches us herein by the Examples there
shown of the Punishment of so great a Crime; Ibidem.
For says he, They who made the Idol of the golden Calf were punished only by
the Sword; But they who made the Schism were swallowed up by the Earth; By this
diversity of chastisements, one may know that Schism is a greater Crime than
Idolatry.

See hereupon the Epistle -- 171. where in the Person of the Church he exhorts
the Donatists to renounce their unhappy Schism; Amongst other things there he
has these elegant sayings: Why will you tear the Garments of our Lord? And why
will you not, with the rest of the world, leave entire, this Coat of Charity,
which is but of one sole texture, and which his very Persecutors would not
rend? And a little after. You feign before the time of harvest to eschew the
Cockle which is mingled (by what you say) with you; because it is your selves
that are this Cockle. For if you were the good grain, you would suffer the
being mixed with Tares and would not separate your seves from the Wheat of Jesus
Christ.

There needs here no more than to change the word Donatists into that of
Calvinists, a thing which shows how far the Church has always been, and always
ought to be, acknowledged for infallible, seeing we must give place to its
Decisions, And that the Fathers have so firmly asserted, we ought never to
depart from her bosom, and that we are so much the more obliged to remain
united to her, for that she never refuses to give ear to the complaints of her
Children.

The 14th. Method.
To confirm the precedent Method with a fourteenth; we may demand of the
Calvinists, as to all our Articles, what St. Austin demanded of the Donatists;
when the Church reconciled penitent Heretics without rebaptising them. For
example, It may be demanded of them; when Jesus Christ was adored in the holy
Eucharist before the Schism, was the Church then the true Church, or was it no
longer so? If it was; then none ought to have separated from it, for a practice
which it authorized. If it was no longer so; From whence departed Calvin?
Austin Lib. 3. de Bapt. Cont Don. Cap. 2.
What soil put forth this Sprig? What Sea cast him on our Coast? From what
Heaven did he fall upon Earth? From whence came these Reformers? Of whom
received they their Doctrine, and Authority to Preach? Let those who have
followed them look well, where they are, seeing they can arise no higher then to
these People, to find their Original: As for us, we are secure in the Communion
of that Church, in which is now practiced vuiversally throughout, that which
also was every where done, before Agrippinus and Cyprian. Then he adds these
elegant words, which are decisive. In the mean while neither Agrippinus, nor
Cyprian, nor those who followed them, though they were of an opinion contrary
to that of others, did separate from them, but remained with their Dissenters
in the Communion, and unity of the same Church. That is to say, expecting till
she decided their differences.

Afterward repeating in few words, what he had said, he conclude's. Ibidem.
If then the Church perished, for having taught that the Baptism of Heretics
was good, they could not show the original of their Communion; but if the true
Church subsisted they could not justify their separation, and Schism which they
made. As much may be said against the Waldenses, the Lutherans, the Calvinists,
and other Heretics, who can derive themselves no higher, than from Waldo,
Luther, Calvin and their other Ringleaders. This method of St. Austin is
excellent.

If our pretended reformed Brethren will defend themselves, saying, as in
effect, they do in all their Books, that it is not they, that have made the
separation, but rather, it came from us, and that it is we who, have cut them
off from our Communion; We must answer, That there are two sorts of separation,
the one which is criminal, the other which is lawful: In the first, One
seperates himself from his Pastor, by a manifest Dissobedience. In the second
the Pastor seperateth from the Flock, him who making a band apart, refuses to
submit himself to the Orders of the Church; The one is a Fault, the other a
Punishment: the one is a voluntary Departure the other an Abstision by
sentence; So the Judge pronounces Condemnation against him, who has taken
away from himself, his own Life.

The proof of these two different seperations may be seen in the thirty eighth
letter of St. Cyprian, where he speaks of one called Augendus, who had betaken
himself to the party of Felicissimus the Deacon; and it appeared that this
great Saint had suspended, and excommunicated him, for having subtracted
himself from his obedience, and engaged others in the same separation; Let him
who shall follow his opinions, and faction, learn, That he shall have no more
communication with us, for his having voluntarily separated himself from the
Church. He says the same thing of Novatian in his seventy sixth Epistle, and
of those who had followed him in his Revolt; For that rending the Church by
their Rebellion, and breaking the Peace, and Unity of Jesus Christ, they were
forced to Authorize their particular Doctrine; To be independent; and to usurp a
power of baptizing, and of offering the Sacrifice.

This Distinction is clearly expressed in the fourth Article of the Council of
Calcedon, where those two ancient Canons of the Council of Antioch, taken out
of the Canons of the Apostles, are rehearsed, the first concerning those who
were separated, the second concerning those who voluntarily separated
themselves; The Greek expresses it. (...) Con. Calced. Action 4. 10. Can. 83.


Si quis Episcopus a Synodo depositus, aut* Presbiter, aut: Diaconus aut omnino
qui est* sub Regula aproprio Episcopo, ausus fucrit amplius aliquid sacri*
Ministerii gerere, five Episcopus juxta superiorem, consuetudinem, five
Presbiter, five Diaconus; postea non liceat ei, ne in alter a quidem Synodo
spem Restitutionis, nec Desensionis locum habere: Sed and omnes qui ei
communicant ejioiantur ex Ecclesia; Et maxim si postquam cognoveruut
sententiam in praedictos latam, ils communicare ausi fuerint. Can. 84. de ils
qui scipsos seperant. Si quis Presbiter aut Diaconus contempto propri^
Episcopo, se ab Ecclesia segregaverit, ac scorfim congregationem habucrit, and
Altar constituerit; Si commonen^e Episcopo non acqueverit, nec consentire, vel
obedire voluerit, semel and iterum, ac tertium, vocanti, is omnino deponatur;
nec vltra remedium consequi, nec proprium honorem recipere Possit. Quod si
perseveraverit tumultuari, and Ecclesiam perturbare, per potestatem externam
tanquam seditios^^ corrigatur.
It is believed, it would be to the purpose here to transcribe these two Canons,
which are, as it were the fundamental Laws of the practice of the Church in
regard to Heretics, and Schismatics, whom she casts out of her Bosom, and who
separate themselves from her. These Canons are the fourth and fifth of the
Council of Antioch, and the twenty seventh and thirtyeth of the Appostolick
Canon. And our pretended reformed, cannot reject their Authority, seeing they
keep amongst them the same Discipline, when any particular Persons, either
Ministers, or others of their Communion, will not submit to the Decisions of
their Synods.

These two Canons were read and reported in the fourth Act of the Council of
Calcedon in the case of two Monks, Carozius, and Dorotheus, who made a Schism,
and adhereing to Eutyches, separated themselves from the Church, as Luther, and
Calvin and those that have followed them, are separated from it, in these later
times.

The 15th. Method.
To all these precedent Methods, may be added a fifteenth in making known to our
pretended Reformed, that in their confession of Faith, in their Catechisms, in
their Articles of Discipline, in the Resolutions of their Synods, and in the
Books of their chief Ministers, who have writ upon Controversy's, are found
several Articles from whence arguments may be drawn, to prove against them, by
their own confession, the truth of our belief. For Example their Discipline
allows the Communion under one sole kind to those who cannot drink Wine; from
whence it may be concluded, that Communion under both kinds is not a necessary
Article, and that they are to blame, to alledg it, as a lawful ground of their
Separation.

The Minister Daille, and many others confess that at the time of St. Gregory
Nazianzen, of St. Chrysostom, and of St. Jerome, the Invocation of Saints was
in use in the Church, as also the Veneration which we render to Relics. John
Forbese adds, that Tradition is Uniform in the Church concerning Prayer for the
Dead: And being he denis that the Books of the Maccabe's are canonical, He
says, that the Scripture speaks nothing of it. But without entering into that
difficulty which regards the Books of the Maccabees (wherein they have no more
reason than in the rest) It is easy to conclude from their own Principles, that
it was no wise allowable for them to separate on account of Points which are
established, according to themselves, by so considerable an Authority, and by
so constant an Accord of all Ages.

Finally, when may solidly impugn these Novellists, by the contradiction of
their tenants of Faith; In showing the changes which they have made from the
Confession of Ausburg, as also by all the different Professions of Faith, which
they have received, and authorized since that time; A thing which makes
appear, that their Faith being doubtful, and wavering, It could not have the
character of a Divine Revelation, which ought to be certain, and constant.
Regula quidem fides v^^ omnino est sola immobil^; and irreformabilis Catera jam
Disciplina, and conversationis, admittuus novitatem correctionis. Tertullde
virgi^ib. vel and. c. 1. advers. Mare. l. 1. c. 21.
There is nothing but Faith, which will suffer no Reformation. Tertullian
served himself of this argument in most of his Books; and St. Hillary, most
excellently applied it against the Emperor Constance on the occasion of the new
Creeds which the Arrians published every day, changing continually their Faith,
whilst the Catholic Church remained firm, in that of Nice.

We may yet make use of one Method more which consists in showing the
conformity of the Roman Church with the Greek Church, in the chief Articles of
Faith debated between us, and the pretending Reformed; and also with those
Societys which are separated from the Church by Errors which our pretended
reformed condemn with her, as are the Nestorians and the Eutychians.

To these Methods we must add particular conferences, solid writings, Sermons,
and Missions; and apply all these means in the Spirit of Charity, without
sharpness, andabove all, without injuries, being mindful of that lovely saying
of St. Austin, Lib. 3. Contr. Litt. Peul. Cap. 1.
I do not abuse those against whom I dispute thereby to get an advantage over
them: I only seek to convince them, and save them. And of the Canon of the
Council of Africa, which requires. That although the Donatists were cut off
from the Church of our Lord by their Schism, nevertheless they should be
sweetly treated withal, 1 Cor. 4. V. 21.
To the end that correcting them with Mildness, as the Apostle says; God may
grant them the grace of Repentance to know the truth, and to withdraw
themselves from the Snares of the Devil, of whom they are Captives.


