A Perfect Discovery OF WITCHES.

SHOWING The Divine Cause of the Distractions of this Kingdom, and also of the
Christian WORLD.

Justitia Thronum firmat.

PROVE. 29.14. The King that faithfully judges the poor, his Throne shall be
established.

Very profitable to be read by all sorts of People, especially JUDGES of
Assizes, Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, and Grand-Jury-men, before they
pass sentence on those that are condemned for WITCHCRAFT.

By THOMAS ADY, M.A.

London, Printed for R. I. to be sold by H. Brom at the Gun in Ivy-Lane. 1661.

The Reason of the Book.
THe Grand Error of these latter Ages is ascribing power to Witches, and by
foolish imagination of men's brains, without grounds in the Scriptures,
wrongful killing of the innocent under the name of Witches; unto which
Idolatry and bloud-guiltiness (being as bad, or worse than the Idolatry of the
ancient Heathen) men are led as violently by fond imagination, as were the
Ephesians to the worshipping of Diana, and of the Image which (as they blindly
thought) fell down from Jupiter, Acts 19.35. It is reported by Travelers, that
some People in America do worship, for a day, the first living Creature they
see in the morning, be it but a Bird, or a Worm; this Idolatry is like the
Idolatry of this part of the World, who when they are afflicted in Body, or
Goods, by Gods hand, they have an eye to some Mouse, or Bugg, or Frog, or other
living Creature, saying, It is some Witches Impe that is sent to afflict them,
ascribing the Work of God, to a Witch, or any mean Creature rather than to God.
Mr. Scot published a Book, called his Discovery of Witchcraft, in the beginning
of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, for the instruction of all Judges, and
Justices of those times; which Book did for a time take great impression in the
Magistracy, and also in the Clergy, but since that time England has shamefully
fallen from the Truth which they began to receive; wherefore here is again a
necessary and illustrious discourse for the Magistracy, and other People of
this Age, where I entreat all to take notice, that many do falsely report of Mr.
Scot, that he held an Opinion, that Witches are not, for it was neither his
Tenent, neither is it mine; but that Witches are not such as are commonly
executed for Witches.

A Candle in the Dark.
The First Book, showing what Witches are in the Scripturesence, throughout the
Old and New Testament.

The Second Book, showing how grossly the Scriptures have been mis-interpreted
by Antichrist concerning Witches, by which interpretation he has made the
Nations go astray. With a confutation of those Errors.

The Third Book, touching some erroneous English Writers, who have upheld the
same Errors which Antichrist has broached to the world;

Also the Works of a Scotch-man, called, The Works of King James. With an
addition of fifteen Causes; also a reference to Scot, and also the opinion of
Luther concerning Devils. Also an instruction to Lawyers.

Errata.
PAge 11. line 3. for Magnus, read Magus, p. 15. l. 21, for 6 Chron. r. 2 Chro.
p. 22. l. 1. for Prophets, r. Prophetess, p. 28. l. 23. for magis r. magi, p.
30. l. 11. for inchantation, r. incantation, p. 38 l. 15. for little r. liche,
l. 19. for tax, r. tap, thrice in the same page, in p 48. l. 8. for Charms r.
Charmer, p. 76. l. 33. for equivocately, r. equivocally, p. 77. l. 8. for
Scopula. r. Scapula, over p. 79. for Oracle giver, r. South sayer, so over p.
87. Necromancer should not be.

The Second Book.

Page 92. l. 5. for drew r. grew, p. 96. l. 10, for inquisitions r.
inquisitors, p. 106 l. 8. tor superstitions, r. suspicions, p. 122. l. 35, for
quem, r. quum, p. 124. l. 15. for an r. and, p 129, l. 15. or preternatural r,
preternatural, p. 136. l. 28. for any sort, r. every other sort, p. 145. l. 30,
for discovered, r. discoursed, p. 146. l. 36. for and by them cast on can cure,
r. and by them can cast on, or inflict and cure diseases, p. 147. l. 4. for
send r. teach. p. 170. l 17, for endicat, r. indicat.

Reader, take notice that most of these faults are mended with Pen and Ink
already,

TO THE Prince of the Kings of the Earth.
IT is the manner of men, O heavenly King, to dedicate their Books to some
great men, thereby to have their Works protected and countenanced among men;
but thou only art able by thy holy Spirit of Truth to defend thy Truth, and to
make it take impression in the heart and understanding of men: Unto thee alone
do I dedicate this Work, entreating thy most High Majesty to grant, That
whoever shall open this Book, thy holy Spirit may so possess their
understanding, as that the spirit of error may depart from them, and that they
may read, and try thy Truth by the touchstone of thy Truth, the holy
Scriptures, and finding that Truth may embrace it, and forsake these darksome
inventions of Antichrist, that have deluded and defiled the Nations now, and in
former Ages.

Enlighten the World, thou that art the Light of the World, and let Darkness be
no more in the World now, or in any future Age; but make all people to walk as
Children of the Light for ever; and destroy Antichrist that has deceived the
Nations, and save us the residue, by thy self alone, and let not Satan any more
delude us; for the Truth is thine for ever.

To the Reader.
SIR,
IF you be a courteous Reader, I entreat you that what weakness and
imperfections you shall think you epsy in this Book from the Author thereof,
you pass them by for the Truths sake whereupon this Book treats.

Secondly, if you be so discourteous as to carp and censure, then I entreat you
to carp only at me, and not at the Truth, lest you resist the truth.

Thirdly, I entreat you to Read my Book through before you cast it by, for
otherwise, Sir, it may argue weakness in your self to slight the Book before
you see the Argument.

It is one of the vanities of the World to write many Books, and when a man
has taken pains to write, few men will take the pains to read; which Solomon
intimates Eccle. 12.12. but Sir, if you find no leisure to read and consider,
then I pray find no leisure to gainsay, or to argue against.

Fourthly, for all places of Scripture alleged in this Book, if you shall
search our English Translations, and not find them to carry the sense which I
drive at in my discourse, I entreat you either to search the Original, or else
to look upon the Latin Translations of Junius and Tremellius, which carry the
true sense of the Original, as it was written by the Spirit of God.

Your Friend T. A. Non quis, sed quid.

To the more Judicious and Wise, and Discreet part of the Clergy of ENGLAND.
Joshua 7.11.
THese words, Israel has sinned, are not so to be understood, as if Israel had
been free from all other sins but only that of Achan, and yet that sin of
Achan was the sin that kindled the anger of God against Israel; so likewise,
2 Samuel 21.1. David had been an adulterer, Joab was a murderer, Shimei a rayler,
Sheba a wicked man of Belial, and many sins were in Israel at that time, and
yet the sin that kindled Gods wrath, and brought the famine, was the
blood-guiltiness of Saul, as appears in the Chapter and verse aforesaid; so
likewise 1 Kings 16.30. Ahab was more wicked than all that were before him, yet
the sin that cost him his life, and his crown, was murdering of Naboth,
Chapter 21.19. so that it is easily gathered, that some one abominable sin
does sometimes more provoke God to anger, against any particular man, or
against a Nation, than all other sins that are commonly committed. Then you
that should be as messengers from God, in that you cry against sin in
general, ye do well, but in that ye seek not out this cursed Achans wedg
that has defiled England and the Christian world, look to it betimes, lest it
be laid to your charge, if the Nations perish for lack of knowledge.

Your Friend T. A. Non quis, sed quid.

A PREFACE.
SInce the time that I have tried to bring truth upon the stage of the world,
to be censured by all men, I being acquainted with but few in comparison of
all, and some of them knowing my intent to put this discourse in Print, I have
nearly guessed by common discourse amongst them, what the censure of this book
will be, that is, it will be the same among many, that it is among few; for
among few, I find some so reasonable in their discourse, that when they find by
argumentation, that there is reason and grounds in the Scripture for what I
write, they upon second cogitations, and deliberate musings, have yielded to
this truth, (and some of them very learned.) Some again, after some serious
argumentation, being fully convinced that this is the very truth, yet do still
suspend their censure, till they see how it will be approved of by others, by
which they show they are ready at all times, to believe as the Church believes,
and to pin their opinion upon the sleeve of other men's judgments. A third sort
there are, who at the first onset of discourse, do think themselves so surely
grounded, and this truth so groundless and vain an opinion, as that they
cannot speak without disdain, as great Goliath spoke to little David, and thus
they begin in fury, O gross! what madness is this? what will you deny the
Scriptures? what answer you to this? Thou shall not suffer a Witch to live: but
when they are so suddenly answered, and suddenly convinced, that this place of
Scripture makes nothing for them, and that this their great Champion-argument,
has so soon received a stone in the forehead, they either let their discourse
fall to the ground like Goliath, and slight this as a new opinion; or else they
run away cowardly, like the host of the Philistines, and forsake the
Scriptures (which they first pretended should be their only weapon to fight
withal) and betake themselves to their legs, running into some vain story
taken out of Bodinus or Bat. Spineus, or some such popish vain writer, and
report that it was done in Lancashier, or in Westmerland, or in some remote
place far off; and that they heard it credibly reported from men of worth and
quality, and so they engage me to answer to a story, which they would compel
me to believe, or else to go see where it was done; but if it happens (as
often it does) that I make it appear by Scripture, that it is absurd or
impossible, not to be reported by a Christian, or that I show them the story,
in any of the aforesaid Authors, who have been the Authors of many vain fables,
then they presently fly to another story, as vain and absurd as the former, and
that being answered, they fly to another, saying, Sir, what do you answer to
this? in which manner of disputes I have heard sometimes such monstrous
impossibilities reported and affirmed to be true, (for they had it by credible
report) as would make the Angels in Heaven blush to hear them. Therefore
setting aside all such unscholar-like way of arguing, I desire all to argue by
the Scriptures, and I will answer, or to answer by the Scriptures, and I will
argue by the Scriptures, as follows in this Dilemma.

A DILEMMA THAT Cannot be answered by VVITCH-MONGERS. Luke 4.4, 8, 12.
CHrist who is our forerunner, Heb. 6.20. by whose holy Spirit the holy
Scriptures were written, whose words were of equal truth and authority with
the Scriptures; Yet when he was to conquer the father of lies, the Prince of
darkness (not for his own sake, but for our example) although he was able to
have argued by common reason, beyond the wisdom of Solomon, yet being
tempted, would not answer any one temptation without Scriptum est, it is
written (because the Scriptures are the only rule of righteousness;) whosoever
then will take example by him, to try the Truth by Scriptures, and to argue by
them, as he did in this place of Luke, (and not by strange reports, which are
the objects of vain credulity) let them answer me by Scriptum est.

1 Where is it written in all the old and new Testament, that a Witch is a
murderer, or has power to kill by Witchcraft, or to afflict with any disease
or infirmity?

2 Where is it written, that Witches have Imps sucking of their bodies?

3 Where is it written, that Witches have biggs for Imps to suck on?

4 Where is it written, that the Devil sets privy marks upon Witches,
whereby they should be known or searched out? or that any man or woman has any
mark upon their body any more than natural, or by some disease or hurt, which
is preternatural?

5 Where is it written, that the trial of a Witch should be by sinking or
swimming in the water? or by biggs or privy marks, or suspicion of people, to
be signs of a Witch?

6 Where is it written, that Witches can hurt corn or cattle, or transport
corn by Witchcraft, or can fly in the air, and do many such strange wonders?

7 Where is it written, that a Witch is such a man or woman that makes a
league with the Devil, written with his or her blood, and by virtue of that
covenant to have the Devil at command?

8 Where is it written, that any man or woman was called in the Scripture
strix. or lamia, or where is any word of such signification or importance,
either in the Hebrew text, or in the Latin translation, where is a Witch said
in the Scriptures to be any such kind of person?

9 What is a witch in the scripture sense, according to Deu. 18.10, 11 where
all sorts of witches are nominated by nine terms of description?

10 Where is it written, that there are any other sorts of Witches than such as
are there described? Deuteronomy. 18.10, 11.

11 Where do we read of a he devil, or a she devil, called incubus or
succubus, that uses generation or copulation with Witches, or Witches with
them?

12 It is written, Woe unto such as devour widows houses, and in a pretense
make long prayers, Matthew. 23.14.

13 It is written, the Lord hates the hand that sheddeth innocent blood, and
the false witness that speaks lies, and the feet that are swift to do
mischief, and a heart that devises wicked imaginations, Pro. 6. 17 18, 19.

14 It is written, shall there be evil in a City and the Lord has not done
it? Amos. 3.6.

15 It is written, there is no God with me, I kill and I make alive; I wound,
and heal, Deuteronomy. 32.39. and again, the Lord kills, and makes alive; he
brings down to the grave, and brings up; the Lord makes poor, and makes
rich, 1 Samuel 2.6, 7.

16 It is written, If ye were blind ye had had no sin, but now ye say ye
see, therefore your sin remains, John 9.41.

17 It is written, Because they received not the love of the Truth, that they
might be saved; therefore God shall send them strong delusions, that they
should believe lies, that they might be damned that believed not the Truth, but
had pleasure in unrighteousness 2 These. 2. 10, 11, 12.

18 It is written, Thou shall not raise a false report: put not thy hand with
the wicked to be an unrighteous witness, Exodus 23.1.

19 It is written, If ye any way afflict the widow or the fatherless, and
they cry at all unto me, I will surely hear their cry; and my wrath shall wax
hot, and I will kill you with the sword, and your wives shall be widows, and
your children fatherless, Exodus 22.23, 24.

20 It is written, God saw that the imaginations of the thoughts of men's hearts
were only evil continually; and it repented the Lord that he had made man, and
therefore he destroyed the old world, Genesis 6.5, 6, 7,

Therefore you that are of the sacred order of the ministry; that do use to cry
to the people, give ear with fear and reverence to the word of God, as it is
written in the text, how dare ye teach for doctrine, the traditions of
Antichrist that are not written in the Book of God?

Whether do not some prefer the mad imaginations of Cornelius Agrippa and
others, before the Scriptures, for the defending their opinions?

So much for my Dilemma, now for the Text.

A Candle in the Dark: SHEVVING The Divine Cause of the distractions of the
whole Nation of ENGLAND, and of the Christian World.
Deuteronomy 18.10, 11. LEt the Reader take notice that in all the Scriptures
there is not any kind of Witch spoken of but such as are mentioned in these two
verses; which that every one may understand, I will expound punctually, not
according to our English obscure translations, but according to the true
meaning, and signification of the original text, as it was written by Moses in
the Hebrew tongue, and as it is truly translated (for the better and easier
satisfaction of many that have not knowledge in the Hebrew tongue;) by Junius,
and Tremellius, in their Latin Bible; whether also I refer the Reader for all
places of Scripture, alleged in this Book; and here I do in Gods name, and in
Zeal for his truth, desire and entreat him that thinks himself the learned
Clerk, to show me in all the Scriptures, such a word as Striges or lamiae, or
any word of that signification, importing such doctrins, as have a long time
defiled the Nations.

Deuteronomy. 18.10, 11. Let there not be found among you, any that makes his son
or his daughter to pass through the fire, a user of divinations, a planetarian,
or a Conjecturer, or a Jugler.

Also a user of charms, or one that seeks an Oracle, or a South-sayer, or
one that asks counsel of the dead.

The Latin translation is this.

Ne invenitor in te qui traducat filium suum, aut filiam suam per ignem, utens
divinationibus, planetarius, aut conjector, aut praestigiator,

Item utens incantatione, aut requirens pythonem, aut ariolus, aut necromantis;

The Hebrew Text.

(...)

And here is the Hebrew Text written in the Roman character, with the
construction of every word.

Lo jimatzae ne invenitor, beca in te, magnabir qui traducat, beno filium suum,
uubitto aut filiam suam, baese per ignem, kosem kesamim divinans divinationes,
megnonen, planetarius, uumenachese aut conjector, umechascscph aut
praestigiator, vechobhir chabber incantans incantatione, vessoel ob requirens
pythonem, vejiddegnoni, aut ariolus, vedhorese el hamethim aut consulens
mortuos;

so much for the Text.
Exodus. 22.18. Mechascscepha lo thechajek, praestigiatricem non sines vivere.
There is also another word, Hartumim in Exodus 4.17. Genesis 41 8. and in other
places, which is taken in the general sense for Magnus a Magician; that has
one or all these crafts or impostures, yet by many it is restrained to the
particular, and often translated Ariolus, being the most allowed signification,
for Arioli, were called Magi, being counted wise men, and therefore the word is
used for all sorts of Magicians; these and all other words in the Scriptures
concerning Witches are consonant to the words in the Text.

The Text opened.
THe Text is verbatim, according to the Original as it was written by Moses in
the Hebrew tongue, which I will expound orderly: and here is to be noted, that
in these two verses, are nine sorts of Witches nominated by God, unto Moses,
and the people, to this end and purpose; that whereas God has chosen the
people of Israel, to be a peculiar church and people to himself, he would be
their only Counselor, to keep them in the way of wisdom and holiness, and
therefore commands them, in no wise to ask counsel of any but the true
prophets and messengers of God, as appears in the 14. and 15. verses of this
chapter, and because there were so many sorts of people in the world, that did
commonly abuse and usurp the office of Gods Prophets: God describes them, in
the 10. and 11. verses of this chapter, by nine several nominations or
descriptions, commanding them to shun and avoid them as false Prophets and
deceivers of the people; for it was the manner of the heathen (to seek unto
such for counsel,) and the Lord having cast out those heathen people, for such
abominable ways gives his own people warning of all such ways to avoid them,
and not to hearken to them namely, to those nine sorts of witches, or
deceivers, or false prophets, or seducers of the people from God and his
prophets, to lying Idolatrous ways, and gives them warning in the three last
verses of the same chapter of all false Prophets whatsoever, that should
presumptuously take upon them to speak any thing in Gods name which God had not
commanded, or to speak in the name of other Gods, that such should be slain,
and these nine appellations in the tenth and eleventh verses, are not terms of
distinction, but several terms of description, whereby to discern false
Prophets, or Witches, whom the Lord would have cut off from among his people;
and thorefore the Lord describes them in the tenth and eleventh verses,
shows the destruction of the Nations that hearkened to them, in the 12, 13,
and 14. verses (where also he commands his people to be holy, and not like
those Nations) promises that his people should always have a true Prophet
amongst them to hearken unto, in the 15, 16, 17, and 18. verses (which although
it was fulfilled in Christ chiefly, Acts 3.23. yet it is meant, and also
verified of all the rest of the Prophets, that were successively Messengers of
Christ from Moses, till the coming of Christ in the Flesh) commands them to
hearken to such a Prophet, in the nineteenth verse, but for all false Prophets,
the Lord will have them cut off in the twentieth verse, and sets down a
trial, and a discerning rule between a true Prophet, and a false Prophet that
speaks in Gods Name, in the one and twentieth and two and twentieth verses,
as appears orderly in the chapter, who so pleases to read it.

And now to come to the Exposition, or Interpretation of these two verses,
Deuteronomy. 18.10, 11. and of the nine appellations or descriptions therein
contained. And first, for the first.

Let there not be found among you, any that makes his Son or his Daughter to
pass through the fire, this is the first description whereby God describes a
Witch, or a false Prophet; and in what manner this should be a description of a
Witch, or false Prophet, that we may the better understand, I must first define
what a Witch is, and then come to the matter.

The Definition of a Witch, or a certain Demonstration what a Witch is (for the
vulgar capacity.)
A Witch is a Man, or Woman, that practices Devilish crafts, of seducing the
people for gain, from the knowledge and worship of God, and from the truth to
vain credulity, (or believing of lies) or to the Worshipping of Idols.

So likewise for the definition of Witchcraft.
WItchcraft is a Devilish craft of seducing the people for gain, from the
knowledge and worship of God, and from his Truth to vain credulity (or
believing of lies) or to the worshipping of Idols.

That it is a Craft truly so called, and likewise that it is for gain is
proved, Acts 16.16, 19, the Maid that followed Paul crying, brought in her
Master much gain; and that it is a craft of perverting the people, or seducing
them from God and his Truth, is proved, Acts 13.6, 7, 8. Elimas the Sorcerer
labored to pervert the Deputy from the Faith. So likewise, Acts 8, 9, 10, 11.
verses, it does more plainly prove all in these words, And there was a man
before in the City called Simon, which used Witchcraft, and bewitched the
people of Samaria, saying that he himself was some great man, to whom they gave
heed from the least to the greatest, saying, This man is the great power of
God, and gave heed unto him, because that of long time he had bewitched them
with Sorceries; How bewitched them with Sorceries? That is, seduced them with
Devilish crafts (as the Greek and also Tremelius Latin Translation do more
plainly illustrate) in this sense speaks Paul to the Galathians 3.1. O
foolish Galathians who has bewitched you, that you should not obey the truth?
and that a Witch, or Witchcraft is taken in no other sense in all the
Scripture, it appears by the whole current of the Scriptures, as you may see
in this Book. But now to return to the Text.

Deuteronomy. 18.10, 11. THe first description of a Witch in the Text is, Let there
not be found among you, any that makes his Son or his Daughter to pass
through the fire.

Here we must note that there was in those days a great Idol of great request
among the Heathen, the name of which Idol was Molech, and was first set up by
the Ammonites, 1 King. 11.5. and by them called Milcom, and from thence grew in
request, and defiled a great part of the world, who were generally led after it
to Idolatry, insomuch that the Kings and Nobles of the earth did sometimes make
their Sons and their Daughters pass through the fire in honor to that Idol, as
Manasses did, 2 Chronicles. 33.6. and how that passing through the fire, was, or in
what manner, is questionable, Some think they burnt them in the fire, as
Burnt-offerings to that Idol, because it is said, Deuteronomy. 12.31. they burnt their
Sons and their Daughters in the fire to their gods; and also in Psalm. 106.38.
But although that was one Grand Abomination amongst the Heathen, sometimes to
burn their Children in Sacrifice to their Idols, upon some extraordinary
request, or Petition made to their Idols for the obtaining of some great matter
(which was also forbidden the people of Israel in that place of Deuteronomy
12.31.) yet that is not the meaning of this place, in Deuteronomy. 18.10. but only
that they made them pass through the fire, as an Idolatrous Ceremony, whereby
they dedicated them to their Idol Molech. And this is the most allowable
Exposition, for otherwise they must have bereaved themselves of Children; but
we read that Manasses was not left childless, for Ammon his Son reigned in his
stead, 2 Chronicles. 33.20. but yet in what manner soever it was, that they made
their Children to pass through the fire, the scope and meaning of the text,
Deuteronomy. 18.10, is, That they should not be Ringleaders to Idolatry; as in Levit.
20.5. whosoever did give his Children to Molech was to be slain, with all that
followed him in his Idolatry, they that followed him to Idolatry were to be
slain as Idolaters, but he that gave his Children to Molech, to make them pass
through the fire, is chiefly named here to be slain, as a Ringleader of other
men to Idolatry, and is in Deuteronomy. 18.10. reckoned amongst Witches, according to
the definition of a Witch afore-shewed, Witches being in all the
Scripture-sence only Seducers, or inticers of the people to Spiritual Whoredom
and here in the Text Moses speaks, Per Synecdocen, of one Idol for all; all
one as if he had said, Let none be found among you that is an inticer or
ringleader of the people to Idolatry, in which sense all Idol Priests are
Witches, and are styled so in common Scripture phrase, 1 Samuel 6.2. the
Philistims called their Priests, and South-sayers together; for the setting up
or upholding of any Idol, is the Grand Witchcraft of all, and the very Mother
of all other Witchcraft, and it is most probable the Priests of Molech were
first devoted to that service, by using that Ceremony of passing through the
fire; and all that did in like manner pass through the fire did become Priests,
or at least Servants to the Idol, for the work of the Burnt-offerings, in this
sense is Jesabel, called a Witch, 2 King. 9.22. Why was it said the
Witch-crafts of Jesabel? Because she was an upholder of Baal, and his
Prophets, who were juggling Seducers of the people to Idolatry: Why in the same
verse is it said the Whoredoms of Jesabel? Because Spiritual Whoredom (or
Idolatry) and Witchcraft are inseparable companions, therefore it is said,
Scortationes and praestigiae Jezebelae, the Whoredoms, and juglings, or
Witch-crafts of Jesabel; in this sense is Mae^asses truly said to use
Witchcraft, 6 Chron. 33. and the first eight verses, almost all that is spoken
of in Deuteronomy. 18.10, 11. Manasses is said to be guilty of in this place of
Chronicles; First, he set up several Idols, and immediately follows the
inseparable companions, that is the Witches, or Priests of Idols, called here
South-sayers, with their several Witch-crafts, in the sixth verse of the same
Chapter of the Chronicles. Why do Idols, and Witch-crafts, and Witches come in
rolling together so thick in this place?

The first Reason is, because as the setting up of an Idol is Witchcraft, so
where Idols are, there must needs be Witches; namely South-sayers, or Idol
Priests, or else the Idol of it self can do nothing; as when it is said in 2
King. 1, 2. Ahaziah sent to inquire of the god of Ekron, it is not to be
supposed that there could be an answer given by the bare Idol (being but a
stock) but the answer or Divination must come from the Priests and
South-sayers, that were there belonging to that Idol, and upholding it.

The second Reason is, because as I have said before of the nine several
appellations of Witches in Deuteronomy. 18.10, 11. that they are not terms of
distinction but of description; so here in the 2 Chronicles. 33. all that is said of
Manasses in the seven first Verses or the Chapter, is not to be understood as
expressions of several distinct things done by Manasses, but a full expression
of one thing by several terms of description, expressing fully that one act of
Manasses, that is, first he set up several Idols, as in the third, fourth, and
fifth, and the beginning of the sixth verse of the Chapter does appear; and then
it follows that he used those things that did necessarily belong to the Idol,
without which the Idol could be of no force, or request among the people, and
that was as appears in the sixth verse, he used Divinations, and
Conjecturings, and Juglings, and set up an Oracle, and South-sayers, (the
Latin translation is) Et divinationibus, and conjectationibus, and prestigiis
usus est, instituitque pythonem and ariolos) so all that Manasses did, was
setting up of Idols with their adjuncts, and though the Idols indeed were
several and various, yet all was one act, tending only to the making up of one
complete Idol-house, that was the House of God, verse the fourth and seventh,
he abusing it, and making it an House of Idols, this one act produced one
effect; that was, he made Judah and Jerusalem go astray to Idolatry, as
appears verse nine, but Josiah destroyed the Idols, with their Adjuncts,
Oracles, and South-sayers, 2 King. 23, 24. being Idol Priests.

So much for the first and grand description of a Witch in the text, that is, a
Ringleader to Idolatry, intimated in these words, Let there not be found among
you, any that makes his Son or his Daughter to pass through the fire; this
first description being rightly understood, the other eight will be the more
easily expounded, being but appurtenances to the first, or rather Monsters in
the belly or the first.

Now follows the second description, or appellation of a Witch, that is, Let
there not be found among you, any that uses Divinations.

To use Divinations was to take upon them to tell things to come, and things
hidden, which things could not be done by any but by God, and his Prophets, as
appears, Isa. 41.23. Show what is to come after, that we may know that ye
are gods; yet as Gods Prophets could tell things to come, so in the second of
Kings, 6.12. Elisha the Prophet could tell the King of Israel what was spoken
in the secret Chamber of the King of Aram; and although God would have his
people know, that none could do these things truly but himself, by his
Prophets, and therefore he would have his people to hearken after none but his
Prophets, in enquiring of things to come, or things hidden; yet many false
Prophets did take upon them to tell such things merely to seduce the people for
gain, pretending that they could do it, either by virtue of their Idol, and so
led the people a whoring after them, as in 2 King. 1.2. Ahaziah sent to enquire
of the god of Ekron, and Jeremiah, 23.13. they Prophesied by Baal, and seduced
my people.

Or else falsely pretending themselves to be Gods Prophets, and so in a fair
pretense, to pervert the people from the truth to lies, as Micha 3.11. Quorum
Prophetae, pecunia divinant, whose Prophets do give Divinations for money; and
Jer. 23.21. I have not spoken to them, and yet they have Prophesied says the
Lord. In this sense Samuel said to Saul, Rebellio est sicut peccatum
divinationis, Rebellion is as the sin of divination, or according to our
English translations, is as the sin of Witchcraft, 1 Samuel 15.23. and for these
divinations, and false Prophesies they had this color, That whereas God did
usually speak to his Prophets in Dreams, and Visions of the night, as
appears, Numb. 12.6. these Witches, or false Prophets pretended that they had
also Dreamed, and had seen Visions, that so they might bewitch and seduce the
people from Gods way, Deuteronomy. 13.1.5. and also Jer. 23.25. They prophecy lies in
my name, saying, I have dreamed, I have dreamed; and verse. 27. Think they to
cause my people so to forget my Name by their Dreams, which they tell every one
to his neighbor, as their fathers have forgotten my name for Baal? not but
that Dreams were to be declared and regarded, if it were truly done without
deceit, for it follows in the twenty eighth verse, He that has a Dream, let
him tell a dream, and he that has my Word, let him speak my Word faithfully;
but these Dreamers, or Witches, did falsely pretend Dreams and Visions, that
they might seduce the people, verse. 32. these were the right Enthusiasts of the
Heathen, this was one great practice of the Priests of the great Idol Apollo,
that was called the Oracle of Apollo, they would lie down behind the Altar, and
sleep for a time, and then make people believe they had seen a Vision, whereby
they could determine their matters, and accordingly gave their Divinations, or
Oracles; many other colors, or pretenses, had their Diviners, for their
cheating Witchcraft, or Divinations, as they would make the people believe
they could talk with the spirit departed of the dead, and so know things
hidden, or things to come, but of that more in the ninth description, and
indeed most of the following descriptions, or appellations in the text were
linken to the second, to lying Divinations, as also linked to each other, yet
because the manner of their actions were various, the Lord here describes them
according to the variety of their actions, all tending to one end, and that is
to oppose the way of God, and the Prophets for gain.

A Question resolved.
SEeing it is manifest by the Scriptures, as appears in this second
description of a Witch, that he that uses Divinations is a Witch, and one main
pretense in giving Divinations, was Dreams and Visions of the night, then it
may be supposed that he that tells a Dream to his neighbor, thereby
foretelling things to come, uses Divinations, and ought to be censured as a
Witch, or else must needs be a Prophet.

To this it is answered, That Dreams in the Scripture do appear to be of two
sorts, the first sort were Prophetical, wherein men had a direct command from
God to go and Prophecy to the people, and these Dreams came ordinarily to the
Prophets, upon so many several occasions as were needful for the Prophets to
admonish the people, to show them their sins, and declare the truth to them,
and for the declaring of future things to the people, either concerning
Judgments of God that would come upon them for their sins if they did not
amend, or concerning some great work, that God would do for his people that
feared him, and these Dreams were proper to the Prophets only, Numb. 12.6. and
they that did falsely pretend such Dreams, and Inspirations, to dissemble the
Prophets, to seduce the people to Idolatry were Witches, or false Prophets,
according to this second description of using lying Divinations, and ought to
be slain, Deuteronomy. 13.1.5.

Secondly, the second sort of Dreams that we read of in the Scriptures were
warning Dreams, whereby men were forewarned of things to come, but were not
thereby sent to Prophecy to the people by special command from God, but were
forewarned; First, for the avoiding of danger that might come upon them, or
others whom this Dream concerned, or at the least that they might know the
danger before it came, and these Dreams were common to many as well as to the
Prophets, both to the godly and ungodly, Mat. 2.12, 13 and 27.19. Genesis 40.8.
and Chap. 41. Dan. 2.1. Secondly, these sort of warning Dreams fore-shewed a
blessing upon the godly to encourage them, Genesis 37.5.9. and for these sorts of
Dreams, we read by these examples in the Scriptures, that they are common to
all sorts of people, and useful either to hear, or to declare, but whosoever
did declare a Prophetical Dream, was either a true Prophet indeed, or else a
lying Enthusiast, or false Prophet (such as were the Idol Priests of the
Heathen) to seduce the people, as is showed in the Scriptures before mentioned
in this second description, and also in Jeremiah 23.16.25.

And whereas some may question whether Dreams are now sent by God to forewarn,
as in ancient times, so long as we have no Scripture to the contrary (but
rather for it) we may not deny it; and do also find by common experience that
some have dreamed of their Child falling into the fire, and some into the
water, and of other several dangers concerning themselves, and others, of which
some have come to pass that might have been prevented, by prayer and diligent
care. I know a man that was forewarned in a Dream of these Wars in England
before they began, (or were like to be) but Prophetical Dreams are not usual
in these days.

Yet here it may further be noted, that in some case a man may also declare a
Prophetical Dream, and yet be neither a true Propher, nor a Witch, or false
Prophet; and that has sometimes been seen by experience in such as have been
troubled in their fantasies through distemper of body, or other distracting
occasions hurting their fantasy, they imagine that God has spoken to them by
Dream, or Vision, or Voice heard, or by an Angel, and has bidden them go
Prophecy such and such things, and these are to be charitably judged of, and
not rashly censured; this distemper of body may be discerned by the effects,
that is, Death, or Sickness following within a short time after, if not
prevented by the Physicians; also troubled fancy by outward distractions may
be discerned by the foregoing occasions that have troubled them, and hurt
their phansies; and here is required great discretion in all that shall see, or
hear a Man or Woman declare a Message from God (as he thinks) for the intent
of a false Prophet is only to deceive, or seduce for advantage of gain or
preferment; some have written concerning Dreams, that some Dreams are
Diabolical, which are only Philosophical Notions, having no grounds in the
Scripture. And whereas it is manifest in the Scriptures that God speaks to
men by Dreams, and interpretations of Dreams are only by the Spirit of God,
Genesis 40.8 I think it presumption and Fantasy, to add any such distinction of
Dreams, except Enthusiasmes, which although they are of the Devil, yet are no
real Dreams, but Lies, for the Enthusiasts did falsely pretend that they had
Dreamed, Jer. 23.25.27.32.

Natural Dreams I deny not, which come from the multitude of business, and from
the natural disposition of the body, but none of these are any way concerning
future events, but are only the objects of our Natural affections, and although
some of these are lascivious Dreams, some Murtherous, some Covetous, and in
that sense may be called Diabolical; yet in these Dreams are nothing besides
Nature, neither has the Devil any further act in them than in our corrupt
straggling affections in the day time; and though our thoughts are sometimes
worse in the night than in the day, it is because our affections are busied in
the day with other objects preventing such thoughts.

So much for the Second description of a Witch in the text, that is an user of
Divinations or false Prophesies.
The Third Description.
THe Third description of a Witch in the text, Deuteronomy. 18.10, 11. is Planetarius,
let there not be found among you a Planetarian; some have thought by a
Planetarian here is meant such a one as did observe the course and influence of
the Planets, and from thence gave predictions of future events, that these were
unlawful Arts, and ought not to be practiced, and therefore have absolutely
condemned judicial Astrology, but if they be right in this opinion, how then
do they answer to Psalm. 19.1. The Firmament shows the works of his hands;
this is not to be understood only of the making of the Canopy of Heaven, for
then it had been said the Firmament is the works of his hands (he that likes
not this exposition, let him read Cornelius Gemma de natura Cometae) and God
himself speaks of the influence of the Heavens, Job 38.31. Can thou
restrain the sweet influence of the Pleiades, or can thou loose the bonds of
Orion? etc. And whereas some have said, That the Star that showed the birth of
Christ, Mat. 2.2. was Miraculous, and not any Natural Star, how then could the
Wise men or Astrologians see the signification of that Star by their Science of
Astrology, whereas if it reaches not to the knowledge of future
contingensies, then much less to the knowledge of things supernatural or
miraculous, and yet they saw that the Stars appearance did signify the birth
of that great King (although I deny not, that the motion of the star in the
ninth verse might be miraculous.) And to come farther, Judge. 5.20. the Stars
in their Rampires fought against Sisera; it is not spoken of any thing beyond
nature, but the Prophets did observe that the stars in their natural places
fought against Sisera, also Genesis 1.14. God made the Lights of Heaven to be
signs for seasons, and for days, and for years; it seems then that judicial
Astrology is not condemned in the Scripture, if it be not abused; what then was
a Planetarian in the sense of the text? and why were they forbidden by God, and
set in the Catalogue of Witches? To this it is answered, That under the color
of Astrology these Planetarians that are here forbidden did harbor
themselves, that because there was somewhat in that Science for the knowledge
of some future things, therefore in the pretense of their knowledge in that
Science they did take upon them to compare themselves with the Prophets, and to
draw the people after their uncertain Predictions, as if they had been equal
with the Prophets, and many of them having no knowledge at all in that Science,
yet did under the color thereof harbor their deceitful Oracles, or
Divinations, ascribing a Deity to the Planets, calling them gods, as Mars the
god of War, Venus the goddess of Beauty, etc. and did also ascribe so much to
their influence, as they believed no power above them, and so drew the people a
whoring after them, to make them forget God the Author of all things, and to
Deifie the Creature; and these Planetarians being mere Naturalists, and
believing no power above the Planets, would bear a breast against the Prophets,
and undertake to do those things that were only proper to the Prophets to do,
and could be done by no other power but by the Spirit of God, Dan. 2.2, 3, 4.
they would undertake the interpretation of Dreams, if the dreams were related
to them, nevertheless the expounding of dreams is of God only, verse. 27, 28.
and Genesis 41.16. and 40.8. And whereas God did put into the heart of
Nebuchadnezzar, to put them to difficult task, they said no man upon earth was
able to do it, Dan. 2.10. inferring that the Prophets themselves could do no
more than they; yea so did they deifie the Planets, that they ascribed to them
to be the gods of the seven Days of the Week, and caused the people to worship
them, and bring their daily oblations to them, and to keep Holy days to them,
from the names of which Planets the days do take their nominations; as Sunday
from the Sun, Monday from the Moon, etc. and in other Tongues is more manifest
for every day; which if it be true that the Planets have their several
influences upon the several days of the Week, yet their wickedness was in
denying God that made the Heavens, and their Host, and in deifying the
Creature; and for this they are described among Witches, or seducers of the
people to Idolatry, and this Idolatry God warns his people to avoid, Deuteronomy.
4.19 Take heed when thou liftest up thine eyes to Heaven, and see the Sun,
and the Moon, and Stars, with all the Host of Heaven, should be driven to
worship them and serve them, which the Lord thy God has distributed to all
people under heaven. Although God had given and distributed their influence to
all people under Heaven, yet men may not worship them, but worship God that
made them. So likewise Deuteronomy. 17.3. also this Idolatry part of the Israelites
were defiled with, Jer. 44 17. they burnt Incense, and poured Drink Offerings
to the Queen of Heaven, or (as it is in the Original) to the works of Heaven,
that is, to the Planets; of this Idolatry Job clears himself, Job 31.26. If I
did behold the Sun when it shined, or the Moon walking in her brightness (that
is, if I did behold them with adoration) this had been iniquity, for I had
denied the God above, as follows verse. 28. also 2 Chronicles. 33.5. This was part
of Manasses Witchcraft, he built Altars to all the Host of Heaven, and made the
people go astray, verse. 9. And so for this Third description of a Witch in the
text, a Planetarian, that is, that under the color of Astrology seduced the
people to lying vanities, or Divinations, and causes them to deifie and
Idolize the Planets, or that boasts himself in his Predictions against the
Prophets, crying peace when the Prophets Prophecy destruction, Isa. 47.13. Let
thy Astrologians stand up that do view the Stars, and do make known their
monthly Predictions, and save thee from the things that shall come upon thee I
might quote also some profane Writers of this sort, who are seducing Witches,
because under pretense of Astrology they teach things beyond the intent and
scope of that, or any lawful Science. As Julius Maternus has devillishly
written, That he that is born when Saturn is in Leone, shall live long, and go
to Heaven when he dies; and so Albumazar says, Who so prays to God when the
Moon is in Capite draconis, shall obtain his prayer. These Planetarians, for
these and the like impious devices, in pretense of a lawful Science, are
described in the text among Witches.

Astrologians have also annexed to their Science of Astrology, Palmistrie, and
Physiognomie, the Caelestial Bodies, as they say, having fixed their Characters
upon the inferior Bodies of men (as he that reads their Books may see, with
the reason thereof) and therefore these Arts together with Astrology do serve
them to make their Prognostics concerning the strength, health, disposition,
and several events of any man's life; which Prognostics do often happen true,
because Natures course may be probably conjectured by the course and character
of the Planets (although these Arts are much abused by wandering Gypsies, who
under color of such knowledge, do commonly cheat silly people, and also rob
their pockets, when they are viewing their hands and face to tell them their
Fortunes;) now herein was one difference between Planetarians, or Astrologians,
lawful or unlawful in the Scripture sense, the lawful Astrologian foretelling
probable events, foreseen by Natural causes upon any person, or Nation; as
Deborah observed the Stars concerning Sicera and his Army (although she knew
what should come to pass more certainly by the Spirit of Prophecy than by the
Stars.) The unlawful Astrologian, or Planetarian foretelling things not only
probably, but certain and necessarily to come to pass, as if there were such
strong inclination, influence, and co-action in those Celestial Bodies, as
that our earthly bodies can no way avoid them, and as if God has no Decree but
what may be foreseen in the Stars. But the Scripture, and true Religion
teaches us otherwise, for as a man may not be so stupid as to deny the
influence of the Stars, so no man may be so Atheistical as to deny that Divine
Providence rules all inferior bodies; not only in that sense, that Astra
regunt homines and regit astra Deus, (which is the Astrologians Creed) but
beyond the influence of the Stars; otherwise it were in vain to pray to God for
recovery from sickness, or loss, or calamity, because happily the Stars threaten
death, or ruin; in vain it were then for the Elders of the Church to pray over
the sick, with hope of their recovery, except the Stars say, Amen. In vain it
were then for a Nation to fast, and pray for Peace when the Stars threaten War.
In vain it were for a man to hope for prosperity in all his undertakings, by
walking in Gods way (as is taught in Deuteronomy. 29.9.) because the Stars in that
man's Nativity threaten evil, and no prosperity to the whole course of that man's
life. But as a skilful Physician may by good Phisical applications of remedies
lengthen the days of a man, upon whom the Stars have a bad influence, and
threaten death (which Astrologians themselves confess) how much more may true
Religion in a man obtain a blessing for health, and prosperity, and peace,
beyond what the Stars do promise? which is the whole discourse of Levit. chap.
26. therefore it must needs follow that Grace may turn away the bad influence,
and Vice may hinder the good influence of the Stars from a Man, or a Nation;
and they that were such mere Naturalists, as that under color of their science
in Astrology they taught the people otherwise, they were seducing Witches; and
they that did seek to such for Divinations, and did not regard Divine
Providence to rule beyond the Stars influence, and so neglected seeking to God
in time of trouble, they were Idolaters bewitched.

Another way might Astrologians become Witches, that is, if an Astrologian
finding that many of his Prognostics happened true, and did thereby dissemble
Prophecy, pretending that he did by Revelation, or prophetical Inspiration
foretell those things which yet he did only conjecturally foresee by the
Stars, that pretense or dissimulation made him a Witch, fit to seduce and
mis-lead the people.

So much for the Third description.
The Fourth Description.
THe Fourth description, or term of description, of a Witch in the text is
Conjector, a Conjecturer; that was such a one that had some particular pretense
or color whereupon he grounded his Divinations, making the people believe that
thereby he could Divine or Prophecy unto the people; whereas yet it was
altogether a cousening imposture, or uncertain guessing, or conjecturing, and
according to that he is here described by Moses as a Witch; what that Imposture
was, Expositors have given several glosses, one Exposition is, That they
observed the flying of Fowls, and thence gave their uncertain Predictions, or
Divinations, but for that we find no example in the Scriptures in the Original
sense, and therefore leave it, and do also think, that to observe the flying of
Fowls for Predictions of weather, as also the postures of Beasts, and creeping
things is no offense, nor is here forbidden. Another exposition is, That they
observed the intralls of Beasts, from whence they pretended they did know the
will of the gods; and that was indeed of Beasts that were offered in Sacrifice
to their Idols. By which pretense being but a mere cousening Imposture, they
seduced the people to Idolatry, and therefore were reckoned and described among
Witches in the text; and for that exposition we have that example in the
Scriptures, Ezekiel. 21.26. (which in Tremellins translation is thus) To use
Divinations, he will furbush Knives, he will consult with Idols, he will look
in the Liver, this is a plain demonstration of this Fourth description of a
Witch in the text; that is, such a one as pretended to the people that their
Idol gods hiding their secrets in the intralls of the sacrificed Beasts, he
being one of their Priests, could by searching the intralls, conjecture to the
people the meaning of the gods. This exposition is agreeable to that, 2 Chronicles.
33.3. when Manasses had built Idol-Altars in the House of God, it follows
immediately in the sixth verse, Et Divinationibus, and conjectationibus and
prestigiis usus est; and he used Divinations, and Conjecturings, and Juglings,
all tending to one end, to seduce the people to Idolatry, as follows in the
ninth verse, he made Judah and Jerusalem to go astray, for God had appointed
his people not to inquire after uncertain conjecturings, by any Idol Impostures
of the Heathen, but to inquire after himself, by the Prophets, and by his
Priests, by an Ephod, by Urim and Thummim, as appears, 1 Samuel 30.7. Exodus
28.30.

Some report that the Roman South-sayers did take the anckle bone of a Beast
sacrificed, which bone was by them called talus in the Latin, the said bone is
easy to be seen in the foot of any Ox or Sheep, and has four sides equally
poysed, and being cast upon a Table it falls contingently like a Dye; and
therefore are the Dies called by the same name in latin tali, and when those
Idol Priests, the Roman South-sayers, would enquire of their Idols for
Divinations, or rather give Divinations in the name of their Idols, they would
cast that bone upon the Table, and according to the several contingent falling
of the bone like the cast of a Dye, so they gave several conjecturing
Divinations, every side when it chanced upward being of a several
signification, given by their Idol, as they pretended; a mere cheating
Imposture to seduce the people; a lively demonstration of it may be seen among
Boys, casting the bone in the same manner in certain childish Games called
cock-up-all.

It may be collected also, That the Idol Priests of the Heathen did sometimes
use this imposture for one, (they having diverse ways to delude the people),
that was, for the Priest to be blinde-folded, and one or more to touch him, and
he to conjecture or guess who it was that touched him; which was easily done by
the confederacy of some stander by, some Priest like himself, who gave him a
private token which the people did not take notice of, but were thereby
deluded, and thought him to have a Prophetical inspiration from the Idol gods,
and this is collected from Matthew. 26.68. especially if that place be compared
with Mark 14.65. where it appears, That the corrupt Jews, who had been
defiled by the manner of the Heathen, did blindfold Christ and smite him, and
said, Prophecy, who it is that smote thee; they offering to try Christ by such
ways as they had seen the Heathen try their Prophets by, who notwithstanding
were Impostors and false Prophets.

So much for the Fourth term, of description, of a Witch in the text,
Conjector, a Conjecturer.
The Fifth Description.
The Fifth Appellation, or term of description of a Witch in the Text, is
Prestigiator, that is, a Jugler.
THe interpretation of this word is plain in the Scriptures, that is, one that
works false or lying Wonders, or lying Miracles, in opposition of the true
Miracles that were wrought by God, by his Prophets, such were Jannes, and
Jambres, 2 Timothy 3.8, 9. As Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so also do these
resist the truth; now how Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses it appears,
Exodus 7.5.8.9. God would have his Prophets, Moses, and Aaron to be known by
their Miracles, that the people might believe that God had sent them, they
wrought the Miracles that God had commanded them, Exodus 7.13. but it appears
in verse. 14. that these Juglers withstood them, and when the Messengers of God
wrought true Miracles, those Witches wrought lying Miracles in opposition of
them, Fecerunt similiter, they did the like. The Latin translation is thus; Tum
vocavit Pharo sapientes and Prestigiatores, ut facerent ipsi quoque magi
Aegyptii suis incantation bus similiter; and Pharaoh called the Wise men, and
Juglers, that the Magicians of Egypt might also do the like with their
enchantments; so likewise verse. 25. Fecerunt similtier magis suis
incantationibus, the Magicians did the like with their Enchantments; this word
Similiter, the like, or in like manner, is of great importance, least some
ignorant reader of the Scriptures should suppose, that the Magicians did the
same Miracles that the Prophets did, whereas those acts of the Magicians were
only delusions, (although enough to blind Pharaohs eyes, because God would
harden his heart.) And as it appears in 2 Timothy 3.9. their actions were only
mad fooleries that came to light, and were proved ridiculous, as the words
import, for the craft of Juggling, to them that are not acquainted with it,
breeds great admiration in the beholders, and seems, to silly people, to be
miraculous, and yet being known is but deceit and foolery; so that the beholder
himself cannot but blush, and be ashamed to think he was so easily cousened,
and did so much admire a ridiculous Imposture, that craft of Juggling consists.

First, In slight of hand, or cleanly conveyance.

Secondly, In confederacy; and

Thirdly, In the abuse of Natural Magic.

The first is profitably seen in our common Juglers, that go up and down to
play their Tricks in Fayrs and Markets, I will speak of one man more excelling
in that craft than others, that went about in King James his time, and long
since, who called himself, The Kings Majesty's most excellent Hocus Pocus, and
so was he called, because that at the playing of every Trick, he used to say,
Hocus pocus, tontus talontus, vade celeriter jubeo, a dark composure of words,
to blind the eyes of the beholders, to make his Trick pass the more currantly
without discovery, because when the eye and the ear of the beholder are both
earnestly busied, the Trick is not so easily discovered, nor the Imposture
discerned; the going about of this Fellow was very useful to the wife, to see
how easily people among the ancient Heathen were deceived, in times and places
of ignorance, for in these times many silly people (yea and some also that
think themselves wise) will stand like Pharaoh and his Servants, and admire a
Juggling Imposture; or like the silly Samaritans, Acts 8.10. who did so much
admire a seducing Jugler, as they said, He was the great power of God, until
they saw the true and real Miracles of Philip, verse. 6. And others again on the
contrary will stand affrighted, or run out of the room scared like fools,
saying, The Devil is in the room, and helps him to do such Tricks; and some
saying absolutely. He is a Witch, and ought to be hanged; when as he did only
act the part of a Witch to enlighten, and not to deceive, that people might see
and discern the Impostures by which the Idols of the Heathen were made famous,
by their juggling Priests, and might laugh at their vanities (they that would
see the manner of this part of Juggling, or cleanly conveyance more fully, may
read Master Scots discovery of Witchcraft, where it is set down at large, to
the satisfaction of all those that are not wilfully ignorant; as also briefly
afterward in this Fifth description, after page 34. And now for illustrating of
the History of Pharaohs Magicians, I will parallel this Hocus Pocus, or English
Jugler, a little with them; they are called Prestigiatores, Juglers, Exodus
7.14. and yet in the same verse, and also in verse. 25. it is said, they did in
like manner by their enchantments; Why with their Enchantments? Not that
Juggling and Enchanting are one and the same imposture, but the reason is,
because when they wrought a Juggling Trick, or lying Miracle, they always spoke
a Charm, or Inchantation immediately before it, like to that of our English
Jugler aforesaid, to make the delusion the stronger, by busying the senses of
Hearing and Seeing in the Spectator both at once, for a Charm, or Inchantation
was only a composure of words to delude people, who thought that words spoken
in a strange manner had virtue and efficacy in them (as may be seen more fully
in the Sixth description following) therefore are they said to work their false
Miracles by their Enchantments, because they seemed to silly beholders to do
them by their inchantations or words, when as indeed they did them only by
slight of hand, or cleanly conveyance called Legerdemain; and they that are
well acquainted with this craft of Juggling, may easily conceive how these
Magicians did their Feats without so much admiring them, when they read the
History, as if they had done great Wonders, which were only delusions; The
second and third Miracle, that they dissembled, do plainly appear in the letter
of the History, Exodus 7.2. they seemed to turn water into blood, Fecerunt
similiter, and yet mark well the History, and ye shall see there was no water
in Egypt, for Moses had turned it all into blood before, verse. 20.21.24.25. so
then they could find no River or Pond to do that feat in, it must needs follow
then, that they sent for water where it was to be had, which was no nearer than
Goshen, and so showed a petty Juggling Trick before Pharaoh in a room, with a
Bowl or Tray of water, setting it upon the ground, and by slight of hand
conveying blood into it to color it; so likewise for the Third Miracle which
they dissembled, Chap. 8.7. it was necessarily done by a such vessel of water;
for they could not find any other water free in all Egypt, which were not
already full of the abundance of Frogs, verse. 3.5. and what common Jugler might
not easily dissemble that Miracle, by setting a bowl of water down before
Pharaoh and his Servants, and by slight of hand conveying in three or four
Frogs, and so holding up their staff, and speaking certain words to make it
seem to silly spectators that the waters brought forth those Frogs; The first
Miracle indeed seems more difficult to dissemble, and yet not so difficult if
you saw it acted, for what is easier than for a cunning Jugler to hold up a
staff as if he would throw it down, and then to speak a lofty inchantation, to
busy the intention of the Spectators, and then with slight of hand to throw
down an artificial Serpent instead of his staff, and convey away his staff,
that so they might think his staff was turned into a Serpent, for these
Histories are set down according to the apprehension of the deceived beholders,
and not that the Magicians did them really, for then we must believe that they
wrought real Miracles as the Prophets did, which were an ignorant and absurd
tenent; whereas the Scriptures do manifest that they were only mad fooleries,
and were discovered and came to light, 2 Timothy 3.9. yet many are so stupid, that
rather then they will not have them really done, they say they were really done
by the power of the Devil, and so ascribe power to the Devil for working
Miracles, whereas we never read in the Scriptures that the Devil may have any
supernatural power ascribed to him, but is only the Father of Lies.

The same kind of Juggling Tricks were the Impostures of Simon Magus, in Acts
8.9. which although the people did for a time behold with admiration, yet when
they saw real Miracles wrought by Philip, verse. 6.12. they believed him, and
not the Impostor any longer, for they did easily see a difference between real
Miracles, and cheating Impostures.

Some again will have it, that these Acts of Pharaohs Juglers, and others in
the Scriptures might be real as they seemed to be, and yet brought to pass by
the profoundness of the Art of Magic, which Art is of greater force (say they)
than Juggling, or else why were they called in the same verse, Exodus 7.11.
Juglers, Wise men, and Magicians all at once? but let not any be so weak in
understanding as to think, That any Art in the World could do that really that
required a miraculous hand of power to do, for this is the essential or formal
reason of a Miracle to be done by a power Supreme, and beyond the power of Man
or Devil, or the virtue of any Art; and for this word, Magicians, in its own
proper sense it is taken for Wise and Learned men, in Astrology, and other
Arts wherein Scholars are instituted; and so there is no difference between
(...) and (...) in the Greek, neither was it taken in any other sense among the
ancient, and such were they that came to Christ and offered gifts, Matthew.
2.1.11. called Magi; in this sense also it is said, That Moses was learned in
all the wisdom of the Egyptians, Acts 7.22. and here in Exodus 7.11. these
Juglers are called Magi, Wise men, and Learned, because they pretend so, and
were so thought by the people, whereas they were indeed but cheating Impostors,
but because they and many other cousening Mates mentioned in the Scriptures,
have by usurpation obtained that appellation from the people, Magicians, or
Wise men, therefore it is used and taken by some Writers for such as use all
cousening Diabolical Impostures; yet Moses here in this place of Exodus 7.11.
gave them not that manner of name or appellation, only Magicians, but withal
describes them by their peculier appellation, that is Juglers; and so in all
the Old Testament, where Magician is taken in the worst sense, it is not set
alone, but conjoined with some other terms of an Impostor for a more full
description, so that a Magician in the worst sense in the Scripture phrase is
only an Impostor, or Deceiver; in the best sense, a learned Wise man, therefore
no real Miracle, but only delusions can be wrought by Magic.

I said a little before, That this craft of Juggling consists of three things;
the First is, Slight of Hand, or cleanly conveyance; the Second is Confederacy,
that is, when many or few agents do agree together in bringing to pass cheating
impostures, contrary to the truth. An example of this we have in the History
of Bell, the Idol, in the Book of Daniel, which though it be called Apocripha,
and doubtful whether it be a true History, yet this example whether it be true
or not, it does plainly demonstrate the Witchcraft of Idol Priests by
confederacy, which is one main arm of the craft of Juggling, Wisd. 14.14.20. it
appears plain how they confederated together in extolling the Idol, to uphold
it for their own delicious maintenance, and to seduce the King and people to
Idolatry, by making them believe that Bell did eat up all the daily provision
that was set before him, whereas they themselves, with their Wives and
Children, came in at secret doors in the night, and did eat up and carry away
all that was provided at the Kings charge, until Daniel discovered that their
juggling imposture; and although there be not so plain a demonstration of the
Juggling Impostures of every Idol spoken of in the Scriptures, yet no Idol but
had the like delusions; for they built their Idol Houses on purpose with
several slights, and secret conveyances to bring their Juggling Tricks to pass,
and had daily new inventions of new Impostures whereby they deceived the World,
and seduced them to Idolatry, therefore Elijah, 1 King. 18.19. would not trust
the Priests of Baal to remain in their own Idol House, when he would discover
them to the people, but caused them all to come forth to Mount Carmel, and then
he said, as in verse. 24. The God that answers by fire, let him be God. Why
did he cause the King to command them all to Mount Carmel? The reason was,
because if they might have acted their part in their Idol House, being built
with secret conveyances for all deceit, they might have secretly fired the
Oblation, and so might have deluded the people, still making them believe their
Idol had answered them by fire, but being in Mount Carmel, remote from their
Idol House, they could only act the part of Madmen, cutting themselves that
the people might have somewhat to gaze at, but could bring nothing to pass to
save their credit, or their lives; the deluding impostures of the Priests of
Baal, are called Praestigiae Isabelae, 2 King. 9.22 the Juglings or Witchcraft
of Jezabel, because she being an Idolatrous Woman maintained those Priests of
Baal in their Witchcraft, or delusions, to seduce the people to Idolatry.

The third Branch whereupon this craft of Juggling consists, is the abuse of
Natural Magic, that is, the abuse of their knowledge in Natural causes, as for
instance in some few; take Woolfs dung, and carry it in your pocket that it may
take the heat of your body, and it will make any mad Bull, or other Cattle of
that kind to fly from you, and to run very far away from their pasture to
the admiration of the beholders. Take a piece of paper and rub one part of it
with fresh Lemmon peele, and dry it again a little, and then dip your Pen in
Ink, that is made of stone blew, steeped two or three days in cold water, and
write upon the place that had the tincture of the Lemmon peele, and it will
write a pure bright red, and then with the same Pen and Ink write upon another
place of the paper, and it writes blew, whereby there is caused great
admiration in the beholders, to see a man with one Pen, and one and the same
Ink write red and blew.

Albartus Magnus, and also Misaldus do write of many wonderful things that may
be done by the knowledge of Natural causes, or the secrets of Nature, which
although many of them be false, yet for such as are true, they may be lawfully
done; and therein we may glorify God, in beholding the wonderful Works of his
hands, in the secret causes of things.

But now for the abuse of these things, as namely by the doing of these things
to seduce the people, by making silly people believe we do them by a miraculous
power, thereby pretending our selves to be Prophets, as did Simon Magus in the
Acts; this is right Juggling Witchcraft, or to make the people believe that they
are done by the power of some Idol, thereby to seduce the people, or any way to
affront the Prophets, by comparing them with true Miracles, to withstand the
truth, as Pharaohs Magicians did, were right Witchcraft.

So likewise for the Ointment called Unguentum armaxisum, or Weapon salve (that
is an Ointment made of such ingredients, as by anointing the Weapon wherewith a
man or beast is wounded, it heals the Wound (if it be true by certain
experience, as many Physicians and Chyrurgions do affirm) it may lawfully be
used, and we may glorify God in the use of it, who has given such excellent
secret qualities to the Creatures, which are made for the use of man.

Also Jacob used the peeled rods, which by their secret operation being set
before the sheep in the heat of their Generation, caused them, by beholding
them in their conceiving, to conceive and bring forth party colored Lambs; but
if any man shall use these secrets to this end to make the people believe they
are Prophets, and do them by a miraculous power, that so they may seduce the
people to error under a color of working Miracles, such men are seducing
Witches.

Thus a Planetarian abusing the lawful Science of Astrology may become a
Witch, not only under the notion of 2 Planetarian, but of a Jugler; as for
instance, Pedro Mexi^ a Spanish Historian, writes of one Columbus, who coming
to an Island in the newfound World called Hispaniola, desired Traffic with
the Natives for Victuals, which they denying, he told them they should all dye
of the Plague, and for a sign hereof they should see the Moon as red as blood
at such a time, and contrary to her former condition; afterward they beholding
the Moon eclipsed at the same time foretold by Columbus, and knowing no rules
of Astrology, they believed his words and craved pardon, and brought him
supply of Victuals; This was but a remiss degree of deceiving Witchcraft, or
rather a Cheat, because it tended not to Idolatry, but yet in the act it self,
pretending falsely a miraculous power, it was Juggling Witchcraft.

It is now fully demonstrated what a Jugler is in the Scripture sense, but yet
Moses mentions both Sexes in the Scriptures, for it is written, Exodus 22.18.
Praestigiatricem ne sinito vivere, suffer not a Juggling Woman to live. This is
not any thing different in Nature from Praestigiator a Juggling man, but only in
Sex, as if he had said, As you ought not to suffer Juggling seducing men to
live, so likewise if there be a Woman found among you that uses this craft of
working false Miracles, to delude and seduce the people to Idolatry, although
she be the weaker Sex, to whom mercy might seem to be due, yet suffer her not
to live; all one in sense with that Levit. 20.27 where Witches of both Sexes
are mentioned in one verse; If man or woman be a giver of Oracles, or
Divinations, or a South-sayer, they shall be put to death; yet whereas Moses,
in all the Law, speaks more fully of Witches in the Masculine, than in the
female Sex; it confuteth that common tradition of people that Witches are most
of the female Sex.

Here I am compelled (for the satisfaction of some that are so weak in capacity
that they will rather stand to cavil in a disputative way, than to understand
things that are not in themselves disputative, but demonstrative) to
demonstrate some few of the most admired Tricks of common Juggling.

First, A Jugler knowing the common tradition, and fooli^^ opinion that a
familiar Spirit in some bodily shape must be had for the doing of strange
things, beyond the Vulgar capacity, he therefore carries about him the skin of
a Mouse stopped with feathers, or some like Artificial thing, and in the hinder
part thereof sticks a small springing Wire of about a foot long, or longer,
and when he begins to act his part in a Fair, or a Market before Vulgar people,
he brings forth his Impe, and makes it spring from him once or twice upon
the Table, and then catches it up, saying, would you be gone? I will make you
stay and play some Tricks for me before you go, and then he nimbly sticks one
end of the Wire upon his waste, and makes his Impe spring up three or four
times to his shoulder, and nimbly catches it, and pulls it down again every
time, saying, Would you be gone? in troth if you be gone I can play no Tricks,
or Feats of Activity to day, and then holds it fast in one hand, and beats
it with the other, and slily makes a squeeking noise with his lips, as if his
Impe cried, and then puts his Impe in his breeches, or in his pocket,
saying, I will make you stay, would you be gone? Then begin the silly people to
wonder, and whisper, then he shows many slights of activity as if he did them
by the help of his Familiar, which the silliest sort of beholders do verily
believe; amongst which he espyeth one or other young Boy or Wench, and lays a
tester or shilling in his hand wetted, and bids him hold it fast, but whilst
the said Boy, or silly Wench thinks to enclose the piece of silver fast in
the hand, he nimbly takes it away with his finger, and hasteneth the holder of
it to close his hand, saying, Hold fast or it will be gone, and then mumbleth
certain words, and cries by the virtue of Hocus, Pocus, hay pass prestor, be
gone; now open your hand, and the silly Boy or Wench, and the beholders stand
amazed to see that there is nothing left in the hand; and then for the
confirmation of the wonder, a Confederate with the Jugler, stands up among
the crowd (in habit like some countryman or stranger that came in like the
rest of the people) saying, I will lay with you forty shillings you shall not
convey a shilling out of my hand; it is done says the Jugler, take you this
shilling in your hand, yea marry (says he) and I will hold it so fast as if
you get it from me by words speaking, I will say you speak in the Devils name,
and with that he looks in his hand in the sight of all the people, saying, I
am sure I have it, and then claspeth his hand very close, and lays his other
hand to it also, pretending to hold it the faster, but withal slily conveyeth
away the shilling into his glove, or into his pocket, and then the Jugler
cries, Hay pass, presto vade, jubeo, by the virtue of Hocus Pocus, it is gone;
then the Confederate opens his hand, and in a dissembling manner faineth
himself much to wonder, that all that are present may likewise wonder; then the
Jugler calls to his Boy, and bids him bring him a glass of Claret Wine,
which he takes in his hand and drinks, and then he takes out of his bag
a tonnel made of Tin, or Latin double, in which double device he has formerly
put so much claret wine as will almost fill the glass again, and stopping this
tonnel at the little end with his finger, turns it up that all may behold it
to be empty, and then sets it to his forehead, and takes away his finger,
and lets the Wine run into the Glass, the silly Spectators thinking it to be
the same wine which he drank to come again out of his forehead; then he says,
If this be not enough I will draw good Claret Wine out of a post, and then
takes out of his bag a Wine-gimblet, and so he pierces the Post quite
through with his Gimblet; and then is one of his boys on the other side of the
wall with a Bladder and a Pipe (like as when a Clister is administered by the
Phisician) and conveyeth the Wine to his Master through the Post, which his
Master (Vintner like) draws forth into a Pot, and fills it into a Glass,
and gives the company to drink.

Another way it is very craftily done by a Spanish Borachio, that is a Leather
Bottle as thin and little as a Glove, the neck whereof is about a foot long,
with a screw at the top instead of a stopple; this Bottle the Jugler holds
under his arm, and lets the neck of it come along to his hand under the
sleeve of his Coat, and with the same hand takes the tax in the fasset that is
in the post, and yet holds the tax half in and half out, and crusheth the
Bottle with his arm, and with his other band holds a Wine-pot to the tax, so
that it seems to the beholders that the Wine comes out of the tax, which yet
comes out of the Bottle, and then he gives it among the company to drink; and
being all drunk up but one small glass at the last, he calls to his Boy,
saying, Come sirrah, you would feign have a cup, but his Boy makeeth answer in
a disdainful manner, saying, No Master not I, if that be good Wine that is
drawn out of a Post I will lose my head; yea sirrah says his Master, then your
head you shall lose; come sirrah, you shall go to pot for that word; then he
lays his Boy down upon the Table upon a Carpet, with his face downward
commanding him to lie still, then he takes a linen cloth, and spreads it
upon the Boys head broad upon the table, and by slight of hand conveyeth under
the cloth a Head with a face, limned so like his Boys Head and Face that it is
not discerned from it; then he draws forth his Sword or Falchion, and
seems to cut off his Boys head; but withal it is to be noted, That the
confederating Boy puts his head through a slit in the Carpet, and through a
hole in the Table made on purpose, yet unknown to the Spectators, and his
Master also by slight of hand lays to the Boys shoulder a piece of wood made
concave at one end like a scuppit, and round at the other end like a man's neck
with the head cut off, the concave end is hidden under the Boys shirt, and the
other end appears to the company very dismal (being limbned over by the
cunning Limbner) like a bloody neck, so lively in show that the very bone and
marrow of the neck appears, insomuch that some Spectators have fainted at the
sight hereof; then he takes up the false Head aforesaid by the hair, and
lays it in a Charger at the feet of the Boy, leaving the bare bloody neck to
the view of the deluded beholders, some gazing upon the neck, some upon the
head, which looks gashful, some beholding the Corpse tremble like a body new
slain; then he walks by the Table, saying to the head, and the seeming dead
Corpse, Ah ha, sirrah, you would rather lose your Head then drink your Drink,
but presently he smites his hand upon his breast, saying, To speak the very
truth in cool blood, the fault did not deserve death, therefore I had best set
on his Head again; then he spreads his broad linen cloth upon the Head and
takes it out of the Charger, and lays it to the shoulders of the Corpse, and
by slight of hand conveyeth both the Head and the false neck into his Bag,
and the Boy raises up his Head from under the Table; then his Master takes
away the linen cloth that was spread upon him, and says, By the virtue of
Hecus pocus, and Fortunatus his Night cap, I wish thou may live again; then
the Boy rises up safe and well, to the admiration of the deluded beholders.

These and the like Juggling Tricks (some whereof are done merely by slight of
hand, some have a help from false Instruments, as false Knives, false Boxes,
false Locks, false Wasecoats, and the like, are many of them demonstrated by
Master Scot, and many are daily invented, which are all done by common reason,
without the least compact with the Devil, (unless they do them to seduce, and
then the Devil is indeed in their heart, as he was in Simon Magus, in the Acts,
and is in every wicked man.) And yet sometimes it happens, that if here have
been any University Scholars at the beholding, or at the acting of these
common Tricks, they have gone out and fallen into a dispute upon the matter,
some saying, Sensus nunquam fallitur circa proprium objectum, some have said
that the Jugler by his Familiar does thicken the Air, some again that he
hurts the Eyesight, and so deceives the beholders; and in all their
discourse they show themselves very Philosophical, but very little capacious.
And Cooper writing upon that subject, has pretended to show himself
Theological, but betrayeth himself to be very silly, blind, and ignorant.

It being fully demonstrated what a Jugler is in the Scripture sense, let every
one consider seriously who be the Juglers, of this and former Ages, that ought
to be put to death by the Law of Moses, we might think that no man were so
silly and foolish to think that it is meant common Juglers, who play their
Tricks in Fayers and Markets, nor Gentlemen who sometimes in imitation of them,
do in sport, play Tricks of slight of hand, or legerdemain, with confederates
or without, for it is most certain and true, that if it be rightly understood,
that these do a great deal of good, that recreation tending rightly to the
illumination of people of all sorts, to show them the vanity and ridiculousness
of those delusions and lying Wonders, by which men were so easily deluded in
old times by Pharaohs Magicians, by Simon Magus, and Elimas the Sorcerer, and
now adays by our professed Wizzards, or Witches, commonly called Cunning Men,
or good Witches, who will undertake to show the face of the Thief in the Glass,
or of any other that has done his Neighbor wrong privily, when as they do all
by Juggling delusions, and are themselves right Witches, that cause men to seek
to the Devil for help, that will undertake and promise to unwitch people that
are (as fools commonly say) bewitched; these common sporting Juglers also may
illuminate people to see the Juggling Witchcraft of Popish Priests, in causing
Rhoods to move their eyes and hands in compassion to peoples prayers, of which
you may read more fully afterward.

Yet in Queen Elizabeth's time, as appears in Mr. Scots Discovery of
Witchcraft, in the fifteenth Book, Chap. 42. there was a Master of Arts
condemned only for using himself to the study and practice of the Juggling
craft, how justly, I will not controvert; but this I say, That if a man may not
study and practice the discovery of Chears without being a Cheater, nor the
discovery of Witchcraft without being accounted a Witch, it is the way for
Witches and Cheaters to play their pranks, and no man able to tax them, or
accuse them, or to say who they are that are Witches; and this foolish nice
censuring, and ignorant condemning has bred great and general ignorance of
this subject of Witchcraft; which God himself describes so often in the
Scriptures, for people to know and avoid the practice of seducing, or being
seduced by it, but for that Master of Arts before named, the Lord of Leicester
having more wisdom in some things than some had, did protect him for a time
after he was condemned, but what became of him is not mentioned, but yet if he
had been a Jugler, or practiser of that Craft to this end, to withstand the
Prophets when they wrought true Miracles, as Pharaohs Juglers withstood Moses,
or if he were one that practiced it to seduce the people after lying delusions,
to magnify himself as a false Prophet, like Simon Magus in the Acts, or to
cause people to ascribe miraculous power to him, or to seek to the Devil as our
common Deceivers, called good Witches, do, he was deservedly condemned; but to
study Witchcraft, and actually to demonstrate it by practice, to show how
easily people were and may be deluded by it (seeing God has commanded Witches
to be put to death, and what they were or are, is not now a days fully
understood (no not by the Learned) is no more deserving death than for Master
Scot to write a book in the discovery of it, or for a Minister to discover to
the people the danger of an Idol; to which Witchcraft is necessarily joined as
an upholder and companion, or for a Minister to show the secret and dangerous
nature, and several windings of Sin and Satan; for the essence of a Witch is
not in doing false Miracles, or any other Witchcraft by demonstration or
discovery, but in seducing people from God, and his Truth; As for example,
Pharaohs Magicians in that they did throw down their stafle, and made it seem
to be turned into a Serpent, to the end to withstand Moses, and to seduce the
Egyptians, they were absolute Witches, but if any man now do the very same, or
had then done it to discover the Juggling deceit of it, he is no Witch, but a
teacher and instructor of the people.

So again for another example, he that goes behind a Rhood, or other Popish
Image, and draws the secret Wiers that causes the eyes and hands of the
Image to move, to the end to delude and seduce the people to Idolatry, by
admiration of it, as Popish Priests do; he is an absolute Witch, but he that
goes behind it, and acts the same part, and then comes out and shows
people the Imposture, and shows them the Wyers and secret delusions, is not a
Witch, but a discoverer of a Witch (that did it to the end to seduce) and a
Teacher and illuminator of the people. See more in the Sixth description.

But we must know that in Queen Elizabeth's time the Protestant Religion being
then in its minority, when as Popery was but only suppressed, and not worn out
of the memory, nor out of the hearts and affections of men (that yet in outward
show were Protestants) it was a brief tenent in the Universities, that he that
did but study and contemplate upon this subject of Witchcraft was a dealer with
unlawful and vain Science, and ought to be censured for a Witch, and by this
subtle tradition they feared all Students, that no man dared to search into
the bowels and secrets of that Craft, least (as they knew full well) thereby he
should discover to the World the secret Impostures of the Popish Religion,
which is altogether upheld by Witchcraft, of which Religion, many stood daily
in expectation to have it set on foot as brief as ever, when (as they hoped)
the times would change. Has God given nine several descriptions of Witchcraft
at once? Deuteronomy. 18.10, 11. and reiterated them in many places of Scripture that
we might take notice, who and what they are, with the Mystery of iniquity, and
delusions that they practiced? and shall not we study and contemplate upon it?
by this vain tradition were many of their devilish Witchcrafts concealed, and
came not to light, for many years, to the view of the world; example of that
Popish Idol, Cheapside Cross, which stood for many years like the Golden Image
of Nebuchadnezzar, few men knowing the juggling Witchcraft that was therein,
until at the command of the Parliament it being pulled down, there were found
therein the several slights to move the Arms, Eyes, and Heads of the Images,
and the Pipes to convey the water to make the Images shed tears in compassion
to the peoples prayers, and to convey Milk into the breasts of the Image of the
Virgin Mary, that the poor deluded people (seeing such lying Wonders, as Images
of Gold, to move, to weep, and shed tears in abundance, and Milk to drop out of
the Virgins breasts, through her earnest laboring with her Son to hear, and
grant the prayers of the people) went home, bewitched to that devilish
Idolatry by that grand Witch, that Whore of Rome that has deceived all Nations
with her Witchcraft, Revel. 18.23. yet, to the grief of the hearts of this
Popish crew, in the beginning of the reign of Queen Elizabeth, many of their
devilish Witchcrafts were daily discovered, as in Master Lumberts Book of the
Perambulation of Kent it appears, was discovered the Rhood of grace in Kent,
who was always accompanied and helped by little St. Rumball, which Idol as Mr.
Scot notes in Lib. 7. Chap. 6. was not inferior in all deluding Impostures to
the great Idol Apollo (or Apollos Oracle) whose Priests were the grand Witches
of the World in its time) yet afterward the wires that made the eyes of the
Images to goggle, and the Pins and Instruments for several delusions were
discovered, with all the Witchcraft of the juggling Priests, with every
circumstance thereof, which Image and Instruments were openly burnt together,
by the authority and command of the Queen.

And now it falls in my way to speak of another grand Witch of the World,
that is, Mahomet, the great Idol of the Turks, who by his Juglings and
Divinations has seduced a great part of the World to an Idolatrous worship, so
absurd and silly, that his Disciples are ashamed to let any Christians come
near the place of his supposed Sepulcher at Mecha, lest they should laugh at
their folly in worshipping an Iron Sepulcher, therefore all Christians are
forbidden to come within five miles of that place upon pain of death; and
because various reports have been abroad by several Authors concerning this
Deceiver of the world, I will only cite the most allowable reports confirmed by
Lampadius in Mellificio Historico, and also by Gulielmus Biddulphus an English
Travellor (called, The Travels of certain Englishmen into far Countries)
very agreeable to the foresaid Lampadius;) This devilish Impostor Mahomet
desiring to magnify himself among the people, did first of all delude his
Wife, making her believe that he was a Prophet of God, for having the
Falling Sickness, with which he fell often, and lay like a man in a trance, he
told his Wife that Gabriel the Archangel did often appear to him, and reveal
secrets from Heaven, and for the confirmation thereof Sergius a wicked Monck,
who was his instructor, affirmed. That Gabriel did use to appear to all
Prophets, and so both of them together did persuade the silly Woman that the
reason of his falling in a Trance was, because the Angel was so glorious that
he was not able to behold him without falling, and that all the time of his
lying thus prostrate the Angel was talking with him; this silly Woman rejoicing
in this, That she was married to a Prophet, reported the thing among other
Women, so that in time this fellow obtained among prattling Women, and common
people, the name of a Prophet; the Devil by this fellow taking occasion, and
waiting his opportunity to deceive the World (as also by Sergius the Monck who
was his companion) it happened about the year of our Lord Christ, 591. about
which time also began the Antichristian Popedom at Rome) that Heraclius the
Roman Emperor, making use of the Armies of the Sarazens against the Persians,
(and not giving them their daily pay or stipend, which they expected and
required of his Captains over them) they revolted from him; then this Mahomet,
with his companion Sergius seconding him) became the Head of the Rebellion, or
at least desired so to be thought by the people, that so he might any way
become great among them; but the Soldiers not much regarding him, Sergius and
he did so use their wits to persuade them, telling them, That he was ordained
by God to that end, and sent by the Angel Gabriel to bring the people to the
worship of God by the power of the Sword (for said he, Christ came only by
Miracles and Signs to persuade, but I am the next Prophet, and the last that
shall come, and am to compel people by the Sword) so that partly by subtilty,
and partly by compulsion he drew a mighty Army to him, to the overthrow of the
Emperors power in those parts, from whence came that mighty Empire of the
Turks; and because that Sergius had counseled him, that the only way to
increase in strength was to set up a New Religion, he gathered unto him besides
Sergius, John Presbyter an Arrian Heretic, and Selan a Jewish Astrologian, and
another Barran, Persam Jacobitam; who together, that they might draw all people
after him, Coined a Religion, partly of the Circumcision, that so he might win
the Jews, and the Saracens (who coming of Ishmael, do use the Circumcision of
Abraham to this day) and were called Saracens, because Hagar was Sarahs Maid,
and Hagarens from their Mother Hagar) and partly of Christianity, that so he
might win Christians (for the Turks do acknowledge Christ to have been a
Prophet, but they deny his Divinity, and his satisfaction for the Sins of Man,
for they say that God had no Wife, and therefore could have no Son; and of this
and the like silly conceits is composed the Turkish Alcoran) and that he might
distinguish his Sect from Jews and Christians, he has instituted his Sabbath
on the Friday, and for the enticing of all men to his Religion, he tells
them, That they that fight boldly for his Worship, shall (if they be slain)
enter directly into Paradise, where they shall enjoy plenty of pleasures, meat,
and drink, and pretty Wenches abundance, and with these hopes (says Lampadius)
his Soldiers are so bewitched that they are always furious and greedy of
fighting, be their danger never so great. Much more is reported of this
Impostor by several Historians, but I have only described him briefly by these
his seducements, (although he had many more) wherein may be noted that he was a
Juggling false Prophet, in faining himself to be in ecstasy of mind, in a
miraculous manner talking with the Angel Gabriel (according to this fifth term
of description in the text) whereas he was only visited with the fits of his
Epileptick disease; and in that he pretended these absurd Fantasies to be
revealed to him by the Angel, he was a Diviner, and a lying Enthusiast
(according to the second term of description in the text) in both which sense
Sergius the Monck, and the rest of his Companions aforesaid, who joined with
him in his delusions, were Witches also; and herein it is strange to see the
world of people that are infatuated by so groundless a Religion, for were it
not for the stupidity of men's minds and understanding, God did enough discover
this Mahomet (the founder of this Turkish Religion) to be an Impostor) at his
death, for when he boasted himself that at his death he would rise again the
third day as Christ did, Albunar, one of his Disciples, to try the truth of his
Doctrins and vaticiniations, gave him a cup of deadly poison, which being drunk
he swelled and dyed, and some hoping to see his Resurrection let him lie twelve
days above ground, until he stunk so intollerably that all men left him; and
upon the twelfth day Albunar coming to view his Corpse found his bones almost
bare, his flesh being eaten with Dogs; wherefore he gathered his bones
together and buried them in a pot, yet for the establishing of the Empire, to
his Successors, they maintain still his Religion, and have made him an Iron
Sepulcher at Mecha.

So much for the Fifth description of a Witch in the text, Prestigiator, a
Jugler.
The Sixth Description.
THe Sixth description of a Witch in the Text, is, Incantator, or Utens
incantatione, that is, an Inchanter, or user of Charms, or a Charmer.

A Charm (as is said before in the Fifth description) is only a strange
composure of words to blind the understandings of people, it pretending that
by virtue of words great matters were brought to pass, and these Charms were
used either before a Juggling Trick, to busy the minds of the Spectators, to
make the Trick pass the more currently without being perceived, as Pharaohs
Juglers used them, who are said to do that which they did with their
Enchantments, because they seemed to do things by virtue of words spoken, which
were not done at all, but only dissembled by the juggling craft; (which
demonstration of a Charm, or Incantation used in that kind is also set down in
the Fifth description) or else otherwise these Charms were used or spoken alone
without a Juggling slight, and thereby was pretended, that by virtue of such and
such words spoken, such things should come to pass as the party desired, who
inquired after Charmers for matters of concernment; sometimes these Charms were
given in writing for a man to wear about his neck, or to carry in his pocket,
pretending that by virtue of those words his matters should be brought to pass,
whereas words of themselves either spoken, or written, have no force to bring
any thing to pass; neither was it the word Ephatha, Mark 7.34. that opened the
ears of the deaf (as some enchanting Wizards would make people believe it was)
but the power of him that spoke it; yet such was the manner of the Idol
Priests, and false Prophets, that whereas Gods Prophets spoke words in the name
of the Lord, and the things they spoke came to pass by Gods power, those Idol
Priests and false Prophets pretended, that by virtue of words they could bring
to pass the like, and so they led the people a whoring after them, to regard
more their foolish deluding Charms, than the power of God, that brings all
things to pass.

The Roman South-sayers gave their Charms in verse, from whence is derived the
word Charm, from Carmen, signifying a Verse, or a Charm; the manner of Charms
sometimes consisted in blessing and cursing, the Inchanter pretending, That by
virtue of a Charm he could bless, and that they were blessed that carried such
words about them written in a paper, or that had such words spoken to them, or
in their behalf by the Charms; and that by virtue of an Incantation pronounced
against any man, that man was cursed, and that he that carried such a Charm
with him, his enemies were cursed, and should fall before him. Elisha indeed
cursed two and forty Children in the name of the Lord, and they were accursed,
because it was the wrath of God pronounced against them by his Prophet, 2 King.
2.23. but he that imputes it to the virtue of a Curse, and uses such words
as Elisha spoke to bring such a thing to pass, against an enemy, without
warrant from God, he is an enchanting Witch; and he that trusts to such
words merely for the virtue of words, either of blessing or cursing, is an
Idolater, not discerning the power of God, the Curse without cause shall not
come, Prove. 3.33. neither shall blessing or cursing prevail any thing if it be
not from the Lord; if Micaiah had Prophesied good to the King of Israel, as he
would have had him, it had not availed, but it had been a mere Charm, that is,
a mere composure of unwarranted words, 1 King. 22.13. and yet his false
Prophets could please him well, making him believe that by virtue of their
pretended Prophecy (which was but a mere Charm) all things should go well with
him, 1 King. 22.10, 11, 12.

A more plain demonstration of this Discourse is the History of Balaam, Numb.
22.6. Balac sent to Balaam to Curse the people of Israel, but he concludes,
Numb. 23.27. there is no enchanting against Israel, for had Balaam played the
enchanting Witch, as Balac would have had him, it had availed nothing, because
Charms are of no force, no more than Divinations, which are only given by
deceiving Witches to cheat Idolatrous fools of their money. And in Chap. 24.
verse. 1. it is said, Balaam went not as formerly to fetch Enchantments, or
Incantations, that is, groundless and unwarranted Execrations, which are but
Charms of no force, but only to delude the Hearers; for it is understood in the
Chapter and Verse aforesaid, not that Balaam had formerly gone to fetch
Incantations, for it is said in Chap 22. verse. 19. and chap. 23.3, 4, 5.
verses, he went to inquire of the Lord; but here in Chap. 24.1. it is spoken
according to the intention of Balak and his Princes, for they desired that
Balaam would but curse Israel, whether he had warrant or not, supposing the
words being but spoken by him were sufficient, as is said in Chap. 22. verse. 6.
and Chap 23. verse. 11. which intention of theirs is here in Chap. 24. verse. 1.
called fetching of Incantations, for it implies the foolish supposition of
Balak and his Princes, which they expressed in chap. 22. verse. 6. That
whomsoever Balaam cursed were accursed, and whom he blessed were blessed; for
if a very Prophet should so far transgress, and go without warrant from God
in blessing and cursing, or Prophesying, that Prophet were no more a Prophet,
but an enchanting deluding Witch, and his words would not be worth regarding;
and this is a sufficient demonstration of a Charmer, or Inchanter, or user of
Incantations, being the Sixth term of description in the text, that is, that
makes any composure of words to delude the people, pretending to the people
any virtue in words to bring things to pass, and so causes people not to
discern the power of God that brings all things to pass, but to impute things
to the power of words, being but Charms, or Incantations. And indeed the
forenamed History of Balaam, if it be rightly observed, is a large and a plain
demonstration of the vanity of this sort of Witchcraft, whereby people were
commonly seduced by false Prophets, or Witches, by listening only to the sound
of words, and not to God the only disposer and bringer of all things to pass;
for it appears in the History, that when Balak had caused Balaam to try all
the ways that could be to curse the people by Charms, and he could not (because
God gave him no warrant, and he knew it was in vain to do it without warrant)
yet Balaam transgressing the word and command of God, showed to Balak the only
way to bring a Curse upon Israel indeed, and that was by seducing them to
Idolatry, and causing their God to be angry with them, as appears, Numb.
24.14. where it is to be marked, That although in that verse this counsel of
Balaam to Balak is not set down at large, yet the effect thereof appears in
the next Chapter, and also in Revel. 2.14. and Jude, verse. 11. where we may see
that Balaam for reward taught Balak to lay a stumbling block before the people,
to cause them to fall, that stumbling block were the Idols of Moab, which they
being defiled withal, brought down the frowns of God upon them, Numb. 25.3.
but to hurt them with Charms or Incantations, was a vain and Idolatrous
superstition of Balak, and if Balaam had answered his expectation, he had been
indeed a Juggling Witch.

The manner of Heathen Kings was, to strengthen themselves in their Kingdom (as
they thought in their Idolatrous credulity) by these Enchantments, supposing,
that if their enchanting false Prophets, (which were also Planetarians, and
South-sayers, and Juggling deluders) did but utter their Enchantments, (being
pretended Prophecies, and cursings artificially composed) against their
enemies, that then their enemies should fall before them; and this is manifest
in the Scriptures, not only of Balak, but of the King of Babel, and of the
Chaldeans, Isa. 47.12. Stand now with thy Enchantments wherewith thou have
labored from thy youth, if perhaps thou may profit, if perhaps thou shall
show thy self strong. This also was Ahabs Idolatry, when he desired Micaiah to
Prophecy good unto him against Ramoth Gilead, thinking by virtue of ungrounded
Prophecy (which had been but a mere composed Charm) he should prevail, 1
King. 22.13.

Here may arise a Question, Whether every one that curses his Neighbor be a
Witch or not, according to this Sixth description in the text?

To this I answer, That all blessing and cursing is not the formal essence of
an Inchanter, for every one ought to bless, Luke 6.28. and he indeed that
curses his Neighbor, saying, A Plague take him, or I would he might break his
neck, or never come home again, is a cursing railer, like Shime^, and a wicked
breaker of Gods Law, for we ought to pray for our enemies; but all this kind
of passionate cursing does not make an Inchanter, or Witch, but that blessing
or cursing that makes an Inchanter or Witch, or is of the essence of an
Inchanter, is the professed craft of composing blessings and cursings, whereby
they drew the people a whoring after them, making them believe, that by virtue
of Charms, whomsoever they blessed were blessed, and whom they cursed were
accursed, as Balak and his Princes being trained up in that kind of Idolatry,
thought, and said of Balaam; and had Balaam answered them according to their
expectations, he had been an Inchanter, or Witch, or false Prophet; this
description of a Charmer, as also all the nine terms of description of a Witch
in the text, being only descriptions of false Prophets that seduced the people;
and whereas Gods Prophets blessed in the name of the Lord, as Isaac blessed
Jacob, or cursed, or pronounced a Curse, as Elisha against the forty and two
Children, 2 King. 2.24. and in all this, and in all other Prophesyings they did
nothing of themselves, nor could any whit transgress the Word of the Lord; so
on the contrary, false Prophets would give Divinations for rewards without any
warrant or command from God; as Balak supposing Balaam would do, sent the
reward of Divinations, Numb. 22.7. (that is there to be taken) he sent the
reward of Enchantments, or Incantations; for Divinations against any man, that
is unwarranted Prophesying against any man, is Enchantments (Divinations
properly pretending Predictions, and manifestation of things hidden, being the
Second description) but to use any composure of Divining words, thereby to
cause any thing to come to pass, as Balak thought Balaam could do, and as Ahab
thought Micaiah could do, is Incantation, or Enchanting here.

Here may arise another Question, Whether was Balaam a Witch or not, as some
have supposed?

Answ. If he was a Witch, it must be according to some one term of description
in Deuteronomy. 18.10, 11. but which of these can we call him? Inchanter he was none,
for he refused to do it, although he was offered a reward. Surely Balaam was a
Prophet of God, whom Balak thought could bring things to pass by his own power,
he not discerning the power of God. All that we read of him in uttering of his
Parables was to this end, That Israel was blessed, and Incantations or Cursing
could not hurt them.

2 The History is a real Prophecy acted by Balaam by Gods appointment,
concluding all in this one Doctrine, That the only way to bewitch Israel, was,
to lay stumbling blocks before them, to ensnare them with sins, and to bring
down Gods Judgments upon them, Numb: 24.14. Revel. 2.14. yet the calling of
this a Prophecy seems to be contradictory to the Scriptures, for how could
he be said to be a Prophet of God, that taught Balak how to bring a curse upon
Israel? but if we mark well the History, it may seem to some to be full of
contradictions, as in Numb. 22.12. God said to Balaam, Go not, and verse. 20.
Rise up and go with them; and verse. 22. The wrath of God was kindled because he
went; and verse. 34. Balaam said, If it displease thee, I will return home
again; and verse. 35. The Angel said, Go with the men; what is the meaning of
this, go not, and yet go so often repeated? That is, go not according to the
hire and request of Balak to play the Inchanter, but go to do the work of a
Prophet, to show the vanity of Balak his thoughts, who thinks that words can
prevail either to Bless or to Curse without warrant from God; and so Balaam as
a Prophet obeyed the Lord, and did as the Lord commanded him, as appears in
all the History; but yet it appears, Revel. 2.14. he taught Balak to lay a
stumbling block before the people, was that the part of a Prophet? yea
according to the forenamed seeming contradictions it was, and it was not; for
in the truth of the Doctrine that he delivered to Balak, that that was the only
way to bring a Curse upon the people, to cause them to commit Idolatry, it was
the part of a Prophet, but in that it became a snare to Israel, it was the part
of a Witch, or a false Prophet, yet God would have such a thing come to pass by
his Prophet for the full illustration of this Doctrine in the Scriptures, (for
our sakes) that no Enchantment can hurt us, but the only thing that can hurt
any man is sinning against God, as God has taught us elsewhere, Deuteronomy. 28. the
fourteen first verses, the only way to be blessed, is, to keep the Commandments
of God, and from verse. 15. to the end of the Chapter, the only way to be
accursed, is, to disobey God, and break his Commandments. And whereas Balaam
was blamed, and afterward slain for teaching this Doctrine so plain to Balak who
abused it to ensnare Israel, yet God has taught us the same Doctrine, that we
might know with Israel, and by Isreal's example, that nothing can hurt us but
sin. So we may conclude of Balaam, that he was a Prophet, and yet acted the
part of a Prophet and a Witch both at once (at least) a Prophet, in that his
Doctrine was true, a Witch, in that he taught Balak to play the Witch, that
is, to draw the people to Idolatry, according to the First description, which
is the very essence of Witchcraft; and although God would have this thing come
to pass for our instruction, yet this was the error of Balaam, That he had
laid open to Balak the way to bewitch he people, and in this only he
transgressed, he did that which God had not commanded him, as some other
Prophets did besides him, 1 King. 13.18, 19, 22.

To this Sixth description of a Witch in the text, is referred that place in
Jerem. 23.10. so commonly falsely interpreted as falsely translated, Because of
Oaths the Land mourns, as if it were meant of common Swearing, which
although Swearing be a wicked thing, yet what room is there in that place for
Swearing? unless ye will bring it in abruptly by head and shoulders, what
coherence is there? Tremelius ttanslateth it thus, The Land is full of
Adulterers, and because of Execrations the Land mourns; Execrations is there
taken for Incantations, being by a Synechdoche put for all kind of Witchcraft,
being an inseparable companion of Idolatry, Adulterers are taken for Idolaters
in a Spiritual sense, and the false Prophets that used these Incantations to
seduce the people are spoken of, verse. 1, 11, 13. who being false Prophets, or
Witches, had defiled the Land with their several seducing Witchcrafts, leading
the people to Idolatry, and in this practice of Charming Execrations, they were
seducers of the people to repose confidence in ungrounded, and unwarranted
composures of words to bring things to pass, which words so composed are mere
Incantations, or Charms.

In this Sixth description of a Witch in the text, or under the term of a
Charmer, is contained Conjurers, who are Witches only in this sense, That they
pretend that by virtue of words they can do many things, and amongst the rest,
that they can by virtue of words command the Devil, which yet is but a mere
cheating delusion to deceive poor Idolatrous people, who do more credit the
virtue of words than they credit the truth of Gods Word; which foolish practice
is sufficiently confuted, Acts 19.13. certain Exorcists, or Conjurers, did take
upon them to name over them that had evil Spirits, the name of the Lord Jesus,
saying, I adjure you by Jesus whom Paul preaches, and the Evil Spirits
answered and said, Jesus I acknowledge, and Paul I know, but who are ye? Paul
and the rest of the Apostles did indeed cast out Devils in the Name of Jesus,
but not by the bare naming of Jesus, but by the spirit and power of Jesus; but
if words could have done it, then those Conjurers might as well have done it,
and then every one that could but imitate the Apostles, and the Prophets, and
speak the same words, or the like, might work Miracles, but God will have it
known otherwise, as appears in this place of the Acts aforesaid, That no
words spoken, but the power of God brings things to pass.

This was the manner of Idolatrous Heathen, to repose great confidence in
Charms, and they that studied this practice of making and composing of Charms
to seduce the people to this kind of Idolatry, were Witches, according to this
Sixth description in the text, Utens incantatione.

If we do but read of the Heathen, we may see in many places how they Idolized
Charms, or Incantations.

Plutarch says, That Aganice the Daughter of Hegetoris Thesali being skilful
in the course of the Planets, foretold to certain credulous people an Eclipse
of the Moon, and they had such confidence in Charms, that when they saw it came
to pass, they believed that Aganice had with Charms plucked the Moon from
heaven. Like to that in Virgil, Eclog. 8.

Carmina vel Coelo possunt deducere Lunam,
Carminibus Circe socios mutavit Ulyssis,
Frigidus in pratis cantando rumpitur anguis.
Enchantments pluck out of the Sky
The Moon, though she be placed high;
Dame Circes with her Charms so fine,
Ulysses Mates did turn to Swine;
The Snake with Charms is burst in twain,
In meadows where she does remain.
Notwithstanding the Prophet David tells us, That the deaf Adder hears not,
or regards not the voice of the most skilful user of Charms, Psalm. 58.5.
where he alludeth (with deriding) to the vain conceit of the Heathen, who
reposed such confidence in Charms, and imputed such power to words. This
Heathenish Witchcraft to cause people thus to Idolize Charms, is still
practiced by the Pope and his Train, their whole form of Religion, both in
public worship and common practice, consisting of Charms of all sorts, and of
that very specifical difference of Incantation or Charming, which is called
Conjuring, and if we look in the Masse-book, and if you search Durandus, you
may find Charms abundance, and he that is loath to take so much pains, let
him but look Mr. Scots discovery of Witchcraft, the twelfth Book, the ninth
Chapter, and so forwards, where he has neatly set forth the Witchcraft of the
Pope, and his Train, in the manner of their several Charms (though not
exemplifying the tenth part of them) I will also show you three or four of
them, which Master Scot has also rehearsed, with many more.

The first shall be the Amulet that Pope Leo said he had from an Angel, who did
bid him take it to a certain King going to Battle, and the Angel said, that
whosoever carried that Writing about him, and said every day three Pater
nosters, three Avies, and one Creed, shall not that day be conquered of his
enemies, nor be in any other danger ghostly or bodily, but shall be protected
by virtue of these holy Names of Jesus Christ written, with the four
Evangelists, and the Crosses between them.

Jesus Christus Messiah Soter Emanuel Sabbath Adonai Unigenitus Majestas
Paracletus Salvator noster Agiros Iskiros Agios Athanatos Gasper Melchior and
Balthazar Matthaeus Marcus Lucas Johannes, Another Charm of Pope Leo sent to a
King, having the like virtues in it, being read or carried about a man (being
in an Epistle written by St. Savior in these words.)

The Cross of Christ is a wonderful defense The Cross of Christ be always with
me The Cross is it which I do always worship The Cross of Christ is true health
The Cross of Christ does loose the bands of death The Cross of Christ is the
truth and the way I take my journey upon the Cross of the Lord The Cross of
Christ beats down every evil The Cross of Christ gives all good things The
Cross of Christ takes away pains everlasting The Cross of Christ save me O
Cross of Christ be upon me before and behind me because the ancient enemy
cannot abide the sight of thee The Cross of Christ save me, keep me, govern me,
and direct me Thomas bearing the note of thy Divine Majesty Alpha Omega first
and last midst and end beginning and first begotten Wisdom and Virtue This is
still a common practice among the Papists to carry Charms about them (to make
them Shot-free) when they go to War, as also has been found by experience in
the late Irish Wars (before the Cessation of Arms proclaimed by King Charles)
many of the poor Idolatrous Irish Rebels being found slain with Charms in their
pockets, composed by the Popish Clergy, the Witches of these latter times.

Another to be said in time of Sickness; first, let the Party sprinckle himself
with Holy Water, and then say this Charm following, Aqua benedicta sit mihi
salus and vita.
Let Holy Water be both life and health to me.


Another to be said every day, and upon every occasion, as often as any danger
or occasion shall be; first, let the party that would be blessed cross himself
with his finger, making a sign of the Cross three or four times, and then say
these words, and then without doubt he shall be safe.

Signum sancta crucis defendat me a malis praesentibus, praeteritis, and
futuris, interioribus and exterioribus. That is, The sign of the Holy Cross
defend me from evils present, past, and to come, inward and outward.

A Charm or Conjuration, or an Exorcism, whereby they make Holy Water in the
Popish pontifical, In Ecclesiae dedicatione.

I conjure thee thou Creature of Water, in the name of the Father, and the Son,
and the Holy Ghost, that thou drive the Devil out of every corner of this
Church and Altar, so that he remain not within our precincts, which are just
and holy. After these words spoken, say they, that Water so Conjured has power
and virtue to drive away the Devil, and with this Holy Water they use many
several Conjurations to keep the Devil in awe; with it they Conjure him from
their Churches and dwelling houses, from their meat and drink, and the very
Salt upon the Table; and if it were not for their continual Conjurations, they
make people believe the Devil would walk every where, and kill, and devour, and
carry away; therefore they Charm and Conjure their Bells in the Steeple (which
they also Baptize and name by the name of some Saint or Angel, and after these
Ceremonies, (say they) and after such holy names named over the Bells, and the
name of some Saint or Angel given to each Bell, and written upon them, those
Bells have virtue to drive away and clear the air from Devils every where
within the sound of them, from whence was the first beginning of passing peals,
that the Devils might not come near to carry away the Soul of the dying man
(although our Church use (I confess) to ring such peals only to give notice to
their Neighbors, who desire to see them, and to pray tor them before their
departure.) They also use Charms at Funerals, persuading people, that the Souls
of the dead, and also their Bodies, would be carried away by the Devil, if it
were not for their charming (of which foppery Bucan a learned Theologian
reproves them, Loco 24. Quaestione 16.) and so the poor Popish people are
deluded, so long as they see not the Devil in an ugly shape, they think they
are safe, and the Devil far enough, whereas the Devil is no where more than
in a Popish Charm or Conjuration; and yet Master Scot has collected in his
twelfth Book so many Popish Charms, as it appears they had Conjurations, and
other Charms for the Plague, the Quartain Fever, the Consumption, the
Toothache, and all manner of Diseases in Men and Cattle; and it appears still
among common silly country people, how they had learned Charms by tradition
from Popish times, for curing Cattle, Men, Women, and Children; for churning of
Butter, for baking their Bread, and many other occasions; one or two whereof I
will rehearse only, for brevity.

An old Woman in Essex who was living in my time, she had lived also in Queen
Mary's time, had learned thence many Popish Charms, one whereof was this; every
night when she lay down to sleep she charmed her Bed, saying; Matthew, Mark,
Luke, and John,
The Bed be blessed that I lie on.


And this would she repeat three times, reposing great confidence therein,
because (as she said) she had been taught it, when she was a young Maid, by the
Churchmen of those times.

Another old Woman came into an house at a time when as the Maid was churning
of Butter, and having labored long and could not make her Butter come, the old
Woman told the Maid what was wont to be done when she was a Maid, and also in
her Mothers young time, that if it happened their Butter would not come
readily, they used a Charm to be said over it, whilst yet it was in beating,
and it would come straight ways, and that was this: Come Butter come, come
Butter come, Peter stands at the Gate, waiting for a buttered Cake, come Butter
come.

This, said the old Woman, being said three times, will make your Butter come,
for it was taught my Mother by a learned Churchman in Queen Mary's days, when
as Churchmen had more cunning, and could teach people many a trick, that our
Ministers now a days know not.

Thus we may see still how the Witchcrafts of that grand Witch, that Whore of
Rome, has deceived all people; yet I would not have any think that I accuse
the old Wives for Witches, for they used these Charms not to seduce, but were
seduced, and bewitched by them to repose confidence in them; but the Popish
Rout, the contrivers of these Charms, to delude the people, were the Witches;
those poor deluded old Wives were Idolaters, Idolizing of words.

A Devilish practice of Conjuring Charms used by the Popish Clergy, discovered
at Orleance in France, acted chiefly by two Popish Doctors in Divinity,
Colimanus, and Stephanus Aterbatensis, and their Knavery found out.
IN the place aforesaid, in the year of our Lord, 1534. it happened that a
Majors Wife dyed, and was buried in the Church of the Franciscans, her Husband
giving the Popish Clergy only six Crowns at the Funeral, whereas they expected
a greater Prey, and were much discontent; it happened shortly after, that as
they were mumbling their Prayers in a Popish manner, according to their usual
custom, in the Church, there was heard in a secret Wainscot over the Arches of
the Church a great rumbling noise, the Moncks with the said Doctors presently
began to Conjure, and to ask if it were not some spirit of some body lately
dead, and if it were, they conjured the same Spirit to rumble again by way of
answer, which it did; then they charged him by their Conjurations to answer by
rumbling and knocking whose spirit it was, they named many that had formerly
been dead and buried, and the Spirit would not answer by rumbling and knocking
when they named them; but at last to bring their purpose to pass, they named
the Majors Wife, and then the Spirit rumbled exceedingly, and made a fearful
noise, this they acted several times, that it might be known in the City, so
that many people came to the hearing and witnessing of tnis strange Wonder; but
at the last they by their Conjurations had made the Spirit so tame, as it made
them answer by knocking to any thing they desired it should answer; always when
it answered not by knocking, then they concluded the thing was not so as they
asked, or demanded, but otherways when it knocked, then that was an affirmative
to the thing asked; at last they made the Spirit confess by that manner of
answering, That it was the departed Soul of the Majors Wife, and that she was
damned for holding the Heresy of Luther, and that she desired that her Body
might be taken up again and buried in some other place, for that place was not
fit for the body of the Damned, being a Consecrated place. But the Mayor being
wise, and full of courage, so handled the matter, that he with the help of some
of the City that loved him well, caused the place to be searched where the
noise was; the Moncks did take the matter grievously, and would have resisted,
it being at a time of the holy Conjuring, but yet the Mayor causing a search,
found there a young Boy, placed there by these Popish Doctors, on purpose to
act the part of a Spirit, as formerly related, and upon examination he
confessed the whole imposture, to the shame and confusion of the Actors and
Contrivers thereof, who were by the Laws (which were then and there free
notwithstanding the Popish Tyranny) censured to be carried to the place of
Execution, there to confess their deluding Witchcraft.

Let the Reader take special notice, that the Actors, and Contrivers of this
notable piece of Witchcraft were Witches in a threefold sense.

First, In their bringing to pass their cheating imposture, by confederating
with a young Boy to act the part of a Spirit, they were Juglers, according to
the first term of description.

Secondly, In their Charms and Conjurations, whereby they charged the Spirit to
answer them they were Inchanters and Conjurers, according to this Sixth term of
description.

Thirdly, In their consulting with the spirit of the dead, the Majors Wife,
they were Necromancers, according to the Ninth term of description.

This Imposture may be paralleled with that of the Witch of Endor; from this
cousening Witchcraft of the Popish crew, our common Wizards have learned their
craft of cousening the people, making them believe they can Conjure up the
Devil to give them Oracles according to the matter that they seek to the Wizard
to be resolved of, and can conjure him down again at their pleasure. As for
example, I will give you a true story, but whether you believe it or not, it
will serve to illustrate the manner of their deceivings.

A Butcher in Essex having lost Cattle, he resolved he would go to a Cunning
man, to know what was become of his Cattle, and so went to a notable cousening
Knave, that was (as common people say) skilful in the Black Art, and this
deceiving Witch, seeing his opportunity of gaining a Fee, for the purpose in
hand, used his Conjurations in a room contrived for his usual impostures, and
presently came in a Confederate of his covered over with a Bulls Hide, and a
pair of horns on his head, the poor Butcher sitting and looking in a Glass made
for that purpose, in which he was to behold the Object more terrible, and not
so easily discovered as if he had looked right upon it, for he was charged by
the Conjurer not to look behind him, for if he did, the Devil would be
outrageous; this confederate, or counterfeit Devil, after the Conjurers many
exorcising Charms, or Conjurations, willed the Butcher to look East and West,
North and South to find his Cattle; the Butcher sought much to find his
Cattle according to the Devils counsel, but yet perceiving after much seeking
and not finding, that it was a mere piece of Knavery, returned to the Conjurer
again, and desired him to call up the Devil once again, which he did as
formerly, but the Butcher had appointed his Boy to stand near hand Without the
house with a Mastiff Dog, and at the Butchers whistle, the Boy as he was
appointed, let go the Dog, which came in presently to his Master, and seized
upon the Knave in the Bulls hide; the Conjurer cried out, as likewise the
Devil, For the love of God take off your Dog, Nay, said the Butcher, fight
Dog, fight Devil, if you will venture your Devil, I will venture my Dog;
but yet after much entreaty he called off his Dog, but wittily discovered the
cheating craft of Conjuring.

He that acts the part as this Conjurer did, with the same intent to deceive,
and to make silly people believe and repose confidence in words (that is, in
Charms and Conjurations to command the Devil, and to keep him in awe) is a
seducing Witch, as he was; but he that acts the same part, and causes people
to wonder at him, and to think that he has really conjured the Devil, to this
intent only to show to the world in a sporting way, how easily people are and
have been deceived, is no Witch, but may be an instructor and inlightner of
silly people, according to the Fifth description of Juggling delusions, in Page
42. And truly (if people were not so much naturally given to vain credulity, or
believing of Lies) that sort of Conjurers (so commonly prated of by silly
people) had not been heard of in the world, had not these deluders learned this
cousening craft from the Popish rout, whereby they delude silly people, making
them believe they do things really by virtue of words, as by the naming of the
Trinity, and the several names of God, and of Christ, and by naming of Angels,
Archangels, and the Apostles (just the same with Popish Conjurations) whereas
their doings, as likewise the Popes, are all but cheating impostures, for if
Conjuring Charms could keep the Devil in awe, why did he not submit to the
Conjurers, Acts 19.13?

Another notable true Relation of what happened in a Town in England, wherein
is plainly showed how easily men are deceived by Juggling Confederacy in
Conjuration.
IT happened, that a Minister being remote from his dwelling, lodged in an
Inn, and because he wanted company fit for him, he sent for a young Cambridge
Scholar to keep him company, who being of his acquaintance, and dwelling in
the Town, came to him, and after some discourse they fell into a dispute about
Witches, and their Power, the Minister affirming, That Witches do truly conjure
up the Devil in several shapes as they list, for said he, I know some that
stood privately behind a Hedge when a Conjurer raised up the Devil in the shape
of a Cock, and then again in the shape of a Horse, and heard the Cock crow, and
the Horse neigh, but being very dark they could not see him; but the Scholar
holding the contrary opinion, said, I will undertake to demonstrate the same
thing to you in this Chamber, so as you shall verily think that I Conjure up
the Devil in such shapes; Come on said the Minister, if you can do that, then
also will I acknowledge these things to be but delusions.

Now mark how strangely it happened. There was a Tapsters Boy in the Inn at
that time, who had by wanton custom gotten a faculty of imitating the crowing
of a Cock, the neighing of a Horse, the barking of a Dog, the quacking of
Ducks, and the noise of many several Beasts, in a very wonderful manner; the
Scholar therefore, for the lively acting of the foresaid Delusion, went down,
and instructed this Boy to bring up a Jugge of Beer, and to set it down by the
fire, and then to convey himself under the Bed, and withal to act the part of
all several Creatures as the Scholar should call for them by Conjuration; now
when this Boy had so conveyed himself under the Bed, the Scholar did put out
the Candle, and left no light in the Chamber but the obscure light of a dim
fire, the relics of an Ostree Faggot, and said to the Minister, Now will I
make you believe that I Conjure up the Devil, Come Pluto, I have a Letter to be
sent with all speed to the Pope, therefore I conjure and command thee to come
speedily to me from the lowest pit, in the shape of a swift running Horse, that
may carry this Letter with speed, and bring me an answer; then began the Boy to
snort, and neigh, and stamp, very much resembling a wild marwood Horse, in so
lively a resemblance, as it made the Minister begin to look sad, and amazed;
then said the Scholar, Now I have well considered the matter, thou art not a
Creature swift enough for this business, therefore I conjure thee down again,
and I command Pluto to come to me in the shape of a Greyhound, Praesto, vade,
jubeo, celeriter; then the Boy under the Bed barked, and howled so like a
Dog, as the Minister did more and more creep close to the corner of the
Chimney, sighing very sadly. Then said the Scholar, I consider that thou art
not swift enough for my purpose, therefore I command thee to return to thy
place, and send me up a Cock; then the Boy crowed so like a Cock, as no ear
should distinguish it from a natural Cock; then said the Scholar, Thou art not
a Creature swift enough for my purpose, therefore I command Pluto to send me up
a Duck; at that command the Boy did so lively act the quacking of Ducks, as a
man would have thought that many Ducks had been in the room. Then began the
Minister seriously to exhort and admonish the Scholar, saying, Verily thou art
far gone, certainly thou art far gone in this craft, and many more words;
at which so sad discourse, the Boy under the Bed burst out in laughter, and
came forth and acted his part again openly, and made the Minister ashamed.

Yet here it may be noted, that the Ministers fantasy was so far deluded,
that he would not be persuaded, but that he saw real Ducks squirming about the
room, as he expressed.

I say then, how little credit ought Ministers or other men to give to flying
Reports, when they themselves may so easily be deluded? The setting of Spells is
referred to this description, and is done only by confederacy with him that is
spelled; who feigneth himself so Charmed, or spelled, that others who would be
in like action of Theevery, might fear to come into that place to steal,
because of the Spel.

So much for the Sixth term of description in the text, Vtens incantatione,
that is, an Inchanter or Charmer.
THe Seventh term of description of a Witch in the text, is Requirens Pythonem,
that is, Pythonicus Sacerdos, according to the sense of Plutarch, De def^ct.
Orac. one that seeks out an Oracle, as did the Priests of the Idol Apollo,
which, was called the Oracle of Apollo; the same practice was common to the
Priests of all Idols, that were in request before the Idol Apollo (although
indeed Apollo being the most famous of the latest Idols, has more Histories
and reports still extant concerning their practice, than all former Idols have)
as Plutarch witnesses, that in Boeotia there had been many Oracles, some
whereof grew silent when their Priests dyed, and some grew out of request for
want of subtilty in giving answers (and because the impostures grew so common
that people knew them, and would not be deluded by them any more.) We read
there of the Lebadian Oracle, and the Amphiaran Oracle, and also of an Oracle
of Mopsi, and at Amphilochi, and many more; these had their several terms of
appellation, according to the Language of the people adjacent, as the Lebadian
Oracle was given in the Aeolic Tongue, and had its peculiar appellation in that
Language; and so the Oracle at Delphos was called by such appellations as came
from the Greek, and also from the Roman Language, as Pytho, and Python, and
Oraculum, and Oracles used by the ancient Heathen, were by the Hebrews in their
Language called Ob, which Oracles were only giving Divinations to the peoples
inquiries, as when Ahasin sent to inquire of the god of Eckron, 2 King. 1.2.
save only this word Ob in the text, which is translated Python, implies, the
imposture whereupon these deceivers upheld their Divinations, as follows by
and by.

This is not to be understood that they that did seek to such Witches as gave
Oracles, that they also were Witches, for these were only bewitched Idolaters,
but they only were Witches, in this term of description, that being sought unto
by these deluded Idolaters, used such deluding impostures, whereby they made
the people believe they sought out an Oracle (that is, an answer to the inquiry
of those Idolaters) either directly from their Idols, or else that they sought
out an Oracle from the spirits of the dead, as did the Pythonist of Endor, in
which sense also they were called Necromantists, that is such as asked counsel
of the dead, being the Ninth term of description, 1 Chronicles. 10.13. Saulus
consulere Pythonem quae susser, Saul had sought to ask counsel of the Oracle,
there Saul was an Idolater, and not a Witch; but she that sought out that
Oracle for him from the dead, she was a deluding Witch.

This description, or term of description of a Witch, has a various manner of
expression in the Scriptures, which is needful to be noted by the Reader, for
in this text, Deuteronomy. 18.10, 11. such a Witch is called Pythonem requirens, one
that seeks out an Oracle; and in Levit. 20.6. there such a Witch is called
Python, an Oracle-giver, in these words, Anima qua converterit se ad Pythanos
and ar^ilos ut scortando sectetur eos, etc. That soul that turns himself
after Oracles and South-sayers, to commit Idolatry, in following them, shall be
cut off; and in verse. 27. of the same Chapter, Viri autem aut mulieres si erit
ex cis Pytho, aut axiodus, omnino morte afficiuntor; If there shall be found
either man or woman that is an Oracler, or a South-sayer, they shall be put to
death. There is also a Marginal note of Tremellius worth noting, in these
words, Qui Diabolicis artibus reliquos a Dei cultu and sui sanctificatione
avocant; Those Oraclers and South-sayers, says he, are such as by their
Devilish deluding craft do lead others from the true Worship of God, and living
holily. People so misled to Idolatry are spoken of in verse. 6. chap. 20. of
Leviticus before noted. And further, look 1 Samuel 28.7. there such a Witch being
of the female kind, is called, Mulier Pythone praedita, A woman that has the
craft of Oracling, or seeking out an Oracle. And Acts 16.16. there such a Witch
is said to have (...), the spirit of Oracling; Where Beza in his Latin
translation says in his marginal notes, that that spirit of Oracling was only
an expression, alluding to the Idol Apollo, which was called Python, and gave
answers unto them that asked, namely, by the Priests that belonged unto it, of
which Idol the Poets feigned many things; so they that had the imposture of
Divination, were said by the Heathen to be inspired by the spirit of Apollo,
Plutarch de def. Orac. and in this place of the Acts St. Luke speaks after
the common phrase of the Heathen, because he delivers the error of the common
people, but not by what instinct the Maid gave Divinations, for it is certain
that under the mask of that Idol, the Devil played his deluding pranks, and
this spirit of Apollo was nothing, but as much as to say, an imposture, or
deluding trick of the Devil, practiced by the Priests of Apollo. So much says
Beza, who plainly expounds, that that spirit of Divination, or Oracling, was
only a Devilish deluding imposture, and not a familiar Devil, as many do
fondly imagine. And whereas it is said in the verse following, that Paul did
cast that Spirit out of the Maid, it was, that he by the power of the Gospel of
Jesus rebuked her wickedness, so that her Conscience being terrified, she was
either converted, or else at the least dared not to follow that deluding craft
of Divination any longer; as when Christ did cast out seven Devils out of Mary
Magdalen, it is to be understood that he did convert her from many Devilish
sinful courses in which she had walked, Luke 8.2. and 7.47.

(But if any be still so obstinate as to follow the common fond tradition, that
Python, or spiritus Pythonis, was a real familiar visible discoursing Devil,
yet I hope none are so mad as to say upon serious consideration, that it was
any thing but a spirit of lying Prophecy, or Divination, or Oracling in all
the discourse of the Scripture, no man can show in all the Scriptures, be they
never so grossly expounded, that any man or woman had a killing, or a murdering
Devil, whereby to bewitch any man to death, nor the least color of any such
Devilish exposition.)

This Seventh term in the text, namely, Requirens Pythonem, one that seeks
out an Oracle, differs not from the second term of description, that is,
Utens Divinationibus, one that ^^eth Divinations, or false Prophecies, save
only in this, that that second term of description implies only bare
Predictions of future things, and telling of hidden things, by which the Witch
was described, but this Seventh term of description implies some particular
impostures, whereupon the Witches grounded their Predictions; according to
which impostures they are called Oraclers, or seekers out of Oracles; the
Hebrew word is Ob, and is translated Python; Ob signifies properly a Bottle,
or any such like hollow thing; and here in the text, and in all other
Scripture-sense it implies the imposture of speaking with their mouths in a
Bottle, from a hollow Cave in the earth, out of which came a voice, spoken by
some confederate with the Impostor, or Witch, which confederate was upon such
occasion to go into a secret conveyance, and to make answer to the inquiry,
with a hollow sounding voice, caused by the Bottle, and so it seemed to the
silly deluded people, that the voice came out of the firm ground, as an answer
sent by the gods, by the departed soul of some Prophet, or other man that had
formerly died (in which sense also they were called Necromantists, from asking
counsel of the dead, being the Ninth term of description) for which imposture
all Idol houses, and houses of all such other Witches as practiced the same
imposture, that the Idol-Priests did practice, were built and contrived on
purpose with a room called Manteum, in which the said Cave and hollow passage
was, in which room some fond Writers do say, that the Devil spoke, but had it
been so, that a real familiar Devil had answered, as is fondly imagined, why
then did he answer only in that room? Surely if their Devil was so familiar,
and at command, he might as well have answered in any room as in that, but a
confederate man or woman could not bring to pass the imposture in any room but
in that.

This imposture is alluded unto by the Prophet Isaiah 29.4. Sitque quasi
Pythonis e terra vox tua, and e pulvere sermo tuus pipiat, and thy voice shall
be as an Oracler out of the earth, and thy speech shall be whispering out of
the dust: because they used cheating impostures to seduce the people, making
them believe they could call the departed Ghosts of their friends to give them
Oracles, or answers to their inquiry, out of the earth, this imposture the
Prophet Isaiah warns the people to avoid the delusion of it, Isaiah 8.19. in
Tremellius translation, Quum enim edicunt vobis, consulito Pythones and
ariolos, qui pipiunt and mussitant; nonne populus Deum suum consulturus est pro
viventibus mortuos consulat? for when they say unto you, Ask counsel of
Oraclers, and South-sayers, that whisper and mutter, should not a people ask
counsel of their God? Shall they ask counsel of the dead for them that are
living? And here in Isaiah 29.4. the Prophet alludeth not to all the impostures
of such Oracling Idols, which were many, but only to this one imposture, from
whence they had their description, or term of appellation from speaking in a
Bottle out of the earth. In this sense the Pythonist of Endor was called Mulier
pythone pradita, a Woman endued with an Oracle, or with the imposture of
Oracling, because she made it seem by the foresaid imposture, to silly,
deluded, or bewitched people, that the dead spoke out of the earth, by which
imposture she deluded Saul, 1 Samuel 28. And because that History of the Witch of
Endor has been commonly mis-interpreted, and many unwary Readers do believe,
that that which she did was somewhat more than a cousening imposture, and that
she did either raise up Samuel, or the Devil in the likeness of Samuel, or
assuming the body of Samuel, and speaking in it (where by the way it is to be
noted, that if any such things were, it makes nothing to prove the common
error, that a Witch is any where at all taken for a Murderer; for the scope of
all that she did, was only at last to give an Oracle, or Divination to Saul)
yet let but such a Reader as thinks she did any thing really; examine well
the Chapter, and he shall find, it was only a deluding cheating imposture by a
confederate in the ground, and he that will not believe this, let him but
gather up his Objections, and I will lay down my Answers as follows.

The first Objection, or ground of mistake, is, the twelfth verse of the
Chapter, 1 Samuel 28. And when the woman saw Samuel, etc. Here perhaps you will
say, it is plain she saw Samuel?

Ans. It is not here to be understood according to the letter of the History,
neither did yet any Expositor so understand it, for it may not be supposed that
any Devilish Craft can call a Saint from Heaven; no, but you will say, It was
the Devil in the likeness of Samuel; I answer, If you hold to the letter of the
History, you must say it was real Samuel, but if you vary from the letter,
whence then can you gather that it was the Devil? And why is not this
Exposition true, that she only pretended that she saw Samuel, to bring about
her cousening imposture? for I have made it plain in all the discourse of this
Book by the current of the Scriptures, that all Witchcraft was only a delusion,
and to say that it was the body of Samuel raised up by the Devil, is to make
the Devil able to work the same Miracle that was wrought by Christ upon the
Cross, who by the power of his Godhead raised up the Bodies of the Saints, for
a time, who appeared unto many, from whence the Centurion concluded, that
Christ was the Son of God, knowing that no other power was able to do it, Mat.
27.52, 53, 54.

The second Objection may be, she learned of Samuel that it was Saul, as in the
twelfth verse, And when the woman saw Samuel she said unto Saul, why have thou
deceived me, for thou art Saul? therefore she saw him.

Answ. The seeing of Samuel could instruct her nothing, if living Samuel had
been there, much less dead Samuel, nor seeing the Devil in Samuels likeness,
for neither the body of Samuel, nor the Devil, was a Looking-glass to see Saul
in, but it was her subtle pretense, and color, that she had seen Samuel, and
so found out Saul by her craft, whom she knew before; think you that this
subtle Wizard did not know the King? when she dwelt nigh the Kings Court, as
appears in the Chapter, for he went thither and stayed while she acted her
part, and after a while she prepared meat, and he and his Servants did eat, and
returned the same night. But you may say, he was disguised. Ans. He was taller
than all the men in Israel by the head and shoulders, and without making
himself so much the shorter, he could not but be known by a subtle Wizard.
Also I answer; That the Servants of Saul, that could so readily tell him where
he should find such a woman at Endor, could not but be intimate with her, and
so warn her of Saul's coming, or give her some discovery of the present
occasion, at their coming along with Saul, or else how could they have
concealed her, and kept her counsel in the time a little before, when Saul had
made strict proclamation that all Wizards should be banished the Land, as they
were; and doubtless had not those servants concealed her, she had also been
banished. Again, Saul could not but discover himself to her, by his Oath that
he swear to her immediately before, for who was able to save her from
punishment but the King.

Another Objection is, Saul himself saw Samuel, or the Devil in his likeness.

Ans. It is plain in the History, he saw neither Samuel, nor his likeness, for
he said to the woman in verse. 13, 14. What saw thou, and what form and
fashion is he of? where it is plain, he was only too credulous, and believed
that she had seen some apparition, for if he had seen any thing himself, why
did he say, What saw thou? She answered, I saw an old man clothed in a
mantle, making a true description of Samuel, because she knew that he was the
man that Saul desired, then Saul acknowledged that it was Samuel, only from her
describing of him, verse. 14. and therefore bowed himself with his face to the
ground in honor to Samuel, whom he expected should answer him out of the earth.

Another Objection is; But Samuel talked with Saul?

Ans. It is proved before that Saul saw no body, therefore Saul only heard a
voice which he imagined came from Samuel, but was only the voice of a
Confederate under the ground.

But you will say, that the Scripture says, Samuel said unto Saul, Why have
thou disquieted me?

Ans. If you hold me to the letter of the History, why do you not hold your
self to it, but say, it was the Devil in the likeness of Samuel, as that it was
real Samuel you will not say, why not a Confederate then? and here indeed the
History is set down only according to the apprehension of Saul, not discovering
the imposture.

But how should she describe a man so like Samuel? that is, an old man clothed
in a mantle?

Ans. The only noted Prophet in Israel was known to all, and could not be
unknown to a subtle Wizard, whose practice was to be acquainted with all things
of note, the bettet to help her craft of Oracling Divinations upon any occasion
for gain.

Another Objection, But if it were not Samuel, nor the Devil, what Confederate
was able to tell Saul so right, and give so true an Oracle of what should
betide Saul the next day in the battle?

Ans. All such Oraclers and Wizards did give Oracles two ways.

First, In doubtful things, they gave doubtful answers.

Secondly, Where were more certain probabilities, there they gave more certain
answers. Now what was more certain than that the Kingdom should be rent from
Saul? Samuel had Prophesied of it, and all Israel knew it; and what was more
probable than that the time was at hand, when so mighty an Host of his enemies
were come against him, when his heart and spirit failed him, and when God had
forsaken him? and if it had not come to pass, such Oraclers did use to have
evasions, the fault might have been laid upon Samuels Ghost, and further
cousenage might still have been wrought to blind Saul's eyes; and had it
happened how it could, so that the Witch had come off blewly, and her imposture
been afterward known to Saul, yet she had the Oath of the King to save her
harmless.

Further, it is the opinion of some learned men, that there was no certainty at
all in the answer given to Saul, and that it was merely conjectural, and though
happening some way true, yet it failed in the day prefixed, for whereas it was
said, To morrow shall thou and thy Sons be with me, verse. 9. it was very false,
for when the Philistims went up to Battle, David returning was three days
marching back to Ziglag, 1 Samuel 30.1. and one day pursuing his enemies, verse.
17. and the third day after that, tidings was brought to David from the Camp of
Saul, that Saul and his Sons were dead, 2 Samuel 1, 2, 3, 4. which made in all
seven days, and therefore it was not likely that Saul and his Sons were slain
upon the morrow, which was the scope of the Oracle, or answer that was given to
Saul; this I say, is the opinion of a learned Writer. So much by the way.

Further, if it had not been a mere delusion to blind the eyes of Saul, why
must Samuel be described an old man clothed in a mantle? That indeed was the
fashion of living Samuel, but after he was dead and buried, had Samuel appeared
as she pretended, or had the Devil appeared in his likeness, as some fond
Readers suppose he did, it must have been like Samuel in a Winding Sheet; but
indeed had she described him by his Winding Sheet, that might have been any man
else as well as Samuel, and Saul had not been so easily deluded in his fond
credulity and Idolatrous way. If you think it an incredible thing that Saul
should be so easily deluded, look Isaiah 8.20. in the Latin translation (which
carries the true sense of the Original, how odly soever our English
Translators run) where the Prophet speaking of such as would counsel men to
seek to Oraclers and South-sayers, he faith (in Tremelius) An non loquuntur in
sententiam illam cuicunque nulla est lucis scintilla; do they not give this
counsel to such as have not the least spark of light or understanding? and this
was Saul's case, Saul indeed had been a wise man formerly, when the Spirit of
God was upon him, when it was said, Is Saul also among the Prophets? but then
when God had forsaken him, his wisdom, his courage, and his victoriousness went
all away together, and then, and never till then, was he deceived by a Witch.
And however many erroneous Readers, when they read this History of the Witch of
Endor, do suppose she did such things really as are set down, only according to
the apprehension of the Spectators (namely, Saul and his Servants) yet let them
but consider the nature of impostures, and they may easily conceive how such a
cheating imposture might easily, and still may be brought to pass to delude
fools, by an ordinary Juggling confederacy, according to the manner before
described, as well and as really as ever she did it, and that without a
familiar Devil (as is foolishly supposed she had) only a Devil ruling in the
heart of them that do it to the like end, to delude and lead people from God,
as she did, the Devil being the Father of all lying delusions, and rules in
the hearts of the children of disobedience. Such a Devil was in the heart of
Ahabs Prophets, 1 King. 22.23. (But for such as will not allow of that
exposition, that the Witch of Endor did all by a confederate, I say, she might
do it also by the imposture of Hariolating, as may be seen in the latter end of
the Eighth term of description following) And truly, for such as will still
believe the common foolish error, that Python was such a Witch as had a
familiar spirit (except they mean such a lying spirit of Oracling Divination) I
wonder how far they will stretch the sense and coherence of the Scriptures,
to make any such interpretation?

Look but T(...)us Translation, 2 Chronicles, 33.6. it is said of Manasseh, among
the Witchcrafts which he used (or rather that the Idolatrous Priests under him
used) Instituitque Pythonem; What is that? Did he set up a familiar Spirit? one
that had a familiar Spirit; or did be set up an Oracle? Which is best sense?
but the common conceit of Readers is, because their Dictionary says Python
signifies a Devilish spirit of Divination, or one that has such a Spirit,
therefore that must needs be a familiar Spirit (and indeed the common abuse of
words may make words signify any thing) but let such as trust only to their
Latin Dictionaries, or Greek Lexicon, show me in them, or any authentic
Writer, but especially in the Scriptures, where Python is taken in any such
sense as a familiar Spirit, (especially where it is taken for a killing spirit
of a Witch) according to the common doctrine of Devils, that has defiled the
Nations, but only for a spirit of lying Prophecy, or one that has such a
Spirit or Devil in his heart; and in the text it is taken for the Oracle of the
Devil; and if any carp at words, yet they must examine as well the sense of the
Original, and the sense and coherence of the Scriptures from place to place, as
where words may by abuse and ill custom signify; yet I say, where do we read
of a Familiar Spirit in all the Scriptures, if they be truly translated,
especially where do we read of a killing spirit of a Witch?

So much for the Seventh term of description, Requirens Pythonem.
The Eighth term of Description.
THe Eighth term of Description of a Witch in the text, is, Ariolus, for the
most part written Hariolus, and is by all men taken for a South-sayer, but a
South-sayer differs not from Utens Divinationibus, being the Second term of
description, for what difference is there between South-saying, and using of
Divinations, or lying Prophecies? so then it might seem to be a Tautologie in
the text; but as it has been said before, that these Nine terms of appellation
in the text, are not terms of distinction, but several terms of description, so
if Moses had set here down hundred several terms of description, signifying one
and the same thing, it had not been a tautologie in the worst sense, but a more
full expression of the same thing for illustration of the matter in hand: but
yet as most of the rest of the terms of description in the text did all tend to
Divinations (being the Second term of description) only they do imply a several
imposture, whereupon the self-same Witches grounded their Divinations, and yet
being described by their several impostures were not so many several kinds of
Witches, but still one and the same kind, and all of them false Prophets, who
by several impostures seduced the people; so it may well be understood, that
under this Eighth term of description in the text, Hariolus, commonly called a
South-sayer, is implied some particular imposture used in their Divinations,
whereby to delude and seduce the people, which imposture, though it be not
fully declared in the Scriptures, what it was, yet it may be collected by the
several places in the Scriptures where the said expression is so often
repeated, that it was some imposture used, together with the foresaid imposture
of Oracling* (being the Seventh description) because in most places of the
Scripture, Pythones and arioli are named together as one and the same, although
implying a several imposture. The Hebrew word in the text is Jiddegnoni, or as
by some pronounced Jiddoni, and signifies Hariolus, but the Hebrews borrowed a
word from some other Language, which word is Hartumim, which in Genesis 41 8.24.
and in several places of Scripture, is used as a general word for all sorts of
Witches, and is by Tremelius translated Magus, a Magician, but by common use
did signify among the Hebrews, Hariolus, a South-sayer, and yet used
equivocately to express the Genus, and the Species as one, because South-sayers
were Magicians, and were counted the only wise men, and is by many Expositors
expounded Hariolus. The Latins commonly used another word, Haruspex; and here
it may be noted, that these words, Hartumim, Hariolus, Haruspex, do imply the
imposture of a hollow feigned voice, which those Witches or Deceivers used in
their Oracling Divinations, by harring in their throats, and these are they
that are also otherwise called Pythones, according to another imposture of
speaking in a Bottle, as in the Seventh term of description is before showed
Plutarch de defec. Orac. says, They that used to draw a Prophesying voice out
of their belly are also called Pythones, that is, as Johannes Scapula upon the
place of Plutarch, says, (...) e ventre Hariolantes, and this was the
imposture aimed at in the text under the Eighth term of description, Ariolus,
namely, that they spoke with a counterfeit voice of harring in the throat,
whereby to dissemble some other, and therefore changed their Natural voice, and
these were they that spoke in the room of the Idol Houses, called in Greek and
Latin Manteium (as in the Seventh description) and these were they that
speaking in that room in a Cave under the ground, or some other hollow place,
did therefore change their natural voice, to counterfeit the voice of some
other; such a one was he that being confederate with the Witch of Endor,
feigned the voice of Samuel talking to Saul (as is more fully set down in the
Seventh term of description) or she her self might by this Imposture speak all
that was spoken to Saul; and these did rather har in their throats, that they
might thereby the more terribly dissemble a voice from the dead rising again,
and therefore differed as much as they could from Human voice; such a one was
also by the Graecians and Latins called Mantes, which some Writers that knew
not the imposture, say it was the Devil; but Mantes was such a Witch, or false
Prophet, as had that devilish imposture of harring in their throats to deceive
the people, called of some Ventriloquium, a speaking in the belly, and they
that practiced this imposture were so perfect in it, that they would speak so
strangely, that many times they dared to practice their imposture above ground,
whereby they made it seem to silly people that the spirit of Apollo, or some
other Idol (which they called gods) spoke within them, according to the
expression of Saint Luke, who used the vulgar expression, Acts 16.16. where it
is said, the Maid had Spiritus Pythonis, the spirit of Oracling, or as Beza
expounds it, the spirit of Apollo, which he says was only a devilish
cousening imposture (as is before noted at large in the Seventh description)
And this exposition of Ariolos is agreeable to the saying of the Prophet, Isa.
8.19. Quum enim edicunt vobis consulite Pythones and ariolos, qui pipiunt and
mussitant; and when they say unto you, Ask counsel of Oraclers, and
South-sayers, that peep, and that mutter, here Tremelius gives this Exposition;
The Prophet (says he) aggravateth the beinous crime of those Witches from the
vanity of those Divinations, which the very manner of them betrayeth, those
Seducers have not so much wit that they dare speak to the people the thing they
pretend to speak in plain and open terms, with an audible clear voice, as they
that are Gods Prophets, who speak the Word of God as loud as may be, and as
plain as they can to the people, but they chirp in their Bellies, and very low
in their throats, like Chickens half out of the shells in the hatching. So much
Tremelius. And further he says, That many Historians do mention these their
delusions, but especially Origenes advers. Celsum.

This imposture of speaking in the Belly has been often practiced in these
latter days in many places, and namely in this Island of England, and they that
practice it do it commonly to this end, to draw many silly people to them, to
stand wondering at them, that so by the concourse of people money may be given
them, for they by this imposture do make the people believe that they are
possessed by the Devil, speaking within them, and tormenting them, and so do by
that pretense move the people to charity, to be liberal to them.

Master Scot in his Discovery of Witchcraft, Lib. 7. Cap. 1. writes of such a
one at Westwel in Kent, that had so perfectly this imposture of speaking in the
Belly, that many Ministers were deceived by her, and made no question but she
had been possessed by a tormenting Devil, and came and talked so long with that
Devil, and charged him in the name of God to go out of her, as that he said he
would kill her, he would tear her it pieces, he would kill them all; He also
told them whom sent him in, and accused some poor people for Witches. The words
and testimony of this Devil were taken in writing, and how many they that sent
him had Witched to death, and yet when this matter came to examination by two
wise Justices of the Peace, Mt. Thomas Wotton, and Mr. George Darrel, the Maid
being discreetly examined, confessed the whole imposture; and for confirmation
of the truth of the matter, so plain was the Maid in confession, that she acted
the same thing over again before the said Magistrates, and many other Gentlemen
and Gentlewomen, to the shame of those Ministers who had taken the testimony of
the Devil against poor people in writing, and were credulous therein, believing
and teaching such Doctrins, that a Witch can send a Devil to possess and
torment people, and another Witch can cast him out; but if they and all
Ministers were led by the Spirit of truth, they should know, that this deluding
Hagge was the Witch, and not they whom she accused; for what difference was
there between her imposture and a spirit of Divination? like the Maid, in Acts
16.16. formerly mentioned, whose spirit of Divination or Oracling was only a
Devilish cousening imposture, says Beza; and such ought to be put to death by
the Law of Moses, because they use Divinations, pretending the discovery of
Witches, it being manifest therein that they are the Witches, and because they
by false accusation murder others; such a Maid was lately at Brantree in
Essex, who practiced the same imposture to the astonishment of many, and gained
money from the deceived beholders, until the report thereof grew stale, and
fools had done wondering, and the concourse of people ceased, and her gains
came not in, and then the Devil did easily leave her, and the business almost
forgotten, and yet no men so ready to put in execution the Law of God against
her, or any such, as against poor people that are accused by such, and by
fools, and hanged up without ground or warrant, or possibility of truth.

This imposture has wrought strange delusions among the ancient Heathen, and
the actors thereof did by this imposture delude the people; one way very
notable was (by them speaking in the Belly in the manner aforesaid) they would
make it seem to the standers by that a voice came from afar off, or from some
secret place, and that that voice was the voice of some of the gods, and then
they would report abroad that in such a place a voice was heard, declaring, or
commanding such and such matters, and the poor deluded standers by would
witness, and report the same to be true, whereas the voice came only from the
deluding Witch that was among them when they heard the voice; as we may read in
Plutarch de defec. Orac.

A certain ship sailing by the Island of Paxis (in which ship were some
Egyptians, the manner of which Nation was to practice the several impostures
of Witchcraft, for their advantage and fame among the people) there was heard
from the shore of Paxis a voice, calling thrice to Thamus by name, (he being an
Egyptian in the ship) Thamus, when thou come to Palos, report that great Pan
is dead, which thing he did. When he came near Palos he looked toward the
shore, and cried aloud, Great Pan is dead; then there was heard a terrible
sighing and groaning, which much affrighted the people in the ship; the report
of this was speedily testified at Rome, in so much that this Thamus was sent
for by Tyberius Caesar, and so was much taken notice of in the Emperors Court;
and although many were deluded by that voice, which was so heard by the men in
the ship, and did much dispute about it what it should signify, yet they that
do rightly understand the imposture of Hariolating, or speaking in the belly,
may easily conceive that Thamus himself was the man, or some confederate with
him, that spoke the voice, and made that mighty groaning at the last, thereby
to delude the people, and to make himself famous, as some great Man, to whom
some of the gods had spoken; and whereas it was about the time that Christ was
Crucified, And some would have it that that voice was really spoken by some
strange Spirit, and might signify Christ: I yield thus far, that Thamus
himself might have heard the same of the passages of the Life, and Death, and
Resurrection of Christ, and might speak of, and concerning Christ, not that he
believed in Christ, but would tell some notable thing in his own deluding way,
for the magnifying of himself among the people, implying, that he was the man
to whom such a voice should come from the gods; and whereas he said, Great Pan
is dead, it was because the Jews were the posterity of Shepherds, and the
Heathen had feigned Pan to be the god of Shepherds; thus might he mean Christ,
as the Maid in the Acts, chapter 16.16. acknowledged Paul and his Doctrine, not by
belief, but thereby to uphold and countenance her imposture among the people,
for her own fame and gain; so might this Impostor mean Christ, although, nor
he, nor any other, did ever conclude any thing fully concerning the meaning of
that voice, but left it doubtful (as all Oracles of the Heathen were) insomuch
that some told Tiberius, that it was spoken from the gods of one that was risen
up between Mercury and Penelopa. Thus did Thamus by his imposture get himself
fame at the Emperors Court (which was the thing he aimed at) and left
superstitious fools disputing of an ambiguous Oracle.

It has been credibly reported, that there was a man in the Court, in King
James his days, that could act this imposture so lively that he could call the
King by name, and cause the King to look round about him, wondering who it was
that called him, whereas he that called him stood before him in his presence,
with his face toward him, but after this imposture was known, the King in his
merriment would sometimes take occasion by this Impostor to make sport upon
some of his Courtiers; as for instance, There was a Knight belonging to the
Court, whom the King caused to come before him in his private room (where no
man was but the King, and this Knight, and the Impostor) and feigned some
occasion of serious discourse with the Knight; but when the King began to
speak, and the Knight bending his attention to the King, suddenly there came a
voice as out of another room, calling the Knight by name, Sir John, Sir John,
come away Sir John; at which the Knight began to frown, that any man should be
so unmannerly as to molest the King and him; and still listening to the Kings
discourse, the voice came again, Sir John, Sir John, come away and drink off
your Sack; at that Sir John began to swell with anger, and looked into the next
rooms to see who it was that dared to call him so importunately, and could not
find out who it was, and having chid with whomsoever he found, he returned
again to the King; the King again had no sooner began to speak as formerly, but
the voice came again, Sir John, come away, your Sack stays for you; at that,
Sir John begun to stamp with madness, and looked out, and returned several
times to the King, but could not be quiet in his discourse with the King,
because of the voice that so often troubled him, till the King had sported
enough.

So much for this Eighth term of description of a Witch in the text, Ariolus a
South-sayer.
The Ninth term of Description.
THe Ninth term of Description, is, Necromantis, a Necromancer, that is in the
sense of the Hebrew, Consulens mortuos, one that seeks counsel of the dead,
as Tremellius notes in the margent.

This is the last term set down by Moses in the text, describing a Witch, and
this term implies the pretense in the impostures used by the foresaid
Oraclers, and South-sayers, as in the Seventh and Eighth description (is amply
set down); and that the world might fully understand the delusion of Witches,
Moses here sets down this last and more full expression, or term of
description of a Witch, Necromantis, which is all one with the former, and in
regard of Predictions was called in the Second description, Vtens Divinatione,
a Diviner; in regard of the imposture of giving Oracles from a hollow Cave in
the earth, with a Bottle, was called Ol in the Hebrew (translated Python by
Tremellius) that is an Oracle, or an Oracler, according to the sense of
Plutarch, de defect. orac. and in regard of the imposture of counterfeiting a
voice of another by harring in then throats, was called, Ariolus, or Hariolus;
in regard of the asking counsel of the dead was called, Necromantis, or
consulens mortuos, one that asks counsel of the dead; and in regard of the
Charms and Conjurations that they used, in calling up the souls and spirits of
the dead, they were Charmers, or Conjurers.

The Seventh and Eighth terms of description do imply the impostures which
these deluding Witches used in their Oracling Divinations; this Ninth term of
description implies their pretense which they had in those cousening
impostures, that is, they pretended that they consulted with the souls of them
that were departed this life, and thereby could tell things to come, or things
hidden; and this was one pretense of all that were Oraclers, or South-sayers,
according to which pretense they were called Necromancers, according to that
place in Isa. 8.19. (very fitly rehearsed again in this description) in
Tremellius translation; For when they shall say unto you, Ask counsel of
Oraclers and South-sayers, that whisper, and that mutter, should not a people
ask counsel of their God? shall they ask counsel of the dead for them that are
living? And this pretense of these Witches is manifest, not only in the
Scriptures, but in common Writers, where we may read the Tenants, and the
Opinions of the Heathen concerning this matter, Plutarch de defec. orac.
shows their opinions and vain conceits, That the souls of men that were
departed this life, were of more excellent perfection, than the souls of men in
the prison of the body; and these were by those vain Heathen called Genii,
which Genii or departed souls (say they) being of such perfection, and having
likewise familiarity with the gods, would (when they were sought unto by men
living here) come and inspire them to give Divinations, which they could easily
do, by reason of their perfect estate after this life. These were by some of
the Heathen called, and esteemed gods, and were among the Romans called Manes,
that is, Infernal gods, or souls of men, to whom they offered Sacrifices,
called Inferiae.

The Pythonist, or Witch of Endor did act her part so subtly, that she did
not only pretend inspiration from the Soul of Samuel, but (to satisfy Saul's
insatiable blindness in his demand) that she could call him up, and make him
appear to her, both Body and Soul united again, to prophecy again to Saul;
which thing indeed was acted by her according to the silliness of Saul's demand,
as appears more fully in the Seventh description, who, after the Spirit of
God had forsaken him, was given over to believe such foolish fancies of
faithless and ignorant people, as silly Women, and Children, and fools are
inclined to believe unto this day, that people after their death can walk, and
frequent the Houses, and Gardens, and Orchards, where they have used to be in
their life time, which thing is a mere fancy of faithless and ignorant people,
and cannot be brought to pass by either Witch or Devil, either really, or in
appearance; for it was a Miracle once done by the power of Christ at his
suffering upon the Cross, that many of the bodies of the Saints that were
departed rose, and appeared unto many in the holy City, Mat. 27.52, 53. from
whence the Centurion acknowledged Christ to be the Son of God, knowing that
such things could not be done but by the mighty power of God; and he that
reads over the foresaid Book of Plutarch, shall easily find, that one of the
chief grounds of Oracles and Divinations, was this vain conceit of the Heathen,
that wanted the light of the Scriptures, that the souls of dead men did give
answers to them that had knowledge in the Art of seeking of Oracles; which Art
indeed was only a craft of working impostures to delude the people, as is set
down more at large in the Seventh and Eighth descriptions; and from this old
conceit of the Heathen, and practice of these deluding Witches of ancient
times, has that grand Witch, that Whore of Rome (the Pope and his train)
derived her notable Witchcraft, whereby she has deluded the world, teaching
people to invocate the souls of Saints departed, as likewise to conjure them.

Let but the Reader look back to the Sixth term of description (a Charmer) and
there he may read of a notable piece of Necromancy acted by two Popish Doctors
at Orleance in France, with their devilish Conjurations. These Roman Witches
are the Necromancers of these latter Ages, according to this Ninth description;
these are the Inchanters of these latter Ages, as is fully demonstrated in the
Sixth description; these are the Juggling Witches of these latter Ages in the
Christian world, as is fully demonstrated in the Fifth description, and
therefore it is said of this Purple Whore, Revel. 18.23. with thy Witchcrafts
all Nations were deceived. And he that will be zealous for God, in obeying the
command given in Exodus 22.18. Suffer not a Witch to live, must leave his fond
ignorant course of teaching people to hang up poor, and widows, and aged, and
lame helpless people, and must bend his devotion against that Whore of Rome (as
all the world ought to do) as also against the Mohammedan Witches among the
Turks. Therefore it were a good Law in England, if duly kept, That no Jesuit,
or Popish Priest should be suffered to live, in any part of these Dominions,
because these Witches are they that bewitch the people (where they be
tolerated) by their several deluding impostures, leading the people to
Idolatry, and also to the undermining of Governments. So much for the Ninth
term of description of a Witch in the text, a Necromantist, one that asks
counsel of the dead.

The false Prophets of ancient times having their several impostures and
pretenses, whereby they seduced the people to vain Idolatry, which was
abominable to Gods eyes, are hereby the Spirit of God demonstrated to the world
by the Nine several terms of description in the text, that the world might
fully know the mystery of iniquity, and avoid all such evil workers, as
deceivers of his people, and learn to know God, and his Prophets, who teach
people the right way of God; and these are the terms of expressions that are
used in the Old Testament to demonstrate false Prophets, according to which
expressions we use the general word Witch, or Sorcerer, in the English Tongue,
and do find no other sort of Witches spoken of in the Scriptures. What sort of
Witches soever are spoken of in the New Testament, are all taken in the same
sense that they, are in the Old Testament, and are sufficiently glossed at the
beginning of this Book, upon the Definition of a Witch, and Witchcraft; but yet
in Revel. 22.15. there is found a word that is used as a general expression for
all sorts of Witches, which word because it has been abused by some Popish
Expositors, and blind interpreters, disputing upon the same word used by the
Septuagint, it may not be omitted to speak somewhat of it, the word is (...),
signifying by Etimology a Poysoner, or a compounder of Poisons, and is
translated veneficus, signifying also a Poysoner, and yet both words both in
Greek and Latin are used commonly for a Witch in general of all sorts, and is
so taken in that place of the Revelations, and from hence some that are willing
to uphold fond Opinions, do draw this fond conclusion, That a Witch is such a
one as kills people by Poisons, and can infect the Air, and bring many mortal
Diseases by Witchcraft, and by the same craft can kill any particular Man or
Beast with looks, by poisoning the Air in a direct line, as some feign of the
Cockatrice. But what Logician will not say it is an absurdity to draw a
Conclusion, and ground an opinion, from the bare signification of words? and
yet for the words, it is easily conceived, that a Witch was first called (...)
in Greek, and Veneficus in Latin, by a Metaphor taken from the deceitfulness
of a Poysoner, that gives a man Poisons by deceit to betray his life; or from
a deceitful Apothecary, or Mountebank, that sells Poison, sophisticated
Medicines, instead of wholesome Physic, as a Witch is taken in no other sense
in all the foregoing places of Scripture than for a Deceiver, or Impostor; yet
because (as I have said before) that bare significations of words do prove
nothing directly, therefore let us but expound Scripture by Scripture, and we
may easily find that (...), Veneficus, is taken for a Deceiver, or Impostor,
and not for a Poysoner or Murderer, and for that look Revel. 18.23. With thy
Witchcrafts all Nations were deceived; there the conjugal word is (...)
veneficiis tuis, as much as to say, with thy poisoned Medicines, or Poisons,
all Nations were deceived; there is the same Metaphor used again, and such
words as might signify Poisons are used for deceiving Witchcrafts; with thy
Witchcrafts all Nations were deceived, not killed. So then, to conclude with
Revelations, we read not in all the Old or New Testament of a Killing Witch, or
Murdering Witch, but only of deceiving Witches, Impostors, or false Prophets,
seducing people to Idolatry by their delusions and impostures.

He that will have any further description of a Witch, let him take this
description; A Witch is as like a Prophet as can be, and yet a deceiving false
Prophet, Dan. 2.13. A Decree went forth from the King, that the Magicians
should be slain, and they sought Daniel and his fellows to be slain; there the
Executioners knew no difference between the Magicians and Daniel, that was a
Prophet, for the word Magician, or Wise men, being properly taken in a good
sense, was equivocally given to South-sayers, and all sorts of deceiving
Witches, as well as to those that were termed Wise men, and as to the Prophets
themselves, and under that Decree Daniel himself had been slain, if it had not
been stayed by Gods providence.

The blasphemous Priests and Pharisees called Christ a Deceiver, or Impostor,
or as Beza expounds, a Jugler, and a Seducer, Matthew. 27.63. when as he was
the great Prophet of the world.

Plutarch says, De defect. Orac. That he which first began the Oracle of
Apollo was Coreta, who set up the Oracle, in a pretense of being Divinely
inspired with the spirit of Prophecy.

Mr. Scot in his Discovery, who (was a Student in the Laws, and learned in the
Roman Laws) shows, Lib. 11. Cap. 5. and 6. that certain Colleges were erected
at Rome, in time of Heathenish ignorance, for Diviners and South-sayers to be
instituted to expound the minds and admonishments of the gods, and by their
Law young Princes were to be sent to Hetruria to learn, and bring home the
cunning of that Art (it being the only Divinity the poor Heathen knew to seek
to such as pretended they could know the minds and wills of the gods) and in
process of time these Colleges increased to a great University, in which were
brought up such as learned the practice of Divination, or Augury, by several
impostures described in the text; who notwithstanding they were accounted
Prophets among the Heathen, yet are all aimed at, and described in the text for
Witches, and South-sayers, and such as the people of Israel (being a chosen
people, to be taught by God and his Prophets) were commanded to destroy, that
no such bewitching false Prophets should be found among them; such a one was
Elimas the Sorcerer, called both a Sorcerer, and a false Prophet, Acts 12.6.
and these were such as were sometimes great, Scholars, yet abusing their
learning.

Some may object and say, If Witches were only false Prophets, then all false
Teachers are Witches?

Answ. A Witch and a false Prophet are reciprocal terms, but not a Witch and a
false Teacher, for all the Nine terms of description in the text are plainly
describing Witches and false Prophets as one and the same, and having one of
these two properties;

First, He sets up an Idol, which is the first main Witchcraft, being the
first description in the text; or,

Secondly, He uses some, or all of the eight following Witchcrafts described
in the text, either to confirm and uphold his Idol by seducing the people, or
else to make the people believe that he is a true Prophet of God, as did Simon
Magus in the Acts, and as is rehearsed in the same Chapter in the text, Deuteronomy.
18.20. for the more full and general description of a Witch, or false Prophet,
which was described in the text, by Nine specifical descriptions, specifying
the Nine Witchcrafts of such seducing false Prophets: but yet it does not
follow that all false Teachers are Witches; for a man may be a false Teacher
through weakness of understanding, and error of judgment (as were the Scribes
and Pharisees in some things) and yet not a Witch; but he that is a wilful
upholder of Heresies, or any vain unprofitable Doctrine, only to draw people to
a head to uphold his own gain, and so for gain makes the people to miss of the
sincerity of Religion, although he be no Impostor, nor brings himself within
the compass of the punishment due to a Witch from the Civil Magistrate, because
he does not use impostures, or any of the Nine Witchcrafts described in the
text, yet in his intent he makes gain his end, and perverteth souls in a
smooth pretense of holiness. I know not how his final intention differs from
the final intention of a Witch (that is, gain by seducing the people) nor
whether he or a Witch shall have the greatest condemnation at the last day,
Acts 20.30. for it appears in verse. 20. following the text, that a false
Prophet considered distinctly from the foresaid impostors, is in the same
Condemnation, and the same with a Witch, and ought to be censured by the Civil
Magistrate to dye as a Witch, merely quatenus a false Prophet; for although he
be described by his several impostures before in the text, yet the bare using
of impostures makes not a Witch, unless by them he be a false Prophet; (as is
demonstrated more fully in the Fifth description) so then, the Formalis ratio
of a Witch, or that which makes him to be a Witch, is because he is a false
Prophet, so that it follows, that as every wilful false teacher, or wilful
upholder of Heresy, or any vain unprofitable Doctrine to seduce the people for
gain, differs not in his final intention from a false Prophet, so by the same
reason he differs not from a Witch; and although he cannot always be
convicted by the Magistrate, yet in Gods sight he is a very Witch.

Our English Translators not knowing the difference of the terms of description
in the text, by the several impostures therein implied, according to the intent
and meaning of the Scriptures, have used words promiscuously one for another,
without expressing the true and full meaning of the Original so well, as is
expressed by Junius and Tremelius in Latin, as in Deuteronomy. 18.10, 11. they call a
Diviner a Witch, and a South-sayer a Wizard, expressing specifical descriptions
by general words, that may be as well given to any of the nine; and in Exodus
22.18. they call a Jugler a Witch, using the same general expression that they
used before, for one that uses Divination, or a Diviner; they call a
Planetarian an observer of times, a phrase more obscure than can imply the
original meaning of the Scriptures; they call a Conjecturer an Inchanter, and
they call an Inchanter a Charmer, whereas in the Original and Latin
Translations, an Inchanter, and a Charmer is all one term of description; they
call an Oracler one that has a familiar Spirit, and that may be as well given
to any of the Nine terms in the text (by the same reason that all Witches have
a familiar spirit, according to the common tenent, though it cannot be proved
that any had any, otherwise than the spirit of error ruling in their hearts.)
And 2 Chronicles. 33.6. there they call using Divinations, observing of times, which
phrase they used before for a Planetarian; and if we compare several English
Translations, we may find them much varying one from another in translating
of those terms, not but that they were good and able Linguists, but not knowing
the several impostures employed in these original terms of description, could
not express them in such apt words in English, as if they had known the mystery
of iniquity according to the original sense and meaning, Genesis 44.5. they
translate it, Is not this the cup by which my Master divineth? Here they would
make Witchcraft lawful, (for Divination is Witchcraft) but the original sense
is nothing so as they translate it; look Tremellius. All this argues that
these our ancient Bishops and great Clerks knew not what Witchcraft was in the
Scripture sense.

THE SECOND BOOK.
IT is manifest, that the Scriptures were given by God, for a rule for man in
this depraved nature to walk by, That whereas all Mankind since the fall of
Adam are naturally darkened in their understandings, and averse from the truth
of God, the Scriptures might be a light unto us, to lead us in the righteous
way of Gods truth.

And now Christ Jesus the Light of the World (in whom are fulfilled all the
Divine Mysteries of the Scriptures) is come into the world to enlighten the
world; and whereas before his coming the world sat in darkness, and were
wholly given to run after Idols, and to be seduced by Idol-Priests, who
practiced the several Witchcrafts described in the text, Deuteronomy. 18.10, 11. to
seduce the people to Idolatry, yet then at the coming, and by the power of the
coming of Christ, (who was manifested by Miracles, and taught the people by his
Spirit of Truth) were all those ways of darkness discovered to the whole Word,
to be lying delusions, tending to destruction, as is prophesied by the Prophet,
Isa. Chap. 8. he speaking of Witches, and their delusions, and the darksome
errors and evils accompanying them, from the nineteenth Verse to the end of
the Chapter, immediately in the two first Verses of the next Chapter, he
prophesies of Christ, the light of whose coming should destroy the ways of
darkness, in these words, In the way of the Sea beyond Jordan, Galile of the
Gentiles, the people that sat in darkness shall see great light, and upon them
that dwell in the Land of the shadow of death shall light shine forth; and thus
it was fulfilled at his coming. The Nations that were given to Idolatry, and
seduced by false Prophets (being Idol-Priests, and deluding Witches) were so
enlightened, that all Idolatrous delusions were discovered, the Oracle of
Apollo, and of all Idols, drew dumb, Simon Magus, and Elimas the Sorcerer, and
all bewitching false Prophets were confounded, and all these Instruments of
darkness grew out of request among the people, being clearly discovered that
they were all Liars, and used lying delusions to deceive the Nations. And
notwithstanding this perfect rule of righteousness in the Old and New
Testament, written by the Prophets before the coming of Christ, and at his
coming finished by him and his Apostles, yet such is the obstinacy of man's
darksome nature, that men will carry a Candle of their own in their hands, even
at Noonday, imagining they can by their own wisdom find out truths that are
not written in the Scriptures, and that their Candle will enlighten them more
than the beams of the Sun when it shines forth in its full strength; Like a
silly Labourer, that counting the day by a Pocket Watch, whose Wheels being out
of Kilter went too fast, he had such a conceit of his Watch, that he affirmed,
That the Sun in the sky went too slow, for his Watch was known to be true.

Thus do men play with the Scriptures, preferring Human traditions beyond the
truth of God contained in the Scripture; and this is the cause why men a long
time have been deceived by the Man of Sin, who still prevails to lead the
World in darkness, because they love not the truth, but have pleasure in
unrighteousness, 2 These. 2.10, 11, 12. for this man of sin, that Whore of Rome,
being the grand Witch of the Christian world, pointed at Revel. 18.23. that he
might still have freedom to deceive the Nations, has broached this Doctrine
wherewith he has defiled the world, that a Witch is not a false Prophet, or a
Deceiver, but one that can send the Devil to kill men and women, and children,
and to make the ground barren, and men and women barren in Generation, and kill
the children in the Womb, and can with looks kill Lambs and Cattle, and can
fly in the Air, and can do many things by the help of the Devil; which things
are not possible to be done by any power, but by the mighty power of God.

We may read of the Priests of the Idol Astaroth, that were indeed real Witches
in the Scripture sense, who professed to do such things by the power of their
Idol, but were discovered by Bartholomaeus the Apostle, to be deceivers of the
people, by the Devils subtle delusions, who ruled in their hearts, so they with
their Idol were destroyed, and many people converted to the Christian Faith.
Hendorfius in the fifth page of his Theater of History (his words are these,
Bartholomaeus Idolum Astaroth evertit, frauds Satanae qui miraculis homines
effacinatos morbis jam premebat, jam pressos levabat, detexit. etc.) And where
do we read in Holy Writ (or common History that saver of truth) that men by
Devils could do such things really? and to uphold such errors contrary to
Scripture, what is this but mere prevarication with the truth, and resisting
Gods holy Spirit of truth? Where do we find any such thing in Scriptures, or
any such description of a VVitch, or that a VVitch was such a one as has made
a League with the Devil, and sealed it with his blood, or has Imps sucking
him, or Biggs, or privy Marks, or that lies with Incubus, or Succubus, or any
such phrase or expression in all the Scriptures? What least inkling have we of
these things in all the Scriptures? Whence received the Church of England this
Doctrine? O foolish England, who has bewitched you, that you should not obey
the truth? Surely it was the Pope. This groundless, impious, and fantastical
Doctrine was never taught by Gods Prophets, but that VVitch, the Pope, knowing
in his Conscience that he is the very VVitch, the Deceiver of the Nations
pointed at in the Revelations, and that the Scriptures were so plain, that by
the light thereof his devilish delusions must needs come to light, if the
World should have true insight into the Scriptures, and so that by that means
all Nations would rise up on him and destroy him, he not only labored to hide
the Scriptures from the common people, which he did for a long time, but also
has been so bold as to prevaricate with the Scriptures, and to publish through
the Nations, that Witches were to be understood no Deceivers, but such as
practiced such wonderful things, as the Scripture teaches us that the doing
thereof ought to be attributed to no Creature, but only to the Creator, as Pope
Innocent the eighth to the Inquisitors of Almain, and Pope Julius the second,
to the Inquisitors of Bergoman sent those words; It is come to our ears, that
many lewd persons of both kinds, as well male as female, using the company of
the Devils Incubus and Succubus, with Incantations, and Conjurations, do
destroy the birth of Women with child, the young of all Cattle, the Corn of
the field, the Grapes of the Vine, the fruit of the Trees, Men and Women, and
all kind of Cattle, and beasts of the field, and with their said Enchantments
do wholly extinguish, suffocate, and spoil all Vine-yards, Orchyards, Meadows,
Pastures, Grass, green Corn, ripe Corn, and all other provisions, men and women
are by their imprecations so afflicted, with external and inward pains and
diseases, that men cannot beget, nor women bring forth, nor accomplish the duty
of Wedlock, denying the faith which in Baptism they profess, to the
destruction of their souls; Our pleasure therefore is, That all inpediments
that may hinder the Inquisitors Office be removed from among the people, lest
this blot of Heresy proceed to defile them that be yet innocent, and therefore
we do ordain by virtue of the Apostical authority, that our Inquisitors of high
Almain may execute the Office of Inquisition, by all Tortures, and Afflictions,
in all places, and upon all persons. What Scripture had the Pope for this? we
read indeed of such Fictions in the Poets, as in Ovids Metamorph. 7.

Cum volui ripis ipsis mirantibus amnes
In fontes redire suos, concussaque sisto,
Stantia concutio cantu freta, nubila pello,
Nubilaque induco, ventos abigoque vocoque
Vipereas rumpo verbis and carmine fauces,
Vivaque saxa, sua convulsaque robora terra,
Et sylvas moveo, iubeoque tremiscere montes,
Et mugire solum, manesque exire Sepulchris,
Te quoque Luna trahe.
The Rivers I can make retire
into the Fountains whence they flow,
Whereat the banks themselves admire,
I can make standing waters go;
With Charms I drive both Sea and Cloud,
I make it calm, and blow aloud.
The Vipers jaws, the rockie stone,
with Word and Charm I break in twain,
The force of earth congealed in one,
I move the Woods, the Hills tremble plain:
I make the souls of men arise,
I pluck the Moon out of the skies.
Also Ovid, de Medea Epist: 4.

Et misorum tenues in jecur urget acus,
She sticks also Needles fine,
In livers, whereby men do pine.
Also Virgil: Nescio quis teneros oculus mihi fascinat agnos.
I know not whence some fierce bewitching eye
With looks does kill my Lambkins as they lie.


These are the Popes Scriptures whereon he groundeth his groundless inventions
to torment the Christian World, and upon these grounds being inventions and
pastimes of Poets, has he sent out Inquisitors in all places to torment; from
thence is the Spanish Inquisition, which makes search for Heretics and
Witches all as one, and now lest the world should take notice that his daily
practice is to torment and kill Reformists, and so his Villainy ring the more in
the ears of the world, he has joined as equivocal with the word Heretics,
Witches, a more ignominious name, thereby to instigate people the more against
them, and so by this means will not be seen to kill men for matter of Religion,
for then men would resist and help one another, but under the name of Witches
he melts away every one that has but a smell of the reformed Religion, and
the world perceives it not, this is that Grand Witch, the Whore of Rome, the
Pope and his train.

And these Inquisitions before mentioned sent out by the Pope, have for the
confirmation of their villainous Doctrins and Inventions, set forth great
Volumes of horrible lies and impossibilities, and also for the hiding of their
unparalleled cruelty from the ears of the world, of which sort are James
Sprenger, Henry Institor, in malleo maleficarum, also Nider and Cumanus,
Daneus, Hyperius, Hemingius, but most of all Bodinus and Bartholomaeus Spineus
(I do not say that all these dyed Papists) and lest their authority should fail
in deceiving the world in this Doctrine of Devils, some great Scholars of the
Popish rout have approved and affirmed the matter to be true in some causes
writing of fascination, and of that sort are Thomas Aquinas, and Suares. In
which Authors (although they were learned men) whosoever reads their
discourse of this subject, shall find nothing at all proved, either by
Scripture or Philosophical argument, but they take it for granted and undoubted
truth confirmed by tradition, that Fascination or Witchcraft is an Art of
killing and afflicting Men and Cattle, and upon this Hypothesis they take in
hand to dispute upon it, not whether it be true or not, but how it may be done,
as they conceive, for say they, Et si agens non potest diffundere actionem suam
usque ad rem distantem, fit tamen ut aer proximus inficiatur and usque ad
certam distantiam perveniat, and sic noceat alteri; if this subject, the force
of fascination had been first proved by them, then this their reason had had
some seeming force in it, but because it can no way be proved by firm Argument,
they quote History for it, and so pass on to their hypothetical disputes about
the reason of it, and that they may make the matter seem true, one quotes
another authority for it, and Suarez quoteth Thomas Aquinas and Pliny, and
Pliny cites Hogonus and Niphodorus, and Apollonides for his Authors, that
among the Triballians, and Illyrians, and Scythians, there be certain Women
that can kill with their eyesight whom they look wishfully upon; mark, but how
first things are reported by Travelers who may lie by authority; then Pliny
gathers their several reports into the Volume of his Natural History (whom
all men may see was abused by being too credulous of other men's reports) and
yet Suarez is forced to use Plinies Pen to prove that which cannot be proved or
defended by reason, and having no better Argument, he says further, Sunt qui
negant illam vim fascinationis, sed non est cur experientiam a Philosophis and
medicis comprobatam, and fere communi sensu receptam, negemus; by which
Argument a man may as well prove that Idols were gods, because they were
approved in their time by men of all Arts and Sciences, Et fere communi sensu
recepta; and further (according to Plinies report) he says, that these women
do kill but by some poisonous quality of their Natural complexion, and inward
humors of their bodies, communicated to the vital spirits, and by the action
of the mind brought to the eyesight, and from thence infecting the party whom
they look upon, and this (he says expressly) comes naturally to pass, and of
inbred natural causes in the Witches bodies; but mark how this fellow (although
notable for learning) has wildered himself in searching out the reason of a
mere vain supposition, and erroneous tradition, that Witches can kill by looks;
for whereas he gives this reason, that Witches have inward natural poison,
whereby they naturally kill others; what an absurdity is this to say, that any
Creature can by its natural quality be contrary or destructive to its own
species? for a Viper cannot poison a Viper, nor a Toad cannot poison a Toad;
for their nature is one, and not contrary to its own species.

Secondly, whereas he reasons, that this poison is communicated from the
humors to the vital spirits, and by the action of the mind brought to the
eyesight. It is most absurd in Philosophy; for what Physician or Philosopher
does not acknowledge that the vital spirits, once poisoned, do suffocate the
Heart, the fountain of Life (as is often seen in the Pestilence) whereby the
Witch her self must needs perish; and is also often seen in those who having
but the Natural humors of their own bodies corrupt, the vital spirits are
debilitated, and cannot operate, but the party decays and soon perishes,
because the heart cannot abide any corrupt poison, or contrary temperature to
its own nature.

Thirdly, whereas he says, this poison is sent from the Witch by the force of
seeing, this also is an absurdity in Philosophy; for all sound Philosophers do
acknowledge, that Oculus non vidit emittendo vim suam videndi ad objectum
visibile, sed recipiendo species visibiles ab objecto; how then can the sight
(if it were poison) hurt any way the party upon whom it only looks?

Fourthly, whereas he says, that Witches do kill by their natural complexion
and inward humor, being naturally poison, what an absurdity arises from hence
in Divinity? To conceive that God should make men and women naturally poison,
and destructive to others, and yet should make a Law that such should be put to
death, yea cruel death, for being such as God made them in their nature and
complexion? Surely if man had stood in the manner in which he was made, God had
not punished him with death. Now after he has thus intrapped himself in his
Discourse, by seeking out a reason of that which is not (but only conceived to
be by credulous people) he falls off from his own weak reasons, to the reason
that Thomas Aquinas gives, and that is, That sometimes this Fascination is
wrought by a secret compact with the Devil; but how can these Reasons accord
one with the other? for if it be natural to the Witch to bewitch others, what
needs she then to seek help of the Devil to do that which she can do by
nature? For, Deus est author Naturae and sure the Devil cannot make more
perfect or forceable that which God has made; but such is the nature of all
these Popish Writers, that when they cannot strongly enough maintain a Lie,
they father their Lies upon their Master the Father of Lies, and are forced,
after all their vain argumentation, to use his name to uphold a Lie, and
(although they were great Scholars) have rather entangled themselves with folly
in reasoning, and with so manifest error (whereby they have exposed themselves
to the lash of common Censure) than to forsake their Popish darkness, which
they are engaged to defend. What shall not be done to bring the Popes ends to
pass? what Lies, what foolish Fictions, what impossibilities can the Heart of
man devise, that these together have not affirmed for truth unto the World, to
infect the Nations with Heresy, or Atheism, whereby to destroy the Christian
Church? And for further confirmation of the matter, they have devised, among
other Tortures, to make people confess that they can do such impossibilities,
one of the most devilish cruelties that has been devised among men, and that
is, to keep the poor accused party from sleep many nights and days, thereby to
distemper their brains, and hurt their fancies, at length to extort confession
from them, and then to bring their own confession as an evidence against them;
and if they cannot make them confess, they torture one of their little Children
to make it accuse their Parents, and that they call confession; this trick will
tame any wild Beast, and make it tractable, or any wild Hawk, and make it
tame, and come to your fist, how much more may it make men or women yield to
confess Lies, and impossibilities? And if that device will not serve, then they
shave them, and search narrowly all parts of their bodies, where they think
modest men will not be forward to look, to see the truth of the matter, and
there they report that they have found the Devils privy Marks, and Biggs, for
the Devil to suck them; a most devilish Lie and invention, unless they can
show me Scripture for it, but I can show them Scripture against it, Joh. 1.3.
Without God was nothing made that was made; who then made those Biggs, or
Teats, and who made the bodies of those Devils called Imps? Also what Scripture
says, that Biggs or privy Marks are signs or trials of Witches? (yet I deny
not but sometimes are found fleshy Warts, and other preter-natural tumors
written of by Physic Authors, as diseases of the body) and among other devices
(as Master Scot in his discovery affirms (who was zealous for Gods truth, and
took more pains than ordinary to search and confute those impious Writers) they
have set down certain signs whereby to suspect and apprehend Witches, which are
these;

First, If they will not fast on Fridays.

Secondly, If they fast on Sundays.

Thirdly, If they spettle at the time of Elevation.

Fourthly, If they refuse Holy Water.

Fifthly, If they despise Crosses.

Sixthly, If they deny any of the seven Sacraments.

These are great suspicions that they are Witches; for the Devil (say they)
chooses them by these signs (being steps to the reformed Religion) apprehend
them, bring them to the Tormentor; but if they see any of these signs, they
will easily find other holes enough in their Coats to condemn them.

Then they cast them into the water, to see whether they will sink or swim, a
mere Juggling delusion to blind peoples eyes, for he that has been used to the
Art of Swimming may know, that few men or women being tied hand and feet
together can sink quite away till they be drowned, or if he lay them flat on
their back, and hold up their feet with a string, their forepart will not
sink, and therein they can use Juggling to blind the peoples, eyes for
difference sake; for when they will save any man or woman, they will let loose
the string which they hold in their hand, and let their feet sink first, and
then all their body will sink, then they cry out to the people, Look you now,
and see the difference betwixt an honest man or woman, and a Witch, take her
out, she is an honest woman, yea verily, for sometimes she is one of their own
confederates. Yet whereas some may object, that some of them that are cast
fairly into the water, without holding up their feet with a string, do sink
more than others, and some again do swim more than others (although none do
sink quite away without any part appearing above water) The reason of this
difference is easy to conceive to men of knowledge; for,

First; There is difference of constitution in peoples bodies; some are heavy
of temper, and they sink most; some again are more light of temper, fuller of
vital spirits, and they sink not so much.

Secondly, we must observe the Systole and Diastole of breathing; some happen
to fall into the water when their bodies are full of breath, and they swim
most; some happen to fall into the water when their breath is out of their
bodies, before they can draw it up again, and they sink most. Some are kept
long fasting in watching and torment, and then are cast into the water when
their bowels and veins are empty of food and filled with Wind, and these swim
more than those that are filled with nourishment; or perhaps they are kept
fasting so long that they have scarce any life left, and then they happen to
sink most, but if they do, it must not serve their turn, for the cruel
Inquisitor will still torment them till he extort confession, if the party live
long enough for his cruelty to take place. Some again are Women cast into the
water, with their Coats tied close toward their feet, and Men with their
apparel on (and for this they pretend modesty) but who knows not that their
apparel will carry them above water for a time? Some again are Women, whose
bodies are dilated with bearing of Children, and do always after remain
spongiously hollow, more apt to swim than to sink, especially tied hands and
feet together, to bring their bodies into a round and apt fashion to swim. They
that are used to the Art of swimming in the water, might easily discover these
to be but Delusions and Juglings, if they were not too credulous; and yet with
these has poor England been bewitched and deceived, as also with the former,
of keeping the accused from sleep till they confess; and these delusions have
been impiously acted here in England, of late in Essex, and Suffolk, by a
wicked Inquisitor pretending authority for it, to the cutting off of fourteen
innocent people at Chelmsford Assizes, and about an hundred at Berry Assizes,
whereof one was a Minister near Fremingham, of about fourscore years age,
wherein this Inquisitor has laid such a president for the Popes Inquisition
(if times of Popish Tyranny should again come in, from which God in his mercy
defend us) as would not easily be removed, when although we have no Laws in
England to try people upon Life and Death by any Inquisition, or Inquisitor, in
that manner; yet it may then be said, was it Law then, when the Law was in
your hands, and is it not Law now? but if such times of tyrannous Inquisition
come, do they that have had a hand in this president think they shall escape
it, or their Posterity? There is already a president for killing of Ministers
for Witches.

Also some credulous people hearing of the Condemnation of those people, have
published a Book, wherein they report such impossibilities to be done by them,
as I hope no wise man will believe; wherein also Hoy, the Jailer, is brought in
for a Witness, a fellow, that is not fit to bear the Office of a Jailer, nor
any other Office in a Christian Commonwealth, who also wanted Vails, and
thought the more Prisoners were executed, the more he should gain; and yet it
is reported, his Testimony was taken as an Evidence against them, although his
testimony was partly of impossibilities, partly mere prevarications and lies,
to the dis-honour of Gods Majesty, and the shedding of innocent blood.

But seeing then this miserable Massacre of people throughout the Christian
World has been but a trick of Antichrist, to blind the World, that thereby he
might the more easily and quietly destroy the Church under the name of Witches,
Surely if good Christians have been destroyed in this impious way, then
thousands of the Souls of such are now under the Altar, Revel. 6.9, 10. crying,
How long Lord, holy and true, will it be ere thou avenge our blood upon them
that dwell upon the earth? being some of them the very people that have been
destroyed for the Word of God, and for the testimony of the truth; and
therefore have been brought into these murderous Inquisitors hands; And
although it may be said, These in England have not been slain for the testimony
of the truth; yet I answer, The Church stands for the testimony of the truth,
and this persecution was invented against the Church, and so they as Members of
the Church have been slain by the enemies invention; for had they been of that
Popish crew, and fighters against the Church, those wrongful accusations had
not been brought against them by them. But it may be said, Some of these were
Scoulds and Brawlers, therefore their Souls are not under the Altar. I answer,
yea, and many honest Livers that have been executed in that kind lately, and
in times past; but whatsoever they were, if they were unjustly slain, know,
that if God would avenge the blood of Cain, will he not avenge the blood of
these?

Before the destruction of Germany, that Nation was so deluded by these Popish
errors; that they put to death thousands in that kind, of all sorts, and that
Nation was so carried away with that darksome Idolatrous opinion of Witches
power, that seldom came any thing cross, but some were accused to have
occasioned it as Witches, and at last God sent destroying Plagues among them,
and their hearts were so hardened, that they dug the dead out of the Graves
to cut off their Heads to stay the Plague; so blind were they, and so given
over, that rather than they would acknowledge Gods hand in all things, they
would say, the dead in their Graves, by the Devils help, brought the plague;
and some Physicians among them were so bold to affirm it for truth, who
although they might be some way approved in Physic, yet besides their horrible
Atheism, they showed their silliness, and it may be said of them as of many
ignorant Physicians, Inscitiae pallium maleficium and incantatio; A Cloak for a
Physicians ignorance, when he cannot find the reason and the nature of the
Disease, he says, the Party is bewitched; this has indeed been written of by
some worthy Authors, but how, and in what manner? Senertus Lib. 4. de febribus,
cap. 2. he being loath to defile his pen with such an impious opinion, says, I
had rather refer the Reader to the writing of another man, Hercul. Saxoniae,
Lib. de plica. cap. 11. than bring my self upon the Stage for broaching of such
an opinion; where also you may read the words of Herc. Saxon. aforesaid, and
he shuffleth it off to Joh. Vesino Leopoliensi, as an Opinion of his, and he
like an Atheist did indeed own that opinion, That in Polonia and Germany,
Witches, after their execution and burial, did commonly send destroying
pestilence; I think indeed the executing of so many innocent poor people did
bring the Pestilence, and the Sword, and Famine, all against them, because they
provoked God with their own inventions, tending not only to Idolatry, in
imputing the Work of the Creator to a Creature, but also to the shedding of
innocent blood.

Master Scot in his Discovery tells us, That our English people in Ireland,
whose posterity were lately barbarously cut off, were much given to this
Idolatry in the Queens time, insomuch that there being a Disease amongst their
Cattle that grew blind, being a common Disease in that Country, they did
commonly execute people for it, calling them eye-biting Witches; Great Britain
has been much infected with that Atheism, and many people both in England and
Scotland have been by foolish false accusations put to death, for doing such
things as are not in the power of men, or of Devils to do, but only of the
Creator; And before these Wars began, what Atheistical reports were published
of certain Lancashire people, that they could transform themselves into
Greyhounds, and into Men and Women again, and pull down Butter and other
provision from the Air, (or from whence any crack-brained accuser would
imagine?)

When King Charles went last to Scotland before these Wars, as he came back
again sailing over the River Humber, the Vessel in which his Plate was carried,
was reported to be cast away, and then was that Atheism so great, even at the
very Court of England, that they reported Witches had done it, instead of
observing Gods supreme Providence, (whereas Christ says, A Sparrow shall not
fall to the ground without Gods providence) since which we have had bloody
Wars, and where is the Court now? and now of late has been in the year one
thousand six hundred forty five, that great slaughter of Men and Women called
Witches, at the Assizes at Berry, and at Chelmsford, those poor accused people
were watched day and night, and kept from sleep with much cruelty, till their
Fancies being hurt, they would confess what their Inquisitors would have them,
although it were a thing impossible, and flat contrary to sense and Christian
understanding to believe; (where, for the removing of Objections, it is to be
noted, That a Fancy so hurt with watching, cannot afterward of a long time
recant, or deny that which they have confessed, no more than a Hawk thoroughly
tamed by watching can grow speedily wild again, although you give them their
full sleep; this manner of extorting confession, and seeming to convict them,
being but a mere Juggling Trick invented by the Pope, and their Trial in that
kind being Juggling Witchcraft it self, that may make the wisest man confess
any thing though never so false) What troubles have followed this Slaughter,
blind men may see.

A little before the Conquest of Scotland (as is reported upon good
intelligence) the Presbytery of Scotland did, by their own pretended authority,
take upon them to Summon, Convent, Censure, and Condemn people to cruel death
for Witches and (as is credibly reported) they caused four thousand to be
executed by Fire and Halter, and had as many in prison to be tried by them,
when God sent his conquering Sword to suppress them, by occasion of which Wars
there were many Ministers (whereof many were Presbyters) slain; What is become
of their Presbyterian Authority now? Yet because there are some that slighting
these observations will hardly be beaten from this conceit of Witches power,
which they have so long believed, and will not yet think but that Witches have
a familiar spirit, by whose help they kill, and act strange Wonders; tell me,
where is a place in all the Scripture that says so? show me in all the
Scriptures such a word, as Striges, lamiae, Incubus, and Succubus, or any word
of such signification or importance; what were Pharaoh his Magicians, but
deluders of Pharaoh and the People? could they by the help of Satan do any
thing truly? were they real Miracles? did not their madness come to light? 2 Timothy 3.9. what spirit had the Maid that followed Paul? Act. 16.16. which is
said to have the spirit of Python, was it more than a cousening spirit of
Divination, for gain? yet still you will say, the word Python has been
interpreted by many, one that had a familiar spirit; imagine they had a
familiar spirit (although it is but a weak Argument to ground an opinion upon
the bare signification of a word (except you will have it a seducing lying
spirit, such a one as was in Ahabs Prophets) yet I say, answer me these Four
Questions.

First, Tell we where a Witch did, or could kill a man in Scripture? What did
Saul go to the Pythonist of Endor for? was it that she might help him kill the
Philistians, or merely for Augury or Divination? what did Pharaoh call his
Witches the Magicians before him for? was it to kill any Man or Beast by their
cunning? or merely to work lying Wonders, and dissemble the Miracles that God
wrought by Moses? so that they might withstand Moses, and the truth, and blind
Pharaohs eyes, because God would harden his heart; tell me where you find in
all the Scriptures, that a Witch did, or could kill a man by Witchcraft; show
me in all the Law of Moses concerning the condemning of men or women for
Murder, that a Murderer was called a Witch, or a Witch a Murderer, Deuteronomy. 19.
and other places of Scripture; are there not several Rules set down for the
trying of Murder? show me one that intimates the Witching of Men or Cattle to
death?

Secondly, Show me in all the Scriptures where Witches are spoken of, that a
Witch was a secret person, or unknown to the World, that should need to be
tried by blind circumstances, and presumptions, and superstitions, or by
privy Marks, or by Teats, or Biggs, by sinking or swimming, or by confessions?
were not Pharaohs Witches called Prastigiatores and magi, openly known? did not
Pharaoh call them together without privy search, or inquiry? did not Saul
banish all the Witches as people openly known, and professing the Art of
Augury, and their several cousening practices? when Saul inquired for a Witch,
did not his servants presently tell him there was one at Endor, was she not
known without privy search, or prime marks? Did not the Maid in the Acts, that
was said to have the spirit of Python, or to be a Pythonist, follow Paul,
crying openly, did not Simon Magus act his Delusions openly, to seduce the
people? as likewise Eli^as the Sorcerer? were not the Witchcrafts of Jezabel
known to be her delusions that she wrought by the Priests of Baal, to seduce
the people? were not the Witchcrafts of Manasses open actions, that made Juda
and Jerusalem to go astray? where then do we read of a Witch by suspicion, or
to be tried by presumptions, or suspicions, or privy marks, or other signs
that are man's invention? whence came this darkness and blind error, but from
the Pope, that grand Witch that has bewitched all Nations? we search for
Witchcrafts and abominations in a poor woman's wooden dish, and Christ tells
us, they are all in a cup of Gold, in the hand of the great Whore, Revel. 17.4.

Thirdly, Show me in all the Scriptures where Witchcraft went without Idolatry,
Isa. 19.3. and had not a necessary dependence on Idolatry, Nahum 3.4. Look
again, Deuteronomy. 18.10, 11. where all sorts of Witches are spoken of, why were they
to be cut off and destroyed? the reason is immediately given, verse. 14. because
they defiled the Nations, in seducing them unto Spiritual Whoredom, and the
Nations were destroyed for seeking, and making inquiry after their Divinations,
or South-sayings, or Oracles, whereas inquiries ought to be to Gods Prophets,
verse. 15. Was not this Saul's Idolatry, when he sought to the Witch of Endor? 1
Chro. 10.13, 14. was not this the sin of Manasses, where he is blamed for using
Witchcrafts, when he made Juda and Jerusalem go astray to Idols? 2 Chronicles. 33.9.
were not the Witchcrafts and VVhoredoms of Jesabel set down as two inseparable
companions, her Witchcraft being the upholding of the Idol Priests of Baal,
that by Witchcraft seduced the people to Idolatry? were not Pharaohs Magicians
seducers of Pharaoh, and the people, from God? was not Simon Magus the like?
but alas, how, and where have those poor souls that are commonly hanged for
Witches seduced the people to Idolatry? who has been led after them for
Divinations, and Southsayings? many indeed have been led after Southsayers, but
they are termed good Witches, and whereas they as Witches ought to dye, many
have been put to death by their devilish false accusations, and if the Witch
of Endor were now living amongst us, we should call her a good VVitch, so
blind are the times.

Fourthly, Show me in all the Law of God against Adulterous uncleaneness (where
Moses writes of several kinds of uncleaneness, as man with man, man with
beast, woman with beast, and many more) the least intimation of uncleanness, by
Incubus, or Succubus; what, did Moses forget this?

Yet because this opinion has been so upheld by reports and imaginations, and
by the extorted confession or people that have been condemned in that kind,
and sometime by the voluntary confession of despairing melancholy people that
have been troubled in mind, and wish rather to dye than to live, although
Volenti mori, non est adhibenda fides; Yet I entreat you to run over these
several places of Scripture with me a little, and see how this opinion of
Witches power agrees with the Scriptures, yea how flat contrary it is to Gods
Word, and the grounds of our Christian faith.

Yet first, because some men will not understand the Scriptures in any other
sense than as their own Expositors have done, be it right or wrong; therefore I
refer them that will seek farther than the Scriptures, to the words, of a
general Counsel, which Mr. Scot in his Discovery has alleged as follows,
Council. Acqui. in decret. 26. the words of the Council. It may not be omitted,
that certain wicked Women following Satan's provocations, being seduced by the
illusion of the Devil, believe, and profess that in the night time they ride
abroad with Diana the Goddess of the Pagans, or else with Herodias, with an
innumerable multitude, upon certain Beasts, and pass over many Countries and
Nations in the silence of the night, and do whatsoever these Ladies or Fairies
command, etc. let all Ministers therefore in their several Cures preach to Gods
people so, as they may know all those things to be false, and whosoever
believes that any Creature can be made by them, or changed into better or
worse, or be any way transformed into any other kind, or likeness, by any but
by the Creator himself, is assuredly an Infidel, and worse than a Pagan. So
much for the words of the Council. Yet here is to be noted, that this great
general Council, that thought these people believed, and confessed such things
to be true in their apprehension, did not then know the inhuman cruelty that
was used upon those people by the cruel Inquisitors to compel, and extort
confession for their own gain, they being maintained by the spoil of such
people being condemned.

Now for the Scriptures, do but mark how those that maintain, and report the
power of Witches, have equalled their supernatural power, with the Miracles of
the Prophets, of Christ, and his Apostles; it was the Miracle of Miracles, that
the Virgin Mary conceived with child without a man; they say, a VVitch may do
the same by Incubus, as Bodin, and other Popish VVriters affirm, and that such
a child will naturally become a VVitch, such a one they say Merlin was; no,
but you say these were Atheists, we believe not so; But some will say, the
Devil can condense a body, and lie carnally with a woman in the shape of a man,
but not beget; yet it was a Miracle that Angels appeared to Abraham in the
shape of men, Genesis 18.2. yet they will say no, but we believe the Devil may
assume and raise a dead body for a time, and so appear to a woman, and lie with
her; and yet it was a Miracle at the suffering of Christ upon the Cross, that
dead, bodies were raised for a time and appeared to many, Matthew. 27.52. yet a
poor VVench was executed at the Assizes at Chelmsford, who was compelled by the
Inquisitor (by keeping her from sleep, and with promises and threatenings) to
confess that she was married to the Devil, and that he lay with her six times
in a man's shape; no, but yet some will say, the Devil can take upon him an
apparent Body, and so may talk with a woman, and seem to lie with her in shape
of a man, and so she shall be hanged for things seeming so; yet it was a
Miracle that Moses and Elias appeared to the Apostles in a Vision, Matthew. 17.3.
Further, Christ says, A Spirit has not flesh and bones, Luke 24.39. and yet
some say, the Devil can condense a body, some say he can assume a body, some
say he can have an apparent body; thus do they make the Word of God of no
validity by their groundless traditions; for if the Devil can have so much as
an apparent body, what validity was in the words of Christ, to take away the
doubt of the Disciples, when they supposed they saw a Spirit? Where also is
that foolish Doctrine of Imps, sucking of men and women Witches become? Are
those Imps bodies or spirits? if bodies, then who made them? Without God was
nothing made, Joh. 1.3. if spirits, then spirits can have bodily shape, and
flesh, and bones; and thus you make the words of Christ of none effect by your
traditions. Christ dispensed Devils to enter into the Herd of Swine, and they
went, Mark 5.12. they say a Witch can do more; she can send the Devil into men
and women, and children, and cattle, to kill them, and to witch them to death.

God said to Satan, All that Job has is in thine hand, Job 1.12. and Job
himself, all but his life, Job 2.6. they say, God permits a Witch to do
more, to send Satan to destroy a man's goods, and cattle, and children, and life
and all; thus they deliver for Doctrine the traditions of men. Job said, The
Lord gives, and the Lord takes away, blessed be the name of the Lord, and
acknowledged Gods hand in all things, neither tempted he God foolishly; But if
one should be so afflicted now adays, instead of acknowledging Gods sovereign
hand, all the poor Wives and Widows in a Country must be called Coram nobis, as
being accused to have done it. Christ says, Revel. 1.18. I have the keys of
Hell and Death, but they say, God gives the keys of Death likewise sometimes
to an old Witch (man or woman) and permits them to witch men to death; Christ
says, A Sparrow falls not to the ground without Gods providence, Matthew. 10
29. but they say, God lays his providence sometimes at the feet of an old
Witch, and permits her to send the Devil to destroy men and cattle; some
will say, A VVitch cannot hurt a godly man, but only a wicked man, and yet God
says, he is the Author of all affliction that comes to the wicked, Levit. 26.
from the fourteenth verse to the thirty fourth. Also the Scripture says, The
Lord kills and makes alive, 1 Samuel 2.6. makes poor, and makes rich; and in
Deuteronomy. 32.39. There is no God with me, I kill and give life, I wound and make
whole; but they say, God permits an old VVitch to send the Devil to kill,
and make poor, and wound, and a good VVitch can heal again by unwitching.

God did shut up every womb of the House of Abimelech, that they bare no
children, Genesis 20.18. they say a VVitch can do the same (God permits it) and
make men and women barren. Christ gave his Disciples power over Devils, to cast
them out, Luke 9.1. they say, a VVitch can send a Devil into men and cattle to
afflict them, and a good VVitch can cast them out by unwitching,
notwithstanding, Christ says, Matthew. 12.25. Every kingdom divided against it
self is brought to desolation; yet they say, that is done by consent of the
Devil, when a good VVitch unwitcheth a man; thus do they make the words of
Christ of none effect by their traditions. Christ came and appeared unto his
Disciples, and vanished away again invisible, Luke 24.31. they say, a VVitch
can go invisible by the help of the Devil, especially if one of the Ladies of
the Fairie will but lend her Giges invisible ring. Christ was lifted up into
the Air, and taken up out of their sight, Acts 1.9. and Bodinus and other
Popish VVriters affirm, that a VVitch can be lifted away in the Air by drinking
the broth of a sodden Infant; but poor Germany, that believed these Doctrins,
and in that confidence executed many people for Witches, was compelled
afterward to boil their children to quell their hunger, and found by sad
experience that there was no such virtue in that woeful Liquor. God said to
Moses, Go up into the mountain and dye, Deuteronomy. 32.49, 50. and he did so, Chap.
34. verse. 5. they say a VVitch can do so at the word of the Devil, and dye when
she list, to escape hanging; and what is a more common report when a poor woman
is laid in prison, and there dies by grief and hard usage, than to report, the
Devil promised her she should not be hanged, and was as good as his word, for
she dyed in prison before the day of Execution came; thus do they make the
Devil able to determine, and limit the life of Man, as God did the life of
Moses.

It is said in Isa. 41.23. Show what is to come after, that we may know ye are
gods; They say, a Witch can truly foretell things to come by her spirit of
Divination (which they call a Familiar) and can by the same familiar tell what
is done in another Town, or House, or Country, and can tell a man where are his
Goods that are lost, as well as Samuel could tell Saul of his Fathers Asses
when they were lost, and such they call good Witches.

Also in the same Verse, Esa. 41.23. it follows in the end of the verse, do
good, or do evil, that we may be dismayed, and behold it together; these words
have relation to the former words, That we may know that ye are gods; that is,
show what is to come hereafter, or do good, or do evil, that we may know ye are
gods, and be dismayed at your doings (even as when God sends the evil of
punishment or affliction upon a people, then they are dismayed at the sight and
apprehension of it,) as in Job 40.11. And here when we read that God claims
the doing thereof as his own Prerogative, inferring as much as to say, They are
gods that can do this, I think that after the reading of this verse in Isaiah,
and Job, no man should be so grossly Idolatrous still, as to ascribe to a Witch
the sending of any affliction; those words also, Do good, or do evil, (the
whole verse having relation to the seventh verse) were spoken to the Idol
Priests of the Heathen, who were the Witches mentioned in the Scriptures, and
had as great a share in the Devil, as any Witch can have, and yet God
challenges them to do either good or evil; and yet when any evil of affliction
comes upon Men or Beast, these Idolaters will still ascribe it to a Witch,
saying still, God permits it. God sent an evil spirit upon Saul to vex him, 1 Samuel 16.14. they say a Witch can send an evil spirit upon men or women to vex
or torment them; Elisha cursed two and forty children in the name of the Lord,
and they were destroyed of Bears, 2 King. 2.24. they say a Witch can curse men
and women in the name of the Devil, and Death or some other Evil shall betide
them.

Pharaohs Magicians, though they were themselves Witches, yet when they saw
Lice creeping upon Men and Beast, they acknowledged the finger of God. They, if
they see a man smitten with a lousie disease as Herod was, say presently he is
bewitched. It was a great Miracle that Christ made the Wind and the Sea obey
him, Mark 4.41. they say Witches can do the same, and raise Winds and Tempests,
and make it calm at their pleasure. Was not this one accusation that was
brought against Mr. Lewis a Minister executed at Berry Assizes, that he had
raised a Tempest, and cast away two Ships at sea by Witchcraft? Christ by his
Almighty power walked upon the waters, Mat. 14.25. they say, cast a Witch into
the waters and she will not sink; and what has been more reported and believed
than this Juggling delusion before spoken of?

God claims it as his own Prerogative to send Lightnings and Thunders, Job
38.25, 35. but they say, when it Thundereth or Lighteneth, that Witches do
sometimes cause it, especially if it be at an Assize time, when many Witches
are condemned; and what has been a more common report than this, when God has
sent thundering voices from Heaven at an Assize time among the people, to warn
them, instead of discerning that God was angry, they say, the Witches and the
Devil was angry, and have caused that thunder?

God teaches us in Levit. 26. that he himself sends Barrenness, and Famine,
Sword, and Pestilence, and all Diseases, and all Adversities, as the punishment
of Sin, but which of these have not been ascribed to Witches? and if the
several accusations of people that have been condemned for Witches, but only
here in England, within the memory of man were Registered, we might read such a
hotch potch of impossibilities, as he that believes that they have been justly
put to death, must not believe the Scriptures, nor ascribe any thing to Gods
mighty Providence, but he may also ascribe it to the will and pleasure of a
Witch; when Christ did by the Spirit of God cast out Devils, and the Pharisees
ascribed that work to Beelzebub, Christ charge them with the sin against the
Holy Ghost, Matthew. 12.28, 31. but alas, how common a thing is it to ascribe to
the Devil and Witches, the works that God tells us in the holy Scriptures are
his own Works, and cannot be done by any other power but by the Spirit of God?
me thinks this should scare all obstinate VVitchmongers. I heard a Suffolk
Minister (whose habit and garb might seem to claim the title of Rabbi, Rabbi)
affirm, that one of the poor women that was hanged for a VVitch at Berry
Assizes, in the year 1645. did send her Imps into the Army, to kill the
Parliaments Soldiers, and another sent her Imps into the Army to kill the
Kings Soldiers, and another caused a man's crop of Corn to fail, and caused
that Corn which he had to be blasted, and tipped, or crockt, and this Minister
did verily affirm that those things were true, for the Witches (said he)
confessed those things; but when I came to argue with him, and to tell him that
these things in the Scripture-sense were Gods Prerogatives, he could answer
nothing, he was not so well skilled in the Scriptures; but he replied, Thou
shall not suffer a Witch to live. I demanded of him, what was the signification
of the Hebrew text, or of the Latin translation, and what was meant by a
VVitch in that place, he could not tell; thus has the salt of the earth lost
its savor; and whereas those should season people with wholesome Doctrine, some
teach Doctrins of Devils, and the inventions of Antichrist, to defile the
Nations.

And people are now so infected with this damnable Heresy, of ascribing to the
power of Witches, that seldom has a man the hand of God against him in his
estate, or health of body, or any way, but presently he cries out of some poor
innocent Neighbor, that he, or she has bewitched him; for says he, such an
old man or woman came lately to my door, and desired some relief, and I denied
it, and God forgive me, my heart did rise against her at that time, my mind
gave me she looked like a VVitch, and presently my Child, my Wife, my Self, my
Horse, my Cow, my Sheep, my Sow, my Hog, my Dog, my Cat, or somewhat was
thus and thus handled, in such a strange manner, as I dare swear she is a
VVitch? or else how should those things be, or come to pass? seldom goes any
man or woman to a Physician for cure of any Disease, but one question they ask
the the Physician is, Sir, do you not think this Party is in ill handling, or
under an ill tongue? or more plainly, Sir, do you not think the party is
bewitched? and to this many an ignorant Physician will answer, Yes verily; the
reason is, Ignorantiae pallium maleficium and incantatio, a cloak for a
Physicians ignorance, when he cannot find the nature of the Disease, he says,
the Party is bewitched. But for all such as go on to defile the people with
these Doctrins, that not only have no grounds in the Scriptures, but are flat
contrary to the light of the Scriptures. I demand of them, at whose hands will
Christ require at the latter day, not only the blood of the innocent, but also
the Souls of such as have perished by the practice of these Atheistical and
bloud-guilty ways? which are in every point so absurd and fantastical, that if
many Ministers can say they never did teach any such Doctrine to the people, yet
are they guilty, in that they have not preached against these devilish
Doctrins, which do make against the true worship of God, and against the life
of charity toward our Neighbor, and toward the poor and widows, and lame and
aged people.

Many Objections and evasions are daily brought against this my Discourse,
which though they are weak and frivolous, yet would fill whole Volumes if I
would stand to answer them.

1 The common evasion of every one when they can prove nothing, nor answer, but
are fully convinced of their errors by the Scriptures, is, Say no more, we
acknowledge that a Witch can do no more than God permits her, or permits him to
do, but what God permits, that a Witch can do; this is just as when God and his
Prophets taught the people early and late, that they should not ascribe any
power to Idols, as if the people had answered the Prophets, Say no more, we
know these Idols can do no more than God permits them ^o do, but if God permit
them to save, or destroy, they can do it. So when God claims it as his own
Prerogative, to kill and make alive, make rich and make poor, wound and heal,
(and many other things, as I have already proved by Scripture) and will not
have his Prerogative ascribed to any Creature, yet still ye say, the Lord
permits it, whereas yet ye have no more ground or warrant in the Scripture,
that God permits any such power to Witches, than the Heathen had to say, the
most high God permitted their Idols also to be gods, and to have power to kill,
or to save alive.

Further, Ye say, God permits one man to murder another, yet for this the
murderer ought to be slain; that is true indeed, but for that ye have
Scripture, where ye read in the Law, of Murder, how it was to be judged, that
is, if one man did wilfully smite another with his hand, or any other material
instrument, that he dyed, it was murder, Numb. 35.16. and so forward, but
where do you read that God permits any such thing to come to pass by a Witch,
or that any man can kill another by Witchcraft, or without a material
Instrument? and when it is proved by many places of Scripture, that many such
things as ye ascribe to Witches are Gods Prerogative, yet still ye cry, God
permits it.

2 Another Objection is this, It is certain that there are some people in
Germany, and Polonia, that do commonly sell Winds by the Devils help to
Seamen, to carry their ships whither they intend; therefore a Witch can make a
League with the Devil, and by his help can raise Winds.

To this I answer, I do not deny but these are Witches, because they use
Impostures to deceive the world, and seduce them to that damnable Idolatry of
ascribing to the Devil and Witches, and seeking to them for that which
belongs to God alone to give, namely Winds for their Journey; but that they
do such things really without delusion is false, which I will first prove by
Scripture, and then show you the delusion; for Scripture, first I prove, if
they can by the Devils raise Winds, then they can also send fair weather, for
the North Wind drives away rain, as Job. 37.22. fair weather comes out of the
North, and Job. 38.24. God speaking of his own mighty work says, By what way
is the light parted, which scatters the East wind upon the earth? and Joh.
1.3. Without God was nothing made, who then makes these winds? Psalm. 148.8.
the Winds fulfill the Word of God, or blow at Gods decree. Also Solomon
reckons the Winds among such things as keep a natural course, and describes
the natural course thereof, Eccles. 1.6. Also things miraculous can be done by
God only, but that was one of the Miracles by which Christ showed himself to be
God, he made the winds and the sea obey him, Mark 4.41. Also it is an absurdity
in Philosophy, to say that a Witch, or the Devil, can cause Winds, for Winds
are exhalations drawn from the Earth, by the influence of the Sun and the
Stars, and driven back by the coldness of the middle region of the Air, which
causes their several motions, and therefore he that says a Witch or a Devil
can cause Winds, must ascribe also to them that they can rule the Stars, and
dispose the quality of the middle Region, by which it must follow that they can
send what weather they list, and so by consequence cause the earth to bring
forth, or to be barren, which were the height of Idolatry to believe. And now
to come to the imposture it self, wherewith the foresaid Impostors do deceive
fools, making them believe they sell them Winds for their Journey. The poor
Mariner who desires to hasten his Journey homewards (but withal considers
not that all men must wait upon Providence) says, I would give five pounds the
Winds would rise, or that they would turn fit for our Journey; and being among
strangers he is presently overheard by some of the Factors of those Impostors,
who presently take occasion to tell him, that they will undertake for half the
money, to carry him to one that shall help him to a VVind according to his
mind, then by degrees they draw him on till they bring him into the company of
more of their Confederates, who do so cunningly combine to obscure his
intellect by discourse, that at the last they lead him (like poor Saul, when
the Spirit of God had forsaken him) to seek to a VVitch, then do they lead him
to the Impostor, who being some skilful Astrologian in those Countries, can
give a near guess by the Stars, when such a VVind will arise, and accordingly
prefixeth a day, saying, a week hence, or two days hence, or sometimes a
fortnight hence you shall have a VVind, in which promise it often happens
that the Impostor himself is deceived, when his Prognostics fail him; and then
they prefixe another day, and do strongly persuade the silly man to stay till
then, whereas they know till the Winds rise he cannot but stay, and I my self
have talked with Seamen, who confess that sometimes they have been driven to
stay a week, sometimes longer, after the day prefixed, and after they parted
with their money; but if it happens that some man after he has laid out his
money upon those Impostors, has speedily a VVind for his Journey; then he
rejoices, and then the Impostors are credited; then he receives from the
Impostor a bottom of Thread which the Impostor says he had from such an old
Woman (because he will not seem to be the VVitch himself) and this Thread is
to be carried by the Mariner, or by the Merchant, into the Ship, and he must by
degrees continually unwinde the bottom of Thread, so long as he would have that
VVind blow; but if all things happen well, then it is concluded, surely it is
by virtue of the Thread; but if Winds prove by the way cross, then it is the
fault of him that unwindeth the bottom too fast, or too slow, or with the
wrong hand; and thus are poor Idolatrous fools cheated by them that make a rich
trade of their Imposture. I deny not but this delusion is variously acted in
several Countries, and some Travellours report some one way, and some another
way of the manner, and carriage of the Imposture; but he that believes that it
is really done, and not a deceiving imposture, is an Idolater, and as bad as an
Infidel, and for such Mariners as will buy Winds in that manner, the Mariners
of Tarshish shall rise up in judgment against them, who when they saw the Wind
rise, and the Sea tempestuous, and against their Voyage, they fought for whose
sin that evil was come upon them, Jonah 1.7. those poor Heathen knew that Winds
and Tempests came not from a Witch, but from the hand of God. To conclude,
stories reported by Travellours prove nothing, neither are they lawful
Objections, and when we hear such a thing reported contrary to the Scriptures,
and to human capacity, it must needs follow that it is a deluding imposture,
although the story be true from him that reports it; and some Travellours
that report this thing, yet are persuaded in themselves that it is but deceit.
And whereas some would confirm this Objection by Scripture, because it is said,
Job. 1.19. after God had said to Satan, All that Job has is in thy power,
there came a strong Wind from the Wilderness, and smote the house that it fell
upon the young men that they dyed. Hence they argue, that the Devil raised that
wind; but this is a false conclusion, for then they may as well argue that the
Devil sent the fire from Heaven, as in verse. 16. which is yet called the fire
of God; and Job himself ascribed all to God only, verse. 21.

Secondly, If the Devil had by Gods peculiar dispensation raised that Wind, God
permitting him to afflict Job, yet it does not follow that he can do it at the
command of a Witch.

Thirdly, Some to prove the power of Witches to afflict men, and women, and
cattle, and to bring to pass strange things, do allege Job 2.7. yet there is
not a Witch mentioned in all the History of Job, but how absurdly they do argue
let wise men judge; because God sent Satan to afflict Job, therefore a Witch
can send him to afflict man. God permits it, say they, by which Argument
they still labor to maintain that God lends his Prerogatives to a Witch.
What though God has power over Satan, to command him to execute his Will, to
torment and afflict the wicked for punishment, to afflict the righteous
sometime for trial? does it therefore follow that a Witch can do it, because
God did it? and where do we read in Scripture that God permits it? and if God
should permit it, where do we read that a Witch has any such power or command
over the Devil, or any such league or covenant with the Devil? or that God
permits the Devil to be at the command of a Witch?

Fourthly, Some will allege, the Witch of Endor, and yet we never read that the
Witch of Endor could hurt, or send the Devil to hurt any man or woman, or
child, or cattle, or raise Winds, or the like; neither did Saul go to her to
desire her to kill the Philistines, but he went for Divinations, to know what
should become of the Battle the next day. And what Objections soever any man
shall bring from the Witch of Endor, they themselves may answer, if they read
but the Seventh description of a Witch, in the first Book of this Treatise, and
he that was bewitched by the Witch of Endor was Saul, and such as sought to her
as Saul did, because they were deluded by her.

Fifthly, Some will allege, and object, That the Serpent tempted Eve, and from
thence they will argue, that the Devil can assume the bodies of Creatures, and
appear in bodily shape, and make a league with a Witch, and execute her will to
kill and afflict people and cattle; but this is a poor consequence, that
because he can tempt, therefore he can kill at the command of a Witch; and
whereas they would prove from hence, that the Devil can assume a bodily shape,
and appear to a Witch, if they bring that Argument from the literal sense of
the History, they must search narrowly to prove the Devil was in the Serpent;
for it is said, The Serpent was more subtle than any beast of the field,
inferring that the Serpent did tempt by its own natural subtilty, or else why
was that expression of the subtilty thereof used by Moses? and hence they must
conclude, that it was the Serpent, and not the Devil, which tempted Eve, which
were an absurd conclusion; and yet if they run upon the letter of the Story,
they cannot deny that conclusion to follow, for there is not any mention of the
Devil in all the History; but if they could prove thence that the Devil did
assume the body of the Serpent, it makes nothing to the purpose, to prove
Witches power to kill, for the Devil did only beguile Eve, and not kill her.

And although it has been a common exposition of that place, that the Devil
did enter into the body of the Serpent, and so appeared unto Eve in a bodily
shape, and talked with her, and tempted her to eat the forbidden Fruit, yet if
this exposition be well and wisely considered, it is most gross and erroneous;
for First, here arises an absurdily, according to their own fond tenants, for
then they must conclude that Eve was a Witch, for say they, whosoever has had
any familiar discourse with the Devil is in some degree a Witch, and ought not
to be trusted, although she has made no compact with the Devil, and I have
known some hanged in my time for that confession, although they did absolutely
deny that ever they made compact with him, or did any murder by him; but yet
to speak the truth, if it were so, that any man or woman could have familiar
discourse with the Devil, this makes not a Witch, for Christ himself was
assaulted by the Devil, and answered his tentations by Scriptum est, Matthew. 4.
yea, I may further say, if any man could enter into an explicit covenant with
the Devil to kill by his help, this indeed would make him a Murderer, but not
a Witch in the Scripture sense, although indeed no man can prove by Scripture
any such compact at all, or if there could be such a compact made with the
Devil, yet that God would ever permit the Devil to perform his covenant with a
man, to kill or hurt at his command, cannot be proved. So much by the way.

Secondly, There arises another absurdity directly from that exposition, that
the Devil did enter into the body of the Serpent, and so tempted Eve, for
thence it must needs follow, that the Devil can open the mouth of a Serpent,
and cause it to speak, and talk, and so that the Devil should have power to
work a Miracle, equal with that great Miracle that was wrought by the mighty
power of God, when he opened the mouth of Balaams Ass, and caused him to speak
to Balaam, which thing were most outrageous Blasphemy to affirm; we must needs
conclude then, that it was neither the Serpent that by its own natural subtilty
tempted Eve, as the letter of the Story imports, nor the Devil abusing the
body of the Serpent; But whereas Moses was here to teach the people a great
mystical Doctrine concerning the fall of Mankind by sin, unto which sin man was
drawn by the temptations and allurements of the Devil; Moses knowing that the
capacity of weak people is naturally estranged from Spiritual matters, and if
he should have taught in plain terms that the Devil tempted man to fall, they
would not have understood his Doctrine, because they knew not what the Devil
was, therefore he, by the Spirit of God guiding him, taught the people in a
Parabolical way, in which Parable when he speaks of the Serpent, and of his
subtilty, he expresses the subtilty and malice of the Devil that tempted Eve,
and all Mankind to disobedience against God, and this Parable he follows
Allegorically, when he says, The Lord said unto the Serpent, upon thy belly
shall thou go, and dust shall thou eat all the days of thy life; whereas if we
deny this to be a Parable, we must hold that the Serpent before that time had
legs, and did not creep upon his belly, and also that the Serpent sinned, and
is punished for sin; and yet if the Devil had power to abuse the body of the
Serpent, the Serpent was compelled to do that which they say he did; but for
those that will take the Scriptures every where in a literal sense, they must
also hold that the Trees of the Field did speak, where it is said in a Parable,
The trees said to the Olive Tree, be thou King over us, Judge. 9.8. But yet if
they will not be beaten off from this, that the Devil can assume a bodily
shape, it makes nothing to prove that Witches are such people as can kill by
Witchcraft, or send the Devil to kill, for there is no such expression of a
VVitch in all the Scriptures, but only that a Witch is such a one as labors
by Diabolical craft to seduce the people from God, and his Truth, to Idolatry,
and believing of lies.

Sixthly, Some will object, and say, It is manifest that the Devil can help a
Witch to fly in the Air, and be transported whither she lists, or else how
had the Devil power to carry Christ, and set him upon the pinnacle of the
Temple? Matthew. 4. and Luke 4.

I answer, This indeed seems to be a strong Argument, if we take the
Scriptures at the second hand, as they are translated unto us in the English,
but if we search the original meaning of the Greek text (as it was written by
the Spirit of God) we shall find there is no strength at all in that Argument,
for St. Luke, 4.5. says only, (...), quem subduxisset eum, or subducens eum,
and in the ninth verse is the fame sense, and so translated by Tremellius and
Beza, and no otherwise to be understood, but that he was led by the Devil from
place to place to be tempted (not that the Devil had power to lead him against
his will) but being full of the Holy Ghost, did by his own Divine counsel yield
so far to the Devil, as to be led into temptation, that so he might overcome
temptation; and whereas St. Matthew uses another phrase, (...) assumpsit eum
Diabolus, verse. 5.8. this sounds indeed (especially in some of our English
translations) as if the Devil had transported him in the Air from place to
place, but it was nothing so; if we compare Matthew and Luke together, and this
phrase used by Matthew, says Tremellius, is by a Metalepsis, so that it is
plain this Objection is of no force, for Christ walked up to the Mountain, and
likewise walked up the stayers of the Temple, and leaned upon, and looked over
the Battlements of the Temple, which went round about the Temple to keep men
from falling, of which we read, says Beza, Deuteronomy. 22.8. which we falsely
translate, Pinacles, (...), and he set him against the Battlements of the
Temple.

Seventhly, Another Objection arises from this Discourse, and that is this; It
seems the Devil can some way talk and discourse with a Witch, and therefore
can make a League and Covenant with her: for he talked and discoursed with
Christ himself, how much more easily can he talk with a sinful man or woman?

I answer, In the same manner that he talked with Christ, he talks with every
man and woman; he says to a Thief, Steal; to a Cutpurse, Cut a Purse; to a
Drunkard, Drink off your liquor; to a Murderer, Kill such a man, and these
obey him; he says to a righteous man, Steal, and he answers, It is written
thou shall not steal; the Devil says again, Go and lie with such a Whore; he
answers, It is written, thou shall not commit Adultery, and so likewise for
all the Commandments; neither is it to be understood otherwise of the
temptations wherewith Christ was tempted; as if the Devil could utter a human
voice without a tongue, or any organ of speaking, that were an absurdity in
Philosophy, for Natura nihil fecit frustra; and this were superfluous in Nature
for a man to have a Tongue, and other Organs of speaking, if a verbal speaking
could be made without them; and whereas it is written, that the Devil said unto
Christ this and that, it was only a mental discourse between Christ and the
Devil, and is expressed in Scripture, according to Human capacity by a
prosopopoia, a Figure very frequent in Scripture, as in Psalm. 98.8. Micha 6.12.
there the Scripture by this Figure brings in Hills and Floods acting as a
man; and so in Mat. 4. Luke 4. the Devil tempting of Christ is introduced in
the story, as speaking like a man, this is used sometimes in Parables, as in
Job, from the seventh verse of the first Chapter to the twelfth, also Chap. 2.
the six first verses; and in Genesis 3.1. 1 King. 22.21. in these and many places
by this Figure, speaking and discoursing verbally, an Human action is ascribed
to such as it does not properly belong; so that it appears to those that
rightly understand, that this objection also is of no force; but yet still for
those that are obstinate, I say, let them prove a League or Covenant by the
Scriptures, between the Devil and a Witch, or that the Devil has power, or
permission to perform such a Covenant if made.

Eighthly, Some again will object and say, If Witches cannot kill, and do many
strange things by Witchcraft, why have many confessed that they have done such
Murders, and other strange matters, whereof they have been accused?

To this I answer, If Adam and Eve in their innocence were so easily overcome,
and tempted to sin, how much more may poor Creatures now after the Fall, by
persuasions, promises, and threatenings, by keeping from sleep, and continual
torture, be brought to confess that which is false and impossible, and contrary
to the faith of a Christian to believe?

Some indeed have in a melancholy distraction of mind confessed voluntarily,
yea and accused themselves to be Witches, that could do, and had done such
strange things, and wonders by the help of the Devil; but mark well their
distemper, and you shall find that they are deeply gone by infirmity of body
affecting the mind, whereby they conceit such things as never were, or can be,
as is often proved by experience among Physicians, many of those dying in a
very short time, (although they be not put to death) except they be cured by
the Physician; and truly if such Doctrins had not been taught to such people
formerly, their melancholy distempers had not had any such objects to work
upon, but who shall at last answer for their confession, but they that have
infected the minds of common people with such devilish doctrins, whereby some
are instigated to accuse their poor Neighbors of impossibilities contrary to
the Scriptures, and some drawn to confess lies, and impossibilities contrary to
Christian light?

And indeed vain and fickle are the minds of such disputants, who do first of
all father their vain opinions upon the Scriptures, pretending that they are
undoubted truths grounded upon the Scriptures, saying, Thou shall not suffer a
Witch to live; but being showed their errors, how they wrest the Scriptures,
will rather forsake the Scriptures, which are the rule of righteousness, then
forsake their Opinions, and will believe confession against the Scriptures.
Some men will yet yield thus far, that these Confessions of poor accused
people do many times extend to impossibilities, and that they verily believe
that the Devil deludeth these people, making them believe that he brings to
pass such things as they require him to do, which yet would come to pass by
Divine providence. Some again do so Idolize the Devil, as that they affirm that
these things are real, and do withal cry out, Great is the power of the Devil;
and yet for any of these Opinions can produce no Scriptures to prove them, but
only Confessions; and although those Confessions are sometimes extorted,
sometimes voluntary in poor melancholy, or distracted people; sometimes in
wicked people, who delight to make the world wonder at lies, or
impossibilities, though it be to their own confusion (they being given over by
God, and so the Devil seeing his opportunity, instigateth them to be his
Instruments to uphold all lying Diabolical Doctrins, so that no true believing
Christian but may discern that all these Confessions are from the Devil, the
Father of lies) yet I say, Suppose with these Confession-mongers, that these
Confessors are deluded by Satan, to think they do such things by the help of
the Devil, yet where do we read in Scripture that such are Witches who are
deluded by Satan, or that such should be slain, or put to death? we read
indeed, that Witches were all sorts of deluding false Prophets, but not such as
were deluded by Satan.

Secondly, If you will still affirm, that their Confessions are real truths,
and not delusions, but that they do indeed bid the Devil do such things, which
(as ye say) he does; yet how can ye prove it by Scripture? where is any such
description of a Witch in the Scripture? but surely it is most horrible
devilish forsaking of the Scriptures, to believe that there is any truth at
all in these Confessions, and such people as are thus seduced by Satan to lying
Confession, ought rather to be taught better knowledge, than to be slain in
their ignorance, and perish altogether for lack of knowledge; but it is, and
has been the manner of these latter Ages, for a Minister to go to such, and
instead of instructing them, whereby they might become instruments of saving
their souls, they urge them to lying Confessions, and so do as much as they can
to send the spirit of error into them to their confusion, yea and for the most
part, these men who uphold their errors by the Confessions of these poor
accused people, do altogether mis-interpret their Confessions for the upholding
of such lies, for the broaching whereof they have formerly mis-interpreted and
belyed the Scriptures; for let but any man that is wise, and free from
prejudice, go and hear but the Confessions which are so commonly alleged, and
he may see with what catching, and cavelling, what thwarting and lying, what
flat and plain Knavery these Confessions are wrung from poor innocent people,
and what monstrous additions and multiplications are afterward invented to make
the matter seem true, which yet is most damnably false, and flat against
Christian light, and human reason to believe. And for such as can hardly
believe that Melancholy, or distemper of body, and troubled fantasy, can
cause people to imagine things so really, as to confess them to their own
destruction, though most false and impossible; let them but consider the late
example of a grave Minister about the Isle of Ely, who by a troubled fantasy
was so deluded (or rather did so delude himself by weakness of Fantasy and
imagination) as he reported that an Angel told him, that the Judgment Day
should be upon the next Friday; by which report many of the Inhabitants were
much troubled till the day was over; if then a grave Minister may be misled by
Fantasy, and distempered mind; how much more plain common people, who have
such Accusations brought against them as are sufficient to break their brains?
Further I say, that if the man of sin spoken of in the second to the
Thessalonians, chap. 2. had not broached these errors to the world, these
Confessors had had no such lying imaginations to confess, for their Confessions
are not from themselves, but from the Devil, that so he might delude them that
love not the truth, but do urge, and seek such Confessions against the truth,
as it is said in the eleventh verse, For this cause God shall send them strong
delusions that they should believe a lie, etc.

Ninthly, Some will object, and say, They have helped search, and have found
Biggs, and privy Marks upon such as have been accused to be Witches; but I
demand of them, Where does the Scriptures teach us that a Witch is known by
Biggs, or privy Marks? I also answer, That very few people in the World are
without privy Marks upon their bodies, as Moles or stains, even such as
Witchmongers call The Devils privy Marks; which Marks Astrologians, do affirm
to be the characters of the Stars, variously fixed upon men according to their
Nativity, and many an honest man or woman have such excrescences growing upon
their bodies, as these Witchmongers do call, the Devils Biggs; as for example;
There is a Disease often found in men or women in the seat of people, called
Hemorroids, or Piles, or the swelling of the Hemorroids veins, a Disease well
known to Physicians, many times swelling forth in the seat of people that are
full of Melancholy blood, and are often found in fashion like Biggs, and
sometimes issuing forth blood, and for this Disease many have been accused by
ignorant people, and put to death for Witches; this was part of the Evidence
that was brought against Matter Lewis a Minister, executed at Berry, in the
year 1645.

There are also found often times Excrescences upon the Bodies of men and
women, called Verrucae pensiles by the Physicians, as we may read in Leonartus
Fuchsius, in the third Book of his Institutions of Physic, chap. 26. where he
reckons up the several preter-natural tumors of men's Bodies; these are a
certain kind of long fleshie Warts, in fashion of Biggs, or Teats, and do grow
commonly on honest people, or any sort of people, and upon Beasts, and yet for
these Excrescences being but outward tumors of the Body, many innocent people
have been condemned and executed.

Another Tumor is found by the Physicians, called Thymion both in Greek and
Latin, rising on several parts of the body like Biggs, or Teats, these and
other kinds of preter-natural Tumors, of which we may read in Physic Authors,
which sometimes being fell, and full of pain by reason of the rankness of blood
that feeds them, and therefore issuing forth blood, are called of ignorant
Witchmongers, Devils Biggs.

There be also some Natural parts of the Body called by a general name
Glandulae, and by a particular name Tonsillae, in the jaws of people, and in
some people do plainly appear under the Tongue like little Biggs, which some
ignorant Witchmongers having found in people, have taken them as a great
evidence against poor innocent people, and for these have many been executed;
but let any wise man consider, what body, of whatsoever constitution,
especially of poor people that commonly want food, can spare a daily exhausting
of blood to nourish Imps sucking them, without an exhausting and over-throwing
of their own Natural lives? whereas few poor or old people, but through want of
nourishment and weakness of nature, have rather want of blood, than an
overpluss of blood.

There be also often found in Women with Child, and in Women that do Nurse
children with their Breasts, and in Women that by any accidental cause do want
their menstruous courses, certain spots black and blew, as if they were pinched
or beaten, which some common ignorant people call Fairy-nips, which
notwithstanding do come from the causes aforesaid; and yet for these have many
ignorant Searchers given Evidence against poor innocent people.

But if any man will yet further cavil against Philosophy, and Physic Rules,
then let him show me any such description of a Witch in all the Scriptures, as
Biggs, or Teats, or privy Marks, or Imps sucking them, or kept by them; and
further I say, that for any kind of Biggs, or any things like Biggs, more than
has been found by Physicians to be preter-natural Tumors, or Diseases of the
Body, or else Natural parts, to believe, is folly and madness, and to affirm,
is a fantastic Lie, invented by the Devil, and the Pope.

Tenthly, Some men will Object, and say, If Witches have not power to afflict,
and torment, and kill People and Cattle, how comes it to pass that after the
angring of such an old man or woman, or such a lame man, or woman, that came to
my House and desired relief, and I rated her away, and gave her no relief, or
did not give her that which she desired; such and such crosses and losses came
upon me, or such a Child was taken in such a manner, with such a Sickness,
presently after, or within few days after his or her coming to my door?

To this I answer, They that make this Objection must dwell very remote from
Neighbors, or else must be known to give very little, or no relief to the
poor, if it can be said at any time when a cross comes upon them, that one
poor body or other has not been at their door that day, or not many days
before, let it happen at any time whatsoever; shall this then be laid to the
charge of him, or her that came last begging to their door? then by that reason
no man in England can at any time be afflicted but he must accuse some poor
body or other to have bewitched him; for Christ says, The poor ye shall have
always; and I think no man of ability is long free from poor coming to his door.

Secondly, I answer, God has given it as a strict Command to all men to
relieve the poor, Levit. 25.35. and in the next Chapter it follows, verse. 14,
15. Whosoever hearkneth not to all the Commandments of the Lord to do them,
(whereof relieving the poor is one) the Lord will send several crosses and
afflictions, and diseases upon them, as follows in the Chapter, and therefore
men should look into the Scriptures, and search what sins bring afflictions
from Gods hand, and not say presently, what old man or woman was last at my
door, that I may hang him or her for a Witch; yea we should rather say, Because
I did not relieve such a poor body that was lately at my door, but gave him
harsh and bitter words, therefore God has laid this affliction upon me, for
God says, Exodus 22.23.24. If thou any way afflict widows, and fatherless, and
they at all cry unto me, I will surely hear their cry, and my wrath shall wax
hot against thee.

Thirdly, I answer, as Aesop says in a Fable, Volunt homines ut plurimum
quando sua culpa aliquid sibi acciderit adversi, in fortunam vel daemonem
culpam confer, ut se crimine exuant; and in his Moral he says, Homines
minime venia digni sunt qui cum libere peccent fortunam vel doemonem accusant.
So may I say of the most part of the World, who if by their own folly and
negligence they wrong themselves, their Children, or their Cattle, they then
accuse their Neighbor of Witchcraft, or if by their sins they bring down Gods
Judgments, they then say they are bewitched, ascribing all to the Devil and
Witches, never beholding Gods hand, or acknowledging that God is just, and
themselves sinners.

Eleventhly, Some will still object and say, What though there be no murdering,
nor afflicting Witch mentioned in the Scripture, nor any command given to put
Witches to death for Murders, may not this common opinion of all men go for
current, unless we can prove it by Scriptures? what shall one or two men's
opinions be preferred before the common tenent of all men?

To this I answer, It was the common tenent of all the Heathen, that Idols were
gods, and ought to be worshipped; it was the common opinion of all the Scribes
and Pharisees that it was a sin to eat with unwashen hands, and yet the
Scripture tells us that these things were false.

Secondly I answer, God gave his Laws, that we should add nothing to them nor
take any thing from them, Deuteronomy. 12.32. why then should any man be so bold,
contrary to the Commandment of God, to make it a Law to put poor people to
death, upon foolish and feigned suppositions, or by the common tenent, and
general blind opinion of people without ground in the Scriptures?

Twelfthly, Some will yet object and say, If we may not conclude Murders and
trials of Witches from Biggs and privy Marks, and sinking, and swimming in the
water, because we have no warrant or mention of such trials in the Scriptures,
then by the same consequence we may not try a Murderer by any trial but such
as is mentioned in the Scriptures; but this is taken for granted, that if a
murdered man bleedeth new and fresh, when the Murderer is near the dead
Carcass, it discovers the Murderer, and many Murderers have been discovered
by Gods providence in that manner, and have confessed the Murder, and yet
there is no warrant for this trial of a Murderer in Scripture.

To this subtle Argument I answer, That a Judge may be too presumptuous in
condemning a man upon any such evidence as that is; for a dead body will for
the most part bleed fresh and new, if it lies two or three days unburied; as
it is often seen in those that dye a natural death upon their Bed, and not
Murdered, the blood does many times issue out of their mouths in great
abundance, at such times as the Humors of the body begin to putrify; and by
the same reason a murdered Body will, when it has lain two or three days,
issue forth blood, both at the mouth, and at the wound, whether the Murderer
be present or not. And what if God by his providence has so brought it to pass
sometimes, that the murdered body has bled when the Murderer has been
present, and so at the sight of the blood the Murderers Conscience has so
accused him that he has been driven to confess the Murder? we may not thence
conclude, or argue, that this is a certain trial of a Murderer, without his
own Confession, or other manifest proofs, for by that means we may sometimes
condemn a guiltless man that stands by at the same time of issuing forth
blood from the dead body, which is a common and a natural thing.

Secondly, I answer this subtle Objection thus, Murder by the hand is a
certain thing, we know it by experience, and also the Scripture speaks of it,
and for the trial and finding out of Murder, when we find a man murdered,
we have an ordinance in the Scriptures, Deuteronomy. 21. the seven first verses, They
were to make diligent inquisition according to the Law of Moses, and in the
seventh verse every man ought to clear himself that his hand has not shed the
blood of him that was slain; and if God blesses his own ordinance of making
such strict search and inquiry, by this wonderful and miraculous kind of
bleeding (as you suppose it to be) yet there is the ground of it, it is his own
ordinance, and therefore God blesses it, and discovers the Murder; But now
to apply this to a Witch, there is no consequence at all, for when we find a
man dead, or when any party is diseased, we have not any ordinance in the
Scripture to make search who has bewitched such a man, or killed such a man by
Witchcraft, but whose hand has slain him. As also in Numb. 35.16. who has
smitten him with an instrument of Iron, or any material instrument, or
hand-weapon; we may not then expect that God should answer men's fancies, and
vain imaginations of Murdering by Witchcraft, that have no ordinance in
Scripture, as he does his own Ordinances; and for sinking, and swimming, Biggs
and privy Marks, that may as well happen to one man as to another, to make
them signs and trials of Witches, or Murderers, is a groundless thing, and
indeed at first invented by the Popes Inquisitors, who rather than they would
not ensnare whom they aimed at to put them to death, they would make any thing
a sign or token of a Witch; and if all these signs that these Popish tyrants
have affirmed to be signs, were as they say, true signs of Witches, then all
people under the Heavens might be by one sign or other proved to be Witches;
these signs may as well signify a Thief, or a Cutpurse, as a Witch, being
indeed no signs at all.

Thirteenthly, Some will object and say, If we may not suppose that Witches can
kill, or afflict people by Witchcraft, except we have ground and warrant for it
in the Scriptures, then by the same reason we may not hang a Thief for Felony,
for by the Scriptures he ought to have restored fourfold, and we find no
warrant in Scripture to put him to death?

To this it is answered, to put a Thief to death for Theft; is either lawful,
or unlawful; if it be not lawful by the Scriptures, though a thing commonly
done, then we may not prove any thing lawful by instancing in a thing unlawful.

Secondly, If it be lawful to put a Thief to death without warrant from the
Scripture, as ye suppose it to be, yet therein we go beyond our warrant, only
in the matter of punishment, which punishment yet falls upon the guilty
Thief, who is certainly convicted by infallible testimony, according to Gods
ordinance; but whosoever puts man or woman to death for bewitching people to
death, or for afflicting man or beast with diseases by Witchcraft, goes beyond
his warrant in matter of guilt, for the Scripture no where says that a Witch
was, or can be guilty of any such thing as killing by Witchcraft, or afflicting
by Diseases, or any cross or adversity by Witchcraft upon men or cattle, and so
in this we sin not, in inflicting greater punishment upon a Witch then is due
by the Law of God (for by Law we ought not to suffer a Witch to live) but the
sin is, in inflicting punishment upon the innocent, in Condemning them for
Witches which are not Witches, for a Witch in the Scriptures is only a seducer
of the people to Idolatry, and for killing without a stroke of the hand, or
some material instrument, God claims it as his own Prerogative proper to
himself only, Deuteronomy. 32.39. 1 Samuel 2.6 so that imputing it to any other, is
against the Scriptures.

Fourteenthly, Some will object and say, Although there were no Murdering
Witches spoken of in the Scriptures, or any such description of a Witch, as one
that makes a League with the Devil, or that lies with Incubus, or Succubus,
or that has Imps, or Biggs, or privy Marks by which they are known, yet such
may be sprung up since the Scriptures were written, as new sins increase daily.

To this I answer, If there be new sins it must be in reference to the Law, for
that makes sin to be sin, because it is a breach of the Law; now, No man may
add any thing to the Law of God, Deuteronomy. 12.32. and therefore we may not suppose
that there be any sins that are not mentioned in the Law; also such sins are
not mentioned in the Gospel; and Saint Paul says, Whosoever preaches any
other Gospel than that we have received, let him be accursed, Gal. 1.9.

Fifteenthly, it has been objected by some, That a Judge, or a Jury-man, is
not to question any truth of opinion concerning the power of Witches, or what
Witches are, but to be guided by the Law of the Nation, and to go according to
the evidence of Witnesses, and if any one will come and witness upon Oath
against any man or woman, that he or she is a Witch, the Jury ought to cast
her, and the Judge ought to condemn her.

To this Objection I answer, Deuteronomy. 17.6. At the mouth of two or three witnesses
shall he that is worthy of death be put to death, but at the mouth of one
witness he shall not be put to death. It is taken for granted, that a man or
woman is sometimes given over to bear false witness, therefore God has made it
one of his Commandments, Thou shall not bear false witness; and here in Deuteronomy.
17.6. God has given us this rule to avoid false witness, That one Witness
shall not pass as a sufficient evidence upon Life and Death, and yet many have
wrongfully suffered death at the mouth of one Witness, contrary to this Law,
without examination of the condition of the Witness, whether Mad, or foolishly
presumptuous, or malicious.

Secondly I answer, Where two or three Witnesses are to pass for true evidence
against any Person, it is to be understood only in matters prescribed by the
Word of God, as Murder by an instrument smitten, or cast at a person, or by
the hand, or by some apparent infallible way, Numb. 35.16, etc. but not in
matters that are no way grounded upon the Word, but are flat contrary to the
Word of God, and are only men's imaginations, for we have no warrant to put any
person to death upon any imaginary offense (if it were likely that two or three
should agree together in such a testimony) neither ought a Judge, or any
Magistrate to administer an Oath, or take, or hear an Oath in any thing Moral
that is not prescribed in Gods Word, but only imaginary; and if two or three
would swear point blank against any person to be a Witch, they ought not to be
suffered to swear against any in that manner, except it be to swear against
such Witches as the Scripture speaks of, according the whole discourse of
this Book, and therein also they ought to give a reason of their Oath, and the
Judge and Jury to consider it.

Thirdly I answer, That Oaths that have been usually taken against many
persons in that kind, are not to be regarded, though true; as that such a one
has been seen to have a Rat or Mouse creep upon her, or under her Coats, or
was heard talking to her Imps, these are not material testimonies, but are
foolish and senseless arguments, not grounded in the Word of God. Further, if
the Witnesses can swear that any person keeps and feeds Imps, it is not a
material Oath, for it is as lawful to keep a Rat, or Mouse, or Dormouse, or any
Creature tame, as to keep a tame Rabbit, or Bird; and one may be an Imp as well
as another, and so may a Flea or Louse by the same reason; and so the Devil
need not go far for a bodily shape to appear in, or to suck men's or women's
flesh in; and it these were material Oaths, who then may not be proved a
Witch? and yet there was an honest woman (so always formerly reputed) executed
at Cambridge in the year 1645, for keeping a tame Frogge in a Box for sport and
Fantasy, which Fantasy of keeping things tame of several species is both
lawful and common among very innocent harmless people, as Mice, Dormice,
Grasshoppers, Caterpillars, Snakes; yea a Gentleman, to please his Fantasy in
trying conclusions, did once keep in a Box a Maggot that came out of a Nut,
till it grew to an incredible bigness; all these are Arguments of no force; yea
I further say, if two or three would swear that they saw such a Creature suck
any persons flesh, it does not prove it to be a Devil, or that the Devil is in
it, or therefore the Person a Witch.

Lastly I answer, If a Judge, or a Jury be bound by the Law of the Nation to
proceed according to that Law, yet they are bound more by the Law of God to
proceed according to his Law, and if there be any Law of any Nation made to put
to death people for any supposed imaginary Witchcraft, not spoken of in Gods
Word, that Law ought to be abrogated, for we may not add to Gods Law, Deuteronomy.
12.32. and in the mean time, that Nation that maintains such a Law, that
Judge, that Jury which prosecuteth such a Law (being not grounded in, but
contrary to the Law of God) they all hazard themselves under the Curse of Gods
Law, Exodus 22.23, 24.

Sixteenthly, The last and wisest Objection is this, It is maniest in the
Scriptures that a Witch may kill by Witchcraft, for it appears Numb. 25.9.
that after Balaam had tried all ways to Curse the people, there dyed of the
people twenty four thousand, and although he could not hurt them by Enchantment
(as he affirms chap. 23.23. There is no Enchantment against Israel) yet it
appears, Revel. 23.14. that he taught Balac to lay a stumbling block before
the people, in enticing them to commit Idolatry, which brought down the anger
of God upon them that they dyed, Numb. 25.9.

To this I answer, This indeed is the only Witchcraft that can kill or hurt any
man (according to the whole Discourse of the First Book, of this Treatise)
seducing the people to Idolatry, whereby they do cause them to provoke God to
anger, and to strike them in his displeasure; and this is the Doctrine we ought
to learn by the History of Balaam, yea this is the only Witchcraft that is
summarily included in all the Nine terms of Description, Deuteronomy. 18.10, 11.
(being the discourse of my first Book) and to show any proof of any sort of
Witches in the Scriptures, I challenge all Witchmongers, yet some will forsake
the Scriptures, and confute me strongly, with a repetition of some of Bodins
lies, or the like Stories, telling them for truth.

But for all such as do still labor, by Objections, Cavils, Inventions, and
Imaginations, to uphold the old Traditions and Errors of that grand Witch the
Pope, and his Train, concerning Witches, and their Power, and not rather to
cleanse the world from these Doctrins of Devils; let them take heed that the
saying belongs not to them, that Stephen spoke to the Jews, Acts 7.51. Ye
stif-necked and uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye do always resist the Holy
Ghost, as your fathers did, so do ye; As it is written, 2 These. 2.10, 11, 12.
because ye received not the love of the truth, that ye might be saved; for
this cause God has sent you strong delusions, that you should believe a lie,
that they all might be damned who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness.

A Conclusion.
HE that groundeth his Opinion upon Fancy and Human traditions, and reports,
without light, and rule of the Scriptures, is like a man groping in the dark,
who for want of light rusheth his face against the door. But if any man will
forsake blind imaginations, and be guided by the light and rule of the
Scriptures, he shall find by them, that Witches are only false Prophets, who
used several deluding impostures to deceive the people (according to the whole
Discourse of the first Book of this Treatise, and these were not poor men and
women, such as are commonly executed for that falsly-imputed Crime of
Witchcraft) but were open practicers of their several Witchcrafts, to delude
and seduce, and those had not their Craft from a Familiar, or by making a
League with the Devil, as has been commonly imagined, but were in a manner
learned, and used Books written for that purpose, to teach them their manifold
impostures, whereby to gain a maintenance among the people, by making them
believe they were Prophets; as we may read. Acts 19.19. many of them being
converted by the powerful preaching of the Gospel, brought their Books, and
burnt them before the people; these Books containing such subtle devices as
were practiced then by the false Prophets, or Witches of the time, to deceive
the people, and now adays by the Popish Rout, and by our common Wizzards. But
now for the thousands of people that have been executed for Witches in several
parts of the World, by the common manner of fond, false accusations, at whose
hands will God require their blood, but at the hands of the Whore of Rome, and
of those that have joined with her in her abominations? Revel. 18.24. In her
was found the blood (not only of Saints) but of all that were slain upon the
earth. This doubtless must be understood of those that are unjustly slain, and
who are they, but such as are slain by wrongful accusations? which wrongful
accusations are occasioned by the devilish Doctrins wherewith she has defiled
the Nations.

Further I say, That this Doctrine of Witches power is the main strength of
Antichristian policy; for whereas that Romish Whore knows, that in all
Nations the Civil Magistrate will hold his power, and not resign it to her, to
have absolute power to kill for Religion, she maintains this damnable Doctrine
to this end, that under the name of Witches she may melt away all whom she
fears, or suspecteth will be opposers of her Antichristian pride, and herein
she ingageth the Civil Magistrate, by her subtle Doctrine, to cut off whom she
pleases; and how can that be said to be a Government for the defense of
peoples Lives and Estates? where contrary to all Law these Villains can steal
away both life and estate from whom they please (except from such as are in
places of Dignity, or so well esteemed in Commonwealths, or have such
friendship among the potent of the Land, that thereby they are able to
withstand their Adversaries) and these poor accused people have no redress, or
help at the hands of the Magistrate; but he who ought to be their Defender is
bewitched, and engaged against them; he is taught indeed not to suffer a Witch
to live, but never truly taught who, and what are Witches; and that many times
they that engage him by their lying Doctrine, are the very Witches themselves,
aimed at in the Scriptures, that ought not to be suffered to live.

THE THIRD BOOK. SHOWING The vanity of some English VVriters concerning
Witches.
BOdinus, Hyperius, Hemingius, and other Popish Bloud-suckers, mentioned before
in the Second Book of this little Treatise, having defiled the World with their
abominable inventions, contrary to the sense and truth of Gods Word, their
devilish Doctrins being already declared sufficiently to be wholly dissonant
to the Word of God; yet some of our English Writers (who otherwise might seem
to have been wise and learned men) have defiled their Pens with these
groundless Fantastical Doctrins, which VVriters are briefly these.

The first is James Bishop of Winton, setting forth three Books, called
Daemonology, in the name and title of the Works of King James (and whether the
Bishop or the King were the Composer of that Work, I stand not to argue) which
Works are collected out of these Popish Writers before mentioned, which the
Author acknowledges in the Preface to his Book, where he alleges Bodinus,
Hyperius, and Hemingius for confirmation of the truth of the matter contained
in his Works, but not a jot of Scripture is produced in all the Work, if
rightly interpreted, to prove it to be truth and yet the Author himself
confesses of Bodinus, that his Book of Daemonomanie is collected with greater
diligence, than composed with judgment; and truly I wish every wise man (that
desires to be resolved in his judgment concerning these Opinions) to observe
that passage; or if he be such a one as can read, and search the several
Writers of this subject of Witchcraft, let him observe the variety of their
Opinions, how few of them do agree in one tenent, or in their manner of
writing, by which it is easily concluded, that all their traditions are but
Phantsies, contrary to the sound of Gods Word; even as a wise Judge, examining
several Witnesses of one thing, if he finds not their testimony to agree, he
concludes, that they compacted together to witness a thing false; and truly,
although wise and learned men have been deluded by these lying inventions, yet
compare but their Opinions one with another, and also with Holy Writ, and you
shall find, that all their Opinions are but one monstrous Devil, striving to
get the mastery of the Spirit of truth; and whether this Work was either
composed by King James, or by the Bishop, may be very well suspected, or rather
by some Scottish man, blinded by some Scottish Mist, who desired to set forth his
own Tenants for the upholding of Popish errors, and Popish Writers,
sufficiently confuted before by Scot, in his Discovery of Witchcraft, he not
being able any whit to answer Scot in his Discourse, labors to uphold false
Tenants and Doctrins, by the authority of a King, because he could not find
any thing in the Scriptures to uphold them, or to answer Scot, as we may read
in the Preface, that his whole aim is at Scot, whom he falsely charge with
the Tenent, and Affirmation, That there is no such thing as Witchcraft; whereas
Scot in all his whole Book says no such thing, but only that Witchcraft is a
craft of deceiving, and seducing the people, and not of killing and making
barren, and raising Winds, and such like Inventions; he that reads that
Preface, and sees how Scot is first and chiefly aimed at in the whole Work,
might presently expect that in the Work he should find Scot notably confuted,
or at the least in some way answered, but reading over the Work, he shall
find not one thing or other answered at all, but only a bare affirmation of
such Tenants, without any ground, or warrant of the Scripture, which Tenants
were confuted by Scot, by the Scriptures; so that for any man to answer that
Work of the Author at large, were only to do that which Scot has already done,
in confuting Bodinus and others; and whereas this Author pretends a
refutation of Scot, he has done nothing else but written again the same
Tenants that Bodinus and others had before written, and were by Scot confuted;
like an obstinate Disputant, that rather than he will not hold his Argument,
though never so foolish, he will deny the Conclusion. One Disputant wisely and
plainly proves that a thing is, and the other foolishly says still it is not;
or one proves that a thing is not, and the other foolishly still says it is;
by which way of arguing a child may hold an Argument against a learned Doctor,
though never so false.

Yet for the answering of the Tenants of this Author in that Work, First, he
says in his first Book, as also in the Preface, That Witches can by the help
of the Devil cause to be brought unto them all kinds of dainty Dishes for
their delicious maintenance; (and yet say I, how many poor lean starved people
have been executed in several places for Witches) and for the truth of this
Doctrine, he brings no place of Scripture to prove it, but only affirms it
to be true, for these reasons;

First, The Devil is a Thief, and delights to steal.

Secondly, He is a Spirit, and therefore can subtly, and suddenly transport
the same from whence and whither he will; by which way of argument, rejecting
the Scriptures, a man may affirm for truth any vain imagination, be it as
absurd as this former; as, that the Devil is a Thief, and therefore has a
Mountain of Gold, which he has taken out of every man's Purse, and heaped up in
Hell, which he being a Spirit, has easily transported from the earth, and
therefore are so many men hastening to Hell, because there is abundance of
Gold; But if such foolish Arguments as these were of any force, what need then
any Scripture to teach us the truth? But if we examine the truth of this
Doctrine by the Scriptures, it will prove for want of ground in Scripture very
fantastical, and in opposition to the truth of the Scriptures very
blasphemous; for hereby we should yield still that what was done by the Angel
of God in miraculous manner, bringing food to Elijah, 1 King. 19.6. may be done
by the Devil, bringing variety of food to them that serve him; and whereas God
by a Miraculous hand brought his people through a barren Wilderness, and fed
them in that Wilderness; the same thing might as well have been done by the
Devil, who (says he) can bring his servants all manner of dainty dishes.

This that is already written were enough to disable and make void all the
three Books of Daemonologie written by this Author but yet for the satisfaction
of such as will expect a Methodical answer, I will begin with his Works in
order as they stand, and in brief show the vanity of them; as for example, he
says in his Epistle to the Reader, Sorcery and VVitchcraft are different from
Magic, and Necromancy, and yet in the first Chapter of the Second Book, he
says, the Maid spoken of in the sixteenth of the Acts was a VVitch, because
she had the spirit of Python, and yet we find in the Scripture, that they that
had the spirit of Python were also Necromancers; how then can this distinction
hold, that VVitchcraft differs from Necromancy? for by that distinction a
Pythonist were a VVitch, and a Necromancer not a VVitch; yet what was the
Pythonist of Endor but a Necromancer, pretending to consult with the dead? and
Necromancy was the pretense of all that were said to have the spirit of Python;
that was, that they consulted with the Souls of the dead, as in Plutarch, and
also in holy Writ, as in Isa. 8.19. (it is manifest in any Tongue but our
English) which in Tremellius translation is to this sense; for when they shall
say unto you, Ask counsel of those that have the spirit of Python (or the
imposture of Oracling) and of South-sayers, should not a people ask counsel of
their God? Shall they ask counsel of the dead for them that are living? so then
it is plain, this distinction is wholly dissonant from Scripture, and that this
Author wrote not according to Scripture, but by phantasy and imagination.

And now for his First Book, and the whole discourse of it he lays this
foundation) he produces these places of Scripture to prove that there is such
a thing as Witchcraft and Witches, Exodus 22.18. 1 Samuel 15.23. Acts 8. Acts 16.
and here he never searches the sense and meaning of these Scriptures, but
proves that Witches are, which thing no man denies; and yet mark but his
proofs, Exodus 22.18. which is taken for a Jugler, or one that works false
Miracles to deceive and seduce, in the same sense is to be understood, Acts
8.9, 10. concerning Simon Magus who was a Jugler and Magician (Juggling being
one main part of Magic in the Scripture discourse) such were Pharaohs
Magicians, which Magicians this Author distinguishes from Witches, and yet
would prove by these places that there is such a thing as Witchcraft and
Witches; so likewise 1 Samuel 15.23. Rebellion is as the sin of Divination, from
hence he would prove Witchcraft also, and yet his distinction denies that
Necromancers (whose main drift was to give Divinations, by consulting with the
dead) are Witches; and this is the sum of his first Chapter, where any wise man
may see how he has lost himself in proving, and not able to prove that which
is easily proved, and that which no man denies, That there is such a thing as
Witches and Witchcraft; for all the rest of his Discourse in his first Book, it
is to prove that there are Magicians and Necromancers, which thing no man
denies according to the Scriptures; but though this be a true Conclusion, yet
it arises not from his proofs before mentioned, according to his own
distinctions, for he produces those proofs only to prove that there are
Witches, which yet he distinguishes from Magicians and Necromancers; how
vainly then does he raise from these proofs a discourse of Magicians and
Necromancers? And further, in all this Discourse, he writing only according to
his own imaginations, without grounds in the Scriptures, or in Arts, and
Sciences, he runs into gross absurdities, as in the third Chapter, that
Judicial Astrology is attained by Circles and Conjurations, raising of Spirits
to resolve their doubts, which shows how little reading he had in that
Science; and in the fourth Chapter he brings in healing by Charms, and
Stones, and Herbs, as if by his method they were a part of Astrology, and not
only in that has he showed his weakness, but in reckoning Stones and Herbs
among Magic Charms. In the Fifth Chapter he says, Magicians conjure the Devil
in a Circle, and if they miss the least circumstance, the Devil breaks into
the Circle, and carries quite away Body and Soul; and yet says, a little
before, in the same Chapter, that the Devil having prescribed that form of
doing, that he may seem to be commanded thereby, will not pass the bounds of
those injunctions (Circles). In the sixth Chapter he talks, That they make a
League with the Devil written with their blood, and so learn of him to play
Juggling Tricks, and Tricks upon the Cards and Dice (in which also he shows
himself but a silly Gamester, in thinking such Tricks cannot be played without
a League with the Devil) and yet by his distinctions, and by his whole
Discourse, he says, these Magicians (though in league with the Devil) are no
Witches, which is contrary to the general Tenent that ever was of his own Sect
(that is where such a League was made, it made a Witch) but to speak the truth,
the ill coherence of the Writings of his, and all other Writers of that sort,
shows, that they have no ground but Phantsy, and Fiction, for any league or
transaction with the Devil, either by Magician or Witch (to use his own
distinction (though senceless) either in Scripture, or Human reason guided by
the Scripture, and this is the whole scope of his first Book.

In the First Chapter of his Second Book he refuteth himself, and plainly
confesses (though dully) that all his former proofs of Scripture concerning
Witches were to be understood only of Magicians, and not of Witches; but says
he, Though that be true, yet the Law of God speaks of Magicians, Inchanters,
Diviners, Sorcerers, and Witches, and whatsoever of that kind that consult
with the Devil, but does not say where the Law speaks so, nor where such are
said to consult with the Devil, but lets it pass for granted which yet I
will grant; thus far the Law of God speaks of Magicians, Inchanters,
Diviners, and Sorcerers, but not of Witches distinct from these, for these were
Witches in all the Scripture-sence, and Diviners were Magicians, and Magicians
were Sorcerers, and Inchanters were Witches, and so were all the rest; but
still mark how he labors to produce some proofs beyond all this, whereby he
would make a Witch somewhat (he cannot tell what) distinct from Magicians,
Diviners, Inchanters, and Necromancers; for says he, the Maid that followed
Paul crying, Acts 16. was a Witch, whose spirit of Divination was put to
silence, says he, and she was a Witch, because she did not raise the Devil,
but he spoke by her tongue publicly, and privately, and that by her consent,
and this is his ultimate proof of a Witch; which I grant; she was a Witch, but
why distinct from the rest? what was she more than a Diviner? and the Scripture
says she had the spirit of Python, which was a spirit of lying Prophecy or
Divination; and says he, she was a Witch, because the Devil spoke by her
tongue, and that by her consent, as if he spoke not by the tongue of all
Diviners, Inchanters, Pythonists, South-sayers, Necromancers, and all false
Prophets, and that by their consent; she was a Witch says he, because she
raised not the Devil, but yet say other Writers of his Sect, they are Witches
that raise the Devil, and she had been a Witch if she had raised the Devil; and
he himself in his seventh Chapter says, Devils are made commonly to appear by
Witchcraft; from these grounds in Scripture, (which are all spoken of
Deceivers, and false Prophets, according to the whole discourse of my first
Book, which indeed were Witches in the Scripture-sense, though weakly
discovered by this Author) he goes on presumptuously in the second and third
Chapters, to say that Witches are such as do compact with the Devil, and in
great number meet in Houses, and Churches, and adore the Devil in Pulpits, and
learn of him to do mischief, and do render account at their several meetings,
what mischief they have done for his service, and to kiss his hinder parts for
adoration, and this is all the scope of his second and third Chapters, without
any tittle of proof from Scripture, but only confession of Condemned people
(which is no proof) being contrary to Scripture and reason, and (all
Circumstances considered) is no Confession; for as he dully argues in his
first Chapter, that because they are loath to confess without Torture,
therefore they are guilty; we may argue the contrary, they therefore are not
guilty, their Confession being extorted, which Confession yet he would argue to
be true, because says he, the Devil was worshipped among the Heathen, and gave
Oracles, and Responses, and was honored with bloody Sacrifice, and gave
Divinations by the intrals of Beasts; But although these things were done by
Heathen people that worshipped Idols, and had Oracles, and Responses from their
Idol Priests (which were the Witches, and false Prophets of the times) and in
that sense might be said to worship the Devil, as in 1 Cor. 10.19, 20. (because
the Devil was in the Idols, or rather in their Priests, and so by them wrought
delusions under the mask of Idols) yet what consequence is here, that because
the Devil was in this sense worshipped publicly by Idolaters, that therefore
he is now privately worshipped by the great Conventions and Assemblies of
Witches? or where do we read in Scripture, that Witches were such as did meet
to worship the Devil? they were indeed such as seduced people to worshipping of
Idols, by the delusions of the Devil ruling in their hearts. And in the fourth
Chapter be says, that Witches can be transported in the Air, by the Devils
help, because Habbakkuk was transported by the Angel, in the History of Daniel
Apocrypha, which if this were a true story Canomical, yet what absurdity is
this, to equalize the Devils power with the power of God by his Angel? And what
consequence is here? If the Angel did so transport, therefore the Devil does
transport; and yet this is the whole scope of his fourth Chapter. In the fifth
Chapter his whole scope is, That Witches can make pictures of Wax, or Clay,
and roast them, and so consume the party whom they intend, and can receive from
the Devil stones and powders, and by them cast on can Cure diseases; that they
can raise Storms and Tempests, and do many strange things, and that no man is
sure to escape their VVitchcraft, which as I have showed in my second Book, are
not only inventions and fictions of Antichrist, without ground in Scripture,
but flat against Scripture, and the faith of Christians to believe.

And whereas he says further, The Devil can send Witches to poison people, I
answer, so he may teach any man else that will undertake it; for that is not
any whit more essential to a VVitch than to any other murthering-minded man or
woman, no more than stabbing with a Knife or Dagger, The scope of the sixth
Chapter is, That the Devil appears to Witches, and teaches them to do
mischief, but yet they have not power to hurt a Magistrate; but sure if
VVitchcraft consisted any whit in the Art of poisoning, why then is the
Magistrate free? for certainly many Magistrates yea Judges, and Kings
themselves, have been poisoned; has a VVitch then less faculty in poisoning
Magistrates then other men have had? why then is their Craft counted so
dangerous? The scope of his seventh and last Chapter is, that Spirits did more
commonly appear in time of Popery than now, and the reason thereof he gives
before he proves it to be true; that is, that the Gospel has dispelled those
Spirits that were wont to appear. This reason has a smooth pretense if it were
given of a true thing, but the thing which he argues upon is not true, for
there were no more Spirits seen in time of Popery than now (and that is just
none at all) but there were more lies reported by papists, and in time of
Popish ignorance, than now, and the Gospel indeed has dispelled those Popish
Errors which were wont to deceive the people more than now; and who so denies
that Spirits appear, he says they are Sadduces, whereas yet there was never
any such dispute among Sadduces, whether Spirits did appear visible or not;
neither were the Pharisees that opposed the Sadduces so silly as to affirm any
such thing; but if any such thing were, as visible apparition of Spirits,
doubtless at had been no Controversy, for the Sadduces might have seen them as
well as the Pharisoes; this is the scope of his First and Second Book. And here
I am compelled to go back again to the third Chapter of the First Book, to
answer one of his Tenants, which I think very material to be answered out of
order, because if I had taken it in order it would have spoiled my method in
answering so curtly as I have done, (his writing being somewhat immethodical.)

Look in his first Book, the third Chapter, and see how he by the bare
signification of a word, labors to ground an absurdity, saying, Necromancy
is one that Prophesies by the dead, and that is, says he, one that consulteth
with the Devil, assuming the body of the dead party; but as I have said, what
Logician does not know that it is not a legal manner of arguing, but most
absurd to draw a Conclusion from the bare signification of words, or from what
words may signify? but he that argues truly, must argue as the words are
taken, and not as they may signify, and also search the Original sense of the
Hebrew, and yet for the word it self it has not the least signification of the
Devil, or that the Devil can assume a dead Body, or the least signification of
Prophesying by the Devil, but only by the dead, according to the vain Tenent of
the Heathen, that the Souls of the dead (by reason of their perfect estate
after this life) could inspire men living upon the earth, with knowledge of
things to come, in which pretense these Witches called Necromancers used
Divinations, or lying Prophecies, as manifestly appears in Plutarch, de.
defect. Orac. and by Scripture, as I have showed more fully in the Ninth
description in my first Book; and as for that Tenent, that the Devil can assume
and raise a dead Body, it is most absurd and blasphemous, for it was by the
divine miraculous power of Christ upon the Cross, that the bodies of the dead
were raised for a time, and appeared unto many, Matthew. 27.52, 53. from whence
the Centuirion acknowledged Christ to be the Son of God, knowing, that such
things could not be done but by the mighty Power of God; yet if this absurdity
were true, That the Devil could assume the bodies of the dead, it makes nothing
to prove their common main Tenent, that Witches are such people as can kill by
Witchcraft, for a Necromancer is only one that takes in hand to Prophecy by
the dead, or to give divinations, and not one that kills, or witcheth people
to death; neither does it agree with this Authors distinctions to hold any such
Tenent, that a Necromancer is one that consulteth with the Devil assuming a
dead body, for he says in his Sixth Chapter of his Second Book, and also in
the third Chapter of the Third Book, that the Devil appears to Witches, and
they consult with him, having assumed a dead body; why then does he in his
former distinctions make a difference betwixt a Necromancer and a Witch?

And now to proceed to the Third Book, as follows, He labors to prove in
his Third Book, That the Devil can appear bodily, and does commonly haunt
Houses and Fields in shape of men departed this life, and sometimes as Fairies,
sometime in manner of Browning (as he calls it) that is it that by our old
Wives Fables is called Robin Good Fellow) and that these are true, and not
false Fables, and for that in his first Chapter he allegeth, Isa. 13.21. where
it is said, That Zim and Ohim shall dwell in their houses, and Jim shall cry in
their Palaces, which says he, are in the Hebrew the proper names of Devils;
but how erroneous this exposition is, let them that can read the Hebrew text
see, and for them that cannot read the Hebrew text, let them read the Latin
translation of Junius and Tremellius, which is thus; Et recubabunt ferae illic,
and implebunt domos eorum noxia animalia; habitabuntque illic ululae, and
scopes saltabunt illic, clamitabitque terrificum animal in viduatis palatiis
ipsius, and serpens in templis voluptariis: That is, Wild Beasts shall lodge
there, and hurtful Beasts shall fill their Houses, and Owls shall dwell there,
and Night-birds shall hop there, and a Dragon shall cry in their desolate
Palaces, and the Serpent in their pleasant Temples; (Tremellius in his Marginal
Notes says, Terrificum animal, id est draco) Those were all only such
Creatures as do commonly inhabit desolate places; The Prophet speaking in the
former verse of desolation that should come upon the Land; and indeed the Devil
has least to do in desolate places, and is most busied where people are most;
but had Zim and Iim been the proper names of Devils, it had not made any thing
to the purpose, to prove that the Devil walks up and down in corporal
appearance, for it is said, Revel. 2.13. that the Devil dwelt at Pergamus, and
yet it is not meant that he was there seen at all to appear in any shape, but
was there in the hearts and works of wicked men; but such is the manner of all
that are tainted with Popish Tenants, that they would have people conceive of
the Devil, that he is some ugly terrible Creature to look upon, some black man
with a pair of Horns on his head, and a Cloven Foot, and a long Tail, or some
monstrous Beast that inhabiteth in Woods, and walks about in the night to
scare people, and this doctrine is maintained by Popish Writers, least people
should discern that the Devil is in all their Popish Doctrins and actions, and
in the hearts of all Popish seducers, and deceivers of the world.

Further, in this his Third Book he talks of Incubus, and Succubus, as if it
were an undoubted truth that the Devil lies commonly with Witches of both
Sexes, having copulation with them, but for this he has not the least
Scripture, nor the least seeming Argument, but only constrained, extorted,
belyed, nullified Confession of poor condemned people, which is the only
Argument for all the devilish Tenants of all Writers of this sort, and yet
they begin with Scripture, saying, Thou shall not suffer a Witch to live; and
upon this they raise a long discourse, contrary to all Scripture, and truth,
and possibility, all which they will father upon the Scriptures, and yet when
they are pinched by dispute to prove their Tenants by Scripture, they fly off
to confession; this confession I say is in all the discourse of this Author his
only Argument (which is no Argument) and yet he pretends his discourse to be
grounded on the Scriptures, and in that pretense in his last Chapter he
concludes his whole discourse with the Law of God, saying, Therefore these
people ought to be put to death according to the Law of God, whereas yet in all
his discourse he could not produce the least jot or tittle of the Law against
any such kind of supposed Witches as he talks of, nor the least color of
argument to prove his supposals, in all the Law, or all the Scriptures, without
misconstruing the Law of God, and the Scriptures. So much for this Author.

Cooper answered.
THe second English Writer upon this subject is one Thomas Cooper a Minister,
who himself being infected with the common Popish tenent, sent forth by Pope
Innocent the Eighth, and Pope Julius the Second, and affirmed by Bodinus, and
other bloody Inquisitors mentioned in my Second Book, that Witches are
Murderers, and such as can raise Winds, and do things impossible, by the help
of the Devil; This Cooper, instead of being himself a Minister to instruct, and
teach the people in Gods Truth, grounded in Scriptures, he became a bloody
Inquisitor to find out Witches, that is a bloody Persecutor of the poor, and
an accuser of them to be Witches, who by his blind zeal in this kind did
cause many to be executed for Witches, as he confesses in his first Book, the
first Chapter, and sixteenth Page, and after this he reading Mr. Scots
Discovery of Witchcraft, which he was no way able to confute by Scripture, nor
to answer him truly, he being galled in his Conscience, and netled in his
mind concerning his reputation in the World (which he feared he should loose
if his wickedness should be convicted and laid open) instead of humbling his
Soul before God, and begging pardon for his sin; he wrote a Book in defense of
his errors, called the mystey of Witchcraft, wherein he has (as others have
done) pretended to confute Scot, and to that end has writ down many Popish
inventions, adding thereunto many of his own foolish imaginations, without one
jot of Scripture to prove or ground any of his Tenants, and after long
discourse of mere lies and imaginations, in a pretense of holy Zeal, yet quite
contrary to Gods truth (yea I may say, imaginations resisting Gods holy Spirit
of Truth) has thought it a sufficient confutation of Scot, to fetch him over
with an use of reproof, as appears in his first Book, the eighteenth page,
just as if a man should preach contrary to the Scriptures that Idols are gods,
and labor to prove it by experience (as this Cooper labors to prove his
Tenants concerning Witches) or to prove it by the example of such as have been
slain, because they would not fall down before an Idol, and worship it (as this
Cooper labors to prove his errors concerning Witches from the example of
many that have been executed for Witches) and then should fetch them over with
an use of reproof, that say Idols are no gods; and after this groundless use of
reproof, this Cooper goes on still in a frivolous discourse, without any
Scripture to prove his Doctrine, and at last labors to show that Juglers are
Witches, which no man yet did ever deny (if they were such as wrought false
Miracles to seduce the people, as Jannes and Jambres, and Simon Magus, and
Elimas the Sorcerer) but he labors to prove that common Juglers are Witches,
that do work their Tricks of Activity, says he, by a Familiar, which yet
(says he) are no real Miracles, but they hurt the Eye, and thicken the Air,
says he, whereby they make things seem to be really done that are not done;
which thing for a Jugler to do, that is, to hurt the eye, and touch it not, and
to thicken the Air were a Miracle it self; but to clear these vain Fancies, who
knows not that Juglers do play their Tricks only by the slight of hand,
called Cleanly Conveyance, or Legerdemain? and what common Jugler that has
gone about to Fairs, or Markets, to show his Tricks of Activity to get Money,
will not in private for a shilling show any Trick that he has acted openly,
and show how it is done to the satisfaction of any man that desires it, and
that without a Familiar, or the least appearance of any such vain Phantsy as
fools imagine; But yet if I should take it for granted, that these common
Juglers are Witches, and do work their Feats by a Familiar Devil, as he
affirms, yet what does that make toward the proving of these poor, and aged,
and lame people to be Witches, that have so commonly been said to be Witches?
What Tricks of Activity have they showed, either in Fayers or Markets, or in
public, or in private? surely if they had been Condemned for Witches, for any
such thing doing, they should not need to be found out by an Inquisitor, to be
tried by Biggs, or privy Marks, or by sinking or swimming in the water, for
their actions would declare them openly. Also if common Juglers were Witches,
as he says; yet how does this prove that a Witch is a Murderer, which is the
main drift of his Book; and to that end he brings many places of Scripture to
prove that there are Witches, which thing no man does deny. Afterward he
affirms, that Witches do make a real League with the Devil, (which has been
a common foolish tradition) and for that he alleges Psalm. 58.5. where says
he the Original yields thus, Which hears not the Charmer, or mutterer,
joining societies together, where (says he) the Holy Ghost sets down the
effect of a Charm, namely, that it is able to stay the Adder from stinging
those that shall touch him; but mark how this fellow belyeth the Scriptures,
for which (because many understand not the Hebrew) I refer them to the
Translation of Iunius and Tremellius, which is this; Quae non auscultat voci
mussitantium, utentis incantationibus peritissimi, which hearkeneth not to the
voice of mutterers, or of the most skilful user of Charms; so that there is not
a word of joining Societies together, not a word of the Devil, nor of any
league with the Devil; yet if it had been so, and that he could have proved
such a League or Covenant, it had made nothing to prove that a Witch is a
Murderer (which is his drift) for a League might be made for a Deceiver, as
well as for a Murderer; And whereas he says the place aforesaid proves the
effect of a Charm, that it can stay the Adder from stinging, it proves the
clean contrary; for if the Prophet had said the Adder hearkneth to, or
regards the voice of a Charmer, it had proved that a Charm is effectual; but
in that he says the Adder regards not, or hearkneth not to the voice of the
Charmer be he never so skilful, it proves that a Charm is of no force; and
indeed the Prophet does there allude deridingly to the vanity of that
Idolatrous conceit of the Heathen, who thought that charms had virtue in them,
and so were seduced by charms to put confidence in charms and conjurations,
according to the Sixth term of description in the First Book of this Treatise,
showing the common conceit of the Heathen concerning charms, appearing in their
Poets; Frigidus in pratis, cantando rumpitur anguis.

This fellow does further contradict himself sundry ways, one of his most
manifest absurd contradictions is in page 85. where he confesses that God only
has power to send Satan to torment the wicked, and afflict the godly, and yet
he affirms in page 261. that Witches also can send Satan to possess men, and
torment them.

Who so pleases to read over this Author, shall find that he is bold to affirm,
not only that the Devil does at the command of a Witch raise storms, poison the
Air, blast Corn, kill Cattle, torment the bodies of men, but also cast out
Devils, as in page 158. also that he sometimes enliveneth a dead child, and
brings it to a Witch in her traveling to bring forth child, and tells her
that it is the child born of her body, begotten by himself, and so says he,
she is deceived with her new darling, as in page 122. so that according to the
Devilish doctrine of this Author, the Devil can raise the dead, as Christ raised
Lazarus and Dorcas, and cast out Devils, as Christ did; but to conclude, they
that shall read his blasphemous and vain imaginations, and yet shall see
therewithal the pretense of holy zeal in all his Discourse, may plainly behold
in him the Devil turning himself into an Angel of Light to deceive the World.

And so I leave this Cooper where I found him, namely, in a Stationers shop,
dear of taking up.

Master Perkins answered.
THere is yet another Author writing upon this subject of Witchcraft, well known
to all, and that is M. Perkins, who because he was such a chosen instrument of
preaching Gods Word in his life, I blush to name him, least some should think I
go about to defame him so long after his death, whom I honor in his Grave; but
yet to take away all suspicions in that kind, let every one know, that the
Volume of Mr. Perkins his Works, in which is contained that Treatise of
Witchcraft, was not put in print by himself, but were certain Writings found in
his Study after his death, most of which were taught by him in the Pulpit in
his Lifetime, but not all, and were put in press for the benefit of his Wife,
who had but small means for her maintenance in her widdowhood; which thing
being well considered, it may well be questioned, whether that treatise of
Witchcraft, was of his own writing or not, and it it was, yet it may well be
questioned, whether he wrote it, with an intent to teach it for Truth openly,
or only with an intent to confute such Heresies, as had formerly been delivered
by Bodinus, Hiperius, and other popish writers, if he had lived, for if it be
well considered and compared with those Authors, it is only a collection of
mingled notions out of them, put into another Method; also it might be foisted
in among his writings, by some Ignorant or Popish Heretic, who desired to
bolster his Errors under the name of so famous an Instrument in the Church as
Mr. Perkins was; also it might be added to his works, by those that were
appointed by his Wife to put his works in print, either for the bolstring of
their own Errors, or for the enlarging of the Volume, to make the Book sell the
better; yea many ways Mr. Perkins may be clear from being the Author of that
Treatise; But yet if some will still believe that it is his work, let them but
compare it with the Scriptures, and see how little consonant it is with the
Scriptures; he delivers the common Error, that Witches can kill by
Witchcraft, have made a league with the Devil, have the Devil at their call,
that the Devil is ready at a watchword given him by the Witch to do mischief,
and many such strange inventions, whereof there is not the least inckling in
the Scriptures; and therefore need no farther confutation.

Mr. Gaul answered.
SInce the finishing of my Book, there is come to my hand the works of a fourth
English Writer, Mr. John Gaul, a Minister of Staughton in Huntington shire,
whom I find (in his zeal for God, and in his Religious hatred to the barbarous
cruelty of this age, in persecuting the poor and innocent) much inclining to
the Truth, and I cannot say of him, but his intentions were godly; but yet has
been so swayed by the common tradition of men, and the impetuousnesse of the
times, and the authority of such Writers, as he calls the learned, as that
although he has written some Truths (in preaching also whereof he has done
much good in Gods Vineyard, in laboring to stay that bloody persecution on
foot against the poor and Innocent) yet he has much swerved from the Truth of
this subject of Witches and Witchcraft, in that he yeildeth at all to the
common contagion of Error that has defiled the World, (not that Witches are,
for that were my Error to deny, seeing the Scriptures do manifestly condemn
them) but that Witches in the Scripture sense, are such as have made a familier
compact with the Devil, and receive power from him to kill and the like; I
wonder (but that the hour of darkness is not yet fully past) that so many
Ministers should still wander in this darksome imagination; what least
intimation or description of such a kind of Witch has God given us in the
Scriptures? or of Devils in the corporal shape of Imps, making a familier
compact with any of mankind, or any ground for such imaginary whimses of man's
brain, what consequence is there in Logical dispute, or in Theological
Principles, that he that denies these fantasies, denies that there is a
Devil, and so finally that there is a God; the Scripture teaches us that
there is a God, and likewise a Devil, or Devils; but what Scripture speaks
of a familiar Devil, or Jmp? or that a Witch can kill by Witchcraft, or hurt
either body or goods, by Witchcraft, by the Devils help, either by Gods
permission or without? I rather think that this forsaking of the Scriptures,
and delivering for Doctrine the traditions of Antichristian Popish Writers, is a
forsaking of God, and consequently a denying of God; he says he could
instance from story, how many have had no Faith of Witches being, till their
bewitched body or goods, has served to unwitch them of their opinions and
conceit; is this a Theological way of Argument to ground a Doctrine upon vain
reports, and phantasmes without Scriptures? yea flat contrary to the
Scriptures? Deuteronomy. 32.39. 1 Samuel 2.6, 7. dare any man contrary to those and many
places of Scripture (when he is afflicted in body or goods) ascribe that to a
Witch (upon vain Fantasy, and carnal reason, and superstitious imaginations,
and foolish traditions) without Scriptures, which by the Scriptures we are
taught to ascribe only to God? yes, men dare do so, and Ministers dare teach
so, And this is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men
love darkness rather than light. But now to speak to the man himself, of whom I
have written sparingly. Mr. Gaul, if this work of mine shall come to your
hand, as yours has come to mine, be not angry with me for writing Gods Truth,
I am sure you shall get more estimation among true Believers, more favor with
God, and do more good in Christ's Vineyard by acknowledging your error, and by
embracing Gods Truth, than by being carried away with the streams of these
floods of iniquity that have over-flowed the Christian world. You say in your
second case, page 24. It is hard to observe any specifique difference of
Witches, in which you acknowledge the subject to be difficult to write of; Sir,
I have given you full specifical descriptions of them according to the
Scriptures, then although Sir, you be learned in other things, disdain not to
learn of me the truth of this subject, I doubt not, but if you had first read
my Book, your own Book had been more perfect, Suffer not a Witch to live;
Prestigiatricem, a Juggling person, that works false Miracles to seduce the
people to Idolatry, Exodus 22.18. Jofias destroying of Witches, 2 King. 23, 24.
what was it but pulling down the Idols, with their Adjuncts, Oraclers, and
South-sayers, that were the Idol Priests that seduced the people? Examine the
places which are your own quotations, then Sir, I entreat you, in Christ's name,
that as you have been fervent for Gods Cause with Apollos, Act. 18.25. so learn
of me the way of God more perfectly, as he did of the Disciples, verse. 26.
farewell Sir, the Spirit of God be your familiar Spirit to guide you in the
truth:

Non quis? Sed quid?
Master Giffard answered.
THere is yet another Book come to my hand written by Mr. George Giffard, an
able Minister of Gods Word in Maldon, which because the common way of some man's
arguing is by questioning, what say you to this? and what say you to that
Author? therefore I will give a brief description of his Tenants, which are
chiefly three; the first is, That a VVitch can not by a Familiar, or by any
craft, any way hurt, or weaken the life, health, or estate of any man, by
bewitching with disease, or infirmity, either Man or Beast, or hurting his
Goods; and this he proves plainly by Scripture, and Reason, as I have also
done in my Second Book of this Discourse.

The second Tenent is, That Witches have Imps and Familiars. The third Tenent
is, That these Familiars do nothing really, but only do deceive the VVitch, by
making her believe they do that which comes to pass upon Man or Beast by
Divine providence; but for these two last Tenants he does not prove by
Scripture as he did the first, nor yet affirm for truth, but only being
overcome by the strength of common report, grounded upon the Confession of such
as have been executed, he only yields to those strong delusions which have
deceived many, Hypothetically arguing, if Witches have such Imps or Familiars,
they are only deceived by them; but herein is he not confident, and therefore
these two last Tenants being not confirmed by him do confirm nothing, and for
the first of the two, That Witches have Imps, is sufficiently disproved in my
Second Book, and that all their Confessions are no argument; then for the last
Tenent, having reference to the first, it is in like manner nullified, for if
they have no Imps, nor no Familiar, then they are not deceived by them, nor do
believe or confess any such thing, wherein they seem to him to be deceived, any
further than Confession is wrung from them, by them who are the deceivers of
themselves and others, by the Deceiver of the World, that dwells in them,
except sometimes by the depth of Melancholy, or distempered brain, as I have
formerly demonstrated in my Second Book, and therefore need no further answer.

So much for this Author who I believe had more of the Spirit of truth in him
than many of his profession.

Now for all that have written in that kind, I summon all VVitch-mongers to
show me in the Old or New Testament, which are given as a rule of truth, the
least inference of any such Doctrine as is delivered by them. Also, I desire any
man of right understanding, to compare them with the Scriptures, and so compare
also this my Book with the Scriptures, and to see which of them is most
consonant with the Scriptures, and which is most dissonant from the Scriptures,
and so to try them by Gods touchstone of truth.

The Conclusion.
TO conclude, you that are convicted of your Errors, and yet do make a light
matter of it, and lay it not to heart, was Cain and Ahab accursed for
murdering of each of them one man, and do ye make it a light matter to have
murdered thousands by your ignorant doctrine? What will it avail at the latter
day, that ye have preached, and prayed, and spread forth your hands, and made
great stir in pretense of Religion? If Christ shall say, Depart from me ye
workers of iniquity, and shodders of innocent blood? if thousands that are
wrongfully slain shall rise up in Judgment against you, if it shall be said to
many Ministers, and Preachers of the Word, in that ye have not taught against
these abominations, ye are partakers in them.

Causes of upholding the damnable Doctrine of Witches power.
IF I did not aim at brevity, I might enlarge this Volume upon these
particulars following, which I will only name and leave them, being the causes
of upholding the opinion of Witches power.

1 Some Ministers for want of due examining of the Scriptures, have taught in
the Pulpits unwarily? and inconsiderately, the Doctrine of Witches Power, as
also some have published their Works in print.

2 Many Ministers although they are of the contrary opinion, yet have neglected
to beat down the common fantastical conceit of people concerning Witches power.

3 The common hatred that all men do bear to a Witch, so that if any poor
Creature has the report of being a Witch, they join their hand with the rest
in persecuting, blindly, without due consideration.

4 The false reports that are commonly raised in that kind concerning Witches?
whereby men lead one another like wandering lost Sheep, to believe lies; it is
certain it was done in such a place, I have credibly heard it.

5 Vain credulity, which all men are naturally prone unto ever since Adams
Fall, that is a Vice whereby men are subject to believe every lying report,
being the ground of infidelity; Credula men's hominis, and erectae fabulis aures.

6 Infidelity, or not believing the Scriptures to be the only perfect rule of
righteousness, and touchstone of truth.

7 Ignorance of the Scriptures, either by wresting them, or by neglecting to
search them, or want of being able to read them, or when they are read, want of
ability to understand them; all such men may be led away with any opinion.

8 Generality of opinion makes weak people, and ignorant to argue, sure it is
safest to say, and think as others do.

9 Obstinacy in opinion in such as have some weak knowledge, let such be beaten
from one Argument they will fly to another, and beat them from all Arguments,
yet at last they will still hold their opinion.

10 Melancholy, which frames much representation in the mind of any terrible
report or doctrine (though it be groundless and false) and causes it to take
great impression in the deluded understanding.

11 Timerousness, whereby men like little Children, and Women especially, are
afraid of every idle fantastical report that they hear of Witches power,
especially if they be alone in the dark.

12 Cracked Fantasy, whereby many a man or woman, specially in Sickness have
strange Apparitions either in bed, or abroad, which they report to silly
people, and are believed, whereas it is nothing but their broken and hurt
fancy, occasioned in some by sickness or distemper, in some by much
Drunkenness, in some by a blow on the head, and in Scholars sometimes by
overmuch study, whereby they presently conceit, and are judged by others to be
bewitched, or at least to be pursued by a Witch, or by a Witches Imps, and
judge so themselves.

13 People that are handled by strange Diseases, as Children in Convulsion
Fits, or Women in Fits of the Mother, and the like, are by ignorant beholders;
and sometimes by ignorant Physicians said to be bewitched, as were Frogmontens
Children said to be falsely.

14 Old Wives Fables, who sit talking, and chatting of many false old Stories
of Witches, and Fairies, and Robin Good Fellow, and walking Spirits, and the
Dead walking again; all which lying fancies people are more naturally inclined
to listen after than to the Scriptures.

15 Another abominable cause is the suffering of Impostors to live, such as
silly people call Cunning men, who will undertake to tell them who has
bewitched them, who, and which of their Neighbors it was, by the delusions of
such Impostors, many poor innocent people are branded with a report of being
Witches, by reason of which report coming first from a Witch, they are in
process of time suspected, accused, arreigned, and hanged.

A Reference to Mr. Scots Treatise of Spirits, and also the Opinion of Luther
concerning Devils.
I Might further enlarge this Volume with a Treatise of Spirits, or the nature
of Devils, concerning which people have much abused themselves for want of
knowledge in the Scriptures, but for brevity I refer the Reader to Mr. Scot,
who has excellently written in the latter end of his Discovery of Witchcraft,
a Discourse called, A Treatise of Spirits; also I thought good to add in brief
the words of Luther concerning Devils, which are these; De phreneticis sic
sentio, omnes moriones and qui usu rationis privantur a daemonibus vexari, non
quod ideo damnati sunt, sed quod variis modis Satan homines tentat, alios
gravius, alios lenius, alios longius, quod medici multa ajusmodi tribuunt
naturalibus causit, and remediis aliquando mitigant, fit quod ignorant quanta
sit potentia and jus daemonum. Christus non dubitat, curvam illam anum in
Evangelio, vinctam a Satana dicere; and Petrus Actorum decimo, oppressos a
Diabolo dicit, quos Christus sanarat, ita etiam multos surdos, claudos malitia
Satana tales esse, Deo tamen premittente; denique pestes, febres, atque alios
graves morbos opera damoniorum esse, qui and tempestates incendia frugum
calamitates operantur vere affirmamus; Summa mali sunt Angeli, quid mirum, si
omnia faeciunt mala humano generi noxia and pericula intentent, quatinus Deus
premittit; etiamsi plurima talia herbis, and aliis remediis naturalibus curari
possunt, volente Deo, and miserente nostri, exemplum Jobi endicat, quae passus
sit a Satana, quae medicus omnia naturaliter fieri, and curari assereret;
sciendum est igitur phreneticos a Satana tentari saltem temporaliter, as Satan
non faceret phreneticos? qui corda replet fornicatione, coede, rapina, and
omnibus pravis affectibus; summa, Satan proprior nobis est quam ullus credere
possit, cum sanctissimis sit propinquissimus adeo, ut ipsum Paulum colaphizare
and Christum vehere possit quor sum libet. These are the words of Luther, and
where he says at the last, that the Devil could carry Christ whither he
listed, it is his error, for the Devil did not carry him at all, but led him
by temptation, as appears, Luke 4. and as I have more at large written in my
Second Book, in my answer to the Sixth Objection, if you look back to it; yet
from this brief Discourse of Luther may be observed, That the Devil may be said
to be an instrument in all Diseases, crosses, and calamities, as Luther proves
by the Story of Job, and the saying of Christ concerning the woman, Luke
13.11.16. and as is expressed, 2 Thessalonians. 2.18. Luke 11.14. but yet it must
necessarily be true that the Devil is Gods Instrument in all these afflictions,
as Job acknowledges in all his afflictions, ascribing all to God, Chap.
1.22.2.10.9.34. and God claims these things as his own Prerogatives, Lev. 26.
Deuteronomy. 32.39.

From all which it is fully concluded, That the Devil is only Gods instrument
to afflict and tempt the righteous, to afflict, tempt, and torment the wicked,
and in all this does nothing but by Gods peculiar dispensation, not by a bare
permission, nor by the appointment of a VVitch; whatsoever some have written
more concerning the nature of Devils, as that there are Incubus, and Succubus,
the He Devil, and the She Devil, that the Devil makes a League with Witches,
and that the Devil is the Witches Instrument as well as Gods, and that by Gods
permission; that the Devil walks in Churchyards, and near Sepulchers, and in
desolate places; that he is black, that he assumeth a Corporal shape, that he
has a Cloven Foot, that he walks in the dark Nights, that he sometime
roareth, and makes a fearful noise, that he uses to scare people in VVoods
and Fields, that there are fiery, aerie, earthy, and watery Devils, that there
are degrees, orders, and supremacies among Devils, that some are greater in
power than others; these are all dissonant to Scripture, and are only the vain
fancies of men, who delight to fill the world with Fables.

And whereas some do argue from Matthew 12.24 that some Devils are greater in
power than others, and also in degree and superiority, because Beelzebub is
there called, The Prince of Devils, it is to be understood that the Pharisees
called him the Prince of Devils, because Baal-zebub was the chief Idol by which
the Israelites had been defiled sometimes, and was by them called therefore,
the chief Devil, or the Prince of Devils, and was called by them Beelzebub, by
an Antithisis, putting e for a, which Idol was spoken of, 1 Kings, 1.2. and
Beza and Tremellius do both agree in that Exposition, that it is meant of
Baalzebub, if we look their Notes upon Matthew 10.25. and Beelzebub may be
interpreted, The Prince of Flies, not because Devils are Flies (as some imagine
in the Story of Francis Spirah) but because his Temple was pestered with Flies
through the smell of the abundance of Flesh that was there spent daily, and
also because the Country being much troubled with Flies, the people used to
seek to that Idol for help against that annoyance of Flies, says Beza.

Lucifer is also by some thought to be the chief among Devils, and that when he
fell, all his Angels fell with him, from that place in Isa. 14.12, 13, 14, 15.
but that is only an Allegorical exposition of the fall and exile of
Nebuchadnezzar, who is there Metaphorically called Lucifer, because of his
pride, in exalting himself as far above others in his own thought, as the
bright Morning Star exceeds other Stars.

He that would read these things more at large handled, may read Mr. Scot
aforesaid, as also a little Book, called, The Deacon of Spirits.

An Instruction for Lawyers.
YOu that are learned in the Laws of the Land, are commonly found to be the
most able and worthy to be Judges of the people, and these Laws which are the
rule of Justice, are concluded by you, all to be exceeding good Laws; and
therefore it must needs follow that such opinions as do make these Laws of no
validity are absurd opinions, therefore I am bold to state two Questions, or
Cases, and leave them to your Wisdoms.

I. A man is found dead in the Fields, who a little before went out well;
another man being his Adversary is questioned for his Life, as being suspected
to have murdered him; this man proving that he was a hundred, or two hundred
miles from the place where and when the man dyed, is quit by the Law. I demand
then, what Justice is in that Law that quiteth him, if he might send the Devil,
or leave order with the Devil or with his Imps, to Witch him to death at that
time?

II. Two men strive together, one overcomes and beats the other, who
presently sickneth, and within three days dies; the other is questioned by the
Law for his Life; what Justice were in this Law, if an old Witch hating one, or
both of them, and seeing opportunity should have power to witch the one to
death, that so she might cause the other to be Hanged for him?

FINIS.

