ADVERTISEMENT Be AGNES CAMPBEL, Relict of the Deceast Master WILLIAM GVTHRIE,
Minister of the Gospel, to such, Unto whose hands some printed Papers, called
SERMONS bearing the said Master Willam his name, may come.
CHRISTIAN READER.
BEing much afflicted with the sight of some Printed Papers, or Sermons, to
which the name of my Worthy Husband (now with the Lord) is prefixed, by these
that have published them, because I found many things therein injurious, not
only to his memory, but to the Truth: I was therefore at the pains to cause
compare them with his Notes I have beside me; And likewise to Interrogate some
of his most Judicious and Conscientious ordinary Hearers, yet living, anent
the same: And after due and serious consideration of the whole, I dare very
confidently declare, that they are not the genuine Works and Sermons of my
foresaid Husband; which may be very evident to all that knew him, considering
the perplexed style, the confusion, and want of connection, and a multitude of
vain repetitions that are oft-times to be found therein; as also want of that
clear method familiar to him, together with the un soundness sometimes of the
matter, which was known to be far from him, being well instructed in the form
of sound words, which in all his discourses to the people he held fast.
Moreover there be many things therein clear nonsense, and not intelligible by
the Reader a fault very far from his way in Preaching. And this is to be the
less wondered, at seeing, that when he was yet alive, some made bold to Print
some Sermons of his without his knowledge, which he would not own, and
therefore was necessitate to emit these few Sermons himself, Entitled, The
trial of a Saving Interest in Christ, to the advantage of the truth, which had
been otherwise wronged.

IT IS hoped therefore that every conscientious person will be so far tender
of the Truth, and of the Fame of such a faithful Minister of the Gospel, who is
not now to speak for himself, that they will not look upon these Printed
Sermons as his Works, seeing they have been put forth to the publict view,
without the knowledge or consent of any of his Relations or Brethren of the
Ministry, who were particularly acquaint with him, and his way of Doctrine, and
to whom, if he had minded any thing for the Press, he would have left the
charge or the oversight thereof. The World has already had a taste of his
gift, and of the Spirit that appeared in him in the foresaid useful little Book
published by himself, and blessed of God to the Edification of many, which I
hope will easily move the observing and Judicious Reader to have these lately
Printed under his name in suspicion. I shall add no more, but for the future
entreat that nothing bearing his name may be looked upon as his, that is not
attested by his nearest Relations, and his Brethren of the Ministry.

I am Thy well-wisher A. C.


