AN ADVERTISEMENT FROM THE Society of Chemical Physicians, TOUCHING MEDICINES
by them prepared, in pursuance of his Majesty's Command, For the Prevention,
and for the Cure of the PLAGUE.
IT Being a matter avowed by the most laborious Physicians practicing in this
famous City, yea and now openly acknowledged by those also in several Prints,
who are principally addicted to Galenick Doctrines and Medicines, that Remedies
made by Chemical preparation are of greater Excellence than any other, for
preservation from Diseases, as well as for the Cure of them, and that the other
failing, the people are to have recourse unto Chemical Medicines, whereby it is
clearly given and granted, that they are the most powerful and efficacious
Means, and thereupon have been by those worthy Persons particularly recommended
for public use, in this sad time and deplorable Estate of Pestilential
Contagion; We cannot but with all our hearts congratulate our Brethren,
touching this their so seasonable and ingenuous an acknowledgment, rejoicing to
see the day, that the unhappy Controversy betwixt us and them, touching the
efficacy of Medicines, is now at an end: so that we look on it as a good Omen
toward a more full and free coming over to us in the future, even of the most
averse of those that till of late have been otherwise inclined; and it gives
hope, that we may one day come to a more Brotherly correspondence, and
unanimously endeavor to reform and rectify the state of Medidicine, both as
to Principles and Practice, according to the Chemical and more ancient way.

We therefore, the Society of Chemical Physicians of London, being deeply moved
with commiseration of the calamity befallen this great City by the Pestilence,
and perceiving it every day to increase notwithstanding the use of those common
Galenical Medicines, which have been recommended to the people by others, have
thought fit, in obedience to his Majesty's command, to hold several meetings,
and have thereupon deliberately consulted about the preparation of such
Medicines, both Preservative and Curative, by Art Chemical, as are not borrowed
out of former Authors, but agreeably devised and fitted to the nature of the
present Pest, which in many things differs from the Pests of former times, or
in Foreign Countries where those Authors lived. Which Medicines so prepared we
here offer to our Countrymen, not doubting but that the great God, who has
given us a heart and light to search into the mysteries of Nature, and the
mysterious nature of diseases, will so second our endeavors by his special
blessing, as to make us and our Remedies as his own hands, to secure the sound,
and save the sick from this devouring Malady.

In pursuance whereof, it is thought meet to signify the places, to which all
persons concerned may repair and be furnished with the Antidotes so by us
prepared, at reasonable Rates, with Directions how to use them in order to
Preservation, and in case of Cure.

Viz. at the Houses of
Dr. William Goddard, in St. John's Close near Clarkenwel. Dr. Marchamont
Nedham in St. Thomas Apostles. Dr. Edward Bolnest in Jewen-street near
Cripplegate. Dr. Thomas Williams in Two-Cranes Court in Fleet Street. Dr.
Everard Manwaring next door to the Blew Boar at the foot of Ludgate Hill
without Ludgate. Dr. George Thompson next to the Blew Boar Inn without Algate.
Dr. Thomas O Dowde at his House against St. Clements Church in the Strand. Dr.
Richard Barker in Barbican.
These Places are named, because our Society is not yet provided (as we intend
suddenly to be) of a Public House or College, with public Officers, to whom
the people might be directed to resort for the Medicines; and there is a
necessity of doing somewhat immediately, because of the present distress of his
Majesty's Subjects.

Licensed 28 June 1665.

London Printed for John Starkey, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Mitre
near Temple Bar.


