BRIEF NOTES Upon the whole Book of PSALMS.

Put forth for the help of such who desire to exercise themselves in them, and
cannot understand without a Guide.

Being a pithie and clear opening of the Scope and Meaning of the Text, to the
capacity of the Weakest.

By GEORGE ABBOT.

ACTS 18. verse. 30, 31. And Philip said unto the Eunuch, Understand thou
what thou Read? And he said, How can I except some man should Guide me?
LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM BENTLEY, and are to be sold by John Williams at the
Crown, and Francis Eglesfield at the Mary-gold, in S. Paul's Churchyard. Anno
Dom. 1651.

TO The truly Religious and Virtuous, Mris. JOAN PUREFOY Wife to the Honorable
Colonel, William Purefoy of Caldecote in Warwickshire, Esquire, a Member of
this present PARLIAMENT.
THe Authors name bespeaks entertainment for this Book with those that knew
him, and the work it self, with those that knew him not. The return of it unto
you (whose interest and property therein is greater than can be derived by any
dedication) may peradventure at the first sight, have the like operation upon
you which those words of Jospeph's brethren had upon their father Jacob. Is not
this thy sons Coat? But upon further insight into, and more inward acquaintance
with it, you shall find that he who took a great part of your heart with him
out of this World, Has distilled into this work so much of those sweet spirits
and graces which were fragrant in him while he lived; as may represent and
continue unto you, the fruition of him in that which was his better part:
besides whom you had no other object of maternall affection, and by whom there
was left no other offspring, but the fruit of his studies and pen; the more
lively characters of his heart and spirit, of which this is the last; drawn
forth unto the life immediately before his death; left as a legacy to the
people of God, and as an account of his expense of that time, which by reason
of bodily infirmities could not be employed in the service of the Commonwealth
in Parliament whereof he was a Member; There is not a line added to it* by any
other pencill, neither did it need any thing but midwifery to bring it forth
into the World, and present it unto you as his, or (if you please) as him. The
honor of which service pardon me, if I claim as of a kind of right, upon my
acquaintance with his studies, and his both frequent communications with me,
and obligations put upon me, for the greater part of twenty years together, in
which he lived under my Ministry, and in intimate correspondence with me,
whereby he put me into a greater debt to him than I can exonerate by this
acknowledgment, which indeed might lessen my testimony by misprision of
partiality, had he not left a blessed memory behind him for my justification
and encouragement: If I should set forth his spiritual abilities to the life,
which I decline, and rather choose to point out the way and means of his
improvement to so great a measure and maturity of them, and thereby render the
point at which he aimed, attainable by others that shall transcribe his copy,
by showing the line in which he moved to it. The method or discipline which God
used toward him at his first entrance into the school of Christ, was not
unlike to that of the Wilderness, wherein through the frequent recesses of the
spirit, and Gods turning the dark side of the cloud toward him, he was
exercised with fresh agitations and discomposures of spirit, so as (like
massive bodies) he could not settle upon his true center without previous
trepidation; whereupon he converted his studies and endeavors to the
settlement of his spiritual estate, and began to search the Scriptures for the
treasure hidden in that field, which together with his assiduity in hearing the
word Preached, his sucking the sweet out of such Books as had marrow and
experience in them, his constant trade with Heaven by Prayer, his communication
of experience, and conversation with such as knew Jesus Christ, brought him to
such firmness of consistence in his own spirit, as one that was the better
rooted by former shakings, to such fixedness in his principles, as one that did
not only understand the truth of them, but had tasted the goodness, and felt
the power of them, to such riches of spiritual experiences, as he became the
resort of troubled consciences, and a dexterous artist in swathing up tender
and weak infants in grace, and to such spiritualty of affection, as in whom the
primogeniall virtue and sense of Gods dispensations toward, and impressions
upon him in his conversion, or (as the Scripture speaks) the love of his
espousalls continued fresh and vigorous: As for his proficiency and progress in
the way of Christianity, it was thus advanced in matter of knowledge or
doctrine, his chiefest inquiry upon any point was cui bono, of what proper use
and conducement it was unto practical holiness, or fruition of good, etc.
Searching out the nutrimentall pith or marrow that was in it, and not greatly
engaging his thoughts into opinions of contention or mere notion, which had no
kernel. In duties altogether unsatisfied, except he found the spirit acting,
and stirring in him, or were particularly sensible of the absence and
withdrawments of it. In company communicative, and trading in the staple
commodities of Heaven, Especially upon the Sabbath Day, wherein he used to
sequester his thoughts and words to the proper work of that day, and to divert
common and obvious occurrences into matter of spiritual insinuation, which day
he also vindicated in his Book entitled Vindiciae Sabbati, when that
controversy was rife and hot: and some began to lay open Gods enclosure into
common fields, and upon which day the Lord of the day honored him in the
defense of an unfortified House, by a very few assistants against the furious
assaults by fire and sword of a numerous and potent enemy. The memory of which
deliverance he kept alive in himself, and expressed his sense thereof even in his
last will and Testament: the rather doubtless in respect that you his ever
honored Mother being embarked in the same bottom with him at that time, was
supported with courage above your sex, and with faith above present sense, and
so brought clear off that threatening storm, by the good hand of the Lord your
God, unto whom (as you have learned and do know) it is all one to save, by few,
as by many, I shall say no more of him, thereby to aggravate your loss, (which
yet was not all yours, for the Family; the Town, the Country, were sensible of
the influence of his exemplary holiness) but shall pray for you a heart to make
a gain of it, by learning to walk with God without a crutch, and in him only
to make out all deficiency and wants of secondary helps, in whom every
creature-comfort is virtually and eminently contained; and so shall you quench
your thirst at the spring it self, whose waters are purest and which never
shall be dry. A lesson which you shall be often taught by the holy Psalmist;
and the godly Paraphrast, in this Book; whereof I need not say a word, being
therein prevented by the Author himself, in his Epistle to the Reader; who
shall here find the sweet spices punned, into a greater fragrancy, by the
Authors accommodating his style to the most vulgar capacity, for it was his
aim to elevate affections, which in Psalms and spiritual songs are the
predominant part, and therefore he wrote not so much to the eye as to the taste
which ( pardon the solecisme) is the best sense to read him with, so carrying
on the work in this Paraphrase as also in that of Job, as one that had not a
mere notionall or carnal knowledge of spiritual things, but that peculiar
light which they have which are taught of God; Without which even Scholars
themselves do see the beauty of them but by candlelight, and which that it may
increase in you as the light of the Sun unto the perfect day, shall be the
Prayer of

LONDON, June 17. 1650. Your ever obliged Servant In the work of the Lord
Jesus. RICHARD VINES

TO THE READER, In way of ARGUMENT and APPLICATION.
ALL Scripture was written by the holy men of God, as they were moved or
inspired by the holy Ghost, but this of the Psalms was not only written by a
holy man, but by a holy man in holy frames, who was not only moved by the
spirit to write them, but was in the spirit when he penned them; not so much
acted by external impulsion, as inward affection, warmth of zeal, and sensible
experience; For the Psalms being to be a special part of the worship of God in
all ages of the Church, whereby God not only speaks to us (as in other
Scripture) but we to him, in Prayer and praise, (the Arguments of almost all of
them) were therefore dictated by another spirit, than other Scripture, by the
spirit of grace and operation, not only of illumination, prophecy, or
inspiration; to show us, how God is to be worshipped, not only by holy
regenerate men (such as were all the sacred penmen) but by the regenerate part
of a regenerate man; else, Prayers nor praises neither come down from heaven,
nor go up to heaven; It was not enough to be a Priest to offer Sacrifice, but
it must be done by a holy man with holy fire. And therefore should we sing the
Psalms of David in the spirit of David, and read them as he writ them, with
frameable tempers to the matter treated. Of all Scripture, our meditation in
the perusal of this Book of the Psalms (so full of practical Gospel) ought
to be sweet and spiritual, of which one rightly affirms; Let all the rest of
the Scripture be the body, and this is the heart, so full of heavenly
affections: Every Psalm whereof is a spiritual pang, or fresh gail, breathed
by the holy Ghost on David's heart, and penned by him, and the rest, in
instanti, in heat of affection: His writing is his feeling, and so should be
thy reading; the music of the Temple should make music in the living Temples
of the holy Ghost, the sons of Sion: therefore have I labored not only to
render the proper, but also the full extensive meanings of the Psalmists by
congruous enlargements, to move the affections, as well as to inform the
judgment: That so David's spirit in these Psalms may be transmigrated into the
experienced Reader in proportionable power and energie, wherewith they were
conceived and digestedly put over by him to the Church; whereof (as of Christ)
he was a most lively type, wading through so many dangers, temptations,
ebbings, flowings, yea, and sins too, to create him to be a Looking-glass for
the Church and Spouse of Christ, who may be black yet comely, and can never pass
through any condition of sin or suffering, where first he has not led the way,
and shown the issue, whose varieties of providence, states, and tempers made
him of such an evangelicall spirit in the time of the Law, as that God styles
him a man after his own heart; so that in him we see, that neither great sins
nor great afflictions can separate us from the love and approbation of God,
though the one may cost us dear, and the other may lay us low, yet neither the
one nor the other can build up such a partition wall, but that the grapling
irons of Faith, Prayer, and Repentance are able to demolish it, and make way
for us to the throne of grace, whither if we can but come, we shall be sure to
speed; for grace can deny grace to none, that graciously ask it. And therefore
if ever we will gain that Encomium of being as he was, after Gods own heart,
(who ever loves a zealous penitent, better than a lukewarm innocent) it must
be by improving all advantages to the increase of Gospel-growth, thus. If at
any time God in his wisdom let us fall, or Satan by his subtility and strength
give us a fall, or we by our weakness catch a fall, all which, may be in one
and the same sin, then know, that that sin is thine advantage or opportunity,
which thou art to improve to mount thee to a higher rise of Gospel-ground, and
step forward toward more grace by the fresh exercise, or exercise of fresh
faith and humiliation, God being more pleased with us when we penitently and
faithfully confess our sin (wherein David was very ingenuous) than displeased
when we commit it. For though we are not to sin that grace may abound, yet when
we have sinned, its both our wisdom and duty too, to look that grace do abound,
and that we make a sanctified sin of it. Acts of sinning in the regenerate
(contrary to Philosophy) lessening the habits of sin. And so if we fall into
afflictions, there is another opportunity. (for the promise is, that all shall
work for good, and that, going in and out, we shall find pasture) yea, even a
price in our hands, which if improved by the exercise of seasonable and
suitable graces, will ready us in our Gospel-way, better than any trade-wind or
constant gail of providence can ever do. Several conditions make exceedingly
for setting forth the Art of God in the second Creation, as several creatures
do his skill in the first, which variety in both makes us to abound not only
with necessaries but delights, which Scripture calls things both new and old,
which no one condition unvaried can possibly render us capable of, for it is
said, all things work together for good etc. Alluding to the Art of the
Apothecary in the mixing of various and diverse Simples, no one whereof alone
is able to work that effect that many jointly can. And when I speak of change
of states, I mean inward as well as outward, for the soul would be as a cake
unturned, excellent in something and stark naught in othersome, or as a vessel
unemptied, taking taint by long standing in any one condition, and therefore
God has ordered it, that the soul as the Sea shall purge it sel^ by its
constant vicissitudes of ebbings and flowings, whether the winds blow without
or not. But least Christians wonder at such fortunes as befall them, God has
shown us, that we sail but the course of other men that went before us, and
have landed safely through many cross winds and high Seas in a happy issue or
conclusion, and David is the highest Sea-mark in all the Bible for men of
shipwracked souls, bodies, states, or names, to cast their eye upon; who ever
lived that endured such, and such variety of affliction, for that he was to be
the type as of the Crown, so of the cross of Christ, yea, and of every
Christian, or the Church in general. And therefore what state soever thou
be in, the Psalms are as an Apothecaries stop, full of boxes, and they are
full of all manner of store for men in all tempers and distempers; at all
times, and in all tunes to make use of, especially when thou have to do in a
good cause against a wicked enemy. Bodily weakness disabling me for other
imploiments, gave me opportunity to make thus much more progress in
Scripture-paraphrase, and though the Psalms (which being so frequently used
ought the better to be understood) may prima facie seem to need none, yet they
that look into them with inspection, will find much more sense than lies above
board, besides that of coherence and connection (the hardest part of paraphrase)
which most Readers omit, and most expositours neglect, rendering though a true
sense of the Text, if disjoined yet, not carefully considering the scope of the
contexture, they give not the sense in its full propriety, which is the
endeavor of

Thine, in the work of the Lord. G. F.

Advertisements premised.
WHerein the word Maschil is prefixed to a Psalm, it imports it to be a Psalm
of direction, instruction, or information, in some sort or other.

Where the word Selah is affixed to any sentence or verse, it is to be
understood by way of Emphasis, or as an Emphaticall close to the matter
foregoing suitable to it, by way of Exaggeration, or Amplification, for
Impression sake. And so in like sort, the word Higgaion, which signifies to
muse or meditate, is to be taken, when and where it is affixed to a sentence,
as where Higgaion Selah concludes a verse.

The first PSALM.
The Contents.
The Prophet to induce to godliness and dissuade from wickedness, shows in this
Psalm, that the first of these does only make men happy and blessed, and the
other does certainly and eternally make men miserable.

1 Would thou be a blessed man? BLessed is the man that walks not in the
counsel of the ungodly, nor stands in the way of sinners, nor sits in the
seat of the scornful.
mistake not then, but know upon the word of a Prophet speaking from God, that
He, and He only is here, and shall be for ever hereafter, happy and blessed
(to wit, with the favor of God, true peace of conscience, and joys of heaven,
the only true happiness) that maugre the opinion of the world to the
contrary, shuts his ear to the sinful persuasions of wicked men, not suffering
himself to be seduced to lead their lives: much less willingly and impudently
gives himself over to a course of sinning, and least of all with brazen face
scorns and opposes the ways of God and them that walk them.

2 But on the contrary, But his delight is in the law of the Lord, and in his
law, does he meditate day and night.
is ruled by the Word, studying it and walking those ways which it prescribes
and commands, with as much pleasure and content of mind, as wicked men take in
sin, keeping it in mind and memory to order his ways according to it, that in
nothing, nor at no time, sin may mislead him.

3 And God shall so bless this his holy care and industry, And he shall be
like a tree planted by the rivers of water that brings forth his fruit in his
season, his leaf also shall not wither, and whatsoever he does shall prosper.
that his soul shall be plentifully fed from heaven, with the never-failing
influences of Grace and Consolation, to the making him fruitful in every good
work and work, comfortable in every condition, and enable him to hold forth a
holy profession throughout prosperity and adversity, to the end, (maugre the
world and wicked men) to the glory of God and honor of Religion, and his own
great advantage too here as well as hereafter, thereby procuring the blessing
of God upon all he has and does.

The ungodly are not so, but are like the chaft which the wind drives away.
4 Whereas the wicked have no firm footing in any good condition, for in the way
they walk, God will never bless them, nor respect them, but as they are naught,
so will he set them at naught, and will make it appear he does so, when he
executes his displeasure upon them, which shall part them from the prosperity
they enjoyed in this life, with a fearful farewell, never exspecting to see good
day again.

Therefore the ungodly shall not stand in the judgment, nor sinners in the
congregation of the righteous.
5 For the conscience of their wicked ways, and the expectation of that just and
fearful sentence, Go ye cursed, to be pronounced upon them, shall make them
hang the head in deep despair at the great Assize, when as the godly shall be
able to lift up their heads with joy, nor shall such sinful wretches ever set
foot within heavens threshold, or have any fellowship or share there in the
happiness of the saints.

For the Lord knows the way of the righteous, but the way of the ungodly
shall perish.
6 For however wicked men that know not things that differ, think as well and
better of themselves and their ways, than of the godly and theirs. Yet God
knows the difference, and shall one day make them to know it too, when he comes
to judge and reward every one according to his works, then he will make it
appear what notice he took of the godly, and how he approved them the world
contemned. And the wicked they shall see and find for all their confidence and
jolity, where their way will end, and to what a woeful condition it will bring
them at last. Even to everlasting destruction.

Second PSALM.
David finding great opposition in his coming to the Kingdom, both at home by
the House of Saul, and they that sided with them, and also abroad by
confederacy of neighbour-Princes and People. He shows them both their folly and
danger in so doing; for that as a Prophet he does assure them that God has
designed him to rule both over Jews and Gentiles, as a figure of Christ's doing
the like in his spiritual Kingdom all the world over, and therefore exhorts
them to desist, and submit to the will of the Lord; and not to their utter
undoing put from them the Grace that is offered them in Christ, (whose type
only he was, and of whose Kingdom he prophesies) which would make them blessed
for ever. Psalm 2.


1 HOw senselesly do the Gentile and Heathen nations amongst us and about us,
WHy do the heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain thing?
yea and so many that are of Israel too, so violently oppose my Government, and
refuse their subjection to me? which nevertheless shall be effected maugre all
their rage and resistance, for that herein I am to be a type of Christ the Son
of God, his universal Sovereignty over Jews and Gentiles, which by the wicked
of both sorts shall in like manner be opposed, but in vain, for his spiritual
Kingdom, his Church, shall prosper in spite of all the world, as shall my
temporal.

2 Yea mighty Princes and great Statesmen by their worldly power and wisdom,
The Kings of the earth set themselves, and the Rulers took counsel together,
against the Lord and against his anointed, saying,
both within Israel, and without in many neighbour-nations, set themselves with
all their might against me, but in so doing they fight against God, and against
me, not for mine own sake (who never sought the Kingdom) but because the Lord
had anointed and designed me to it, in a figure to pourtray out Christ and his
Kingdom by me, who likewise shall be so opposed.

Let us break their bands asunder, and cast away their cords from us.
3 They say in effect both Princes and People, we will not be subject to David,
nor under his Government, but in so saying, they also in effect say, they will
not be subject to God, nor have his Son Christ to rule over them, neither him
nor me.

He that sits in the Heavens shall laugh, the Lord shall have them in
derision.
4 And therefore (though they set light by me, and think themselves able enough
by their worldly power and policy to crush me, yet) he that reigns in Heaven,
in whom I trust, being engaged in my quarrel, contemns their pride, and laughs
at their foolishness, for that he both can and will subjugate them to me, and
in me to himself.

Then shall he speak unto them in his wrath, and vex them in his sore
displeasure.
5 And if they will needs provoke him to anger, and put him to use his power,
refusing to submit to his Scepter and mine, they shall then find him a potent
and wrathful enemy in his own and my behalf, and such an one as will easily
subdue and destroy them, and revenge himself to the full upon their rebellious
stubbornness against him and me.

Yet have I set my King upon my holy hill of Sion.
6 For as a Prophet in the Name of the Lord I pronounce it. That maugre what man
can do, the Lord shall certainly set me over Israel, and establish my throne in
Jerusalem where his holy Temple shall be built, as the chosen type of Christ,
who shall rule by the Scepter of his Holiness in and over his Church, whereof
Sion is a type, maugre all the enemies both of him and me.

I will declare the decree the Lord has said unto me, Thou art my Son, this
day h^ve I begotten thee.
7 And further, that men may know they strive against the stream in opposing me,
I will tell them truly what the Lord has revealed to me concerning my self by
the spirit of prophecy; that is, That he has decreed me to be the figure of
Christ. And in a figure has said thus to me. Thou art and shall be my son,
that is, in the place and stead of mine only Son, the Heir of all things,
resembling the power that he shall have over his enemies, and the Government in
his Church which I shall give him, then when I have as it were begotten him a
new, and powerfully declared him to be so, by raising him from the dead, and
exalted him at my right hand in glory, as I have and shall do thee out of thy
low and troublous state, by anointing thee King, and setting thee in the throne
of Israel.

8 And as I will do by him, Ask of me and I shall give thee the Heathen for
thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession.
so will I do by thee, By his intercession the heathen Gentiles shall come
under his subjection, yea the most remote and furthest parts of all the world
as well as Judea, shall he possess and inherit by my gift, for to be his
people. And so at thy prayer and entreaty shall thou prevail over, and be
possessor of all them that rise up against thee both Jews and Gentiles, far and
near, to be thine and under thee.

9 Maugre all their resistance and rebellion, Thou shall break them with a rod
of iron, thou shall dash them in pieces like a potters vessel.
yet shall thou be set over them, and they miserably destroyed by thy power
that will not come under the Scepter, as shall all be that make resistance to
my Son Christ, whose wrathful vengeance will fall heavy upon such mortals as
refuse salvation from him, and subjection to him.

10 Now therefore, Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings: be instructed ye Judges
of the earth.
seeing I have told you the truth. Take warning and be advised even ye that are
Kings and Potentates here on earth, yet, to do your Homage and render obedience
and subjection in me, to the Lord, that rules in Heaven. Neither do you that
are the Judges and Sages of the world think your selves too wise to take Laws
from God, though here you give Laws to men.

Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling.
11 As high as you are, think not scorn to stoop to serve the Lord with fear of
his displeasure, and take heed your prosperity make you not forget your selves
and God, but use it soberly, and rejoice in it moderately, fearing to offend
him that raised you up, and can cast you down.

Kiss the Son lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way, when his wrath is
kindled but a little, blessed are all they that put their trust in him.
12 Take heed of rejecting Christ in rejecting me, who is Son and Heir of all
things, but yield obedience and do your homage unto him in believing what I
have said, and framing your course accordingly, least you turn that grace and
favor which he has offered you, by being willing to accept you for his
people, into heavy displeasure, and so forsaking the only way of happiness
which God has chalked you out in him, you perish and that everlastingly, when
as by refusing subjection to his gracious Government, you have once shut the
door of mercy upon your selves, and kindled his anger against you, the least
spark whereof will be of dreadful consequence to the rebellious. Therefore if
you would be happy and blessed, as I know all desire to be, then be assured of
this; That they, and they only are, and shall be so, that in humility and
faith embrace the mercy that is offered them in him, receiving him for their
Savior, and yielding themselves his thankful and obedient servants and
subjects, whose type and Prophet only I am.

Third PSALM.
David being much troubled at the unnatural and undutiful rebellion of his son
and subjects, makes his complaint to God, lamenting his enemies strength and
opprobries. But notwithstanding chears up himself by his faith in God to
restore him, as by an answer to a prayer he was assured. In the ^aith whereof
for all his many adversaries, he comforts himself and is confident, and prays
that God would make good this his confidence by delivering him now as
heretofore, in respect of his promise to make him a blessed type of Christ to
his people.

A Psalm made by Davidupon occasion of his flying from Absalom his son, Psalm
3. A Psalm of David when he fled from Absalom his son.
when he rebelled against him.

1 LOrd how strange and unexpectedly are new enemies risen up to molest and vex
me, LOrd how are they increased that trouble me^ many are they that rise up
against me.
when I was in hope of Rest and Peace, not only mine old inveterate ones of
the house of Saul, but even mine own offspring, and almost all Israel rebel
against me, and go about to take the Kingdom from me?

2 And to such straits am I now brought worse than ever, Many there be which
say of my soul, There is no help for him in God. Selah.
as that most men give me for lost, and by reason of my sin which has caused
this trouble, they think me to be utterly out of favor with thee, so that they
are confident they shall prevail, for that thou have quite rejected me, which I
would have them know would be to me the worst of evils.

3 But though my sin be great, But thou, O Lord, art a shield for me; my glory
and the lifter up of my head.
for which thou have brought this distress upon me, so that I am esteemed as
quite undone; yet cannot I so easily yield up my faith, and distrust thy
promise and goodness. But am confident thou that art the Lord Almighty, and my
good God, wilt now deliver me from mine enemies as thou have ever done, and
wilt restore me to, and maintain me in, mine honor which thou have given me,
and turn my sorrow into joy.

I cried unto the Lord with my voice, and he heard me out of his holy hill.
Selah.
4 Nor do I speak this presumptiously or by guess, but am well assured of it, by
a special answer I received from God in mine earnest prayer, which I made
toward mount Sion, where his Ark resides. And this my confidence to find mercy
with God, I care not who know, so sure am I of it.

I laid me down and slept; I awaked, for the Lord sustained me.
5 Which has so comfortably secured me in mine own mind, as that for all my
trouble I can sleep as quietly, and wake as cheerfully as at any time before;
The Lord has given me such a spirit of confidence and assurance, that he will
be the same God to me that he has been, and will sustain me now as he has
done heretofore, maugre mine enemies.

I will not be afraid of ten thousands of people that have set themselves
against me round about.
6 So that, though I must needs confess in outward appearance my condition is
very forlorn, being fain to fly before mine enemies, yet I am so comforted in
God, as that my faith is far above my fear, so that though multitudes oppose
me, and the whole Kingdom (as it were) on every hand rebel against me, and but
a very few left to take my part, whilst God is for me, I care not who or how
many be against me.

Arise, O Lord, save me, O my God; for thou have smitten all ^ine enemies upon
the cheek bone: thou have broken the teeth of the ungodly.
7 And now, O Lord, let it appear that I speak the truth, show thy self in my
behalf, put forth thine Almighty power and save me, who thou know am thine,
and one that trusts in thee, and cause I have to do so, for thou have ever been
gracious to me, and defeated mine enemies, though they have been never so
strong, and I in never such peril, yet have thou brought me out, and set me
free from the malicious cruelty of all those ungodly ones that have opposed me,
for such and none other have ever been mine enemies.

8 So that it is neither the power of mine adversaries, Salvation belongs
unto the Lord: thy blessing is upon thy people. Selah.
nor the straits I am in, that shall make me doubt of deliverance, whilst I
have a God to trust in, who can, and will preserve me as he has done, (for to
him belongs the glory of my preservation) because he has firmly purposed,
and faithfully promised his chief and choicest blessing to his Church and
people by me, which shall not be frustrated, even his Son Christ to rule over
them, and to be victorious for them, of whom he has made me the Type. Oh that
Israel would understand this, submit to it, and praise him for it.

Fourth PSALM.
David first speaks to God by prayer, and gaining comfort and confidence
thereby, he then speaks to his enemies by advice, to leave off troubling him
and themselves in vain, for that they should never be able to get his Kingdom
from him, because God had given it to him, and would keep it for him, do what
they could, and therefore admonishes them not headily to persist in sinning by
rebelling, but to advise with their pillow in a point of so great concernment
and infallibility, and to desist and subject themselves to the will of God, so
should they find pardon and favor with him, which would be better to them than
all worldly happiness which they were so greedy of, and which for his part
seeing he had done, he feared nothing.

To him that is most skilful upon the stringed instrument Neginoth to which
this Psalm is chiefly set, Psalm. 4. To the chief musician on Neginoth. A Psalm
of David.
do I David that made it, recommend it, for the care and ordering of it in the
Quire.

1 O Lord suffer much in thy quarrel, HEar when I call, O God of my
righteousness: thou have enlarged me when I was in distress, have mercy upon
me, and hear my prayer.
and am put to many straits, in all which I fly to thee, therefore good Lord
hear my prayer in such cases: for though I my self be a sinner, yet I trust in
thy righteousness, and make thee the judge of mine innocence, of whose
goodness I have had large experiences, for thou have ever been faithful to
deliver me out of all my dangers. And therefore I will still believe in thee,
and pray to thee, that thou will continue thy mercy, as mine enemies continue
their malice, and hear me still as they give me cause to cry to thee for help.

O ye sons of men, how long will ye turn my glory into shame? how long will ye
love vanity, and seek after leasing? Selah.
2 O ye that are too weak to resist the Almighty, and as weak in understanding
heavenly things, how long will you perversely refuse to give and acknowledge
that honor which God has designed to me, and will certainly fulfill in making
me the Kingly type of the promised Messiah, and in that relation to submit unto
me? Will you never be reclaimed? But still vainly seek to destroy Christ's
spiritual Kingdom by endeavoring to dispossess me of mine, which you shall
never be able to compass, though you labor it never so, in hope to have it
from me, but deceive your selves and lose your labor. I would you would take
warning to seek the heavenly and not the earthly Kingdom which you are so
greedy of.

But know that the Lord has set apart him that is godly, for himself; the Lord
will hear when I call unto him.
3 Indeed be advised, and know to save you further trouble, that I have not
labored to advance my self to this honor of a King for ambition sake, but it
was God who had a favor to me for the grace sake he has wrought in me, that
has designed me to this place and office wherein he is pleased to use me, and
as he has raised me to it, so will he never suffer me to be divested of it,
but will be sure to relieve me, and give me the better of mine enemies,
whenever in my need I call upon him.

4 O that you would take my counsel to fear God, Stand in aw, and sin not:
commune with your own heart upon your bed, and be still. Selah.
and not proudly and passionately go on in sinning against him by opposing your
selves against me. Weigh but with your selves seriously the consequence of mine
advice as to your everlasting welfare, and in cold blood consider the strange
providence that have thus far carried on the work of mine advancement to the
Kingdom maugre mine enemies, and judge whether that do not promise as much as I
prophecy, and whether it were not therefore best for you to give over and be
quiet, I would you would consider it for your good.

5 Come, Offer the sacrifices of righteousness: and put your trust in the Lord.
be persuaded to submit and render your selves the righteous and obedient
servants and subjects of the Lord, as a sacrifice due to him that deserves and
expects it from you, and in so doing trust in the Lord for mercy and grace
which you shall be sure to find, and trust not in your own power and policy to
frustrate his will and pleasure.

6 How many gape after this worldly and outward prosperity, There be many that
say, who will show us any good? Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance
upon us.
and labor it tooth and nail, as if that were their chiefest good. But let me
tell you the way to be happy indeed, is to get the grace and favor of God to
belong unto you, this I for my part would have above all for me and mine to be
happy by.

7 For, Thou have put gladness in my heart, more than in the time that their
corn and their wine increased.
for my own part I am able to speak it to thy praise. That hereby O Lord thou
have more rejoiced my heart, than all the joys under heaven could have done,
the joy of harvest be it never so plentiful is nothing comparable to the
shining of Gods favorable countenance through Christ upon the soul, and the
assurance of his grace toward us in him.

I will both lay me down in peace, and sleep: for thou Lord only make me
dwell in safety.
8 Yea I am so comforted with his favor, and confident of his faithfulness in
protecting me, that all my troubles and dangers shall not disquiet me, but I
can peaceably enjoy my self and take my rest through faith in God. For whilst
I have thee O Lord on my side, and that thou do but thus fortify my spirit
with the assurance of thy faithfulness and favor, and keep fresh in memory
thy former mercies in my manifold deliverances, be my case never so desperate,
thou alone art security enough unto me.

Fifth PSALM.
David prays to God for audience and answer touching his preservation,
because of his firm confidence, vehement importunity; and his enemies
wickedness, which God hating in his holiness will therefore punish in his
justice. But because David was and ever would be a servant and worshipper of
God, he therefore hopes and prays that God will show him how to escape his
enemies, which without his direction he can never do, they are so full of
deceit and cruelty. For which he prays God to punish them, yea to take them
in their traps. But for the godly that trust in the Lord, and do love and fear
him, he prays they may ever prosper, and have cause of continual rejoicing in
outward preservation and inward manifestation of grace and favor, which
likewise he promises to such. Psalm. 5. To the chief musician upon Neginoth. A
Psalm of David.


To him that is most skilful upon the instrument Nehiloth to which the Psalm is
chiefly set, do I David that made it recommend it for his care and ordering of
it in the Quire.

GIve ear to my words O Lord, consider my meditations.
1 GOod Lord let me have thine ear to the prayer wherewith I humbly bespeak
thee, which is not a bare lip-labor, but springs from within me, out of the
most intense thoughts of my mind and heart, caused by the sense of my many
miseries, and confidence of thy gracious goodness, which I pray thee consider
to move thee to hear and grant my requests.

2 My grief makes me importunate and earnest with thee for audience, Hearken
unto the voice of my cry, my King, and my God, for unto thee will I pray.
to whose free gift and Sovereign bounty I pay the Homage of all I hold, and
in whom I only trust for protection, knowing and believing thee to be my
all-sufficient and good God. Therefore thou must not fail to hear and answer
me, for I will never cease calling upon thee, nor will I seek to any other but
thee.

3 My greatest confidence is in thee, My voice shall thou hear in the morning,
O Lord, in the morning will I direct my prayer unto thee, and will look up.
and therefore my first and chiefest addresses shall be to thee. It is thee O
Lord that I rely upon, and prefer before wicked shifts and humane policy, and
therefore with me thou shall have precedencie of all things both for time and
place. Early when others are otherways busied, contriving how to bring to pass
their wicked designs by evil means, then will I be supplicating thy throne of
grace O Lord, there will I be busied, and thither will I direct my prayer.

4 And in this I have great odds of mine enemies, For thou art not a God that
has pleasure in wickedness: neither shall evil dwell with thee.
for I know the righteous God loves righteousness, and takes no pleasure in the
wickedness of the wicked; How pleasing soever their ways be to themselves, they
are hateful to God, nor shall ever sin and iniquity find favor from him, be
acceptable to him, or be blessed by him.

5 And as sin, The foolish shall not stand in thy sight: thou hate all
workers of iniquity.
so the obstinate sinners shall have no favor from the Lord, for thou art too
righteous to love wicked workers, nay in thy holiness thou hate and abhorrest
them.

Thou shall destroy them that speak leasing: the Lord will abhor the bloody
and deceitful man.
6 They that think to prevail by lying and dissembling, thou will in thy
righteousness turn it to their ruin, thou Lord wilt not endure that the cruel
minded and fals-hearted should prosper.

But as for me I will come into thy house in the multitude of thy mercy: and
in thy fear will I worship toward thy holy Temple.
7 Let them think to thrive in those ways, for my part I am resolved of another
course, I Will keep close to thee, and trust firmly in thine abundant goodness
and mercy to me, which shall make me frequent thee with prayer and praise, and
in obedience to thy holy will, I will make mine humble supplications, and offer
up thanks-givings to thee through the mediation of Christ, who shall be figured
by the holy Temple.

Lead me, O Lord, in thy righteousness, because of mine enemies; make thy way
straight before my face.
8 O Lord be thou faithful to me and careful over me, that I fall not into the
snares of mine enemies, who are so watchful to catch me, show me the way thou
would have me to walk, and which thou will bless unto me for my preservation.

For there is no faithfulness in their mouth, their inward part is very
wickedness; their throat is an open sepulcher, they flatter with their tongue.
9 For if thou do not furnish me with wisdom, and instruct me how to escape,
they will be too hard for me, seeing they make no conscience to lie and
dissemble, they have no truth nor honesty in them, but are wholly composed of
malice, mischief, and deceit, its their study and delight, they care not what
they say nor how false they pretend, so that thereby they may devour me and
them that side with me, and to compass their cruel designs can speak fair and
mean false.

Destroy thou them, O God; let them fall by their own counsels: cast them out
in the multitude of their transgressio^s, for thy have rebelled against thee.
10 Thou that art a righteous God and hate such dealing, plague them for it,
that they may know thou know it, and abhorrest them for it, entrap them by
their own dissemblings, and take them in their own deceitful snares. Let their
sins which are so many and great, stir up thy just wrath against them to
confound them, and free thine Israel of them, for it is not me only but thee
that they set at naught, and rebel against.

11 And as thou show thy self an enemy to thine enemies, But let all those
that put their trust in thee, rejoice: let them ever shout for joy: because
thou defendest him: let them also that love thy name, be joyful in thee.
so let the world see thou art a friend to thy friends. Let all those that
faithfully trust in thee, and humbly depend upon thee, prosper in so doing,
when thine enemies weep let them rejoice, and that with infinite joy and
gladness, because of thy wonderful and apparent preservation of them. Yea let
those who believing in thee, do withal fear and love thee, not only joy in
thine outward preservation of them, but also inwardly in thy grace and
salvation.

12 For indeed thou Lord art and wilt ever be, For thou Lord wilt bless the
righteous, with favor will thou compass him as with a shield.
not only a God of outward blessings to him that loves thee, and trusts in
thee, but wilt also inwardly so manifest thy special and saving grace and
favor to him, as it shall make him dreadless of any outward danger, by being
assured through thy mercy of salvation it self.

Sixth PSALM.
God having brought upon David a fore sickness (or some grievous affliction) he
entreats to be chastized with fatherly gentleness, and that he would
compassionate the great misery he sustained both in body and soul, and
restore him to health and comfort, and not prosecute him to death, but let him
live to give him thanks: professing how many tears and prayers his sin and
sickness had cost him, and the rather, because of the malicious insolency of
his enemies, whom he concludes, God will certainly defeat of their hope and
desire, having heard his prayer and pitied his case, and assures them, it
shall not be long before they see it to their shame and grief.

To him that is most skilful upon the stringed instrument Neginoth; To the
chief musician on Neginoth upon Sheminith, A Psalm of David.
to be sung with a high voice to the eighth tune, or instrument of eight
strings called Sheminith, whereto this Psalm is chiefly set, do I David that
made it recommend it.

O Lord rebuke me not in thine anger, neither chasten me in thy hot displeasure.
1 O Lord thou have many ways afflicted me, for besides my many enemies, thou
have now brought upon me a very soar and painful sickness, which make me fear
thine anger is kindled against me, which I humbly knowledge my sins have
deserved. But good Lord remember mercy, and chastize me for them, not in thy
heavy displeasure, but according to thy Fatherly compassion.

Have mercy upon me O Lord; for I am weak: O Lord heal me for my bones are
vexed.
2 For though sin does provoke thee to anger, yet misery is wont to move thee
to show mercy, and truly, O Lord, my case is very woeful, for I am exceeding
low brought by my disease, therefore have pity upon me, for certainly thou
may do a great cure, and get thee a great deal of honor in recovering me
now I am grown to that extremity, that my very bones are tortured with pain,
and are not of strength to support me.

My soul is also soar vexed: but thou, O Lord, how long?
3 Nor am I only sick in body, but that which most makes me fear thy
displeasure toward me, is this. That my soul is also soar troubled, and as my
body can find no ease, so nor my soul find comfort, which indeed is a grievous
sadning to me. But thou O Lord, who I am sure art a God of mercy and
compassion, as well as of just displeasure, how long can thou behold me in
this case, and forbear to help me, specially with soul-comfort?

Return, O Lord, deliver my soul; o save me for thy mercy sake.
4 Good Lord change thy mind, and now after so great and long affliction become
my God again, by setting my soul (at least) at liberty from its comfortless
state. Look no longer at my sins to punish them, but consider and cast an eye
upon thine own merciful nature now a while, and for its sake restore me to
health and inward peace.

5 And so shall I live to praise thee, For in death there is no remembrance of
thee: in the grave who shall give thee thanks?
whereas if thou pursue me to death, what good will thou get by that, here if
thou letst me live I shall remember from time to time this mercy of my
recoverie, with many other good turns done me, to thy glory and praise; but in
the grave I shall forget all, for both the knowledge of thee, and the
remembrance of all the mercies thou have showed me (which I was wont to
celebrate with thankfulness in this life) must needs vanish when life it self
departs, and be buried in the grave with me in oblivion and silence.

6 Truly, I am weary with my groaning, all the night make I my bed to swim; I
water my couch with my tears:
Lord, I have had a very sad time of it, and a heavy burden have I born a
long while, which has cost me much sorrow and grief, in so much as my groans
have been incessant and without any ease or intermission, so that I am now
quite spent and weary, ready to give over for want of breath and spirit to
express my moanings, night nor day have I had any quiet, nor taken any rest,
but instead of sleep I have spent the night in continual weeping, and in stead
of repose upon my couch in the day time, I have done nothing but shed tears.

7 In so much as my sight is decayed, Mine eye is consumed because of grief; it
waxes old because of all mine enemies.
and mine eyes wasted with incessant sorrowing, and sunck into my head, as it
were with old age, because of thy heavy hand, and chiefly for the insultations
of my many enemies over me because of mine affliction.

8 But blessed be thy name; Depart from me all ye workers of iniquity; for the
Lord has heard the voice of my weeping.
me thinks of a sudden upon this my prayer I find my heart much cleared, and my
spirit well assured of thy favor and future mercy to me, so that now I hope
mine enemies shall have small cause to rejoice over me; for that I know thou will speedily disappoint that malicious and wicked desire they had of my
destruction, and wilt restore me, for though my grief has cost me many tears,
yet the Lord I perceive has taken notice of them, and pitied me for them.

The Lord has heard my supplication; the Lord will receive my prayer.
9 Yea he has listened to the supplications I made in mine extremity and will
not reject them, but according to my prayer will show me mercy, receive me to
favor, and restore me to health and comfort.

Let all mine enemies be ashamed and sore vexed: let them return and be ashamed
suddenly.
10 So that now I am confident it shall be mine enemies turn to hang their heads
for shame and vexation, and mine to triumph over them, when they see such an
unexpected and sudden alteration, and God to appear so much for me in it, who
they thought had been quite out of favor, and should have now perished in his
displeasure.

Seventh PSALM.
David being falsely accused to Saul by Cush to have abused his favor, and
made use of his reconciliation to strengthen himself against him and supplant
him in the Kingdom, and Saul by this slanderous report being enraged against
David, prosecutes him with greater hatred than before, whereupon David flies to
God by prayer for deliverance from Saul's enraged cruelty, pleading his
innocence in the thing whereof he was accused, whereupon he stirs up God to
stand for him against his cruel adversaries, for the promise sake which he had
made him of the Kingdom, and the service he would procure him in Israel
thereby, and withal prays him that he will judge him according to his
innocence, and the wicked according to their wickedness, for that he knew who
was in fault, he, or his enemies. And in confidence thereof prophesies his
enemies ruin and disappointment, and that he shall live to see the day when he
shall have cause to praise God for it, and when that day comes, he promises not
to fail to do it.

Psalm 7. Shiggaion of David, which he sang unto the Lord, concerning the words
of Cush the Benjamite.
A Psalm which David made and set to the tune of Shiggaion, whereby he sought
the Lord when as he was endangered by false accusation of him to Saul by that
pick-thank flatterer Cush, the Benjamite.

1 MOst Almighty Lord, O Lord my God, in thee do I put my trust: save me from
all them that persecute me, and deliver me.
and my most gracious God, unto thy power and goodness do I fly for
safeguard, relying only on thee, and therefore pray thee undertake my defense
against my many adversaries, Saul and his partisans, who do most wrongfully
persecute me, from whose hands therefore, good Lord, deliver me.

2 Lest if I fall into his hands he take away my life and put me to death by
torments, Lest he tear my soul like a Lion, renting it in pieces, while there
is none to deliver.
now that he is so enraged by false flatterers, and I have none left about him
that will or dare stand my friend, and speak a good word for me.

3 My most righteous Lord and God, O Lord my God, if I have done this; if there
be iniquity in my hands.
if this thing be true that Saul is informed off against me, and for which he
thus persecutes me, if I have had any treacherous design upon him, or broken
Covenant with him as is suggested.

4 If under the color of peace and agreement I have sought to bring to pass
any treacherous or treasonable thing, If I have rewarded evil unto him that was
at peace with me. (Yea, I have delivered him that without cause is mine enemy.
or since our capitulation have falsified my word, (nay, I am so far from
thinking evil to Saul, that though he be mine utter enemy, and has wrongfully
and without any cause at any time given by me labored my destruction, which
nature can ill brook, yet even then in that time of open hostility, when I had
him at advantage, and might have rid my self of him once or twice, such was my
respect and loyalty to him, and fear of sinning against thee, that I delivered
him, though to the hazard of mine own life thereby.)

5 If thou Lord who know all things, Let the enemy persecute my soul, and
take it, yea, let him tread down my life upon the earth, and lay mine honor in
the dust. Selah.
know me guilty of this persidious treachery whereof I am accused, then in thy
righteous judgment let Saul never cease to seek my life, till he have it, and
then let him put me to as shameful a death as ever any suffered, and brand me
for a most treacherous ignominious wretch to all posterity, even from my heart
I wish it.

Arise, O Lord, in thine a^ger, lift up thy self, because of the rage of mine
enemies: and awake for me to the judgment that thou have commanded.
6 But, Lord, thou know its otherways, therefore in thy just displeasure, and
in the greatness of thy power bestir thee in my behalf to right me on my false
accusers and bloody persecutors, because of their unjust violence against me,
and delay no longer, but take this season of their sinning to destroy them, and
fulfill that righteous decree and judgment which is gone forth of thy mouth,
concerning the making me the Kingly type of Christ over Israel.

So shall the congregation of the people compass thee about: for their sakes
therefore return thou ^e high.
7 And I will cause thy sanctuary to be erected upon Sion, so shall all Israel
meet solemnly to worship thee, therefore for thy peoples sake who do now want
the means of serving and seeking thee as they desire, seat thy self upon thy
Tribunal to do justice which now thou have long forborne, and show forth thy
power from heaven, as formerly thou have done in their behalfs.

The Lord shall judge the people: judge me, O Lord, according, to my
righteousness and according to mine integrity that is in me.
8 The Lord will right this wrong which his people sustain, in having his
worship detained from them; and I pray thee consider my case too, O Lord, to
right me also on mine enemies who have deprived me of thine ordinances, for
that thou know me just in my behavior, and in mine heart upright toward
Saul, and most falsely slandered in those things whereof I am accused, and for
which I am persecuted.

Oh let the wickedness of the wicked come to an end, but establish the just:
^or the righteous God tries the hea^rs and reins.
9 O Lord do thou put an end to the wicked practices of mine ungodly enemies,
but make good thy promise of mine establishment in the throne of Israel, who
fears thy name, and am just in all my dealings, for thou that know the
inward thoughts and desires of men's hearts can judge whether I or mine
enemies be the wrong-doors.

10 My trust is wholly in the Lord for my preservation, My defense is of God,
which saves the upright in heart.
against the fury of mine implacable and malicious adversaries, who I know
will not let the upright hearted man perish who fears to sin, and has a care
to walk honestly.

11 God though he seem slack yet will sooner or later judge the righteous man's
cause, God judges the righteous, and God is angry with the wicked every day.
and as well as the wicked seem to prosper, yet has God a continual eye upon
them, and their evil ways, whereby his displeasure is daily increased against
them.

12 He indeed waits a time to see if the wicked will repent and turn from his
evil ways, If he turn not, he will when his sword, he has bent his bow, and
made it ready.
but if after he have waited a while, he turn not, then will he be the more
enraged and severe in the execution of justice, for which he has all things in
a readiness when the time comes.

13 Yea he is preparing all the while, He has also prepared for him the
instruments of death, he ordains his arrows against the persecutors.
he lets him live in sin to bring upon him utter destruction for it at last,
and the proud persecutors of the poor and godly, he means in the end to make
them the marks at whom he will discharge all his quiver of plagues and
punishments.

14 The world shall see, Behold, he travelleth with iniquity, and has
conceived mischief, and brought forth falsehood.
that after he has taken a great deal of pains, and been at much trouble to
compass his wicked ends by wicked means, and has with much study contrived
mischievous devices against the innocent, the end will be, that he will be
deceived in his expectation, both of the righteous man's ruin, and his own
prospering, for he shall be the man that shall perish with all his
machinations, but the upright man shall be preserved in his innocence.

He made a pit and dug it, and is fallen into the ditch which he made.
15 After he has long set his wits a work, and moiled and toiled to compass the
godly man's destruction, God shall so bring it about, that his very design upon
the righteous shall turn to his own utter undoing.

His mischief shall return upon his own head, and his violent dealing shall
come upon his own pate.
16 All the ill he meant to others shall light upon himself, and his violence
against the good, shall fall heavy upon him to his utter destruction.

I will praise the Lord according to his righteousness: and will sing praise to
the name of the Lord most high.
17 That day I know and am sure I shall live to see, (though it seems afar off)
when I shall have cause to praise the Lord for keeping promise with me, and for
all his righteous judging me according to mine innocence, in my deliverance
and mine enemies downfall; and when this is which I am sure will be, I promise
before hand (in the faith of it) that I will praise the power and goodness of
the Lord God Almighty who rules over all; and raises, and abaseth, whom he
pleases.

Eighth PSALM.
David having honored God with his absolute and relative title of
Sovereigntie, extols the excellency of his manifested attributes which appear
in his works by way of interrogation, as unable otherways to express them to
their worth; showing how both great and small, yea the smallest things most
convincingly set forth the praise of his admirable power, and gracious goodness
and providence toward mankind, even to the confounding and confuting all
ungodly and perverse Atheists. And shows, that for his own part, when he
seriously considers the workmanship of God in the Heavens, and his creating the
lights that shine therein for man's use, together with his gracious rebestowing
the use and dominion of the creature upon him by a new title of Redemption, and
heaven to boot, when as he had lost all by sin, and was worthy of none; he
cannot but with admiration acknowledge his great goodness to man, yea he cannot
enough admire both his greatness, and goodness.

Psalm 8. To the chief musician upon Gittith. A Psalm of David.
To him that is most skilful upon Gittith, the instrument used by Obed-Edom the
Gittite and his family, do I David that made this Psalm commit it for his
ordering it in the Quire.

1 MOst glorious Lord who have the dominion over all the world, O Lord our God
how excellent is thy name in all the earth! who have set thy glory above the
Heavens.
and specially over us thy chosen, how full of renown is thy power, wisdom and
greatness all the world over, by reason of those admirable creatures and
glorious Lights, the Sun, Moon, and Stars, which thou have created and placed
up on high to shine through the ayrie regions to give light and convey heat to
all that live upon earth.

2 Yea every thing, Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings have thou ordained
strength, because of thine^ enemies, that thou might still the enemy and
the avenger.
high and low, great and small hold forth thy glory, and manifest thy
prais-worthy power and providence. The very instinct and infant oratory that
thou put into the new born babe, to cry after the Mothers breasts, making
that silly creature so wise as to seek its subsistence, so soon as it has a
Being; and by moving pity therewith, to be able also to procure it, when it is
utterly of it self helpless, and at another finding: this does most
convincingly testify (to thy praise) thy power, and providence in despite of
all wicked and ungodly Atheists that list not to acknowledge thee; and stops the
mouth of the most perverse and devillish-minded caviller against thee, whilst
they must needs see thy great power and as great goodness (whereof themselves
have shared) in putting that instinct into little children to provide for
themselves, and that power in nature to accommodate their need with food suting
their weak estates, and that love and pity in parents to understand their
meaning by instinct.

3 When for my part I take view and seriously When I consider thy Heavens, the
work of thy fingers, the Moon and the Stars which thou have ordained.
consider that wonderful workmanship of thine, the Heavens with their infinite
height, and vast extent, and the world of great and weighty Clouds that pass
and repass therein, and those foresaid Lights of Moon and Stars, which thou
have appointed to move in their courses, and appear in their Seasons, and to
give Light and influence down below.

What is man, that thou art mindful of him? and the son of man that thou
visitest him?
4 It maks me thankfully acknowledge, and wonder at that great goodness thou have
showed to man above all (how unsensible soever others are of it) whom thou
made out of dust and clay, that thou should set so much by him, as to
create and ordain such things for his use, and should further have such
continual regard to him (that is of such ill desert by sin, and so little
worth by nature, frail and mortal, subject to generation and corruption) as to
exercise such a daily care and providence over him from first to last, and to
redeem him out of his lost estate by taking his nature.

For thou have made him a little lower than the Angels, and have crowned him
with glory and honor.
5 For, notwithstanding all these superexcellent and permanent creatures, yet
have thou given him, and renewed unto him the principal place in the order of
creation next the Angels, honoring him with a greater dominion and likeness to
thy self, in heavenly and angelical qualities than any thing but they, and made
him capable of that celestial and everlasting glory and happiness which they
enjoy with thee by the redemption which thou have afforded him in Christ, who
himself became lower than the Angels by suffering in our nature, that he might
invest him with a title to heaven and the glory and happiness that is there,
which in virtue of his resurrection he is already possessed of for him.

6 And restore him again to his dominion over the creature, Thou made him to
have dominion over the works of thy hands; thou have put all things under his
feet.
having as at first put the rule of all terrestrial things into his hands,
though they were made by thee and not by him, and have subordinated every
creature to his use and regiment.

7 The multitude of sheep and neat that are every where in the world, All sheep
and Oxen, yea, and the beasts of the field.
yea, both tame and wild beasts are subjugated to his dominion, and ordained
for his service.

8 The fowl that flee above him yet are subjected under him, The fowl of the
air, and the fish of the sea, and whatsoever passes through the paths of the
sea.
and the fish that inhabit the great, vast, and deep seas, and live and move
there invisibly to man, are yet ordained for him, and subordinated to him.

9 O Lord, whom we must needs acknowledge to be Lord over us, O Lord, our Lord,
how excellent is thy name in all the earth!
though thou have made us Lords over all, its admirable to consider how many
ways, and in how many and sundry things thy wisdom, power, providence,
greatness and goodness excels toward mankind by what thou have provided for
him, and do bestow upon him, furnishing every place both above and below
throughout the whole world with infinite store and variety of all good
creatures for his sake.

Ninth PSALM.
David breaks out into a joyful and faithful praising of God for his many
wonderful deliverances, his enemies overthrows, and his executing judgment
according to the justness of his cause and his enemies wickedness; showing his
adversaries by the success, the difference between their trust and his, and the
different judgment that righteousness and unrighteousness shall ever have from
God, encouraging all Gods people to take notice of what he has done for him,
thereby to strengthen their faith for themselves. He praises the Lord and
excites others to it, who when the time comes will punish the oppressor, and
right the oppressed. And after praises given for former victories, having
further need of his help because of more enemies, he prays him still to be his
deliverer, that still he may have farther matter of praise, and rejoicing in
him. Stirring up all men to take notice of the admirable defeats God has given
to his wicked enemies, and that so all the Churches enemies shall be served.
Concluding with prayer to God, not to suffer himself to be wounded in his
honor through his sides by his proud enemies.

Psalm. 9. To the chief musici^n upon Muth-labben. A Psalm of David.
To him that is most skilful upon the instrument Muth-labben so called (some
conceive) from the victory he had in the duel fought with Goliath) to which this
Psalm is chiefly set, do I David that made it, recommend it, for the care and
ordering of it in the Quire.

I will praise thee, O Lord, with my whole heart, I will show forth all thy
mavelous works.
1 O Lord I have often prayed to thee, and always sped so well, as that now I
will praise thee with as good a heart and will, as ever I prayed unto thee for
my preservation in my greatest danger, and will let the world know, what
wonderful things thou have done for me from time to time, by dedicating a
Psalm of praise to thee for them.

I will be glad and rejoice in thee: I will sing praise to thy name, O thou
most high.
2 I will wonderfully cheer up my heart in the apprehensions of thy favor to me
so amply manifested, and will with public praises glorify thy power and
goodness which have appeared in thy mavelous works. O God, of infinite might
and Majesty.

When mine enemies are turned back, they shall fall and perish at thy presence.
3 Mine enemies though they vex me sore and persecute me long, yet when the time
comes that thou will foil them, then they shall be able to make no resistance,
but in thy just displeasure shall certainly come to naught.

For thou have maintained my right and my cause, thou ^atest in the throne
judgeing right.
4 As has been already made apparent, for maugre their power and malice, thou
have still hitherto maintained and manifested my title to the Kingdom to be
just, and my cause to be honest, by thy righteous judgments; whereby thou have
made it appear more than once, that thou art, and wilt prove thy self a
righteous judge.

5 Thou have punished all that were against me, Thou have rebuked the heathen,
thou have destroyed the wicked; thou have put out their name for ever and ever.
whether they were my heathen and foreign enemies that knew less what they
did, yet they have smarted for it, or my wicked countrymen and domestic foes,
who should have had more understanding, them therefore have thou quite
destroyed, and divested of all their power and authority, and cut of all title
to the throne of Israel from them and their posterity for ever.

6 O thou mine implacable enemy, O thou enemy destructions are come to a
perpetual end: and thou have destroyed cities, their memory is perished with
them.
that would never be reconciled till thou wast ruined, which now thou art,
and all thy destructive plots and practices with thee, never to trouble me
more; Both themselves and the great Cities, and Fortresses they builded for to
establish their dominion, and eternize their name, have thou, Lord, destroyed,
and caused them and their memorials to perish for ever.

7 But the Lord who is my city of refuge abides for ever for me to trust in;
But the Lord shall endure for ever: he has prepared his throne for judgment.
He shows now that he has not been idle all the while he seemed so, but has
been fitting himself to execute judgment when the time shall come, as now it
is.

8 And the wicked of the world shall ever find it so, And he shall judge the
world in righteousness, he shall minister judgment to the people in
uprightness.
that though they think him remiss, and careless how things go, yet they shall
find that he is not so, but with most perfect wisdom, righteousness and
integrity will judge and punish the wicked, all the world over sooner or later.

9 And so also on the other side shall the poor and innocent when they are
unjustly oppressed, The Lord also will be a refuge for the oppressed, a refuge
in times of trouble.
(however they may likewise think him regardless) yet shall they not find him
so, but if they flee to him, and trust in him, he will be a refuge to them, yea
then, when because of extremity they most need it, and can least think or
exspect it.

And they that know thy name will put their trust in thee: for thou, Lord, have
not forsaken them that seek thee.
10 And truly they that know thy power and goodness, and have had trial of it,
will venture all upon thee. For, for my part I am able to say it, that as I
have sought to thee and none but thee, so thou have never failed mine
exspectation, nor been unfaithful to my trust, but according to my prayer and
dependence have I ever found thee helpful to me, and so shall others.

Sing praises to the Lord, which dwells in Sion: declare among the people his
doings.
11 O ye Ministers of his worship to whom I have recommended this Psalm of
praise. Lift up your voices in praises to the Lord, that has chosen Sion for
the place of his special residence and solemn worship, where accordingly you
celebrate it, let the people that resort thither hear you sing aloud his
marveilous doings, that they may also learn to praise him, and trust in him.

When he makes inquisition for blood, he remembers them; he forgets not
the cry of the humble.
12 When the time comes that men's sins are ripe, and that he will call them to
account and reckon with them for the blood of the innocent, which they have
unjustly shed or coveted, he will then make it appear, that he remembers to
right the wrongs of them that trust in him, and seek to him, and forgets not
the cry of the afflicted, that in singleness of heart and poverty of spirit
makes his humble addresses to him, as to his only refuge.

Have mercy upon me, O Lord, consider my trouble which I suffer of them that
hate me, thou that liftest me up from the gates of death.
13 Though I have had many deliverances and thou have given me great cause to
praise thee for ridding me of a world of enemies, yet I am not without, but
still have those that hate me, and of mere malice vex and trouble me, so that I
suffer much by them; good Lord, still continue to be merciful to me and to
deliver me, thou, that many and many a time have delivered me, when mine
enemies had brought me to that pass that I knew not which way to turn me, but
death and destruction waited for me on every side.

14 That I may muster up all thy mercies and praisefully proclaim them in the
public assemblies of Sion, That I may show forth all thy praise in the gates
of the daughter of Sion: I will rejoice in thy salvation.
the place which of all Israel and Jerusalem thou have chosen for thy public
and solemn worship. Yea there I will most joyfully make known thy saving grace
and favor to me.

15 Thou have vanquished the heathen, The heathen are sunk down in the pit that
they made: in the net which they hid, is their own foot taken.
and disappointed their plots and designs against me, having ensnared them in
the ruin they meant to me.

16 All men that have eyes may see that thou favorest me, The Lord is known by
the judgment which he executes: the wicked is snared in the work of his own
hands. Higgaion, Selah.
and may be convinced that it is only thy doing that mine enemies are foiled,
by the manner of thy effecting it, and thine executing such wonderful and
admirable judgments upon them, making their own wicked enterprises against me,
the means to bring to pass their own destruction; I cannot but extraordinarily
put men on seriously to mind and muse on this thy remarkable providence. Yea
again and again I wish they would well consider this thing.

17 And mark how my foes perish, The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all
the nations that forget God.
even so shall all the wicked of the world that rebel against Christ, and
resist his government, and oppress his innocent and righteous people, perish
eternally in hell; even all the nations of the world, that know not God to
serve him and believe in him, like as the heathen people hereabout that take up
arms against me, come to ruin.

For the needy shall not always be forgotten: the exspectation of the poor
shall not perish for ever.
18 For though God may defer his judgeing the wicked, and his delivering the
poor and needy that trust in him, very long, for so he did me; yet will he not
ever do so, either first or last there will come a time when the poor afflicted
ones shall be sure of what they have long prayed and looked for.

Arise, O Lord, let not man prevail, let the heathen be judged in thy sight.
19 Thou O Lord have long forborne the heathen, but truly they are grown now to
that greatness and insolency, that if thou do not show thy self in my
behalf, they will have the better of me, and so of thee whose quarrel I
maintain; Therefore look thou to it that they which are but men, get not the
better of thee, by vanquishing me, but by thy judgments upon them, let them
plainly see its thou that condemnest them, and justifies me.

Put them in fear, O Lord: that the nations may know themselves to be but men.
Selah.
20 O Lord, by thy judgments upon them make them afraid to hold on their course
of enmity and opposition against me, by seeing thee to take part with me, and
so cause them to know by their ill success, that for all their great power and
multitudes of people, they are too weak by humane strength (which yet they
trust in, as if it were more) to resist thee, whose cause I maintain, and fight
for. Yea, Lord, make them know it to purpose.

Tenth PSALM.
David represents to God his own and his peoples condition generally in this
world, under the insolent confidence of the wicked, heaping unmeasurable
pressures upon the godly, by reason of his long-suffering toward them, which
makes them worse and not better, as he finds by experience in his persecutors
Saul and his accomplices. And therefore prays the Lord to appear for his people
against them that do but abuse his patience, and doubts not but he will, even
destroy the Churches enemies, as he did the Cananites for Isreal's sake, Psalm
10.
being the same God in pity and power now as ever.

1, 2 MOst merciful and righteous Lord, WHy stand thou afar of, O Lord? why
hidest thou thy self in times of trouble?
why art thou contrary to thy nature and promise, a stranger to the trouble of
thy people, me, and others; and take no knowledge of it to help us in it, The
wicked in his pride does persecute the poor: let them be taken in the devices,
that they have imagined.
but seems to let the wicked afflict the godly without regard, who by thy
forbearance is heightened exceedingly in wickedness, and takes a pride to vex and
trample down the poor, thinking to make themselves great by oppression, but,
Lord, do thou blast and utterly disappoint their wicked designs against them
that are good, and do thou turn all the evil they unjustly imagine against the
innocent upon the nocent.

3 And truly its time for thee to show thy self, For the wicked boasts of his
hearts desire, and blesses the covetous, whom the Lord abhors.
for men grow shameless in wickedness, and are confident by those courses to
carry all before them, thinking meanly of all good men, and the ways they
walk, that are not as wicked and worldly minded as themselves, esteeming those
only wise and happy that heap up riches, and grow great by hook or crook,
whom yet the Lord abhors and counts the greatest fools.

4 The wicked have had such a time of it against the godly, The wicked through
the pride of his countenance, will not seek after God: God is not in all his
thoughts.
and therewith are grown so high-minded, and self-confident, that he never
cares whether God be with him or against him, he thinks least of him, or sets
least by him, of any thing.

His ways are always grievous: thy judgments are far above out of his sight.
5 Leading a life as if there were no God, for his whole trade and course is
composed of nothing else but disobedience to God and injury to men, and
because he feels not thy judgments, he is therefore fearless, and thinks they
will never befall him, but that he is safe enough, not caring a jot, but setting
at naught both God, and all that take Gods part with me against him.

He has said in his heart, I shall not be moved: for I shall never be in
adversity.
6 And has fully concluded in the pride of his heart, and confidence of his
present condition, that he shall never be worse than he is, but shall ever
prosper, and never taste of misfortune.

His mouth is full of cursing and deceit, and fraud: under his tongue is
mischief and vanity.
7 He stands in no aw of God, nor scruples no sin, but gives liberty of speech
to himself to curse, swear, and forswear, lie and dissemble, in so much as that
he is altogether conversant in mischievous speeches, and self confident
boastings, not any truth or good comes from him.

He sits in the lurking places of the villages: in the secret places does he
murder the innocent: his eyes are privily ^et against the poor.
8 He every where fore-laids me, lying in wait near high ways, and neighbor
Towns, to catch me, and seeks in holes and corners where he thinks I hide my
self or may pass by, to find me out and murder me without any cause given,
watching diligently all opportunities and means to take me at unawares, who am
poor and friendless.

He lies in wait secretly as a Lion in his den: he lies in wait to catch the
poor, he does cat^h the poor: when he draws him into his net.
9 He is as greedily affected and as cruelly disposed toward me as a Lion to
his prey; seeking all advantages against me, never regarding mine innocence
and the unjust sufferings he exposes me to, studying by all means possible to
seduce and to entrap me in my simplicity, that he may circumvent me to destroy
me.

10 And as proud as he is, He croucheth, and humbles himself; that the poor
may fall by his strong ones.
yet in subtilty he can abase himself and with glavering speeches, and fawning
behavior indirectly endeavor the overthrow of the innocent and distressed,
that by fair pretenses he may deceive and bring them under his power, and
execute his rage upon them by the hands of his privado's, desperate Assassinats.

11 And in all this is confident of impunitie, He has said in his heart, God
has forgotten: he hides his face, he will never see it.
taking for granted, because at present he perceives not God, to mind him, that
therefore he never will, but as he thinks what is past is forgotten, so he shall
speed no worse for the time to come.

12 But Lord let him find it otherways by some manifestation of thy self in
judgment, Arise, O Lord, O God lift up thine hand; forget not the humble.
good God have a care of thine honor and mine innocence, and other thy people
who are concerned in me, yea, of thy whole Church which is resembled by me, by
executing some remarkable judgment, and let not the world have cause to think
thee careless of the afflicted, that humbly depend upon thee.

13 Why should thou by thy forbearance give the wicked such occasion to
insult over thee, Wherefore does the wicked contemn God? he has said in his
heart, Thou will not require it.
and slight thy judgments, confidently promising himself, that thou will never
call him to an account for what he does.

14 But its sure enough that thou take notice of the mischievous and spiteful
carriage of the wicked both against God, Thou have seen it, for tho^ beholdest
mischief and spite to require it with thy hand: the poor commits himself
unto thee, thou art the ^e^per of the fatherless.
and those that are godly, for what ever, they think yet I know thou precisely
markest them to pay them home with condign punishment, in the faith whereof it
is, that the poor afflicted man, I, and others that in this world must look to
fare as I do, puts himself and his cause over into thine hands to be righted,
for that thou art the helper of the helpless and distressed against oppressors.

Break thou the arm of the wicked, and the evil man: seek out his wick^dness
till thou find none.
15 Weaken thou the power of the wicked wherein he so much trusts, and which
he imploys to evil purposes, trase him quite through the course and trade of
his iniquities, even to the uttermost end of them, and punish him accordingly.

The Lord is King for ever and ever: the heathen are perished out of his land.
16 The Lord that governs his Church and people has approved himself, and ever
will, to be the supreme commander, and disposer of all, and over all, for their
sakes as appears by his wonderful works; for how has he destroyed the heathen
in this land? which he promised to bestow upon Israel, and made it holy of
profane, in so much as they are wasted to just nothing who were potent and
numerous; and his worship and worshippers planted in it, maugre their
resistance, after that sort shall he do by the enemies of his Church and
people, destroy them, as these.

Lord, thou have heard the desire of the humble: thou will prepare their heart,
thou will cause thine ear to hear.
17 For it has been always Gods manner to try his peoples faith and patience,
till they see a need of him, and make their humble addresses to him, and then
to help them. Yea, when he has a purpose and sees it time to work their
deliverance, and destroy their enemies, then does he inspire them with a more
than ordinary spirit of prayer and faith to seek and hope for those very
things?

To judge the fatherless and the oppressed, that the man of the earth may no
more oppress.
18 Which shall certainly come to pass, for therefore has God deferred it, and
always does, until most remarkably for his peoples greater good, and his
greater glory he may vindicate their oppressions, and enfranchise them from
under the tyranny of their oppressors, who when they are at the highest in
carnal confidence, and the godly at the lowest in worldly diffidence, that's
Gods time to rescue these, and ruin those.

The xi. PSALM.
David by protesting his trust in God, silences his companions, and rejects the
advice they gave him to save himself by flight, and give over expecting the
Kingdom, disswades them from disheartning him, and shows how he no whit
doubts, but by the justice of God, his wicked enemies for all their malicious
designs upon him, should perish in their wickedness, and that he should be
sustained in his uprightnes.

To him that is the first and principal of all the Quire do I David that made
this Psalm recommend it for the care and ordering of it to be sung. Psalm xi.
To the chief musician, A Psalm of David.


1 IN the Lord whom I know to be a sufficient safeguard, IN the Lord put ^ my
trust: how say ye to my soul, flee as a bird to your mountain.
do I trust to fulfill his promise. How then is it that you my companions
despair, and to the grief of my soul counsel me distrustfully to give all for
lost, abandon the cause, and never more to look after it, but how to save my
self.

2 For though its true the power and malice of mine enemies is great: For lo,
the wicked bend their bow, they make ready their arrow upon the string: that
they may privily shoot at the upright in heart.
yet consider this, They are wicked and manage an unrighteous cause,
maliciously seeking my destruction, whom they in their own consciences know to
be upright and innocent, and therefore I am confident it shall turn to theirs.

3 Do not ye tempt me by despair to relinquish a righteous cause, If the
foundations be destroyed; what can the righteous do?
and to distrust a righteous God. For faith and an upright heart are the only
foundations that a righteous man has to support himself withal, and if you
undermine them, you quite undo him.

4 Be confident of this therefore, The Lord is in his holy temple, the Lords
throne is in heaven; his eyes behold, his eye lids try the children of men.
that God is neither absent nor idle, but is present in his tabernacle here
below, to hear the prayer of the righteous and afflicted, and also sits a judge
in heaven above, strictly noticing thence the ways of men, beholding who does
right, and wrong.

The Lord tries the righteous: but the wicked and him that loves violence,
his soul hates.
5 The Lord takes special notice of the righteous man, and his cause, to approve
both him and it, but as for the unrighteous and cruel persecutor, he hates him
at his heart, and so he shall find.

Upon the wicked he shall rain snares, fire and brimstone, and an horrible
tempest: this shall be the portion of their cup.
6 For however the wicked may go on in their evil ways for a time, yet God shall
overtake them, with an unexpected storm of judgments, wherein their sins shall
ensnare them, even as he did Sodom and Gomorrha. God will fearfully execute his
wrath upon them. This shall certainly be their reward, and herewith shall their
cup be filled to the brim, and they made to drink it to the bottom.

For the righteous Lord loves righteousness, his countenan^e does behold the
upright.
7 For God who is just hates injustice, and only loves and likes righteous
ways and causes, so as to bless and prosper them, as also amongst men, the
upright and innocent are only they he beholds with favor and affection to
reward and defend them.

The xii. PSALM.
David cries to God to succor him against the treacherous dealing of feigned
friends. And upon his prayer promises himself by Gods just judgment the ruin
both of his undermining and insulting enemies, and also his own deliverance
from their oppression and pride: Magnifying the promises of God for their
faithfulness, he encourages all Gods people to trust in God, and in conclusion
shows the reason why his enemies were so many and so treacherous, because they
that could work him most mischief, had most favor.

Psalm xii. To the chief musician upon Sheminith. A Psalm of David.
To him that is most skilful in the eighth tune or upon the instrument with
eight strings, called Sheminith; whereto this Psalm is chiefly set, do I David
that made it recommend it.

HElp Lord, for the godly man cease, for the faithful fail from among the
children o^ men.
1 O Lord, in thy faithfulness succor me, for I am left alone to serve thee, all
men forsaking God and me, deceitfully studying by all manner of treacherous
dealing to work wickedness against me.

2 I know not any one I can trust be he never so near me, They speak vanity
every one with hi^ neighbor: with flattering lips, and wit^ a double heart
(...) they speak.
I find all men so full of feigned friendship, such lying dissemblers,
practicing nothing but flattery and falsehood.

3 But my confidence is, The Lord shall cut off all flattering lips, and the
tongue that speaks proud things.
that though I cannot know them to avoid them, yet the righteous God will be
meet with them, and by their own ruin disappoint them of their ends against me;
both the dissembler and the proud boaster, that either seeks to deceive me or
sets light by me, and my righteous cause, will he preserve me from, and right
me upon.

4 Who have arrogantly boasted themselves to be too cunning for me, Who have
said, with our tongue will we prevail, our lips are our own: who is Lord over
us?
and confidently given it out they will deceive and entrap me; presuming
themselves lawless in all they say, or do, though never so false, and not
accountable to any, no not to God himself, whom they disesteem for my sake.

5 But this shall be the issue. For the oppression of the poor, for the sighing
of the needy, now will I arise (says the Lord) I will set him in safety from
him, that puffs at him.
That when they have done their worst, and their hopes be at the fairest: Then
will God, beholding mine oppression and wrong, and hearing my prayer, arise for
me (as he has promised) and deliver me from the disdainful pride and malice of
my scornful and wicked enemies.

6 The promises which the Lord has given to me, The words of the Lord are pure
words: as silver tried in a furnace of earth, purified seven times.
and to his people, have no deceit in them, but are most true and faithful
ones, I have had often trial of them in my manifold afflictions, and I ever
found them so.

7 And I dare affirm it of thee, Thou shall keep them, (O Lord,) thou shall
preserve them from this Generation for ever.
(O righteous Lord,) thou will ever be to all them that trust in thee a
faithful keeper and preserver in all ages hereafter, as thou have been to me,
whom thou have made an example of thy truth and goodness to all Generations.

The wicked walk on every side, when the vilest men are exalted.
8 But no wonder, there are so many wicked wretches that set themselves on every
side, and use all means to procure my ruin, seeing they that can work most
wickedness against me be they never so base and vile, are most set by, and best
rewarded.

The xiii. PSALM.
David ^xpostulates with God touching his long delay in fulfilling his
promis^s, and his undergoing such miseries, whilst his enemies prosper.
Whereupon he prays him to lay his case to heart, and that timely too, least
death surprise him before he enjoy the promise, and so his enemy take occasion
to blasphem^ and insult at his downfall. After which prayer his heart is
refreshed with a fresh gail of says, wherein he confidently promises himself
deliverance, Psalm xiii. To the chief musician, A Psalm of David.
and God the praises of it.

To him that is the first and principal of all the Quire, do I David that made
this Psalm recommend it for the care and ordering of it to be sung.

HOw long will thou forget me (O Lord) for ever? how long will thou hide thy
face from me?
1 MAny gracious promises have thou made me, but how long, Lord, shall I wait
for their accomplishment? will they never be fulfild? how long will thou
exercise me under adversity?

How long shall I take counsel in my soul, having sorrow in my heart daily? how
long shall mine enemies be exalted over me?
2 How long shall my soul be off and on, tossed between hope and despair, not
knowing what to think of my self and thee, by reason of mine incessant
miseries, notwithstanding all thy promises. How long will thou suffer mine
enemy to have the better, and I the worse?

Consider and hear me, O Lord my God, lighten mine eyes, least I sleep the
sleep of death.
3 Consider my case and hear my prayer, O Almighty and most merciful Lord God,
and give me betimes to see thy faithfulness by my deliverance, least by
extremity of grief and trouble death cut me short of thy promise.

Lest mine enemies say I have prevailed against him, and those that trouble me,
rejoice when I am moved.
4 Yea least my wicked enemy insult and say; for all the promises which thou
have made, and my confidence in them, the day is his, and those that have long
sought my ruin, rejoice to see it.

5 But yet for all my present perplexities, But I have trusted in thy mercy,
my heart shall rejoice in thy salvation.
and mine enemies insolences, as I have, so I do still firmly trust that thou will show me mercy, and am confident, that my heart shall one day have as much
joy (as now it has sorrow) in a gracious and glorious deliverance.

6 I know the time shall come when I shall and will endite a Psalm of praise to
thee the Lord, I will sing unto the Lord, because he has dealt bountifully
with me.
for fulfilling those great things thou have promised, which I am as confident
of, as if they were now done.

The xiiii. PSALM.
David speaking in the wisdom of the holy Ghost, befools the wisdom of all
flesh, which in all men naturally out of an enmity and misunderstanding of
God, leads only unto sin, and professedly hates those few in the world whom
God has renewed, in stead of seeking to become such themselves. But he shows,
that they both have and shall certainly smart for that sin of cont^mpt and
hatred of Gods people that serve and trust him, and prays, that God would
presently by him give tranquillity to his people, as Christ shall to his
Church.

To him that is the first and principal of all the Quire, Psalm xiii. To the
chief musician, A Psalm of David.
do I David that made this Psalm recommend it for the care and ordering of it
to be sung.

1 MAn by his fall has lost, THe fool has said in his heart, there is no God:
they are corrupt, they have done abominable works, there is none that does good.
and naturally is void of the right understanding of God, believing nothing so
of him as he is, and so makes him as if he were not. And out of this depraved
ignorance all natural men live in sin, and from the beginning have multiplied
abominations; not one either is, or ever was, that by nature, without special
and supernatural grace, ever knew or served the Lord aright.

2 The Lord made a long trial of it in the first age The Lord looked down from
heaven upon the children of men, to see if there were any that did understand,
and seek God.
of the world in that time of nature between Adam and the giving of the Law,
purposely to see what it of it self would bring forth, and how improve the
talent that age afforded, whether there were any one of all mankind that could
and would improve it to the knowledge, belief, and worship of him; or for
default, by nature to make out to him for grace.

They are all gone aside, they are all together become filthy: there is none
that does good, no not one.
3 But he found by long experience, notwithstanding his documents to, and
judgments upon the old world, and so he finds still. That all men are
naturally fools, void of understanding, and generally without exception of
polluted hearts and lives, loathsome in his sight; that none in nature does
that which is right and acceptable, no not a man of all mankind, nor covets
grace.

Have all the workers of iniquity no knowledge? who eat up my people as they
eat bread, and call not upon the Lord.
4 In so much as God himself admired to see all men by nature void of the
knowledge of him, and of themselves in relation to him, and wholly given over
to sin and carnalitie; yea, even to the hatred and devouring those few in the
world that are the people of God, upon whom he has bestowed his favor and
grace, and that differing from them, walk in holiness and righteousness; never
taking thought to do, or be like them; neither themselves of themselves by
nature worshipping God, nor seeking to God for the like grace and inablement
that those had given them; but contemned it, and hated them.

There were they in great fear: for God is in the generation of the righteous.
5 Which at last brought fearful desolation upon them when the flood came and
swept them all away. Like measure shall the wicked contemners and haters of God
and his worshippers have, they shall find, that God, who by his spirit and
grace throughout all ages is in the righteous, will also be for them, and
against those that are against them.

You h^ve shamed the counsel of the poor; because the Lord is his refuge.
6 You graceless and wicked ones of this age take notice of it, that have
persecuted the poor and helpless, and scorned him as a hairbrain fool for
trusting so nakedly upon the Lord, and bearing himself upon him without humane
probabilities, for deliverance and establishment.

7 But, O that the salvation of Israel were come out of Sion! when the Lord
brings back the captivity of his people, Jacob shall rejoice, and Israel
shall be glad.
O that the time were come, which I am sure will come, and is not long too,
that God will, by mine enemies ruin, settle my Kingdom in Sion, as a Type of
Christ's in heaven; and then and there by me send deliverance and happiness to
his people Israel, as he will thence by him send salvation to his Church. When
God shall have thus delivered them from their enemies, and out of their present
troubles, as formerly he did out of their captivities, into peace and
tranquillity, as his Church by Christ shall be from wrath and hell; how shall
the faithful and true Israel of God, who properly are the seed of his servant
Jacob, rejoice proportionably in the type, to what they shall then in the
Antitype.

The xv. PSALM.
David d^sirous to convince and convert the f^rm^^ professor, or outward J^y,
of, and from, an overweening conceit and mistaken apprehension of himself and
his ceremonious worship. As a Prophet goes to God by way of question, to know
of him and so to deliver from him who he is that is in his account a true
worsh^pper of him, and is and shall be partaker of his grace and glory. And
brings answer, that its he, and only he, that in the sight of God is as well
conscientious of the moral as of the ceremonial law, practizing as well
righteousness as holiness, in all manner converse and commerce with men, in
thought, words, and actions.

A Psalm made by David. Psalm xv. A Psalm of David.


1 LOrd there are many pretenders to thy service and frequenters of thy
Tabernacle worship, LOrd, who shall abide in thy tabernacle? who shall dwell in
thy holy hill?
that take themselves to be of the Church, because they are in it, but thou
know that many are of Israel that are not Israel. Therefore declare by me
thy prophet, who, and what manner of man he must be that is an Israelite
indeed; a true worshipper of thee, and savingly implanted into the true Church,
ever to abide in thy Kingdom of grace here, and of glory hereafter.

He that walks uprightly, and works righteousness, and speaks the truth in
his heart.
2 Why, no wicked man, nor bare professor or mere ceremonial worshipper that is
but seemingly holy: But he, and he only, that in conscience to God carries on
the whole trade of his life holily and righteously both in duties of piety,
and acts of morality, in common converse and commerce 'twixt man and man;
doing what he does justly and honestly, without fraud and deceit, and saying
what he says in truth, from his heart without dissembling.

He that backbiteth not with his tongue, nor does evil to his neighbor, nor
takes up a reproach against his neighbor.
3 Doing injury to no man by undermining his good name, and sliely seeking his
disreputation by insinuating and speaking ill of him behind his back, yea, that
neither in word or deed does willingly disparage or disprofit any man, nor is
well pleased another should, not itching after tales and reports to other men's
disparagement and aspersion, nor being over credulous of them when he hears
them to the lessening their credit, but in all things is careful to do, as he
would be done by, counting every man his neighbor, and walking thereafter in
doing good and not evil to all.

In whose eyes a ^^le person is contemned, but he honors them that fear the
Lord: he that swears to his own hurt, and changes not.
4 He that gives no countenance or encouragement to wickedness and wicked men,
but declares himself against it, and them, for its sake: contrarily having in
great esteem, and showing good respect to them that are known to be holy and
good; and is careful to walk unblameably, and therefore is so tender of his
word, as that if he have promised or sworn any lawful thing, he will keep it
though it be to his disadvantage, rather than falsify.

5 He that violates not the Laws of charity, He that putted: not out his money
to usurie, nor takes reward against the innocent. He that does these things
shall never be moved.
and justice, but having it by him, lends freely to them that need, intending
their commodity and not his own. And that in office or judicature gives
judgment uprightly, not suffering himself to be perverted by bribery to wrong
the innocent. He that thus walks is no formalist, nor Hipocr^^ or castaway,
but is the truly godly man that is blessed for ever with saving grace, and
assurance of glory.

The xvi. PSALM.
David having prayed for divine preservation shows he expects to be saved by
Gods goodness, and not his own, which only is gratuitous not meritorious. Then
he shows the vanity and misery of false religion and worship, which he for
his part disclain^s, and by faith chooses to be happy in God only. Blessing
God that has by his word and spirit given him the wisdom to believe in him.
Which stablishes his heart in peace during life, and in assured hope after
death, touching perseverance to the end, and heaven in the end.

A Psalm made and set by David to a special tune called Michtam. Psalm xvi.
Michtam of David.

1 O God of power uphold me from falling from thee, PReserve me O God: for in
thee do I put my trust.
and lead me on in the knowledge, love, and obedience of thy truth to the end,
for on thee only and on thy good grace do I trust for preservatio^ unto
salvation.

2 My soul has firmly entered covenant with thee, O my soul, thou have said
unto the Lord; Thou art my Lord, my goodness extends not to thee.
and chosen thee for its Lord, to serve thee, and to be saved by thee of thy
free mercy, abandoning all worth or goodness of mine own, as any ways
meritorious or beneficial to thee, that needs nothing, but have all fulness
and cause of full contentednes in the self alone.

3 Only to thy children and sanctified ones here on earth do I labor to
express my gratitude, But to the s^^ints that are in the earth, and to the
excellent in whom is all my delight.
by what offices of love and respect I can show for thy sake, as they that to
me are most excellent of all men in the world, be their outward condition never
so mean, being happy to be a fellow servant and true worshipper of thee amongst
them.

Their sorrows shall be multiplied, that hasten after another God: their
drink offerings of blood will I not offer, nor take up their names into my lips.
4 Discomfort and destruction, insted of peace and salvation shall be heaped
upon them, that forsaking thee, have their hearts set upon any other God. For
my part I renounce all but thee, and will serve, and sacrifice to thee alone,
and will have nothing to do with their false worship, nor once open my lips to
any God but thee to swear by him, or to pray to him.

The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance, and of my cup: thou maintainest
my lot.
5 With the Lord alone am I well satisfied, a singular portion and rich
inheritance do I account my knowledge of him, and interest in him, thou art
full content to me, in thee and by thee shall I be ever happy and blessed,
when other men of other confidences shall be miserable.

The lines are fallen unto me in pleasant places: yea, I have a goodly heritage.
6 In having thee for my God I have my hearts desire, and think my self enriched
beyond all earthly pleasures and profits, which many in the world have, which
have not thee.

I will bless the Lord, who has given me counsel: my reins also instruct me in
the night seasons.
7 I will ever bless and praise the Lord for revealing to me in his word the way
of life and salvation, when others sit in darkness and in the shadow of death,
and also teaching me effectually by the inward and secret inspiration and
whisperings of his spirit, consciously to walk in it, when as others that know
it externally for want of inspiration, do wander from it.

I have set the Lord always before me: because he is at my right hand, I shall
not be moved.
8 In what condition soever I have been, I have still kept the eye of my faith
full upon God, and not suffered it to take to other things, and because I make
God my support, and lean so wholly upon him, I know he will not deceive my
confidence, but will sustain me in his favor, and support me with his power
and grace for ever, till he bring me to glory.

Therefore my heart is glad, and my glory rejoices: my flesh also shall rest
in hope.
9 And in the faith hereof my heart is comforted above all worldly sorrows, even
to the causing my tongue to break out in holy boastings and praises, that
instrument of speech, wherein man transcends other creatures. Yea in this
confidence I dare die as well as live, and by virtue of it, cheerfully bequeath
my body to the grave in certain expectation of a blessed resurrection thence.

10 For as thou will enable Christ (whose type I am, For thou will not leave my
soul in hell; neither ^ilt thou suffer thine holy one to see corruption.
and who shall spring from me) to overcome all his sufferings, and preserve him
who is thy beloved son, and solely without sin, from the putrefaction which all
men else that are sinners must sustain in the grave, making him to triumph over
death, who is the resurrection and the life. So by Christ shall I be set free
in soul and body from wrath and mortality, by a glorious resurrection to
immortality and life.

11 Yea thou will teach me the way of life and salvation, Thou will show me the
path of life: in thy presence is fullness of joy, at thy right hand there are
pleasures for evermore.
and lead me in it, until thou bring me into thy heavenly presence, to partake
and be possessed of those soul-satisfying and substantial joys that are there,
and of those everlasting and immortal pleasures, which Christ the head of his
Church at thy right hand has to bestow on all his glorified members.

The xvii. PSALM.
David (probably when he was in the cave encompassed by Saul) makes his prayer
and appeal to God, impartially pleading his innocence against his enemies.
Further testifies, that in conscience to God he durst never do as he was done
by, nor prays he never may, but commits his matter over to God in prayer, to
be righted by him, and delivered from the violence of his proud outrageous
enemies in his extreme straights. And again presses hard upon the Lord to show
himself for him against them that have no interest in his special and saving
favor, (only share in his common mercies) which he has, and prizeth as an
happiness above all,

Psalm 17. A prayer of David.
A Psalm of David in way of prayer.

Hear the right, O Lord, attend unto my cry, give ear unto my prayer that goes
not out of feigned lips.
1 THou that art a righteous God, hear the prayer of the righteous and innocent
person, heed my humble and vehement supplication, let my prayer have audience,
which speaks nothing but truth of my self and enemies.

Let my sentence come forth from thy presence: let thine eyes behold the things
that are equal.
2 Judge thou my cause against mine adversaries by clearing mine innocence,
behold the wrong I sustain, and by thy just judgments do me right upon them
according to my righteousness.

Thou have proved mine heart, thou have vi^ited me in the night, thou have
tried me, and shall find nothing. I am purposed that my mouth shall not
transgre^^.
3 Mine integrity is not unknown to thee, for thou have searched mine heart as
well as seen mine actions, thou have put me upon the scrutiny and discovery of
my self in my most retired thoughts; yea, in thought, word, and deed, have thou
tried me; and sifted me through great and many afflictions, and neither have,
nor shall find unrighteousness in me; for I am (by thy blessed assistance)
fully purposed, as to think, so, to speak the truth in all uprightness, and not
to seek mine advantage by lying and dissembling as do mine enemies.

Concerning the works of men, by the word of thy lips, I have kept me from the
paths of the destroyer.
4 Concerning the wrongs they have done me, I have been careful for all their
unjust provocations to walk by the rule of thy word, not rendering evil for
evil, nor requiting their injurious cruelty with the like, though it lay in my
power.

Hold up my goings in thy paths, that my footsteps slip not.
5 And so Lord enable me ever to do, to walk after thy word, that I may never
err from thy truth, nor by sinning forfeit my well doing, and good success in
the end, which by thy promise in the way of obedience I am sure of.

I have called upon thee, for thou will hear me, O God: incline thine ear unto
me, and hear my speech.
6 I have made thee my confidence, and ever addressed me to thee, for I know and
believe according to thy promise thou will hear and do for me; now Lord is a
fit time and a needful, I pray thee therefore withdraw not thy self, but be
entreated to take notice of me, and to hear mine instant prayer.

7 Show thy love to me in marvellously delivering me, Show thy mavelous
loving kindness, O thou that savest by thy right hand, them which put their
trust in thee, from those that rise up against them.
and fulfilling the wonderful things thou have promised me; O Lord, that usest
to employ thy power for their preservation that trust in thee, for deliverance
from them that unjustly oppress them.

8 Do thou Lord watch carefully over me that am dear to thee, Keep me as the
apple of the eye: hide me under the shadow of thy wings.
and in tender compassion preserve thy weak and innocent one.

9 From them that unjustly seek my ruin, From the wicked that oppress me, from
my deadly enemies, who compass me about.
and pursue me to the death with mighty ods of power and strength.

10 They bear themselves high in confidence of their own greatness and power,
They are enclosed in their own fat: with their mouth they speak proudly.
wallowing in abundance, and give out great swelling words in disdain and
contempt of me an abject.

11 They have hunted me and my small company from place to place, They have now
compassed us in our steps: they have set their eyes bowing down to the earth:
and have now overtaken and begirt us round, using all diligence to find us out
wheresoever we hide our selves, that they may destroy us.

12 Greedily, Like as a lion that is greedy of his prey, and as it were a young
lion lurking in secret places.
lion-like gaping after us to prey upon us, and either by strength or policy
utterly to ruin us.

13 Consider my strait O Lord and step into my rescue, Arise, O Lord,
disappoint him, cast him down; deliver my soul from the wicked, which is ( or,
as in the margin, by) thy sword.
defeat his purpose and disable his power, save my life now endangered by my
wicked enemies, and destroy them that would destroy me, by thy might and in thy
justice.

14 Save me from men which though they are too From men which are ( or, as in
the margin, by) thine hand, O Lord, from men of the world, which have their
portion in this life, and whose belly thou fillest with thy hid treasur^: they
are full of children, and leave the rest of their substance to their babes.
hard for me, are not able to stand under thy hand O Lord God of power; yea,
from such men as care never to see thy face in heaven, nor shall they, on whom
thou liberally bestowest temporal favors (for that's all they are to have from
thee) as the fat and sweet of the earth, and store of children, to whom they
leave store of wealth, and that's all they care for.

As for me, I will behold thy face in righteousness: I shall be satisfied, when
I awake, with thy likeness.
15 But Lord this is not my care, nor herein consists not my happiness, but in
this, that I can appeal to thee, in the faith of thy grace, and the sense of
mine own innocence. This is my care and comfort at present, and I am sure for
future I shall be happy when they are miserable, at the day of the resurrection
of all flesh, when I shall appear acceptable to thee, clothed in thine Image of
holiness and righteousness, which they shall not; and so be received into life
and immortality, when they shall be rejected.

The xviii. PSALM.
David having upon the consideration, and view of his great and many benefits,
first kindled the love of God in his heart, then falls to praising him for
them, which he performs with much divine Art and elegancy, in musical
Identities, poetical strains, and Hyperbolical allusions, similitudes, and
comparisons of his deliverances, for substance with the most wonderful ones
that ever God wrought for his Church or servants, by any his notoriousest
miracles. Then he sh^ws the ground hereof, to wit, the innocence of his cause,
the uprightness of his ways, and the grace and righteousness of his good God.
And thence raises conclusions of future mercies both to himself and others in
like case that walk with and depend on the Lord, as he had done, to whom he
thankfully ascribes all his preservation, deliverance, victories, advancement;
and promises himself victory for time to come, and enlargement of his dominions
(as a type of Christ's Kingdom) over as well Heathens as Israelites. And
resuming his acknowledgements, above all, he records his deliverance from Saul,
as most remarkable and thank-worthy. By all which he gives to understand the
ratification of the Kingdom to him by God, and his appointment; to signify,
for the comfort of the faithful, Christ's conquests by the power of his father
in the Church^s behalf, in and over which he shall r^ign for ever. Psalm xviii.
To the chief musician a Psalm of David, the servant of the Lord, who spoke unto
the Lord the words of this song in the day that the Lord delivered him from the
hand of all his enemies, and from the hand of Saul* And he said;


To him that is the first and principal of all the Quire is recommended (for
the care and ordering of it to be sung) by David whose greatest honor in this
his high advancement is, that he is the designed and dedicated servant of the
Lord; this Psalm, which he composed at the end of his troubles, when the Lord
had delivered him from the power and violence of all his homebred enemies, but
principally from Saul who was his greatest persecutor, and potent adversary,
and made him King in his stead. And upon this occasion he gave thanks and
praised God as follows;

1 AS I have cause so I ever will bear in mind thy mercies, I Will love the^* O
Lord, my strength.
and love thee for them, O Lord; in whom I repose all my trust and stay, and so
have ever done.

2 I have bottomed my self on the Lord only, The Lord is my rock, and my
fortress, and my deliverer: my God, my strength in whom I will trust, my
buckler, and the born of my salvation, and my high tower.
and made him my defendor, and trusted in him for deliverance, which he has
sent me. I own him and no other God but him for my God, I will never think my
self weak while I have him for my strength, whom I will choose to trust in as
mine all in all, my defendor, and mine enemies strong offender in my behalf, my
safeguard from them, and advancer above them.

3 I have often called on the Lord in prayer in mine adversity, I will call
upon the Lord, who is worthy to be prai^ed: so shall I be saved from mine
enemies.
and now I will change my note and sing a Psalm of praise to him, who is right
worthy to be praised by me, for what he has done for me; and so I shall still
be sure of him for my God and Savior, as well against those that shall be mine
enemies, as those that have been.

The sorrows of death compassed me, and the floods of ungodly men made me
afraid.
4 I have been many times brought into inextricable dangers of death, so that I
have even given my self for lost, and have thought it impossible to escape the
hands of such a wicked multitude as sought my blood.

The sorrows of hell compassed me about: the snares of death prevented me.
5 Yea, I have made full account of my grave, so near have I been to mine end,
in mine own apprehension; I judged it utterly impossible ever to escape the
deadly dangers I have been in.

In my distress I called upon the Lord, and cried unto my God, he heard my
prayer out of his Temple, and my cry came before him, even into his ears.
6 But ever in my distress I made my repair to God, I called to him who I knew
was of power to help me, and made my earnest supplication to him, that I
believed loved me, and would be good unto me, and accordingly I found it so,
for he failed me not, but heard my prayer and answered it from Heaven the place
of his presence, as shall be the Temple, and was moved by my pitiful case and
earnest supplication, which he took special notice of, and ever lent me relief
according to it.

Then the earth shook and trembled; the foundations also of the hills moved and
were shaken, because he was wroth.
7 For thereupon he miraculously delivered me, and wrought wonderfully for me,
and against mine enemies; in effect as much, and as marvellously as he did of
old either in the punishment or for the terror of his own people when they
rebelled against him and his servant Moses, or at any time for the deliverance
of Israel, whether in Egypt, the red sea, wilderness, or since, yea, as
conspicuously did he appear for me in the acts of providence and power, as if
he had really and in letter created all those revolutions and transmutations in
the air and elements hereafter mentioned, as to instance, when at any time in
his wrath he did (or as if he had) sent terrible earthquakes, that as it were
shook the whole earth, and the most unmovable mountains from top to bottom.

8 And like as when supernaturally he sent forth fire and smoke, There went up
a smoke out of his nostrils, and fire out of his mouth devoured: coals were
kindled by it.
which consumed the ungodly and rebellious with all they had to ashes, and
strangely kindled and set on fire combustible materials, as natural fire
naturally uses to do coals and such like.

9 Or manifested his presence in thick and darksome clouds, He bowed the
heavens also and came down: and darkness was under his feet.
descending as it were down to the earth.

10 Or when at any time he used the powerful ministration of Angels and winds,
And he rode upon a cherub, and did fly: yea, he did fly upon the wings of the
wind.
wherewith himself also was present.

11 Or terribly appeared by overcasting the air with an unwonted darkness, He
made darkness his secret place: his pavilion ^round about him, were dark
watters, and thick clouds of the skies.
occasioned by an extraordinary concourse of dark watery clouds all over the
sky, benighting the day, and obscuring the sun by their blackness and
greatness.

12 And then suddenly changing the face of the heavens from that immensity of
darkness, At the brightness that was before him his thick clouds passed,
hailstones and coals of fire.
to such an extraordinary and supernatural brightness which ushered in his
presence, as instantly dispelled those foresaid clouds, wherein before he
terribly appeared, and then again as terribly in the contrary temperament of
the sky, being all of a light fire, by flashes of lightening (which even
consumed and burnt up what was combustible) accompanied with showers of hail
issuing from those clouds so broken with the brightness of his appearing.

13 Or when as the Lord raised terrible thunderclaps in the heavens, The Lord
also thundered in the heavens, and the highest gave his voice; hailstones and
coals of fire.
and sent forth that dreadful voice of his to the amazement of his peoples
enemies the Egyptians and others, and therewith powered down upon them
hailstones mingled with fire, which beat them, and burnt them up like straw or
stubble.

Yea, he sent out his arrows, and scattered them; and be shot out lightnings,
and discomfited them.
14 Yea, when he shot his mortal thunderbolts amongst them, and put them to
flight, frighting them out of all order and array, and discharged his swift and
penetrating lightnings upon them, and utterly routed and discomfited them.

Then the channels of waters were seen, and the foundations of the world were
discovered: at thy rebuke, O Lord, at the blast of the breath of thy nostrils.
15 And when his people being in danger, upon their prayer God made the very sea
it self dry and fordable for their safe retreat and their enemies ruin. And
the bottom of that deep concave and Abisse whereinto the earth received the
water at the creation, was disclosed by the seas dividing it self at the Lords
command, and by the winds that he raised to interrupt its course, and force it
to a stand.

He sent from above, he took me, he drew me out of many waters.
16 As much as all this has he done for me, though by a more occult way of
providence, he has wrought and fought from heaven for me many a time, and
after diverse manners, he ever had a special eye to me and care of my safety,
and from manifold and great dangers has he powerfully, maugre the force and
malice of mine enemies, delivered me.

He delivered me from my strong enemy, and from them which hated me: for they
were too strong for me.
17 Yea from Saul who was my mightiest and cruelest enemy, and from all that
sided with him against me in hatred to me, has he most miraculously delivered
me, whom else I could never have escaped nor prevailed against, considering
their strength above mine.

They prevented me in the day of my calamity: but the Lord was my stay.
18 For in humane power and policy they were ever too hard for me in the time of
mine adversity and persecution. But I firmly trusted in the Lord, who was
always on my side, and still sustained and delivered me, notwithstanding all
they could do.

19 Yea he has not only brought me out of my troubles, He brought me forth
also into a large place: he delivered me, because he delighted in me.
but moreover has advanced me highly, and stated me in a most happy condition
from out those straits I was in. And the reason why he thus wrought for me, and
had such care over me, to deliver me, was his good grace and free favor to me.

20 And to the honest cause which I maintained, The Lord rewarded me according
to my righteousness, according to the cleanness of my hand; has he recomp^nced
me.
and which he sustained in my behalf, prospering me in it and for it; and mine
innocent and just behavior against mine enemies injustice and cruelty, has he
recompensed with their downfall and mine advancement.

21 For in all my troubles I was careful to keep a good conscience toward God
in doing justly, For I have kept the ways of the Lord, and have not wickedly
departed from my God.
and walking uprightly, and did not (saving the slips of humane frailty and
infirmity) at any time perversely step aside or fail in my duty to God, whom I
ever found so gracious.

22 For I was sincere, For all his judgments were before me, and I did not put
away his statutes from me.
and had always his righteous precepts in mind and memory to order my self and
my ways impartially thereafter, and did not refuse upon any reason or occasion
to yield obedience to them.

23 Nor was mine inward man wanting, I was also upright before him: and I kept
my self from mine iniquity.
but he that sees all things knows my obedience was performed from my heart, in
faith and affection to the commander, as well as to the commandment, and that
in love to him I bridled and refrained my self from the sin, that either by
nature or occasion I was most prone and tempted to.

Therefore has the Lord recompensed me according to my righteousness,
according to the cleanness of my hands in his eyesight.
24 And now I find I am no loser by it, for the Lord in mercy has had
consideration of the justice of my cause, and of mine innocent and holy
demeanor, and has rewarded me accordingly with the ruin of mine enemies, and
mine own preservation and advancement.

With the merciful thou will show thy self merciful, with an upright man thou will show thy self upright.
25 I and mine enemies are a pattern of thy truth and justice, and that thou will reward all manner of men according to their works, they that show mercy
shall find mercy at thine hands, as I have done in my deliverance, and they
that exercise their faith and love toward thee, shall find both love and
faithfulness from thee again.

With the pure thou will show thy self pure: and with the froward, thou will
show thy self froward.
26 And such as are undefiled in the way, careful to walk uprightly and do
justly according to thy commandments, shall in the end find thee just in thy
promises, and gracious in thy providence; and on the contrary, so shall they
find thee cross in providence, and just in judgments, that proudly and
perversely err from thy precepts.

For thou will save the afflicted people: but wilt bring down high looks.
27 For thou will not fail to save and deliver the innocent and oppressed that
trust in thee, and call upon thee, but on the other hand wilt be sure to bring
to ruin those that set light by thee and thine.

For thou will light my candle: the Lord my God will enlighten my darkness.
28 I may say it, for so I have and shall find it more and more to be true, for
thou both have and wilt make my condition prosperous and happy, the Lord in
whom I trust, and whom I have ever found trusty to me, as he has out of love
and faithfulness begun, so I know and believe he will go on until he have
estated me in perfect peace and prosperity, and made me as happy as ever I was
miserable.

29 For by what thou have done I know what thou will do, For by thee, I have
run through a troup^: and by my God have I leaped over a wall.
in that by thy power I have been wonderfully preserved in battle and defeated
mine enemies, and by thy assistance have escaped many perils and skaled their
fortresses, even so shall I do still.

30 As for God you need not doubt him, As for God, his way is perfect: the word
of the Lord is tried: he is a buckler to all those that trust in him.
for his way of proceeding toward his people is a most absolute and perfect
way, full of wisdom, justice, and truth, his promises have always been found
true and never deceived them that trusted to them; for according to them, he
ever was, and ever will be a preserver and defender of all them that faithfully
depend upon him.

31 And the contrary is very foolishness, For who is God save the Lord? or who
is a rock, save our God?
for who is a God to be trusted in and depended on, save the Lord Almighty
only, and who can defend and protect, but that God who has showed such
wonderful strength and power in our preservation that relied on him.

32 It is God, It is God that girde^h me with strength, and makes my way
perfect.
and God alone, that has made me of mean and impotent, to become thus
considerable and potent above mine enemies, and that makes all my proceedings
prosperous and successful.

33 He enables me to overrun and conquer all mine enemies with ease and
expedition, He makes my feet like hindes feet, and sets me upon my high
pla^es.
and subdues them under me, making me Lord of them, and all their strength.

34 He puts power and skill into me, He teaches my hands to war, so that a
bow of steel is broken by mine arms.
and makes me both too cunning and too strong for mine enemies.

35 Thou have not only thus given me power over mine enemies, Thou have also
given me the shield of thy salvation: and thy right hand has holden me up, and
thy gentleness has made me great.
but have also evermore preserved me from theirs, and by thine omnipotency have
upheld me from being overthrown in the days of my weakness and persecution,
and as thy tender care has thus preserved me, so thy loving kindness has
advanced me to this top of honor and felicity I am now seated in.

Thou have enlarged my steps under me; that my feet did not slip.
36 Thou many a time set me at liberty out of my straights and difficulties, so
that I miscarried not in my hazardous condition.

I have pursued mine enemies, and overtaken them: neither did I turn again till
they were consumed.
37 I have defeated mine enemies so that they have fled from me, and I have
chased, overtaken, and utterly destroyed them, returning victorious.

I have wounded them that they were not able to rise: they are fallen under my
feet.
38 I have so spoiled and disabled their power, that they have not been able to
stir against me, they are subdued under me, and are at my mercy.

For thou have girded me with strength unto battle: thou have subdued under me
those that rose up against me.
39 For thou, Lord, did furnish me with courage and puissance to encounter
mine enemies in plain field and set battle. And thou it is that gave me
victory, and enablest me to vanquish them, that have waged war against me.

Thou have also given me the necks of mine enemies: that I might destroy them
that hate me.
40 Yea thou have subjugated them under mine obeisance and command, and given me
absolute and supreme power to execute my pleasure on them that dare to malign
or oppose me, as Christ shall have.

They cried, but there was none to save them; even unto the Lord, but he
answered them not.
41 In their necessities they importuned help on all hands, but there were none
that durst appear in their behalfs against me; yea, they tried how they could
speed by prayer to God, because they saw others had done so, and found
themselves void of all other succor, but they lost their labor and had no
answer.

Then did I beat them small as the dust before the wind: I did cast them out as
the dirt in the streets.
42 But in stead thereof were wholly put into my hands, whom I made examples of
my just displeasure, by taking deserved punishment upon them; executing martial
law: I destroyed them by multitudes without mercy or compassion, as Christ
shall his enemies when he takes vengeance on them, and breaks them to pieces
with a rod of iron.

43 Thou have delivered me from the oppositions and gain sayings that I found
at mine entrance to the Crown by mine own people Israel, Thou have delivered me
from the strivings of the people: and thou have made me the head of the
heathen: a people whom I have not known shall serve me.
and have both set me over them, and extended my dominions over many heathen
nations also; yea, thou will yet make more and strange nations subject to me,
as well as they, even as Jews and Gentiles shall be to Christ.

44 So soon as they hear of my prowess and victories, they shall be willing to
become my tributaries. As soon as they hear of me they shall obey me: the
strangers shall submit themselves unto me.
The heathen shall be glad to strike sail, and offer me their allegiance, as in
like manner they shall do to the Messiah, who shall conquer by his word as I by
my sword.

45 The courages of the heathen shall abate, The strangers shall fade away, and
be afraid out of their close places.
and they shall fly away at the renown of my power, nor shall they think
themselves safe in their strong holds, but shall abandon them for fear of me.

46 It is the Almighty and everliving God, The Lord lives, and blessed be my
rock: and let the God of my salvation be exalted.
to whom I ascribe the surviving of all my miseries, and the enjoyment of all
my happiness, and him will I ever bless who has been a sure rock of defense
and safety to me in all storms, and I will never forget to magnify God as my
sole and only Savior out of all my troubles.

47 It is God that takes vengeance of my potent and malicious enemies, It is
God that avengeth me, and subdueth the people under me.
and suppresseth the mutinous and rebellious spirits of the popularity, and
keeps them in subjection and Allegiance to me.

He delivers me from mine enemies: yea, thou liftest me up above those that
rise up against me: thou have delivered me from the violent man.
48 He delivers me from all mine enemies great and small, less and more; yea,
and subdues them that take up arms against me under my dominion: yea, thou have
done many favors for me, but one above all the rest, which I must principally
record, that is, my great preservation from Saul my ^orest enemy, and most
malicious persecutor.

Therefore will I give thanks unto thee, (O Lord) among the heathen: and sing
p^ai^^^^ unto thy name.
49 Therefore will I give thee thanks, O Lord, even amongst the heathen will I
publish the renown of thy saving power and goodness, as Christ shall thy saving
grace and righteousness, that they may also know thee and believe in thee, and
will sing the praises of all thou have wrought for me, and give the glory
thereof to thy grace and might.

Great deliverance gives he to his King: and shows mercy to his anointed,
to David, and to his seed for evermore.
50 Great deliverance he both has given, and still continues to give to me,
whom he has made King over Israel, and ratified it after an extraordinary
manner. And has and will show mercy to his appointed and Anointed servant and
Sovereign of his people in testimony of his favor and good will to him, even
to David, the selected type of Christ and his victorious Kingdom, who shall
come of him, and reign over his Church everlastingly; as he and his posterity
shall over Judah from generation to generation.

The xix. PSALM.
David intending to magnify Gods word, and the condition of his people the
Jews, that did enjoy it of all the people of the world, takes his rise from his
works, and those nations that only enjoy them, whereby though they might
attain to much excellent knowledge of God, thereby to magnify and praise him.
Yet do his works how excellent soever declare him but under a common notion,
whereas his word holds him forth in a special manner, manifesting and that with
power and efficacy the way of life and salvation, which we having lost, it
only restores it to us; making us holy like it self, and consequently happy,
containing nothing but what is pure, true, and just, and yields most profit and
delight of any thing to them that conscionably observe it. Which none does or
can do so exactly, but that he needs both pardon of unknown sins, and
preservation against known ones, which the very godly themselves cannot avoid
but by power from God. To be accepted in whose sight we must get our persons
sanctified in thought, word, and deed, and our sins done away by the virtue of
Christ's redemption.

To him that is the first and principal of all the Quire, Psalm 19. To the
chief musician. A Psalm of David.
do I David that made this Psalm recommend it, for the care and ordering of it
to be sung.

1 THe heavens and those glorious lights that shine therein manifest and
magnify the more glorious wisdom and power of God, THe heavens declare the
glory of God: and the firmament shows his handy work.
and that vast expanse and transparent region of the air, wherein those great
and mighty clouds reside, and birds take their flight, show forth his might and
skill that made them.

2 The continual and never failing succession of one day after another, Day
unto day utters speech, and night unto night shows knowledge.
by the suns return upon the earth, speaks the praise of his wise contrivement,
and by a constant course of one nights following another, by the setting of the
sun, and the appearing of the moon and stars, is his exceeding great wisdom,
power, and providence showed and held forth.

3 There is no people under heaven be they of never such different languages,
There is no speech nor language, where their voice is not heard.
but the benefit of these things are participated to them, and thereby the
praise and glory of God is taught them, and communicated to their
understandings and capacities.

Their line is gone out throughout all the earth, and their words to the end of
the world: in them has he set a Tabernacle for the sun.
4 This glorious piece of creation, the heavens and the firmament, by the
ordinance of God ever from the beginning have they overspread the whole earth,
and they speak the excellent wisdom and power of God to all parts and people
thereof. In them may all men see how wonderfully God has ordained the sun to
reside and shine.

Which is as a bridegroom coming out of his chamber, and rejoices as a strong
man to run a ^ace.
5 Which at its first arising, and mornings beautiful appearance is most welcome
to all men's sight, bringing light and as it were life with it from under the
dark curtain of the sable night; and with a free and natural motion fit for
such an undertaking, without difficulty sets upon the course it is to run and
finish in the appointed time, from one end of the heaven to the other.

His going forth is from the end of the Heaven, and his circuit unto the ends
of it: and there is nothing hid from the heat thereof.
6 His setting forth is from the East, and in a day he makes his progress to the
West, diffusing also his light and influence North and South; whose penetrating
heat in this his motion, reaches the very lowermost parts of the earth,
concocting minerals, and quickening vegetables.

The law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul: the testimony of the Lord
is sure, making wise the simple.
7 Glorious is God in his works which declare his power and wisdom to all men,
but much more glorious is he in his word and doctrine delivered peculiarly to
his people, which holds forth to them his covenant of saving grace. Those
things by a natural propensity convey to men many common and bodily benefits.
But the word of God is far beyond them all; restoring both our title to them
(lost by our fall) and which is infinitely more, supernaturally revealing to us
the perfect and infallible way of life, and turning again to God, and
powerfully bringing it to pass upon* us. The truth delivered in it by the Lord
touching our salvation is unquestionable and may be trusted to, which
understood and embraced enriches us, who foolishly lost our first estate of
holiness and happiness, with understanding how to get it again.

8 The saving principles and ordinances which God gives us in his word to walk
by, The statutes of the Lord are right, rejoicing the heart: the commandment of
the Lord is pure, enlightening the eyes.
are holy and righteous, and such as being observed and obeyed in faith and
conscience to the Lawgiver, brings joy and hearts ease in the comfortable
sense of our sincerity, and assurance of Gods favor to us, and acceptance of
us. The whole will of God revealed is it self pure, void of error or
corruption, and makes them so that walk according to it, enlightening them with
understanding to tread in the way of truth and life, when others wander in
bypath of death and error.

9 The holy law of God which he has ordained his people to fear and serve him
by, The fear of the Lord is clean, enduring for ever: the judgments of the
Lord are true and righteous altogether.
is free from corruption, and makes them like it that observe it, holy and
pure; and is everlastingly the same, like God the giver of it, not to be varied
by us at no time nor occasion, bringing with it the reward of everlasting
happiness. The ordinances and commandments of the Lord by which he expects to be
obeyed, and purposes to judge the world are completely perfect, free from all
error and injustice, and only makes men so.

10 They are of more worth and yield a man more profit than all the riches of
the world, More to be desired are they than gold; yea, than much fine gold:
sweeter also then honey, and the honeycomb.
better are they to be prized, and more to be desired than the most refined
gold. And more true pleasure and content do they bring to the soul and
conscience by faithful observance, than the sweetest honey does to the taste.

Moreover, by them is thy servant warned: and in keeping of them there is great
reward.
11 After a special manner they are and ever have been useful to me and to all
that fear thee, showing us how to stear a right course in every condition, by
choosing the good and refusing the evil. And well worthy are they to be obeyed,
for they bring a blessed reward with them even peace of conscience and
everlasting life.

Who can understand his errors? cleanse thou me from secret faults.
12 So holy are all thy foresaid laws and commandments, and so binding both to
the inward and outward man; as, who lives that can know how often he offends
against them? Lord pardon me therefore my unknown sins, and sanctify my heart
and spirit conformably to thy law which is spiritual.

Keep back thy servant also from presumptuous s^^s, let them not have dominion
over me: then shall I be upright, and I shall be innocent from the great
transgression.
13 Protect me also who am thy servant, and desire to yield thee universal
obedience, from outward and grosser iniquities committed against knowledge, let
not such prevail over me by strength of temptation. And so being thus pardoned
and sanctified, notwithstanding my many frailties and daily infirmities, I
shall be uprightly righteous in thy sight, and shall be though not innocent and
free from all sin, yet from known and presumptuous ones, any of which lived in,
may justly stagger my sincerity and covenant-peace, which without thy special
preventing grace I shall notwithstanding fall into.

Let the words of my mouth, and the meditation of my heart be acceptable in thy
sight, O Lord, my strength and my redeemer.
14 Yea cleanse me throughout. Let my very words and thoughts, as well as deeds,
be such as suit with thy law and will. Thus, Lord, grant me grace and pardon,
who only art my sanctifier and redeemer.

The xx. PSALM.
David as a prophet instructs his people in a pattern and form of prayer to
pray for him their King, and to seek their own welfare in him, as the Churches
in Christ, whereof he and they were respective types. And to look at God for
all the good they expected by his means, and withal to be confident of it by
says, grounded upon pregnant experiences of his grace and favor to him. And
how ever God might make them strong in outward things, yet not to change their
trust, but to keep it firm in God, by example both of their enemies
miscarriages through their misgrounded confidence, and of their own experienced
success by trusting in the Lord. Closing up the prayer with a brief of all.
Praying God to preserve both them and their King, and to make him able to
govern and defend them in equity and tranquillity, as Christ his Church.

To him that is the first and principal of all the Quire, Psalm xx. To the
chief musician A Psalm of David.
do I David that made this Psalm, recommend it for the care and ordering of it
to be sung.

1 WE the people of God, THe Lord bear thee in the day of trouble, the name of
the God of Jacob defend thee.
and thee, whom God has set over us, pray for thee. That the Lord would hear
thy prayers against thine enemies in time of need: the grace and providence of
God which he showed to our father Jacob, and promised to us his seed, who are
his peculiar people, evermore accompany and preserve thee our King.

2 Yea, Send thee help from the sanctuary: and strengthen thee out of Sion.
the good Lord answer thee succesfully from that place which he has specially
appointed to hear, and for us to offer prayers in, even his holy Tabernacle.
And grant thee his Almighty aid according to the daily prayers of his priests
and people which they put up unto him in his holy mountain in thy behalf.

3 The Lord keep in mind thy pious offerings of praise and thanksgivings for
mercies past, Remember all thy offerings, and accept thy burnt sacrifice. Selah.
to give thee further cause to do the like, and the Lord accept the
propitiation for thy sins to pardon them, and show forth the gracious fruits
and effects of his reconciled favor to thee. All this we humbly and heartily
pray for.

Grant thee according to thine own heart, and fulfill all thy counsel.
4 God grant thee answers and issues according to thine own desire, and bless
all thy advice and undertakings for God and his people with suitable success.

We will rejoice: in thy salvation, and in the name of our God we will set up
our banners: the Lord fulfill all thy petitions.
5 We are confident that God is and ever will be with thee, and therefore
rejoice before hand in that happiness and preservation we promise our selves
under thee, as the Church shall have under the Messiah, and with much assurance
and boldness in our God and thine, will we triumphantly and in confidence of
victory march against thine and our enemies. And to that purpose the Lord
hear, and effectually answer all thy petitions.

Now know I, that the Lord saves his anointed: he will hear him from his holy
heaven, with the saving strength of his ^ight hand.
6 We have had good experience and sufficient proof of Gods great good will
toward thee, and that ever since thy first anointing by Samuel; the Lord has
so preserved and kept thee, and spite of all thine enemies placed thee in the
throne, as that we doubt not, but that still God will be the same in grace and
good will to thee, hearing thy further requests which thou shall put up against
thine and our enemies, and answering thee from heaven with preservation and
victory.

Some trust in chariots, and some in horses; but we will remember the name of
the Lord our God.
7 Our enemies according to their national accommodations and military
provisions, so is their confidence, some in one thing, some in another. But we
will strengthen our selves in the Lord, and repose our trust in him alone, by
virtue of his many gracious promises made to us, and his former mighty works
wrought for us.

They are brought down and fallen, but we are risen and stand up ^ight.
8 And cause we have to do so, if we consider. How helpless they have found
them, whose trust was in other things, and how notwithstanding their pride and
power, it has brought them to ruin. Whilst we by trusting in the Lord, are
through his power and goodness attained to great felicity and superiority
above them, from a low and despicable condition.

9 Good Lord, Save Lord, let the King hear us when we call.
be still our preserver and our Kings, and so strengthen him with power, and
endow him with clemency and justice. That he may be both able to keep us in
peace from our enemies that seek to annoy us, and in righteousness preserve us
from civil oppression amongst our selves. As Christ can and will his Church and
people, when they cry to him.

The xxi. PSALM.
David in the name of Israel foretells much happiness to him and to themselves*
in him their King answerable to the Churches happiness in her head Christ, the
only Savior of his people, and they ground it upon experience of Gods former
extraordinary favors to him, which makes them in him confidently boast
themselves on the Lord, for that he still trusts in God, who therefore will
preserve him, and with fierce wrath destroy his enemies as rebels and traitors
against God himself, for so are all the enemies of Christ whom David typifies.
Having thus declared their faith, they end with prayer and promise praise.

To him that is the first and principal of all the Quire, Psalm xxi. To the
chief musician A Psalm of David.
do I David that made this Psalm recommend it, for the care and ordering of it
to be sung.

1 DAvid whom thou have made head and King over us thy people, THe King shall
joy in thy strength, O Lord: and in thy salvation how greatly shall he rejoice!
as Christ is over his Church: shall (we are confident) find thee a never
failing God unto him, and that thou will give him continual cause of rejoicing
in that gracious assistance thou will ever afford him against his enemies. Yea,
its not to be expressed how great things thou have done for him, and what
further favors thou will show him in the preservation of him and his people,
to his and their unspeakable joy.

Thou have given him his hearts desire, and have not withholden the request of
his lips. Sel^h.
2 Thou have brought all things to pass after a mervellous manner which long
since thou promisedst him, and which accordingly he has long expected, nor
have thou disappointed his faithful waiting and fervent praying, but have
fulfilled them to the uttermost, as thou shall the Messiahs. To thy praise be
it spoken.

For thou preventest him with the blessings of goodness: thou set a crown
of pure gold on his head.
3 Thou have done more for him and shown more bounteous goodness to him, than
ever he could have asked for himself, for of thine own good pleasure unthought
of, and undesired have thou advanced him from a mean estate, and brought him
out of a turbulent condition to be the King of thy people Israel in much glory
and rest.

He asked life thee, and thou gave it him, even length of days for ever and
ever.
4 He did but beg deliverance of thee out of his troubles, that he might not be
destroyed in them, and so frustrate thy promise of the Kingdom to him, and thou
gave him his desire, and more, for thou have entailed the crown upon him and
his heirs for ever, nay, and moreover have advanced him to be a type and
progenitor of Christ, whose Kingdom shall last for ever and ever.

His glory is great in thy salvation, honor and majesty have thou laid upon
him.
5 His faith and ours, emboldens both him, and us in him, to glory and boast
our selves on thee, in assurance of preservation and deliverance, which we
ground upon that, that thou have done already for him, in fulfilling the
promise of the Kingdom to him.

For thou have made him most blessed for ever: thou have made him exceeding
glad with thy countenance.
6 For thou have wonderfully blessed him, both realy in his own person, and
promissorily in his seed, which shall also inherit the Kingdom after him. And
that which yields him and us most content in all his worldly felicity, is,
that it is the gift of thy grace, and a token of thy love and favor to him,
which is more worth than all besides.

7 And as thou have done, For the King trusts in the Lord, and through the
mercy of the most high, he shall not be moved.
so he and we make sure account thou will do, for though thou have advanced him
to great authority, and furnished him with strength and power. Yet as
heretofore, so still now he is King, his trust is never the less in thee, and
in nothing else, and therefore he and we are confident, that as thou have
raised him to this condition, so of thy good grace thou will establish him in
it, and us under him in happiness.

8 We verily believe, Thine hand shall find out all thine enemies, thy right
hand shall find out those that hate thee.
that as thou have already done by thine and his enemies, so still thou will
continue to hunt them down, and by thy power to root them out, that in him,
make opposition to thee and thy Christ.

9 Thou will bitterly enrage thy self against them, Thou shall make them as a
fiery oven in the time of thine anger: the Lord shall swallow them up in his
wrath, and the fire shall devour them.
and execute fierce destruction upon them, even as thou will upon the enemies
of Christ at the day of judgment, whom everlasting burnings shall devour.

10 Root and branch of them shall thou cut off, Their fruit shall thou destroy
from the earth, and their seed from among the children of men.
that refuse to come under thy scepter, and seek to destroy thy Kingdom, as not
worthy to live upon the earth.

11 For they are rebels and traitors, For they intended evil against thee: they
imagined a mischievous device, which they are not able to perform.
not so much against him as thee, whose anointed he is, to typifie Christ;
notwithstanding they have attempted to unthrone him, and to take Israel out of
his hands, and so out of thine: which though they have strongly endeavored, yet
all in vain, for they cannot bring it to pass, no more than the world shall
Christ's people out of his.

Therefore shall thou make them turn their back, when thou shall make ready
thine arrows upon thy strings, against the face of them.
12 Therefore though thou may suffer much, and be loath to do execution upon
them, yet when they put thee to it, that thou must show thy self on thy King
and peoples behalf, thou will make them know to their conviction whom they
fight against, by the woeful destruction thou will bring upon them.

Be thou exalted, Lord, in thine own strength: so will we sing, and praise thy
power.
13 Lord do thou answer our faith and confidence in thee, for our King and us,
by putting forth thy glorious strength in his and our behalves against our
enemies, that we may exalt thee. To whose power and goodness we promise with
all self-denying thankfulness to sing the praises of all our happiness and succes.

The xxii. PSALM.
David as a type of Christ shows his faith in God, and Gods love and
faithfulness toward him, notwithstanding the despightful usage, and cruel
persecution of his enemies, which he sets forth by metaphorical expressions,
and hyperbolical allusions of his sufferings, to those, which Christ shall
realy undergo, and for all his sufferings he tells how close he stuck to God in
prayer-fulnes and praise-ful confidence, and how friendly and faithful he had
ever found God to him in his most despicable and forlorn condition, as he will
be to Christ whom he will highly favor in his greatest abasement, and exalt
him to the highest dignity of being the sole Savior of his Church, and
supreme potentate of all the World.

Psalm xxii. To the chief musician upon Aijeleth-Shahar, A Psalm of David.
To him that is most skilful upon the instrument Aijeleth-Shahar, which
signifies the Hind of the morning; showing David's and Christ's early and
uncessant persecution (or hunting) till they came to their Kingdoms.

MY God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? why art thou so far from helping
me, and from the words of my roaring.
1 THou that art my God, I am confident and well assured in special relation and
affection to me, why then seem thou to have forsaken me, and exposest me to
such extreme sufferings by mine enemies, as force from me grievous complaints,
and yet find no relief, or audience, as unto ease, in these my sufferings, as
shall befall Christ himself in the agony of his passion.

2 O God whom I must and cannot but own for mine, O my God, I cry in the day
time, but thou hear not; and in the night season, and am not silent.
night and day am I in continual vexation, and put up uncessant prayers unto
thee accordingly, but am not heard.

3 But however thou delayest to answer, But thou art holy, O thou that
inhabitest the praises of Israel.
yet art thou holy and faithful of thy word and promise, and therefore I Will both
trust and try thee to the uttermost. O thou that dwell in thy sanctuary
where the wonderful praise-worthie works which thou have done and do for thy
people Israel are acknowledged to thy glory, and where I hope to praise thee,
as well as others.

4 Our forefathers made thee their salvation, Our fathers trusted in thee: they
trusted, and thou did deliver them.
they believed in thy promises of protection, and thou did not deceive them,
but did wonderfully preserve them, maugre all their powerful and spiteful
enemies.

5 When they in their distresses put up their prayers to thee, They cried unto
thee, and were delivered: they trusted in thee, and were not confounded.
thou heardest and answerest them with deliverance. They believed in thy
faithfulness and power to uphold and protect them, and sped accordingly, never
having cause to be ashamed of their trust in thee.

6 And if it have been thy custom to show them most good will and faithfulness
in their worst estate, But I am a worm, and no man: a reproach of men, and
despised of the people.
why I am (as Christ shall be) brought as low as low can be imagined, reputed
in the eye of the world an abject fellow, one, to whom most men offer all
manner of scorn and despite.

7 None owns me for better than a laughing stock All they that see me laugh me
to scorn: they shoot out the lip, they shake the head saying,
showing all signs of contempt and disgrace to me, as they shall to him.

He trusted on the Lord, that he would deliver him: let him deliver him seeing
he delighted in him.
8 And all, because I have trusted in thee to carry on the business of the
Kingdom that thou have engaged me in, they blasphemously mock at my faith as a
vain and fruitles thing, and at thy power as if it were not able to deliver;
and at thy favor also, wherein its true I have boasted my self; as if it were
a delusion or mere imaginary thing, of no realitie or benefit to them that
have it, more than to them that have it not; The like whereof they shall do to
Christ.

But thou art he that took me out of the womb: thou did make me hope, when I
was upon my mothers breasts.
9 But say they what they will in mockage of my trust and thy favor, yet thou
have been my God from the very first, and so shall be to the last, and from
thee and thy good grace and providence do I own all my subsistence and being,
and what good soever has been by any contributed to me I ascribe it all to
thee, even that which the midwife or my mother did for me in my very infancy.

I was cast upon thee from the womb; thou art my God from my mothers belly.
10 I have had all my preservation from thee, both in, and ever since my birth,
have thou showed thy manifold love and care to me.

Be not far from me, for trouble is near; for there is none to help.
11 And thou that have kept me hitherto, I hope wilt not now cast me of in time
off need, nor expose me to undergo my troubles without thee, who art mine only
helper.

Many bulls have compassed me: strong bulls of Bashan have beset me round.
12 Many enemies of great wrath and fury have combined themselves against me,
as they will against Christ; yea, men of greatest power and violence have
begirt me to procure my ruin, like so many high fed bulls in the fat pastures of
Bashan.

13 They have showed all signs of hatred and cruelty to me, They gaped upon me
with their mouths, as a ravening and roaring Lion.
and would even Lion-like tear me in pieces, for the indignation they have
against me, were I in their hands to prey upon.

14 I am a man dissolved in tears by reason of my great extremities, I am
poured out like water, and all my bones are out of joint: my heart is like wax,
it is melted in the midst of my bowels.
nor have I any ease, but by reason of mine uncessant sorrows am like a man in
perpetual rack and torture, in type sustaining the very agonies of Christ; mine
heart is enfeebled, and as it were wasted and consumed within me, by reason of
mine inward grief and earnings.

15 All my spirits are spent through sorrow, My strength is dried up like a
pot-sheard: and my tongue cleaves to my jaws; and thou have brought me into
the dust of death.
and I am become like a broken pot-sheard, without any natural moisture left in
me, wherewith life and strength should be maintained, it being quite wasted and
dried up: yea, that which feeds and facilitates the motion of the tongue in
speech, is exhausted, and my tongue is put to silence, and made useless through
want of its supply. All manner of moisture is so spent, and my body so dried
up and parched with the excessive sorrows thou have heaped upon me, that it
seems, as if it would dissolve into dust, as when it is in the grave.

16 For I am persecuted and endangered by unreasonable men of fierce implacable
minds; For dogs have compassed me, the assembly of the wicked have enclosed me:
they pierced my hands and my feet.
I am in extreme hazard by a multitude of impious and blasphemous wretches,
that hate me as they will the Messiah for righteousness sake, and with endless
vexations as it were crucify me, as they will do him by a lingering death upon
the cross.

17 Grief has so pined me away, I may tell all my bones: they look and stare
upon me.
that my flesh is wasted from my bones, and I am become like an Anatomy, even
to the wonderment of my pitiless enemies, so Christ shall be to his.

They part my garments among them and cast lots for my vesture.
18 They verily believe to make a prey of me, first to ruin me, and then to
divide that which is mine as a spoil amongst them, as they shall the garments
of Christ when they have put him to death.

But be not thou far from me, O Lord; O ^^y strength, have the^ to help me.
19 But though they be thus mischievously bent against me, yet Lord let me have
thee on my side: Be not thou to seek in mine extremities, that art mine only
trust and succor, but be ready at hand to help me in my need.

Deliver my soul from the sword: my darling from the power of the dog.
20 Let them not take away my life by the sword of violence and injustice, but
preserve thou it from their power and malice, which is the choicest of all thy
blessings bestowed upon me, as that wherein my very being consists, therefore
let not the cruel-minded man that persecutes me for it ever obtein it.

Save me from the Lions mouth: for thou have heard me from the horns of the
unicorns.
21 My case is very desperate and full of danger, for I am ready to be devoured
by my Lion-like enemies, but Lord, thou that can deliver, do deliver me; in
token of the resurrection of Christ even from death it self, and the rather,
for that heretofore I have found favor and had audience, in as desperate a
condition and as imminent peril of death by mighty enemies.

I will declare thy name unto my brethren, in the midst of the congregation
will I praise thee.
22 I will in Psalms of praise magnify thy power and goodness amongst thy
people, who are my brethren, flesh of my flesh, as the regenerate are one with
Christ in spirit. In the midst of all Israel met together at thy sanctuary to
worship thee, shall thy praises be openly sung in Psalms of praise which I will
dedicate to thee.

23 Stirring up thereby thy faithful and obedient people to praise thee with
me, Ye that fear the Lord, praise him; all ye the seed of Jacob, glorify him,
and fear him, all ye seed of Israel.
and for me the Type, as thy Church and chosen ones will for Christ the
Antitype. All ye who are Jacobs posterity and resemble Gods peculiar and elect
people, exalt the Lord for the great benefits he has afforded me, and to you
by me; Serve him with reverence and Godly fear, all you that are Israel and
sprung of Israel, as shall do the children of the promise, or the spiritual
Israel of God under the Government of the Messiah.

24 For he has ever been mindful both of you and me in all our afflictions,
For he has not despised nor abhorred the affliction of the afflicted: neither
has he hid his face from him, but when he cried unto him he heard.
then when the world has contemned and disdained you, as it will his Church,
and me as it will Christ; yet has he highly set by us and done for us, nor
has he ever withdrawn his grace and favor from me, in my worst estate, no
more than he will from the Messiah in his, but when at such times I cried unto
him he has most of all expressed it, ever vouchsafing me a gracious answer,
and relief, as he will to him and his in like condition.

25 Therefore will I pay my homage of praise and thanks unto thee of whom I
have received all my welfare and happiness, My praise shall be of thee in the
great congregation: I will pay my vows before them that fear him.
even before all Israel will I do it, to provoke them to do the like, who have
like cause with me: I will at those times of most solemn and public worship
sing thy praise and offer my sacrifice of thanksgiving unto thee, that all may
join with me, and take example by me.

26 They that meekly undergo their sufferings, The meek shall eat and be
satisfied: they shall praise the Lord that seek him; your heart shall live for
ever.
and do wait upon the Lord for deliverance, and the fulfilling of his gracious
promises, shall be sure at last to have their hearts desire, and shall be
feasted with their own peace offerings, as Christ shall be in heaven after he
has endured the cross. They shall have cause of praise that faithfully seek to
him by prayer in their distresses. Such men shall not need to be discouraged at
no time, nor in no condition, but shall always have cause comfortably to enjoy
themselves by faith in God.

27 The time shall come, when Christ is come, and after his sufferings is
exalted into glory, All the ends of the world shall remember, and turn unto
the Lord: and all the kinreds of the nations shall worship before thee.
as contemptible as he seems to be, that all the world shall take notice of
their lost estate. But for him whom God has exalted to the office of a Savior
and Mediator, and shall thereupon willingly and with all their hearts renounce
their errors and idols to serve the only true God in Christ; and the manifold
nations of the Gentiles, who now are a separate body from the Church, shall
then be incorporated into it, acknowledging the Lord Christ and worshipping
him, who when he is lifted up shall draw all men after him.

For the Kingdom is the Lords: and he is the Governor among the nations.
28 For God has put all power into his hands, and he will show that his Kingdom
is not confined to Israel alone, but that he is King over the Gentiles, whom he
will also bring under his dominion and allegiance.

All they that be fat upon earth, shall eat and worship: all they that go down
to the dust, shall bow before him, and none can keep alive his own soul.
29 All sorts of people from all parts of the earth shall submit to Christ's
scepter and salvation. They that outwardly abound in wealth and honor, or
inwardly with carnal confidence or self-righteousness, shall yet be glad to
casheer such destructive principles and deceivable, and account it their
greater safety and felicity to take their souls repast in Christ, whom they
shall feed upon by faith, as their peace offering, for whom, and by whom they
shall thankfully adore and worship God; all also that are abject and poor, or
that in self-despair apprehend themselves under the bondage and fear of death
by sin, shall likewise humbly and thankfully take hold of him for their
Savior, and honor him as their only Redeemer. And thus it shall be made
appear by the conviction of all men's consciences, that were it not for him, all
the world were undone; for no man can be saved without him, by his own
righteousness; nor purchase heaven either by worldly affluence or voluntary
penury and penance of soul or body, but only by being Christ's, and having
Christ for his.

30 Not that all the whole world shall either serve him or be saved by him. A
seed shall serve him, it shall be accounted to the Lord for a Generation.
But a holy seed, like Jacobs, chosen and called every where out of the world
shall believe in him, and yield obedience to him, and they shall be counted to
the Lord for children, and he to them for a Father, because of their faith in
him and obedience to him, and his reciprocal love to them and care over them.

31 They by the Fathers drawing shall come to Christ, They shall come, and
shall declare his righteousness unto a people that shall be born, that he has
done this.
and partake of his justifying righteousness and grace, when he is raised and
exalted out of his abased condition of humiliation to be the King and Savior
of his Church. Which in zeal to Christ himself, and in Christian charity and
duty they shall promulgate and declare also to succeeding Generations, and
teach it to their children and childrens children, that they in like manner may
partake of his grace, and be begotten to God by believing in him. Even those
great things shall they declare, which he has done for Christ, and for his
Church in and through Christ, like as he has done for me, and for the people
of Israel by me.

The xxiii. PSALM.
David from what God had done for him in bringing him to the Kingdom argues
what he will do, and sets his seal of faith and assurance to it, so as that by
reason of his past and present condition, no future dangers shall dismay him.
But is confident he shall spend and end his life in happiness, and promises
constant praises, for perpetuated mercies.

Psalm xxiii. A Psalm of David.
A Psalm made by David.

THe Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want.
1 THe Lord has shown himself as careful and tender over me as a shepherd over
his sheep, which makes me confident of his gracious benignity to me for the
time to come, that of his bounteous goodness he will so see to me, that I shall
lack nothing that is expedient for me.

He makes me to lie down in green pastures: he leads me besides the still
waters.
2 For present, he has made large provision for me, and carved with a bountiful
hand unto me of every good thing, he gives me peace and plenty, and has
brought me into a safe and happy condition void of danger, and full of inward
and outward tranquillity.

He restores my soul: he leads me in the paths of righteousness for his names
sake.
3 He has as it were given me a resurrection from the dead by freeing me from
mortal dangers which put my very life in peril, and caused much affliction of
mind, he has carried on all the course of his providence toward me in a way
of truth and faithfulness according to his promise* and that only for his own
free grace and mercies sake, therefore has nothing failed of all that he
promised me.

4 Yea, Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will
fear no evil: for thou art with me, thy rod and thy staff they comfort me.
I have had such large and unquestionable experience of thy love and
faithfulness, that though I should be brought into never so great danger, and
lie never so long under it, yet will I not distrust thy deliverance at last,
for because all that befalls me is by thy permission, and makes not void thy
grace and providence, which is then with me, when all things are against me.
Thou have a rod of offense for mine enemies, and a staff of defense and
protection for thy sheep, and for me thy servant, which sustains my faith and
courage against all fears and dangers.

5 Thou have plentifully provided for me, Thou preparest a table before me in
the presence of mine enemies: thou anointest my head with oil, my cup runs
over.
enriched me with the spoil of my very enemies, and made me master and owner of
that was theirs to the great regret of those of them that live to see me so, as
many of them do; Thou have heaped such an abundance of all manner of affluence
and beneficence both for honor, delight, and necessity upon me, that thou
have made me overflow in blessings and benefits unto others, as shall Christ
the head to his members.

6 I cannot but conclude from that goodness and mercy I have already found
according to thy promise, Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the
days of my life: and I will dwell in the house of the Lord for ever.
that I shall ever whilst I live be a large sharer in thy free and bounteous
beneficence and liberality. And I promise by Gods grace I will never so surfeit
of thy benefits, as to forget my benefactor, but will diligently frequent thy
sanctuary, and hold on a constant course of praise and thanksgiving therein,
according to thy commandments, as thou shall hold on a course of mercy and
favor to me, according to promise, ending as I begin.

The xxiiii. PSALM.
David to invite men into a participation of the sanctifying graces of the
spirit, and salvation and glorification by Christ; shows, That though all the
world and men in it belong to God, yet with great difference, for though all
are his by right of creation, yet has his special favor of election and
calling passed only upon such as are holy, others are but his creatures, these
his sons and daughters, whom he spurs on to enlarge their desires after Christ
in the exercise of faith and use of means; and promises both him, and together
with him, happiness and security to such.

Psalm xxiiii. A Psalm of David.
A Psalm made by David.

THe earth is the Lords, and the fulness thereof, the world and they that dwell
therein.
1 THe Lord has dominion over all the earth, which together with those infinite
species and individuals of creatures animate and inanimate that are in it, are
all of them his. Yea, the whole world from North to South, and East to West is
his, and under his regiment, together with all the inhabitants thereof every
where.

For he has founded it upon the seas, and established it upon the floods.
2 For it is he that has made all both sea and land, and that has given an
habitable existence and being to the earth above the waters, which he has
placed below it in that great Abyss where the seas remain. By his decree it is
thus established over and above the waves and surges of the sea, which else
would soon surmount it.

Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? and who shall stand in his holy
place.
3 But though all the world be the Lords in common right of creation; yet who
are they that are his redeemed ones in special relation? that have the honor
and privilege to be peculiarly elected, and called out of the world to worship
and serve him here, and to be glorified of him hereafter (like as in type we
are, being his peculiar and chosen people, who of all the world are privileged
with his sanctuary which we frequent, and where we worship him upon mount Sion
the figure of heaven.)

4 Why, He that has clean hands and a pure heart; who has not lift up his
soul unto vanity, nor sworn deceitfully.
only he that is holy and upright, whose conversation and affections are
changed from the corrupt course of the world, in obedience and love to God
purifying his heart from inward concupiscences, and leading his life
unblameably. Who has not either committed impiety, in trusting in vain
confidences, or worshipping vain idols instead of the true God; or iniquity,
in swearing falsely to the wronging of truth or equity.

5 Such an one is and shall be blessed of the Lord with his grace and favor,
He shall receive the blessing from the Lord, and righteousness from the God of
his salvation.
and shall partake the righteous reward of his holy walking at the hands of
God, who has thereby ordained him unto salvation and glorification*

6 These are the peculiar people and children of God chosen out of the world,
This is the generation of them that seek him, that seek thy face O Jacob. Selah.
that do thus truly and sincerely set themselves to worship him. Yea, amongst
Israel it self also there are none that are truly, that is, spiritually, the
children of holy Jacob, that in this wise walk not in his steps sincerely,
serving and worshipping the God of Jacob. These are only the blessed people of
a blessed God.

7 Ye that are thus the living Temples of the Lord, Lift up your heads, O ye
gates ^^d be ye lift up ye everlasting doors, and the King of glory shall come
in.
and have already entertained his sanctifying spirit into you, do you lift up
your hearts in the use of holy ordinances through faith in joyful desires and
assured expectation of him; yea, be you abundantly lift up by faith in the use
of holy means, who are the everlasting habitation of an everlasting God, with a
joyful and assured welcome of him; for so shall you invite and undoubtedly
entertain the high and mighty potentate, the Lord Christ into your souls, with
the glorious manifestation and ravishing operation of his love, benefits, and
graces.

Who is this King of glory? the Lord strong and mighty, the Lord mighty in
battle.
8 And know, O all ye faithful and obedient ones for your courage and comfort,
who, and of what quality, this glorious King the Lord Jesus is, whom the world
despises but you honor. Why, he is the Almighty God, of power all-sufficient
to preserve and defend his people and Church, that in trust of him do love and
serve him, against all the strength and power of men, and devils that do or
shall malign or oppose themselves against them, and to put them to the foil, as
we his Israel in the letter have found by experience for your instruction and
corroboration that are his people in Spirit.

Lift up your heads O ye gates, even lift them up ye everlasting doors, and the
King of glory shall come in.
9, 10 See the seventh and eigth verses foregoing. These being a repetition
tending to amplification, for further assurance of what is there promised, and
ratified with a Selah for the encouragement of the Godly. Who is this King of
glory? the Lord of hosts, he is the King of glory. Selah.


The xxv. PSALM.
David notwithstanding the deep sense he had of his sins by reason of the great
afflictions he lay under, yet confidently repairs to God in prayer for justice
against his enemies, and mercy for himself, both in the pardon of his sins,
and bestowing grace upon him, assuring himself, that herein he shall be heard
because of Gods goodness, and the many sweet promises which in the general he
has made to his people, which he applies to himself in particular. And so ends
as he begins with prayer, forcibly urged upon God by the greatness of his
afflictions, the cruelty of his enemies, the uprightnes of his cause, and his
peoples necessities.

A Psalm made by David. Psalm xxxv. A Psalm of David.


1 TO thee above, UNto thee, O Lord, do I lift up my soul.
O lord, does my soul faithfully address it self, and its desires continually,
and to no other.

2 O thou, O my God, I trust in thee, let me not be ashamed: let not mine
enemies triumph over me.
that by many gracious and sweet promises, I know assuredly to be my God, in
thee only do I put my trust, let not me therefore miscarry, and be defeated of
my hopes, and so both I and my faith be rendered a scorn to my wicked enemies.

3 Yea, Yea, let none that wait on thee be ashamed which transgress without
cause.
Lord, remember, what a tie of truth and goodness lies upon thee, toward them
that in faith and holiness depend on thee, and walk with thee as I do; not to
suffer such to miscarry, and fail of their confidence or reward, no, let mine
enemies do so who trust in other things, and spitefully without any cause on my
part, break all Laws of Justice and Charity toward me; so shall thou magnify
thy faithfulness to the faithful, and thy Justice upon the wicked.

4 How ever other men walk toward me, Show me thy ways, O Lord, teach me thy
paths.
yet my desire is to keep touch with thee, and therefore, O Lord, I pray thee,
in all my trials, show me thy promises and commandments, appertaining to my
present case and condition, and teach me to understand what safety and reward
there is in them, that I may never depart from them.

5 Powerfully enable me to stick close to thy word of truth by faith and
obedience, Lead me in thy truth, and teach me; for thou art the God of my
salvation, on thee do I wait all the day.
refusing every false way and refuge. Thus instruct me both to do, and know thy
will in the midst of my temptations, for thou art the God in whom I trust, for
all manner of preservation in well-doing, and wel-being, on thee do I constantly
depend every hour, for every thing both for direction, and protection in all my
trials.

Remember, O Lord, thy tender mercies, and thy loving kindnesses: for they have
been ever of old.
6 O Lord, forget not what fatherly pity and love thou have evermore born to
thine, and what expressions and manifestations thou have made thereof, upon all
occasions as they have needed, for they never yet failed thy people; nor let
them do so now to me, that plead that privilege to be one of thine, to whom
mercy successively belongs in my generation, as to them in theirs.

Remember not the sins of my youth, nor my transgressions: according to thy
mercy remember thou me, for thy goodness sake, O Lord.
7 Call not to mind my sins long since committed before I knew thee, nor the
errors I was guilty of in that estate, now to inflict their punishment upon me,
but contrarily according to that mercy thou have in store for me and have
promised to me, do thou pardon them, and show thy self gracious to me in mine
afflictions, and that of thy mere and free goodness, O Lord, not for any motive
or merit of mine.

Good and upright is the Lord: therefore will he teach sinners in the way.
8 Gracious and faithful is the Lord, therefore will he, and for no other
reason, both pardon self-judgeing, and enable self-outed sinners to turn to him
with all their hearts, and to walk before him in all welpleasing.

The meek will he guide in judgment: and the meek will he teach his way.
9 The humble and lowly-hearted that sensibly needs, and sincerely craves supply
of grace and wisdom from God, he will give them a good understanding how to
walk acceptably before him, so as to have his favor and protection, such shall
not want supply of enlightening and enabling grace to know and do his will.

All the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth, unto such as keep his covenant,
and his testimonies.
10 However, even the faithful may think, some of Gods ways he takes toward
them, by the strangeness of them, to be unagreeable to that mercy and truth is
in him and his promises. Yet be they never so contrary to flesh and blood, they
are all of them consonant to his grace and faithfulness, which he has
contracted with those that are in covenant with him, and walk accordingly in
faith and obedience.

11 For thy truth and mercy sake, For thy names sake, O Lord, pardon mine
iniquity: for it is great.
O Lord, and for no cause else, do away my sin out of thy sight which is great
and manifold, and lies heavy on me, and which else will certainly bring upon me
soar afflictions, as I have already felt they have done.

12 Few there are that reverence and fear the Lord, What man is he that fears
the Lord? him shall he teach in the way that he shall choose.
so as to seek to him to be pardoned their sins and made his servants, but in
this I may comfort my self, and so may any else, that in so doing I nor they,
shall not fail of our desires, but that God in his love and goodness to such an
one will so direct and guide him, as that he shall not be given over to his own
corrupt lusts, but shall be instructed and enabled to walk in such a way as he
shall best accept.

13 And he that does so, His soul shall dwell at ease: and his seed shall
inherit the land.
though he may have troubles without, yet he may be sure of peace within, nor
shall he be devoid of temporal blessings neither, but sooner or later in Gods
good time, according to his covenant, he will reward his service upon him and
his posterity, especially if they walk in his steps, even with outward mercies
of peace and plenty, as we see it fulfilled to us according to promise made to
our holy forefathers, and so I doubt not shall it be to me and mine as God has
promised.

14 However the godly are in the world neglected, The secret of the Lord is
with them that fear him, and he will show them his covenant.
yet with God they are in special favor, for in a gracious familiarity and
good will, he sweetly imparts the sacred mystery of his good pleasure and
purpose of their salvation in a spiritual way to the spiritual man, that fears
to offend and desires to please him; which as a secret is hid from the knowledge
of the world, who only partake his common and outward benefits. Yea, such he
will teach with an intimate instruction and impression of his spirit upon their
hearts, what are the covenant-graces, privileges, and benefits belonging to,
and on his part to be bestowed upon them, he will show them the honor and
happiness to be in covenant with him, as also what are the covenant-duties and
gratuitous returns reciprocally to be performed on their parts to him, with
enablement to do them in love and thankfulness, by writing his law in their
hearts.

Mine eyes are ever toward the Lord: for he shall pluck my feet out of the net.
15 I will make nothing my trust but God, nor will I ever cease to wait upon the
Lord, and pray unto him for deliverance, but be my case never so desperate, and
my misery never so tedious, yet will I confidently and with a fixed mind
exspect it; for according to his promise I know the time will come when I shall
be set at liberty, and disintangled from my troublesome dangers.

Turn thee unto me, and have mercy upon me: for I am desolate and afflicted.
16 As mine eyes are toward thee, so, Lord, set thy face favorably to me-ward,
whom thou have seemed long to have neglected: Now therefore bethink thee, and
let me at last find grace in thy sight, and give me a merciful deliverance, for
I am without any help but thine, and greatly afflicted by many outward enemies,
and inward trials.

The troubles of my heart are enlarged: O bring thou me out of my distresses.
17 My miseries strike deep into my soul, which is very sore oppressed with
grief; O consider it in thy tender mercies, and deliver me out of my great
afflictions.

18 Lord take me into thy consideration, Look upon mine affliction, and my
pain, and forgive all my sins.
do but cast an eye upon the greatness of mine affliction and dolor, and let
it move thee to compassion, and pardon of all those my sins that may have
caused thy displeasure, that so I may find favor and receive some ease.

19 My state is very forlorn and perilous, Consider mine enemies, for they are
many, and they hate me with cruel hatred.
if thou consider (as I pray thee do, and send help accordingly) mine enemies,
for their number which is great, and for their hatred of me, which is to the
death, and their pursuit is accordingly with extreme violence.

20 They do all they can to take away my life; O keep my soul and deliver me:
let me not be ashamed, for I put my trust in thee.
O therefore do thou undertake to protect it from their rage, and deliver me
out of their hands. Let me not miscarry by their power or policy, and so I and
my faith be rendered scornful and scandalous to them, for I put my trust in
thee, thy truth and goodness therefore fail me not.

21 Let the innocence of my cause, Let integrity ^ uprightness preserve me: for
I wait on thee.
and my just behavior in it, move thee to preserve me from the injustice of
mine adversaries; for on thee in respect of thy righteous promises do I trust
and wait to be righted against their wrongs.

22 O God, Redeem Israel, O God; out of all his troubles.
that in thy faithfulness did deliver Israel our Father out of all his
troubles, do the like by his seed, and bring them into a state of peace and
rest by and under me, as shall the Church and faithful have one day by Christ.

The xxvi. PSALM.
David being slaundered by his enemies appeals to God, to judge if he have done
or thought as they say of him; and whether to God and man his behavior has
not been such as it should be, which he is sure it has, the love of God
constraining him. Yea, he has declined all temptations to the contrary, and is
fully resolved to keep faith and a good conscience to the end. And then prays:
That since he is and has been studious of piety and innocence, he may not be
exposed to wicked men's cruelty, nor his end be like theirs, promising when God
shall advance him, to be as incorrupt and innocent in prosperity as in
adversity. And concludes with confidence of supportation and good success in
Gods way, which is the way he is in.

Psalm xxvi. A Psalm of David.
A Psalm made by David.

JUdge me, O Lord, for I have walked in mine innocence: I have trusted also in
the Lord: therefore I shall not slide.
1 MIne enemies condemn and censure me, but, Lord, I appeal to thee who judge
with righteous judgment, of whom I am sure I shall be acquit of all their
slanderous accusations, for thou know that all I have done has been with
an honest heart in obedience to thee, and without wrong-doing to any man, nor
have I so much as stepped out of the way by indirect and unlawful means, to
compass the fulfilling of thy promises, but have both waited and believed in
the Lord, to do it in his own way and time. Therefore I am confident that God
in his grace and righteousness will uphold and prosper me and mine innocence
against mine enemies.

Examine me, O Lord; and prove me; try my reins and my heart.
2 Having a clear conscience, I freely expose and put my self into thine hands,
where I am sure of justice and truth, to be examined and tried of those things
whereof mine enemies unjustly accuse me, both within and without, as well
touching the uprightness of mine heart in respect of pride or malice, as the
honesty and warrantableness of mine actions.

3 For indeed I have such a tie upon me, For thy loving kindness is before mine
eyes: and I have walked in thy truth.
by reason of thy love and goodness to me, which I always with such thankful
admiration and faithful dependence bear in mind, as that it awes me from
offending thee in any kind, and makes me in return of love to thee to be most
precise in my walking, strictly observing to answer my duty to thy word and
will in all things.

4 Besides I have ever shunned occasions of evil, I have not sat with vain
persons, neither will I go in with dissemblers.
not so much as taking counsel of men void of grace and conscience to do as
they would have me, nor will I ever consent to use or practice any crafty or
hipocritical dealing, like men that live and move more by policy, than faith
and honesty.

5 I have ever detested both the company and counsels of wicked men, I have
hated the congregation of evil doers: and will not sit with the wicked.
nor will I be infected with them, or adviced by them to go out of the way of
faith and uprightness.

6 My purpose is always to tread an innocent path, I will wash mine hands in
innocence: so will I compass thine Altar, O Lord.
and to keep my self from doing unjust or unlawful things, for such I know, O
Lord, by those many legal cleansings thou have instituted, thou will only
accept of to worship thee, and therefore will I be careful principally to
maintain a pure conscience and conversation, and then will I in comfort and
confidence of thine acceptance of me and mine offering frequent thy tabernacle,
and there perform my ceremonial services of sacrifices and peace offerings to
thee.

7 That so I may let all men know that do resort thither, That I may publish
with the voice of thanksgiving, and tell of all thy wondrous works.
and declare to them both by those tokens of my thankfulness appointed in thy
law for that purpose, and by Psalms of praise the wonderful things, thou shall
have wrought for me according to my trust in thee, and thy promises, which are
my only stay; and thereby move them also to faithful thanksgiving.

Lord, I have loved the habitation of thy house, and the place where thine
honor dwells.
8 O Lord, thou know my ways have not been ways of wickedness, but of piety
and holiness. I have dearly loved and devoutly frequented thy holy ordinances
in thy holy tabernacle, and have been a diligent worshipper and honourer of
thee there, which thou have ordained for that purpose, and where thou art
specially present.

Gather not my soul with sinners, nor my life with bloody men.
9 In thy goodness and mercy therefore remember me, as such an one that desires
and endeavors to serve thee in holiness and righteousness, and expose me not
to the wicked and bloody hands of mine enemies, nor bring that wrathful
destruction upon me thou intendest unto them, as the punishment of their
iniquity and cruelty.

In whose hands is mischief: and their right hand is full of bribes.
10 Who plot and practice nothing but mischievous things, and regard neither
truth, nor honesty, but abuse their authority, and pervert justice through
corruption of bribes.

But as for me, I will walk in mine integrity: redeem me, and be merciful unto
me.
11 But as for me, if thou please to set me in place of justice and authority,
then as I have carried my self in mine affliction, so thou shall find I will
still keep a good conscience, and walk in incorrupt and sincere ways,
therefore, O Lord, think on me to deliver me out of my great affliction and
misery, and in mercy make good thy gracious promises to me.

My foot stands in an even place: in the congregations will I bless the Lord.
12 The unjust and unequitable ways that mine enemies walk, I am sure will
bring them to ruin, but as for me, as I have trodden the path of piety and
equity, so I am sure to find the reward of grace and mercy, and to be upheld
and made to stand when they shall stumble and fall. This I know shall be my
portion, and for this before hand I vow praises and thanksgivings to God, even
in the public congregations of Israel.

The xxvii. PSALM.
David rowseth up his faith to overtop his fear by many arguments, taken from
former preservations, and confidence, that as God has stirred up an earnest
desire in him, to worship him in his Tabernacle, so he shall be preserved
thereunto. He further backs his faith with prayer, pressing upon God the
warrant of his own word, and his former remarkable providence; as also his
strong affiance and trust in him, and his enemies malice against him; and so
concludes with great encouragement to himself, and every one of Gods people to
wait and trust everlastingly in a promise, never to give out, but encourage
themselves in God his goodness, be their condition never so desperate.

A Psalm made by David. Psalm xxvii. A Psalm of David.


1 IN my most afflicted state and darksome condition, THe Lord is my light, and
my salvation, who^ shall I fear? the Lord is the strength of my life, of whom
shall I be afraid.
the Lord has and does afford me both comfort and direction; yea, and also
preservation and deliverance, and so has promised to do always, and I believe
no less by him, from whom then need I fear any harm. The Lord is he, that
according to his promise and my trust in him, defends and upholds me spite of
all the power of men and devils, of whom then need I be afraid, be they who
they will, and do they what they can.

2 When as multitude of wicked ones with cruel hatred conspired against me,
When the wicked, even mine enemies and my foes came upon me to eat up my flesh,
they stumbled and fell.
and joined all their forces to wreak their teen upon me, and barbarously
destroy me; what got they by it? but ruin to themselves, which they thought to
bring upon me, by the just judgment of God upon them for my sake.

Though an host should en^amp against me, my heart shall not fear; though war
should rise against me, in this will I be confident.
3 Whilst thus I am sure of God on my side, though an whole army of men should
be ready to make an assault upon me, my heart by faith shall bear up in God
without dismaiedness. Though I were never so implunged in wars by foreign
enemies, or domestic insurrections, yet by faith in Gods grace and powerful
assistance, will I confidently exspect an happy issue out of them all.

One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after, that I may dwell
in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the
Lord, and to enquire in his Temple.
4 The thing I have always in all conditions mainly desired of God, and which
still I do and ever will principally sue to him for, is, that he will so order
mine affairs, that I may not be put besides my hope, and desires of that
transcendent happiness of frequenting his presence, and enjoying his ordinances
in his tabernacle, where I could gladly lead my life, there to behold through
those many legal types and shadows, the admirable grace and wisdom of God in
the salvation of man through Christ, and to make there my daily prayers, and to
ask advice of him upon all occasions, as the people of God shall one day do in
his holy Temple.

For in the time of trouble he shall hide me in his pavilion; in the secret of
his tabernacle shall he hide me, he shall set me up upon a rock.
5 Nor shall I entreat this of him in vain, for he that has stirred me up to
seek it, will fulfill it, and to that end in my greatest trouble, I am confident
he will preserve and safely protect me; Yea, as if I were shut up in his holy
Ark, so shall I be kept and secured by him, he shall make me invincible spite
of all mine adversaries, and set me above and out of their reach to hurt me.

And now shall mine head be lifted up above mine enemies round about me;
therefore will I offer in his tabernacle sacrifices of joy, I will sing, yea, I
will sing praises unto the Lord.
6 And sure I am it is not long too, before I shall have the better of all mine
enemies one and other, and shall live in a flourishing state of peace and
prosperity, therefore do I confidently aforehand vow peace offerings to him,
which I will plentifully and publicly offer in his tabernacle, with joyful
thanksgiving in the congregation, for my deliverances, where I so much desire
to serve him. And where also I will sing his praises, and publish his
praiseworthy mercies to me in manifold Psalms and Himnes.

7 Thou that art the God of my faith and trust, Hear, O Lord, when I cry with
my voice: have mercy also upon me, and answer me.
O hear me when mine afflictions cause me to cry and pour forth my prayers unto
thee, and in mercy answer me with deliverance.

8 For whereas thy word warrants and enjoynes thy people in all their
difficulties to seek thy gracious help and favor in prayer and faith, When
thou saidest, seek ye my face; my heart said unto thee, thy face, Lord, will I
seek.
my heart readily echoes, and says Amen to it, does as it bids, for it has
always been my practice to prefer thy grace as my greatest good, and only
support because of thy faithfulness.

9 And still do I beg of thee above all things not to eclipse thy favor, Hide
not thy face far from me, put not thy servant away in anger: thou have been
my help, leave me not, neither forsake me, O God of my salvation.
or withdraw thine assistance from me, take not such displeasure at me, who
though a sinner yet am thy servant, as to divorce me from thy favor and
protection. Thou know, and so do I, what mercies and providence thou have
shown me in my need, which is wont to bind thee to further goodness, and to
encourage us to greater faith, and therefore let me in the faith thereof,
humbly put thee in mind of thy former grace, to move thee to second it now and
always as I have need, and thou have opportunity, by standing for me and
sticking to me, not leaving me to mine enemies, nor withdrawing thy help; for
thou have been, art, and ever shall be the God that I only have and will trust
in for preservation.

10 Truly my faith is more in thee, When my father and my mother forsake me,
then the Lord will take me up.
and a nearer tie of love and affiance does mine heart apprehend from thee,
than from the dearest bonds of nature and natural affections, so that my father
that begot me, and my mother that bare me, I more distrust to fail and forsake
me in their love and care, than thou, who I am confident wilt never forsake me,
nor fail in thy love and promises to me, whosoever do, nay thou will then most
of all be a friend unto me, when I am left most friendless and forlorn.

Teach me thy way, O Lord, and lead me in a plain path, because of mine enemies.
11 O Lord manifest thy love and care both in my protection and direction,
instructing me how to walk obediently toward thee in all my temptations, and
safely in regard of mine enemies, by escaping their traps and snares, who would
be glad to see my fall both into sin, that they may have whereof to accuse me,
and into danger, to have their wills upon me.

Deliver me not over unto the will of mine enemies: for false witnesses are
risen up against me, and such as breath out cruelty.
12 But, Lord, let mine enemies never have their wills and desires of me by my
miscarriages any way, though they seek and long for it every way, by fraud and
force endeavoring it; forging lies against me, and threatening all manner of
cruelty to me.

I had fainted, unless I had believed to see the goodness of the Lord, in the
land of the living.
13 Certainly, so many and grievous have been my pressures, that I could never
have subsisted under them, unless I had had a promise to stay me, and faith to
stay upon the promise through the goodness of God for my deliverance and
settlement one day in a happy condition, free from persecution and banishment,
amongst the ordinances and people of God, which I am sure I shall have before I
die, though in the nature of a resurrection from the dead.

Wait on the Lord: be of good courage, and he shall strengthen thine heart,
wait, I say, on the Lord.
14 And truly this has ever upheld me, and so does still to wait on the Lord,
which for the promise sake I will never fail to do, for I know it shall be
fulfilled, therefore will I encourage my self by faith in God, and so shall I
be sure of him to give me heart-upholding grace and spirit. No, never will I
give over waiting on the Lord, till he cause me cease it by fulfilling what I
wait for according to his promise. And so let all and every one of the people
of God, be encouraged to do in like sort by mine example.

The xxviii. PSALM.
David prays to have his prayers heard, and difference made between him and
his wicked enemies, whom he accurses as the wilful withstanders of the will of
God touching him a type of Christ; And therefore promises and prophesies their
destruction, and his own assured establishment over Israel, whom he prays for,
that they may be blessed under him, as the Church shall be under the Messiah.

A Psalm made by David. Psalm xxviii. A Psalm of David.


1 UNto thee will I as I have ever done make my moan in my misery, UNto thee
will I cry, O Lord, my rock, be not silent to me: lest if thou be silent to me,
I become like them that go down into the pit.
and cry for help, for on thee, O Lord, depends all my trust and hope of safety
therefore deny not to hear and help me, who have no other helper; for if thou
do, I am utterly helpless and must unavoidably perish.

2 Stop not thine ears nor withold not thy favor from me, Hear the voice of
my supplications, when I cry unto thee; when I lift up mine hands toward thy
holy oracle.
for it is as bitter as death to have my prayers unheard, when in anguish of my
spirit I pour them forth before thee, and when according to thine ordinance, I
lift up mine eyes and hands in supplication toward the sanctuary, which thou
have appointed as a type of heaven to vouchsafe thy presence, and to hear and
answer prayer in.

3 Let me not perish as an evil doer by evil doers, Draw me not away with the
wicked, and with the workers of iniquity: which speak peace to their
neighbors, but mischief is in their hearts.
nor be untimely taken away in thy wrath as a male-factour, and wicked worker
amongst those that are so, who with hipocritical dissembling make show of peace
and friendship, to them that really mean no ill, but intend nothing but
mischievous deceit against them.

Give them according to their deeds, and according to the wickedness of their
endeavors: give them after the works of their hands, render to them their
desert.
4 Such as are so, and do so (which are mine enemies) let them feel and find thy
just displeasure according to their demerits, and answerable to their sinful
practices against the innocent, let them have the wages they have wrought for,
and in thy justice pay them their just deserved punishment.

Because they regard not the works of the lord, nor the operation of his hands,
he shall destroy them, and not build them up.
5 And because they regard so little, and slight so much the Lord in his
remarkable judgments upon themselves, and his no less remarkable grace and
favor unto me, so clearly manifested by extraordinary testimonies, and
singular providence, confirming mine election to the Kingdom as a type of
Christ, he will and shall therefore at last I am sure do himself and me right
upon them, and make them understand it by their utter extirpation and
overthrow, and my establishment in their steads, as he shall do by Christ and
his enemies.

Blessed be the Lord, because he has heard the voice of my supplications.
6 Now blessed be the Lord, who enables me in full assurance of faith, and by an
infallible spirit of of prophecy, to foresee the issue of my prayers to be
according to my desires, and his gracious promise and decree touching me.

The Lord is my strength, and my shield, my heart trusted in him, and I am
helped: therefore my heart greatly rejoices, and with my song will I praise
him.
7 So that I can say in the assurance of the event; that the Lord is and shall
be to the end my all-sufficient preserver and defendor against mine enemies.
Yea in full persuasion of faith I can say, as if I had already taken a farewell
of all my troubles; That I am (for so I shall be be) fully delivered and
graciously established in a good estate according to the trust I have put in
him, therefore my heart at present rejoices, as if all were done and past, and
with a Psalm of thanksgiving do I now promise publicly to praise the Lord,
when it shall be so.

8 The Lord is a faithful and powerful deliverer, The Lord is their strength,
and he is the saving strength of his anointed.
and rescuer of his people from out their oppressions, and from under their
enemies, and for their sakes he is and will be the undoubted Savior and
preserver of me, whom he has anointed and decreed to set over them, for their
good and welfare, as a type of Christ over his Church.

9 Therefore remember thy people to bring them out of the tyranny of their
enemies, Save thy people, and bless thine inheritance: feed them also, and lift
them up for ever.
and the present distempers they lie under, and bless them whom thou have
peculiarly chosen out of all the world to be thine, by setting me over them as
a type of Christ, and feed them under me, as Christ the shepherd shall feed
his flock with plenty of grace and peace, and bring them to a lasting and
settled condition of tranquillity, giving them the victory and dominion over
all their enemies by and under me, as the Church shall have by and under him.

The xxix. PSALM.
David to awe all men to be respective of Gods Church and people, specially
Kings from whom they then did, and ever should receive most opposition and
hardship. He first seeks to awe them by a due respect of God himself and of his
ordinances, exhorting them to give him honor and worship. And therefore sets
before their considerations the terriblest of his words to convince them of his
glorious greatness, to wit, the thunder, showing the mavelous effects it has
upon things both sensible and unsensible, the better to move with man, and
specially with great men, to reverence the greatness of Almighty God: And
besides that, he also preaches to them his glorious goodness manifested in his
word and ordinances, to excite them to partake therein together with his
people. But in case they refuse, and obstinately oppose themselves against him
and them; He incourageth the Israelites, and in them the faithful, assuring
them, that God will subdue their enemies, and make them prosperous under him
(as Christ shall his Church) spite of all the world.

Psalm xxix. A Psalm of David.
A Psalm made by David.

GIve unto the Lord) O ye mighty, give unto the Lord glory and strength.
1 O ye mighty potentates of the world suffer a word of exhortation, be not high
in your own conceits, to which you are most subject, be warned not to swell
with the pride of your honor and power, but set the Lord above you, and pay
the homage of both to God, least he lay your honor in the dust, and bring your
strength to weakness.

Give unto the Lord the glory due unto his name; worship the Lord in the beauty
of Holiness.
2 Do by God as you exspect others should do by you, that are your subjects and
inferiors. Give him the honor that is due to his greatness, and leave off
your superstition and come and worship him, and bring your gifts in token of
service and subjection, to his beautiful sanctuary, for no where else will he
receive them, it being the sole appointed place of his glorious and solemn
worship and special presence.

The voice of the Lord is upon the waters: the God of glory thundereth, the
Lord is upon many waters.
3 Your power is here below, but Gods is up above which loudly declares it self
to us on earth, from out those watery clouds that are in the firmament over us,
whence God, who is the Lord of supreme glory dreadfully thunders, and shows his
greatness by that terrible noise multiplied out of sundry clouds, by sundry
thunderclaps at once, and by the infinite inundation of rain that immediately
follows thereupon.

by sundry thunderclaps at once, and by the infinite inundation of rain that
immedaitly follows thereupon.

4 This voice of the Lords thunder is in it self very dreadful, The voice of
the Lord is powerful; the voice of the Lord is full of Majesty.
and declares him to be of mighty power and of exceeding great Majesty and
glory, far above all earthly potentates.

5 When the Lord thunders, The voice of the Lord breaks Cedars: yea, the Lord
breaks the Cedars of Lebanon.
it is so mighty and forcible, that it overthrows the strongest trees; even
the great and tall Cedars of Lebanon are broken and turned up by the roots by
the violence of thunder-storms.

6 Yea, He makes them also to skip like a calf: Lebanon and Sirion like a
young unicorn.
of such affrightment is that terrible voice of his, and with such power does
it operate even upon unsensible creatures: That not only the trees, but also
the mighty and unmovable mountains whereon they grow are shaken by it, and
seem to jump up out of their places, and from their center by the earthquake,
which is begotten by that noise. Even the mountains Lebanon and Hermon, as
great and weighty as they are, are moved; and in a moment rise and fall with
the force of thunder.

7 The thunder sends forth fearful and fiery-flashes of lightning from out the
clouds, The voice of the Lord divides the flames of fire.
and in an instant with a violent and sudden motion disperses and darts them
hither and thither.

8 The thunder by its mighty and frightful noise uttered as it were by the
omnipotent mouth of God himself, The voice of the Lord shakes the wilderness,
the Lord shakes the wilderness of Kad^sh.
makes even the vast and savage wilderness, yea, that great and terrible one
which the Israelites wandered in 40 years between Egypt and Canaan together with
the wild beasts and formidable creatures therein, which are so frightful to
others, themselves to quake and tremble.

The voice of the Lord makes the Hinds to calve, and discovers the forests:
and in his temple does every one speak of his glory.
9 This noise of thunder so terrifies the most wild and untamedst creatures, and
which are of difficult production, as are the Hinds, that it makes them prevent
natures season, and for fear, untimely cast their young, and of such force it
is, that it lays the forest in many parts of it plain, by turning up trees by
the roots, making a clear prospect through woods and groves. This is one way
whereby God gets himself glory, showing this his greatness to the amazement of
all men and all things, and exspects of all men to be honored thereafter. But
another and better way whereby he is honored, is, now in his tabernacle, and
hereafter in his temple, for saving-mercies with a sanctified worship; where
all the faithful do and must resort to give him the glory and praises not
only of his greatness manifested in his works, but chiefly of his goodness and
mercy manifested in his word.

The Lord sits upon the flood: yea, the Lord sits King for ever.
10 O that the Kings and great men of the earth would therefore be awed by his
works, and won by his word to honor him, and subject themselves to him and his
holy ordinances, and cease to rebel and rise up against him, by opposing his
Church and peoples quiet; but if not, The Lord that commands the raging seas
and subdues their force, can and will subdue theirs also, for he shall bring
all his enemies be they never so great, under his feet, and will reign for ever
in and for his Church, spite of all earthly power to the contrary.

The Lord will give strength unto his people, the Lord will bless his people
with pea^e.
11 The Lord will give his people the better of their adversaries be they never
so potent, and will establish them in peace and tranquillity by and under me,
as Christ shall his Church in inward spiritual peace and consolation, spite of
all her enemies, the world, flesh, or devil.

The xxx. PSALM.
David upon his return to Jerusalem after Absaloms expulsion of him, dedicates
his house anew, and thereat gratulates the mercies of God with this Psalm of
praise for his deliverance and his enemies overthrow, exhorting the Israel of
God to rejoice with him, whom God had made such a monument of mercy to his
people, whom though for sin he may afflict, as he did him, yet will he remember
mercy and hear their prayers as he did his, to the end they may ever have
cause to praise him, as for his part he had, and for ever would. Psalm xxx. A
Psalm and song, at the dedication of the house of David.


A Psalm of praise and thanksgiving made by David at his peaceable and
victorious return to Jerusalem after Absaloms rebellion, and appointed to be
song with voice and instruments at the solemnity of dedicating his house, by
purging it from those incestuous filthinesses committed in it, by him with his
fathers concubines. Whom therefore he put apart, never to have any further
knowledge of them.

1 AS I have great cause, I Will extol thee, O Lord, for thou have lifted me
up, and have not made my foes to rejoice over me.
so, O Lord, I will greatly magnify the grace and mercy toward me, for thou
have again exalted me, and set me in my Kingdom, and given me the better of
mine enemies that traitorously rebelled against me, and would have deposed me
to have inthronized themselves in it.

2 Lord God of infinite power and goodness, O Lord, my God, I cried unto thee;
and thou have healed me.
such thou have approved thy self to me, when I was in distress I made thee
mine only refuge, to thee, alone did I in prayer and supplication make my
moan, and of thee sought I relief, and thou have accordingly quit me of all my
troubles, and restored me to my Kingdom in peace and safety, as from death to
life.

3 O Lord, to thy power and goodness do I wholly and solely ascribe my
subsistence and recovery, O, Lord, thou have brought up my soul from the grave:
thou have kept me alive, that I should not go down to the pit.
so miraculous and wonderful has been my deliverance from such dangers, that
by no humane power could have been prevented from destroying me, had not thou
preserved me alive beyond all humane hope or help.

4 O all ye my fellow-saints and servants, the adopted and called of the Lord,
Sing unto the Lord, (O ye saints, of his;) and give thanks at the remembrance
of his holiness.
join with me to bless and praise him with joyful hearts, in this my solemn
memorial and thankful gratulation of his grace and faithfulness.

5 For this my strange and speedy deliverance and restorement; For his anger
endures but a moment; in his favor is life: weeping may endure for a night,
but joy comes in the morning.
whereby he has made me a monument of his goodness and mercy to his people,
everlastingly in all ages, to encourage them to believe in him and pray to him,
be their sin, and his displeasure seemingly never so great, for that in
faithfulness he will remember mercy even in judgment, to such his anger is
short-lived, and makes the return of his favor much more sweet and precious
like life from death. If his people by sin grieve him, he may justly withdraw
the light of his countenance and grieve them, but grace and mercy sought to in
faith and humility will soon remove the eclipse, it shall be but as an evening
to a morning, the light of grace like that of nature will certainly return, and
with advantage, for short sorrow makes welcome joy.

And in my prosperity I said I should never be moved.
6 And I for my part can give a full testimony of this his dealing in my
behalf, for when as I was settled peaceably in my Kingdom, and had brought under
mine enemies, my heart began to contract security and carnal confidence, not
living by faith and prayer as at other times, but thought my self unchangeably
happy, never dreaming of such a strange revolt and rebellion.

7 Acknowledging but with a mixture of too much carnal confidence in my present
condition, Lord, by thy favor thou have made my mountain to stand strong: thou
did hide thy face, and I was troubled.
the grace of God in bestowing it on me, and establishing it unto me, not
considering that he could as easily take it from me for sin, as bestow it on me
in mercy; therefore God seeing cause, withdrew his favor and support from me,
let me first fall into sin, and then into danger, to let me see what had
preserved me from both, to wit, neither my goodness, nor my good condition, but
his grace and favor, and that only can do it. For notwithstanding all the
obligations on his part, and vows and promises on mine; yet so soon as he
ceased to dispense his auxiliarie favor and grace, I fell into monstrous
folly, which wrought me this trouble and misery.

8 And hereupon I betook me to my never failing refuge of fervent and faithful
prayer, I cried to thee, O Lord: and unto the Lord I made supplication.
which I put up to the Lord again and again.

9 Reasoning the matter thus in an humble boldness, What profit is there in my
blood, when I go down to the pit? shall the dust praise thee? shall it declare
thy truth?
what satisfaction can my blood make thee for my sin? or how can my death
glorify thee comparably to my life and restorement? what an opportunity of
praise will thou lose, if thou take away my life? though I confess in justice
I have forfeited it: but consider if according to thy mercy and faithfulness,
thou so far beyond my merits shall pardon and spare me, what praise it will
bring thee, and how I and others for my sake shall be set on work to admire and
magnify the omnipotency of thy grace, and infallibility of thy promise.

Hear, O Lord, and have mercy upon me: Lord be thou mine helper.
10 Therefore make not my life a prey to mine enemies, but hear my prayer, and
in mercy pardon my sin, and grant me deliverance, be thou Lord my helper and
savior from my sin and danger.

Thou have turned for me my mourning into dancing: thou have put off my
sackcloth, and girded me with gladness.
11 And upon my prayer the Lord has helped me, yea, to thine everlasting praise
be it spoken, thou, Lord, have been merciful to me, and have done away both my
sin and thine anger; quit me of mine enemies, and restored me out of my
sorrowful estate to a joyful condition, and out of my humiliation and
abasement, into an established tranquillity and happiness.

To the end that my glory may sing praise to thee and not be silent: O Lord my
God, I will give thanks unto thee for ever.
12 And this thou have done for me; To the end I may by this merciful occasion
have my tongue oiled from a heart enlarged to exalt thee, in thy never to be
forgotten praises, by Psalms of thanksgiving: and accordingly, O Lord, that
art the God of all my happiness, I will never forget this thy mercy, but with
everlasting thankfulness according to my duty and thy desert, will I celebrate
the praise thereof unto thee.

The xxxi. PSALM.
David by many circumstances in this Psalm does doubtless intend his sufferings
and the great straits he was brought into under Absaloms rebellion, against
which he prays, and comforts himself by, and from Gods former mercies shown in
his deliverance under Saul's persecution; and in prayer urges hard upon God his
great extremities under the burden of his sin and sufferings, together with his
injurious usage, solitary friendlesness, and extreme hazard of his life. In
all which afflictions he yet animates himself by his says in God, and
earnestly persists in prayer to him, even until he be fully heard and answered
in his own preservation and his enemies overthrow. And then blames his faith
for sailing him upon the suddenness and greatness of his temptation, but
magnifies the goodness of God that yet was merciful and faithful to him. And
exhorts all the Godly never in no case to disbelieve the power and grace of
God, assuring the faithful, that they shall ever find God so.

To him that is the first and principal of all the Quire, Psalm xxxi. To the
chief musician A Psalm of David.
do I David that made this Psalm recommend it for the care and ordering of it
to be sung.

1 THee, IN thee, O Lord, do I put my trust, let me never be ashamed: deliver
me in thy righteousness.
O Lord, do I make mine only refuge in all mine adversities, trusting in
nothing but thy help, and grace, therefore at no time, no more now then
heretofore let me miscarrie, nor my faith, nor self be rendered a scorn to mine
adversaries, but do thou keep promise with me, and deliver me.

2 Lend an hearing ear to the prayer I put up unto thee, Bow down thine ear to
me, deliver me speedily, be thou my strong rock, for an house of defense to
save me.
and delay not to deliver me in mine extremity, which is urgent and requires
speedy relief, as my faith makes thee, so let it find thee an all-sufficient
support and safety to me in all adverse fortune.

3 For truly thou art all in all to me, For thou art my rock, and my fortress:
therefore for thy name sake lead me, and guide me.
I have not any thing to trust unto, nor do I trust in any thing but thee for
defense and preservation, therefore for the honor of thy faithfulness
whereupon I solely depend, take me into thy tuition, and trase out my way for
me by thy gracious and wise providence, that I be not ensnared by mine enemies.

4 Prevent their crafty counsels and subtle practices Pull me out of the net,
that they have laid privily for me: for thou art my strength.
against me, not suffering me to be entrap'd, but so directing me in all my
ways as to shun their deceits, or if I by thine appointment and permitting
providence fall into their snares, deliver me out of them, for there are none
too wise or too strong for thee, who art of wisdom and power sufficient either
to prevent or to rescue me.

Into thine hand I commit my spirit: thou have redeemed me, O Lord God of truth.
5 I betrust my life and safety to nothing but thy custody, there I deposit it
now and for ever, and good cause have I, for thou have given good testimony of
thy tender care and love to it and me, thou have rescued my life from temporal
danger, and my soul from spiritual, and eternal. O Lord, thou have hitherto
made good thy word of grace, and so I trust wilt still.

I have hated them that regard lying vanities: but I trust in the Lord.
6 I have been tempted and persuaded in my necessities to leave off depending on
thee, and to take other courses like other men, but I have ever expressed my
dislike of such counsels, and reproved such counselors that would have drawn
me to seek mine advantages against mine enemies, as they do against me by
sinful and unjustifiable proceedings, and have always both in word and deed
declared my self to rely on the Lord for deliverance in his own way, and time.

I will be gl^d and rejoice in thy mercy: for thou have considered my trouble;
thou have known my soul in adversities.
7 And whilst I take this course, I know I shall rejoice in the issue, yea, I
promise and assure my self beforehand, that I shall ever have cause of
gladness and joy in thy goodness and mercy, for thou will still have as thou
have ever had a tender regard of me in my troubles, testifying thy mindfulness
of me by my manifold extraordinary preservations and deliverances.

8 Which thou have given me from mine archenemie Saul, And have not shut me up
into the hand of the enemy: thou have set my feet in a large room.
who thought me his, and that I could not escape him, many a time, when yet I
did; Yea, thou have set me free out of all those troubles with advantage of
honor and happiness.

9 And now, Have mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am in trouble, mine eye is
consumed with grief, yea, my soul and my belly.
O Lord, do as thou have done, show me mercy in delivering me out of my
present distress, for my trouble is very great, so that my sight is become dim
with continual weeping, and my spirits and vitals are wasted and decayed within
me by my pensivenes.

10 For my very life draws nigh to death with extreme grieving, For my life is
spent with grief, and my years with sighing: my strength fails because of
mine iniquity, and my bones are consumed.
and my time is cut off and shortened by the exhausting of my spirits with
incessant sighings and lamentations. Yea, my natural strenght decays and
wastes by reason of my sin and thy displeasure, so that my very bones are
sensibly enfeebled with it.

11 Mine old inveterate enemies and Saul's friends were all glad in heart to see
mine affliction, I was a reproach among all mine enemies, but especially among
my neighbors, and a fear to mine acquaintance: they that did see me without
sled from me.
insulting thereupon, but especially was I most injuriously and reprochfully
used by my near allies and friends Absalom and Ancitophel, being forced to fly
and shift for my self in a poor condition, in so much as that those that wished
me well, and were mine entire friends and acquaintance, durst not own me, or
take part with me, almost all that saw me so changed, glad to forsake Jerusalem
and fly for my life, did in like manner fly from me and save themselves.

12 Upon mine alteration I am become of no request, I am forgotten as a dead
man out of mind: I am like a broken vessel.
but given for lost and undone, without all hope of recoverie, counted as a
castaway and contemptible man, in an irreparable condition.

For I have heard the slander of many, fear was on every side, while they took
counsel together against me, they devised to take away my life.
13 Yea, manifold slanders and disgraceful injuries have come to mine ears,
which by mine enemies are heaped upon me, to bring me into hatred and procure
my destruction, so that every way I am beset with fears and dangers, by false
rumors and secret plots and conspiracies devising to deprive me of my life and
Kingdom.

But I trusted in thee, O Lord: I said, Thou art my God.
14 But in my deepest distress, my faith failed me not, but that still I trusted
firmly in thee, believing and encouraging my self still with this; That by
proof and promise I can say thou art my God in near relation, and dear
affection what ever befall me.

My times are in thy hand: deliver me from the hand of mine enemies; and from
them that persecute me.
15 And besides I know my self and fortune are wholly in thine hands, and that
nothing can befall me but by thy providence; notwithstanding the malicious
hatred of mine enemies, thou can preserve me from them that go about to
destroy me; be they never so potent or politic, they cannot have their wills
upon me to hurt me, except thou permit it, which I pray thee do not, but
deliver me.

Make thy face to shine upon thy servant: save me for thy mercies sake.
16 I have long and grievously undergone thy displeasure, both inwardly and
outwardly, I have felt thine ire, and the smart of my sin, which has brought
me near to ruin; now therefore Lord at last in tender mercy, pity me and
show me some sign of favor to refresh my spirit withal, and give me some hopes
of escape and recoverie, who, though a sinner, yet am thy servant, that thereby
all men may see thy lovingkindness toward me, by thy delivering me out of this
danger also, and restoring me to my former happy condition, which how ever my
sin deserves the contrary, yet for thy mercy sake vouchsafe it.

17 Let not, Let me not be ashamed, O Lord, for I have called upon thee: let
the wicked be ashamed, and let them be silent in the grave.
O Lord, the misfortune which mine enemies hope to bring upon me, ever befall me
to the disappointing of my hope, for I have trusted in thee, and prayed unto
thee, which my wicked enemies have not done, therefore let them miscarrie, and
let their hopes be frustrate; yea, let their vexatious courses receive an end,
by themselves doing so; cut them off in thy displeasure, for nothing but their
deaths will secure my life in peace and quietness, and my name from opprobrie,
so restless are they in mischievous devices against me both by word and deed.

18 Let the slanderous mouths of my wicked adversaries be stopped after that
sort, Let the lying lips be put to silence: which speak grievous things proudly
and contemptuously against the righteous.
they that through pride and malice lay mine honor in the dust through lies
and contumelies, in thy justice Lord lay them there, for thou know me
guiltless of their false aspersions, and innocent of that they accuse me.

19 O Lord, O how great is thy goodness which thou have laid up for them that
fear thee; which thou have wrought for them that trust in thee, before the s^ns
of men!
for all mine afflictions yet mine heart is much comforted in the faithful
confidence of thy great goodness and mercy, which thou have in store for such
as are thine, and walk holily as thine, being careful to please and fearful to
offend thee, as I am; and also because of the great manifestation thou have
ever made of it in admirable preservations, and deliverances both of me and
others that have relied upon thee, in spite and sight of all our enemies.

20 Such shall thou by special and extraordinary providence keep as safe as if
they were in heaven, Thou shall hide them in the secret of thy presence from
the pride of man: thou shall keep them secretly in a pavilion from the strife
of tongues.
from the power of man, be he never so potent and proud withal. Yea, all that
they enmiously give out against them in brags and threats and slanderous
suggestions, shall have no issue, but shall be as wind, so safe shall thou keep
them from all harm.

Blessed be the Lord; for he has showed me his mavelous kindness in a strong
city.
21 What I say, I know by experience to be true; Blessed and magnified be the
Lord for it, for as poor and destitute as I was left, so much the more
mavelous has his loving kindness appeared, that by his goodness and
providence has preserved me safe from the power and malice of mine enemy, so
that no fortress though never so fortified could have better secured me.

For I said in my have, I am cut off from before thine eyes: nevertheless thou
hear the voice of my supplications, when I cried unto thee.
22 For so great was my trouble, and desolate my condition, that upon the
surprise, before I well bethought me of thy goodness and power, I apprehended
my self as given up by thee into mine enemies hands inevitably to be destroyed.
Yet I had so much faith left, as to pray for preservation, though I could
scarce hope it, and though my faith was weak in regard of deliverance. Yet in
fervencie and supplication it was strong, and thou wast pleased in mercy to
pass by mine infirmity, and was entreated of me in my misery, and effectually
did hear me, when in the anguish of my spirit I powered out my soul before
thee.

O love the Lord, all ye his saints: for the Lord preserves the faithful, and
plentifully rewards the proud doer.
23 Be you provoked by mine exhortation and example; O all ye Godly faithful
ones, to take heed of hasty discontent and unbelief, let your condition be
what it will be, still bear up in faith, have good thoughts of God; who,
however he seems otherways, yet is firm in his affections toward you, and be
you confident, that he both can and will preserve you, if you dare rely upon
him, and will wait for him; the power, and pride of your enemies he will bring
down, and in his own good time will make them plentifully taste the fruit of
their evil ways, by pouring upon them his heavy and just displeasure.

24 Be but steadfast and stout in faith when trials are upon you, Be of good
courage, and he shall strengthen your heart, all ye that hope in the Lord.
do but then hold out in undaunted believing, and he shall give you inwardly by
his spirit, and outwardly by his providence great stay and comfort of heart,
even thus shall he do to all that choose him and only him to hope and trust in
for protection. Take it upon my word, that speak it, both by prophecy and
experience.

The xxxii. PSALM.
David shows what makes a man blessed, to wit, the justifying, pardoning, and
sanctifying grace of God; which he affirms feelingly in the sense of his own
misery, the whilst it was suspended from him, and the happiness he had when
God renewed it in him, whence he takes occasion to animate himself and all that
are Godly in the faith of Gods goodness, and from his own experience persuades
from stubbornness in sin, to yieldableness in piety, for that produces nothing
but misery, but faith and holiness brings true joy and happiness. Psalm xxxii.
A Psalm of David, Maschil.


A Psalm made by David upon the experimental misery of the guilt of sin,
instructing all men wherein true happiness only consists.

1 ALl men would be happy and blessed, BLessed is he whose transgression is
forgiven, whose sin is covered.
but all men are not so, whatever they think by themselves, no, no one are,
abound they never so in worldly felicity, saving he and he only, who by a
lively faith laying hold of mercy in the virtue of a promise is sensible of
the free pardon of all his transgressions, and of his being clothed upon with
the imputed righteousness of his redeemer.

2 Blessed, Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord imputes not iniquity, and
in whose spirit there is no guil.
yea, I say again, only blessed and happy is that man whom in mercy God
freely justifies, and acquits from the guilt and punishment of his sin, and
seals it to him by the never-failing testimony of his sanctifying spirit,
bestowed upon him, creating him anew toward God in sincerity and holiness.

When I kept silence, my bones waxed old; through my roaring all the day long.
3 I can speak by experience, for when as I loved my sin, and lived in it, and
was loath to confess and forsake it, not seeking pardon for it, nor grace
against it, how bitter and burdensome at last did the Lord make it to me,
tormenting me within with most insupportable horrors to the sensible decay of
nature, by reason of his heavy displeasure, and the want of his favor, so that
it made me restlesly to roar and cry.

For day and night thy hand was heavy upon me: my moisture is turned into the
drought of summer. Selah
4 Yea, incessantly without intermission was I tormented with fear and terror,
so that I was even scorched, and my natural moisture dried up with inward
anguish, like unto leaves and grass by a summers drought. I speak it freelingly.

I acknowledged my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity have I not hid: I said I
will confess my transgression unto the Lord; and thou forgavest the iniquity
of my sin. Selah.
5 This made me come off, and glad I was to acknowledge my sin unto thee, and
ask forgiveness, which I did, not daring to conceal it any longer, but spread
it before thee with confession and deprecation: And truly when once I did but
feel my self thoroughly and sincerely resolved in my spirit no longer to hide
and harbor it in my bosom, but humbly in self-judging to lay it open before
the Lord, presently hereupon I felt my heart eased of mine inward pressures,
and cleared with the comfortable apprehension of the pardon of the guilt and
punishment of my sin, and thine acceptance of me into grace and favor again. I
speak it joyfully.

6 This testimony of mine touching thy ready mercy to humble penitents, For
this, shall every one that is Godly, pray unto thee in a time when thou may
be found: surely in the floods of great waters, they shall not come nigh unto
him.
shall incite by the faith thereof all that are, or desire to be Godly, to make
their addresses to thee in their trouble for sin, in hope and full assurance to
find the like mercy from thee in their misery, which is a time indeed wherein
thou art readiest to afford help and comfort. Surely in the greatest of outward
troubles or inward perplexities such an one as flies to thee for refuge, shall
find as I have done, that though like waves they may threaten and affright him,
yet they shall not overwhelm him, but being in faith by prayer sought unto,
thou will command a calm in his soul, as thou did in mine.

7 Thou art the refuge that my soul still flies unto for succor in all
distresses, Thou art my hiding place, thou shall preserve me from trouble: thou
shall compass me about with songs of deliverance. Selah.
and so thou have approved thy self, and so wilt ever do in time of need: I am
confident thou will never but show me mercy in my misery, and so wilt ever
give me cause to praise thee, and rejoice in thee, still as I have need of
thee, by my manifold and seasonable deliverances. To thy glory I speak it.

8 As I have learned of the Lord the way of weldoing, so will I, I will
instruct thee, and teach thee in the way which thou shall go: I will guide thee
with mine eye.
as is my duty teach it unto thee, who ever thou art, for thy welfare; out of
a care and and desire of thy good. I will show thee the ready and certain way
of gaining the favor of God, as I have found it, and seen the experience of
it, so will I declare it to thee.

9 Which is this, Be ye not as the horse or as the mule which have no
understanding: whose mouths must be held in with bit and bridle, lest they come
near unto thee.
walk humbly with thy God, and be tractable to his will and pleasure, not
rebelliously persisting in sin, and so foolishly provoking him against thee to
reduce thee by extremities, as we are fain to do brute beasts, or plague thee
with his judgments, to keep thee within compass.

Many sorrows shall be to the wicked: but he that trusts in the Lord, mercy
shall compass him about.
10 For the wicked by their wickedness do but kick against pricks, and heap up
judgment to themselves. But he that is the Lords by faith and obedience, the
sails of his soul shall be filled with the comfortable sense of Gods mercy and
favor to him, and he shall find the good effects thereof in the whole course
of his life.

Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice ye righteous: and shout for joy all ye that
are up^ight in heart.
11 Therefore if the wicked will still be so, at their peril. But as for the
Godly they have chosen the better part, for the Lord is their portion, in whom
they may and ought to be glad and rejoice, even all that believe in him for the
pardon of their sins, and are sanctified by his holy spirit; such, whatsoever
the world think of them, that are thus sincere and truly Godly (which all are
not that make profession, and show of religion) have infinite cause of joy, in
their blessed and happy condition, which they shall do well to put in
practice, and make conscience of, by an answerable actual rejoicing and
comfortable course of life to the conviction of the world, and the honor of
God.

The xxxiii. PSALM.
In this Psalm the Godly are incited exceedingly to praise the Lord, because of
their faithful experience of his word and works, his holy nature, goodness, and
power, manifested all the world over, for which all men also ought to reverence
him. But principally his people Israel whose happiness he has decreed, and
will bring to pass maugre all opposition of contrary counsels and attempts; in
case they walk with him and hope in him, he will be with them. He underrates
for Israel (in the name of all the faithful) that they will and do effectually
hope in the Lord, and promises in so doing, they shall speed accordingly, and
lastly prays it may be so. Psalm xxxiii.


1 O all ye chosen Israel, who are or should be Saints and servants of the
Lord, Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous, for praise is comely for the upright.
rejoice, and be exceeding glad all those that are so, in that you have him for
your portion, and truly better and more seemly service they cannot do him that
are partakers of his grace and spirit, than to render him praise for his love
and benefits toward them.

2 Never think you can give too many or too much praise to God, Praise the Lord
with harp: sing unto him with the psalterie, and an instrument of ten strings.
but learn to be skilful in it, and every way in the very best manner, and with
the most raised affections look you perform it to him, that so highly deserves
it at your hands.

3 As he vouchsafes new mercies, Sing unto him a new song, play skilfully with
a loud noise.
so still do you indite new praises to him with thankful hearts, set all your
skill and might on work to magnify him.

4 For the word of promise which he has made to the righteous is firm to be
trusted, For the word of the Lord is right: and all his works are done in truth.
and will not deceive the believing soul, but is and ever shall be true to him,
and all his works of power and providence toward them, and against their
enemies are the fruits of his mercy and faithfulness.

5 The Lord is righteous and holy, He loves righteousness and judgment: the
earth is full of the goodness of the Lord.
hates the ways of the world, injury and oppression; and contrarily loves
justice and equity, and such as practice them; he is bountiful also, and out of
his goodness fills the earth with abundance of good things for the use of man.

6 And as his goodness, By the word of the Lord we^e the heavens made: and all
the host of them, by the breath of his mouth.
so his power wonderfully appears in the world, for at his mere command, the
heavens and all those lightsome glorious ornaments therein were made, and other
way of Being they had none, saving his command to Be.

He gathers the waters of the sea together, as an heap: he lays up the
depth in store houses.
7 And as the heavens above, so the earth beneath shows his infinite power,
for thereto has he given a surface above the waters, which he has
(notwithstanding they were once uppermost, and would be so again) confined to
their concave, or the pit he dug for them; for all their fluid and spreading
nature, there he keeps them safe from breaking out, and overwhelming the earth
again.

Let all the earth fear the Lord: let all the inhabitants of the world stand in
awe of him.
8 And as the faithfully righteous have cause to praise the Lord for his word
and works, as being happy in him for their God, that is of such power and
truth: so also from that light and power which is imparted to them out of the
creation, should all the world, one and other submit to his authority, and know
it to be their duty to honor and obey him, reverencing his commandments, and
fearing his powerful judgments.

For he spoke and it was done, he commanded and it stood fast.
9 For all things that they see how great and wonderful soever, above and
beneath them, were made merely by his f^at or word of command; yea, the great
and weighty globe of the earth was established for ever by its sole and only
center, without any other prop or pillar through the Almighty command of God
for it so to be.

The Lord brings the counsel of the heathen to naught: he makes the devices
of the people of none effect.
10 And the Lord is as wise as powerful, defeating in his peoples behalf all
the machinations that their enemies device against them; frustrating and making
ineffectual all the plots of the Gentiles round about, against his chosen.

The counsel of the Lord stands for ever, the thoughts of his heart to all
generations.
11 For the gracious purposes of the Almighty toward his shall stand good,
spite of all opposing power and policy; yea, they shall never be frustrated,
but ever be effectual and succesfull in the behalf of those that trust in him,
to the worlds end.

12 O therefore blessed are we above all the world, Blessed is the nation whose
God is the Lord; and the people whom he has chosen for his own inheritance.
who have the knowledge and worship of the true God, and so have him in a
special manner gracious to us, and Lord over us. Yea, happy are the people whom
he has picked out from amongst all people unto the adoption of sons and
servants, as we are.

13 This God, The Lord looks from heaven: he beholds all the sons of men.
who is our God, is in heaven, and from thence he beholds and governs all men,
and all their actions.

14 Yea, From the place of his habitation, he looks upon all the inhabitants
of the earth.
from heaven the place of his most glorious and special residence does he
all-knowingly see and dispose of all men, and all things here below.

15 The Lord knows all men within and without, He fashioneth their hearts
alike: he considers all their works.
for he made all, and therefore knows all, no man made himself, but he alike
made all as any, and therefore knows all as well as any, even the subtilest and
wisest devices of the deepest politicians he is privy to, and considers the
events, ordering them after his mind, and not after theirs.

16 So that be man's confidence never so great, There is no King saved by the
multitude of an host: a mighty man is not delivered by much strength.
though he be a King and have never such authority, and power, or if for bodily
strength he be equal to a Giant, yet can it neither conquer, nor keep himself
from being conquered, if God be not purposed to favor him.

17 If God help not, An horse is a vain thing for safety: neither shall he
deliver any by his great strength.
nothing can, an Horse which men trust much in, be he never so swift or strong,
will deceive; and can neither safeguard his rider, nor harm his opposer if God
forbid it.

Behold, the eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him: upon them that hope in
his mercy.
18 The gracious favor and good providence of God is worth all, which they are
sure of that in fear obey him, and by faith trust in his goodness and mercy,
over whom he keeps a careful and watchful eye.

To deliver their soul from death, and to keep them alive in famine.
19 To deliver them from the deadly plots of their enemies, and other dangerous
perils, and to sustain and provide for them in times of scarcity and want, when
he lets other men starve.

Our soul waits for the Lord: he is our help and our shield.
20 We therefore that are the Lords people ought, (and I hope we do) with one
heart and mind, faithfully and affectionately seek to him and trust in him, as
our only preserver and defendor, as do and ever will the faithful.

For our heart shall rejoice in him: because we have trusted in his holy name.
21 And this we may be sure of, that we shall find him faithful, he will not
fail us but we shall have cause of joy and thanksgiving in the manifestation of
his grace and favor to us; if so be that we fail not to put our trust
steadfastly in his power and goodness, which for his holiness sake can never
deceive them that trust therein, as do the faithful.

Let thy mercy (O Lord) be upon us, according as we hope in thee.
22 Let, Lord, accordingly thy merciful loving kindness and gracious providence
be for ever vouchsafed unto thy people who make thee their stay and strength
alone.

xxxiv. PSALM.
For his deliverance mentioned in the title, David, in the ravishing
apprehension thereof, excites himself and others to praise the Lord greatly,
and to believe in him so too, promising as he sped, so should they in so doing,
be their danger never so great, and their help humanely never so small. He
would have them that doubt it but try him by trusting, and assures them they
shall experimentally find all true that he says touching Gods goodness. And
out of his duty to God and love to the godly he instructs them as a prophet,
and from his own experience, how to outlive temptations and afflictions, and
be happy and blessed; to wit, by eschewing evil and doing good; for to such and
such only the Lord is good and gracious, for the wicked shall certainly smart
for their wickedness, it shall cost them their undoing.

A Psalm made by David, Psalm xxxiv. A Psalm of David, when he changed his
behavior before Abimelech: who drove him away, and he departed.
when as, being forced to fly from Saul, and not knowing where to be safe in
Israel, he betook himself to Gath of the Philistines, where being known, by
reason of his late conquest of Goliath, and hated for the destruction that befell
their Host thereby, he was therefore in great danger, and put to his shifts to
feign himself mad, for which being contemned of the King he was dismissed his
presence, and so escaped again to Judea.

1 SO great has been the goodness and power of God in my behalf, I will bless
the Lord at all times: his praise shall continually be in my mouth.
as that I will never forget to magnify him for it, but will ever bear it in
remembrance and continually be speaking of his praiseworthy mercies to me in
my deliverance.

2 Yea, My soul shall make her boast in the Lord: the humble shall hear
thereof, and be glad.
from my very soul and inmost affections will I praise him, and confidently
tell both what he has done, and what thereupon I believe he will do for me,
whereby I shall I am sure encourage all self-denying believers to the worlds
end, to hope in him in trouble and adversity, and for present shall have such
as fear God, and wish me well, partakers of my joy.

3 And such I call upon to help me in exalting the Lord, O magnify the Lord
with me, and let us exalt his name together.
and with heart and voice to join with me in magnifying his loving kindness and
power, the better to amplify his praises.

I sought the Lord and he heard me, and delivered me from all my fears.
4 For I in mine extremity put up my prayers faithfully and fervently to the
Lord, and was presently answered, and freed from my dangers by his good
providence.

They looked unto him, and were lightened: and their faces were not ashamed.
5 And as it was with me, so shall it be for certain with other his people, that
from mine example humbly rely upon him, and in extremity not knowing which way
to turn them, with fervency of spirit by faithful prayer and ejaculation cast
their eyes toward heaven, they shall find favor, and have a way showed them
to escape in the greatest and doubtfullest dangers, nor shall they have cause
to hide their heads, because of their miscarrying, for God will deliver them,
and they shall praise him.

This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him; and saved him out of all his
troubles.
6 They shall make me their instance and encouragement of their faith, how that
as I in my poor and hazardous condition cried to the Lord for mercy, and was
graciously heard and delivered, so they shall take heart to do the like in a
like estate, in confidence of like success from God, who is graciously pitiful
to all that in affliction faithfully seek to him, as I did.

The Angel of the Lord, encampeth round about them that fear him, and
delivers them.
7 Nor matters it how humanely helpless and desolate any such seem to be, for
God has given his faithful and obedient people in charge to Christ, and his
ministering spirits the holy Angels, to yield them divine assistance, who
accordingly have a watchful eye over them to prevent their hurt and procure
their good, maugre all their enemies*

O taste and see that the Lord is good, blessed is the man that trusts in him.
8 Make but proof of God as I have done by believing in him and relying on him,
and you shall find him no worse, but by faith and experience shall be able to
affirm him as I do, to be sensibly gracious and good to such as seek to him,
for it is as true and undeniable as any thing can be, that he certainly and he
alone is blessed, and shall be happy that makes him and him only his trust and
confidence.

9 O therefore stick close to the Lord you that are his people, O fear the Lord
ye his Saints: for there is no want to them that fear him.
and depart not from him, be your temptation what it will be, by mistrust or
misdoing, for be sure of it you shall not want the Lords gracious presence with
you, and providence for you, if you so do.

10 Faithfully relying upon, The young lions do lack, and suffer hunger: but
they that seek the Lord shall not want any good thing.
and seeking to the Lord, is the most effectual and prosperous way any man can
take, all else is fallible; wisdom, strength, whatsoever is relied upon. Though
a man had the force and courage of the stoutest lion, yet, as they
notwithstanding theirs go without their prey till providence supply it them, so
shall he notwithstanding his, of what he stands in need, if he seek it not of
God, who only is to be confided in, and sought to for whatsoever we need or
desire, for to such has he engaged himself as far as is desirable, even to
give them what is good for them, whatever else they want, God and his goodness
shall be theirs to their hearts contentment.

11 Come all ye that are the children of the most High, Come ye children,
hearken unto me: I will teach you the fear of the Lord.
and as dear to me, as mine, and that in love and meekness desire to walk
well-pleasingly toward God. Give ear to what I say as an experienced man and
true Prophet: And it shall show you your hearts desire, even how to walk
acceptably with him.

12 What man is he that does desire to outlive his enemies, What man is he
that desires life, and loves many days that he may see good?
and the miseries he sustains by them, and would be blessed of God with a long
and happy life, which though all would have, yet all men take not the way to
get, but by their sin procure themselves misery and destruction, therefore
hearken thou to such instructions as will effect it.

Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips from speaking guile.
13 Do what God commands thee in word and deed, refrain thy tongue and lips from
revengeful slanders, or deceivable lies to or against any.

Depart from evil, and do good: seek peace and pursue it.
14 Be not tempted or enticed either by the provocations of thy nature, or the
worlds corruptions to wrong or deceit, and on the contrary study and endeavor
to walk holily and righteously in all things toward God and men, in all manner
of well-doing, seek the favor of God carefully, maintain peace with men and
pursue it earnestly, with the uttermost self-denial, in meek, holy, and
righteous walking.

The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his ears are open unto their
cry.
15 For only they are in favor with God, and have the eyes of the Lord
watchful over them for good, that are good, and he is very inclinable to hear
the cries of such in affliction, and to send them relief accordingly.

The face of the Lord is against them that do evil; to cut off the remembrance
of them from the earth.
16 But on the contrary in stead of a long and happy life, the anger of the Lord
is against them that are evil, whom by his judgments he shall in justice cut
off, both them and theirs.

The righteous cry, and the Lord hears; and delivers them out of all their
troubles.
17 The good its true may be afflicted as well as the bad, but with this
difference, that they have the Lord to go, and bewail themselves, unto; and the
Lord has promised to hear them, and has approved himself manifoldly as good
as his word, and so will still to such, for if they call, he will answer, and
ease them of their troubles.

The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a broken heart: and saves such as be
of a contrite spirit.
18 For the Lord is apt to pity them that he sees humbled under his afflicting
hand, and very ready to relieve them in their extremities; and does deliver
them that self-judgeingly in the sense of their unworthiness in time of misery
seek to him for mercy.

19 Those that are righteous and live godly, Many are the afflictions of the
righteous: but the Lord delivers him out of them all.
have many enemies, and suffer as many if not more trials and afflictions than
do the wicked, but still as I say with this difference, the Lord that brings
them in, leads them out.

20 And spite of all the power and malice of their enemies, He keeps all his
bones: not one of them is broken.
who if they could would grind them to powder, yet shall they not be able to
fasten the least evil upon them, which the wise providence of God not appointed
for their good, for he keeps them so safe, that not so much as their little
finger shall take hurt, or a hair of their head perish by any will or power of
man.

21 But now contrary-wise, Evil shall slay the wicked: and they that hate the
righteous shall be desolate.
the malicious evil ways of the wicked shall be their utter ruin, and they
that wickedly persecute the godly, shall in stead of compassing their
destruction, procure their own and their posterities for ever.

22 Whereas for the comfort of the godly, The Lord redeemeth the soul of his
servants: and none of them that trust in him shall be desolate.
let the lives of his people that faithfully trust in him, and dutifully serve
him, be it never such hazard and danger by the power of their enemies, yet he
that redeemed their souls from everlasting destruction, can and will preserve
and deliver them; I can put a probatum est unto it; and none of all those that
depend upon him and trust in him, shall be destroyed by the wrath of man, as
shall the wicked by the wrath of God, for he will preserve them, I know by
experience.

The xxxv. PSALM.
David in the name of Christ's and the Churches enemies, prays for the
confusion of his own, because of their unjust and inhumane dealing, promising
exceedingly to praise God, when he shall be delivered from their violence and
wrong: making God the judge betwixt him and them, and praying him to maintain
his innocence against their unrighteousness by making them examples of his
justice, and him of his mercy; so shall he purchase to himself much praise from
the whole Church, but specially from himself, which he shall be sure of.

Psalm xxxv. A Psalm of David.
A Psalm made by David.

PLead my cause (O Lord) with them that strive with me: fight against them that
fight against me.
1 O Lord oppose mine opposers; be thou the defendor of mine innocence, and the
preserver of my life against my slanderous back-biters, and persecuting
enemies, to whom be thou an enemy.

Take hold of shield and buckler, and stand up for mine help.
2 I have no help but thine, therefore quit thee answerably to the affiance I
put in thee for my defense, for thou art mine all in all, therefore stand to me
and appear for me, fail me not, but by thine Almighty power defend and keep me
safe from my violent adversaries.

Draw out also the spear, and stop the way against them that persecute me: say
unto my soul, I am thy salvation.
3 Nor only defend me, but also offend them that would offend me, secure me
from my persecutors, and prevent their cruel designs upon me. Let thine actions
outwardly speak thy loving kindness toward me, and inwardly persuade mine
heart to firm affiance in thee amidst mine afflictions.

Let them be confounded and put to shame that seek after my soul: let them be
turned back and brought to confusion that devise my hurt.
4 O Lord thou know in what place thou have set me, not as a private man
therefore for revenge, but as a Prophet and public person representing thy
Christ and Church do I accurse mine enemies, and pray that they may not prosper
in their designs, but that confusion and destruction may be the portion of them
that persecute my life, let them be discomfited and brought to ruin, that plot
mine.

5 Let thy violent and sudden judgments sweep them away past all help. Let
them be as chaff before the wind: and let the Angel of the Lord chase them.
Yea with a divine and unresistable power from heaven do thou utterly defeat
all their humane power wherein they put such confidence.

6 And let them totally miscarry in their discomfiture, Let their way be dark
and slippery, and let the Angel of the Lord persebute them.
so that they may not know how to escape to save themselves, but void of power
and policy let them stumble and fall, and be followed at the heels by thine
immediate judgments, until they be overtaken and quite destroyed.

7 Yea, For without cause have they hid for me their net, in a pit, which
without cause they have dug for my soul.
Lord, let them be catched in thy trap, as they have endeavored to catch me in
theirs, using all manner of deceit and craft to compass my destruction, and to
take away my life unjustly, without any desert or cause given by me.

8 Measure to mine enemy as he would measure to me. Let destruction come upon
him at unawares, and let his net that he has hid, catch himself, into that
very destruction let him fall.
Let sudden destruction befall him, when he least fears himself, and makes most
sure of me; Yea, let him be caught in his own very craft, and the self-same
ruin he intends to me let it fall on him.

9 So will thou give me cause of rejoicing in thee, And my soul shall be joyful
in the Lord: it shall rejoice in his salvation.
and thy favor toward me; yea, and accordingly I will exceedingly rejoice in
thy saving mercy, and will praise thee for it, ascribing all my safety to it.

10 Yea, All my bones shall say, Lord, who is like unto thee, which deliverest
the poor from him that is too strong for him?
both soul and body, each part and faculty, with all their might, in a joint
and joyful acclamation, shall feelingly break out into unexpressible praises
and thankful acknowledgements, of thy transcendent power and goodness in my
behalf. So that I will make faithful publication of thee to be a non-such for
poor afflicted persons to trust in, and seek to, when they are distressed and
overpowered by unjust violence, yea, for the most impotent and despicable
person living to fly to, to be righted and relieved on him that wrongfully
violates and oppresses him, be he never so much too hard for him.

False witnesses did rise up; they laid to my charge things that I knew not.
11 Thou, O Lord, know how falsely I (as Christ shall be) am accused by mine
injurious adversaries, to Saul; who by might suppresses right, and I can get no
hearing, but am partially and unduly proceeded against, as guilty of such
things, as, never so much as came in my thoughts, nor am not suffered to clear
my self.

They rewarded me evil for good, to the spoiling of my soul.
12 Yea, they have dealt most inhumanely with me, requiting all the good service
that I have done them, by preserving their lives with the apparent hazard of
mine own, against their enemies; with the going about enviously to deprive me
of mine, as they shall Christ of his.

But as for me, when they were sick, my clothing was sackcloth: I humbled my
soul with fasting, and my prayer returned into mine own bosom.
13 Their carriage toward me, is not as mine to them, for when they ailed any
thing, were sick or in trouble, so far was I from wishing them ill as is
falsely suggested, that I fasted and prayed for thy mercy to them and
deliverance of them, as for my self, though I now perceive God having rejected
them for their wickedness, I lost my labor, but not my reward, for I have the
comfort of a self-excusing conscience by it.

I behaved my self as though he had been my friend, or brother: I bowed down
heavily, as one that mourns for his mother.
14 Thou, Lord, know what manner of duty and love I bare to Saul, how that
had he been my brother a thousand times, I could not have borne and showed more
tender affections to him than I did. Yea, my sorrow was as natural and
passionate for him, as a child's for his mother.

15 But alas, But in mine adversity they rejoiced and gathered themselves
together: yea, the abjects gathered themselves together against me, and I know
it not, they did tear me and ceased not.
how differently have they walked toward me, driving me into adversity, and
rejoicing at it, all that envied and maligned me combining together against me,
to bring me to ruin and hatred: yea, base unworthy wretches, men of flattering
and lying tongues laid their heads together to accuse and calumniate me, which
(being innocent) I suspected not; incessantly backbiting me, and slandering
mine innocence.

16 They have scornfully derided me at their feasts and in their cups, With
hypocritical mockers in feasts: they gnashed upon me with their teeth.
even such as I thought had been my friends, but they prove false ones; and
have uttered their spiteful aspersions of me, and threats against me.

17 O Lord, Lord, how long will thou look on? rescue my soul from their
destructions, my darling from the lions.
be moved to compassionate me, and be not always a spectator of my miseries,
and a tolerator of mine enemies cruelties, but take me and my cause into thy
merciful consideration, and let not my life be a prey to their hatred, but
preserve and deliver my precious soul, that principal part, from the malicious
rage of them that would unjustly deprive me of it by cruel death.

18 Which when thou shall have done, I will give thee thanks in the great
congregation: I will praise thee among much people.
and made me partaker of thy public ordinances, from which mine enemies have
driven me; I will promise to magnify and praise thee with sacrifices of
thanksgiving in the face of all Israel, gathered together at thy Sanctuary.

19 Seeing I stand for the right, Let not them that are mine enemies wrongfully
rejoice over me: neither let them wink with the eye, that hate me without a
cause.
let not mine enemies that maintain a wrong cause against me ever have their
wills upon me, and rejoice at mine unjust overthrow, never let them have cause
mockingly to insult, and contemptuously to jear in their sleeves at my
destruction, that they causelessly hunt after and hope for.

For they speak not peace, but they devise deceit^ul matters against them that
are quiet in the land.
20 For mine enemies are so implacably and violently bent against me, that no
parley or hope of peace can be had at their hands, but they practice all manner
of ways by false accusations and treacherous machinations to molest and harm
me, yea, utterly to ruin me that would fain live peaceably by them in the land
of Israel, without doing or thinking any harm unto them, and not be driven
thence.

Yea, they opened their mouth wide against me, and said Aha, aha, our eye has
seen it.
21 They have made me their table-talk, belching out their hatred against me in
impudent false assertions; and joyful expressions at my misery.

This thou have seen (O Lord) keep not silence: O Lord be not far from me.
22 This their carriage toward me, O Lord, thou art privy to, and have seen
their malice, forbear no longer to rebuke them for it. O Lord, whom I serve and
trust, be not deaf to my cries; nor a stranger to my wrongs, but take my part,
and send me speedy help.

Stir up thy self, and awake to my judgment, even unto my cause, my God and my
Lord.
23 Be provoked by mine enemies outrage, and my wronged innocence to execute
judgment on mine and my causes behalf upon the wrong-doers, O my most gracious
and Almighty Lord God.

Judge me, O Lord my God, according to thy righteousness, and let them not
rejoice over me.
24 Such is my reighteousness and innocence in this matter, as I put it into
thine hands to be judge of, and pray thee, O thou my righteous and good God, in
thy justice and faithfulness to defend the cause of thy servant; where the
fault is there let the punishment light, and let not them that are wicked have
cause to rejoice at my destruction, that am innocent.

Let them not say in their hearts, Ah, so would we have it: let them not say,
we have swallowed him up.
25 Let them never have cause to rejoice in my ruin, and say when they see it:
It is as we would have it; let them not prey upon me, and boast themselves
against me, and say, we have our desire.

26 Let them, Let them be ashamed and brought to confusion together, that
rejoice at mine hurt; let them be clothed with shame, and dishonor that
magnify themselves against me.
O Lord, as enemies to Christ and his Church be shamefully defeated of their
hopes, and brought to utter destruction, even the whole rout of them, that
unjustly wish me ill, and rejoice to see it befall me. Let disgrace and obloquy
be their portion that seek to make it mine, and that proudly insult over me in
my misery.

27 And on the contrary, Let them shout for joy, and be glad, that favor my
righteous cause: yea, let them say continually, Let the Lord be magnified,
which has pleasure in the prosperity of his servant.
let them as friends of Christ and his Church have their hearts desire, and
their bellies full of joy and comfort, that out of love and pity to mine
innocence, and the cause of Christ as it is engaged in me, wish well to me and
take part with me; Let such have cause for ever to remember with praise and
thankfulness thy loving kindness and mercy to me: thine anointed and chosen
one, shown in my preservation and prosperous success against mine enemies, and
in thy vindication of mine innocence against my false malignant accusers.

28 And I for mine own part promise, And my tongue shall speak of thy
righteousness, and of thy praise all the day long.
that thy praises shall never die on my hand, but when as thou shall have
fulfilled thy goodness and truth to me, I will all my life long preach and
declare thy faithfulness and grace for the defense of thy people, and thy
righteous judgments against their wicked enemies, to invite others to trust in
thee, and wait upon thee, of both which I shall be then a singular example,
which I will perpetually publish, to thy no less singular glory.

The xxxvi. PSALM.
David gives (as I conceive) the character of Saul and the rest of his enemies,
branding them deeply for wicked men, and treacherous: But with all incourageth
himself in the superlative faithfulness, mercy and loving kindness which God
has promised, and keeps in store for his people that serve him, and trust in
him, which shall not deceive them: and which he prays may be ever the portion
of all the godly, but more especially of himself, in his preservation, and his
enemies destruction.

Psalm xxxvi. To the chief musician, A Psalm of David, the servant of the Lord.
To him that is first and principal of all the Quire, is recommended (for the
care and ordering of it to be sung) by David, the designed and dedicated
servant of the Lord, this Psalm which himself made.

THe transgression of the wicked says within my heart, that there is no fear
of God before his eye^.
1 THe constant course of wickedness, which appears in my perverse and malicious
enemies, adures me that I may with a safe conscience censure them to be wicked
men, void of all conscience and piety, enemies to God and goodness, and that
both they and their cause is naught.

For he flattereth himself in his own eyes, until his iniquity be found to be
hateful.
2 It clearly appears they are so, for that they proudly bolster up themselves
in their own evil ways, without remorse or amendment, and so its like will
ever do till God by his judgments convince them, how hateful they are.

The words of his mouth are iniquity and deceit: he has left off to be wise,
and to do good.
3 They make no conscience to slander and dissemble, they have quite given over
the profession and practice of godliness and honesty, counting it foolishness,
and practice nothing but craft and iniquity, as if that were the only wisdom.

He devises mischief upon his bed, he sets himself in a way that is not
good; he abhors not evil.
4 They set all their wits a work to do mischief, night and day, early and late,
they make a very trade of it, with might and main endeavoring to work
wickedness, never scrupeling to act any thing, be it never so sinful, but the
worse it is the better they like it.

Thy mercy, O Lord, is in the heavens; and thy faithfulness reaches unto the
clouds.
5 Yet have I no cause to dread them* considering how far thy mercy and truth,
wherein I trust, is able do for me, above what they can do against me, which as
far exceeds them, Thy righteousness is like the great mountains; thy judgments
are a great deep; O Lord, thou preservest man and beast.
their power and policy; as the heavens and the clouds above do the earth
beneath.

6 Thy righteousness goes as far beyond all that they by unrighteousnes can do
against thy people, as great mountains do little mole-hills, and thy wisdom is
not to be fathomed by reason; it is to it, as the Sea to shallowes. All thine
infinite excellencies are thy peoples inheritances, whom thou certainly wilt
preserve and bless maugre their enemies, who notwithstanding the worlds
sinfulness preservest man and beast, of thy mere faithfulness, and them much
more

7 Thy goodness appears to be so great in thy promises, How excellent is thy
loving kindness' O God! therefore the children of men put their trust under the
shadow o^ thy wings.
and such abundance of loving kindness and mercy is held forth therein, as
that it is a most sweet and powerful attraction to draw men to thee, to trust
in thee for salvation and protection, whose eyes thou openest, and whose hearts
thou disposest.

8 And such as do convert to thee, They shall be abundantly satisfied with the
fatness of thy house: and thou shall make them drink of the river of thy
pleasures.
and repose themselves upon thee with trust and confidence, they shall not
repent it, but shall feel and find infinite soul-satisfaction in the track of
piety and use of holy ordinances, and thou shall utterly quench their thirst
after the world and sin, by inspiring them with thy divine and heavenly grace
and consolation, to their surpassing ravishment and content.

9 For in thee, For with thee is the fountain of life: in thy light shall we
see light.
and from thee only is the life of grace and true consolation to be had, in
the light of thy countenance and gracious favor shining upon us, and by thy
illuminating us therewith, we shall have inward light and happiness, when we
are otherways never so in darkness, and infelicitie.

10 O Lord, O continue thy loving kindness unto them that know thee; and thy
righteousness to the upright in heart.
as thou have promised so perform thy grace and favor to them that are
enlightened by thee, and drawn to thee, withdraw not the light of thy
countenance from such as serve thee and believe in thee, but shine upon thy
faithful and sincere people, and bless them with preservation and safety
answerable to thy promise and their trust.

Let not the foot of pride come against me, and let not the hand of the wicked
remove me.
11 As thou have, so still continue to succor me, and prevent the attempts of
my proud and wicked enemies upon me, who would tread me under foot, let them
not with all their might and malice be able to stagger my faith in thee, nor
compass my ruin.

There are the workers of iniquity fallen: they are cast down, and shall not
be able to rise.
12 But let me for my part be able to see by experience and to say to thy
glory. There are my wicked enemies, for all their pride and power destroyed by
the just judgment of God, and that (according to thy promise) by thine
almighty power, they are utterly subdued under me, and fallen without
likelihood of recoverie.

The xxxvii. PSALM.
David grounding much upon his own experience and observation of Gods dealing
with himself, presses many excellent exhortations upon the people of God,
advising them to patience, faith, and comfort in God, promising them in so
doing a happy issue to themselves, and an unhappie to their wicked
adversaries, which exhortations and promises doubled and redoubled, the better
to take impression, and beget encouragement, is the substance of this whole
Psalm. Psalm xxxvii. A Psalm of David.


A Psalm made by David.

FRet not thy self because of evil doers, neither be thou envious against the
workers of iniquity.
1 BE not thou that belongest to God angry or agrieved to see wicked men to
prosper, and to go unpunished in the world, neither envy thou the happiness of
sinners in their affluence of worldly felicity, nor be moved by it to step out
of thy way, into theirs.

2 For it is but for a very little while that they do so, For they shall soon
be cut down like the grass, and wither as the green herb.
their happiness is short-lived, commonly God by some unexpected judgment and
untimely end snatches them from it, or if not, yet at best its mortal like
themselves, and dies with them.

3 But whilst they trust in their strength or store, Trust in the Lord, and do
good, so shall thou dwell in the land, and verily thou shall be fed.
do thou trust in God, and whilst they go on in sinning, do thou go on in
serving the Lord, so shall thou and thy posterity inherit the promise of life
and blessing to survive the wicked, maugre their power and malice that at
present Lord it, as if life and inheritances were not the gifts of God, but
theirs by an indeleble propriety, whom yet God will extirpate; and doubt not
but trusting in him, and being careful to do thy duty to him, he will provide
what is needful for thee, and will bless thee with convenient food and raiment,
as much as a gracious heart, and contented mind desires; for Godliness has the
promise of this life, and that which is to come, they shall not hinder it.

4 Also the whilst they make riches and pleasures their God and greatest good,
4 Delight thy self also in the Lord; and he shall give thee the desires of
thine heart.
do thou make God and his good grace, thy riches and chief delight, and so God
will give thee what shall be for thy good, and withhold from thee what may do
thee hurt, which is the desire of every gracious heart.

5 Be not over solicitous and careful in and about thine affairs, Commit thy
way unto the Lord: trust also in him, and he shall bring it to pass.
but ease thy mind on God when thou art engaged in his cause, or by his
providence, pass them over to him to manage for thee, trusting withal, that
according to his goodness and faithfulness he will order and dispose them, and
thou shall find every thing to prosper better in his hands than in thine, and a
good success to follow upon it.

And he shall bring forth thy righteousness as the light, and thy judgment as
the noonday.
6 And though thy piety and innocence may be rewarded with obloquy and
oppression, yet be sure the time will come, and be comforted in it, when God
shall right all thy wrongs, and vindicate thine uprightness (if thou trust in
him to do it) to thy full satisfaction, and the worlds conviction, as certainly
as light springs out of darkness, and day out of night, and as clearly as the
sun shines in his greatest brightness, for all eyes to see it.

Rest in the Lord, and wait patiently for him: fret not thy self because of him
who prospers in his way, because of the man who brings wicked devices to
pass.
7 How ever things frame, rely thou upon God with a steadfast unwavering faith,
and a quiet contented mind, be not hasty nor impatient of the end, but stay
Gods leisure submissively to his will, and believingly in his promise to the
very uttermost period of his pleasure. And though thou in a good cause go by
the worse, and others in a bad one succeed and prosper; yet let it not unsettle
thy faith, or distemper thy spirit to see wicked men fortunate, in wicked ways
and evil designs.

Cease from anger, (...) forsake wrath: ^^et not thy self in any wise to do
evil.
8 At any rate suppress passionate misprisions of God his truth or
righteousness, and beware of casting off a meek spirit, and entertaining a
wrathful envious disposition incident in such temptations, let not distemper
seize upon thee however matters go, but specially not so far as to move thee to
forgo thy faith and and obedience, and to fall to sinful shifts and practices.

For evil doers shall be cut off: but those that wait upon the Lord, they shall
inherit the land.
9 For so thou and they shall fare alike, even both be cut off in Gods
displeasure, whereas if thou hold on in patient and faithful waiting on the
Lord, thou shall at last find it to be the most successeful and prosperous
course, and that in so doing God will bless and provide for thee, when as they
and their hopes shall perish.

For yet a little while, and the wicked shall not be* ye^, thou shall
diligently consider his place, and i^ shall not be.
10 For if thou will but have a little patience, and stay Gods leisure, it shall
not be long before the wicked have their reward, though God may let them
prosper for a while, yet the time will come when either their happiness shall
be taken from them, or they from it; yea, thou or thine shall see an end of him
and his, to your admiration, and God his exaltation.

11 But on the contrary, But the meek shall inherit the earth: and shall
delight themselves in the abundance of peace.
they that wait patiently and bear meekly, they shall find it the best and
happiest way, for that God will preserve them, and at last bless them with rest
and safety, when the wicked shall perish.

12 The malice of the wicked indeed is every way very provoking, The wicked
plotteth against the just, and gnasheth upon him with his teeth.
both in real wrongs, causelessly working against the righteous; and in
irritating deportments, manifesting his inward rancor and imbittered mind
against him, when he cannot prevail.

13 But there is no danger, The Lord shall laugh at him, for he sees that his
day is coming.
for God laughs to see his folly, so to fret himself, and labor in vain to
root out the faithful and Godly man, when as all that while he is but digging
his own grave, and hastening his own destruction, for the more he endangers
him, and has him at a lift, the speedier shall be his own ruin, to make way
for his preservation.

14 The wicked do all they can by wit or power to overthrow the poor opressed
innocent man, The wicked have drawn out the sword, and have bent their bow to
cast down the poor and needy, and to slay such as be of upright conversation.
and set themselves with all their might to slay without cause the good, even
because they are good.

15 But God shall make use of their power and violence against themselves,
Their sword shall enter into their own heart, and their bows shall he broken.
for they shall work their own destruction, and the aim they have at the Godly
shall be defeated, and they preserved, spite of all their power and malice.

A little that a righteous man has, is is better than the riches of many
wicked.
16 The righteous man that trusts in God and serves him is happier and richer in
a little that God gives him, than the wicked are with much ill gotten goods,
wherein they put great confidence.

For the arms of the wicked shall be broken: but the Lord upholdeth the
righteous.
17 For the carnal confidences and strength of the wicked wherein they trust,
shall be weakened, and made ineffectual, against the Godly and their faith; but
them will God sustain, be they never so despicable and void of secundarie
helps, spite of all adverse power.

The Lord knows the days of the upright: and their inheritance shall be for
ever.
18 The Lord has decreed to a minute how long the righteous shall suffer, and
remembers his promise touching their surviving happiness after their miseries,
and their enemies oppressions, to keep it: which he will certainly do, to their
well-being here, or if not, for ever hereafter in heaven.

They shall not be ashamed in the evil time: and in the days of famine they
shall be satisfied.
19 Which confidence of theirs shall make them hold up their heads when others
droop, in times of distress. Yea, their hope and trust in God shall yield them
their bellies full of content even in death.

But the wicked shall perish, and the enemies of the Lord shall be as the fat
of lambs, they shall consume: into smoke shall they consume away.
20 When as the wicked for want of it shall comfortlesly pine away, and the
ungodly ones for whose sake those judgments are sent, together with all their
substance, shall in the Lords anger be consumed by them, as the fire melts
lambs grease; yea, they shall be quite consumed.

The wicked borrows and pays not again: but the righteous shows mercy
and gives.
21 The wicked for all his abundance, and abundant confidence therein, by Gods
just judgments are often times impoverished and put to borrow, and disabled to
pay again, whereas the righteous whose confidence is in God, and can find in
his heart, in obedience to him to be charitable with that he has, is blessed
of God with enough for his own comfortable subsistence, and the relief of the
needy.

22 For he has temporal blessings in store for them on whom he has bestowed
his favor and grace, For such as be blessed of him shall inherit the earth;
and they that be cursed of him shall be cut off.
and they shall have a comfortable subsistence, when as others far greater and
of more account in the world, living in sin, and being in hatred with God,
shall unexspectedly be undone and destroyed.

23 God prospers him that is good, The steps of a good man are ordered by the
Lord: and he delights in his way.
and gives a good issue to his undertakings, because he takes pleasure in, and
receives honor from his conscionable and serviceable walking.

24 He may be low brought and hard set, Though he fall, he shall not utterly be
cast down: for the Lord upholdeth him with his hand.
but he shall never be quite forsaken of God, nor rendered to the will of his
enemies to his utter undoing. For the Lord has an eye to him, and an hand on
him, to keep him from drowning though he let him sink, they may be cast down,
but not destroyed.

25 All my life long (which is no short one) I have ever taken notice of Gods
dealing with his people, I have been young, and now am old: yet have I not seen
the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging bread.
and have always observed his faithfulness to the faithful, how that they that
have trusted in him, and walked with him have never been quite forsaken of him,
though they have often and many a time been put soar to it, yet has he never
falsified his word of promise and providence, but whereas I have seen the
wicked turned naked out of all, and glad to be beholden to to the righteous (as
Esau was to Jacob for a mess of pottage) the Lord on the contrary has always
provided so competently and contentedly for them, that they have never needed
to crave relief from the ungodly.

26 The righteous man's property is still to be doing good, He is ever merciful
and lends: and his seed is blessed.
trusting in the Lord more than in riches, and therefore whereas others hoard
up all they can get, he lends and gives as there is cause to them that want,
and hopes to be never the poorer for it, (counting it his riches to lay out,
not to lay up;) nor is he, for God rewards his good deeds upon his posterity
after him, and blesses them for his sake.

Depart from evil, and do good: and dwell for evermore.
27 Would thou then have a blessing upon thy self, and derive it to thy
posterity? take the course the godly do, forsake sin, and serve God, and thou
shall find that that's the only way for thee and thine to be happy from
generation to generation.

For the Lord loves judgment, and forsakes not his saints, they are
preserved for ever: but the seed of the wicked shall be cut off.
28 For the righteous Lord loves righteousness, and will bless them that love
and practice it, they that are holy and practice holiness, heel stick as close
to them as they do to him, and will never fail them of his promises that he
has made to them and theirs, but the wicked shall find he as much hates them,
as he loves the godly, either they or their posterity shall smart for their
wickedness, and be rooted out by it.

The righteous, shall inherit the land, and dwell therein for ever.
29 The righteous liver shall by the blessing of God subsist, and derive a
subsistence from himself to his children of peace and happiness, and the favor
of God, generation after generation.

The mouth of the righteous speaks wisdom; and his tongue talks of
judgment.
30 The righteous man as he himself is good, so he loves to be doing good, and
to instruct others as opportunity serves, specially his own, like as God has
instructed him with the knowledge of his ways of holiness and righteousness,
wherein he is conversant both in walking and talking.

The Law of his God is in his heart, none of his steps shall slide.
31 The Law of God (whom he loves, and who he knows loves him) is written in his
heart, and naturalized therein, which shall keep him from sin, and for which
God will prosper and preserve him from evil, maugre Satan and the World.

32 Yea, The wicked watches the righteous, and seeks to slay him.
though the wicked watch him never so narrowly by power or policy to ruin him.

33 For the Lord will not forget his promise, The Lord will not leave him in
his hand, nor condemn him when he is judged.
nor withdraw his providence, so as to expose him without support or supply,
nor will God judge him, as they do, nor condemn him upon their accusations, but
will defend him, acquit his innocence, and revenge his wrong.

34 Trust steadfastly in the Lord, Wait on the Lord, and keep his way, and he
shall exalt thee to inherit the land: when the wicked are cut off thou shall
see it.
patiently waiting upon him in his own time to fulfill his own promise, and show
forth his mercy to thee in thy trouble; and keep a good conscience by walking
unweariedly and with a constant course in and after his commandments, and he
will at last do great things for thee, thou shall certainly be a top of the
wheel, and shall see the wicked under thee, how ever they at present overtop
thee.

35 I speak what I have seen, I have seen the wicked in great power: and
spreading himself like a green bay tree.
and what others shall see if they wait and observe, to wit, The wicked most
formidably powerful, and priding themselves in great prosperity, flourishing
like a bay tree in earthly felicity.

36 Yet have I lived to see him quite blasted and withered, Yet he passed away,
and so he was not: yea, I sought him, but he could not be found.
so, as if he never had been such a man; and all this in my time.

37 So likewise have I marked the righteous man, Mark the perfect man, and
behold the upright: for the end of that man is peace.
and so I would have others to do; to prevent rash judgment, and that they may
see what I say to be true, to wit, That though he that is faithful and sincere
toward God, may have a time of sadness and suffering, yet its most certain his
end shall be most comfortable, for either he shall outlive his miseries here,
as often they do, or leave them behind him with a peaceable and joyful departure
out of this life from them to the Lord his God, who will receive him into
everlasting happiness.

But the transgressors shall be destroyed together, the end of the wicked
shall be cut off.
38 Whereas on the contrary, well may the wicked fare for a while, but in the
end judgment shall devour them, and as they have been brethren in evil, so
shall they be fellows in punishment, none shall escape; The end of the wicked
shall not be death, but destruction, wrath shall slay them, happiness forsake
them, and confusion receive them.

But the salvation of the righteous is of the Lord, he is their strength in
time of trouble.
39 So it is with them, but so shall it not be with the righteous, whose
salvation is not placed in false refuges, as is wicked men's, but in the power
and faithfulness of the Lord, he is their strength and trust in time of trouble.

And the Lord shall help them, and deliver them: he shall deliver them from the
wicked, and save them because they trust in him.
40 Who will not deceive them, but will certainly relieve and release them, he
both must and will do it, for he is bound by his grace and truth to save them
that trust in him, and destroy the wicked enemies of his Church, and that bond
he will never break.

The xxxviii. PSALM.
David lying soar oppressed at once both under some bodily distemper and many
enemies, humbly repairs to God in prayer: Wherein first he bewaileth his sin,
and Gods displeasure, and then his sufferings both in body (which were very
grievous) and also in mind. But yet comforts himself in this, that the groans
and prayers which those miseries forced from him, were heard and regarded of
God, though he had not present relief, but continued worse and worse: And still
holds out praying and ripping up his whole estate to God, how it fared with him
on the one side, and with his enemies on the other.

Psalm xxxviii. A Psalm of David to bring to remembrance.
A Psalm made by David in soar affliction, both to mind God of his pitious
state, to gain relief; and himself of sin, and the fruit thereof, to humble him
under it.

1 O Lord, O Lord, rebuke me not in thy wrath: neither chasten me in thy hot
displeasure.
I confess my self a sinner, and to deserve thy punishment, but remember thou
art good, and merciful, therefore let thy chastisements be fatherly; not in
rigor, void of compassion and forgivenes.

2 Which me thinks thou art, For thine arrows stick fast in me; and thine hand
presses me soar.
for thou have wounded me deep in body and mind, thy punishing hand is
exceeding heavy upon me.

3 My diseased body is all over tormented with extreme pain, There is no
soundness in my flesh, because of thine anger: neither is there any rest in my
bones, because of my sin.
which in thy displeasure thou have cast me into. My sin has brought me into a
miserable condition, my very bones feel the smart of it.

4 For mine iniquities have overwhelmed me with a deluge of wrath, For mine
iniquities are gone over mine head: as an heavy burden they are too heavy for
me.
and like a thick cloud have intercepted thy favor from me: They and their sad
effects lie so heavy upon me, that my spirit is almost overwhelmed by them,
and my very life endangered.

5 My disease is very grievous, My wounds stink and are corrupt: because of my
foolishness.
painful, and loathsome, for which I condemn my self and acquit thee, for I may
thank mine own folly: my sin has caused my suffering.

6 Yea, I am troubled, I am bowed down greatly, I go mourning all the day long.
it has brought me into a heavy case; for my trouble is great by reason of
it, the weight thereof presses me soar. I have no ease but continual sorrow
for it, and by it.

7 For I lie under a grievous malady, For my loins are filled with a loathsome
disease: and there is no soundness in my flesh.
noisomly diseased, all my body over tormented so, that by reason thereof my
loins fail me that should support me, and my strength every where else is
decayed.

I am feeble and sore broken: I have roared by reason of the disquietness of my
heart.
8 Through the length and nature of my distemper I am extremely weakened in
nature and constitution, my bones are as if they were broken. And my mind is as
much out of order as my body, through the extreme anguish of my sins guilt and
Gods heavy displeasure, which has forced upon outcries from me.

Lord, all my desire is before thee: and my groaning is not hid from thee.
9 But yet this comforts me, that thou, O Lord, take notice and art privy to
my cries, which in faithfulness I put up unto thee, though thou do not seem
to do so, and my groans are known to thee, though hitherto they bring no relief
from thee.

My heart pants, my strength fails me: as for the light of mine eyes, it
also is gone from me.
10 For yet its worse with me and no better, for still mine heart languisheth
with sorrow, more and more, and my strength it decays, and my sight through
sorrowful mournings is grown dim, and mine eyes almost quite benighted.

My lovers and my friends stand aloof from my sore: and my kinsmen stand far
off.
11 I am very forlorn and destitute of help and comfort, for my disease is so
dangerous and loathsome, that my very friends are forced from me, who in their
hearts entirely love me, and would not forgo me, could they safely accompany
me, and possibly endure me; yea, all men, not only my friends and
acquaintance, but my nearest kindred and allies are so too.

They also that seek after my life, lay snares for me; and they that seek my
hurt ^peak mischievous things, and imagine deceits all the day long.
12 And at once both thus my friends forsake me, and mine enemies endanger me,
endeavoring mine utter destruction by all possible means, secret or open, any
way by word or deed to do me mischief, which they terribly threaten, is their
desire, and continual endeavor.

But I, as a deaf man heard not; and I was as a dumb man that opened not his
mouth.
13 But I sustained my self in faith and patience, not rendering evil for evil,
in the sense of mine unworthines, and faith of thy goodness I was silent,
commending my self and them respectively unto thee for mercy and justice.

14 I refrained both from impatience, Thus I was as a man that hears not, and
in whose mouth are no reproofs.
and revengeful retributions of any kind, committing my cause to thee, in
meekness, and humility.

15 I gave place to wrath; For in thee, O Lord, do I hope: thou will hear, O
Lord my God.
for that in thee, O Lord, is my hope and confidence, that in thy good time
thou will do me right on them that injure me, and will hear the cry of my
wronged innocence, and my prayer for deliverance, O Lord my God, in whose
faithfulness I trust, and whose servant I am.

16 For to thee have I, For I said, Hear me, least otherwise they should
re^oyce over me: when my foot slippeth, they magnify themselves against me.
and do I make my prayer for support and deliverance, least if mine enemies
should procure mine undoing; it would be thy dishonouring and the shame of my
faith and profession. I know that would be the issue by those experiences I
have had of their behavior, for upon all advantages they have disparaged me,
and my cause, and been raised in self-confidence above me and my hopes.

17 I cry unto thee for support and deliverance, For I am ready to halt, and
my sorrow is continually before me.
for God knows, of my self, without it, I am ready every foot to perish, and
to be utterly depressed with the greatness of my calamity, such and so
uncessant is my grief, that I must needs else sink under it.

18 Yea, For I will declare mine iniquity; I will be sorry for my sin.
I have prayed unto thee for mercy, and that with promise and full purpose of
heart to repent of my sin that caused my suffering; I have promised humbly to
confess it, and heartily to lament it, and have done it accordingly.

19 This Lord has been my manner, But mine enemies are lively, and they are
strong: and they that hate me, wrongfully are multiplied.
to confess my sin, pray thy pardon, submit to thy punishment, wait for thy
mercy, and yet still I remain sick and weak, in misery and distress, whilst
my wicked and graceless enemies, are notwithstanding in health and strength,
feel nothing of that I do^ yea, I every way decrease and they increase, my
friends grow less, and mine enemies more, the combination of such as mortally
and injuriously hate me greatens exceedingly.

They also that render evil for good, are mine adversaries: because I follow
the thing that good is.
20 And such and so ill-natured men are my adversaries, that as I render not
them evil for evil, so contrarily they render me evil for good, and hate me for
no other cause, but because I am good, and do good.

Forsake me not, O Lord: O my God be not far from me.
21 Now, Lord, consider what I have said, and the arguments I have used both
touching my self and mine enemies, and do accordingly. Let me, that am thus
destitute of all help, but thine, and that walk close with thee, and depend
firmly on thee, not be forsaken; but find thee faithful and gracious to uphold
and deliver me.

Make have to help me, O Lord my salvation.
22 Vouchsafe me thine helping hand before I perish, which I am in imminent
danger to do, O Lord, that by thy promise and my faith art my only preserver
and deliverer.

The xxxix. PSALM.
David for his sin, suffering (as is most probable) under Absaloms rebellion,
resolves patiently to bear the opprobries that were cast upon him by his
adversaries, and so did: only makes his address to God by prayerful
expostulation, desiring to know an end of his miseries, though it were with the
end of his life, showing the vanity of him, every man, and everything, and
that happiness is only to be had in the grace and favor of God. Praying him
to pardon his sins for which he justly suffered, and in mercy to mitigate his
displeasure, which had almost quite consumed him, and so is able to do the
whole world. And lastly with cries and tears entreats for pity in this short
sojourning state of mortallitie, and that he may taste and see the favor of God
in his restorement, before he die.

To Jeduthun one of the prime musicians, Psalm xxxvi. To the chief musician,
even to Jeduthun. A Psalm of David.
and the principal of all his lineage, do I David that made this Psalm recommend
it, for the care and ordering of it to be sung.

1 BEing grievously tempted to impatiencie by extreme afflictions, I Said, I
will take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my tongue: I will keep my mouth
with a bridle, while the wicked is before me.
and mine enemies provocations, I was fain to watch my self narrowly, and to
take up a vow and resolution not to give the reins to my tongue, but to bridle
it from taking liberty to exceed in intemperate speeches, specially whilst I
had to do with wicked men, who lay at advantage to take scandal at me and my
profession by any miscarriage they could epsy.

2 Wherefere I abstained utterly from speaking, I was dumb with silence, I held
my peace, even from good, and my sorrow was stirred.
even that which was truth in mine own defense and their reproof, least
therewith impatiencie should get vent, though thereby I was much troubled, and
had much ado to do it.

3 In so much as my heart was full, My heart was hot within me, while I was
musing the fire burned: then spoke I with my tongue.
and so heated with smothering my grief, that I burst out in prayerful
expostulation betwixt God and me, and said.

4 Lord mine afflictions are so many and great, Lord, make me to know mine end,
and the measure of my days, what it is: that I may know how frail I am.
as that they make me weary of my life; comfort me so far as to inform me how
near I am to mine end, and how few my miserable days shall be. Let me know
this of thee, that so I may hope of deliverance at least by mortality.

5 Sure I am my life is not long, Behold, thou have made my days as an
hand-bredth, and mine age is as nothing before thee: verily every man at his
best state is altogether vanity. Selah.
and at longest it is but short compared with thine eternal, being its as
nothing, and what is man's life considered in it self? Even when it is at best,
its very vanity, void of true satisfaction? Would men would consider it.

Surely every man walks in a vain show: surely they are disquieted in vain:
he heapeth up riches, and knows not who shall gather them.
6 Surely every man has here but an imaginary happiness, certainly they cark
and care to be that which this life can never make them, laboring in vain to
be happy in it. What a deal of pains does a man take to be rich, yea richer
and richer, and can never live, to use all he has, nor knows not how soon he
shall depart with it, nor how it will be spent, nor into whose hands it will
come when he is gone: witness the state I had, and was in erewhile, whereof,
how soon and unexpectedly am I deprived?

And now, Lord, what wait I for? my hope is in thee.
7 And now, Lord, seeing every thing is thus empty and unprofitable, why should
I trust in or desire to be happy by any thing short of thee? no, I do not. Thy
favor and grace is that I prize and hope in most of all; I wait for, and
desire it above all earthly felicity, the restorement of it is more to me than
my Kingdom, and happier shall I be in it.

Deliver me from all my transgressions, make me not the reproach of the foolish.
8 Grant me (for my happiness) the pardon of my sins, that have brought me into
this misery, and let not my wicked enemies prevail against me to destroy me,
and insult over me, and God in me.

I was dumb, I opened not my mouth; because thou did it.
9 Though I endured very much, yet I bare it patiently without fretfulness,
because I know in justice I had deserved it, and thou inflictedst it.

Remove thy stroke away from me: I am consumed by the blow of thine hand.
10 Good Lord, be entreated to pity me, and to ease me of my grief, for I am
almost utterly perished by thine afflicting hand, and heavy judgment for my
sin.

When thou with rebukes do correct man for iniquity, thou make his beauty
to consume away like a moth; surely every man is vanity. Selah.
11 When thou punishes and corrects man for iniquity, thou changest him
quite from what he was, both in condition and constitution, his honor thou
layest in the dust, and himself thou make little less, every way defacest
him, and make him comparatively to what he was, as a beautiful garment when
its moth-eaten and consumed, thus am I, yea, surely every man even the whole
kind of him in thine hands is as nothing. To thy glory, and man's abasing and
humbling be it spoken.

12 O Lord, Hear my prayer, O Lord, and give ear unto my cry, hold not thy
peace at my tears: for I am a stranger with thee, and a sojourner, as all my
fathers were.
hear the prayer I put up unto thee, and the cries I pour forth in mine
extremity; let my tears be effectual and prevalent in mine own behalf, and
against mine enemies, for my help is wholly in thee, and must be from thee, in
the faith of whose truth and goodness I subsist in my travel through this
world* as did my godly forefathers, who were heirs of promise, and lived by
faith, being though in the world, yet not of it, but belonged to thee, and so
do I, who therefore suffer therein as they did.

13 O take me not away in thy displeasure, O spare me that I may recover
strength, before I go hence, and be no more.
but in mercy revive and restore me to a comfortable feeling of thy favor
again, in the sensible pardon of my sin, remission of my punishment, and
re-establishment in mine estate, that so I may end this my short and transitory
life, when I do end it, which is not long to, in thy grace, both to mine own
sense, and the worlds sight when I bid it adeiu.

The xl. PSALM.
David being in trouble (probably under Absaloms rebellion) reckons up his
former experiences of Gods goodness, and his great deliverances, first from
Saul, and then from after evils, pronouncing a blessing upon himself, and
others that trust firmly in the Lord, extolling his wonderful mercies to
such. And shows what manner of praise he has wont to offer to God for them,
not ceremonial but real, and thus winds in upon God by recounting his favors
to him, and his service back again to God, both in praising and publishing his
goodness and truth, And then after a self-judging preamble, comes upon him with
new requests for instant deliverance both from sin and punishment, and for
confusion of his enemies, and lastly chears up himself and all his faithful
well-willers and partakers with a hopeful prayer, notwithstanding his present
condition.

Psalm xl. To the chief musician A Psalm of David.
To him that is the first and principal of all the Quire, do I David that made
this Psalm recommend it, for the care and ordering of it to be sung.

I waited patiently for the Lord, and he inclined unto me, and heard my cry.
1 I have endured much, and long, but having a promise I staid my self upon it,
and have patiently undergone all his providence in a faithful expectation of
the Lord, in truth and goodness to fulfill it at last, which he has done, and
has most graciously vouchsafed me audience, and deliverance.

He brought me up also out of an horrible pit, out of the mirie clay, and set
my feet upon a rock, and established my goings.
2 I was low sunk in fear and danger even of utter ruin, whence he has
marvellously delivered me; out of a very miserable condition has he brought
me, that no power but his could ever have freed me from, but he has done it,
and not only delivered me from an ill estate, but estated me in a good and
safe one, and confirmed it to me spite of all those mine enemies and opposers,
and all they could do to the contrary.

And he has put a new song in my mouth, even praise unto our God: many shall
see it and fear, and shall trust in the Lord.
3 And has given me further occasion of thanksgiving and praises by new and
fresh mercies, even to the full accomplishment of his promise and my happiness,
his wonderful power and goodness to meward shall amaze many that never thought
to see it, and affect them both with fear of, and faith in the Lord, that
brings great things to pass.

4 That man is a blessed man, Blessed is that man that makes the Lord his
trust: and respects not the proud, nor such as turn aside to lies.
and shall be a successful man, that steadfastly relies upon the Lord alone,
and regards not the threatenings of the proud presumptuous boaster, nor the
brags of such as put their confidence in sinful practices and self-refuges, to
dissettle his faith, or follow their example.

5 Manifold, Many, O Lord my God, are thy wonderful works which thou have
done, and thy thoughts which are to usward, they cannot be reckoned up in
order unto thee: If I would declare and speak of them, they are more than can
be numbered.
O most powerful and gracious Lord God, are the wonderful providence,
protections, and deliverances, which thou have done and wrought for thy
children and servants from time to time; and the thoughts of mercy and goodness
which thou have had toward us, and showed upon us that have believed in thee,
they are so many, that we cannot count them nor orderly declare them, should I
go about particularly to praise thee for them, or to tell the world of them, my
memory would, yea, could not but deceive me, they are so numberless.

6 Sacrifices and offerings though they be by the appointment of thy Law,
Sacrifice and offering thou did not desire, mine ears have thou opened:
burnt-offering, and sin-offering have thou not required.
yet as they are commonly used, or rather abused by formal and outward
devotion* thou carest not for them, it is the kernel, and not the shell,
comparatively, that thou regardest, to wit, a bored pliable ear, and yielding
heart, to do thy will in faith and obedience, which (blessed be thy name) thou
have bestowed upon me (whom herein thou have made a type of thy son and
servant Christ, the only acceptable sacrifice and substance of all shadows)
and which I know thou valuest in me, above never so many burnt and
sinne-offerings, wherein others for most part put their religion.

Then said I, Lo, I come: in the volume of the book it is written of me.
7 For by thy bestowing on me this spiritual ear, and regenerate heart, I am
made apt and ready to offer and consecrate my self in all filial alacrity, a
sacrifice to thy service, as it is written and prophesied of me, in resemblance
of Christ, of whose son-like love and perfect obedience the whole Scripture
foretells.

I delight to do thy will, O my God: yea, thy law is within my heart.
8 I do (as he much more shall) delight to please and obey thee in all things, O
my God and his, thy holy and righteous law is not to me as it is to the world,
untoothsome and harsh, but pleasing and connatural, as it shall be to Christ.

I have preached righteousness in the great congregation: so, I have not
refrained my lips, O Lord, thou know.
9 And what I have learned and known to be thy righteous will, as a Prophet and
faithful servant of the Lord, I have, (as Christ shall) taken occasion to
declare and teach it to thy people in the most solemn feasts, and greatest
concourse, as might make most for thy glory, and their edifying. I have not
ceased to do my duty to thee and them, but have informed and instructed them; O
Lord, I know thou know this, and take notice of my poor weak but sincere
service herein.

I have not hid thy righteousness within my heart, I have declared thy
faithfulness and thy salvation: I have not concealed thy loving kindness, and
thy truth, from the great congregation.
10 I have kept back nothing which I knew, and whereof I ought to have informed
them, touching thee and thy good grace, but both by mine example in praising
thee, and also by doctrine have I declared to them the faithfulness that is in
thee, and that thou have and ever wilt show to them that believe in thy
promises, for grace and salvation. I have not smothered mine own experimented
knowledge of thy merciful loving kindness to such, and thy truth, in fulfilling
what thou have promised them, but have taken the best opportunity to make it
known, most to thy praise and thy peoples edification.

11 And as I have done so I will do still, Withhold not thou thy tender mercies
from me, O Lord: let thy loving kindness, and thy truth continually preserve me.
as thou give me occasion, therefore be as gracious and merciful as thou have
been, let me find thy love and faithfulness ever at hand to preserve me.

12 For I am now in as great need as ever I was, For innumerable evils have
compassed me about, mine iniquities have taken hold upon me, so that I am not
able to look up: they are more than the hairs of mine head, therefore mine
heart fails me.
being surrounded with manifold miseries and great dangers, deserved
punishments for mine iniquities, which have arrested me and keep me prisoner,
under the burden of thy heavy displeasure, which makes me of a dejected heart
and countenance, ashamed, and afeard to make mine addresses to a God so
displeased with a sinner so exceeding sinful as I am, doubting my success and
thy favor.

13 Nor yet can I be silent, Be pleased, O Lord, to deliver me: O Lord, make
have to help me.
my dangers on the other hand press so soar upon me, therefore of thine own
good grace, O Lord, deliver me from the burden of my sin and misery. O Lord,
consider my great straits, and delay not to relieve me, for thou art gracious
and pitiful.

14 Let the shame and confusion which mine enemies would bring upon me, Let
them be ashamed and confounded together, that seek after my soul to destroy it:
let them be driven backward, and put to shame that wish me evil.
fall upon themselves, let them as they sin together, so perish together, that
seek my life, let them be defeated of their expectation and desire, and come to
a shameful end themselves, that seek mine undoing.

15 Let them be utterly ruinated, Let them be desolate for a reward of their
shame, that say unto me, Aha, Aha.
and made desolate for a just reward and punishment of their shameful and
sinful behavior toward me, that rejoice unjustly and undeservedly at my
misery.

16 But contrariwise, Let all those that seek thee, rejoice and be glad in
thee, let such as love thy salvation, say continually, the Lord be magnified.
let all those that love me for Christ's sake whose type I am, and that trust in
thee, and religiously pray unto thee in their own and my behalf, let both me
and they have cause of joy and gladness in thy mercy toward us, let such as
love thy saving grace to trust in it and be happy by it, ever have cause to
speak and sing the praises of thee and it.

But I am poor and needy, yet the Lord thinks upon me; thou art my help and
my deliverer, make no tarrying, O my God.
17 But as yet its otherwise with me, I am poor and desolate, distressed both
without and within, yet I know I am not forgotten, nor forsaken of God, but
that he is mindful of me at the worst, and purposes to do me good at the last;
My faith makes him all in all to me, mine only helper and deliverer, and my
condition presses hard upon him to be so out of hand, which is very desperate,
and therefore I beseech thee that art the God of all my faith and hope, delay
not to deliver me speedily, least I perish utterly.

The xli. PSALM.
Though this Psalm by the propriety of its language, is applicable in time of
sickness, yet the Scripture no where in the historical part of it, mentioning
any such bodily distemperature as the Psalmist here insists on, it is conceived
by interpretors (and yet Psalms the sixth and thirty eight import otherwise)
rather to be spoken allegoricallie by David than reallie, in allusion to his
condition under Absaloms rebellion, whereby being brought low and in a
desperate state, he was sorelie censured by his enemies, and shamefully
deserted by reason of his affliction, which he here reproves, commending the
contrary virtue of charity and pity, which he knows is in God though it
fail in men, and accordingly makes his prayer to find it from him, his enemies
and false friends so deceiving, and traducinglie judgeing him, which he prays
he may live to punish, and hopes he shall, upon probable signs of favor from
God, for which he blesses him, and for the assured confidence he has that God
will be as good as his word to his Israel, and to him in Isreal's behalf. Psalm
xl. To the chief musician, A Psalm of David.


To him that is the first and principal of all the Quire, do I David that made
this Psalm recommend it, for the care and ordering of it to be sung.

BLessed is he that considers the poor; the Lord will deliver him in time of
trouble.
1 HOw rash are most men's judgments of men in affliction, and thereupon how apt
are they to abandon them. But blessed is and shall be the man that judges with
righteous judgment, and not according to appearance, knowing that God is both
gracious and faithful, and though he do cast down, yet he can and will raise up
again the afflicted that repent toward him, and trust in him.

2 Yea, The Lord will preserve him, and keep him alive, and he shall be blessed
upon the earth; and thou will not deliver him into the will of his enemies.
for all his dangers, the Lord will and can preserve and keep him safe, and
according to his faithfulness will again restore him to a happy condition, be
he at present never so miserable, and will not expose him into the hands of his
wicked and malicious enemies, though he seem very near it.

3 When he is at weakest God will put strength into him, The Lord will
strengthen him upon the bed of languishing: thou will make all his bed in his
sickness.
yea, thou, O Lord, what ever men think, and though upon misprisions they
forsake the poor distressed, as if he had some plague sore or infectious
disease, yet will thou be mindful of him, and charitable and helpful to him, in
his helpless condition, and be an all in all to him, when all forsake him.

4 This I verily believed, I said, Lord, be merciful unto me, heal my soul, for
I have sinned against thee.
and therefore I prayed accordingly to God to be merciful to me, and reconciled
with me, and to ease and relieve me of my misery, which by my sin I had brought
upon my self, and justly deserved from the Lord.

5 Mine enemies and they that are hollow-hearted toward me, Mine enemies speak
evil of me: when shall he die and his name perish.
give out hard speeches against me, and revile and curse me because of mine
affliction, conceiving me rejected and reprobated of God, wishing and
prophesying the utter destruction of me, and mine honor.

6 And if under dissembled friendship they come to visit me, And if he come to
see me, he speaks vanity: his heart gathers iniquity to it self, when he
goes abroad, he tells it.
they lie to me, studying how to deceive me with false pretenses, and then
boasts themselves to their treacherous brotherhood, of their base behavior.

All that hate me whisper together against me: against me do they devise my
hurt.
7 All that bear me ill, will plot and conspire my undoing, how they may compass
it.

An evil disease, say they cleaves fast unto him: and now that he lies, he
shall rise up no more.
8 For they count me a castaway, and by reason of my present affliction they
condemn me, as rejected of God, and plagued by him, as with some pestilential
mortal disease, never to recover, or find mercy.

Yea, mine own familiar friend in who^ I trusted, which did eat of my bread,
has lift up his heel against me.
9 Yea, I am deserted by those that in my prosperity were near and dear unto me,
to whom I imparted my counsels, and on whom I conferred many favors, and made
them my companions, even they have reproachfully and malignantly turned against
me, and endeavored my downfall, as Judas shall do Christ's in like manner,
treacherously betraying him, though dipping with him in the dish.

But thou, O Lord, be merciful unto me, and raise me up, that I may requite
them.
10 But these are but men, though friends in pretense, and show themselves
accordingly subject to change. But thou art an unchangeable God, and may be
trusted, and therefore the more I am forsaken of man, the more I repair to thee
to be merciful to me, and befriend me, with deliverance from them, and success
against them, that being restored to my former State and Authority, which they
hope never to see, I may be enabled to punish their disloyalty and ingratitude.

By this I know that thou favourest me: because mine enemy does not triumph
over me.
11 And truly I have good hopes thou will restore me, and that for all my sin
and thy severity, thou bear good will toward me, because in all this while
notwithstanding the great advantage mine enemies have against me, he has not
been able to crush me, but has been hitherto disappointed and put besides his
aim.

12 And as for me, And as for me, thou upholdest me in mine integrity: and
set me before thy face for ever.
how ever thou punishest my sin, yet thou have consideration of mine unjust
suffering at the hands of mine enemies, and favourest mine innocent cause, and
graciously remembrest thy promise of grace and favor to me, and mine, to
fulfill it, by establishing the throne of Israel upon me to many generations,
and upon Christ (who shall be the seed of David) to all eternity.

13 In the faith whereof I dare and do praise thee, Blessed be the Lord God of
Israel, from everlasting, and to everlasting. Amen and Amen.
thy power, goodness, and truth in Isreal's behalf and mine, and pronounce thee
infallible. and unchangeable to thy faithful people, how ever the state of
things seem now to contradict it, what thou have said thou will make good from
first to last, therefore in confidence of thy faithfulness we bless and praise
thee for it, in full assurance it shall be fulfilled to thy glory and our
happiness.

The xlii. PSALM.
David under Saul's persecution, being driven from the sanctuary and public
worship of God, where a^oretime he had been conversant, bewailes his condition,
testifies his ardent desire after it, and his sorrowful apprehensions of his
enemies blasphemous misjudgeing him for his afflictions. But yet he blames
himself with hope of better; promising to worship God as he is able in such a
suffering condition. And though he be greatly overwhelmed with outward sorrows,
yet he inwardly comforts himself in the Lord, and takes encouragement humbly to
expostulate with God concerning himself and his enemies, whose blasphemies go
to his heart. And again rebukes his dejectedness, and quickens his faith. Psalm
xlii. To the chief musician, Maschil, for the sons of Korah.


A Psalm made by David for direction of his soul to trust in the Lord, and
committed to Heman the the chief musician of the family of the Korathites, for
him and them to sing.

1 AS the hunted and heated Heart greedily thirsts As the Heart pants after the
waterbrooks, so pants my soul after thee, O God.
after the waterbrooks to quench and cool him, so is my soul extremely
affected after those refreshing communions, and sweet enjoyments I was wont to
have of thee in thy sanctuary, and public ordinances, from which I am hunted
and driven, and kept per-force by my persecuting enemies.

My soul thirsts for God, for the living God: when shall I come and appear
before God?
2 My heart and affections do keenly earn after God, his worship and ordinances,
and the enlivening communion of him therein, who is the true and everliving (no
idol) God; I cannot but think it extreme long, till I be restored to the
happiness of worshipping him at his sanctuary again.

My tears have been my meat day and night, while they continually say unto me,
where is thy God?
3 I have sustained great and uncessant grief, at the reproachful blasphemy of
mine enemies, who through me deride the Lord himself, and his faithfulness,
wherein I have trusted, and by mine afflictions censure me a castaway and
rejected of God, banished his presence.

When I remember these things, I pour out my soul in me; for I had gone with
the multitude, I went with them to the house of God; with the voice of joy and
praise, with a multitude that kept holy day.
4 When as these considerations offer themselves to my thoughts, I cannot but
lay them sadly to heart, and express my self accordingly by sorrowful
bewailings, for that I am debarred the happiness which once I had to go with,
and accompany my brethren and fellow-Israelites, the people of God, to the
sanctuary of the Lord, to worship and praise him, and rejoice there before him
with peace offerings and feasts of thanksgivings at solemn appointed times.

Why art thou cast down, O my soul, and why art thou disquieted in me? hope
thou in God, for I shall yet praise him for the help of his countenance.
5 But why art thou, O my soul, so dejected at thy present condition, and
disquieted with inward grief, gather up thy self and fasten thy hope and
confidence in Gods goodness and faithfulness, for I verily believe he will find
a time to restore me, and fulfill his promise to me, so that I know how ever it
is with me at present, I shall one day have ample occasion of praise and
thanksgiving for his grace and favor to me.

6 O my God, O my God, my soul is cast down within me: therefore will I
remember thee from the land of Jordan, and of the Hermonites from the hill
Mizar.
toward whom is all my desire, my soul is much troubled at my long exile from
thine ordinances, therefore will I as I am able in this my banishment,
longingly and prayerfully look toward thine holy sanctuary, wheresoever I am
driven and how far soever distant from it, be it in the country beyond Jordan,
whether often times I am forced to fly; or in that, bordering upon mount Hermon,
where I am fain to take refuge in one of the tops thereof, being a little
obscure hill called Mizar, whence I send many a longing look, and thoughtful
desire toward the place of thy worship, where thou art more especially present.

7 Thou have brought an inundation of misery upon me, Deep calls unto deep at
the noise of thy water-spouts: all thy waves and thy billows are gone over me.
troubles come so thick successively one in the neck of another, like waters
falling from the clouds, which rise higher and higher, and implunge me lower
and lower: as a ship in a storm in extremity of weather ready to sink, so am I,
wave upon wave endlesly assailing me, to the continual hazard of my life. Yea,
the waters both above and below the firmament, the windows of heaven are as it
were opened, and give the watchword to the fountains of the deep to be broken
up, as at the deluge, and both of them seem to threaten to overwhelm and devour
me at once, as then they did the world by thine appointment.

8 Yet I am not left without inward support in the midst of mine outward
troubles, Yet the Lord will command his loving kindness in the day time, and in
the night his song shall be with me, and my prayer unto the God of my life.
I am confident I shall see the sun of righteousness shine through the clouds
with healing in his wings, and by the power and grace of God, I doubt not but a
happy day will succeed this uncomfortable night, to the chearing of mine heart,
nor in the interim shall I be destitute of mercy and goodness, but shall ever
and anon by particular providence, before I arrive at my full establishment,
have cause of thanksgiving and praise; and encouragement to offer up my prayers
in faith of him for my preserver at present, and deliverer at last.

I will sing unto God, my rock, why have thou forgotten me? why go I mourning,
because of the oppression of the enemy?
9 I will humbly and faithfully mind him of my condition, and his obligation to
me; and praying, say, thou that by thy promise and my faith art my great and
sole support, how is it then that thou have thus left me, why go I mourning,
and find no relief from under the heavy oppressions and wrongs of mine enemies.

As with a sword in my bones, mine enemies reproach me: while they say daily
unto me, where is thy God?
10 Whose reproachful and scornful blasphemies against thy word, and my faith in
it, taunting me as one deluded by trusting in thee, and rejected by thee, wound
me to the very heart, and torment me exceedingly.

Why art thou cast down, O my soul? and why art thou disquieted within me? hope
thou in God, for I shall yet praise him.
11 Yet such is my faith in thee, notwithstanding the opposition it receives,
and all the heavy burdens that lie upon me, as that I cannot but rebuke my soul
for being dejected at these things, and rouse it up to trust and hope still in
thee, that one day I shall have my mourning turned into rejoicing, and my
prayers into praises, for the good success and gracious favor thou will show
me, in delivering me, as thou have promised, and as I believe.

The xliii. PSALM.
David under Saul's persecution, appeals to God to judge his cause, and pr^y^s
to be delivered according to his gracious promise, that so he may worship him
in Sion, which he promises to do joyfully, and thankfully, and quickens up his
drooping spirit by the hopes thereof. Psalm xliii.


1 JUdge for me, JUdge me, O God, and plead my cause against an ungodly nation;
O deliver me from the deceitful and unjust man.
and in my behalf O righteous God, and maintain my just and honest cause,
against an unjust and wicked people, that set themselves against me, and in me
oppose the Lord himself. O deliver me (thou that art righteous and only
all-sufficient) from them and their cheiftane, that deals deceitfully and
injuriously with me.

2 For thou and thy promise is all the strength I have, For thou art the God of
my strength, why do thou cast me off? why go I mourning because of the
oppression of the enemy.
and that I trust in, why do thou seem then to neglect me, and do thus
expose me to my malignant adversaries? Why go I continually mourning, because
of the intolerable oppressions and injuries of mine enemies.

3 O Lord, O send out thy light and thy truth; let them lead me, let them bring
me unto thy holy hill, and to thy tabernacles.
show forth thy favor and grace, and fulfill thy word of promise to me; Let
them, spite of mine enemies, bring me into that estate thou have promised me,
wherein I may enjoy thy public worship, and frequent thine Ark and Tabernacle
in Sion, for there shall that be the place thereof.

4 Then will I go with a merry heart, Then will I go unto the altar of God,
unto God my exceeding joy: yea, upon the harp will I praise thee, O God, my God.
and carry my peace offerings, and thankfully sacrifice them to God upon his
altar, even to God who shall at that time by reason of his favor and grace, be
unspeakable joy and consolation to me. I am ravished with the very thoughts of
that day, when I shall have such exceeding cause of joy, and praise, which I
will abundantly offer up unto him, and in the skilfullest and chearfullest
manner I can devise, upon the Harp, which of all instruments I can best finger,
will I praise thee, O Almighty, and my most gracious God.

5 And seeing these sorrows shall have an end, Why art thou cast down, O my
soul? and why art thou disquieted within me? hope in God, for I shall yet
praise him, who is the health of my countenance and my God.
and such an end, accompanied with so much happiness: be not dejected at thy
present sufferings, O my soul; but cheer up thy self in faith and hope, for
thou shall praise the Lord (in stead of praying to him) for thy great and his
gracious deliverance.

xliv. PSALM.
The people of Israel being in grievous captivity. The Author of this Psalm
accosts God with his Covenant-mercies shown of old to their forefathers, whose
seed they are, and whose God he also is, and so they are confident will in his
good time approve himself. But in the mean time their extremities are very
great, and his favor quite eclipsed; And yet they are faithful to him, chosing
rather to die, than forsake him: and therefore prays him to pity their case,
and hear their prayers joined with fasting and deep humiliation for help and
succor. Psalm xliv. To the chief musician, for the sons of Korah, Maschil.


A Psalm made for the instruction of the Church in afflictions, showing the use
of them and carriage in them; and committed to Heman the chief musician of the
family of the Korathites, for him and them to sing.

WE have heard with our ears, O God, our fathers have told us, what work thou
did in their days, in the times of old.
1 WE have heard it both by word and writing from thy servants and our
forefathers, O gracious God, the grace and goodness thou shewdst to thy people
Israel then in their times long ago, at their first coming into a Canan.

How thou did drive out the heathen with thy hand, and plantedst them: how
thou did afflict the people, and cast them out.
2 How then thou wroughtest for them, and shewdst forth thy mighty power against
the many heathenish nations, and their great strength; which, notwithstanding
thou did subdue and vanquish in thy peoples behalf, driving out them to make
way for these, whom thou according to promise did plant in their steads by a
mavelous outstretched arm, wherewith thou did oppress the Cananites,
destroying some, and expelling others, from out that land.

3 For it was not their own power and might that possessed them of the promised
land, For they got not the land in possession by their own sword, neither did
their own arm save them: but thy right hand, and thine arm, and the light of
thy countenance, because thou had a favor unto them.
nor was it their own strength that either preserved them from their enemies,
or subdued them, but it was thy power and strength* and thy gracious goodness
and presence with them, that did it for them, because they were the people whom
thou had chosen, and to whom thou had promised thy grace and assistance.

4 Thou Lord, Thou art my King O God, command deliverances for Jacob.
art still the God and King of thy people, whom they serve, and in whom they
trust, remember therefore the Covenant of protection and mercy thou made with
Jacob and his seed, and as thou fulfillest it to him in his own person, so now
make it good also to him in his posterity, by setting them free from their
enemies, as thou did him from his.

5 That so by thy powerful assistance we may now do by our enemies, Through
thee will we push down our enemies: through thy name will we tread them under
that rise up against us.
as our forefathers did by theirs, overthrow and destroy them, and through thy
good grace and faithful promise we hope to speed no worse than they, but that
we shall be able to vanquish and subdue them that do oppose and subjugate us.

6 For it is neither bow nor sword, For I will not trust in my bow, neither
shall my sword save me.
skill nor strength, that we thy people trust in as do the heathens.

7 But in thee, But thou have saved us from our enemies, and have put them to
shame that hated us.
who have all this while hitherto from Abraham till now wrought and fought for
us against our enemies, and given us still the better, and them the worse, that
opposed themselves against us, and sought to destroy us.

8 In thee the Lord, In God we boast all the day long: and praise thy name for
ever. Selah.
for that thou have done, and promised to do, do we boast our selves, and glory
in the faith thereof continually, and in no strength nor power but thine, the
praise of all our prosperity as from aforetime till now, so from hence even for
ever shall it be ascribed by us to thee only. From our hearts we intend it.

But thou have cast off, and put us to shame; and go not forth with our
armies.
9 Thou have been we must and do confess a praiseworthy God to us in former
times; but alas now thou seem to have rejected us, for thou make us go by
the worse, and give the enemy the better of us, to our great reproach and
thine, not prospering our armies, nor giving victory on our side, as thou wast
wont to do.

Thou make us to turn back from the enemy: and they which hate us spoil for
themselves.
10 Thou turnest our faith and courage, wherewith we were wont manfully to
withstand our enemies into fearful and faint-hearted flight, and whereas we
used to vanquish and spoil them that fought against us, now they on the
contrary vanquish us, and prey upon our substance, enriching themselves upon
our ruins.

Thou have given us like sheep appointed for meat: and have scattered us among
the heathen.
11 Thou have wonderfully altered thy course of grace and providence toward us,
for we that once commanded and bare rule, are now sold over to our enemies to
be spoiled and devoured at their pleasure, and thou have driven us out of our
country, where once thou plantedst us, and from the exercise of our religion
there, and made us bondmen to the heathen, who formerly were so to us.

Thou sellest thy people for naught, and do not increase thy wealth by their
price.
12 Of lates days thou have set light by thy people, for whereas thou wast wont
to prize them highly, and to give nations for them, now thou give them away,
and exposest them to all that will spoil them, they not being so much as sold
for bondslaves like unto others, but are made so for naught, in so much as thy
people are less worth to thee than common bondmen are to their masters, who
use not to part with them but for their profit, but so do not thou by us.

13 Thou have brought us from such an height of happiness to such a low estate
of misery and subjection, Thou make us a reproach to our neighbors, a scorn
and a derision to them that are round about us.
that now our neighbour-nations who once admired us, and showed all respectful
behavior to us in our prosperity, do now generally reproach us as an abject
nation.

14 Thou make us that are thine own people, Thou make us a byword among
the heathen: a shaking of the head among the people.
chosen out of all the world to serve and worship thee, and to relate
peculiarly to thee, to be the laughingstock and scornful byword of the
heathen, and because of our calamities to be esteemed an abject people by the
abject Gentiles.

15 The woeful condition we are brought into, My confusion is continually before
me, and the shame of my face has covered me.
under our hateful enemy is sadly remembered, and laid to heart always by us,
and a dejected shamefastnes has utterly possessed us

16 For because of the scorns and blasphemies that through us are cast out
against thee by the revengefull enemy, For the vo^^e of him that reprocheth
and blasphemeth: by reason of the enemy and avenger.
that has longed for this hour wherein he might despite us, and our God.

17 All this woeful misery of bondage and reproach is fallen upon us, All this
is come upon us; yet have we not forgotten thee, neither have we dealt falsely
in thy covenant.
yet in the midst thereof, we forsake thee not, but own thee still for our God,
trusting in thee, and worshipping of thee, nor have we broken covenant by
deserting thee, and choosing other Gods to worship them, as do our enemies that
revile us.

18 We have not peevishly cast off our affection, Our heart is not turned back:
neither have our steps de^lined from thy way.
and duty to thee, neither have we sought our remedy by indirect ways, but
still trust in thee, seek to thee, and walk with thee.

Though thou have sore broken us in the place of dragons, and covered us with
the shadow of death.
19 Though thou have exercised and humbled us under sore and heavy trials, and
have plunged us into a sea of misery, and brought us out of a happy condition
into a most desolate state, uncomfortably scattering us among fierce and cruel
enemies, so that nothing but present destruction seems to hang over our heads
continually.

If we have forgotten the name of our God, or stretched out our hands to a
strange God.
20 If for all this we have forsaken the worshipping, and trusting in thee, or
betaken our selves to other Gods than thee, to pray to, or trust in them for
help.

Shall not God search this out? for he knows the secrets of the heart.
21 To God, who we know to be jealous of his glory, and a searcher of hearts,
we appeal if this be so.

Yea, for thy sake are we killed all the day long: we are counted as sheep for
the slaughter.
22 Yea, if on the contrary for thy truths sake we suffer not continual
martyrdom and persecution.

23 We trust in thee, and pray to thee, but find no relief from thee, Awake,
why sleep thou, O Lord? arise, cast us not off for ever.
O Lord, bethink thy self of our miseries and thine engagements, forbear our
enemies no longer, but show thy self against them, and for us, whom thou have
long exposed to their cruelty, but now give an end to it in mercy.

Wherefore hidest thou thy face? and forgettest our affliction, and our
oppression?
24 Why Lord do thou so long turn thy back upon us in displeasure, and show us
no favor, but seem utterly to have forgotten us, as if we neither were, nor
never had been thy people, and to have no regard at all to our miserable state
and condition.

For our soul is bowed down to the dust; our belly cleaves unto the earth.
25 For we fruitlesly afflict our souls, and mourn in dust and ashes,
prostrating our selves upon the earth before thee in continual prayer and
supplication, but are not heard.

Arise, for our help, and redeem us for thy mercy sake.
26 Be moved at last, O Lord, to pity our extremities, and to hear our prayers,
after so long and great oppression, and misery, show us some mercy; help and
deliver us by thy great power out of our great straits and miserable captivity.

xlv. PSALM.
The Author of this Psalm commends Solomon and his Government and in him
Christ; and after puts the Church (especially that of the Gentiles) in mind of
her happiness in being married to such an husband under the type of Pharaohs
daughter, exhorting to carry her self worthy such high pre^erment, and wooing
her to it by many ensuing benefits.

A Psalm made and set to Shoshannim, The xlv. Psalm. To the chief musician upon
Shoshannim, for the sons of Korah, Maschil: A song of loves.
an instrument of six strings; for instruction to the wife of Solomon, and so
to the Church (especially of the Gentiles) to turn from false Gods, and their
worship, to the embracing of God in Christ. Being a love-song, typically
showing the extraordinary love of Christ to, and delight in his spouse the
Church, by the type of Solomon's love and delight in his wife, in case she
became a proselyte. And committed to the family of the Korathites for them to
sing.

1 MY heart is happily inspired, MY heart is enditing a good matter: I speak of
the things which I have made touching the King: my tongue is the pen of a ready
writer.
and my spirit inkindled to speak of a remarkable piece of Gospel-misterie,
touching Christ and his spouse. I borrow my speech and allusion from King
Solomon and such praise-worthie things as are observable in him: My heart is
full of Divine inspiration to set forth the praises of Christ thereby, and my
tongue is made apt to utter them with a ready dexterity.

2 As God has advanced thee, Thou art fairer than the children of men: grace
is poured into thy lips: therefore God has blessed thee for ever.
O Solomon, with honor to be King over Israel, as Christ shall be over his
Church, so has he beautified thee above the ordinary rank of men, and
adorned thee with excellent Divine wisdom and utterance, worthy thy place of
regiment, like as he will do Christ, the blessed King, and bridegroom of his
Church, with all the excellent inward ornaments of grace and spirit, wherein he
shall exceed all, and of which his excellencies he shall participate to all his
people by his powerful and saving word of grace, which is an infallible
argument of the never failing love, and favor God has to thee, and will ever
bear thee the type, as to Christ the antitype, and the blessings that shall
accompany it.

Gird thy sword upon thy high, O most mighty: with thy glory and thy majesty.
3 Whenever thou preparest for war, prepare for victory, O thou that art
mightily blessed and aided by the Almighty God of heaven, and made the King of
most renown and majesty in all the world, as Christ shall be the most powerful
and victorious Savior of his Church, and mightiest potentate, to whom all
power shall be given both in heaven and earth.

And in thy majesty ride prosperously, because of truth and meekness, and
righteousness: and thy right hand shall teach thee terrible things.
4 And in the majestic power that God has given thee, prosperously proceed to
aw and conquer all thine enemies, not by falsehood, pride, and injustice, as do
other Kings, that move upon earthly principles, but in Gods way by the exercise
of his graces of faithfulness, meekness, and justice, as shall do Christ by his
Kingly office in behalf of his Church, prevailing and conquering by the saving
truth of his word, patient long-suffering, and righteous performing of his
promises: ruling and walking in this manner, thou shall be able to work
wonders, and shall strike terror into thine enemies, and reverence into thy
people, as shall Christ into his.

5 Those that shall oppose thy Sovereign rule and government, Thine arrows are
sharp in the heart of the Kings en^mies; whereby the people fall under thee.
will have but bad success, for thou art as Christ shall be, of power to quell
them, whereby whole nations of the Gentiles shall be subdued to thy subjection
and obedience, as they shall to his.

6 Thy dominion and sovereigntie, Thy throne, O God) is for ever and ever: the
scepter of thy Kingdom is a right scepter.
O Solomon, the type of Christ, the son of God, is not like mere earthly Kings
that perish, but it shall in him, who is God and our Divine mediator be
extended over all, and to all eternity; Thou have right to rule, for God
himself has given thee dominion over Jews and Gentiles, as he has done to
Christ over all the world, a just and righteous government shall thou the type
execute in him the antitype, who is the just and holy God, not subject to the
corruptions of earthly Princes.

7 For he whom thou resemblest, Thou love righteousness, and hate
wickedness: therefore God, thy God, has anointed thee with the oil of
gladness above thy fellows.
perfectly loves and obeys the holy and righteous will of God, and as perfectly
hates both sin and sinners: for which cause, that he may be Gods high officer,
and King over his Church, chosen peculiarly to that place and honor before all
mankind, and Gods own people too, as David was before all Israel, and both he
and thou before the rest of your brethren; therefore is he enabled and enriched
from God, whose son even by nature he is, and whose love most especially he
has, with the spirit of consolation, and all his Divine graces in his humane
nature, even without measure; whereof the adopted sons of God, and
fellow members of Christ, that are partakers with him of the Divine nature, as
he is with them of the humane, do share, but in measure, short of him,
receiving grace for grace from him.

8 All thy royal robes, All thy garments smell of myrrh, and a loes, and
caslia; out of the ivory palaces, whereby they have made thee glad.
O Solomon, are richly and odoriferously perfumed with the most costly
aromatic spices, when as thou show thy self to thy people, from out thy
stately palaces, who at the sight and smell of thee are rejoiced and refreshed,
and reciprocally return their joyful and loyal acclamations to thee again, to
thy great contentment as well as theirs: Like as Christ shall come from heaven
furnished in his humane nature, with all excellent graces and perfections
befitting his high office, to the infinite joy of his people, who enjoy the
sweet and benefit thereof, which they return again unto him in love, honor,
and service, to his good content.

Kings daughters were among thy honorable women; upon thy right hand did stand
the Queen in gold of Ophir.
9 Thou art honored with many wives, and concubines of high birth, even Kings
daughters are in the number of them; but especially, and of most account with
thee is Pharaohs daughter, who is Queen above all the rest, and more gloriously
attired than any. Like as Christ shall have the attendance and company of many
noble and famous congregations, that will profess him, and worship him
externally in his ordinances: But his only and principal spouse is the holy
Catholic Church, consisting principally of the elect Gentiles, whom he shall
cloth like himself in his own righteousness, and adorn her with the Divine
nature, and the graces of his spirit, and prefer her to special favor here,
and glory with him hereafter in heaven.

Hearken (O daughter) and consider, and incline thine ear; forget all thine own
people, and thy fathers house.
10 O daughter of Egypt whom God has made so happy as to bring thee thence,
and to marry thee to King Solomon the type of Christ, be thou also the
resemblance of his spouse the Church, specially of the Gentiles, by hearkening
unto, and embracing the true and saving knowledge of the only true God, and be
converted by it, as she shall be, and turn from the errors wherein thou wast
bred and born, inheriting them by education, and birthright, as do even the
elect of God their sinful and corrupt nature, till they be married to Christ by
a new nature, and forsake all for him.

11 So shall King Solomon far more entirely love thee and delight in thee (thy
beauty being much increased thereby, So shall the King greatly desire thy
beauty: for he is thy Lord, and worship thou him.
and thou made glorious within as well as without) who is thy Lord and husband,
and therefore one whom thou ought to obey and desire to please; Like as
shall the Church be infinitely pleasing to Christ, when she has given herself
to him, and is endowed with his graces, whose Lord and husband he is, and whom
she ought to serve and honor.

12 Nor shall thou lose thereby, And the daughter of Tire shall be there with a
gift, even the rich among the people shall entreat thy favor.
but God will greatly increase thine honor and esteem, far more than being the
daughter of Pharaoah comes to; for so shall thou in conjugal participation gain
the homage and subjection of great and rich nations; the most mighty and
powerful people of all the world shall be brought under, and made glad of thy
favor, through the favor and blessing of God upon thee: Like as it shall be
with the Church which worships Christ in purity and sincerity, she shall be
so blessed by him, as that no enemy shall stand before her, but by the
assistance of the power and grace of Christ her Lord and husband, she shall be
Lady and Mistress of the whole world, sought unto of all nations for the
knowledge of her saving truth, and participation of her graces, with the
renouncing of their false confidences, to share with her in Christ.

The Kings daughter is all glorious within: her clothing is of wrought gold.
13 Thou the daughter of King Pharaoh, art not gloriously attired only at such
times as thou appearest in the worlds eye, as ordinary women are, but art ever
so, even within thy palace, as well as without; (as is the Church, not formally
hypocritical; and to the worlds view only, but really and sincerely, gracious,
adorned by Christ, with his own justifying righteousousness, and sanctifying
graces.)

She shall be brought unto the King in raiment of needle work: the virgins her
companions that follow her shall be brought unto thee.
14 That so thou may delight and please thy Lord and King, when ever thou art
presented to him in raiment worthy thy high lineage, and royal marriage, and art
accompanied to him with a gallant train of damsels fitting thy state, and
dignity: As shall the Catholic Church be by Christ his sanctifying spirit
presented to himself in holiness and righteousness, even all the blessed
company of saints gathered from out the whole world to make up that blessed
society, and only spouse of Christ.

With gladness and re^oycing shall they be brought: they shall enter in^o the
Kings place.
15 Thou with thy troup of damsels shall by Somons command and his servants
ready attendance and obedience be ushered to his royal presence and palace
with infinite rejoycings and acclamations at that meeting and mutual embracing*
As shall the Church and spouse of Christ made up of all the holy saints, and
sanctified ones be brought and presented by their holy calling in the ministry
and by the ministers of the word, unto Christ his grace and favor, and by
Angels into his everlasting glory and presence in heaven, to the infinite joy
of Gods ministers and servants, and with the acclamation of all those
ministering spirits.

16 By forsaking thy fathers house, In stead of thy fathers shall be thy
children, whom thou may make princes in all the earth.
God himself will become a father to thee, and will bless thee, and make thee,
a happy mother of many hopeful children who shall command both Jews and
Gentiles. As shall the Church of Christ by choosing him the second Adam for her
Lord and husband, and forsaking the first, she shall thereby have God for her
father, and shall be blessed with a numerous offspring all the world over, all
which spiritual progeny are a royal Generation, children of the most high, and
put in Kingly office by him to command over all their earthly corruptions.

17 And by so doing thou shall lose no honor, I will make thy name to be
remembered in all Generations: therefore shall the people praise thee for ever
and ever.
but through my blessing upon thee for it, I will make the renown of this
glorious act of thine to be famous, and thou for it from age to age; and thy
memory shall be precious, and thy praises recorded in everlasting remembrance
by the people of the Lord. As shall be the Church and spouse of Christ
successively famous and honored in all Generations for being his, and her
memory happy and blessed from age to age, after Generations of Gods people
honorably memorizing them that went before, with estimation and imitation to
the worlds end.

The xlvi. PSALM.
Jerusalem or the people of Israel being at present in some great strait, or
siedge, by a powerful enemy, and receiving deliverance. The Author of this
Psalm expresses it in a high and hyperbolical strain, thereby to encourage the
faith of Gods people to a strong and extraordinary belief in God for ever,
from their late eminent experience of his power and readiness to help them, his
favor toward them, and presence with them, which ought to establish and
secure them for future.

Psalm xlvi. To the chief musician, for the sons of Korah. A song upon Alamoth.
A Psalm or song made and set to Alamoth, an instrument or tune for the treble,
and committed to the family of the Korathites for them to sing.

1 GOd is to us his people, that depend upon him and trust in him, GOd is our
refuge and strength a very present help in trouble.
both safety from, and power against our enemies, he may be confided in to the
uttermost peril; for when we are nearest danger, he is nearest to deliver.

2 And therefore, should there be never such revolutions in nature, Therefore
will not we fear, though the earth be removed: and though the mountains be
carried into the midst of the sea.
strange and terrible; yet, our faith in God shall keep us steadie; yea, though
the center of the earth should shake and remove from its place, and that by the
violence of tempests, the very mountains should be taken and hurled as a stone
out of a sling from their place of residence far into the sea, yet shall our
faith establish our hearts in God his grace and protection, how much more in
the greatest tumults and commotions of civil affairs.

3 Though storms both at land and sea should at once seem to overwhelm us,
Though the waters thereof roar, and be troubled, though the mountains shake
with the swelling thereof. Selah.
and all the world, and to dissolve the very course of nature it self, the seas
threatening an universal deluge by their tempestuous rising, and fearful
roaring, and should even shake the very mountains with their violent and
impetuous beating upon them, yet, in God shall our hearts hold up their heads.

There is a river, the streams whereof shall make glad the City of God: the
holy place of the tabernacles of the most high.
4 When the sea of troubles and combustions seem to overwhelm all the world
besides, and they be made to drink of most bitter and troubled waters, even
then shall the land of Jewry and especially the City of Jerusalem have peace
and tranquillity, and drink their fill of the fresh and pleasant streams of
Cedron, for that it is Gods peculiar habitation, and therefore has it his
peculiar protection and favor, as shall have his holy and Catholic Church,
typified by his sanctuary there, the only place of resort for all the Israel
of God to worship him in.

5 God in his worship and presence is there above all the world, God is in the
midst of her; she shall not be moved; God shall help her, and that right early.
and therefore she shall be protected, though the world be exposed; she shall
need to fear no danger, for God shall both certainly and seasonably deliver her.

6 The heathen people with great force and fury were enraged against us, The
heathen raged, the Kingdoms were moved; he uttered his voice, the earth melted.
whole Kingdoms and conspiracies of the Gentil-nations were moved at us, to
seek our overthrow: but the Lord Almighty took our parts, and expressing his
wrathful indignation by terrible thunderclaps from heaven against them,
dissipated and discomfited all their earthly power.

7 Whatsoever armies are against us, The Lord of hosts is with u^; the God of
Jacob is our refuge. Selah.
the powerful and great commander, the Lord of hosts is with us, the God of our
father Jacob, that mightily delivered him, is on our side, and in covenant with
us, to do the like for us: Let us therefore be comforted in him.

8 Consider well and thankfully remember the mighty mercies he has shown us in
the powerful overthrows of our great and numerous enemies, Come, behold the
works of the Lord, what desolations he has made in the earth.
how for our sakes he has wonderfully destroyed them more than once, and
nations more than one or two.

He makes wars to cease unto the end of the earth: he breaks the bow, and
cutteth the spear insunder, he burns the chariot in the fire.
9 He has often times settled his people Israel in an universal peace, spite of
all the nations of the world, their opposits; whose forces he has defeated,
and disabled their strength, though great, and as he has done, so his power
and promises are still of force to do for his Church, which he will preserve
maugre her enemies and persecutors that infest her, and will give her peace by
their destruction, and disablement, as he has done for us.

Be still, and know that I am God: I will be exalted among the heathen, I will
be exalted in the earth.
10 Repose your hearts on God with inward content and security by a faithful
expecting and apprehending of him for a God all-sufficient in your behalfs,
one, that for your sakes will destroy the heathen, and will honor his power
and greatness upon the Gentiles round about.

The Lord of hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is our refuge. Selah.
11 Whatsoever armies are against us, the powerful and great commander in chief,
the Lord of Hosts, even of all the numberless number of created beings in
heaven and earth, is with us; the God of Jacob, that mightily delivered him is
on our side, and in covenant with us, to do the like for us in time of danger
and difficulty. Let us therefore be comforted in him.

The xlvii. PSALM.
The Author of this Psalm, which seems to be penned in the time of the glorious
condition of the people of Israel under David and Solomon, in the name of the
Jewish Church and nation, invites all the world to yield obedience to the
Government of Christ typified in theirs then ascendent, and to be partakers of
their happiness, and tells them the danger of refusing, for as Christ must
prevail, so must his Church and people, whose happiness he greatly extols,
because of the love and presence of God with them; for which he stirs them up
mightily to magnify the Lord. And prophesies the enlargement of Christ's
Kingdom over and amongst the Gentiles by the Almighty overruling hand of God,
and the glorious condition of the Evangelical Church under him as of theirs
under David or Solomon, and far beyond it. Psalm xlvii. To the chief musician,
A Psalm for the sons of Korah.


A Psalm committed to Heman the chief musician of the family of the Korathites
for him and them to sing.

1 O That all the world would be advised to share in our happiness, O Clap your
hands (all ye people,) shout unto God with the voice of triumph.
by entertaining that common salvation tendered them in the Messiah, now as it
were ascended into heaven in that pledge of his presence the Ark pitched upon
Sion; and that now they would subject themselves unto him, together with us,
not of constraint, but of a willing mind, with joyful and thankful hearts, as
one day they shall, receiving him for their Lord and King, that he might
triumphantly reign over Jews and Gentiles.

2 For they that refuse voluntary subjection to him, For the Lord most high is
terrible; he is a great King over all the earth.
will have cause to repent it, they will find him (even the Messiah whom they
slighted in his types on earth) to be the most high God reigning not only in
heaven, but on earth also, yea, all the world over, as he will make it appear
by executing terrible vengeance upon such as rebel against him.

3 But for our parts that are his chosen people, He shall subdue the people
under us, and the nations under our feet.
we shall be blessed of the Lord, and how ever the Gentiles do stubbornly refuse
to come in unto us, partake of our privileges, and subject themselves to his
government among us, yet shall they be made subject to us, and to our Kings the
types of Christ, whose spiritual Kingdom shall enlarge it self over all the
world, over-powring by his spirit the most ignorant and rebellious to receive
him, and be subject to him.

For he shall choose our inheritance for us, the excellency of Jacob whom he
loved. Selah.
4 As he has graciously made choice of us for his people, so will he
accordingly give us the utmost he has promised to our forefathers his faithful
servants and their faithful seed, concerning both an earthly and heavenly
inheritance, maugre all enemies temporal or spiritual, and dignifie us the seed
of holy Jacob his beloved with those excellent privileges appropriated by
promise of Temple-worship and royal government, figuring Christ his King and
priestly office; An honor unspeakable.

God is gone up with a shout, The Lord with the sound of a trumpet.
5 How do we see it made good to us, in that the Lords Ark, the sure pledge and
token of his presence with us and favor to us, is at this time to be fixed in
its abiding place upon mount Sion, whether it is triumphantly carried with
joyful acclamations, and sound of trumpet, answerable to the welcome
entertainment of Christ in the hearts of his Gospel-converts and faithful
people in his Church Evangelical on earth, and his glorious entertainment at
his ascension, by saints and Angels in heaven.

Sing praises to God, sing praises; sing praises unto our King, sing praises.
6 O that we could rise up to their pitch of praise and gratitude for this
unestinable mercy, and privilege we enjoy of the gracious presence, and
divine favor of God in Christ to us, and amongst us in its lively types, but
though we cannot but come short of what it merits from us, yet let us lay out
our selves to the utmost of our skill and abilities in praising, magnifying,
and exalting the Lord, both for his own excellencies, and for our interest and
propriety in him and them, as a people ought to do that have such a God for
their King, and gracious benefactor.

7 We above all people have cause to praise him, For God is the King of all the
earth, sing ye praises with understanding.
for though he be King of all the whole earth, yet of us in a differing manner
and eminency, so that though honor be due to him from all creatures, yet more
especially from us, for that none have that knowledge of him, and peculiar
obligation to him that we have; Therefore we are not to praise him, as others
that know him only by acts of creation, and providence, and are subjects at
large: but with a saving Gospel-understanding of him in the Messiah, and
powerfully not formally acting-faith in our hearts, answerably to the praises
of our lips.

8 And though we be now the only peculiar of God, God reigns over the
heathen: God sits upon the throne of his holiness.
and all the world but we are as it were exempted out of grace and favor: Yet,
are the heathen as well as we under his government and power: And the same God
that has been gracious to us can make them also his people, when he pleases:
And doubtless will from heaven his place of holiness remember in truth and
faithfulness the promises made to, and concerning them, for light to shine out
of Sion to them that sit in darkness, which he is able to fulfill, and bring
them in to himself accordingly.

9 Yea, The Princes of the people are gathered together, even the people of the
God of Abraham; for the shields of the earth belong unto God: he is greatly
exalted.
and which he will certainly do in great abundance, even Kings and Kingdoms
that now are heathenish shall embrace the faith of Christ preached amongst them
out of Jerusalem, and be ingrafted into the stock of faithful Abraham our
predecessor, as well as we our selves, whose seed they all are that do, or
shall believe upon the face of the whole earth, and have as good a right to the
God of Abraham as we, whose privilege ought not to be in the flesh but in the
spirit, by, and in which spirit, shall Jews and Gentiles be united; when the
power of God shall be made manifest in Christ, then shall the great as well as
the small belong unto God, and how ever they have refused subjection to him,
and stood in opposition against him, yet they shall take Laws from him, and and
that right willingly; becoming, of enemies, friends: yea, under him,
protectors and defendors of their fellow-brethren, believers in Christ
throughout all the earth: Thus shall God in Christ be universally worshipped,
and his Kingdom enlarged far beyond the bounds of Jewry. The particion shall be
taken down, and his dominion shall be throughout all the world, as David's and
Salomons is over Jews and Gentiles.

The xlviii. PSALM.
This Psalm seems to be made upon some notable deliverance that Jerusalem had,
from some potent army made up of several nations that had besiedged it, but by
a special and immediate hand of God were wonderfully defeated, and sent away,
without effecting any thing against it; whence the penman takes occasion. to
commend the happy estate and condition of that City above all places in the
world, partly for the natural situation, but chiefly for the divine
privileges and protection God had vouchsafed it. And from their present
experience argues unto future confidence of grace and mercy in like sort, like
as in their distress they had been encouraged by calling to mind former acts of
power and grace to them and their forefathers. For which their so wonderful
deliverance, he says God will have praise every where, but acknowledges it
chiefly due from them, and that both of his power, goodness, and faithfulness;
exciting all that partake of that happiness to express their thankfulness
joyfully, and that they may the better do it, he wishes them to survey, as the
glory of Jerusalem, so withal the glorious power and providence of God, that
has preserved it undefaced maugre their enemies, the memory whereof he would
have entailed upon posterity for ever, for the help of the says of Gods Church
and people in all ages, and distresses.

A Psalm to be both sung and played by voices and instruments by the family of
the Korathites, Psalm xlviii. A song, and Psalm for the sons of Korah.
to whom it is committed for that purpose.

1 GOd in his Majesty and Power has manifested himself to be exceeding great
all the world over, GReat is the Lord, and greatly to be praised in the City
of our God, in the mountain of his holiness.
in all places, to all people, by his works of creation and daily providence,
but beyond all these, he is declared unto us, and has declared himself for us
both great and gracious, in most remarkable mercies of transcendent natures, in
the behalf of his own City Jerusalem, chosen for the peculiar place of his
worship and service, where therefore he is to be praised accordingly, for his
more than ordinary favors vouchsafed to that place and people, and chiefly in
mount Sion the glory of Jerusalem, where the Ark resideth, and with it his
special presence, there therefore is he principally to be magnified.

2 A place it is of it self naturally pleasant and sweetly situated,
Beautiful for situation, the joy of the whole earth is mount Sion, on the
sides of the North, the City of the great King.
beautified also with the glorious splendor of the Temple built thereon,
admirable to behold, but more to be admired for the spiritual beauty and glory
that shines forth thence to all the world, holding forth the saving
Gospel Truths of Jesus Christ the promised Messiah in their types and lively
representations, to all that by faith will lay hold of him, and come in unto
him from the four corners of the earth, and from whence shall spring the
doctrine of salvation, which shall be preached all the world over to the joy of
all that shall receive it, specially Northerly, whether by its situation it
partly looks, and is thereby pleasantly refreshed with the cool winds that
blow from thence in that hot country. Every way commendable it is, but in
nothing more than in this; That it is the chosen Metropolis of King David and
Solomon where they specially resided, and swayed the Scepter over Jews and
Gentiles, in representation of Christ rule and dominion in and over his Church
universal.

God is known in her palaces for a refuge.
3 Nor does the strength of this beautiful City Jerusalem consist only in
that of Art and Nature, which yet is very considerable in her above others, but
chiefly in the favor and protection of God himself there specially residing,
by the Ark in the Temple that glorious structure, and in those Kingly types
inhabiting the royal places thereof, to which and to the whole City for their
sakes he has sundry times yielded admirable preservations, and given great
deliverances, as God shall to his Church and people for Christ's sake their King
and Priest

For ^o, the Kings were assembled, they passed by together.
4 Many instances may be given, wherein God has appeared miraculously in the
behalf of this his City and the holy mountain in it, against sundry potent and
combined forces of heathenish Kings, that have endeavored the destruction of
it more times than once, and have pitched before it for that purpose, but have
been disappointed of their aims, and sent away without their errand, having
been able for all their great preparation and joint combinations against it, to
do it no more harm than as if they had been so many wayfaring men that passed
by it.

They saw it, and so they marvelled, they were troubled and hasted away.
5 Nay, though they came with minds full fraught with pride and hatred against
it, yet when they come to be eyewitnesses of the excellencies humane and
divine, that appeared in the City and Temple, their hearts misgave them, and
they were struck into astonishment and admiration of what they saw; God so
awing their hearts, and doing such supernatural execution upon their armies,
that they wished they had never undertaken the enterprise, and thereupon got
them gone as fast as they could, when they saw it was a place defended by the
living God.

6 Though when they came to beseidge it, Fear took hold upon them there, and
pain, as of a woman in travel.
in their thoughts they had as good as taken it, promising themselves
infallible success by the greatness of their power, but when they once set to
work about it, and should have done execution upon it, God appeared against
them, and then their courage quickly failed them, on a sudden their hearts were
dashed, and they discomfited with extreme distraction and unexpected terror.

7 Thou, Thou breakest the ships of Tarshish with an Eastwind.
O God, did by them, even by these mighty armies, as thou do sometimes by
the strong and tall ships at sea, dashest them one against another by the
storms thou raisest, and so splits and scatters them, that a whole Navy is
brought to nothing, and so were they before Jerusalem, by the mighty and
immediate hand against them.

8 God has approved himself of the self-same goodness to us, As we have heard
so have we seen in the City of the Lord of hosts, in the City of our God, God
will establish it for ever. Selah.
as to our forefathers, and of the same faithfulness in performing as in
promising, for what deliverances God wrought in the times of the Patriarks, and
what he promised by the mouths of his Prophets, we in our times are able, as
concerning his wonderful deliverances of Jerusalem and this Nation, to draw a
parallel line, to any that went before, and to write probatum est to what ever
promise God made for the good of his chosen people, for he has marvellously
improved his power in the defense of this place, which is so peculiarly his
above all places in the world, showing himself to have the command of all
earthly powers, and that he only is the Lord of Hosts, having sovereign
Authority over them and their Kings, which has been manifested by the glorious
and mavelous victories he has given this City, against such potent enemies
as have come against it, because it is his after a peculiar sort, and he ours
so too in a differing manner from all the people upon earth: and what he has
done is a sure sign and pledge of his future favor and grace, that he will
still continue to be the same God to it and us, we continuing so to him, as
Christ will be to his Church and people everlastingly. Even so be it.

We have thought of thy loving kindness, O God, in the midst of thy Temple.
9 In our distresses we had the happiness to have thy Temple (O Lord) to go
unto, and in it the Ark of the Covenant and mercy-seat, signs of thy favor to
us, and presence with us, which did much encourage us to seek unto thee, and
there to mind thee, as of those special relations and engagements, so of all
thy former acts of love and kindness, which when we called to mind, exceedingly
upheld our hearts in the midst of our greatest dangers, and gave us argument of
prayer unto thee, and faith in thee for the like grace in the like occasion, to
be shown again and again, as often as thy people and this place stands in need.

According to thy name, O God, so is thy praise unto the ends of the earth: thy
right hand is full of righteousness.
10 According to the greatness of our deliverances which thou have wrought,
whereby the fame of thy grace and power to usward is spread throughout all the
earth, such is the increase of thine honor, and renown, amongst those people
far and near. And whilst others behold thee only in thy power and goodness to
us, and admire thee for it, we have reason to see farther, and to acknowledge
more of thee than so, even thy faithfulness also (according to what thou have
promised) in all these wonderful works of deliverance which thou have wrought
for us, with an outstretched arm of power and strength, for all the world to
take notice of.

11 And though thy works do challenge the honor and praise that is due unto
thee for them, Let mount Sion rejoice, let the daughters of Judah be glad,
because of thy judgments.
from all Nations where the fame of them is spread, yet, chiefly from us that
experiment the good of them, and the goodness of thee to us, that do so great
things for us, and for thy holy mountain, (the figure of thy Church in all
ages) situate amongst us, whereby thou give cause of joy and gladness, not
only to it, but to all thy people round about it, that are so secured and
safeguarded by it, from all their enemies; which, for the preservation of it,
and them, thou have destroyed with such remarkable manifestation of thy
judgments upon them, and favor unto it and us.

12 The better to stir you up to praise, Walk about Sion, and go round about
her: tell the towers thereof.
and rejoicing, and confidence in God, take an exact view, and advisedly
consider the beauty and strength that he has bestowed upon this place (the
type of heaven it self) above all places in the world, how though it has been
so often, and so mightily attempted by enemies, yet how fruitlesly on their
behalf, that have not been able to deface the least beauty, nor to weaken the
least strength belonging to it, but that round about on all sides God has
defended it (as Christ shall his Church every where) that nothing is
diminished, though surrounded with armies of enemies on every side. The walls
and towers (as you may see) are still the same they were.

Mark ye well her bulwarks, consider her palaces; that ye may tell it to the
generation following.
13 Her fortifications not one jot demolished, her beautiful Temple and palaces
no whit impaired. O wonderful deliverance, O infinite grace, consider it again
and again, what God has done to and for his people, and peculiar place of
residence, that you may declare it to your children, and they to theirs, to
strengthen their faith in God, and to gain him the praises of after ages, who
as well, as we, will taste the sweet of these past and present mercies, and
which are a pledge of future favors unto them.

For this God is our God for ever, and ever; he will be our guide even unto
death.
14 For this God whom we worship in Jerusalem, and who has wrought such
deliverances for it, is one and the same, his power and goodness unchangeable
to his own faithful people and servants in one age as well as in another, and
shall be made so to appear even to the end of the world, and though he be
always theirs, yet, then chiefly shall he show himself their God and guide, when
they have most need of him, and are in greatest danger.

xlix. PSALM.
The Psalmist, that what he should say might be more effectual, and take the
better impression with all sorts and conditions of men, good and bad, high and
low, it being matter both of weight and difficulty, he therefore does introduce
it with a serious preamble. Of weight, both for the godly to understand,
thereby to frame themselves to a patient enduring of afflictions from the
wicked in this life, with assured hope of reward and deliverance in the life to
come, when as their enemies shall perish, and also for the great ones of the
world to know, that they may learn not to put their confidence and felicity in
riches, and honor, which are transiunt, and shall perish with themselves, to
the neglect of true happiness. Of difficulty, to be practiced, and submitted
to, both of the one, and the other, the godly being too apt to fear dissidence,
and impatitiency, by reason of their present sufferings, and they that enjoy
the affluence of the world, to abuse it, to their own destruction.

A Psalm committed to Heman, Psalm xlix. To the chief musician, A Psalm for the
sons of Korah.
the chief musician of the family of the Korathites, for him and them to sing.

1 THat which I am about to speak, HEar this, all ye people, give ear all ye
inhabitants of the world.
in this ensuing Psalm, is of that weight and universal concernment, that I
wish it may come to the knowledge of all men, that live upon the face of the
whole earth, now, or hereafter, and so many as it does, I wish them to be
heedfull of it.

2 Let none exempt themselves, Both low and high, rich and poor together.
for every man, let his condition be what it will, good or bad, is concerned,
one as well as another, in what by the spirit of God I shall teach them.

3 It is no vain or needless thing, My mouth shall speak of wisdom; and the
meditation of my heart shall be of understanding.
that I am about to utter, that which I shall speak is that wisdom, which God
himself has taught me, not any thing hatched in mine own brain nor fancy, but
such understanding as God has revealed to that end, therefore shall I from
mine heart declare it to you.

4 I for my part confess my self a learner in such things as I shall teach you
from God, I will incline mine ear to a parable; I will open my dark saying upon
the Harp.
and therefore though I am used as Gods instrument to declare them, yet will I
consider them with the uttermost care and diligence I can, for my self, as I
would have you to do for your selves. And what I shall speak shall be by way of
Psalm, sung to the Harp the better to affect both my self and you with it,
which being of so divine a nature, is not easily understood by men that in
whole or in part are flesh and blood, as we all are, and therefore need to be
the better heeded.

Wherefore should I fear in the days of evil, when the iniquity of mine heels
shall compass me about?
5 Why should I (or any child of God) distrustfully lay to heart mine
afflictions by wicked worldly men, yea, though God himself set them on work to
punish me, and deservedly too for my sinful ways, and that in such a manner
as there seems (to speak humanely) no way to escape the danger, but to perish
under it.

They that trust in their wealth, and boast themselves in the multitude of
their riches.
6 For what are they that I am afraid of, but vain and foolish men, that trust
not in God, but in deceiveable riches, which is all they have to glory in,
knowing no other happiness.

None of them can by any means redeem his brother, nor give to God a ransom for
him.
7 Which yet stands them in no stead, as to free them from death temporal, or
to the obtaining life eternal, as to these they have no privilege above those
they count, and make, miserable here; for as wealthy as they are, they have
their time set them by God, which they cannot lengthen a moment, neither their
own life nor their friends or kinsmans, but when their hour comes, one must die
as well as the other, how vain then is their confidence in riches.

For the redemption of their soul is precious, and it cease for ever.)
8 For however money may buy other things, yet life (the principal of man's
happiness) neither temporal nor eternal will be purchased by it, its too
precious a commodity to be bought with such trash, another gets ransom is the
price of that, and therefore for all their great wealth, they may be short
lived, and then where is all their happiness; they, and it, cease for ever.

That he should still live for ever, and not see corruption.
9 Neither his own life, nor any ones else that he has a mind should live, can
he with all his wealth make to do so, if that were so, they would be sure to
live always and never die, for they know no happiness, but what this world
affords, on the the other side the grave, they look for no good.

10 And though this be so, For he sees that wise men die, likewise the fool
and the brutish person perish.
that they cannot have an everlasting happiness by the transitory and fading
wealth of this world, but that they must part from it, and leave it behind
them, which they see by daily experience in others of their rank, that death
makes no difference of rich and worldly wise men, from those that they count
fools and brutish, and for all their wisdom in getting and fore-casting, they
are not only so unhappy as to leave their estates behind them, but when they
are dead, often times they have it, that they never meant it to.

11 Yet for all they see, Their inward thought is that their houses shall
continue for ever, and their dwelling places to all generations; they call
their lands after their own names.
and cannot but know this, they are far from reflecting upon themselves, and
seeing their error, but notwithstanding it, their thoughts and minds are
wholly still taken up how to greaten and perpetuate themselves, and their
families, as if it were so that they should never die, nor part from that they
have, and dream of an earthly immortality and felicity and none other, being
ignorant of heavens.

12 But let them think what they will of this their earthly happiness,
Nevertheless man being in honor, abides not: he is like the beasts that
perish.
and price it never so highly, and hope to enjoy it everlastingly, yet they
shall find themselves mistaken miserably; they and their contentments will not
last long, much less always, be they never so highly promoted they shall stoop
to death, and then for all their honor and happiness here, what difference
between them and the very brute beasts, whose happiness was here also? for as
the one so the other by death bids farewell to felicity, which only this life
afforded them.

13 However these men applaud themselves in their worldly wisdom and happiness,
This their way is their folly; yet their posterity approve their sayings. Selah.
and esteem other men fools that value not the things of this life at the rate
they do, yet this their wisdom is but foolishness, and their confidence their
deceit, and their end proves it, whereby all happiness ends with them, but as
nothing is more apparent, so nor less believed, for their posterity tread in
the same steps, approve of their fathers errors, and think that folly that
deceived them, to be the only wisdom, and so are in like sort deceived
themselves. And so let them be.

Like sheep they are laid in the grave, death shall fe^d on them; and the
upright shall have dominion over them in the morning, and their beauty shall
consume in the grave, from their dwelling.
14 Though here on earth by their pomp and plentiful way of living, they were
distinguished from other men of inferior rank, yet the grave will make no
difference, but as sheep are put into a fold, so shall the grave receive them,
like as it does other men, and the worms there consume them; and those that
here they set so light by and trampled upon, the godly and faithful ones,
after the long night of the grave is over, and that Christ in his second coming
shall appear, and they with him in glory and immortality, then shall these
despised righteous ones be their judges, and shall approve that to be the only
true wisdom* which in them, they counted here to be but foolishness. Thus shall
all the honor and contentment they had here on earth, end in the grave in
corruption and rottenness, and they never like to see good days again.

But God will redeem my soul from the power of the grave; for he shall receive
me. Selah.
15 But how ever my case and the case of the children of God may here seem
miserable, Lazarus like, whilst they lie under the contempt and oppression of
the Dives-es of this world, yet are we sure of everlasting salvation (which
they shall not partake of) for God in faithfulness and mercy will raise us up
from death to life, and though our bodies have suffered in this world, our
souls shall be saved in the next, for as we belong to the election of his
grace, so he will be sure to receive us into glory, of this we may be confident.

16 And as I said before, Be not thou afraid when one is made rich, when the
glory of his house is increased.
what need I, or any other child of God then fear, what man can do unto us;
Though we see power put into worldly men's hands that fear not God, though
wealth and honor increase upon them.

17 Let not this dismay us, For when he dies he shall carry nothing away: his
glory shall not descend after him.
nor make us envy them, but consider such a man's end, when death comes, and die
he must; then and there he shall be poor enough and low enough, neither his
honor nor riches shall profit him, or disprofit thee in the grave, then is thy
turn to be happy, and his to be miserable.

18 Though while he lived here in the midst of sensualities, Though whilst he
lived he blessed his soul: and m^n will praise thee, when thou do well to thy
self.
and had what the world could afford to give him content, and make him happy,
he flattered himself with omne been, never once thinking of a change, but lived
as if he should never die, and thought himself by reason of his worldly
affluence, as much and more in favor with God, then Gods own children, that
wanted what he had, and surely so think others too, the world generally
believes those men only to be happy, and in a good condition, that have the
world at will, and pampers themselves with that they have, these are they that
are had in reputation, for the only wise and happy men.

19 But alas, He shall go to the generation of his fathers, they shall never
see light.
how are they deceived, both the one and the other, for he must die as his
forefathers did in their times and turns, his happiness here will have an end
as theirs had, and then begins his misery, as theirs did, which will have no
end, the lamp of this life shall extinguish in utter darkness.

Man that is in honor and understands not, is like the beasts that perish.
20 The sum and substance of all is this. That those men that have honor and
riches, if withal they have not the knowledge and fear of God, they live like
brute beasts, whose God is their belly, and shall die like them too, for they
and their happiness shall perish together.

The l. PSALM.
God by the Psalmist declares that as all the world lies in sin, so he will
judge them for it, and yet can and will save his faithful and elect people,
when he condemns the rest, which he will proc^^^ against in judgment, though
they never partaked of that divine light which sh^^^ only amongst his people
Israel, who therefore he more especially taxes and reproves, not only for a
sinful but an ungrateful and a despising people, that having those excellent
privileges of his worship and presence amongst them, so shamefully play the
hypocrites with him, pretending holiness in outward ceremonial worship and
performances, but never heed how faith and grace acts in their services, nay
many of them are not only formal, but even profane hypocrites, that dare to
live in sin, even gross sins, and yet be frequent in duties, thus mocking God
to his face, and yet think he likes well enough of that they do, because they
smart not for it, but God tells them, they shall taste the bitter fruit of their
ways if they repent not. And for them that spiritually and uprightly worship
him amongst them; as they honor him, so he will reward them to their hearts
content.

Psalm l. A Psalm of Asaph.
A Psalm made by Asaph.

THe mighty God, even the Lord has spoken, and called the earth from the
rising of the sun, unto the going down thereof.
THe only true and Almighty God, the Lord of all the earth, having noted the^
Idolatrous miscarriages, and false worships, that are every where practiced,
summons all men in all the world to take notice.

Out of Sion the perfection of beauty, God has shined.
2 That though the whole world be in sinful darkness, and ignorance of the true
God, and the right way of serving him. Yet there is a corner of the earth that
God has vouchsafed to shine out of, as the sun when it arises in the East, and
spreads its light by degrees over the face of the whole heavens, a place and
people that he has chosen to reveal himself in and amongst, it is his people
Israel in the land of Canaan, principally in the City Jerusalem, but most
especially upon mout Sion, there shall you find and see in a breife map of
lively types and representations God manifested not only in his majesty, but
in his true and saving way of worship, grace and truth shining there, and from
thence shall take its rise to overspread the whole world.

3 This God that is so peculiarly ours, Our God shall come, and shall not keep
silence: a fire shall devour before him, and it shall be very tempestuous round
about him.
and at present seems comparatively to be professor of no part of the earth,
but this that his people dwell in, nor to have no dominion over any else, for
none serve him but they. This God of ours shall one day make it appear that he
is Lord of all the world, when he shall come to judge it, which he will do,
though now he forbear, and suffer it to lie in ignorance and Idolatry, but he
will appear in terror, and great glory to the astonishing and confounding of
all men all the world over, that believe not in him, nor worship him aright.

4 None shall escape his judgment, He shall call to the heavens from above,
and to the earth, that he may judge his people.
the heavens and the earth which he made, he shall command to render up all
mankind, alive, or dead and dissolved into their elements or first principles,
as subject to him to be judged by him, from the four corners of the world.

5 Then shall it appear that but some of all the world are Gods peculiar
sanctified ones, Gather my saints together unto me; those that have made a
covenant with me by sacrifice.
a people sprinkled with the blood of the covenant, keeping faith and a good
conscience, which the Angels by special appointment shall gather together from
out the rest of the world, and set them on Gods right hand in heaven, as now
his Israel, his only covenanting and sacrificing people, severed from all the
world besides, are by a powerful hand settled in Canaan.

And the heavens shall declare his righteousness; for God is judge himself.
Selah.
6 His righteous justice shall be made manifest over all the earth in condemning
the wicked, be they never so many, and saving those that are godly from amongst
them, be they never so few, for the righteous and omnipotent God that is Lord
over all, and has all power both in heaven and earth, who is of wisdom to
judge aright of all men, and of power to execute his judgment, shall himself
pass sentance infallibly from heaven upon them. Even so be it.

Hear O my people, and I will speak^; O Israel, and I will testify against
thee: I am God, even thy God.
7 What have been said of my peculiar favor to you above all the world besides,
is true, how that I have chosen you out of the whole earth, placed you in the
promised land, vouchsafed you my special presence in my special place of
worship, entered covenant with you to be your God, and you likewise with me to
be my people, mine Israel, to tread in the steps of your faithful forefathers;
and therefore, though I have a quarrel with all the world for their sinful
evil ways, for which I will one day judge them as I have said, yet you that are
my people, even because you are so; I would have you know, and therefore do I
passionately press it upon you, that your sins in your ignorance of me and
abuse of my name and worship in an outward pretense of holiness without faith
and affection, are my greatest trouble, and which I cannot but with grief
complain of as a great unkindness against me the God of all the world; but more
especially your God above and beyond all the world besides, and therefore
exspect to be served in sincerity, and not in hypocritical shows and
formalities by you.

8 It is not your sacrifices that I so much care for, I will not reprove thee
for thy sacrifices, or thy burnt-offerings, to have been continually before me.
nor do I complain the want of them, I have had enough and too many of such
ceremonies from you, that I even surfeit again of them.

9 Those are things which thou valuest, I will take no Bullock out of thy
house, nor He-Goats out of thy folds.
thy Bullocks and thy Goats, they are thy livelihood and sustenance, which
makes thee set by such kind of service, but they are not of that value to me,
nor of that use, it is not they that give me content, I had rather be without
them, than have them after that carnal and formal manner you offer them; you
think you do me a pleasure by being at such charges, and that you feast me as
you do your selves with the sacrifices you offer me; whereas did I need such
things, I would not be beholden to your stalls or folds for them.

10 I would go where there is better choice, For every beast of the forest is
mine, and the cattle upon a thousand hills.
and more variety, and take either what I wanted, or what I pleased, all the
world over, for they are all mine, the whole store that the whole earth is
furnished with, and where you can plead no propriety.

11 Yea, I know all the fowls of the mountains: and the wild beasts of the
field are mine.
I can command also the fowls that fly in the air, or that breed in the
mountains, out of your reach, and those beasts that naturally are wild and
untameable, and never will be at your command, they are all mine.

12 So that if I were an hungry, If I be hungry, I would not tell thee, for the
world is mine, and the fullness thereof.
and had an appetite to eat and feed upon the creature, as thou do, as by
your manner of service you seem to fancy me to be, I need not take the meat out
of thy mouth by appointing you sacrifices to any such end, who am the God of
all the world, and can serve my self as I please upon the creature which I have
replenished the whole earth withal.

Will I eat the flesh of Bulls, or drink the blood of goats.
13 Can you have such low and base thoughts of me, as to think me to have
appointed the sacrifices I command you for any such carnal and sensual
respects, that am a spirit, and look to be worshipped in spirit, or are you so
void of reason and understanding, as to offer them to me upon such humane and
gross principles, as if the killing of cattle and shedding their blood, never
discerning the Lords body, were the thing I coveted, were served by, and took
pleasure in, no, I hate such services, and have no pleasure in such sacrifices,
it is not for want of such that I reprove thee, I have had enough and too many of
them.

Offer unto God thanksgiving, and pay thy vows unto the most high.
14 If you will serve me aright, and sacrifice, to give me content, then offer
other manner of sacrifices than these, or these sacrifices after another
manner; I that am a spirit look for the service of your faith and affections,
let the ceremonies and sacrifices you perform be significant, not shells
without kernels, when you pretend to thank me in peace offerings etc. Bring
your hearts with you, let your faith and affections be offered up unto me
through the propitiatory mediator in whom only they are accepted, in an
humble gratulatory way, for the good you acknowledge. Remember its God you have
to do with, who looks for the service of the inward as well as the outward man,
have thy mind on high in the heavens where I am, when thou worships me here
below, and therefore be sure with the spirit thou pour forth praise and thanks
unto me for the goodness and benefits thou acknowledgest to have received from
me, when as thou offerest sacrifice.

15 Its prayer and praise offered up in faith to me, And call upon me in the
day of trouble; I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me.
because of my grace and faithfulness to you, that I set by, its that shall
prevail with me, not your empty ceremonies, and sapless sacrifices. If you be
in trouble at any time, let me then hear from you in that way, and you shall be
sure of a gracious answer from me, because then and never till then, I know I
shall be sure to have a faithful return made me of praise, glory, and thanks,
for the goodness I show unto you.

16 These are the men and this is that manner of service that God accepts of,
But unto the wicked God says, what have thou to do to declare my statures, or
that thou should take my covenant in thy mouth.
but to the carnal hypocrit, or mere formal professor, that is so busy in
external performances of legal rites commanded by God, he would have such an
one know, that he had rather have his room than his company, for all he does is
but in abuse of God and his worship, making show of serving him and keeping
covenant with him, but without any truth or sincerity of heart, whereby he
adulterates Gods own ordinances, and makes them utterly unpleasing to him,
though appointed by him, but never intended they should be practiced or
preached by such men in such a manner.

17 To bolster them up in their impieties, Seeing thou hate instruction, and
castest my words behind thee.
taking liberty to sin because they conform to outward ceremonial ordinances:
God would have such know, that they neither glorify him nor profit themselves,
that are careful in outward duties, and acts of Religion, and careless of
holiness in heart and conversation.

When thou saw a thief, then thou consentedst with him, and have been
partaker with adulterers.
18 Thou, that art so full of seeming sanctity, think thou, that God regards
thy services, if withal thy heart be full of hypocrisy, and thy ways of
unrighteousness, breaking the moral law, whilst thou make conscience of the
ceremonial, giving the reins to thy corrupt heart, and hands to contrive and
act all manner of impieties, as theft, adultery, and joining thy self with such
companions.

Thou give thy mouth to evil, and thy tongue frames deceit.
19 Taking liberty to lie, and deceive, and make even a trade and common
practice of it.

Thou ^i^test and speak against thy brother; thou slanderest thine own
mothers son.
20 Studiously backbiting and traducing others, that mean thee no hurt, nor
never did thee any, but ought to be loved of thee as brethren, and of envy or
emulation slandering those that are near and should be dear unto thee, thine
own very kindred, and allies, laboring their disparagement, and disgrace.

These things have thou done, and I kept silence: thou thoughtest that I was
altogether such an one as thy self; but I will reprove thee, and set them in
order before thine eyes.
21 These things you know have been acted amongst you, even by and amongst you
that yet pretend to be a people in covenant with me, and come and worship
before me, and sacrifice unto me, and because I bear with you in these
hypocritical evil ways of yours, and suffered my self to be thus mocked, and
abused by you, you thought that I approved of you and your doings, but you
shall find that I set not so light by mine honor, as you think for, nor will
not so easily put up with such abuses as you imagine, there will come a time,
that I will make you smart for your base abuse of me, and mine holy ordinances,
and you shall know that I am sensible of your ingratitude, and so shall you be
of my just indignation for these your sins, which I have marked all along; you
shall find so much, how that I Will remember, when you have forgotten them, and
mind you of them to your cost.

22 For think you, Now consider this, ye that forget God, least I tear you in
pieces, and there be none to deliver.
that I will be so severe against the sins of the rest of the world, that in
comparison of you have no knowledge of me, nor have received no favors from
me, and that I will not be much more so toward you; That I cannot pretend
ignorance, but sin against me either out of a stupid supine negligence, and
disrespect of me, or out of a spirit of rebellion; But consider it you had
best, how my name has been profaned amongst you, and persist not to despise
me in this sort, and forget the duty and gratitude that you owe me, who deserve
better from you; least that of all the world you smart most for it, for as your
sins are the greatest being against light, and loving kindness, so without
repentance shall your plagues be the sorest, for as you are without excuse, so
shall you be without mercy; no one, not Moses nor any your forefathers upon
whom you bear your selves, no nor the Messiah himself shall open his mouth for
you, to save or deliver such an hypocritical ill-deserving people.

23 This is generally a national fault amongst you, Who so offers praise,
glorifieth me: and to him that orders his conversation aright, will I show
the salvation of God.
and will at last bring forth national judgments, and common destruction upon
you, but yet as I have known and chosen you (though ill deserving it) to be my
people of all the world, so do I know, and have chosen some from among you,
that bear me better respect than the rest; And such an one who ever he be, let
not him fear to perish with the rest, but be confident who ever he is that
makes conscience to worship me in spirit as well as in form, and when he
sacrifices to me, then with an humble, faithful, and affectionate heart
praises me for my benefits and favors vouchsafed, that's the man that mine eye
is upon, and upon the worship and service he performs to accept it, for he
alone worships me aright, all else is lost labor, and mere mockery: The
spiritual minded man, and the real sincere hearted Israelite, who is as well
conscionable and careful of his life and conversation, to walk uprightly with
God, and honestly with men, as of the rites and formalities of the ceremonial
law, and mine external worship to do them; this is the man, that as he serves
me acceptably, so will I reward him bountifully, he shall see with the eye of
faith, and feel to the rejoicing of his heart, by the inward testimony of Gods
spirit, his gracious acceptance of him, and his services, with the assured hope
of eternal happiness in the Kingdom of heaven, and gracious providence here on
earth, when others shall perish both temporally and eternally.

The li. PSALM.
David having long lain unsensibly under the guilt and power of the sins of
murder and adultery, by Nathan sent from God his conscience being awakened, in
this penitential Psalm, he cries out for pardon and grace, in his woeful
condition under the intolerable torment of his sin, which God he acknowledges
has justly arraigned him for, and brought to light by his own confession
forced from him, and justifies all those fearful judgments denounced, which
after befell him, of ravishment, rebellion, fratricide, and Incest, in his own
house and family. And that Gods people may not stumble at his fall, he
confesses the seeds of all sin to be in him by nature, and that they may not
sin in censuring, advertiseth them, notwithstanding, of his sincerity, is not
out of hope, but falls to prayer for the righteousness of Christ, joy of the
holy Ghost, Sanctification and Justification; iterating his requests of these
kinds, particularly prays, that his bloud-guiltiness may be pardoned, and that
bloodshed threatened may be averted, showing also why he fl^w not upon
sacrifices, as others; because he kn^w it was faith and repentance that God
valued more. And for fear his sins being so public a person might also turn
the indignation of God against his people and ordinances, he prays the
contrary, and that God would perfect his gracious purpose concerning the
building of the Temple, foretelling by way of argument or motive, the
acceptable service that then would be done him.

A Psalm directed to the present Quire for the ordering of it, Psalm li. To the
chief musician, A Psalm of David, when Nathan the Prophet came unto him, after
he had gone in to Bath-sheba.
whereof David is both the Author, and the Argument, publicly declaring his
repentance, and godly sorrow for his adultery with Bath-sheba, and the murder
of her husband Uriah, after that Nathan the Prophet had awakened his conscience
with a message from God.

1 I dare not plead propriety in thee, HAve mercy upon me, O God, ac^ording to
thy loving kindness: according unto the multitude of thy tender mercies blo^
out my transgressions.
nor relation to thee, having deservedly forfeited both, by my many and heinous
transgressions against thee, for which I deserve to have no mercy. But since
thou have spared me all this while that I have lain in sin, and have not cut me
off for my transgression, but graciously sent thy messenger to warn me of it,
and awaken me out of this sleep of death. I am emboldened to make mine
addresses to thee, O God, in humble confession, and supplication, and to beg
pardon of thee for no other reason nor motives, but only thine own free grace
sake, which has been always exceeding great toward me, and so I doubt not to
find it still, so that though my sins be as it were impardonable for their
number and nature, yet mercy and tender-heartedness to a poor penitent wretch
as I am, does every whit as much abound in thee; let me have the experience as
well as the knowledge of this, in the forgiveness of these my sins, and
blotting them out of the book of thy remembrance, though written in black and
bloody characters.

Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin.
2 The filthiness that I have contracted, needs not only legal but spiritual
and evangelicall washings, the guilt that is upon my conscience, and the
trouble of spirit that I am under is not easily removed, the blood and water,
the merit and spirit of the Messiah is it alone that applied by infinite grace
can cure my malady, and render me acceptable again in thy sight, vouchsafe it
me therefore, and that in such a proportion for my justification and
sanctification, as my guilt and pollution stands in need of.

For I acknowledge my transgressions: and my sin is ever before me.
3 For though I have a long time loved, and lived in this grievous sin, which
the Prophet from thee has admonished me of, without sense or sorrow, or once
confessing or deprecating it, yet now the case is altered, I hate it, and my
self for it, and confess it in all its aggravations, and complicate iniquities
as adultery, drunkenness, treachery, murder, rebellion against thee, and what
ever can be justly laid to my charge, I own them, know I am guilty of them, and
confess them all to my shame, both to thee, and in the face of all thy people.
For so incessant, and extreme are the horrors of my conscience, by reason of
these fearful crimes that evermore stare me in the face, that I must and will
cry out against my self, and be incessant in confession, and supplication,
until I be reconciled, and mercy obtained.

4 The injury and wrong I have done to man in this my sin, Against thee, thee
only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy light: that thou might be
justified when thou speak, and be clear when thou judge.
my conscience has dispensed with it, and never budged at it, I so ordered the
matter that neither shame nor blame befell me all this while, though contrary
to my duty of justice and protection, I had my will on Bath-sheba and murdered
Uriah, but so cunningly, that none knew it, nor mine own conscience never
accused me of it, nay it has much pleased me to think how cleanly I have com^
off in this business, and made account I should still have done so, never
considering that thou wast concerned in it, which now I find to my cost and
unspeakable grief, so that though Uriah be dead, and so is not alive to accuse
me, and Bath-sheba I have taken her to wife, and so she is reconciled to me,
and that my rank exempts me from the ordinary process at law, yet am not I
acquit, but now thou, thou, O Lord, have waged law against me in mine own
conscience, made it thy tribunal, and as a thousand witnesses, so that I need
no accusers, mine own confession shall serve the turn to condemn me, though I
am quit at all other bars, and free from all other testimonies, yet do I hold
up my hand at thine, confess the fact and cry guilty before thee, and against
thee, who has taken me to task and art both witness and judge, for thou have
seen all my base miscarriages from first to last, as now I plainly perceive,
and therefore however hitherto, I have concealed my sin, and none accused me,
yet now do I publish this execrable and horrible fact before all Israel, and
confess I have deserved all that thou have denounced against me by thy Prophet
for it, and that thou art just in those thy fearful comminations touching me
and mine house, which run parallel with mine offenses, and so also shall thou
be, when they actually come to pass, and are executed, how formidable and
strange so ever they may then appear unto beholders, and differing to those
promises of grace and favor thou have made to me, and my seed, which
(notwithstanding my sin, and these thy just judgments) thou know how, and
certainly wilt perform in grace, and faithfulness, though I have deservedly
forfeited them.

Behold, I am shapen in iniquity: and in sin did my mother conceive me.
5 And how ever it may seem strange that a man so extraordinarily blessed by
thee and peculiarly favored of thee, should fall so foully, as I have done; for
this, I would have all men know that stumble at it, that its no such marvel
rightly considered, for wherein I differ from others, it is thy grace and not
my goodness that is the cause of it, for the self-same nature and disposition
to sin, yea, to all and any sin, be it never so prodigious, is in me that is in
the worst of men, as I have made it too evident, for I inherit and have growing
in me that bitter root of original pravity that successively is derived from
Adam to all his posterity, which has been fruitful in me all my life long,
the Lord be gracious to me, and pardon, and weaken it in me more and more.

Behold, thou desire truth in the inward parts: and in the hidden part thou
shall make me to know wisdom.
6 Were I no other than nature has formed me, I should neither have acceptance
nor favor from thee, but as bad as I am, and would have thy people know it to
my humbling and their warning, yet withal I would have them know, that grace
and sinful nature is consistent together, so that though they do condemn me
for sin, yet not of insincerity, the root of the matter may be and is in me,
for all this: as thou art gracious to pass by many and great sins, and to own
such a sinner for thy servant if thou see an upright heart, and a sanctified
disposition in him toward thee, so I would have them to be charitable, and to
pass (though a just) yet not a rash and final sentence upon me; for thou both
have, and for all this, out of the abundant riches of thy grace wilt yet
further instruct me in the way of life and salvation, to attain unto it, by
faith in the righteousness of another, though I have none of mine own to trust
in, or to boast of.

7 But what ever men think of me, Purge me with hysope, and I shall be clean;
wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow.
and how ever I stand in their good opinion, yet my hearts desire is to be
received again into thy favor, which I know is possible, notwithstanding my
estate seems desperate. The blood of Christ who shall be sacrificed for
penitent believing sinners, and now is of virtue and use to such in his types,
being by grace through faith sprinkled upon me, and his righteousness afresh
imputed to me, which the Lord grant, is able to render me clean in thy sight,
so all-sufficient and meritorious is the blood of this thy Son and and my
Savior, that if thou will but wash me in it, for all the filthiness I have
contracted, I shall in the sight of God by this supernatural emundation,
exceed the purity of any creature whatsoever in the eyes of man.

Make me to hear joy and gladness: that the bones which thou have broken, may
rejoice.
8 As thou have sent me a sad message of thy heavy displeasure, and threatened me
with sore judgments, and laid my sin terribly home to my conscience, which
has fetched confession and contrition from me; so now Lord, that thou have
humbled and broken my secure and impenitent heart, and cast me into such deep
sorrows, vouchsafe to change the temper of my spirit; and by thine, speak a
reviving effectual word of grace and reconciliation to my soul, assure me of
the pardon of my sin, and mine acceptance into favor, that I may therein
rejoice, notwithstanding the sad things that are like to befall mine outward
man, and that justly.

Hide thy face from my (...); and blot out all mine iniquities.
9 And that thou may do this, Lord interpose the righteousness of Christ
betwixt thine eyes and my sins, look at that and not at them; Let no one of all
my many transgressions remain upon my score unpardoned, for the blood of Christ
is as well able to do away all as any, and till then I shall never be at quiet.

Create in me a clean heart, O God; and renew a right spirit within me.
10 Nor do I desire as hypocrites and unsincere professors do, thy pardoning
without thy purging grace, it is thy justifying grace indeed that I earnestly
sue for, but not without thy sanctifying. My course of sinning has quite put
my soul out of frame, I am as if I never had been regenerated, corruption has
so broken in upon all my faculties, and born down all my graces, that it has
and does, and is like still to bear sway, and grace never to get the better
again, if thy power do not interpose. O therefore, good Lord, begin the work of
sanctification again in me, kindle again those sparks of grace* that he almost
quite smothered, breathe the breath of life into them, that sin and corruption
may take its turn to die; above all, free me from the bondage of lustful
concupiscencce, that has been so predominant, and has precipitated me into so
many hideous sins subservient to it, give me a spirit of holiness for time to
come, specially a pure spirit, and such an one as may be firm for God, and not
drawn aside as mine has been, but able to resist temptations.

11 My sins (as I well deserve they should) have separated betwixt me and my
God, Cast me not away from thy pr^sence; and take not thy holy spirit from me.
the sense of thy love and favor that I was wont to feel in the actings of my
faith and other graces is now extinct, and I am as a banished man from thy
presence, without communion and fellowship, but, Lord, have compassion upon
this my disconsolate condition, smile out upon my spirit in the renewed sense
of thy loving kindness, and be not for ever strange to me, nor take not quite
away the spirit of grace and adoption from me, but in mercy restore me to mine
interest in thee, and relation to thee, and to those active graces that
accompany these.

12 Grant me that which I cannot live without, Restore unto me the joy of thy
salvation: and uphold me with thy free spirit.
though I have deservedly lost it by my sins, yet return it to me graciously,
to wit, the comfortable assurance of my salvation by thy grace, that my heart
may once more taste of those joys and sweet apprehensions which formerly shoon
bright in my soul, but now are miserably eclipsed, and let me not sink deeper
and deeper into sin and sorrow, but by thy spirit of adoption and liberty,
which can only rescue me from the power and bondage of sin, and make me to run
the ways of thy commandments, underprop my decaying comforts and graces.

13 If thou will thus befriend me, Then will I teach transgressors thy ways,
and sinners shall be converted unto thee.
it shall not only engage me personally to thee, but I will so declare thy
grace out of mine own experience, in zeal to the glory of it, that who ever are
burdened with the heavy pressure of their sins as I am, I will instruct them
what way they shall take to come out of that bondage, to be thy freemen and
servants, and will encourage them in it by mine own success, when I am
converted, I will strengthen my brethren, and doubt not but thy grace to me,
and restoration of me into favor, will be a means to convert and save many a
sinner besides my self, that weighs with himself, and finds upon divine record,
what mountainous sins of mine thy mercy has removed out of the way.

Deliver me from bloud-guiltiness, O God, thou God of my salvation: and my
tongue shall sing aloud of thy righteous^
14 The sins I confess are exceeding capital which I have committed, specially
that of murdering Uriah, and the rest that died with him by that design of
mine, for which I deserve capital punishment, even blood for blood, but in
thine infinite mercy pardon this grievous guilt, and bring not the guilt of the
blood of others yet further upon me also, which thou have threatened shall be
shed in punishment of that which I have shed already. In this, O God, thou God
that have promised salvation to thy servant (in which I cannot choose but hope)
hear me, revoke thy sentence, and reverse this judgment, for thy mercy sake;
so will I lift up my voice with joy and thankfulness, and in songs of praise
will extol thy righteousness, thou art as well faithful to pardon, and show
mercy, as just to punish.

O Lord, open thou my lips, and my mouth shall show forth thy praise.
15 O that thou that art the Sovereign Lord of heaven and earth, to whom both
liberty of pardon, and power of punishment does belong, would hear me in
this, and give me thereby occasion, and withal renew my power as thy penman
and Prophet, to celebrate thy praise, and publish the worth of such a mercy in
Psalms and songs.

16 For to promise thee legal sacrifices of Bulls and Goats etc. Especially to
expiate such sins as these are, For thou desire not sacrifice, else would I
give it: thou delightest not in burnt-offering.
were but vain, it is not that will give thee content, else would I give thee
store of them, and think my pardon a cheap purchase, but in this case it is
neither one kind of such sacrifices, nor other that will please thee, or profit
me.

17 That sacrifice which is in stead of all other, The sacrifices of God are a
broken spirit: a broken and contrite heart, O God, thou will not despise.
is, when a poor sinner is grieved at the very soul for his sin against so good
a God, and so himself becomes a moral and spiritual sacrifice burnt and torn
in the spirit of his mind, with the anguish he conceives for his disobedience
and ingratitude, he that with a false-condemning, self-crucifying, and
sin-mortifying heart, humbly and yet believingly makes out for mercy and pardon
in the blood of Christ; this, this is the man, and that's the sacrifice that God
expects, accepts, and makes great account of.

18 Lord however thou be pleased to do by me, Do good in thy good pleasure
unto Sion: build thou the walls of Jerusalem.
yet bring not evil upon thy people, nor upon thy worship or the place thereof
for my sins sake, who have cause to fear the destruction of all by my means:
but for thine own sake, thy Christ and covenant sake, still take pleasure in
thy people and ordinances, though thou have none in me, to continue gracious
and benevolent to them, and let not Jerusalem fare the worse for my
transgressions committed in her, but go on still to preserve her and perfect
her beauty according to thy designment, and gracious engagement touching her,
the emblem of thy Church.

Then shall thou be pleased with the sacrifices of righteousness, with
burnt-offering and whole burnt-offering: then shall they offer Bullocks upon
thine altar.
19 And then when thou have completed all thine Evangelicall ordinances,
graces, and privileges, in their types, in that glorious structure of the
Temple, and the ceremonies exercised therein, then shall the sacrifices be
offered to thee with more understanding, and clear discerning of their
Gospel-sense and meaning, when the Church is triumphant, which now under me is
militant, and then shall sacrifices so offered in the representation, and
faithful application of Christ crucified for sin, and accompanied with a
suitable spirit of repentance and godly sorrow be right acceptable to thee;
sacrifices of every kind thus offered, as then they shall be, O how will they
please thee: That shall be a time of wonderful praise, and plenty of
peace offerings shall be offered with right glad hearts upon thine altar. O let
this time come, and let it receive no interruption by mine unworthiness.

The lii. PSALM.
David in this Psalm, in the person of Do^g shows the si^full vanity, of
trusting in any thing but God, specially in wicked and unlawful practices
against the godly, seem they never so promising, assuring all such that it will
be their utter undoing at last, and the righteous against whom they plot shall
outlive them and their designs, to their corroborating in faith, and contempt
of such vain men and their vain confidences. He fore-shews that thus it shall
be betwixt himself and Doeg, he by his faith shall be established in a happy
condition to the praise of God, when Doeg shall be ejected out of Israel.

Psalm li. To the chief musician Maschil, A Psalm of David, when Doeg the
Edomite came and told Saul, and said unto him, David is come to the house of
Abimelech.
To the President of the Quire is this Psalm committed, instructing unto
confidence in God for his Church and peoples felicity, and their enemies ruin,
notwithstanding any seeming contrariety at present; made by David upon Doeg,
that counterfeit convert, his informing Saul of Abimelechs entertaining David
at Nob when he fled from him, and thereby occasioning the destruction of him,
and the rest of the Priests there.

1 O Thou wretched foolish Doeg, WHy boastest thou thy self in mischief, O
mighty man? the goodness of God endures continually.
that hypocritically professest the true worship of the God of Israel, and as
by nature, so in heart art still an Edomite and persecutor of his Church and
people, why art thou so glad of an opportunity to advance thy self in the Kings
favor by indirect and sinful ways in betraying the innocent? and abuse thine
interest and power at court to the endeavoring my ruin, which yet thou shall
never be able to compass, though thou have been a means to cut off my special
friends and Gods faithful servants, by thy base and treacherous flattery, yet
shall thou never be able to do the like by me, nor the Church of God concerned
in me, or to prevent what God has promised and designed in that behalf, but
both Saul and thou shall be disappointed in all your attempts and devices by
the goodness, power, and wisdom of God, which shall all work for me, and
preserve me maugre all you can do to the contrary.

2 How mischievous have thou been in thy treacherous discoveries of my being
with Abimelech and his relieving me, Thy tongue devises mischiefs: like a
sharp rasour, working deceitfully.
to the exposing him to the rage of Saul, who by that thine information has
wholly cut off both him and the rest of the Priests, as if they and I had
conspired against him, whereas they were utterly ignorant so much as of my very
flight from him at that time, and meant no hurt at all to Saul in that they did
for me, but as I, so they were faithful and loyal to him, doing that they did
in reference to his service, which indeed I then pretended to be imploid in.

Thou love evil more than good: and lying rather than to speak righteousness.
Selah.
3 This act of thine shows thee what thou art in thy heart, an hypocritical
professor, that carest not what mischief thou do, nor by what indirect
means, to the innocent and faithful servants of God, betraying them to the
malice and rage of Saul (from whom thou should rather have endeavored to
preserve them) and that at such a time, as thou could not have chosen a worse
to tell this in, even then (when it made anger against me, he was railing upon,
and condemning all men for my sake as conspirators with me) did thou choose to
make this known, thereby falsely to insinuate Abimelech and those Priests to be
of the combination, which was utterly false.

Thou love all devouring words; O thou deceitful tongue.
4 Thou might well think what would come of such an information at such a
time, but it seems thou did it purposely with a desire to endear thy self by
doing mischief, and being the instrument of Saul's cruelty. O thou treacherous
parasite.

God shall likewise destroy thee for ever, he shall take thee away and pluck
thee out of thy dewlling place, and root thee out of the land of the living.
Selah.
5 But as thou have been the death of the Priests of Nob, even fourscore and
five innocent persons, and have extirpated the family of Abimelech, so shall
God do by thee and thine, he shall utterly destroy both thee and all that
belongs unto thee, null thy hopes of preferment, and ruin thy substance, and
cast thee out of the land of Israel, where there shall not so much as one
remain of thy family, where indeed thou wast never rightly planted,
hypocritically counterfeiting thy self a proselyte, for the place and
preferment sake thou had in Saul's Court. And so bet it.

6 The righteous people of God whom thou so much hate, The righteous also
shall see and fear, and shall laugh at him.
and have been the destruction of not a few of them, for all that, their
survivors shall live to see as much by thee, according to my prediction, and
shall give glory to God in reverence of his righteous justice upon such
enemies, and faithfulness to his Church and people, and in heart shall laugh at
the folly of unbelievers and hypocrites for thy sake, and personally at thee.

7 Whom God shall especially make remarkable, Lo, this is the man that made not
God his strength: but trusted in the abundance of his riches, and strengthened
himself in his wickedness.
in the execution of his just judgments upon thee, whereby the Godly shall be
confirmed in their faith and dependence upon God, when they see what thy
courses come to, in trusting and relying upon thy power at Court, the wealth
thou have gotten, and thine own wicked devises, to amplify and establish
these, and not upon God.

8 Thou shall wither, But I am like a green olive tree in the house of God: I
trust in the mercy of God for ever and ever.
when I (and such as trust in God) shall for all thine and Saul's malice to me,
and the present calamities that lie upon me, being driven from the tabernacle
and service of God, be returned thither again in a flourishing condition of
honor and felicity; and this I believe as confidently as if I were there
already; for as I know thy present prosperity shall have a certain end, so
shall this mine unhappiness, which shall not dismay me for expecting better,
through the mercy of God wherein I trust, which in his own good time shall
implant me in a perpetuated good condition, like as his justice shall weed thee
up by the roots never to grow again.

I will praise thee for ever, because thou have done it: and I will wait on thy
name.
9 Though I am now far from such a State, yet will I give even present, as well
as future thanks and praise unto thee for it, (O God, of my hope) as if I were
possessed of it already, because it is as sure to me as the destruction of Doeg
is to him, both which shall certainly come to pass to thine everlasting praise,
and for which I will live in humble expectancie, depending upon thy grace and
faithfulness, till they be accomplished, which are precious things with thy
people, the very solace and support of their souls, how ever neglected by
hypocrites and unbelievers, who trust in riches and honor, whilst that thy
saints believe in thee, because of them.

The liii. PSALM.
David speaking in the wisdom of the holy Ghost, befools the wisdom of all
flesh, which in all men naturally out of an enmity and misunderstanding of
God, leads only unto sin, and professedly hates those few in the world whom God
has renewed, instead of seeking to become such themselves. But he shows, that
they both have and shall certainly smart for that sin of contempt and hatred of
God and his Church, and prays, that God would presently by him give
tranquillity to his people, Psalm liii. To the chief musician upon Mahalath,
Maschil, A Psalm of David.
as Christ shall to his Church.

To him that is most skilful upon the wind instrument Mahalath, is this Psalm
of David's making committed, instructing what man is by nature, what Gods people
must find from such, and how God will take their parts against them.

THe fool has said in his heart, there is no God; corrupt are they, and have
done abominable iniquity: there is none that does good.
1 MAn by his fall has lost, and naturally is void of the right understanding
of God, believing nothing so of him as he is, and so makes him as if he were
not. And out of this depraved ignorance, all natural men live in sin, and from
the beginning have multiplied abominations; not one, either is, or ever was,
that by nature without special and supernatural grace ever knew or served the
Lord aright.

2 The Lord made a long trial of it, God looked down from heaven upon the
children of men, to see if there were any that did understand, that did seek
God.
in the first age of the world, in that time of nature between Adam and the
Law, purposely to see what nature of it self would bring forth, whether there
were any that could and would improve it to the knowledge, belief, and worship
of God, his love and service, as a glass for after-ages to see themselves in.

3 But he found by long trial and experience, Every one of them is gone back,
they are altogether become filthy; there is none that does good, no not one.
notwithstanding his documents and judgments upon the old world, and so he
finds still, that all men are naturally fools, void of true understanding,
carnally-minded, and generally without exception, of polluted hearts and lives,
loathsome in his sight; that none in nature does that which is right or
acceptable, no, not a man of all mankind, every imagination of the thoughts of
whose heart is only evil continually.

4 Insomuch as God himself admired to see all men by nature void of knowledge,
Have the workers of iniquity no knowledge? who eat up my people, as they eat
bread, they have not called upon God.
and given over to sin, yea, even to the hatred and devouring those few in the
world that are the people of God, and have obtained mercy, and (differing from
them) walk in ways of holiness and righteousness, never taking thought to do,
or to be, like them, neither themselves by nature worshipping God, nor yet
seeking to God for the grace and inablement that they had, but contemned it,
and hated them.

5 Which at last brought fearful and unexpected desolation upon them, There
were they in great fear, where no fear was; for God has scat^ered the bones of
him that encampeth against thee, thou shall put them to flame, because God has
despised them.
when the flood came and swept them all away in the midst of their jollitie.
Like measure shall the wicked contemners, and haters of God and his worshippers
have in after-ages, God will certainly take part with his Church, though never
so few, against her persecutors and despisers though never so many, to save it,
and ruin them: As then he did, so shall he in his fierce wrath destroy even the
whole world of wicked wretches that know not God, and persecute his Church, she
shall worst them, as contemptible as she seems, because themselves are as
hateful and detestable to God, as she is to them, who is and ever will be an
enemy to his Churches enemies, to blast, befool, and utterly destroy them.

O that the salvation of Israel were come out of Sion! when God brings back
the capti^itie of his people, Jacob shall rejoice, and Israel shall be glad.
6 O that the time were come, which I am sure will come and is not long to, that
God will be mine enemies ruin, settle my Kingdom in Sion, as a type of Christ's
in heaven, and then and there by me send deliverance and happiness to his
people Israel, as he will thence salvation to his Church by him. When God shall
thus have delivered them from their enemies and out of their present troubles
(as formerly he did out of their captivities) into peace and tranquillity, as
his Church by Christ shall be from wrath and hell, how shall the faithful and
true Israel of God, who properly are the seed of his servant Jacob, rejoice
proportionably now in the type as then in the antitype?

The liiii. PSALM.
David takes occasion to engage God the more to him, by how much the more his
enemies and dangers increased upon him, by secret treacheries, and open
violences, and found God as he hoped, his deliverer, whereupon he goes a pin
higher, and strengthens his faith in his ultimate deliverance, and
establishment promised; at which time, when it shall come to pass, he promises
not to be a little thankful to God.

The liiii. Psalm. To the chief musician on Neginoth, Maschil, A Psalm of
David, when the Ziphims came and said to Saul, Does not David hide himself with
us?
To him that is most skillful upon the stringed instrument Neginoth, is this
Psalm committed, of David's making, upon that occasion when the Ziphims came
once and again to inform Saul where David had retired himself with his men, for
him to persecute him. Instructing us to draw near to God, as dangers draw
nearer to us.

1 LOrd remember thy gracious engagements for my preservation, SAve me, O God,
by thy name, and judge me by thy strength.
and future establishment, accordingly in thy grace and faithfulness deliver me
out of mine extreme difficulties, when all humane help fails, then for thy
righteousness sake who know mine innocence, and mine enemies treachery,
let thy miraculous and omnipotent power appear for me.

2 Lord be mindful of me that fly to thee for succor; Hear my prayer, O God;
give ear to the words of my mouth.
and make thee my refuge, hear my prayer in this my necessity, and grant me
the deliverance I so earnestly make suite for.

3 For besides the King and his courtiers, For strangers are risen up against
me, and oppressors seek after my soul, they have not set God before them.
Selah.
and his ordinary souldierie, men, that never saw my face, merely, because I
come to safeguard my self amongst them, without any harm to any of them. The
Ziphims, are also conspired against me, and have betrayed me to Saul and his
accomplices, my deadly enemies, who are upon their march against me to catch or
kill me; These Ziphims, as they are strangers to me, so they are to God and his
ways, else they durst never have sought to betray innocent blood in this sort.
The Lord remember them for it.

4 But though enemies increase and dangers multiply, Behold, God is my helper:
the Lord is with them that uphold my Soul.
yet by experience I find that God is able to deliver me, and does do so, as my
late wonderful escapes have made to appear, and though I have many against me
that seek my life, and but few with me or for me, yet they that are on my side,
he is on theirs, and preserves them for my sake.

He shall reward evil unto mine enemies; cut them off in thy truth.
5 The Lord shall be meet with these unjust enemies of mine, and reward them
according to their treacherous dealing, and cruel persecution, in thine own
time and way, O Lord, ease me of them, by destroying them that would destroy me
without cause, according to thy faithful promises and righteous judgments.

I will freely sacrifice unto thee; I will praise thy name, (O Lord) for it is
good.
6 If so, when that time comes, whereas now I am exercised in fear and
dependence, then will I be as conversant in faithful thanks-givings, when thou
shall set me free, I will praise thee with an enlarged heart, and offer
free-will-offerings and peace offerings to thee in a plentiful and gratuitous
manner, magnifying thy grace and faithfulness, which I have found made good
unto me.

For he has delivered me out of all trouble: and mine eye has seen his desire
upon mine enemies.
7 For so it shall come to pass, I am as sure of it as if it were already, my
faith carries me to it, beyond and above all intervening difficulties, so that
I (me thinks) already enjoy my quietus est, and see my bloodthirsty enemies
laid low enough for doing me any more harm.

The lv. PSALM.
David being greatly oppressed by Saul, and in some imminent danger (probably
that of Keilah) plyes God hard by argument in prayer, wishing himself any where
out of Saul's reach, and that God would by some exemplarie judgment both punish
and disappoint his enemies, declaiming against the base perfidiousness of some
old acquaintance and intimates of his, wishing such wicked dissemblers to God
and man might perish remarkably, but for all their crast and hypocrisy toward
him doubts not but God will stand by him, as he has done, and both preserve
him and punish them. He sets forth Saul's perfidious hatred against him, but
strengthens his faith in God, who he is assured will put a speedy end to his
cruelty, and his own misery.

Psalm lv. To the chief musician on Neginoth, Maschil, A Psalm of David.
To him that is most skilful upon the stringed instrument Neginoth, to which
this Psalm of instruction to trust in God for deliverance in greatest troubles,
is chiefly set, do I David that made it recommend it, for the care and ordering
of it in the Quire.

1 O God, GIve ear to my prayer, O God; and hide not thy self from my
supplication.
mine extremity is thine opportunity, as is my danger, such is my prayer, the
one present, the other pressing. In thy faithfulness hear me making my piteous
moan in this my misery for grace and mercy to be shown me, and thy power to
appear for me in this my necessity.

2 Be not careless of my condition, Attend unto me, and hear me: I mourn in my
complaint, and make a noise.
but weigh well what I say and pray, being so nearly concerned, and grant what
I ask: for as my grief, such is my sorrow, both of them very great, forcing me
bitterly to complain to thee of mine enemies, and to lament my self with woeful
bewailing, which for all my strivings I cannot smother, but they do break out
from me.

3 Because of the calumnies and threats of Saul and his accomplices against me,
Because of the voice of the enemy, because of the oppression of the wicked:
for they cast iniquity upon me, and in wrath they hate me.
and their cruel and unjust persecution of me, for they lay treason and
conspiracy to my charge, which I was never guilty of, and for this their
false accusation they, (as if it were true) bear a deadly hatred to me, and
with fury and revenge seek to take away my life.

4 Their rage and cruelty is such, My heart is sore pained within me: and the
terrors of death are fallen upon me.
as I am in such continual danger by it, that I sustain wonderful trouble of
mind, and am almost sunk into despair of escaping their hands, who at this
instant do put my life in peril, if thou deliver not.

5 I cannot express the misery that I am in, Fearfulness and trembling are
come upon me, and horror has overwhelmed me.
and the anguish of mind I lie under at present, my dangers are so imminent,
and my trouble so insupportable.

And I said, O that I had wings like a dove; for then would I fly aw^y, and be
at rest.
6 Insomuch that I could wish my self any where far enough off, to avoid Saul's
causless suspicion of me, where ever I might enjoy my peace and freedom from
this continual fear I am in of him.

Lo, then would I wander far off, and remain in the wilderderness. Selah.
7 Had I but means he should soon see I would quit his Kingdom, where I am such
an eyesore to him, and live in the most solitary place in all the world,
rather than to be thus in continual trouble and hazard. I would to God it were
so.

I would hasten my escape from the windy storm, and tempest.
8 He should soon be rid of me, if I could tell how to get from him, before I
would lead this life to undergo this continual storm and tempest of such
uncessant vexations within and without, I would thrust my ship into any creek
in the whole world, go as far from him, as my legs, nay wings could carry me,
if I had them.

Destroy, O Lord, and divide their rongues: for I have seen violence and strife
in the City.
9 Thou have, O Lord, heretofore admirably manifested thy power, in a marveilous
manner destroying those that opposed, and mutined against thy servants, witness
Korah and his accomplices; and against thee, witness the confusion of Babel:
Truly now art thou also affronted, and I thy servant endangered as Moses was
then by a sort of people (the Lord divert and frustrate their malice by
destroying them, and scattering and dividing them and their counsels) that are
set at liberty by their own deboisherie, and their ringleaders authority, to
practice all manner of wickedness against thy Church and me, without any
restraint or punishment, as if there were no Law nor Government in Israel,
neither indeed is there, nothing is practiced now adays but how to wrong and
oppress the innocent every where.

10 These are the things that all sorts of people, Day and night they go about
it upon the walls thereof: mischief also and sorrow are in the midst of it.
all the Kingdom over watch and are solicitous to bring to pass, nothing but
dissolutenes and wrong-doing in stead of good Laws and orders are practiced
under Saul, to the exceeding great sorrow and sufferings of the faithful in the
land.

11 Not only the out-skirts of the Kingdom that border upon heathens and
infidels, Wickedness is in the midst thereof: deceit and guil depart not from
her streets.
but even the heart and principal parts of it are adulterated, and as wicked as
the rest, and so are the principal men too that should know, and do better,
they that should give good example stick not openly and professedly to plot and
practice treachery and collusion against me, under that very name and notion
to make themselves great with Saul.

^2 Yea, For it was ^ot an enemy that reproched me, then I could have borne it;
neither was it he that hated me, that did magnify himself against me, then I
would have hid my self from him.
principally those that were mine intimates are now become mine accusers to
Saul, and of all others profess most hatred to me, and speak the foulest
against me, which I confess is a great trouble and temptation to me, to see my
self deserted of such: as for others that always maligned me, I should not
have mattered it from them, had they only that had always born me ill will,
to raise themselves in the Kings favor, vapoured against me and tempted my
ruin, I should not have been exposed to such dangers by it as now I am by mine
own credulity, and my dissembling adherents, but would have shifted for my
safety in another manner.

13 But I am betrayed by such as I durst have put my life into their hands, But
it was thou, a man, mine equal, my guide, and mine acquaintance.
one that seemed to draw the same breath with me has opened his mouth against
me, one that formerly I set by as if he had been my brother, whom I allways
took for my bosom friend, and relied much on him in all matters of concernment,
as such an one.

We took sweet counsel together, and walked unto the house of God in company.
14 Communicating mine affairs to him, and he his to me, with mutual and
friendly advisements thereupon, and have many a time conferred together (I
thinking him sincere both to God and me) in matters divine as well as humane,
and jointly frequented the public worship of God, as fellow-heirs of heaven,
never imagining then, that ever he would have turned persecutor of Gods Church
and people.

Let death seize upon them, and let them go down quick into hell: for
wickedness is in their dwellings, and among them.
15 O that God would now execute just and exemplarie vengeance upon such
hypocrites, as he has done formerly in like case upon Korah and his company,
for the terror of others, and way-making for his peoples and Churches peace,
who conspire together by fraud or violence to do all the mischief they can
against them.

As for me, I will call upon God; and the Lord shall save me.
16 But how ever I am thus forsaken and betrayed, yet I have one sure friend,
God, in whom I have and still do trust and firmly believe. I will stick to him,
though none but he stick to me, and in the faith of his faithfulness and
friendship will in all times of danger make mine addresses to him by prayer,
and doubt not of preservation and deliverance maugre all the malice of mine
open enemies and treacherous friends.

Evening and morning, and at noon will I pray, and cry aloud: and he shall
hear my voice.
17 I will not cease to worship him still, though mine old companions
fellow-worshippers have forsaken both me and it, I will daily and duly frequent
him as heretofore, and my prayers and cries shall be answerable to my griefs,
they shall put an edge upon them, and make me both incessant and importunate
with God, who I am sure will not turn the deaf ear toward me, but I shall find
he hears effectually.

18 He has done so heretofore, He has delivered my Soul in peace from the
battle that was against me; for there were many with me.
when I have been in exceeding great straits, the Lord has set my soul free
from the fear and trouble it was in, defeating mine enemies, and given me the
victory over them, when by outward appearance I was very unlikely to obtain
it, but that God from heaven fought for me, and was in stead of legions to me.

19 And as God has been, God shall hear and afflict them, even he that abides
of old, Selah: because they have no changes, therefore they fear not God.
and done, for me upon my prayers, so will he do still, hear and deliver me
from mine enemies, and put them to the worst continually, they shall find him
no changeling, but ever the same toward me and against them. So be it, O Lord,
delay not to bring them under the wheel that they may taste of adversity as I
have done; for their temporal felicity, and the unalterableness of it,
notwithstanding their sinful courses, for which they receive no punishment
either by humane Law or divine hand, makes them boldly persist, not fearing
thy justice, the smart whereof they never yet felt.

20 That implacable enemy of mine, He has put forth his hands against such as
be at peace with him: he has broken his covenant.
Saul, how does he still persist to war upon me? though he has been more than
once convinced of mine innocence and loyalty toward him, not sticking to
break all bonds humane and divine, yea, though never so sacred, to effect his
malicious designs against me.

21 Many a time, The words of his mouth were smoother than butter, but war was
in his heart: his words were softer than oil, yet were they drawn swords.
when I have given good proof of mine integrity toward him by sparing his
life when he was in my power, how has he then bespoke me with specious shows
of love and friendship, commending me, and condemning himself, when yet he
meant me nothing but mischief, as appeared in the event, for so soon as ever he
thought to take me at advantage, he, notwithstanding what he had said,
attempted my destruction that saved his life.

Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he will sustain thee: he shall never suffer
the righteous to be moved.
22 But God has still delivered me both from his open violence, and secret
machinations, and so will still, both me and all others that humbly and
faithfully repose themselves and cast their care upon him, he will succor and
sustain them, such as keep a good conscience and walk uprightly, God will take
their parts, and disappoint the purposes of wicked men against them, and not
subject them to their power and malice.

But thou, O God, shall bring them down into the pit of destruction: bloody
and deceitful men, shall not live out half their days, but I will trust in
thee.
23 But as thou will be just to protect thine, and deliver them, so to punish
their oppressors, who, because they seek to destroy the righteous, shall
themselves be destroyed, even with everlasting destruction, from which there
shall be no deliverance, cruel bloodthirsty and treacherous minded men may for
a time oppress the innocent, but they shall find, that God can preserve them,
when as they themselves shall come to an untimely end; such, and at such a
time, as they never dreamed of. So that let Saul and the rest of mine enemies
hold on their course, though at present they lead me a miserable life, and they
themselves have the world at will, yet shall it not abate of my confidence, but
that they shall come to a speedy and miserable end, and I shall enjoy the fruit
of mine innocence and thy faithfulness.

The lvi. PSALM.
David being extremely persecuted by Saul and his accomplices, and driven to fly
out of Israel, amongst the Philistines his deadly enemies, prays God to stand
his friend, promises to trust in him worst come that can come, hoping his
enemies shall not always escape punishment, nor he always be oppressed;
magnifieth God for his great deliverance out of Gath, and concludes thence Gods
future protection of him. Psalm lvi. To the chief musician, upon
Jonath-elem-rechokim, Michtam of David, when the Philistines took him in Gath.


To him that is most skilful upon the instrument Jonath-elem-rechokim,
signifying the dumb dove in a far Country, (a denomination significant and
proper to David's behavior and condition at Gath of the Philistines, where he
was in imminent danger: and a remarkable deliverance, 1 Samuel 21.10, etc. by
counterfeiting himself mad and speechless, which is the occasion and subject
matter of) this Psalm, being chiefly set to it, and committed to him, by David
that made it, to be sung to the special tune of Michtam, played on that
instrument.

1 O Lord God be thou my helper, BE merciful unto me, O God, for man would
swallow me up; he fighting daily oppresses me.
and vouchsafe me mercy, or else I am in a miserable condition, and sure to be
undone; for I have no friends nor can find no favor on earth, but on all hands
am beset, ready to be devoured and praid upon by cruel-minded men, I am forced
to fly to my very enemies for refuge, and to use my wits to get from them as
soon as I am come to them, being driven into those inextricable straits by Saul
and his accomplices my bloody enemies, who will let me rest no where seeking my
life, and with open war and professed enmity persecuting me continually.

Mine enemies would daily swallow me up: for they be many that fight against
me. O thou most High.
2 So bitterly enraged are mine enemies against me, that they think every day a
year, till they have destroyed me, greedily affecting it; and they are a
numerous company of them, all set by might and main to mischief me, that am a
poor innocent lonely man, thus pursued and persecuted by Saul, and his men of
war. But my confidence and hope is in thee, that art of power and might above
them, to whom only I make my moan.

What time I am afraid, I will trust in thee.
3 And in assurance of thy power and good will to help me, whenever I am in
extreme danger, and in never such fear and perplexity of mind, by reason
thereof, yet such has been my experience of thee at all times, as that when I
can fly no whither, nor be safe no where, I will yet then fly to thee by
faith and hope.

4 And my confidence is, that I shall always find that word and promise of
thine which thou have made concerning me, In God I will praise his word, in God
I have put my trust, I will not fear what flesh can do unto me.
to be faithfully performed by thee, thy grace and power shall answerably
appear for me, and that I shall never have other cause but to praise thee for
thy truth, and to thank thee for thy goodness, notwithstanding all my dangers,
and therefore as I have hitherto believed on thee, so I will still, and whilst
I have thee (that art God) on my side, and they be but men that are mine
enemies, I will never so fear them, nor the harm they can do me, as not to
trust and hope in thee for preservation and deliverance from them.

5 What I say or do be it never so well meant, and be I never so innocent, I am
sure to be belied and perverted by them, Every day they wrest my words: all
their thoughts are against me for evil.
as if I plotted and practiced nothing but treason, when as I do, nor think
nothing less, and as they falsely surmise, so they wickedly conspire, and
complot my ruin.

6 They both secretly advise, They gather themselves together, they hide
themselves, they mark my steps when they wait for my soul.
and openly associate themselves together against me, a single friendless man,
they have stratagems and designs against me, which they carry covertly, least
I should discover and avoid them, as by thy goodness to me I have strangely
done hitherto, and they have spies upon me to pick all advantages against me,
that they may have whereof to accuse me, and a fit opportunity to cut me off,
and murder me, which notwithstanding they could never yet compass.

7 Lord, Shall they escape by iniquity? in thine anger cast down the people, O
God.
how long shall these wicked wretches practice iniquity, and not be punished,
nay, prosper in such courses, O God, manifest at last in thine own good time
thy just displeasure upon such vile reprobate people as these are, by bringing
them and their wicked devices to naught.

8 How ever I am hated by mine enemies, Thou tellest my wanderings, put thou my
tears into thy bottle: are they not in thy book?
and persecuted from place to place, yet am I regarded and preserved by thee,
that have pity on mine unquiet condition, and by thy special providence, and
secret guidance go along with me to protect me. Let my manifold tears which
I shed in my manifold miseries, when no eyes sees me but thine, be heedfully
taken notice of by thee, to remember me according to them, yea, Lord, I know,
and find they are so.

9 Though my peril be imminent and seemingly inavoidable, When I cry unto
thee, then shall mine enemies turn back: this I know, for God is for me.
yet I have found, and doubt not still to find it so, that if I put up a
faithful and fervent prayer unto thee, thou will in instanti some way or other
disappoint and defeat mine enemies, and show me a way to escape them, this I
know to be true by former experience, and shall find it so always; for thou, O
Lord, art every whit as careful and vigilant over me to preserve me, as mine
enemies are to destroy me.

In God will I praise his word, in the Lord will I praise his word.
10, 11. See the fourth verse of this Psalm, which, specially the former part of
it is here repeated to show the strength of David's faith, In God will I put my
trust: I will not be afraid what man can do unto me.
in the truth of God, and his promises, and that it rather increases than
diminishes by his dangers.

Thy vows are upon me, O God: I will render praises unto thee.
12 Such and so great have been my deliverances, that they have drawn solemn
vows from me, of solemn praise and thanks to be given thee in most exact manner
of performance, according to thy Law in such cases, which though at present I
cannot perform in the ceremonies and formalities thereof, being banished from
the place of thy worship, yet I hope and promise to bear them in mind till the
time that thou shall restore and enable me so to do; and in the mean time mine
heart and lips shall not be wanting to give thee praise in spirit and truth.

For thou have delivered my soul from death: wilt not thou deliver^ my feet
from falling, that I may walk before God in the light of the living?
13 For though thou have vouchsafed me many a deliverance, from many a danger,
yet none was ever more imminent, nor thy goodness and power more conspicuous
than in this at Gath, where I was discovered and my life endangered very near;
and shall not I gather from this, (surely I will and do,) that thou will never
let me be a prey to mine enemies, nor worship any other God but thee? which I
was in danger to have done amongst the Philistines, had not thou speedily
brought me thence, but wilt still preserve my life, and give me to enjoy the
happiness of serviving thee, the only true and living God, amongst thine own
people, who only of all the world, that every where lies in darkness and in
the shadow of death, have the light and knowledge to worship thee aright.

The lvii. PSALM.
David being driven into a narrow compass, and being in great straits by his
enemy Saul and his accomplices surrounding him in the cave, flies by prayer and
faith to God, and promises himself deliverance by miracle rather than not at
all. He sets forth the cruel and proud nature of his enemies, to provoke God
thereby against them. And finds all he said to be true concerning Gods
faithfulness to deliver him, which was done in so mavelous a manner, that it
ravished his heart, and raised him above all fears and doubts for future, so
that he promises nothing but faith in, and praise to God for time to come by
reason of it. Psalm lvii. To the chief musician Altaschith, Michtam of David,
when he fled from Saul in the cave.


To the President of the Quire in this Psalm, made by David, committed for his
ordering it to be sung to the special tune of Michtam; The sum or substance
whereof is comprised in this one word Al-taschith, signifying destroy not upon
occasion of the imminent danger he and all his men were in, when they hid
themselves in the cave of Engedi from Saul. 1 Samuel 24.

1 AS my danger is extraordinary, BE merciful unto me, O God, be merciful
unto me, for my soul trusts in thee: yea in the shadow of thy wings will I
make my refuge, until these calamities be overpast.
so, Lord, let be thy mercy, I humbly pray thee, for to effect my deliverance
out of it, for from my very heart do I depend upon thee, and steadfastly believe
in thee for it; as the chicken refugeth it self under the wing of the Hen, till
the Kite be flown over, so do I by faith take sanctuary in thee, thy truth and
protection, until all these storms be blown away, which for an appointed time
I must undergo, and that thou land me safe out of all these miseries in an
estate of rest.

2 Be my danger whatsoever it will, I will cry unto God most high: unto God
that perform^th all things for me.
I will make mine application to God in prayer and faith, because of his
omnipotency over all men, and all things wherein I trust* for his power and
faithfulness is, and will be the same to me it has been, until he has
fulfilled all his promises, and perfected his begun undertakings concerning me
and his Church.

He shall send from heaven and save me, from the reproach of him that would
swallow me up; Selah. God shall send forth his mercy and his truth.
3 Rather than I shall miscarry, and God fail of his faithfulness, I know I
shall be delivered by miracle, from the rage of my bloody enemies, who if they
could gain their wills of me, would triumph and scornfully mock at my faith in
God, and even at God himself too for my sake, I dare say they would. But God
will never suffer it so to come to pass, but as occasion requires God shall
still manifest his mercy and truth in my behalf.

My soul is among lions, and I lie even among them that are set on fire, even
the sons of men, whose teeth are spears and arrows, and their tongue a sharp
sword.
4 I am in a cave like a den, and mine enemies like lions round about me, raging
mad to devour me. I am round beset with men of cruel exasperated minds, that
burn with rage against me, men that are given over to wickedness, utterly
without the fear of God, or common humanity, who deadly hate me, and irritate
Saul against me, to destroy me, by all the damnable lies and slanders they can
invent.

Be thou exalted, O God, above the heavens: let thy glory be above all the
earth.
5 Let it appear, O God, that thou that dwell in heaven art above such
earthworms, as through me (the Type of the distressed Church on earth) do
fight against thy self, and could they vanquish me, would trample upon thy
great and glorious name, let the proudest of them be forced to stoop, and made
to confess that thy power of preserving is above theirs of destroying.

They have prepared a net for my steps, my soul is bowed down: they have dug
a pit before me, into the midst whereof they are fallen themselves. Selah.
6 How have they encompassed me, as in a net? so that humanely I see no way of
escape, but death is ready to seize on me, as a hawk that is over his prey;
they have hunted me narrowly, driven me under ground into this cave, where, in
this my hazardous condition, having no other shift, I am forced to hide my self
from them, ready to catch me, but yet in stead of finding me whom they seek, I
have found them whom I sought not, even Saul himself is cast into mine hands in
this mine hiding hole: O strange providence!

7 By this unlooked for deliverance not only of me, My heart is fixed, O God,
my heart is fixed: I will sing and give praise.
but of mine enemy into my power, in this my most desperate condition; I am so
fully confirmed in my faith touching thy power and faithfulness, as I hope
never to doubt again because of danger, but to live the rest of my life in such
assurance and praise-full tempers, as if I were actually instated into the full
possession of all that thou have promised me, and I live in hope of.

8 I am so ravished with this providence, Awake up my glory, awake Psaltery and
Harp: I my self will awake early.
that I know not how to extol it to give my self satisfaction, but I will lay
out all the skill I have upon it, both in singing and playing, by voice and
instrument, there shall be nothing wanting that I can do to set it forth.

9 Nor shall the praise and renown of this wondrous mercy, I will praise thee,
O Lord, among the people: I will sing unto thee among the nations.
and Almighty providence be circumscribed within Jury or Canaan, the Gentiles
and Heathens shall also hear of it by my means, that in all places, and upon
all occasions will extol it, and thee for it.

10 For to those that fear thee, For thy mercy is great unto the heavens, and
thy truth unto the clouds.
and steadfastly trust in thee, thy mercy is unspeakably great, and so is thy
faithfulness, comparatively they are as far beyond the reach of our reason,
as the heavens, and clouds there, are above the earth.

11 See the fifth verse of this Psalm, Be thou exalted, O God* above the
heavens: let thy glory be above all the earth.
which is here repeated in way of praise, that there was spoken in way of
prayer.

The lviii. PSALM.
David being wrongfully persecuted, and endangered of his life, taxeth' his
enemies of injustice and violence, and shows the reason, because of the
natural antipathy the wicked bear to the godly; and pray^s they may never have
power to execute their malice, but may come to naught they and their
enterprises, which they shall certainly and suddenly do, to the joy of the
righteous, and the glory of God and his justice. Psalm lviii. To the chief
musician, Altaschith, ^ Michtam of David.


To the President of the Quire is this Psalm, made by David, committed for his
ordering of it to be sung to the special tune of Michtam, the sum or substance
whereof is comprised in this one word Altaschith, signifying destroy not.

DO ye indeed speak righteousness, O generation? do ye judge uprightly, O ye
sons of men?
1 YOu that pretend to do justice, and to give faithful advice, and who by your
places which you hold in the state, and about the King ought to do so, do you
do it? Nay, do you not the quite contrary? When you are assembled together, is
not your practice to advise how to entrap me an innocent person, and as men
that favor not the things of the spirit, that have no fear of God or love of
goodness? do you not unjustly condemn and accuse me of treasonable practices
against Saul? When as its nothing so.

Yea, in heart you work wickedness, you weigh the violence of your hands in the
earth.
2 Yea, you study how one to exceed another in false suggestions and mischievous
contrivements against me, you weigh and ponder this thing, and the the other thing
with your selves, and cast about every way in your thoughts, which is likeliest
to take effect, you role every stone, and use all the means in the world to
mischieve me.

The wicked are estranged from the womb, they go astray, as soon as they be
born, speaking lies.
3 There is an innate Antipathy in wicked men, such as are mine enemies, to the
servants and people of God, they manifest it almost as soon as they can either
speak or act, they are trained up early in the way, and practice of their
Parents, to believe and slander them that are better than themselves.

4 Their malice is as natural and as destructive to the people of God, Their
poison is like the poison of a serpent; they are like the deaf Adder that
stops her ear.
if he suffer it to take effect, and ever was so from the beginning, as the
poison of a serpent is to a man, whom he maliced even in paradise. And they are
every whit as unalterable from this their cursed indisposition, as an Adder is
from his venomous nature, no truth can take place nor reason prevail with them
to be other than they are to the godly, but are wilfully prejudiced, and
resolve to continue so, and to do them all the mischief they can.

5 Nothing can do good upon them, Which will not hearken to the voice of
charmers, charming never so wisely.
but as the Adder will not suffer himself to be charmed and hindered from doing
hurt, but resists by stopping the Organ of hearing, that enchantment cannot
operate upon him; so are they hardened against all right reason, good advice,
threats and judgments, nothing can fasten upon them to make them better
disposed toward God, and his faithful servants.

6 And as the serpent has not more poison in him, Break their teeth, O God, in
their mouth; break out the great teeth of the young lions. O Lord.
than mine enemies malice to me, so, nor have the Beast of prey more rage and
fury in them in their hunger and anger, than these men have against me, not the
fiercest sort of lions; therefore, O Lord, watch over me narrowly to disable
their attempts, and disappoint their rage.

7 Lord, Let them melt away as waters, which run continually: when he bends
his bow to shoot his arrows, let them be as cut in pieces.
put a speedy end to them and their destructive purposes, let them be as a
teemed vessel, wasting by degrees, but yet speedily, till there be none left,
let all their enterprises be fruitless and ineffectuall, as he that discharges
a broken arrow which falls a^ his feet.

As a snail which melts, let every one of them pass away: like the untimely
birth of a woman, that they may not see the sun.
8 Let these wicked wretches that are good for nothing, but to do hurt to them
that are good, be like other unprofitable creatures, of no long continuance,
yea, the sooner they come to naught, the better, for if they live but to be
able, they have will enough to do all manner of mischief.

Before your pots can ^eel the thorns, he shall take them away as with a
whirlwind.
9 Yea, and so it shall be, for when they are as it were putting the match to
the powder, ready to blow up the godly and innocent person; God shall yet
prevent them, and by some sudden and remarkable judgment upon them swifter
than thought, shall disappoint and disable them, when they least look for it,
and in their own conceits are furthest from death and danger, shall the Lord in
his fierce wrath suddenly snatch them hence.

The righteous shall rejoice when he sees the vengeance: he shall wash his
feet in the blood of the wicked.
10 So that however they afflict the godly, so long as God gives them leave,
yet, the time will certainly come, when the righteous shall see an end of their
miseries, and of their enemies too, to their no small rejoicing to see God so
mindful of them, and themselves so much in favor with him, as to have the
wicked destroyed for their sakes, and to fall at their feet, who once hoped to
tread upon their necks.

So that a man shall say, verily there is a reward for the righteous: verily he
is a God that judges in the earth.
11 So that any man that observes shall see, and cannot but acknowledge, that
its good trusting in God, and walking obediently to his will, for such shall
not lose their labor, nor their confidence, but God will recompense both in
due time: and that how ever the good and godly are for a time under the wheel,
and the wicked a top, and things seem quite out of order, yet, God that while
is not idle in heaven, but takes notice of good men, and their sufferings, and
of wicked men and their doings, to judge them accordingly.

The lix. PSALM.
David being beseidged in his own house prays for deliverance, alleging his
enemies cruelty, and his own innocence, and that they may not prosper in their
wicked endeavors and contempt of God, which he assures himself; and
strengthens his faith in God against his bloud-thirstie adversaries, whom he
would not have quite cut off* but brought to disgrace and indigency, to
exemplify his wrath and justice against such, both to his own people for their
encouragement, and the heathen for their instruction, and that they may live to
taste the bitter fruit of their own prodigious malice. Lastly, he rejoices in
God because of his present deliverance.

To the President of the Quire is this Psalm made by David, Psalm lix. To the
chief musician Al-taschith, Michtam of David, when Saul sent, and they watched
the house to kill him.
committed for his ordering of it to be sung to the special tune of Michtam;
the sum and substance whereof is comprised in this one word Al-taschith,
signifying destroy not, upon occasion of the danger David was in, when Saul
sent messengers which beset David's house, and watched it round about all night,
to have killed him in the morning. 1 Samuel 19.

1 I must now as at all other times fly to thee for refuge, DEliver me from
mine enemies, O my God; defend me from them that rise up against me.
O God of my salvation, when I am in straits, as at present thou know me to
be, out of which I pray thee to deliver me, which else is impossible; I am like
to be assaulted so on every side, by men that have laid an ambuscado for me,
and intend suddenly to surprise me, the Lord show me a way to escape them.

2 I am thou know, Deliver me from the wr^kers of iniquity, and save me from
bloody men.
O Lord, thy servant, whom they go about to destroy, and they are wicked
wretches, and bloudy-minded men, deliver me therefore from such, and let me not
fall into their hands.

For lo, they lie in wait for my soul; the mighty are gathered against me; not
for my transgression, nor for my sin, O Lord.
3 For it is my life thou see that they seek, Saul and his wicked Courtiers
contrive and attempt my destruction, not that they have any just cause so to
do, for I have never done any thing but what stood with loyalty, nor ever had a
thought of other toward him: Lord thou know it,

They run and prepare themselves without my fault: awake to help me and behold.
4 When Saul bids them go, how ready and diligent are they to be employed
against me, that never did any thing to deserve it either from him or them, be
thou, O Lord, as watchful to help me, as they to destroy me, and behold me
specially in this my present danger to free me from it, whom thou know to be
guiltless and innocent.

Thou therefore, O Lord God of hosts, the God of Israel, awake to visit all the
heathen: be not merciful to any wicked transgressors.
5 Therefore, O Lord, that art of infinite power, and absolute command, and a
faithful God to thy faithful servants, appear in the behalf of thine
oppressed people, and me more especially, and pour out thy just displeasure
upon all those that have no knowledge, nor fear of thee, but after an
heathenish and irreligious manner, are enemies to those that are thine Israel
indeed, though themselves be Israelites; thou that art no respecter of persons,
show no favor to any such wicked wretches, nor be no more merciful to them,
than if they were Infidels and Pagans indeed, for their malice is as much
against the godly, and their sins against thee as great if not greater. But
execute righteous judgment upon all unrighteous men, one as another.

They return at evening, they make a noise like a dog, and go round about the
City.
6 They are incessantly industrious to find me out, rising early and ferreting
every place where they think to have me, and hold on so from morning to night,
and so from day to day, asking and enquiring after me of every one they meet,
with railing and slanderous speeches, backbiting and snarling at me, and thus
they do every where from house to house in Town and Country, where they think
to hear of me.

7 They spare for no railing, Behold, they belch out with their mouth: swords
are in their lips; for who, say they, does hear?
but let fly against me to all men, cursing and threatening what they would do
if they could catch me, and what they would give to find me, being utterly
without the knowledge or fear of God, as if they speak not in his learning, nor
should never be called to an account for those lies and false reports they
raise against me.

8 But thou, But thou, O Lord, shall laugh at them; thou shall have all the
heathen in derision.
O Lord, shall laugh at this presumptuous folly of theirs, that dare set so
light by thee, all those that care not to know and fear thee now, shall one day
wish they had, when as thou shall give them to understand that thou carest as
little for, and sets as light by them as they by thee; and though Israelites in
their own esteem, yet in thine, they are no better than heathens, and so they
shall find.

9 Mine enemy indeed is much too hard for me, Because of his strength will I
wait upon thee: for God is my defense.
but not for thee, so that his strength and power to afflict and wrong me,
shall have this effect, it shall make me adhere to thee and depend upon thee
the firmelier for deliverance, for I never yet was in so perilous condition,
but thou did protect me, nor I believe never shall.

10 But that God whom I have ever found gracious and merciful to me, The God
of my mercy shall prevent me: God shall let me see my desire upon mine enemies.
will still be so, and do more for me than I can ask for my self. And will
certainly be as good as his word, wherein he has caused me to hope, in
confounding mine enemies.

11 Yet I desire not that thou should do by them, Slay them not, least my
people forget: scatter them by thy power; and bring them down, O Lord, our
shield.
as they would do by me, destroy them out and out; both for their good and mine
own, and all my friends and adherents, I rather desire they may remain standing
monuments (as the Jews, Christ's persecutours shall be, to the believing
Gentiles) of thy forepast mercies, to mind us of them that we forget not our
deliverances, and that therefore thou would rather choose by thy power to
abate theirs which they so much confide in, that so they may be humbled, and
come to know and acknowledge thee to be as indeed thou art, O Lord, thy
servants shield and faithful protector.

For the sin of their mouth, and the words of their lips, let them even be
taken in their pride: and for cursing and lying which they speak.
12 Bring all their sinful slanders upon themselves in thy just judgments, let
them be cast from the top of honor and affluence wherein they so pride
themselves for example sake, into the bottom of infamy and indigencie, and
for those curses and falsehoods which they belch out against me.

Consume them in wrath, consume them, that they may not be: and let them know
that God rules in Jacob, unto the ends of the earth.
13 Do thou abase their power and pride, and bring them and it to naught in thy
heavy displeasure, let them live like abjects, here and there, without power or
credit (as shall Christ's crucifiers.) And that not only for encouragement and
instruction of thy peoples faith, but make them examples of thy wrath and
terror to the very heathen also every where, who are capable of instruction of
that nature, that they may learn not to rebel against thee in opposing the
Kingdom of Christ typically resembled in mine, over Israel; which hereby they
may see thou will effect and make good, maugre all opposition, in faithfulness
to thy covenant, and love to thy servant Jacob that type of Christ, the root of
thy Church, which is thy Kingdom, in which thou rulest, and for which thou
overrulest all earthly powers. Let them, Lord, know so much.

14 Let mine enemies, And at evening let them return, and let them make a noise
like a dog, and go round about the city.
and the enemies of thy Church, know what it is to oppress and persecute thy
people, let them have enough of their own ways in the issue, and taste the
bitter fruit of their eager prosecuting and malicious slandering the faithful
and upright, by changing the scene, and being necessitated to range and raven
for their own subsistence, with as much hunger and greediness, as ever they did
for my ruin.

15 Let them come to shameful want and penury, Let them wander up and down for
meat, and grudge if they be not satisfied.
even to beg their bread, and yet not get enough to satisfy their hunger, but
fret and repine at this their lamentable condition; and spend their days in
poverty and discontent.

16 But though they cannot but fret and ^ume under their troubles, But I will
sing of thy power, yea, I will sing aloud of thy mercy in the morning: for thou
have been my defense and refuge in the day of my trouble.
I will sing under mine, and show forth thy power and goodness as concerning
other remarkable deliverances, so specially this over night, from those that
were appointed to kill me in the morning, when yet I shall live to sing hearty
praises to thee, for thou have contrived my rescue out of their hands that
would have detroyed me, and were near the doing it.

17 Though my condition is weak, Unto thee, O my strength, will I sing: for God
is my defense, and the God of my mercy.
and mine enemies potent, yet thou art strong enough to deal with them, that's
my comfort, and in the faith thereof I will cheer up my heart and sing to thee
the praise of my success, magnifying thee, O God, for my deliverance, who have
ever been, and ever wilt be a God of protection and mercy to me.

The lx. Psalm.
David takes occasion from complicate victories of ma^y enemies, to show the
people the different proceedings of God toward them now, to what was
heretofore, then they were the miserablest of all people by reason of their
sins and his judgments, and now through his grace and faithfulness are become
the happiest and succesfullest, under him the type of Christ and his Church:
And admonishes them therefore to live by faith and to seek to God, promising
in so doing they shall prosper and be victorious.

Psalm lx. To the chief musician upon Shushan Eduth Michtam of David, to teach,
when he strove with Aram Naharaim, and with Aram Zobah, when Joab returned, and
smote of Edom in the valley of salt, twelve thousand.
To him that is most skillful upon the sweet instrument Shushan Eduth in this
Psalm, made by David, committed to be played upon that instrument and sung to
the special tune of Michtam, the scope whereof is to teach the Israelites in
whom to trust, and from whom to expect their happiness, even from God and his
faithfulness, because of his promises which he will now fulfill under his
government, as his late victories over the Syrians and Edomites give good proof
2 Samuel 8.3.13. 1 Chronicles. 18.3. etc. Together with other experiences mentioned in
this Psalm.

O God, thou have cast us off, thou have scattered us, thou have been
displeased, O turn thy self to us again.
1 O God, notwithstanding the peculiarity of interest, and relation betwixt us
thy people and thee, yet have thou for a long time suffered us to be oppressed
and worsted by the heathen nations and people about us and within us, our sins
were the cause why thou wast displeased at us, and did so by us; but let it
seem long enough to have been strange to us, now (Lord) have mercy on us, be
reconciled and take part with us, as thou did at first when thou broughtest
us out of Egypt, and gave us this land to possess.

Thou have made the earth to tremble; thou have broken it: heal the breaches
thereof, for it shakes.
2 Fearful concussions have been in this state, by reason of their sins and thy
judgments, what invasions and inrodes of foreign enemies, what civil wars,
fractions, and divisions amongst themselves, and what desolations has befallen
them by all these, so that for a long time miserable has been their disorder
and confusion, therefore pity this thine own people at last, and give them
better times, for the nation has been sore shaken, and thunder-strucken by thy
judgments upon it, that if thou underprop it not now, it cannot stand nor
remain any longer a people to thee.

3 Who though they are so, Thou have showed thy people hard things, thou have
made them to drink the wine of astonishment.
yet have thou greatly afflicted them with many and grievous calamities, thy
judgments and our miseries have been such, and have so staggered and
astonished us, by reason of thy manifold promises of grace and felicity, that
we have been put quite besides all faith and hope, and have not known what to
think of thee or of our selves, nor what to do to gain thy favor, and recover
our selves again into it.

4 But of thine own grace have thou in this juncture of time, Thou have given a
banner to them that fear thee: that it may be displayed because of the truth,
Selah.
and desperate condition of ours set up thy standard, to rally thy people and
their hopes again unto thee, even all that know and fear thee, thou have given
me to be the King over Israel, and by and under me wilt give them halcyon days,
a flourishing state, and victory over their enemies, witness this against the
Syrians besides many others, which is not for our deservings, but for thy truth
and promise sake. Let it have the glory.

5 Lord, That thy beloved may be delivered; save with thy right hand, and hear
me.
go on to do me and thy people good, whom thou have always professed special
love to, that they may get heart again, and under me (as thy Church under
Christ) be delivered from their enemies, to this end put forth thy power, give
us victory, and hear the prayer of me thy servant in mine own and thy peoples
behalfes still as there is cause.

God has spoken in his holiness, I will rejoice: I will divide Shechem, and
mete out the valley of Succoth.
6 The holy God has passed his promise, and pawned his faithfulness upon it
that I shall be King over all Israel complete, and have it peaceably in my
possession, so that I am sure enough of it, for all mine undermining enemies,
and though I have come hardly by it, yet I have it at last fulfilled which was
promised me; What cause have I to rejoice in this goodness, and faithfulness of
God to me, thus to give me full dominion and absolute possession, and dispose
of those very places and people, which stood it out so pertinaciously against
me, and stuck so close to Ishbosheth, as well as of them that voluntarily
submitted to me.

Gilead is mine, and Manasseh is mine, Ephraim also is the strength of mine
head; Judah is my Lawgiver.
7 Yea, of all the tribes, and countries belonging to them, as well those afar
off, as Gilead and Manasseh, as nearer hand, so that now I can pronounce them
mine own as well as any other, the greatest and best peopled are as much mine
as the least, Ephraim that is so populous, God has brought it into mine
obedience, which has added much to me, and both it and all the rest are
content to take Laws, and to be Governed by me that am of the tribe of Judah
principal for Government, out of which Christ the King and Lawgiver of his
Church must come, even out of my loins.

Moab is my washpot, over Edom will I cast my shoe: Philistia triumph thou
because of me.
8 Yea, both of domestics and foreigners, both of Israel and all her bordering
heathenish neighbors and nations, that have been as thorns in her sides, has
God given me the dominion. The Moabites, whom I have absolutely subdued, those
that I have left alive of them, I have destined to do the drudgery and basest
offices of me and my people, and will make them glad to do so, and Edom I have
and will bring under my feet and subjection, that have so proudly trampled upon
the Israel of God. And as for Palestine those accursed Philistines, let them if
they can glory in my destruction, and triumph over me, as they did over Saul
and his sons, whom they overcame, and insultingly abused their dead bodies. 1 Samuel 31.

9 The Edomites, Who will bring me into the strong City? who will lead me into
Edom?
think their Metropolitan City Bozra an impregnable place, and it is a place
of great strength indeed, nor easily taken by mere humane force, but I doubt
not to get it for all that, if no earthly power can do it.

10 God from heaven that has given me these victories over the Syrians, Wilt
not thou, O God, which had cast us off? and thou, O God, which did not go
out with our armies?
and Edomites in the field, shall open the gates of that, and all such places
to me, for all things shall go on our side, now we shall carry all before us,
as heretofore we were born down on all hands, because God was against us.

11 Let us seek to him who is both able, Give us help from trouble: for vain is
the help of man.
and willing (if we do so) to make us a free and happy people, and be convinced
of our sin and folly in trusting to any power but Gods to deliver or establish
us, by what this Kingdom has suffered under Saul, who was of your own choosing,
and in whom you promised your selves such felicity.

12 Let us arm our selves therefore hence-forward principally with faith,
Through God we shall do valiantly: for he it is that shall tread down our
enemies.
trusting in Gods power and faithfulness, and going under his conduct, when we
go against our enemies, so shall we be sure of good success, and come off
conquerous, for as he has promised, so will he perform, if we trust in him and
rely upon him, even the vanquishing and triumphing over all our enemies under
me, as the Church shall under Christ over hers.

The lxi. PSALM.
David by Absalons rebellion, and his Kingdoms revolt being driven from
Jerusalem beyond Jordan to Nahanaim 2 Samuel 17.24. prays earnestly in this
distress, in confidence of deliverance by God, in whom he promises to trust
because of former experience, and Gods engagement by promise touching the
Kingdom to him for his days, and his seed after him, thereupon grounds and
iterates his prayer, and upon restoration promises praise.

Psalm lxi. To the chief musician upon Neginoth, A Psalm of David.
To him that is most skillful upon the stringed instrument Neginoth, to which
this Psalm is chiefly set, do I David that made it, recommend it, for the care
and ordering of it in the Quire.

HEar my cry, O God, attend unto my prayer.
1 AS it ever has been my custom in all my former distresses to fly to thee,
so now in this, and as it has been thy constant usage to hear and deliver me
when I have done so, so now, O God, vouchsafe me the like grace and mercy to
hear me in this mine extremity, which presses hard upon me, and so do I upon
thee by prayer and supplication.

From the end of the earth will I cry unto thee, when mine heart is
overwhelmed: lead me to the rock that is higher than I.
2 Though I am driven far from thy sanctuary, and am banished from mine own
house and thine in Jerusalem, to the uttermost skirts of mine own Kingdom, yea,
though it were to the end of the world, yet will I be the same man as to my
faithful seeking unto thee, that I know is the same God to hear and help me,
when and wheresoever I call upon thee in the anguish and trouble of mine heart,
and greater cause I never had to be troubled, for I never was in greater
extremity, nor had less outward probability to escape, the whole Kingdom (in
effect) being revolted from me, therefore, Lord, thou in this my low condition,
raise up my faith to thee, and establish mine heart in thee, and thine
all sufficiency.

3 For hitherto thou have never failed me of deliverance, For thou have been a
shelter for me, and a strong tower from the enemy.
but have allwaies stepped 'twixt me and mine undoing, and how strong soever
mine enemy has been against me, thou have still appeared stronger for me, and
in my behalf.

4 And as I have found thee faithful, I will abide in thy tabernacle for ever:
I will trust in the cover of thy wings, Selah.
so shall thou find me, for I am resolved in what distress soever I am, and
whithersoever I am driven, though from thine Ark and Tabernacle now at
Jerusalem, yet shall my faith carry it about with me, and give me spiritual
residence in it, knowing that thy presence, though typed by it, yet is not so
typed to it, but thou can hear, and help me, and art present with me, to do
me good here, as there; for thou can stretch thy wings of power, and
protection, as far as I can stretch my faith, and that shall never fail in
every condition and place, to rely upon thee for it. Amen.

5 For I have double assurance from thee, For thou, O God, have heard my vows:
thou have given me the heritage of those that fear thy name.
both my former experiences having evermore had my prayers granted, and my vows
of praise, and thanks accepted, which at any time (and they have not been a
few) in mine extremities I engaged my self to perform unto thee, and the
promise fulfilled of being King over the people, that of all the world only know
and fear thee, as Christ over his Church, both I, and mine, and therefore am
not to be put besides it I am confident, but shall be restored to it again, and
leave it peaceably to my successors.

Thou will prolong the Kings life: and his years as many generations.
6 Yea, I doubt not but I shall outlive this trouble, and being anointed, and
appointed King by God, in special remembrance of the Messiah, I shall be
re-installed, and undoubtedly live out the uttermost period of my days, which
shall not be a few in that estate and condition.

He shall abide before God for ever: O prepare mercy and truth which may
preserve him.
7 This is as certain, as God is true, for herein I (his peculiar chosen for
that purpose) am by the grace and favor of God to be the type and symbol of
Christ's certain, and everlasting reign over his Church, notwithstanding all
his, and her troubles. To this end, Lord, show forth thy mercy in pardoning my
sin, and removing this judgment, and remember thy faithfulness to do as thou
have promised concerning me, for on these two crutches, Mercy, and Truth, do I
lean, and doubt not to be upheld, and preserved by them, and brought out of
this my present misery into a good condition, and restored to Jerusalem, and
thy Tabernacle again, in a peaceable and lasting possession of my Kingdom.

So will I sing praise unto thy name forever: that I may daily perform my vows,
8 And when thou have done this for me, then comes my turn to do for thee, even
to praise thee there, and to magnify thy power and goodness for this my
deliverance so long as I live, which I will certainly do, (and when I am dead
too, by an everlasting Memorandum, which I will leave of it to thy Church) and
will daily resort to thy Sanctuary, and there as often as I go to worship, will
not fail to remember mine engagements, and perform my vows unto thee for this,
and all other thy mercies, for which I stand indebted to thee.

The lxii. PSALM.
David abruptly breaks into a declaration of his sole confidence in God for his
own preservation, and his enemies destruction that malign him to the death,
but encourages himself in his trust in God, and advises all else that are
faithfully affected, and wait upon the promise to do so ^oo, fall back, fall
edge, showing how vain it is to trust in ought else, which he disswades them
from at any rate, because both by Gods word, and our own daily experience we
may learn, That it is his power, mercy, and justice, that only can, and will
save us, and utterly destroy our enemies.

To Seduthun, Psalm lxii. To the chief musician, to Seduthun, A Psalm of David.
one of the prime musicians, and the principal of all his lineage, do I David
that made this Psalm, recommend it for the care and ordering of it to be sung.

1 GOd has been pleased to exercise me under infinite and endless trials,
TRuly my soul waits upon God: from him comes my salvation.
none ever the like, and I have had no small temptations by them to impatience,
and despair, but yet they have not taken effect: I have, and do still hold out
dependingly, rely upon God, and patiently wait the issue, which I know shall be
good, for as I have had one trial upon the neck of another, so has he never
failed me with deliverance upon deliverance in most mavelous manner, no, nor
never will.

2 I have ever found him alone all-sufficient, He only is my rock and my
salvation: he is my defense, I shall not be greatly moved.
to deliver me out of my dangers, though they have been never so great, and
from mine enemies, though they have been never so many, and I doubt not but to
find him so still, for my faith is the same it was, and so is he, and will
approve himself no less I am confident in my behalf, whenever I stand in
need, so that though I may yet wade through more troubles, and undergo further
agitations, yet they shall be but like the rest, exercises and trials of my
faith and patience, they shall never undo me, but I shall sooner or later be
delivered.

How long will ye imagine mischief against a man? Ye shall he slain all of you:
as a bowing wall shall ye be, and as a tottering fence.
3 How long will you persist to compass my ruin, and think because I am but a
man whom you strive against, therefore it must needs be feasible, never
considering what God has decreed, and promised concerning me, which is not
frustrable by all that you can do, but shall make me, though a low and
despicable man in your eyes, able to hold out against you all, who instead of
ruining me, shall your selves be destroyed, your own weight of wickedness shall
serve to crush you, and your sinful courses shall lay you low enough, as
strong and well fortified as you take your selves to be.

They only consult to cast him down from his excellency, they delight in lies:
they bless with their mouths, but they curse inwardly.
4 They set themselves against me, as if they had no other enemy, fearing that I
shall be King, which they would gladly hinder if they could, they stick not to
say I rebelliously seek it, though they know, and have had experience of the
contrary, and out of their own mouths have pronounced me innocent, and
faultless, wished well to me for it in outward expressions, when
notwithstanding, in heart they hated me, and meant me nothing but mischief, as
I have found by experience.

My soul, wait thou only upon God: for mine expectation is from him.
5 My soul, what ever be the carriage of thine enemies toward thee, yet cast
not off thy confidence in God, but hold out patiently to expect the fulfilling
of his promise, and the issue of thy sufferings, make him thy sole stay and
trust, for thou have good grounds so to do.

6 I have ever found him alone all-sufficient to deliver me out of my dangers,
He only is my rock, and my salvation: he is my defense, I shall not be moved.
though they have been never so great, and from mine enemies, though they have
been never so many, and I doubt not but to find him so still, for my faith is
the same it was, and so is he, and will approve himself no less I am confident
in my behalf, whenever I stand in need; so that though more troubles may
befall me, yet shall they be but exercises, and trials of my faith, and
patience; they shall never undo me, but I shall sooner or later be delivered.

7 I have solely deposited my safety and honor in the hands of God, In God is
my salvation and my glory: the rock of my strength, and my refuge is in God.
which mine adversaries seek to ruinate; and to deprive me of both present
being, and future well-being, but shall do neither, for God has undertaken for
both, and will undoubtedly make it good.

8 Let me be your example, Trust in him at all times, ye people, pour out your
hearts before him: God is a refuge for us. Selah.
and encourager to trust immoveably in God at all times, in all conditions,
better or worse. Ye, his faithful upright-hearted people that have waited for
better times, as I have done, be not dismayed, but let your faith be steadfast,
though your state be various; believe in him, and pour out your souls in
fervent and faithful prayer to him, in my behalf, and your own; and take it
upon my word who have tried it, as well as upon his who has promised it, God
shall fail neither you nor me, if we do so, I dare engage for him.

6 Take man under what consideration you will, Surely men of low degree are
vanity, and men of high degree are a lie: to be laid in the balance, they are
altogether lighter than vanity.
and he is not to be confided in, for if they be of low degree, then base fear,
or mercinary lucre will byas them, and betray you, if of high degree, pride,
humor, or preferment sway them, and make them as mutable as the wind. You
shall find no stedfastness in men of any condition, but they are up and down,
now for you, and anon against you; a pair of empty scales is not more
uncertain, and moveable than they; and therefore trust not in them, rely not on
them, for they will deceive you.

Trust not in oppression, and become not vain in robbery: if riches increase,
set not your heart upon them.
10 Least of all trust in sinful courses; go not about to make your selves rich
and great, by oppression, and indirect ways; that is not the way to be happy,
but miserable; nay, though you now increase in the wealth, and welfare of
this world, by honest and laudable courses, yet put not your trust, nor take
not content in them, nor promise your selves felicity by them.

God has spoken once: twice have I heard this, that power belongs unto God.
11 God has in his word told us, how vain and inconsistent with our trust, all
sublunary things are, of no power to render us happy, or yield us support; and
by his providence he has also made it appear so, defeating all such
confidences, and frustrating such expectations; so that I (and you also) have
heard it, and seen it made good in experience, the emptiness and incapacity of
every thing under the sun, to answer our trust, and that the power thereof
only belongs to God.

Also unto thee, O Lord, belongs mercy: for thou renderest to every one
according to his work.
12 And as he only has power to answer our expectations, and make good the
hopes of them that depend upon him; so is he tied to it by those attributes of
mercy, and justice, which to persuade our confidence in him, are also held
forth to us in legible characters, both in his word, and works, having
promised, and daily performing acts of grace and favor to those that put their
trust in his goodness; and likewise in mercy to them, both threatening and
acting justice and judgments, upon their injurious enemies, wicked workers.

The lxiii. PSALM.
David being in the wilderness of Ziph void of outward comforts, and in some
desertion of soul, prays for to be delivered out of his spiritual wilderness,
by the shedding abroad of the love of God in his heart, which would comfort him
beyond all his sorrows: and from former experiences, strengthens his ^aith, and
clears up his heart touching future dispensations, not doubting, but affirming
the destruction of his enemies, and his own advancement to the Kingdom, Psalm
lxiii. A Psalm of David when he was in the wilderness of Judah.
for the good of the Church.

A Psalm made by David when he was in the wilderness of Ziph, belonging to the
tribe of Judah, hiding himself from Saul.

1 O God, O God, thou art my God, early will I seek thee: my soul thirsts
after thee my flesh longs for thee in a a dry and thirsty land where no water
is.
though I am in this solitary condition, am exile from amongst men, and a
companion for wild beasts, yet is not my faith staggered, nor my propriety in
thee impaired, but still thou art the same God in relation to me, and I have
the same interest in thee, that ever I had, no trouble shall make me forget my
dependencie, nor cause me neglect mine addresses to thee, whose favor and
assistance I prefer before all things, and will seek to thee for it in the
first and principal place, as undervalluing all things to it. My soul and
inward man is extremely impatient of some sweet spiritual communion with thee,
which would infinitely refresh and animate both soul and body, in this
uncomfortable condition, and barren wilderness, where I have accommodations for
neither.

2 To be here immediately supplied from thee (in default of those helps I had
in thy Sanctuary whence I am now driven) To see thy power and thy glory: so as
I have seen thee in the Sanctuary.
with those heart-ravishing aprrehensions of thine almighty power and glorious
grace, as heretofore I have had in the celebration of them, in thy Worship and
Ordinances at thy Tabernacle, by those emblematical representations, and types
of thy saving mercies, so comfortably exhibited therein in their lively signals.

Because thy loveing-kindness is better than life: my lips shall praise thee.
3 The memory whereof, though at distance, mind me of thine unspeakable love in
Christ, which to a hungry soul, and a believing sinner, is of higher price, and
more desirable, than life it self, which without it, is but death; and however
in outward respects my condition is so sad, yet, whenever thou will let the
taste of that thy love break in upon my spirit, I know the power and virtue of
it so well, that I am sure mine inward refreshings will bear down the sense of
mine outward wants and sufferings, and I shall be able to praise thee,
whatsoever be my pressures.

Thus will I bless thee, while I live: I will lift up my hands in thy name.
4 If I might be but always thus made happy, I should never be miserable, but
shall have cause enough to bless God, for thus blessing me? If I had no other
happiness but this all my life long, I should have no cause to complain, but of
perpetual rejoicing and confidence in God, his goodness and mercy to me?

My soul shall be satisfied as with marrow and fatness: and my mouth shall
praise thee with joyful lips.
5 Then shall my soul be as full as it can hold, feasted with the bread of life,
and heavenly dainties, far surpassing all creature comforts, even so full as to
make me break out in thy praises, uttered as in a rapture, or ecstasy.

When I remember thee upon my bed: and meditate on thee in the night watches.
6 Especially, when in this sort I can call thee to mind in the night season, in
my retired thoughts, and can express my mind when I lay awaking, after this
manner upon thee. O how sweet is it.

Because thou have been my help: therefore in the shadow of thy wing will I
rejoice.
7 How low soever be my condition either for soul, or body in respect of outward
means; yet, in regard of my former experiences of thy goodness, and
faithfullness in all essays, I will not be discouraged, but in the faith of
thee, and thy tender respects to me, I will clear up my heart.

8 I am sorely pursued, My soul follows hard after thee: thy right hand
upholdeth me.
and my soul in this my sad condition, pursues after thee, as fast as mine
enemies do after me, for I know that still thine heart is toward me; and that
by thy power and grace I am, and shall be upheld.

9 Yea, But those that seek my soul to destroy it: shall go into the lower
parts of the earth.
I shall stand, when by thy justice executed upon mine enemies, they shall
fall; and live, when they are dead and rotten, however it be ebb water with me
now.

10 I know they have not long to live, They shall fall by the sword: they shall
be a portion for Foxes.
their destruction is not far to; and that they shall die a violent death, when
they do die; as they have been cruel and bloudy-minded in their life, so shall
they die a bloody death, and shall fall by the sword of their enmies, who shall
expose their dead bodies, to open disgrace, and inconvenience for Foxes, and
vermin to prey upon, not affording them the common courtesy of burial.

11 But I that am appointed, But the King shall rejoice in God, every one that
swears by him shall glory: but the mouth of them that speak lies shall be
stopped.
and anointed of God to be their King, shall live to rejoice in his wondrous
preservation, and preferment of me to that office, whereof he shall give me
possession, as far remote as I seem to be from it now, and that not only to my
joy, but to the rejoicing of all his faithful people, who in sincerity of
heart profess and serve him, they shall joy and glory in me, as the type of the
Messiah, his rule and governance over his Church, who shall come as hardly by
it, and in the eyes of the world shall seem as unlike for it, as I to be King
of Israel. And when its their turn and mine to rejoice, on the contrary, those
that now make no conscience of any thing they do, or say, shall hang their
heads, and not have a word to speak in excuse, or justification of themselves,
because of despondencie of spirit, and their self-accusing consciencies, as
also shall Christ's enemies at last.

The lxiv. PSALM.
David having some advertisement of great desig^s upon him by his ^^^mies,
prays God to preserve him from them, who are so wickedly, and mischievously
bent against him, and accordingly is confident of his deliverance, and that
Gods just and remarkable judgments shall be^al his adversaries, to the
a^^esting of some with fear, and others with joy.

Psalm lxiv. To the chief musician, A Psalm of David.
To him that is the chief and principal of all the Quire, do I David that made
this Psalm, recommend it for the care and ordering of it to be sung.

HEar my voice, O God, in my prayer: preserve my life from fear of the enemy.
1 O Lord, my present calamity puts me upon great and earnest importunity, hear
me I pray thee that am sore put to it, and therefore both with heart, and
voice, press hard upon thee for the rescue of my life out of mine enemies
hands, that endanger it greatly.

Hide me from the secret counsel of the wicked: from the insurrection of the
workers of iniquity.
2 Let thy protection equal mine enemies projects, who turn every stone to
compass mine undoing. They have their private plottings, and conspirings to
surprise, or betray me; but Lord, do thou hide me, that these hidden stratagems
may never find me, as also from their open violence, for such is their malice,
and so cruelly are they bent, that nothing shall be unattempted upon me.

3 Incensing all they can against me, Who whet their tongue like a sword: and
bend their bow to shoot their arrows, even bitter words.
with false and slanderous reports, to the wounding of mine innocence, and set
me up as a mark to discharge all their callumnies, and falsehoods upon.

4 They know they believe me, That they may shoot in secret at the perfect:
suddenly do they shoot at him, and fear not.
and yet though conscious to their own wickedness, and mine innocence, they
spare not to backbite me, and privily to inform all manner of untruths against
me to Saul; they suggest and let fly any thing against me, that they either
hear, or imagine, never caring to wrong me, nor fearing to offend God, and
provoke his justice.

5 They animate one another, They encourage themselves in an evil matter: they
commune of laying snares privily, they say, who shall see them.
with hopes to prevail against me at last, and that I shall not escape them;
they consult to ensnare me at unawares by fraud and treaherie (any way so it be
done) and think to carry the matter so privately, and to cloak it so cunningly,
as that none shall suspect them, nor nothing can prevent them of their hopes.

6 They contrive exceeding subtly, They search our iniquities, they
accomplish a diligent search: both the inward thought of every one of them, and
the heart is deep.
and cast about in their thoughts and imaginations, with a great deal of study
and diligence, how and which way they may likeliest deceive, and destroy me,
and many times make sure of it; and indeed, so close and dissembling they are,
that it is impossible for me to know or avoid them by any skill or power of
mine.

7 But though I miss the mark; But God shall shoot at them with an arrow:
suddenly shall they be wounded.
and shoot far short of finding out their devices; and may be deceived by their
dissemblings, I am sure God he knows them, they cannot escape him; for all they
lie at a close ward, he knows how, when, and where to hit them, even when they
are most confident, and least fear any ill to befall them, shall his judgments
overtake them.

So they shall make their own tongue to fall upon themselves: all that see them
shall fly away.
8 This shall be the want of all their lying reports, and slanderous
back-bitings, instead of bringing evil upon me, upon whom they design it, they
shall bring sin, and that sin shall bring judgment upon themselves, yea, so
remarkable shall the hand of God be upon them, that men shall shun them as they
did Korah, and his accomplices.

And all men shall fear, and shall declare the work of God: for they shall
wisely cnsider of his doing.
9 The justice and terror of the Lord shall astonish men, and make them both
fear themselves, and caveat others to beware of the judgments of God from this
example; for it shall awaken the minds of men, and put them (all that have any
eyes in their heads) to consider the justice, power, and terror that
accompanies this judgment, in bringing their wickedness thus upon themselves,
and delivering me an innocent person.

The righteous shall be glad in the Lord: and shall trust in him, and all the
upright in heart shall glory.
10 A wonderful confirmation shall it be to all that are upright, and cause of
rejoicing, to see the care that God has over such, to vindicate their
integrities against evil doers, and to deliver them out of their sufferings by
executing apparent judgemens upon their enemies for their sakes; how shall this
make them trust God, and trust in God, what ever betide them? Yea, it shall
make all that are sincerely Godly, from this example of my deliverance, and
mine enemies overthrow, with confidence to bear up themselves in God, and
despise the power and malice of all wicked men, be they never so potent and
politic.

The lxv. PSALM.
David tells God with what saithfull expectations his people wait upon him for
mercies, to the end they might have new occasions to praise him, and though for
their sins they deserve no good from God, yet shall be of Free Grace do them
good, which is a point of special comfort to the faithful, to whom God is a
sure friend, and ever will be, and an enemy to their enemies, and accordingly
will keep and protect them all the world over, for whose sake it is, that
mankind, and all creatures enjoy such temporal blessings, and needful mercies
as they do.

To him that is the first and principal of all the Quire, Psalm lxv. To the
chief musician, A Psalm, and Song of David.
do I David, that made this Psalm, recommend it for the care and ordering of
it, to be both sung and played by voices, and instruments.

1 O God, PRaise waits for thee, O God, in Sion: and unto thee shall the vow
be performed.
we desire to be mindful of thy mercies, and still as thou give occasion of
praise, not to fail to return it, we are ready, O Lord, if thou will administer
fresh mercies to render thee the thanks of them, and to worship thee for them
as thou have appointed, not only inwardly in spirit, but also in thine
Ordinances, with Sacrifices, and Free-will-offerings, according to thy law will
we do it.

2 Thou Lord, O thou that hear prayer: unto thee shall all flesh come.
art the only God of thy peoples prayers, Let it more and more appear that
thou hear us, and that our prayers are powerful with thee for the good of
this poor Church, and thy servants, and people under this administration, that
it may be upon Scripture-record for thy Church in after-ages to encourage their
faith, and to invite them all the world over, to seek unto thee in hope and
confidence of like audience, grace, and success from thee.

Iniquiti^s prevail against me: as for our transgressions, thou shall purge
them away.
3 Mine own and my peoples sins are they that stand in the way of our prayers,
and hinder good things from us, so that I can neither have what I pray for, nor
do what I would successfully, by reason of them: but notwithstanding our sins,
yet my prayer shall be, that in mercy thou will pardon them, and make us a holy
people to thee, and my confidence is, that though our sins do abound, yet thy
grace shall super-abound to do this for us.

Blessed is the man whom thou choosest, and causest to approach unto thee, that
he may dwell in thy courts: we shall be satisfied with the goodness of thy
house, even of thy holy temple.
4 For were it not for thy Free Grace, and Election, no one man upon the face of
the whole earth, much less a nation could ever partake of thy favor, and have
their prayers heard; their sins would hinder them. But though all men are
deservedly out of favor by sin, yet there is a way of grace to bring even
sinners into respect with thee. And for all his sins, yet blessed is such a man
(for there are not many of them compared with the world) whom of Free-election
thou thus have made choice of to bestow thy grace upon, and made able by faith
to see thee a reconciled, and pardoning God unto him, and willing to receive
both his person, and his prayers into acceptance, and audience, and privileged
to frequent thy presence in thy Sanctuary, and perform thy worship there with
assurance of welcome, and spiritual embraces whenever he comes, the oftener the
better. I, and others of this number, I am sure shall find it so, we shall
never lose our labor, but when we come to ask grace, we shall have it, and so
often as we resort to thy tabernacle, and they in after-ages to thy temple,
(signs alike of thy presence) nay, all that are thine, and offer up prayers of
faith to thee in heaven, when there shall be neither tabernacle, nor temple,
which is their antitype, and signification, they shall have but what they will
of thee, even their hearts desire, what heaven and thy grace can afford them,
and us.

5 Such power have thy people, By terrible things in righteousness, will thou
answer us, O God, of our salvation: who art the confidence of all the ends of
the earth, and of them that are a^ar off upon the seas.
and their prayers with thee, as that nothing shall be impossible to them; if
thy Church have need, and be in extremity, why, that will be but thine
opportunity, miraculously to deliver them by evident judgments upon their
enemies, setting forth the power of prayer and thy faithfulness to them, who
have a tender regard of their preservation; and such as thou art now to us, a
few faithful ones in a corner of the world, such shall thou be when thy Church
is enlarged amongst the Gentiles, to all that are thine all the world over, far
and near, in Continents, and in Islands, every where, in all places thou shall
be their God, hearing prayer, and yielding salvation to them that trust in thee.

6 For as by the creation, Which by his strength sets fast the mountains:
being girded with power.
thou have made thy power to appear to all people in all the world, so shall
thy grace extend it self, and those that embrace the tender of it, shall be as
firm, and immovable by any human power, as the mountains, being established
and begirt with thine.

7 Who art able to master the most masterful things in the world which
generally is enraged at thy Church, Which stilleth the noise of the seas, the
noise of their waves, and the tumult of the people.
and people, where ever they be in it; they are tossed and turned like a ship
at sea in a storm, which as thou can calm and bring safe to land, so can
thou, yea, and so will thou too uphold thy Church in the midst of her
tumultuary perplexities, and troubles, which in all places she is exposed unto,
and also deliver her out of them.

8 Thy grace to, They also that dwell in the uttermost parts are afraid of thy
tokens: thou make the outgoings of the morning and evening to rejoice.
and protection of thy Church, shall be to all ages, and in all places most
observable, as well as here amongst us, for the same thou art now, the same
thou shall ever be to the wicked enemies of thy faithful people, terrible in
thy judgments upon them for their sakes, for whom also it is that thou
exercises such gracious providence upon the whole earth, continuing the frame
of nature which else would dissolve, and ordering each creature in its place,
time, and station to do its office; all the world from sun rising to sun
setting, fare the better for them.

Thou visitest the earth and waterest it: thou greatly enrichest it with the
river of God, which is full of water: tho^ preparest them c^rn, when thou have
so provided for it.
9 The earth and all things in it, are therefore seasonable, graciously, and
plentiously supplied with apt showers in times of need, sent from Heaven down
upon it, where thou have ordained the clouds to store up abundance of water to
be at thy dispose for the good of the creature, causing thereby such plenty of
corn to grow fit for man's gathering upon the face of the earth, thus husbanded
by God.

Thou waterest the ridges thereof abundantly: thou setlest the furrows thereof:
thou make it soft with showers, thou blessest the springing thereof.
10 By thy blessing upon man's labor it is, the earth brings forth such plenty,
sending seasonable showers upon tillage-land when its dry, and seasonable
sunshine when its wet, so that both ridge and furrow fructify by
interchangeable softnings and hardnings as there is cause, and the corn by this
means, from first to last through thy blessing, is made to grow and prosper,
which otherways would miscarry, and the taste of bread fail.

Thou crownest the earth with thy goodness: and thy paths drop ^atness.
11 Thou make the earth to excel with the beautiful varieties and rich
blessings that thou bestowest upon it, and causest it in the summer time to
bring forth, when and where thou please to visit it with fruitful and
seasonable showers from above.

They drop upon the pastures of the wilderness: and the little hills rejoice on
every side.
12 Which not only are bestowed upon the inhabited, and husbanded places of the
world, for man to reap the profit of, but also upon the unpeopled places, where
wild beasts and such creatures range, there for their use and sustenance do
thou extend thy bounty, making those places also that want the benefit of Art
and husbandry, and which in their own nature are less capable, both hills and
plains by thy blessing from above to fructify and flourish in their kind with
all needful conveniences for those creatures thou have appointed to feed
thereupon, and inhabit therein.

13 Thus are all places blessed by thee, The pastures are clothed with flocks;
the valleys also are covered over with corn; they shout for joy, they also sung.
the wilderness and mountains brings forth plenty of grass and cattle in their
kind, and the pasturable grounds which men make use of, they abound with herds
and flocks in their kind, the plowed and cultured places also they super-abound
in their kind with the abundance of corn and grain of several sorts that grow
thereon, so that they seem to be sensible in a kind of thy blessings to and
upon them (by the return they make, and bring forth, of plenty and beauty)
and thereby to offer their praises to thee again, and do occasion abundance of
joy and gladness in the owners and inhabitants that reap the profit of these
thy gracious providence.

The lxvi. PSALM.
David fore^els the happy condition of the Gentiles, how that God shall have
his Church among them, as unlikely as it is, that shall worship and serve him
faithfully: which he will he as careful of, and propitious to, as ever he was
to them, and what things he has done for them are not to be forgotten, but to
be had in remembrance of the faithful in all ages as the pledge of like mercy
and protection unto them* as the praise-worthie deliverances he has wrought
for them out of all their sufferings and dangers that they have long undergone,
and given them Canaan the type of heaven, which his people what ever they may
suffer he^e shall be sure of. For which mercies to all Israel, but principally
for his own particular ones which have been extraordinary, he promises praise
with a free heart and a lib^ral hand in all sorts of sacrifices appointed by
God: and would have the upright take notice for their learning, that he never
praid, but was answered, which he speaks to encourage such, not Hypocrites, who
have no such privilege as he and the rest of the ^aithful have, whose prayers
shall be effectual, as his was. Psalm lxvi. To the chief musician, A song or
Psalm.


To the President of the Quire is this Psalm committed for his ordering it to
be sung, and played by voices and instruments.

MAke a joyful noise unto God all ye lands.
1 THough all nations but we are as forreiners to God, yet shall he have a
Church of larger extent, even all the World over, that shall worship and praise
him with joyful acclamations for his saving truths and benefits vouchsafed to
them.

Sing forth the honor or his name: make his praise glorious.
2 They shall have their temple as well as we, even the Gentiles shall partake so
liberally of his saving graces, as that in the Antitype and complement of all
our ceremonious music, they shall upon the coming of Christ, and his having a
Church amongst them, spiritually, and in a more divine strain than ours, honor
and magnify his saving goodness, and gloriously praise him for it in higher
degrees of faith and knowledge.

3 Magnify God for the terrible victories he has at sundry times wrought upon
the Gentiles by the power of his might on the behalf of us his chosen people,
Say unto God, How t^rrible art thou in thy works? through the greatness of thy
power shall thine enemies submit themselves unto thee.
through the greatness of the power of whose grace, shall these same rebellious
Idolatrous Gentiles one day be won to take Laws from God, and become his people,
that now are in open enmity against him and his Church to destroy it, for
which he so destroys them.

4 The time shall come, that not we only, but the whole World shall know thee,
All the earth shall worship thee, and shall sing unto thee, they shall sing to
thy name. Selah.
fear thee, and believe in thee the Lord, and shall offer thee that worship in
substance which ours portrayes out in shadows, the whole earth shall be thy
temple and Quire, for thy Church shall every where praise thee and magnify thy
saving goodness, to them, Lord, let this thy Kingdom come.

5 I would have all that are Gods in all ages, Come and see the works of God:
he is terrible in his doing toward the children of men.
often to recollect and consider for the strengthening of their faith and
glorifying of God, the wondrous things from time to time that he has done for
his Church, and the works he has wrought for the preservation of it, how
terribly he has ever proceeded against the men of this World that have
offended them, and what judgments he has always executed upon such, and ever
will.

6 How of old when his people Israel were in jeopardie, He turned the sea into
dry land: they went through the flood on foot, there did we rejoice in him.
and (humanely) impossible to escape being encompassed on all hands with
unavoidable dangers, the sea before, and Pharaoh and his host behind, how then
the Lord by miracle wrought for them and divided the sea, through which they
passed upon dry land, so also when they entered the land of Canaan, what way
the Lord made for them over Jordan, in like sort though at that time it
overflowed, not going over it by help of boats or bridges, but just as they did
before through the red sea, the waters were divided miraculously, and they went
through on foot in the face of their enemies, as if there had been no river
betwixt; O the joy that then was apprehended by our forefathers at the sight
and experience of such wonderful power, and goodness of God extended to his
Church in their so supernatural accommodations for their safe transporting, and
their enemis destruction, and disheartning! which ought also in the memory of
it to rejoice us and the people of God for ever, being wrought by God as a
pledge and assurance of his continual love toward the whole body of his
Church, and that he is the eternal Savior of it, from which act therefore
ought to flow cause of rejoicing to us, and all the Godly in all ages, in the
faith of the same immutable goodness.

He rules by his power for ever, his eyes behold the nations; let not the
rebellious exalt themselves. Selah.
7 And power, which shall never be weakened, but as he then was, so he is and
ever will be of the same strength and sufficiency to stand his Church in
steed, and to over-master their enemies, nor will he be one jot less careful of
his people hereafter than heretofore, but as circumspect over them for their
good in all parts of the world, when they are universally called and gathered
out of all nations to be peculiarly his, as he was then to those that were so.
And as that ought to be an example and encouragement of joy and confidence for
ever to the Church of God, so of terror and humbling to her enemies, that
having such a president before their eyes upon sacred and everlasting record
dare rebel against God by wronging his people, thinking to suppress and root
them out, because they are few and short of them for power and policy, but it
shall turn to their ruin in after-ages as well as then; They may be sure of it.

O bless our God, ye people, and make the voice of his praise to be heard.
8 All Gods people ought to bless God and magnify him for what he has done,
and assuredly will do for his Church, but especially, we, that are beforehand
possessed of so many mercies and great deliverances, we ought to resound and
publish the praise of his famous acts for the Gentiles to take notice thereof,
thence to be confirmed in faith and hope.

Which holds our soul in life and suffers not our feet to be moved.
9 From what he has done for us; who, but for his care over us had long ere
this been swallowed up a thousand times over of death and destruction, by our
many enemies which yet were never able to have their will of us, but that still
we are a people, and have been upheld against, as it were, the whole world, who
because of Gods peculiar choice, have a special malignant hatred to us.

10 For, For thou, O God, have reproved us; thou have tried us, as silver is
tried.
Lord, thou know what troubles we have undergone since we have been a people
to thee, and all to the end thou might have occasion to show how firm thou
art to us, as thou have ever made it to appear, and to try whether we will be
as firm to thee, in our faith in thee and worship of thee, thou have proved us
over and over again by afflictions, to give us testimony of thee, and that
thou might have assurance of us, a faithful sincere people.

11 Thou thus to try us and show thy self, Thou broughtest us into the net,
thou laidst affliction upon our loins.
have many times led us into inavoidable dangers, and to outward appearance
exposed us into the power of our enemies to be destroyed by them, and suffered
them to oppress us sore as in Egypt and otherwise.

12 We have undergone as base and cruel usage as can be imagined, Thou have
caused men to ride over our heads, we went through ^fire and through water^;
but thou broughtest us out into a wealthy place.
counted no more of them than the dirt in the streets, and enduring the
uttermost hardships under cruel taskmasters and bloody enemies as could
possibly be invented and contrived against us, and such things must thy Church
always look for in this World, but thou have made us amends at last, and all
that thou promisedst have thou performed, for thou have by a strong hand
invested us in a happy condition, and possessed us of a fruitful land, spite
of all our enemies, so shall thy Church have deliverances here, but let not
them never doubt of heaven hereafter.

13, 14 What I would have others do, I will go into thy house with
burnt-offerings: I will pay thee my vous.
I hope I shall not fail for mine own part to practice; I am resolved upon
consideration of what I have recounted, Which my lips have uttered, and my
mouth has spoken, when I was in trouble.
that thou have done for us, and I am sure wilt do for thy Church; to give thee
praise and thanks not only inwardly in my heart, but also outwardly in the
eyes, and for the example sake of all others, according to thine appointment by
solemn sacrifices: and especially for my self, who have been in not a few, nor
those no small troubles, at what time I vowed them to thee, and have tasted
accordingly of not a few and those no small deliverances.

I will offer unto thee burnt sacrifices of fatlings, (...) inc^nse of rams: I
will offer bullocks wit^ goats. Selah.
15 What ever thou have commanded to be offered thee, I will do it to the full
in the performance of my thanks and acknowledgement of thy mercies, both for
number and worth, even the best I can get, what charge soever I am at. And that
with a free heart.

Come and hear all ye that fear God, I will de^lare what he has done for my
soul.
16 Thou have set me up as a pillar and monument of thy unspeakable goodness to
thy servants: which I hope and do desire, that all thy people in all ages of
the World would take notice of, and to that end I will leave it upon record,
even the wondrous mercies I have partaked of, and miraculous preservation that
I have had.

I cried unto him with my mouth, and he was extolled with my tongue.
17 How that I never in my need put up my prayer to him in fervor and faith,
but I had a return answerable, and my prayer was turned to praise.

If I regard iniquity in my heart: the Lord will not hear me.
18 I speak not this to embolden hypocrites, as if they were so privileged, who
are apt enough to pray in their need as well as the Godly, but for the
encouragement of the sincere and upright, such as I bless God I am, harboring
the love of no known sin in me, I know how I should have sped if I had, not as
I have done, but have had the deaf ear turned upon me; and well I had deserved
it, as all hypocrites and carnal, formal, professers do.

19 But assuredly the Lord from time to time has heard me, But verily God has
heard me: he has attended to the voice of my prayer.
and answered me too, very graciously, yea, he has carefully had respect to
me, whenever I poured out my heart before him in the anguish thereof, in time
of trouble.

20 I bless the Lord he has blessed me, Blessed be God, which has not turned
away my prayer, nor his mercy from me.
and not sent me away without mine errand when as I have come to him in prayer
and supplication, nor withheld his mercy from me in mine extremity, but has
effectually appeared for me, and so he will for all that trust in him, and seek
to him, as I have done.

The lxvii. PSALM.
The Psalmist prays that God would in such a sort be good to Israel, that the
Gentiles may note it, and be won by it to embrace his saving truth, and serve
him as well as they. But for the full ^ffecting of their conversion, he wishes
heartily for the coming of Christ and his Kingdom, and the happy days that
shall be then all the World over.

To him that is most skilful upon the stringed instrument Neginoth to which
this Psalm is chiefly set, Psalm lxvii. To the chief musician, on Neginoth. A
psalm or song.
is it committed for his care and ordering it be sung and played.

1 THe good Lord be merciful unto us in the pardon of our sins, GOd be merciful
unto us, and bless us; and cause his face to shine upon us. Selah.
and graciously benevolent and propitious in multiplying blessings upon us, and
manifesting his favor to us, so as it may be notorious in the eyes of the
World. Even so be it.

2 That the whole earth, That thy way may be known upon earth, thy saving
health among all nations.
that now wander out of the way may be brought to acknowledge thee for the only
true God, and to worship thee aright, when they perceive the mercies, that we
that do so, do enjoy above all others, and may be brought to hearken and
enquire after the saving righteousness thou have revealed to us, whereof they
are utterly ignorant.

Let the people praise thee, O God; let all the people praise thee.
3 Lord let the Gentiles as well as we have the knowledge and experience of thy
rich mercy and saving goodness, that they may praise thee for it, yea, spread
and proclaim it to all the World, that thou may every where have a people to
magnify thee for it upon the whole earth.

O let the nations be glad and sing for joy: for thou shall judge the people
righteously and govern the nations upon earth. Selah.
4 When shall Christ come to proclaim the year of Jubilee, even life and
salvation to the Gentiles, to their unspeakable joy and thy unspeakable praise,
and to take the Government into his hands, which he shall sway with equity and
justice both to the good and to the bad? Lord hasten it.

Let the people praise thee, O God, let all the people praise thee.
5 Let the Gentiles as well as we have the knowledge and experience of thy rich
mercy and saving goodness, that they may praise thee for it, yea, spread and
proclaim it to all the World, that thou may every where have a people to
magnify thee for it upon the whole earth.

Then shall the earth yield her increase; and God, even our own God shall bless
us.
6 O that this time were now, for when it is, happy shall those days be, when
the Messiah shall come, infinite of blessings of every sort temporal and
spiritual will he bring with him. The whole earth that is cursed by the fall
shall by him be blessedly restored, and made a Canaan, fruitful to God and man,
and God who was become a stranger by it, shall by and in him be as much and
more his peoples, in more near propriety and relation than ever, and bless
them with better blessings through grace, than ever they were and could be
capable of other ways.

God shall bless us and all the ends of the earth shall fear him.
7 Then shall be a time of sweet harmonious interchangeable correspondencies
betwixt heaven and earth; God he shall pour out his spirit upon all flesh, and
spread his Gospel over the whole earth, and accompany it with no small store of
temporal mercies, and his people shall from all the ends of the World be hereby
gathered to him, and give up themselves in faith and obedience to be his.

The lxviii. PSALM.
David upon the great victories he had had over his enemies, and the remove of
the Ark to its settled abode in Jerusalem, prays and prophesus the infelicitie
of the adversaries of Gods Church, and the prosp^ritie of the righteous,
whereof he advises them to be confident, and therein to rejoice; for God in
mercy will be mindful of the oppressed, and injustice of the oppressors,
whereof they had had ample experience by mavelous deliverance out of Egypt;
and settlement in Canaan, in the gaining whereof he gave them wonderful
victories, and as their case was prosp^rous then, so he prefigures it shall be
again now in his time, both Church and Commonwealth shall flourish, because of
the favor of God to them and his protection over them, for he is to be a
resemblance of Christ after his ascension, victor over all his enemies. Having
shown the happy consequences of the Arks remove, he amplifies the manner of
its transportation from the house of Obed-Edom, in what order and with what
harmony it was conveyed thence to Jerusalem, whither he excites all Israel to
come and duly frequent i^; and promises himself as much of them both one and
other, assuring them, that as its God that has put them into this good
condition, so must be preserve them in it, and therefore must be sought to for
it, and then shall the Church flourish from a tabernacle to a temple, even like
unto Gospel Times, when Gentiles as well as Jews shall make up the Church,
whereof he would have the world take notice, and be (...) to God for it when it
is, who now only is made manifest to them by works of creation, by which they
are to know him, and for which they are to praise him, even him, who is at
present the God which they the Israelites worship, and who from heaven and his
sanctuary has so blessed them, and overthrown their enemies as he has done.

To the President of the Quire is this Psalm committed by David that made it,
Psalm lxviii. To the chief musician, A psalm or song of David.
for his ordering it to be sung and played by voices and instruments.

1 THine Ark, LEt God arise, let his enemies be scattered: let them also that
hate him sly before him.
O Lord, the token of thy presence has hitherto been in obscurity in
comparison of what it shall be upon this remove of it to Jerusalem, there to be
placed upon thy holy hill, where it shall be in far more eminency than
formerly, and thy worship and service better acted and frequented. And as has
been thine Ark, so has been thy self under a cloud toward thy people till
now, that I doubt not will be far otherwise for time to come, and wilt let the
World see, that as thy glory and worship is promoted, and thy people awakened
as it were out of their supine neglect of thee, to honor and serve thee, so
will thou arise for them to do them good, and make them a flourishing nation
under me the type of Christ and his Government, so that their enemies, which
hereafter shall be thine, because theirs, shall by thy power and in thy wrath
be discomfited and confounded in all their attempts against them, and they
shall destroy and be victorious over all that have formerly triumphed over
them, and though still they hate them, yet shall they not now in the
flourishing estate of thy Church be able any more to hurt them; Lord let all
these things be so.

As smoke is driven away, so drive them away; as wax melts before the fire,
so let the wicked perish at the presence of God.
2 Let thine and thy Churches enemies come to naught, scatter their forces and
vacate their counsels and let it appear by the nature and manner of thy
destructive judgments upon such wicked wretches, that it was thee that did
it in the behalf of thy people and for their sakes, with whom and for whom thou
art as really present, as thine Ark is present in Jerusalem.

But let the righteous be glad: let them rejoice before God: yea, let them
exceedingly rejoice.
3 Let it be now the portion of thy faithful ones, thy poor afflicted people to
joy their while in thy presence; as they have been sadned a long time at thine
absence, let them so clearly see thee for them and with them, as may even
ravish their hearts, and raise up their spirits exceedingly.

4 In confidence of this, Sing unto God, sing praises to his name; extol him
that rides upon the heavens by his name Iab, and rejoice before him.
that he will now be with and do after this sort for us his Church and people,
in the faith of it I say (for ye need not doubt it) sing praises to him for it,
even for his grace and faithfulness to us, and the just remuneration of our
enemies which he counts his, let your thoughts be of him and praises to him
answerable to his greatness, let your faith pierce the Heavens to behold him
there in his glory and majesty over-looking the World from thence, and ruling
and ordering all things here by his mighty power, who only has his being of
himself, and gives being to every thing else, which can be said of no God or
Gods besides him, as such be sure to magnify and praise him; and in the faith
hereof, that this his infinite power, absolute regiment and glorious independent
Being, shall be improved and employed for you, do you rejoice in him.

5 God is both gracious to help those that are in need, A father of the
fatherless, and a judge of the widows, is God in his holy habitation.
and just to relieve those that are oppressed, have they never so few friends
or many enemies, this though all the World be against us, we shall, even
therefore, be sure of him on our side, he will from heaven hear our prayers put
up to him in his tabernacle, take our parts, and judge our cause against them
that are against us.

6 Those that are comfortless exiles, God sets the solitary in families: he
brings out those that are bound with chains, but the rebellious dwell in a
dry land.
solitarily wasting their days far from home in penury and pressures,
incident to banishment amongst strangers: God has his eye on such to pity
them, and to give them a settled habitation in a comfortable enjoyment of their
possessions and relations at home, he has compassion on those that suffer for
his sake, which they shall not do always, but shall have deliverance from
under their yoaks and bonds, and be preferred to a free and happy condition,
when as those that are wicked and oppress them, shall be transplanted from that
their prosperous estate, and made miserable.

O God, when thou wentest forth before thy people; when thou did march
through the wilderness. Selah.
7 We have cause to say, so that have had so great experience of his power and
goodness toward us, in that wonderful enfranchising of us out of our Egyptian
thraldom, and destroying the Egyptians before our faces, what wonders did he
work to bring it to pass which we have cause to record in all the circumstances
of it, as a certain pledge to his Church for ever of his care over her. How
then, when the Lord by evident tokens of his presence in a pillar of fire and
cloud conducted and protected his people our forefathers out of Egypt,
through the red sea, and along throughout the desert wilderness. Let it never
be forgotten.

The earth shook, the heavens also dropped at the presence of God: even Sinai
it self was moved at the presence of God, the God of Israel.
8 How then I say he did appear with them and for them, altering the very course
of nature many times for their supply and benefit, both the heaven and the
earth, the one and the other though senseless of all other things, yet seemed
sensible of the presence of the Lord with his people, The earth quaking with
awful reverence, the clouds doing fealty and paying their tribute in emptying
themselves of their exhalations. Sinai also that mighty mountain, when in that
dreadful manner God gave the Law and manifested his presence upon it, was
affected at it with signs of terror and amazement, and all this was when he
undertook the protection and conduct of his people Israel, the emblem of his
Gospel Church, and her travel through this world, her wilderness, to Canaan
which is above.

9 And though we left behind us the fruitful plains of Egypt over-flowed with
Nilus, Thou, O God, did send a plentiful rain, whereby thou did confirm
thine inheritance, when it was weary.
yet have thou brought us into a good land of hills and valleys, blessed by thee
from heaven with seasonable and fructifying showers, whereby thou did approve
it to be a land of promise and thy gift, having made good it to thy people and
thy blessings unto it, as it stood need.

10 Thy Church and people Israel chosen to be so from out the whole earth, Thy
congregation has dwelt therein: thou, O God, have prepared of thy goodness for
the poor.
as thou have placed them, so thou have preserved them there to this day,
maugre all their enemies; Thou have provided for, and protected of thy mere
grace this thy little poor handful of people, maliced and opposed by all the
world.

11 The Lord in exigencies gave his people many wonderful deliverances and
victories, The Lord gave the word, great was the company of those that
published it.
and so administered occasion of praise ever and anon to them, which in an
instant was rumored over all the land, and in every ones mouth, the good news
of thine almighty assistance still as thou did vouchsafe it, passed from one
to another, like the word in an army, with joyful acclamations and praises.

12 Many potent Princes with powerful armies that came against Israel were by
miracle defeated, Kings of armies did fly apace: and she that tarried at home
divided the spoil.
and made, both they and their armies to fly for their lives, leaving behind
them rich booty, and such plenty of it, that the very women who with fearful
minds abode at home doubting the issue, when they heard the news, with joy
made have to congratulate the victory and share in the spoil.

Though ye have lien among the pots, yet shall ye be as the wings of a dove
covered with silver, and her feathers with yellow gold.
13 Though in Egypt your fathers were in woeful slavish condition conversant in
brick and pot-kils, doing all the base work, and being as basely used, and
though since their deliverance thence, you, their posterity have even in this
good land for your evil ways endured much affliction, and undergone great
hardship by tyrannous usages of insulting enemies, yet be confident of this,
the time is come, wherein God will be as propitious to you for his grace sake,
as ever he has been severe against you for your sins, you shall now be a rich
and flourishing nation, blessed with grace and peace, and admired for your
glory and beauty.

When the Almighty scattered Kings in it, it was white as snow in Salmon.
14 You know when first God brought his people into this land, (which then lay
wholly in the darkness of Idolatry) and destroyed the Kings thereof, one after
another for their sake, how famous was this nation then, upon that glorious
change? and how resplendent in the eyes of God and men by the establishment of
Gods pure worship, and the admirable and clear wonders wrought by God here;
why, such now shall be again, though it has been long in infelicitie and
deformity since those days by our sins, and Gods just judgments.

The hill of God is as the hill of Bashan, an high hill as the hill of Bashan.
15 Sion the mount whereon God has chosen now to pitch his tabernacle, and in
it the Ark of his presence, and there, and there only to be worshipped in
solemn and more than ordinary manner, it is by this become more famous for
this Soul-fatning and spiritual repast that is there in such plenty to be had
than that ledge of hills called the hill of Bashan, situate beyond Jordan, is,
for its extraordinary fruitfulness and fatning of cattle, it is raised by this
divine prerogative to a height of eminency and note equal and beyond the
height and greatness of Bashans hills, exceeding it both in profit and pleasure.

16 Why do you the tall and fruitful hills in several parts of the World seem
to carry it so high, Why leap ye, ye high hills? this is the hill which God
desires to dwell in, yea, the Lord will dwell in it for ever.
to joy and pride your selves in your privileges of nature so far above this
of Sion? whereas this one supernatural privilege of Gods residence and worship
here, is more worth than you and all yours put together; for all your
privileges of nature, richness of soil, and high towering tops, yet has God
past you by, and chosen this to be his place of residence on earth, and the
very type of heaven, nor will he change it or alter his mind to transplant
himself, and his worship from thence unto any of you, but has set down his
staff here, his promise is passed to it which he will not revoke. And what is
true of Sion above all other hills, is as true of the spiritual Kingdom of
Christ, typified in me and my Government, which for that reason is transcendent
to all the Kingdoms, nay, the empires of the whole world.

^7 And let not this residence and presence of God we so much magnify our
selves in, The chariots of God are twenty thousand, even thousands of Angels:
the Lord is among them as in Sinai, in the holy place.
be judged of by carnal apprehensions, nor the strength of Sion by outward
appearance, as if the one nor the other afforded no more protection and help to
Gods people than we see with our eyes; Our faith is it that must instruct us in
this matter, to which only God appears aright in his power and majesty
excelling all earthly might. The potentates of the World esteem their strength
by the number of men, horses, and chariots that they can arm and muster. But
what say you to Angels? one whereof is able to destroy thousands, whole armies
of such, nay, what say you to thousands and millions of such Angels, these are
they though invisible, wherewith God appears in the behalf of his Church,
fights for and defends the Kingdom of Christ, and so shall mine, and yet if we
doubt that men may be too hard for Angels, know, that God, even the
irresistible Almighty God is commander in chief over and amongst these his
heavenly host, who alone is sufficient without auxiliaries either of men or
Angels to safeguard his people and place of worship and presence, where he is
as really, though not so visibly, and in as great majesty, strength, and grace
as he appeared on mount Sinai in power and terror, I hope we remember that,
and so should our faith represent him to us now, when we come thither to
worship him and seek unto him in any strait.

Thou have ascended on high, thou have led captivity captive: thou have
received gifts for men, yea, for the rebellious also, that the Lord God might
dwell among them.
18 As I am raised from a low estate to this height of dignity and office, to
be King over Israel, and so made able to overcome those that overcame them, and
to enrich them with the spoils of their enemies and the presents of foreign
nations that seek to me for friendship, which I am ready (for thou have put me
into a capacity to stand mine enemies in steed) to extend to friend, and so be
they never so opposite, thereby to make way for, and hold forth in type thy
willingness, O blessed Savior, to do the like to Jew and Gentil, who shall
draw all men to thee when as thou art lifted up, and raised from thy low estate
of humiliation and death, by a glorious resurrection and ascension, which is as
sure to be, as if it were, and indeed virtually and energetically, as also
typically and in figure, is already done, for so even now as I upon the throne,
so do thou sit at Gods right hand, having conquered all spiritual powers and
enemies to thy Kingdom, as the world, flesh, sin, death, and Satan, who, but
for thy conquest of them, whom by thine ascension thou art victorious over, had
absolute dominion over thy people, who thereby are set at liberty to serve thee
that art enriched in thy humane nature, with all the glorious graces and
excellencies that heaven and the divine nature can afford thee, that thou
may be the bounteous and gracious dispenser of them to thy body mystical,
thy spiritual Israel, that are a willing people to thee, as also empowered and
put into capacity to vanquish and overpower the most ignorant and gainsaying,
that the power of thy spirit and grace may be glorified in and upon thine
enemies, as well as upon thy friends that profess and worship thee, to make
them do the like, and bring them also in favor with God.

19 We who are the people of God, Blessed be the Lord, who daily loadeth us
with benefits, even the God of our salvation. Selah.
do at present day by day, blessed be thy name for it, reap the happy fruits of
Christ's virtuall ascension in his power and goodness, what mercies of all
sorts, spiritual, temporal, are heaped and showred down upon us? And what
salvation has the Lord wrought for us, time after time, which ought to be
ascribed to him. Amen.

20 We can speak by experience, He that is our God, is the God of salvation;
and unto God the Lord belong the issues from death.
that the God we worship and believe in, can save and deliver, I think we have
found it so, and indeed he only can deliver, and save alive, who only has
vanquished and overcome death it self, and has the sole dominion and disposal
of it, and all the means and ways that lead to it, to prevent them be they
never so imminent, as to his people.

But God shall wound the head of his enemies; and the hairy scalp of such a one
as goes on still in his trespasses.
21 And to succeed them to his enemies and theirs, they shall feel the weight of
his hand, if they persist to bruise the heel of his Church, at last he will
break their head, let him be who he will, be as sure as his head grows upon his
shoulders, or hair upon his head, so sure will God meet with him sooner or
later that does so, if he will not repent and be converted.

The Lord said, I will bring again from Bashan, I will bring my people again
from the depths of the sea.
22 The Lord has purposed and promised to do as great things under me for his
people as ever he did heretofore, when he vanquished great and Giant-like
Kings; as Og the King of Bashan for their sakes, and delivered his people out
of his hands, as also out of the hands of Pharaoh by deviding the red sea, and
conducting them thorough; we may be, and have been driven into straits since
then, (and so shall the Church in all times) but the same power shall still
appear for us to relieve us in our greatest extremities, whereof those things
were a pledge.

That thy foot may be dipped in the blood of thine enemies, and the tongue of
thy dogs in the same.
23 Yea, such fearful vengeance shall God take of the implacable enemies of his
Church, as that he shall make way thorough their blood for his peoples
felicity, which he shall enable them by his power and assistants, to shed in
abundance like water spilt upon the ground, of no more regard shall it be.

They have seen thy goings, O God, even the goings of my God, my King, in the
sanctuary.
24 Thy people have often had occasions by thy mercies, vouchsafed them
heretofore to praise thee in thy sanctuary, they have seen there, upon great
victories, solemn thanksgivings, but was ever seen the like to this happy day,
wherein the Ark of God is carried to the Tabernacle pitched in its place of
residence the mount of God, with what infinite solace and expression of joy all
Israel joined their forces unanimously to accompany it, following me their
King, attending the Ark of thee my God, and my King, unto the place of its
abode thy holy mount.

25 It joys me to think in what comely order, The singers went before, the
players on instruments followed after; amongst them were the damsels playing
with timbrels.
and with what sweet harmony of affections and music it was done; How the
voices they marched in the foreranck, singing thy praises, and exalting thy
name, the instruments came next ecchoing to them, and resounding thy glory,
amongst which were orderly intermixed the Damsels playing upon Timbrels, so
universal was this joy, and so glorious was the show, that both men and women
did their uttermost, to express their zeal and forwardness in it.

26 And now the Ark is set in Sion, Bless ye God in the congregations, even the
Lord, from the fountain of Israel.
forget not to congregate your selves to it, but come in flocks and troops to
bless this God which is your God, and Lord, that rules over you and for you;
all that are the faithful offspring of our blessed fountain and forefather
Jacob, whose name of Israel, purchased by his prevailing with God, is ever
since named upon us, come, repair to it, to the Arc and presence of the Lord,
and be you also wrestlers and prevailers with him there.

27 And I cannot doubt of your forwardness and faithfulness so to do, There is
little Benjamin with their ruler, the princes of Judah, and their council, the
princes of Zebulon, and the princes of Naphtali.
that express so much of joy in its transportation, from the least to the
greatest, both those that are near, and those that are afar off, will be
mindful of this mercy, and of their duty to frequent his service, and seek his
presence and protection. Benjamin that was so dear to Jacob, his youngest
darling child, I am sure will follow his fathers steps, and though he was the
last of his sons, yet will be the first and forwardest to worship the God of
his father, even the whole Tribe of them with their godly ruler, an example to
the rest. Nor I hope shall Judah the royal Tribe with their Cheiftaines and
Senators be behind, who ought indeed to give exsample of zeal, that are
preferred in Authority above the rest; no nor will I am confident Zebulon and
Nephtali plead excuse by reason of their remoteness, but even they also,
together with their heads and elders quickening them thereunto, will be forward
to worship the Lord in his sanctuary at Jerusalem.

Thy God has commanded thy strength: strengthen, O God, that which thou have
wrought for us.
28 Into what a glorious and powerful condition, has our God brought us; how
has he by his sovereign all-disposing power and Authority, made thee O Israel
to be thus potent and exalted in strength, and dominion over thine enemies,
that ere-while wast so much at an under? O therefore seek to God, let it be
your prayer, slack not your hands, grow not sinful and secure, but be you
stirred up by his mercies to frequent him duly, and pray to him earnestly to
continue to be gracious, and to establish us in this estate whereinto he has
brought us.

Because of thy Temple at Jerusalem, shall Kings bring presents unto thee.
29 Wait and pray for the building of the glorious Temple in Jerusalem, the type
and figure of Christ and his Gospel Church, instead of this Tabernacle, which
will be a flourishing time indeed, then shall not only God be worshipped
within the boundaries of Canaan, but the renown of the God of Israel shall so
spread, as even foreign potentates shall further both the work and the worship,
and acknowledge him the sole sovereign of the world.

30 For this purpose, Rebuke the company of spear-men, the multitude of the
bulls, with the calves of the people, till every one submit himself with pieces
of silver: scatter thou the people that delight in war.
Lord, prepare the way to that Triumphant golden age of peace, by me a man of
war and thy Church militant under me, chastising those opposite enemies of
thine and ours, that notwithstanding all the evidence thou have given, and
clear demonstration of thy power and goodness to us thy people, are in arms and
hostility against us, let them know to their cost that it is neither their
number, nor their rage that shall prevail, let both they that lead, and they
that are misled, know thus much, let them see their labor in vain, and be
brought to own thee for their God, and to do thee homage, and such as will not
but choose rather to hold on their course of enmity and opposition, Lord, take a
course with such, to destroy them out of the way, that they may not always be
thorns in thy peoples sides.

31 O that the Lord would hasten the coming of the Messiah and his Kingdom,
Princes shall come out of Egypt, Ethiopia shall soon stretch out her hands unto
God.
which all these things portend, like as the glorious and happy reign of
Solomon draws nigh, whose favor and alliance, Egypt and Ethiopia shall seek
and obtain, oh how then would the Gentiles come in apace under his subjection,
yea, the most unlikely, Egypt that arch-enemy of the Church, and Ethiopia the
offspring of Cham, these or as bad as these will willingly offer themselves,
and glad they may be accepted into his service.

32 That day is coming, Sing unto God, ye Kingdoms of the earth: O sing praises
unto the Lord. Selah.
some dawnings of it appear even now in these our days, if your eyes, O ye
Gentiles were open to see it in these illustrious Types, but you shall see the
sun shine forth in full brightness, amongst you that now are in darkness, then
shall you know what it is to be the servants of the Lord, and with glad hearts
shall all his people in all places of the world, sing praise and give glory to
him. O that it were so now!

To him that rides upon the heavens of heavens, which were of old: lo, he does
send out his voice, and that a mighty voice.
33 To him that though you be not his servants, yet is he your Lord and Master,
the great God sole Creator of all things, who made the heavens higher and
lower, ordained them of old with all those lights you see shine in them, and
has ever since maintained, ordered, and ruled them (and much more the world
under them) their manifold motions and influences in their several orbs and
operations, by his Almighty power and wisdom; from whence you hear the voice of
Thunder how terrible and loud it is, why, God sends it purposely to mind you of
him, and to acquaint you with that power and terror he is endowed with, that
you may learn to fear him.

Ascrib ye strength unto God: his excellency is over Israel, and his strength
is in the clouds.
34 Give therefore glory to God, magnify his power and greatness, and know that
this, who is thus excellent, is he that is the God of Israel, whose power is
thus mightily manifested, as you hear and see in the heavens.

O God, thou art terrible out of thy holy places, the God of Israel is he that
gives strength and power unto his people: blessed be God.
35 O Lord, thou art a dreadful God, where thou art present, there is power and
strength with thee, whether in heaven, or in thy sanctuary, for from both those
places, thou have and wilt assist thy people after a mavelous sort, hearing
their prayers above, which they shall pour out here below in thy sanctuary and
the courts thereof, and work deliverance for them, and give victory to them,
wonderfully destroying their enemies, and subduing them under them, blessed be
thy name for it. Yea, Glory be to thee alone.

The lxix. PSALM.
David in great distress prays for speedy relief, bemoans himself and the
wrongs he under-went for God, in whom yet he comforts himself, and falls again
to earnest prayer for speedy relief, appeals to God for justice and vindication
of his wrongs, being innocent and friendless: In the spirit of prophecy he
curses the wicked Jews, that crucified Christ in the persons of those that so
cruelly and unjustly persecuted him, his type; wishing them such temporal and
spiritual miseries, as have since befallen them. But prays that God would
remember to raise him up out of his distresses to be King of Israel, as Christ
shall be raised from death, and the grave to be head over his Church, promises
then to praise him for it, and promises himself the acceptance of his praises,
and assures his few friends, Gods faithful people that lived in expectancy of
it, that it shall certainly be, both for their good, and the good of Gods
Church in after times, And exhorts the world, and all creatures in it, to be in
their kinds praisefull for this mercy of his Churches establishment and
flourishing, for whose sake they have theirs.

A Psalm made by David, Psalm lxix. To the chief musician upon Shoshannim, A
Psalm of David.
and set to Shoshannim, an instrument of six strings, and by him, committed to
him that is most skillful thereupon, for his care and ordering of it in the
Quire.

1 O Lord, SAve me, O God, for the waters are come in unto my soul.
its high time for thee to appear for me, I am brought to such a pinch, as that
I must sink if thou do not save, for the waters are as it were broken in at
several leeks round about the ship, and into my very cabin, so that I am about
utterly to perish, if thou help not suddenly, for such are my miseries, and so
is my life instantly endangered without thy present remedy.

I sink in deep mire, where there is no standing: I am come into deep waters,
where the floods overflow me.
2 I am implunged into manifold miseries, and sink deeper and deeper into them,
as a man in mire, I can find no footing upon earth, all humane helps fail me,
so that I am as a lost man, like one that's past wading, taken of my feet, and
can find no bottom, the waters are as it were both above and below me, for I am
in such a condition, as if I were swallowed up of the main sea amongst the
billows, so that I must be saved by miracle.

I am weary of my crying, my throat is dried: mine eyes fail while I wait for
my God.
3 Thou, Lord, know how many, and what earnest prayers I have put up unto
thee in the trouble of my soul, in so much, as by the exhausting my natural
moisture with continual complaint, my tongue is tired, my throat sore, and my
voice hoarse, and I have looked so long for thy promised deliverance, and wept
so soar before the Lord for it, that both tears and sight begin to fail me.

They that hate me without a cause, are more than the hairs of mine head: they
that would destroy me being mine enemies wrongfully, are mighty: then I
restored that which I took not away.
4 I am a lone man and innocent, causelessly hated and unjustly persecuted to the
death by the King and all the Kingdom, judged a capital offender, and mine
estate confiscated by might not by right, and given as forfeited to those I
never wronged one farthing, as if I were a fellon, bound to make restitution of
what I never stole nor took away.

O God, thou know my foolishness; and my sins are not hid from thee.
5 O God, thou know me, none better, that I am a sinner I confess it, its
well enough known to thee that I am so, subject to, and guilty of the same
aptitude to transgress as other men, yea, my particular sins that have and do
spring from mine innate pravity, which are not a few, are all of them obvious
to thee. But though I am not innocent as to thee, yet do I, and dare I make
thee my judge as to others, whether I be guilty of these treasonable practices
they lay to my charge, and condemn me for, yea, whether ever any such thing
came into my thoughts.

6 Let not those, Let not them that wait on thee, O Lord God of hosts, be
ashamed for my sake: let not those that seek thee, be confounded for my sake, O
God, of Israel.
(O Lord, that have power enough to do otherways) who humbly and dependingly
live in faithful expectation of the fulfilling thy gracious promises to thy
Church, by my means and under my government be disappointed of their hopes, by
my miscarrying through the power and rage of mine enemies; Let not them that
are thy people and whose God thou art, and by reason of thy promise do hope,
and heartily pray for better days to befall them, when thou shall set me over
them, be blasted in their hopes, and disheartened in their prayers by mine
undoing: neither now, O Lord, let me be a stumbling-stone of thy peoples faith,
nor in ages hereafter, to whom I shall appear upon record.

7 O Lord, Because for thy sake I have born reproach; shame has covered my
face.
thou know I never sought nor coveted the Kingdom from Saul, but it was thou
that did cast it upon me unlooked for or desired, anointing me to it when I
was keeping my fathers sheep, and thought nothing less, but for this fact of
thine, I am accused and condemned as a Traitor, and a proud aspiring person,
which slanders (though innocent) yet shame me to think that I should be thus
thought of, when thou, Lord, know its nothing so.

8 My nearest kindred, I am become a stranger unto my brethren, and an aliant
unto my mothers children.
mine own flesh and blood, that lay in a belly with me emulate and censure me
as bad as others, and think it is my pride and rashness that brings this
trouble upon me, and them for my sake, whereupon they avoid me all they can.

9 For truly, For the zeal of thine house has eaten me up; and the reproaches
of them that
Lord, such has been my zeal for thy Church and people, the promoting the good
and prosperity thereof, according as thou have promised and designed I should,
as that I am wholly taken up (as shall the Messiah) with the desire of it, not
mine own self-seeking or interest, as I am falsely and slanderously reported,
by those that indeed are in heart thine enemies, and wish and speak evil of me
only for thy sake: as they shall of Christ who they strike at and wound
through my sides, as they shall thee through his.

When I wept, and chastened my soul with fasting, that was to my reproach.
10 Let my behavior be at never such a distance, to the designs they fasten
upon me, let me walk never so unlike to such attempts, more saint, than either
politician or soldier like, mourning for the sins, and lamenting the
judgments of God upon the Kingdom, instead of coveting it for my sake; why, it
was all one, this humbling my self, and fasting before the Lord, was judged to
be done in hypocrisy and design.

I made sackcloth also my garment: and I became a proverb to them.
11 I could not so demean my self, but whatsoever I did it was wrested to
misprision, if they saw me in sackcloth, they would point at me and say in
derision, Behold the King.

They that sit in the gate spoke against me; and I was the song of the
drunkards.
12 It is not some, but all, of all sorts, that are thus bent against me, they
that should be wiser, graver, and juster, and of better example, even the
magistrates and men in office and judicature, have their invectives and jears at
me, and much more the deboisheers and rabscalions in their cups and
merry-meetings make sport with me, and scornfully abuse me.

But as for me, my prayer is unto thee, O Lord, in an acceptable time: O God,
in the multitude of thy mercy hear me, in the truth of thy salvation.
13 After this sort do men demean themselves, but as for me I study not to
reveng my self, or to return like for like: no, Lord, thou know mine
application and appeal is to thee, and however I am so unacceptable to men, yet
not to God; when all men put me from them, then can I betake my self to God in
prayer and be welcome, he never refuses me: accordingly, O Lord, let me find
thee now, for I am in the midest of a multitude of miseries, therefore in my
behalf oppose against them the multitude of thy mercies, remember thy promises
touching me, my deliverance and preservation, to fulfill them faithfully.

14 For though to my sense and outward appearance, Deliver me out of the mire
and let me not sink: let me be delivered from them that hate me, and out of the
deep waters.
according to the face of things in humane probability. I cannot escape this
danger, yet my faith is not so extinct, but I know all things are possible to
God, and therefore pray thee even for the greatness sake of my present
affliction, to deliver me out of it, that I fall not into the hands of my cruel
enemies, nor by them, but that thou will save me from drowning, that am as it
were already so near it, that I have but this word to speak to thee, before I
sink quite over head and ears irrecoverably.

15 Let not this torrent of afflictions overwhelm me, Let not the water ^loud
overflow me, neither let the deep swallow me up, and let not the pit shut her
mouth upon me.
O thou that command the raging seas, much more land-storms, let me not be
swallowed up of them, like a ship wracked in a Tempest; thou know into what
a depth of miseries I am implunged, find a way out for me to escape, and let
them not bring me to an utter and untimely end.

16 Let me not pour out my complaints in vain, Hear me, O Lord, for thy loving
kindness is good; turn unto me, according to the multitude of thy tender
mercies.
nor in effectually open my case unto thee, but, Lord, consider what I say,
hear me to purpose, grant me releif, let thy loving kindness, which according
to thy promise I know thou bear me, manifest it self in gracious
beneficence, for I am sure, thy love is not a vain but a beneficent love, thou
art a benefactour to whom thou art a wel-willer; accordingly, good Lord, let me
find the sweet effects of the earnings of thy bowels, and the tenderness of
thy compassions toward me, which I know to be very great, in a happy and
powerful relief and release of me out of these miseries, according to my
prayers.

And hide not thy face from thy servant, for I am in trouble: here me speedily.
17 And do not suffer me thus uncomfortably to remain under a cloud, without
sense of thy favor, or experience of thy goodness, who am related to thee as
near as man can be to God, for I am thy servant chosen by thee, and devoted to
thee, and therefore under thy protection, as also because of my trouble, which
as it is for thy sake, so it is great and my danger imminent, and so therefore
must be (and I pray thee so it may be) thy help and succor.

Draw nigh unto my soul, and redeem it; deliver me because of mine enemies.
18 Thou seem to be afar off, though thou art not so in reallity, for my
dangers greaten upon me, and the nearer they approach my life, the farther
(seemingly at least) art thou from it in compassion and providence, but, Lord,
change the scene, come thou speedily to my rescue, let thine own goodness, and
mine enemies ungratiousness, move thee to work my deliverance.

Thou have known my reproach, and my shame, and my dishonor: mine adversaries
are all before thee.
19 For thou, Lord, have known mine innocence, and their injuries, how they have
heaped up lies and disgraces upon me, the wrong they have done me, they are
known to thee, and so are the doers of them, though they are so many I know
them not all, yet thou do, and both can and wilt do me justice upon them.

Reproach has broken my heart, and I am full of heaviness: and I looked for
some to take pity, but there was none; and for comforters, but I found none.
20 Who have so wronged and slandered me, that knowing mine own innocence, it
cuts me to the very heart, and is a great grief unto me, and the more, for that
I have none to take my part, for as some that know me to be innocent do against
their own consciences traduce me, so others that believe so of me, their mouths
for all that is stopped, and they dare not or will not speak a good word for me,
but all men are against me, or as good, for none are for me, to show any
compassion to my wronged innocence, or to afford me any comfort and support in
my misery.

21 Nay, They gave me also gall for my meat, and in my thirst they gave me
vinegar to drink.
instead of comforting me, those that I had need of, and applied my self unto,
added affliction to affliction, in stead of affording me relief when I craved
it, they fell upon me with all manner of bitterness and sour usage; wherein I
am, as a member mystical of Christ's body the Church militant, so also a type
of Christ personal, that shall be thus befriended on the Cross, comforted with
no other cordials then gall and vinegar, in the agony of his soul.

22 Let the present plenty and prosperity of mine enemies, Let their table
become a s^are before them: and that which should have been for their welfare,
let it become a trap.
whereupon they bear themselves so high, and which makes them so proud and
merciless, be the cause of thine humbling them low enough, let abused mercies
turn to curses, as shall Christ himself be to his unjust and inhumane
persecutours though sent of God to better purpose amongst his people, proud of
their privileges which they abuse to their own destruction, that was intended
for their salvation.

23 Let them that persecute me the type, Let their eyes be darkened that they
see not; and make their Ioi^es continually to shake.
and Christ the Antitype, be ruined never to see good days, but live in
perpetual infelicity, anguish, and fear, let them neither know what tends to
their good, nor have power to make use of it, but miserably and irrecoverably
miscarry in horror and darkness like hell it self.

Pour out thine indignation upon them, and let thy wrathful ang^r take hold of
them
24 Blast them in every thing they put their hands unto, and make them a noted
people by the terrible executions of thy wrathful displeasure against them,
and fearful judgments upon them.

Let their habitation be desolate, and let none dwell in their tents.
25 Let the land spue out my persecutours and Christ's, let them become as
vagabonds upon the face of the earth exposed to destruction, that neither they
nor their posterity may ever inherit thy favor, or inhabit this inheritance of
thine and theirs any more, but be desolate.

For they p^rsecute him whom thou have smitten, and they talk to the grief of
those whom thou have wounded.
26 For as they do by me, so will they do by Christ, because thou that art the
sovereign God of all the earth, art pleased in righteousness to exercise and
try thy servant with hardship, and to humble me before thou exalt me, these men
instead of praying for, and pitying of me, they take advantage of thine hand
upon me, and double and trebble my misery, yea, persecute me to the death,
which thou never meantest, and because thou art pleased to wound me and cast me
down, with a purpose to heal me and raise me up, like as Christ shall die and
be buried to rise and live again, they to the grief both of his heart and mine,
shall, and do blaspeme thee, scoffing at me in my misery, and him in his
torments.

Add iniquity to their iniquity: and let them not come into righteousness.
27 Do thou give them over unto their lawless and sinful lusts, until they
heap up their iniquities that the measure of them be full, and let them never
partake of pardoning grace, nor share in thy justifying or renewing
righteousness.

Let them be blotted out of the book of the living, and not be written with the
righteous.
28 Let them by their fearful sinnings, and thy fearful judgments appear and be
known to be that which indeed they are, hypocrites and reprobates, none of
thine elect, nor never let them be such, as are thus wicked enemies to thee and
thy Christ, and persecutors of thy faithful Church and innocent people, let
them be taken away from amongst them, and neither have the name of Israel named
upon them here, nor be partakers of their divine and heavenly privileges
either here or hereafter.

29 But, But I am poor, and sorrowful: let thy salvation, O God, set me up on
high.
Lord, take notice into what a low and uncomfortable condition I am brought by
my persecutors for thy sake, which though it be their doing, yet is it, I am
sure, by thy permitting, let them not have their wills quite to overthrow me,
but do thou that art faithful and able to deliver, bring to pass thy promised
salvation, and that high dignity of my being the Kingly type of the Messiah.

30 Then, I will praise the name of God with a song, and will magnify him with
thanksgiving.
Lord, will I not forget to do my homage, and pay my tribute to thee from whom
I am sure I must have my Kingdom, and of whom I will hold it, and will declare
in the ears of all the people to the praise of thy free grace, thy choosing me
for it, and bringing me to it, through such difficulties, and by such
deliverances, all which I will repeat and register in Psalms and Songs
enumerating them and thy power, grace, and mercy to me in them, and with my
uttermost zeal and skill will thankfully exalt thee for thy goodness,
illustrating the full demensions of it.

31 And as I promise praise and thanks to God, This also shall please the Lord
better than an ox or bullock, that has horns and hoofs.
so I dare promise my self his acceptance of them spiritually, and faithfully
offered up in the merits and mediation Christ, who is the kernel and scope of
all legal sacrifices, which be they never so great and good, and exactly
performed, are but shadows, and of no acceptance with God, saving as they are
offered in spirit, and faith of him their Antitype.

The humble shall see this and be glad: and your heart shall live that seek God.
32 O the happiness and joy of that day not only to me, but to all the humble
and faithful expectants of it, like that of Christ's, and doubt not but it will
come to the reviving of you from out your fears and doubts, and the animation
of all such as you are, in times to come, to seek the Lord as you have done, in
hope of the like success and issue in greatest distress.

For the Lord hears the poor, and despises not his prisoners.
33 For the Lord has an ear, to hear the prayers of his poor afflicted people
in all places and all ages, and how despicable so ever they may be in men's
eyes, subject to all manner of injury and abuse, yet God is regardfull of them
that suffer for his sake, and that most, when they are in the worst condition.

Let the heaven and earth praise him, the seas, and every thing that moves
therein.
34 Let the heavens, the earth, and sea, and all the creatures that he has
given existence to in all these, let them I say be sensible of, and in their
kind thankful to him.

For God will save Sion, and will build the Cities of Judah: that they may
dwell there, and have it in possession.
35 For the good that God will do for his Church, which if he should cast off,
it would be the dissolution of all things even the whole creation, but he of
his grace will preserve Sion, the place of his worship, and save his people
Israel all the Church he now has, and not let them be ruinated, but will now
make them flourish, and will so maintain and uphold them, and will never suffer
his Church to cease from off the earth, but will preserve it, and all created
Beings, for his Churches sake.

The seed also of his servants shall inherit; and they that love his name shall
dwell therein.
36 There shall not be wanting a holy seed to inhabit this holy land, and to be
a Church unto him, whom he will preserve and bless, and all things for their
sakes; yea, for his elects sake, the whole world shall subsist.

The lxx. PSALM.
A Psalm made by David, Psalm lxx. To the chief musician A Psalm made by David,
to bring to remembrance.
and by him committed to the President of the Quire, for his ordering of it;
the purport whereof, is to put God in mind of his piteous state, and his faith
in him, thereby to gain relief.

THis whole Psalm consisting of five verses, MAke have, O God, to deliver me,
make have to help me, O Lord.
is the same with the five last verses of the 40. Psalm; Let them be ashamed
and confounded that seek after my soul: let them be turned backward, and put
to confusion that desire my hurt.
viz. the 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. verses; Let them be turned back for a reward of
their shame: that say, Aha, Aha.
being a part of that Psalm here repeated upon the like occasion of distress,
Let all those that seek thee rejoice, and be glad in thee: and let such as love
thy salvation, say continually, Let God be magnified.
some few words only varying in the texts, But I am poor and needy, make have
unto me, O God: thou art my help and my deliverer, O Lord, make no tarrying.
which being compared, serve the better to explain, and illustrate the sense.

The lxxi. PSALM.
David being in great straits by Absoloms conspiracy flies to God for refuge,
which he prays for, and presses hard by many arguments taken from Gods
purpose, his enemies wickedness, his own hope, trust, and long experience; the
strangeness of his condition, his declining age, and constitution, his enemies
insultation; upon which last he re-inforceth his prayer for himself, and
against them; declares the stedfastness of his hope, notwithstanding
strengthened by former experiences. And prays, that his latter end, as well as
his beginning, may glorify and demonstrate the power, and faithfulness of God,
and particularly* in this deliverance; for which he promises to praise and
magnify the Lord, Psalm lxxi.
all the ways in the world.

1 O Lord, IN thee, O Lord, do I put my trust: let me never be put to confusion.
thou know that what ever be my dangers, yet my faith still sticks close to
thee, and thy promises of deliverance, let me therefore always be preserved
accordingly, and now amongst the rest, let no power, or malice of mine
enenemies, ever be able to prevail against me, to frustrate my hope, or thy
faithfulness.

Deliver me in thy righteousness, and cause me to escape: incline thine ear
unto me, and save me.
2 But always remember thy gracious engagements, which though made to me of
free grace, yet art thou bound in justice now to make them good; therefore
deliver me according to them, and by thy wisdom and power, bring to pass mine
escape out of this perilous condition that I am in, favor me with thine
audience of this my request, and let it be effectual, and prevalent with thee,
to the preserving of my life.

Be thou my strong habitation, whereunto I may continually resort: thou have
given commandment to save me, for thou art my rock and my fortress.
3 Let me find some security, and certainty of protection from thee, still upon
the making out of my faith, and prayer unto thee in every strait, as that I may
thereby be invited, and encouraged to come as often as I have need, and never to
fail thee, because thou never failest me. I know thy promise, and purpose is to
save me, and so long I cannot perish, for nothing can contradict thy will, no
earthly power can hurt me, seeing thou have undertaken to preserve me, whom
every thing must, and shall obey.

Deliver me, O my God, out of the hand of the wicked: out of the hand of the
unrighteous and cruel man.
4 O God, in whom I trust, and whom I serve, let me not fall into the hands of
such wicked wretches, that traitorously seek my life, and have not the fear of
God before their eyes; deliver me from the power, and from the purposes of this
mine unnatural son, and his accomplices, that rebelliously seek to murder me, to
get the Kingdom.

For thou art my hope, O Lord God: thou art my trust from my youth.
5 For though I seem helpless, yet I am not hopeless; O Lord my God, I must do
as I have done, trust in thee still; thou know I ever had a propensitie in
all my necessity to creep under thy wings, as well young, as old.

6 I am not ignorant, By thee have I been holden up from the womb: thou art he
that took me out of my mothers bowels, my praise shall be continually of thee.
nor never was since thou gave me understanding to consider it (though it be
a thing little thought of by most men) how wonderfully I was conceived, and
preserved both in the womb, and ever since by thy power and providence, more
than by any secondarie causes, otherways all humane helps could never have
brought me alive into this world; it was, and is, thou, O Lord, that from first
to last, have evermore upheld me, else I had either never been, or long before
this, had miscarried in so many dangers as I have gone through; no part of my
life but has liberally tasted of thy praiseworthy mercies and benefits, which
I hope, and purpose, gratefully to remember, and praisefully retaliate to my
death.

7 My condition is wonderful strange, I am as a wonder unto many: but thou art
my strong refuge.
and hopeless in most men's judgments, who in diffidence of my success, and in
amazement at this prodigy of my sons rebellion against me, and seeking my
life, they fly from me as if I were some monster, few, or none taking my part,
or ever thinking to see me prosper; but what ever I am to them, I know what
thou art to me, even an all-sufficient God, able to protect me in, and bring me
out of this very distress, and strange trial.

8 Let me have still more and more experience of thy power and goodness, Let my
mouth be filled with thy praise: and with thy honor all the day.
fresh matter for my spirit to work upon; all along my life, furnish me with
opportunities of praising, and magnifying thee, for I love to be so employed,
and now especially is the time, by delivering me.

Cast me not off in the time of old age: forsake me not when my strength
fails.
9 Leave me not void of thy mercy, and goodness now, that by it have carried
me on thus far of my life, be not less good when I have more need, but as thou
have been my God the two foregoing parts of my life, youth and middle-age, so
continue to be in this third and last, wherein I have as much need, if not
more, than ever.

For mine enemies speak against me: and they that lay wait for my soul, take
counsel together.
10 For all the ways in the world, I am labored to be depressed, I am
traduced, and slandered to my people, and rendered as an evil doer by mine
enemies, to cloak their wicked, and unnatural rebellion; and all the plots, and
ways that can be devised, are set on foot, and complotted by Achitophel, and
the rest, to mischieve me, that rather than their lives, would bereave me of
mine.

Saying, God has forsaken him: persecute and take him, for there is none to
deliver him.
11 Giving out, that however God has taken my part heretofore; yet now for my
prodigious sins, God has in his just judgment brought upon me, these
prodigious punishments, that shall certainly bring me to ruin; and therefore
they assure themselves they need not fear the issue, but that if they pursue
me, (a proscribed person) they are confident to overtake, and defeat me, my
party being so small, and God mine enemy.

O God, be not far from me: O my God, make have for my help.
12 But, Lord, let it appear that thou art not so much mine enemy, as they
think for, nay, that thou art still my gracious God, and mighty deliverer, by
stepping in betwixt me and ruin, so contrary to their epexctations, and
wonderful rescuing of me out of their power.

Let them be confounded, and consumed, that are adversaries to my soul: let
them be covered with reproach and dishonor that seek my hurt.
13 Let me be preserved whom causelessly they seek to destroy, and dethrone, and
let them that do so, taste the bitter fruits of their own evil ways, let
destruction and confusion be their portion, that would make it mine, and let
them to their shame be found themselves to be the evil doers, and reap the
disgrace they have sowed for me,

14 And however the clouds gather over my head, But I will hope continually:
and will yet praise thee more and more.
yet my hope shall bear up, I will not despair to the last, but be confident
that this storm will blow over, and that I shall yet have this deliverance
added to, and above all the rest to praise thee for.

15 I shall have cause to glorify and praise thee for thy faithfulness all my
life long, My mouth shall show forth thy righteousness, and thy salvation all
the day: for I know not the numbers thereof.
thou will never fail me of thy promise touching deliverance and preservation,
but the same thou have been, thou will be so to me still in such like
mavelous mercies, which however my desire and purpose is to praise thee in
some proportion, to them which deserve so infinitely, yet must I needs confess
I am short of them, they being so surpassing great and many, and rather the
object of mine admiration, than thanksgiving, which yet shall not be idle, but
alwais acting to my power.

16 I will bear up and hold out steadfast in believing, I will go in the
strength of the Lord God: I will make mention of thy righteousness, even of
thine only.
my faith shall not now no more than at other times fly back from God, either
by despair, or taking to, and relying on other helps and refuges, his power
shall supply my weakness. It is his promise, and faithfulness thereunto, that I
trust in, and doubt not to praise him for, by effectual experience, now, as
ever heretofore I have done, yea, upon it, and it only do I depend, and ever
did so, in all my difficulties.

17 O God, O God, thou have taught me from my youth: and hitherto have I
declared thy wondrous works.
I have been trained up in the frequent experiences of thy never failing
faithfulness, and goodness to me all my life long; always heretofore have thou
done me good, and never but given me cause of praise and thanksgiving by
merciful and powerful deliverances, which I have celebrated accordingly.

Now also when I am old and gray headed, O God forsake me not: until I have
showed thy strength unto this generation, and thy power to every one that is to
come.
18 And now, Lord, approve thine unchangeableness, make out thy goodness to the
uttermost period of my life, when I have most need stick closest to me, now in
my declining old age, O God, withdraw not thine assistance, but still be
helpful to me, and magnify thy power in my weakness, that I may have cause to
declare thy stedfastness and al-sufficiencie to preserve and deliver out and
out, and may be a pattern to the faithful throughout the whole series of my
life, not only to the past, but present, and all succeeding ages and
generations, of thy power to protect by thy wonderful deliverances vouchsafed
me in all of them.

Thy righteousness also, O God, is very high, who have done great things: O
God, who is like unto thee.
19 And thy faithfulness is no less to be extolled, than thy power, and will be
by this mercy magnified in the same degree; equally sharing in the glory of
all the wondrous deliverances thou have, and shall vouchsafe me; O God, how
will thou alone be exalted, and thy peoples faith strengthened, when they shall
consider what thou have done for me from one end of my life to the other? it
will cause astonishment and admiration, and make thee to rule alone in all thy
peoples hearts.

Thou which have showed me great and sore troubles, shall quicken me again: and
shall bring me again from the depths of the earth.
20 For my sake they shall never have cause to despare, when they consider how
often I was plunged into most intricate perplexities, and yet by thine almighty
hand, has been extricated out of them, as I shall be out of this, as well as
all the rest, and shall have a resurrection out of this state of death and
misery, wherein I seem to be swallowed up as of the grave

21 Yea, Thou shall increase my greatness: and comfort me on every side.
thou shall make this humbling, a step to my further exaltation, and as a foil
to my future glory which shall shine the brighter for it, and my present
sorrows shall bring me an increase of comforts, favor and peace, with God and
man shall succeed them.

22 And as thou shall exalt my glory, I will also praise thee with the
Psalterie, even thy truth, O my God: unto thee will I sing with the harp, O
thou holy one of Israel.
and increase my comforts, so will I magnify thee in thanksgiving and
praises, which with mine uttermost power and skill I will give thee, and
particularly for thy truths sake, which has so firmly stuck to me, and never
deceived me whenever I relied upon thee for it who have ever been a faithful
God unto me, therefore will I all the ways I can devise, celebrate thy praises
in the most solemn and affectionate manner that may be: O thou God of truth,
and never failing faithfulness to thine ellect and chosen people, that put
their trust in thee, worship and serve thee in holiness and righteousness.

23 Lord, My lips shall greatly rejoice when I sing unto thee: and my soul
which thou have redeemed.
I will every way that instrument and voice, art and nature, inward and outward
man can act and perform, celebrate thy praises, and that with energie of
spirit, in the joyful impressions, and apprehensions of the things I utter,
will I express my mind, and not with bare lip labor, my mouth shall speak my
heart, and both shall greatly rejoice in thy salvation.

24 Nor shall thou be the only subject of my song, My tongue also shall talk
of thy righteousness all the day long: for they are confounded, for they are
brought unto shame that seek my hurt.
or solemn worship, but also of my discourse, and common converse; thy
faithfulness, and just performance of thy promises, shall never be out of my
mouth; I will make it even my table-talk for all to take notice of, when as
thou shall, as I know thou will, with shame and destruction disapoint, and
defeat mine enemies that conspire against me, to take away my life and Kingdom.

The lxxii. PSALM.
David having set Solomon upon his throne, a little before he dyed, prays for
him, and prophesies of him according to what he prays, how blessed a King he
shall prove, and what a flourishing Church and Kingdom there shall be in his
days, how he shall be admired abroad, and beloved at home, admirably
prefiguring Christ, and his spiritual Kingdom.

Psalm lxxii. A Psalm for Solomon.
A Psalm made by David near his death, for, and concerning his son and
successor, Solomon, and his government.

GIve the King thy judgments, O God: and thy righteousness unto the Kings son.
1 O God, thou by whom Kings reign, as thou have called me, and my son Solomon
after me, to sway the Scepter of Israel, so do thou enable both me, (for that
little time I have yet to live) and him in an happy succession to me, with
those gifts of wisdom and knowledge, as also of justice and holiness, that are
fit for Isreal's King to have above the Tyrants of the world, who is to
represent the Messiah, thy son his government, in, and over his Church.

He shall judge thy people with righteousness: and thy poor with judgment.
2 And Lord, what I pray for, I also prophecy in thy name concerning this my
son and successor, whom thou have especially chosen before all his brethren to
rule in my stead. He shall with understanding and uprightness, administer
justice and judgment unto this thy people committed to his charge, and with
impartialitie, with just and fatherly pity, shall he give easy access to, and
judge the cause of the poor of thy people, as well as of the rich; he shall be
no accepter of persons, thy propriety in them, shall make him accept and
esteem them equally, and administer justice to them accordingly.

3 O the wonderful happiness of peace and plenty, The mountains shall bring
peace to the people: and the little hills by righteousness.
by the blessing of God that shall be all the land over under his government,
by the righteous administration thereof.

4 He shall not only be a father to the poor of thy people Israel, He shall
judge the poor of the people: he shall save the children of the needy, and
shall break in pieces the oppressor.
but a just impartial Judge also to all other poor that come under his
governance, and a merciful protector of the helpless, one, or other, against
those that by might would wrong and oppress them, not suffering a just cause to
miscarrie for want of money, and friends to carry it on, but himself shall be
the poor man's advocate, and the judge of his oppressor, who shall not escape
by his greatness, but be severely, yet justly censured according to his merits.

5 In his time the Temple shall be built, They shall fear thee as long as the
sun and moon endure: throughout all generations.
and the Church and people of Israel put into a flourishing condition, the
worship of God in the types, and significant ceremonies thereof, shall be in
his time completed, never to receive any more augmentation after; who shall
reign as well long, as happily, and is to be the liveliest type of Christ, the
savior and King of his Church, who in the age of the Gospel when he is come,
and taken upon him the Kingdom, shall have a people, a Church, as in all
places, so in all ages of the world, that shall fear and worship him in spirit
and truth, according to those resemblances that shall be in Solomon's days.

6 His wise and just administrations with sweet and gracious deportments, He
shall come down like rain upon the new mowen grass: as shours that water the
earth.
shall clear up the hearts of his people, and make Israel by the blessing of
God, grow again, and be a flourishing Commonwealth, that has undergone sad
times and afflictions formerly, like as Christ shall with evangelical
Doctrines, and the heavenly divine graces of his spirit, distill into, and upon
the hearts of his people, to their spiritual growth and refreshing.

In his days shall the righteous flourish: and abundance of peace so long as
the moon endures.
7 Together with the worship of God, shall the number of the righteous people of
God increase in his days, and exceeding great happiness shall be to them
during the long reign of Solomon, even as under Christ when the church shall
grow, and be blessed with all spiritual imbellishments throughout the ages of
the world.

He shall have dominion also from sea to sea: and from the river unto the ends
of the earth.
8 He shall admirably point out Christ and his Kingdom, as in prosperity and
duration, so in extent and demensions of length and breadth, for as Christ's
must be universal all the world over, some of all nations, and all of some
yielding their subjection to him, so shall Solomon's to figure out this, be
enlarged far beyond the ordinary bounds to the uttermost extent of Moses in
his predictions, even from the red sea adjoining upon the Egyptian, unto the
sea of the Philistines, parcel of the Mediterranian, and also from the greater
river, the river Euphrates, unto the wilderness and Lebanon.

They that dwell in the wilderness shall bow before him: and his enemies shall
lick ^dust.
9 People remote and barbarous, shall be subject to him, and the stout and
stubborn enemies of Israel, shall under his government be brought to a
submissive reverential subjugation far and near.

The Kings of Tarshish and of the Isles shall bring presents: the Kings of
Sheba, and Seba shall offer gifts.
10 The Kings of Cilicia, and of the Islands in, and countries beyond the
Mediterranian sea, shall have him in respect and honor, shall desire his
friendship and confederation, and shall from those remote parts, send embassies
and presents to him, so shall the Queen of the South come out of Sheba in
Arabia-Faelix to see his glory, and hear his wisdom, and shall not come
empty-handed, but shall bring, and present him with the chiefest riches and
choicest commodities of that country, and other far distant Kings and Princes
of the world shall do the like, shall come or send to him, even from Seba in or
bordering upon Ethiopia.

11 No Princes nor people round about him, Yea, all Kings shall fall down
before him: all nations shall serve him.
but they shall give him precedencie of honor and dignity, and shall serve
him either as subjects, or as friends or allies, freely transacting the
commodities of their countries for the use and service of him and his. All
which shall be in resemblance of that universal acknowledgement that shall be
made by the Gentiles, of the sovereignty of Christ, when once he is estated in
his Kingdom spiritual as Solomon (his type) in his Kingdom temporal.

12 Wherein not only greatness, For he shall deliver the needy when he cries:
the poor also, and him that has no helper.
justice, and mercy, he shall figure out the Messiah, for he shall not be a
Tyrant, according to the common course of Kings, nor employ his power to
oppression and wrong, but shall be a Savior of the oppressed and miserable,
the poor and helpless shall be relieved by him, for which the Lord shall exalt
and prosper him.

13 He shall be gentle-handed, He shall spare the poor and needy: and shall
save the souls of the needy.
and tenderhearted to those that are the objects of compassion, and shall
employ his power and authority for the preservation, not for the destruction
of the helpless and afflicted.

14 He shall make it his work to search out a matter in the poors behalf, He
shall redeem their soul from deceit and violence: and precious shall their
blood be in his sight.
and to save him out of the hands of them that would destroy him, his wisdom
and authority shall be the bulwarks of the poor man's innocence, against the
might or fraudulencie of his oppressor, how light soever others set by the
lives of poor men, he shall value them at a higher rate, if they be under his
protection and government, the blood of the poor shall be as precious, as the
blood of the rich.

And he shall live, and to him shall be given of the gold of Sheba: prayer also
shall be made for him continually, and daily shall he be praised.
15 Would all Kings reign thus, and improve their power and greatness to these
uses, they should be happy as he shall; to whom God shall give a long and
prosperous reign in peace and affluence, far and near shall he be honored, and
enriched with the presents of his friends, and tributes of his subjects
willingly paid, so great and gainful shall be their trading. To the poor he
shall yield such protection, govern with such moderation, and administer
justice, with so equal an hand, that all people shall bless him, pray for his
long life, and happy reign, and acknowledge it a rich mercy of God, so to
change the face of things in Israel to what they have been in former ages, by
giveing them a King so divinely qualified with wisdom and and virtue, which
they shall daily reap the benefit of, and he the thanks and praises.

There shall be an handful of corn in the earth upon the top of the mountains:
the fruit thereof shall shake like Lebanon, and they of the city shall
flourish like grass of the earth.
16 The happiness of his government is not to be expressed, with what peace and
plenty God shall bless them all his long reign, there shall be strange increase
in the land all over, it shall seem to bring forth of it self: the blessing of
God shall so strangely metamorphose things, as that barrenest places with no
great pains nor cost, shall fructify unmeasurably, a little scattered corn on
mountains that cannot be husbanded, shall yet yield a great increase; high
hills, shall be as fruitful valleys, and the whole land, both town and
country shall be exceedingly enriched, and so multiply and increase with
people, as that children shall seem to grow in cities and villages, like corn
and grass in the field, so populous, and plentiful shall all places be with all
manner of opulencie.

17 The renown of his wisdom as it shall spread into all nations, His name
shall endure for ever: his name shall be continued as long as the sun: and men
shall be blessed in him, all nations shall call him blessed.
so it shall also be recorded unto all ages; the fame of it shall never die, it
shall be proverbial, As wise as Solomon, his rules and precepts shall for ever
remain in the Church of God, to teach men true wisdom, and understanding, even
the fear of the Lord, the only thing that makes men happy, and blessed. All
nations, and all ages shall confess him to have been peculiarly chosen, and
extraordinarily inspired of God, for that his Kingly office over Israel, in a
blessed resemblance of Christ, who in like sort shall govern his Church with
wisdom, power, and justice.

18 Thus, Blessed be the Lord God: the God of Israel, who only does wondrous
things.
O Lord, I know shall be the happy condition of thy people, in the reign of my
son, Solomon. Blessed be thou, O Lord God, for it, who art the faithful and
gracious God of this thine Israel, and therefore have thou, the only
wonder-working God, marvellously endowed him with wisdom, extraordinary and
supernatural, to govern them happily, and make them a flourishing Church and
State, to the admiration of all the world, that were wont to be a people of
least regard.

19 And now, And blessed be his glorious name for ever: and let the whole earth
be filled with his glory. Amen, and Amen.
Lord, as thou have got thee a name, a glorious renown over all the nations, by
the wisdom, and government of Solomon, and the flourishing condition of thy
people, which I pray may continue for ever; and that it may do so, let thy
Kingdom come, let the Messiah happily, and speedily succeed his type and
prefiguration, that not only Israel, but the whole world may flourish with a
glorious Church, and the saving light of thy Gospel. Lord as I pray, so do thou
say Amen unto it.

The prayers of David: the son of Jesse are ended.
20 And thus ended David his prayer for his son Solomon, which was the last he
made of public note, and upon Scripture record, in time, though not in order,
he dying soon after; who was born a sheapheard, the son of Jesse, and died a
King, and the father of Solomon.

The lxxiii. PSALM.
The Psalmist being delivered out of an extraordinary temptation of corrupt and
fleshly reasoning, occasioned by the wickeds prospiritie, and his own
infelicitie, that had almost cost him a fall, and made him cast off all care of
religion, and fear of God, had not God taken up the business that was in
controversy in his mind, he abruptly thereupon, silenceth all doubts and
disputes, and in the very beginning, and first entrance into the Psalm, breaks
through all difficulties and dissidences wherewith he had been sore pestred,
affirming, and declaring for the instruction, and strengthening of the godly,
that ma^ger all objections to the contrary, God is every jot as good as his
word, for so he had found by experience, and befools himself for his misjudging
of God, and the Godly as he had done, and too highly prizing the wicked man's
happy condition in this life; acknowledges Gods infinite mercy in this his
seasonable illumination, and supportation of his faith so much staggered, but
now resolved, and thereby enabled to declare God to be righteous in all his
works, and that to the faithful, he will ever approve himself such.

Psalm lxxiii. A Psalm of Asaph.
A Psalm made by Asaph.

TRuly God is good to Israel: even to such as are of a clean heart.
1 I Have had my share of trials, and my share of temptations thereupon, and
also my share of experimented providence and mercies from God; so that when
all things are rightly weighed after a long debate and conflict betwixt flesh
and spirit concerning the one, and the other, whether God be, or be not to his
people as he has promised. I must needs conclude, he is God, and as good as
his word to Israel, but to what Israel? for there was my mistake, not to all
that go under that name, because they are the seed of Jacob so called; for all
are not Israel, that are of Israel; but to the Israel in spirit, not in the
letter; to them belongs the promise, and performance of grace and goodness, to
such as are purified by faith, not only in the outward part, by legal
purifyings, which are but umbrages, but in the hidden man of the heart, by
effectual operation of faith, and the spirit of grace: to such the Lord is
gracious, and ever will be, I know it by experience, and so shall they, let
them never doubt it, nor question the truth of Gods word and promise, because
of seeming contraridictoriness in his work of providence thereunto, but take it
upon the word of a Prophet, as well as a promise, it is a truth, whatsoever is
suggested to the contrary by carnal, and corrupt reason; God is so, will be
so, and cannnot be otherwise.

2 I confess it is no easy matter to be thus persuaded, But as for me, my feet
were almost gone: my steps were well nigh slipped.
considering the strange order that is in Gods providence and dispensations; I
my self, for all I can now speak it boldly, yet the time was, when I was as
misbelieving as other men, extremely staggered I was in my faith and judgment,
touching the truth of the promise, and the goodness of God according thereunto;
I was almost fallen from faith, and consequently from hope, reverence, and
every thing of that nature, ready to to turn Atheist, as touching the points of
Gods truth and goodness, truly I was even going, if God had not stayed me, to
deviate, and shift for my self by carnal policy, and creature-confidence, as I
saw others do.

3 For like a fool, For I was envious at the foolist: when I saw the
prosperity of the wicked.
as I was, I fastened mine eyes upon the outward face of things, I saw them
that are best, suffer most, and those that are worst, prosper best, which put
me into a passionate envy of them that clouded my judgment, so that I could
not but raise foolish conclusions upon foolish premises, and think with my
self, that surely it is not God, but Fortune that orders matters thus; or if
it be God, that then he cannot bring both ends together, punish his people,
prosper the wicked, and yet be good to the one, and just to the other.

For there are no bands in their death: but their strength is firm.
4 Whom contrary to their demerits, he lets live in such felicity all their
days; for, for all their sins, they have the world at will, their minds, and
consciencies free from trouble, their constitutions strong, and bodies
healthful, they feel no punishments, nor pains in either, neither living, nor
dying, for after a prosperous life, I thought I should see God meet with them
at their deaths, whereas they died as they lived, without either pangs of
body, or horror of conscience, to mine admiration and stumbling.

5 A man would almost think that judges with worldly judgment as I did, They
are not in trouble as other men: neither are they plagued like other men.
that sin and wickedness, were the highway to happiness, and that the promises
were rather made to the bad, than the good; for whilst the godly undergo
concussions, and agitations within, and without, they live in a serene clime,
under a perpetual calm, and feel not the twentieth part of what the righteous
suffer.

6 And therefore they brave it over them, and pride themselves as the only men
on earth, Therefore pride compasses them about as a chain: violence covers
them as a garment.
whom God favors, far above the Godly, whom they look contemptibly upon,
malign, and oppress them, even for their piety, and poverty sake, judging
them therefore hated of God, and so justly persecuted of men, and themselves
his only friends, and he theirs.

7 They pamper their carcasses, Their eyes stand out with fa^ness: they have
more than heart can wish.
live deliciously, fair well, and thrive well upon it, they have no want of
Worldly wealth and outward felicity, God pours honey into their hive, they
prosper wondrously even beyond their own desires and expectations.

8 Their plenty and voluptuousness makes them quite forget God to be above
them, They are corrupt and speak wickedly concerning oppression: they speak
loftily.
they live sensually and sinfully, as if they were controlable by none, and
with open face do injustice and wrong, bragging of their power to oppress, and
threatening thunderbolts to the poor and despised people of God.

9 Who if they make their appeal to heaven, They set their mouth against the
heavens; and their tongue walks through the earth.
pray for, and plead Gods power to protect them, against theirs, they contemn
them, and blaspheme God, yea, bid defiance both to God and man, not caring for
God above them, and thinking all the world else to be below them, for their
proud and presumptuous speeches import no less.

10 Whereupon it is that the people of God are in my very case, Therefore his
people return hither: and waters of a full cup are wrung out to them.
they stumble and almost fall, and are in grievous agonies not only by
outward affliction, but every way which is worse, by inward diffidences and
debates in themselves, whilst the good are thus extremely under, and the bad a
top of the wheel.

11 Insomuch, And they say, how does God know? and is there knowledge in the
most high?
as I did, so do they, begin to question through the infirmity of the flesh
and their astonishment at the strangeness of such proceedings, the providence
and administration of God, whither at all he that is in heaven heed these
things below, or if he do, then how they can stand with his wise and righteous
dispensations and word of promise.

Behold, these are the ungodly, who prosper in the World, they increase in
riches.
12 For thus they say within themselves, who are they that come on and prosper
in the World, why generally the wicked and ungodly have most and do best, is it
not so every where?

Verily, I have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed mine hands in innocence.
13 And who are they that have least and are most under hatches? why truly they
that fear God most, that labor to keep a good conscience, and to walk
uprightly and innocently both toward God and man, but to little purpose if the
cards play on this fashion.

For all the day long have I been plagued, and chastened every morning.
14 For as they see nothing but good, so I nothing but evil, all my life long
from day to day, and from weeks end to weeks end, have I been harrowsed with
one trouble and misery in the neck of another, and have had the rod never off
my back, who labor to please God and to do well, whereas they that take no
such thought, but live as they list, feel not the smart of any one twig.

If I say I will speak thus: behold, I shall offend against the generation of
thy children.
15 Thus have I been pressed upon by my corruptions and fleshly apprehensions,
as others are no doubt by theirs to give way to such thoughts, yea, and to
break out through discontent into such speeches and to utter such things for
irrefragable positions, but I would not for a World I had done so, O the sad
consequences that would have followed thereupon, what discouragement would thy
people have taken upon it from mine example, both at present and in future ages
also should it have been upon record to my shame, thy dishonor, and a
stumbling-stone to the Godly to the Worlds end.

When I thought to know this, it was too painful for me.
16 And I confess loath I was to let go my hold-fast of thee, and to let my faith
fail, and therefore I sought by all means to give my self satisfaction, and to
quiet my doubts by debate of reason, and to make it speak all it could for
thee, to justify these thy dispensations thus to the good and bad, but alas,
it would not do, my reason was too weak for my affections, my mind would not be
satisfied with all the arguments I could bring by my natural discourse, to
think that such dispensations could possibly be of God, or if they were, how
they could stand with thy truth on one side by reason of thy promises, and with
thy justice on the other side by reason of thy threatenings.

17 Thus did I reason the matter with my self, Until I went into the
sanctuary of God; then understood I their end.
too and again, all in vain, lost my labor, rested still unsatisfied, till at
last when I saw that, then I resolved to take another course, to make mine
addresses to thee to be resolved in this great and difficult case of conscience
touching the strangeness of thine administrations, whereupon I used all holy
means, I prayed earnestly to thee in heaven, prostrating my self before thee in
thy tabernacle, studied thy word, and at last it pleased thee effectually to
inspire me with a right understanding, taughtest me to judge of occurrents by
spiritual and divine principles, then, and never before, could I apprehend, to
any purpose, the end that thou will make with these kind of men, how that then
is time enough for the wicked to be miserable, and for thee to punish, which
shall woefully, certainly, and eternally conclude this their temporary
happiness, so much wondered at.

18 And how ever they think they have firm footing, Surely thou did set them
in slipperie places: thou calledst them down into destruction.
and are greatly in favor with thee, yet its far otherwise, they (and we) are
much deceived, for though thou raisest them high, it is that they may have the
greater fall, their standings upon carnal and creature-confidences cannot hold
long, they will fail them, when death comes they must part, and then the
everlasting perdition that in hell by thy just judgments they shall endure,
shall far surpass the moment of carnal contentment this life afforded them.

How are they brought into desolation, as in a moment? they are utterly
consumed with terrors.
19 O Lord, what a sudden and sad change will there be, when in the moment of
dissolution their souls shall be overwhelmed and seized upon with the dreadful
sense and apprehension of their eternal perdition, how unspeakably shall they
be confounded at it.

As a dream when one awaketh; so, O Lord, when thou awakest thou shall despise
their image.
20 When their sins are ripe, and thou, O Lord, art disposed to take vengeance
on them and execute judgment, how shall all their phanatical imaginary
happiness of Worldly wealth and prosperity be annihilated, and vanish into
forgetfulness and non entity, as a dream when one awakes, and how despicable
shall this their so much Idolized honor and felicity (mistaken tokens of thy
favor) and themselves, notwithstanding it, be to thee then.

Thus my heart was grieved, and I was pricked in my reins.
21 Thus wast thou pleased to show me with what a vain transitory shadow I
troubled my self, and made the imaginary felicity of the wicked a real
infelicitie unto me, in disquieting my mind about it, which when I saw, it was
no small trouble to me that I should commit such an error.

So foolish was I, and ignorant; I was as a beast before thee.
22 And be so bruitishly blockish in my foolish misapprehensions, and sottish
conceits of these prosperous conditions of wicked men, and of thee because of
them, to my shame I now confess my sin and folly before thee, that more like a
beast than a man I have been thus sensually misled.

23 But, Nevertheless, I am continually with thee: thou have holden me by my
right hand.
O the trial I have had of thy grace by this experiment, insomuch as I can say
it for the establishment and strengthening of the generation of the righteous
(whom by my foolishnes I had like to have offended and stumbled, as much, and
more than the prosperity of the wicked,) that truly God is good to Israel,
for, for all my sinful censuring and misjudging thee, being now by thine
infinite mercy brought thus to my right wits, I see I am and so are they
always under thy special care, who by thy mighty power and secret grace have
upheld me from blaspheming and miscarrying under this temptation, when my feet
had well nigh slipped and of thine infinite goodness set me clear of it the worst
of evils.

24 I hope, Thou shall guide me with thy counsel, and afterward receive me to
glory.
Lord, through thy grace to take warning by it, and no more to be ruled by my
corrupt reason, nay, I am confident I shall do so by thy blessing, thou will
instruct me better for time to come, than to let me fool it in this sort any
more, while I live I hope never to follow any other guide but thine, nor to be
wise with any other wisdom, that now has set me into the right way again, so
that I am well assured by this pledge, thou will certainly conduct me through
all the rest of my temptations and difficulties of this life that I am to
undergo, until thou have safely landed me in heaven above all storms and
tempests, there to enjoy the sweet embraces of thy favor in a glorified
estate, which shall put a happy period to all my troubles, the whilst the
prosperity of the wicked that so much stumbled me, I now see shall end in
endless misery.

Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire
besides thee.
25 I have had enough of deviations from thee, it has cost me so dear, and I
see so much vanity in every thing else, as that I am resolved to stick to thee
alone, thou shall be mine all in all, thy word and spirit shall solely rule me,
thy providence shall satisfy me, and thy self in the love and favor thou
vouchsafest me, shall be a portion sufficient for me. Let whom will, I for my
part will no more, either care for, or set by creature comforts or
creature-confidence, but mine heart shall be staid on thee, fall back fall edge.

My flesh and my heart fails: but God is the strength of mine heart, and my
portion for ever.
26 I have so surfeited of self-deceit that abstracted from God I see now what I
am, one that has neither reason to judge aright, nor strength to hold out in a
temptation, if it had not been for the grace and supportation of the Almighty
and my good God, and that I had not left all and taken to him, what had become
of me? but I bless his name I did so, and find him more my friend than I was or
could be mine own, yea, when my wit was non-plussed and my courage cowed, the
Lord restored me to both, so that when all fails* he shall not; my faith in him
shall uphold me, and my propriety in him shall satisfy and content me.

For lo, they that are far from thee, shall perish: thou have destroyed all
them that go a whoring from thee.
27 For it is sure enough, that they that take other courses shall but deviate
and go astray; men that depart from thee by divided hopes and
creature-confidence, the ground they stand upon shall fail them, it will be
their ruin; as it has been thy practice to be faithful to them that are
faithful to thee, so thou have and wilt not fail to disappoint the confidences
of misbelievers, power and policy, and such like harlots, that carnal minded
men do court, shall not only deceive them, but also destroy them; for thou
have often enough made it appear, how thou do blast such men with contrary
events to their expectations, and destruction to themselves.

28 But I in my particular have found the contrary course most beneficial and
establishing, But it is good for me to draw near to God: I have put my trust in
the Lord God, that I may declare all thy works.
to draw off my mind and heart from every thing but thee, and by prayer and
faith to support my spirit and seek mine advantage, the effects whereof I have
lately felt, which has so corroborated my faith in God, that I am now resolved
and fixed upon him satisfactorily, for ever hereafter, to trust him, his
Almighty power and never failing faithfulness, above and against my fleshly
reasoning, for the making good his word by his works; whereof nothing shall
fail, which now I am able confidently to affirm to his praise, and the
establishment of the generation of the righteous, whom ere-while I had almost
scandalized, being enlightened by faith and experience, I have changed my mind,
and declare the contrary to what I then thought, that his works and ways (of
what kind soever) are all of them just and holy, as the faithful shall ever
find.

The lxxiv. PSALM.
The Psalmist lamenteth the woeful declentions of the flourishing estate of the
Kingdom and Church of Judah, by the desolations and captivation of that nation
probably by the Babylonians or Caldees for to those times most of those
particulars in the Psalm seem to point. All which are very pathetically
deplored, and affectionatly expostulated with God, not only in their behalf,
but also in his own, in respect of as well the blasphemies as the cruelties of
the enemy; inter-weaving prayers enforced with those arguments both for their
restoration, Gods own vindication, and their enemies confusion.

Psalm lxxiv. Maschil of (or, for) Asaph.
A Psalm to mind God of his peoples distress and his own dishonor, made either
prophetically by David, and so committed to Asaph, or by Asaph himself, or
committed to those of his course that bare his name after him by some other man
of God that made it upon the captivity, which is the most probable.

O God, why have thou cast us off for ever? why does thine anger smoke against
the sheep of thy past^^^?
1 O God, why have thou brought us into such a state, as seems to be an utter
dereliction of us, for length of time and immeasurableness of misery, why is
thy displeasure so hot; and thy favor so clouded against the people of thine
own choosing to worship thee, and special providing for? doubtless its very
strange, and causes very great thoughts of heart.

Remember the congregation which thou have purchased of old: the rod of thine
inheritance which thou have redeemed, this mount Sion wherein thou have dwelt.
2 Be not unmindful (though thou seem so) of thy peculiar people which thou
did redeem out of their Egyptian thraldom long ago, nor of the land which
thou did allot for their portion, so as to let it be inhabited again by the
nations whom thou have cast out, and destroyed for their sakes, or such like;
but remember graciously what thou have promised and undertaken concerning them
to make it good, and particularly the City Jerusalem, and in it Sion the
habitation of thine Ark, the pledge of thy presence, be evermore propitious to
it.

Lift up thy feet unto the perpetual desolations: even all that the enemy has
done wickedly in the sanctuary.
3 Lord make have to destroy utterly those enemies that have made cruel havoc
of thy people, spoiled the land and profaned thy worship.

4 O the Lion-like cruelties that are executed upon thy people by the Gentiles,
Thine enemies roar in the midst of thy congregations; they set up their ensigns
for signs.
those enemies of thine and theirs, murdering them in the very Temple and
Synagogues in scorn and hatred of thine holy assemblies, offering all manner of
despightful insolences to thy worship and worshippers, destroying both them
and all the holy things thereof, they even cry victoria against God himself,
and brave thee to thy face by advancing the monuments of their Idolatry in the
places of thy worship, and fixing their displayed ensigns on the top of all thy
Temple, proudly triumphing over thee as vanquished by them, and unable to
defend either thy worship or people against them, to thine unspeakable
dishonor.

5 Lord how are things changed, A man was famous according as he had lifted up
axes upon the thick trees.
the time was when happy was he that could contribute most and readiest
assistance to the erecting and beautifying of thy temple, when no pains nor
cost was spared.

6 But now the heathen that are victors, But now they break down the carved
work thereof at once, with axes and hammers.
and have broken in upon us, take as much felicity to demolish it as ever thy
people did to erect it, plundering it of all its treasure and rich utensils,
and every one putting to his helping hand, have regardlesly to the beauty and
holiness of such a place, defaced all the curious workmanship thereof with
military violence, and noise of axes and hammers, that was erected without
any, and in a moment, have they utterly defaced that which was so many years in
building and beautifying.

7 And not satisfied with the demolishings and defacings of so glorious a
structure, They have cast fire into thy sanctuary, they have defiled by
casting down the dwelling place of thy name to the ground.
the better to perfect their malice upon it, and to bring dishonor to thy
name, and root out thy worship, they have burnt it down to the ground, all the
ways they could devise have they abased and annihilated it.

They said in their hearts, Let us destroy them together: they have burnt up
all the Synagogues of God in the land.
8 It is a fearful thing to tell what havoc they have made, and with what minds
they did it; every one, one as forward as another, nay each one striving who
could exceed his fellow* each emulating and imitating other, in doing most
mischief and making quickest work; threatening thunderbolts, and thinking on
nothing but how to multiply and perfect the destruction of thy people, without
exception of age, sex or degree, and increase the devastations of the land;
especially of the Temple and Synagogues, which because they more immediately
concerned thee and thy worship, have they the more elaboratly destroyed them
every where, none escaping; and to make the surer work have done it with fire.

We see not our signs, there is no more any prophet: neither is there any among
us that knows how long.
9 O what a sad condition are we in under such woeful pressures by raging
enemies! and at the same time utterly benighted as to thee-ward, no testimonies
at all of thy favor toward us, or presence with us, are now remaining; all
such signs have quite left us, neither know we whither to go, nor how to do to
enquire of thee as formerly our predecessors were wont to do in straits, never
age nor misery was like to this, since thy people were a people, for we have
not so much as one prophet (that were wont to have whole schools of them) nor
prophetess in all the whole land, who can either instruct us what to do to
reconcile our selves to thee, nor how long it will be before thou be
reconciled, and thy favor renewed to us, as it was ever heretofore wont to be
after some short space.

10 O God find out a way to let us know the end of our miseries, O God, how
long shall the adversary reproach? shall the enemy blaspheme thy name for ever?
and the rather for the disgrace thou suffer the whilst, for thine honor
lies in the dust, as well as we; through our sides thou art wounded, and
divided, as if thou also were conquered, and that thou can not deliver nor
restore us now as heretofore, though thou have been too hard for our enemies,
yet now they are too hard for thee, thus thine omnipotency is impeached, and
thou scorned, as a God that art not able to succor and befriend thy people.
Let the consideration hereof move thee.

11 Lord, Why withdrawest thou thy hand, even thy right hand? pluck it out of
thy bosom.
why do thou suffer thy self thus to be dishonored, and thy people thus to
be destroyed? heretofore thou wast always wont to appear for them upon less
occasions, and powerfully to preserve them, and to be jealous for thy worship;
and Lord, why art thou not so now, why do thou not put forth thy power, and
magnify thy grace now as then, Good Lord be entreated to do so, who can if
thou will.

12 For Lord thou know how thou have ever been related to us and we to thee
above all the World, For God is my King of old: working salvation in the midst
of the earth.
as King and people, and what remarkable protection and great deliverances both
before and since we were planted in Canaan, thou have vouchsafed us answerable
to such relations, in the sight and to the admiration of all both far and near,
upholding us thus long a people to thee in the navel of the earth, in despite
of all the enmity and combinations that have been against us round about.

We have not forgotten, Thou did divide the Sea by thy strength: thou brakest
the heads of the dragons in the waters.
and we pray thee also to remember it, what thou did for us when thou
broughtest us thitherward out of Egypt, how thou miraculously made the sea
drie-land for us to pass through, and by thine Almighty power made the water
to stand like walls on our right hand and on our left, till we were safely
landed on the other side, and till the whole Host of the Egyptians in pursuit
of us, was engaged and ensnared in the deep, and then thou causedst the waters
to come together again, and so destroyedst that bloud-thirstie and mighty
army in their own element, even the Egyptians by inundation of water, that are
a nation above all the World blessed and preserved by it, and as it were bred
and born in it like the Crocodile in Nilus.

Thou brakest the heads of Leviathan in pieces, and gave him to be meat to
the people inhabiting the wilderness.
14 Even Pharaoh himself and all his army utterly perished there, whose
country of Egypt by the mighty over-flowings of that famous river, is as it
were a Sea, and he the whale and master-fish therein, even he with all his host
was drowned in the red sea, where whale-like he purposed to have devoured the
whole Host of Israel, and cast up on that side toward the wilderness, where
thy people were safe on shore, to be a prey to them and provision for them of
many necessaries in that their journey toward Canaan through the wilderness,
chiefly for their faith, to feed upon in all their after-straits and
necessities, and their carcasses to be devoured by wild beasts and ravenous
birds.

Thou did cleave the fountain and the flood: thou driedst up mighty rivers.
15 Thou then wast pleased to work wonders every way for us, as well for our
preservation against extremities of nature, hunger and cold, as from our
enemies. Insomuch, as when thy people Israel extremely provoked thee, yet wast
thou gracious to them, and in their distress did cleave the rock in Horeb,
and after that too, and made thence to flow sweet and plentiful streams for
their refreshing, and supply of them and their cattle, and when they were to
possess the promised land, thou did make way through Jordan even then when it
overflowed all its banks, for their entering into Canaan as thou did before
at the red sea for their coming out of Egypt, that is, made it dry land
for them to pass.

16, 17 Thou can do but what thou will, The day is thine, the night also is
thine; thou have prepared the light and the sun.
there are no bounds to thy power but thy will. Thou that rulest all times, and
in all places, ordeining and ordering day and night, Thou have set all the
borders of the earth: thou have made summer and winter.
sun, and moon, and stars in the heavens above, and has situated the earth,
and the several climates thereof so as they are, accommodating it, and the
inhabitants thereof with meet and fruitful seasons of summer and winter.

18 Thou, Remember this, that the enemy has reproched, O Lord, and that the
foolish people have blasphemed thy name.
art the God whom we worship above all the World, thou that art thus Almighty,
whilst our enemies worship stocks and stones; and yet they triumphing in their
success reproach us with thee even with thee, O Lord, and this heathenish
Idolatrous nation magnify their Gods above thee, because they are now above
us, saying, thou did not, because thou could not, deliver us, and so
blaspheme thine omnipotency, and nullify thy very essence and being: Now, O
Lord, as thou art severe to punish us, so forget not we pray thee to vindicate
thine honor, and to plague them answerably to the greatness of their
provocations.

19 Resume thy goodness toward us. O deliver not the soul of thy turtledove
unto the multitude of the wicked, forget not the congregation of thy poor for
ever.
Thou have but one spouse, one nation and people in all the World that by
contract are married to thee, do not thou, O Lord, so far obdurate thy self
against this wife of thy bosom, thine helpless and harmless Israel to expose
her to a barbarous profane nation to be preyed upon and devoured, as a Turtle
by a Hawk, or a Lamb by a Wolf, but work their deliverance, and restoration,
and forget not thy poor distressed and captived people, to leave them in that
estate for ever.

Have respect unto the covenant: for the dark places of the earth are full of
the habitations of cruelty.
20 But remember and fulfill the obligations of grace, thou boundest thy self in
to our forefathers thy friends and servants, how thou would be their God,
and the God of their seed after them to bless them, which we are, even we that
are now led captive out of the land of the living God, into the dark corners of
the world amongst a people that know not the Lord; and that have as little true
humanity as divinity, for, for thy sake, because, we belong to thee and worship
thee, whom they neither know nor serve, are we used with all manner of
barbarism and cruelty by them.

O let not the oppressed return ashamed: let the poor and needy praise thy name.
21 O let not no more now, then heretofore in Egypt, the pressures of thy people
go unpunished, but magnify thy power in our wonderful deliverances and our
enemies confusion, that for thy sake have reproached us. Let us find thou art a
God that hear prayer, and fulfillest the desire of thy poor necessitated
people, as well now as then, that as they, so we for our remarkable return to
Canaan, may praise and magnify thy power and greatness.

Arise, O God, plead thine own cause: remember how the foolish man reprocheth
thee daily.
22 So much vilified by these heathenish wretches, if not for our sufferings yet
for thine own, which we cannot choose but lay to heart, however thou do by
us, O God, be entreated to vindicate thy self upon this profane nation, that
foolishly judging by success, magnify themselves and their Gods, above us and
ours, daily hitting us in the teeth with thee.

23 We must needs put thee in mind again and again, Forget not the voice of
thine enemies: the tumult of those that rise up against thee increases
continually.
and ease our minds in opening our hearts and uttering our complaints unto
thee, concerning what (to our unsupportable grief) we daily see and hear from
our enemies, how they roar it out against thee, the uncontrolable outrageous
carriage of those that have invaded and conquered us (and thee also as they
think) by thy forbearance to punish them, and thy severitie to us, grows
continually worse and worse. Lord take notice of it to plague them for it.

The lxxv. PSALM.
The Psalmist thankful for past, and confident of future good success minds God
of the dangerous condition, Israel is in by intestine broils betwixt David's
house and that of Saul, bandied between Judah and the rest of the Tribes, and
the destructive event that is like to come of it. But is confident it shall not
last long, but that as he has been, so he will still be David's God and theirs,
aad under his government will shortly s^ttle them in peace, religion, and
righteousness. Admonishes the enemies of their opposition, both from the folly
and danger of it, for as David has done always hitherto against Saul, so
shall he do still, prevail at last, and those that remain shall fall as he did.

A Psalm either made by Asaph himself prophetically personating David and
Christ, Psalm lxxv. To the chief musician, Al-taschith, A psalm or song of (or,
for) Asaph.
or by David and by him committed to Asaph, for him together with the President
of the Quire, to order it to be sung and played by voices and instruments, The
sum or substance whereof is comprised in this one word Al-taschith, signifying
destroy not upon occasion of the difference that was long depending, betwixt
the house of David and the house of Saul, and the bloodshed of the people of
Israel that was thereupon, which therefore the prophet would have to have a
speedy end, and that the people may not longer be so destroyed.

UNto thee, O God, do we give thanks, unto thee do we give thanks, for that thy
name is near, thy wondrous works declare.
1 IT is thou, O Lord, that art our praise-worthie God, to thee will we that are
thy faithful people give special and peculiar thanks, yea, to thee only will
we give them, and thy power and goodness toward us will we certainly celebrate,
for that thou have been a benign and beneficent God to us, and specially to
me, the things thou have done and the wonders thou have wrought for us in
general, and for me in particular in the midst of so many enemies and great
oppositions do sufficiently declare it, out of all which, and in all which thou
have still delivered and preserved us, and brought us to the dawnings of
happier times than ever yet the Godly saw, which bode the near approach of the
full complement thereof long since promised to thy people, and that shortly
thou will be known by thy name Jehovah that give being to all predictions,
and promises recorded in thy word touching thy Churches well-being.

2 And therefore I am confident the time is at hand that I shall be King over
all Israel which already is begun in part, When I shall receive the
congregation, I will judge uprightly.
and when I am so, it is my purpose and promise to walk worthy mine office,
and the place I hold in thy Church in upright and just dispensations to thy
people, in resemblance of that righteousness which Christ the Judge of all the
World and King of his Church shall in behalf thereof administer.

3 Lord thou see what a dissolution is like to befall us by these civil
dissentions and destructions that ensue thereupon, The earth and all the
inhabitants thereof are dissolved: I bear up the pi^lars of it. Selah.
if they should continue, it would bring to ruin by consequence the whole
World, for both this Church and Commonwealth, Land and People all would
perish, for whom, and by whom the world subsists, and be utterly spoiled and
wasted by themselves or foreigners, that will take advantage thereof, if this
disorder should last long: but I know its otherways determined by thee, for as
the world subsists by them, so they and it by me, I am appointed to reduce this
people into a better condition, I am he that must establish Religion and
Justice amongst them in better times, and speedily reconcile in one Judah and
Israel, though now at so great difference, by a peaceable and happy reign over
both, as Christ the mediatorian King of his people at his coming, when things
shall be at worst as now they are, shall Jews and Gentiles, by a peaceable
Government of his Church made up of both in the whole world, the partition wall
being broken down. This is certainly true.

4 I would fain have advised those, I said unto the fools, deal not foolishly;
and to the wicked, lift not up your horn.
that so unwisely go about to frustrate thy decrees concerning me by opposing
my rise, to have desisted and saved both blood and labor, and such as out of
pride and perverseness of spirit, are confident to prevail against me,
notwithstanding, they see what a progress thou have already made toward it, I
being actual King of Judah so considerable a Tribe, because they have all the
rest to side with them, these I would gladly have rectified, and persuaded
them; to a peaceable submission to thy determination, and not with such pride
and confidence in sublunary power, to wage war against thee.

5 And in such a manner to scorn and set light by me, Lift not up your horn on
high; speak not with a stiff neck.
as never likely to have any more than this single Tribe, nor that neither
long; I have been thought meanly of heretofore, and was in an unlikely case as
mine enemies thought then, ever to come to good, but you know what is come of
them, and you see what a step I have made in despite of that great and general
opposition, toward the Kingdom, and for all your high words and proud
speeches, I am sure to have the rest as well as this, and the proudest of you
all shall submit to me and be subjected under my government, as reluctant, and
renitant as you are to it.

For promotion comes neither from the east, nor from the west, nor from the
south.
6 For no advancement of any man upon earth comes by mere chance, nor by humane
power or policy, least of all this of mine, that I should become King over
Israel in stead of Saul, this is not of man nor therefore to be hindered by man
his power or policy.

But God is the judge: he puts down one, and sets up another.
7 But it is God that in his righteous judgment punished his sin and rewarded
mine innocence, and who has the sovereign imperial dispensation of all
honors and preferments in his power, whereupon it is that this man is
preferred, and not that, and that one man is abased and another advanced, even
that Saul and his house must grow weaker and weaker, and I and my house must
grow stronger and stronger, do you what you can to the contrary.

For in the hand of the Lord there is a cup, and the wine is red: it is full of
mixture, and he pours out of the same: but the dregs thereof all the wicked
of the earth shall wring them out, and drink them.
8 For affliction is the portion of all men, all have sinned and all must feel
the smart of it more or less; Gods anger is enkindled generally against all
mankind, experience shows this, for who have not their share of sufferings? do
Gods own people escape? no, his displeasure lights often times in this life very
heavy, even upon them who drink, and that deep too of the cup of his justice
and terror, almost to their astonishment and inebriation; I know it to be true
by what I have undergone. But though the godly may drink deep, yet not to the
bottom, the worst is the last, and that is reserved for the ungodly, he may
punish the good (who yet are bad enough) but he will destroy the wicked, and
pour out all his indignation upon him, yea, his fierce wrath shall certainly
overtake all such, Jews or Gentiles, as oppose the Kingdom of his Son, and
refuse to submit to it, which I prefigure, in all ages and all places of the
world, none shall escape the everlasting torments prepared for them, which they
must and shall endure, besides what often befalls them in this life, as you see
by Saul, forced to lay violent hands upon himself.

9 This sad end has he made, But I will declare for ever; I will sing praise
to the God of Jacob.
but though he was the persecutour and I the persecuted, yet, do I live to
survive my miseries, and to inherit the promises, for which as I am bound, so I
will not fail to publish at present, and to leave upon record for ever to all
after ages of his Church, the glorious deliverances and wonderful
preservations he has wrought for me, and will praise him for the faithful
performance of his covenant, and those gracious promises made of old to our
forefathers, especially to Jacob and his seed, of whom we are more immediately
descended, how that he would be their God, raise them a savior, which I am to
be, even the type of his anointed, the sole King and Savior of his Church,
Christ Jesus.

All the horns of the wicked also will I cut o^f; but the horns of the
righteous shall be exalted.
10 And as he in his spiritual Kingdom, so shall I in this my temporal be made
able to suppress all rebellious power, but such as submit to me (his figure and
forerunner) shall thereby be rendered happy and blessed, as the Church shall
under him.

The lxxvi. PSALM.
The Psalmist illustrates the wonderful and miraculous deliverance of
Hezekiah, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, yea, indeed of all Israel, and the
whole worship of God from being utterly destroyed by that blasphemous boasting
army of Senacherib; by the immediate hand of God, destroying in one night a
hundred four-score and five thousand: for which he magnifies the happy
condition of Gods people, and God himself; and excites both Israel to be
thankful to their God, and the neighbour-nations to own and reverence him, and
their Kings to take warning, lest themselves be made examples in like sort.

Psalm lxxvi. To the chief musician, on Neginoth, a Psalm or song of (or, for)
Asaph.
A Psalm either made prophetically by Asaph himself, or some other man of God,
and by him committed to Asaphs successors that bare his name, principally to
him that is most skillful upon the stringed instrument Neginoth, to which it is
chiefly set, for his ordering it to be sung and played.

IN Judah is God known: his name is great in Israel.
1 AS God is more especialy worshipped within the confines of Judah, so has he
most wonderfully magnified and manifested himself there, by a most miraculous
deliverance of his people out of the cruel hands of proud and potent
invadours, which though it was acted in that Tribe, yet the God of all Israel
did it, and ought to be magnified by them all jointly for it, who are concerned
all of them in it, and who are become terrible to their enemies, through the
power and goodness of their God that wrought this great deliverance for them.

2 At Jerusalem aunciently called Salem there it was done, In Salem also is his
Tabernacle, and his dwelling place in Sion.
which is the place famous for it, and for the Tabernacle also which is in it,
and for which Tabernacle sake he did it, because of his residence and presence
there typified in his Ark, situate upon mount Sion, signifying his vigorous
and gracious defense and protection of his Church mystical, and every member
of it, in whom he has a real and spiritual residence.

3 There it was when he wrought this wonderful deliverance of his people,
There brake he the arrows of the bow, the shield and the sword, and the
battle. Selah.
and defeat of their enemies. O the miserable slaughter and havoc that from
heaven by the hand of an Angel he made of that numerous army of Senacherib,
which beseidged Jerusalem, infinite of men killed, and of arms broken, and
spoild, as if it had been in a set battle; utterly ruined them. To his name be
the praise.

4 It is true that the great and infinite armies of the Assirians, Thou art
more glorious and excellent than the mountains of prey.
have been too strong for diverse neighbour-nations, they have conquered them,
plundered and preyed upon them at their pleasure, and enriched themselves with
their spoils, and destroyed and burnt their Gods as they make their boasts, so
that none could deliver out of their hands, but let them brag of what they have
got at thine, this huge mountainous army, that thought it self able to carry
all before it, thou Lord, have given a stop to it, and approved thy self far
beyond it for power and might.

5 For thou have quite destroyed it. The stout-hearted are spoiled, they have
slept their sleep: and none of the men of might have found their hands.
Those Goddamme Gallants, that in the confidence of their strength, and pride
of their hearts stuck not to blaspheme thee before Jerusalem where thou art to
be worshipped, how have thou in a moment overthrown them, yea, so many
thousands of them in one night by the stroke of death have thou made to sleep
their last, never to wake again, those mighty Warriors and stout Champions
that were wont to conquer and kill whole nations, and a little before had
boasted what they would do to us; when it stood then upon, they were not able
to resist or abide the stroke of thine only one destroying Angel, but perished
without power to defend themselves, or oppose their assailant.

At thy rebuke; O God of Jacob, both the chariot and the horse are cast into a
dead sleep.
6 When thou that art the God of our father Jacob, and of Israel his seed, did
vouchsafe to appear in behalf of thy people, thy bare command without ever a
stroke striking served the turn, to overturn and utterly to ruinate this
invincible and potent army, yea, their Princes, Nobles, and mighty men, with
all their military accommodations of Horses and Chariots, and whatsoever they
most confided in.

Thou, even thou art to be feared, and who may stand in thy sight when once
thou art angry?
7 O that our faith might guide our fear, then should we not thus be startled at
created Powers, that we see thou can annihilate in a moment, thou, and thou
only have power to kill, and save alive, and therefore art thou, and thou
only the object both of faith and fear, for who are able to abide the least
frown of thy countenance, or one word of anger from thee, not this mighty army
could not, when once thou wast disposed to hear the cries of thy people, and
their proud blasphemies which incensed thee against them.

Thou did cause judgment to be heard from heaven: the earth feared and was
still.
8 Thou, Lord, did this thing by such remarkable and clear evidence of thine
immediate and omnipotent hand, as that none can share with thee in it, nor
ascribe it to ought else besides thee, such extraordinary and strange vengeance
did thou take upon those blasphemous enemies, as if it had been with the
stroke and terror of a Thunderbolt from heaven, and so terrifying it was to
all nations where the fame of it came, (and it spread not a little ground, the
report of this wonderful overthrow of so mighty an army) as that none of them
had the heart to invade us, but were quiet, and durst not stir though their
fingers itched to be at us.

9 Upon Gods executing this just and fearful judgment on the Assyrian army,
When God arose to judgment to save all the meek of the earth. Selah.
in rescue of his own poor distressed people, even all his whole Church, and
faithful servants at once which he had upon the face of the whole earth, that
were in a helpless hopeless condition, and had no remedy left but prayer.

10 Surely, Surely the wrath of man shall praise thee: the remainder of wrath
shall thou restrain.
Lord, thy servants need fear nothing but thee, for the rage and fury of thy
peoples and Churches enemies, shall serve not for theirs, but their own
destruction; thou shall so order the matter, as that it shall prove but the
ripening of their sins, and the hastening of thy righteous judgments upon
their heads, and be occasion of thy peoples praises and thanksgivings to thee,
and shall so terribly affright others that are like minded toward thy Church,
that they shall have no mind to meddle, when they hear so great an army, that
gave out so great words and threats, could effect nothing, but came to such an
end.

11 O Israel, Vow, and pay unto the Lord your God, let all that be round about
him bring presents unto him that ought to be feared.
and chiefly you inhabitants of Jerusalem, vow praises and thanksgivings to the
Lord, for this unspeakable deliverance and miraculous preservation, and forget
not to pay what you owe in that kind, let neither supine negligence now you are
in peace and quietness, nor unfaithful covetousness hinder your solemn returns
to God, both with inward fervor and outward legal solemnities and sacrifices,
yea, let all the heathen people and nations round about, that hear of this
wondrous work of God, do homage to him as the only God, worthy to be
worshipped and feared of all the world, even Isreal's God.

He shall cut off the spirit of Princes: he is terrible to the Kings of the
earth.
12 For as he has done by these, so shall he do by others, even the Princes and
Potentates of the earth, if they take not warning, thus they shall be served,
it shall cost them their lives if they blaspheme and rebel against God,
contemn his worship, or distress his Church, in his wrath shall he destroy them
suddenly, and make them a terror to the Kings of the earth, like as he has
made Senacherib exemplary unto them.

The lxxvii. PSALM.
The Psalmist in grievous affliction and desertion labors to comfort himself
with the success of former prayers in former distresses, and by parallel
difficulty in prevailing then, so now; but is overpowered with the extremity
and prolixity of his present grief, and the ineffectualness of his endeavors
to minister comfort to himself, which puts him upon an expostulatory
interrogating himself, with some diffidence touching the nature and promise of
God, for which he chides himself at last, takes up another resolution, and
falls to work in a quite other way, encouraging himself by the faith of those
very things, and experiences* God to his Church in their distress, which before
he perverted and made use of to the increase of diffidence.

Psalm lxxvii. To the chief musi^ian, to Jeduthun, A Psalm of Asaph.
To Jeduthun one of the prime musicians, and the principal of all his lineage,
do I Asaph that made this Psalm recommend it for the care and ordering of it to
be sung.

1 O Lord, I cried unto God with my voice: even unto God with my voice, and he
gave car unto me.
how often have I upon occasion put up my prayers unto thee, even continually in
my distresses of what sort soever, I made thee still my sanctuary, fled to thee
by faithful and fervent prayer, and I do not know the time that ever I went
without mine errant, but was always heard and had my suite granted though long
first and hardly gained.

2 I will remember what a troublous fit I had under a painful disease, In the
day of my trouble I sought the Lord; my sore ran in the night, and ceased not:
my soul refused to be comforted.
in what extremity I lay for a long time, both in pain of body and anguish of
mind, finding neither remedy for the one, nor comfort for the other, though I
sought to God earnestly and importunately in that my sad condition, yet I could
have no ease, my pain was the same, and my soul, that nothing else could
comfort, could obtain no glimpse of Gods favor toward it, to quiet and
refresh it withal, for a long season.

3 Insomuch that I was even tired out with fruitless solicitations, I remembered
God and was troubled, I complained and my spirit was overwhelmed. Selah.
I was in such misery, and found so little remedy though I prayed hard for it,
as that at last, prayer it self became painful to me. I could not think of
going to God (having gone so often and sped so ill) but it troubled me, when as
all my complaints in so sad a condition moved nothing, it even killed my very
heart. This case was I in, and to this extremity was I brought.

4 And as it was then, Thou hold mine eyes waking; I am so troubled that I
cannot speak.
so is it now, thou have cast me into such extreme affliction and misery, that
it does not only take up whole days, the pain of it, but whole nights too
without any intermission, so that I can take no rest all the night long, and so
from night to night, and I have prayed so long and sped so ill, that the
trouble of my mind has even stopped my mouth. I can speak no more.

I have considered the days of old, the years of ancient times.
5 I have cast about every way, and considered every thing that might make for
my comfort, I have called to mind thy former gracious dispensations to thy
people, and servants of old in their distresses, recorded purposely for thy
Churches benefit in succeeding times.

I call to remembrance my song in the night; I commune with my own heart, and
my spirit made diligent sear^h.
6 As also mine own former experiments, and happy changes which thou have made
of sorrow into joy and praise. I consider how many times thou have ravished my
heart with the sense of thy loving kindness, and made me lie awake in the night
season, to bless and praise thee with a ravished heart, not to weep and lament
as now I do, I think with my self what may comfort me, and call to mind all
things of that nature, as also what should be the cause that no comfort can
fasten, but that there is so great and so long an estrangement, and that I and
comfort are so far asunder.

Will the Lord cast off for ever? and will he be favorable no more?
7 Insomuch as then I think with my self, surely I have seen all the comfort
that ever I must have in this life; and yet I cannot conclude it neither, but
the length and extremity of my grief makes me in some fear, and doubtfulness
interrogate with my self, whether or no it will ever be other, whether God is
purposed thus to afflict me, and withdraw the signs and sense of his favor
from me always?

Is his mercy clean gone for ever? does his promise fail for evermore?
8 Shall I never taste of mercy any more, but must I wear away under trouble and
sorrow thus? shall his promise of pity and compassion whereupon I so much
rely, be for ever ineffectuall to me?

9 Has God quite forgotten me? can he so contrary to his nature let me thus
pine away, Has God forgotten to be gracious? has he in anger shut up his
tender mercies? Selah.
without any dispensation of his grace and compassion, has he conceived such
displeasure against me, as forever to shut the door of mercy upon me? yea,
shall he who is a God of bowels, and those bowels full of earnings toward his
people in distress, shall he suffer himself to be inexorably transported with
anger against me? Surely it cannot be, I thought so with my self.

10 And replied to all these my expostulatory interrogations, And I said, this
is my infirmity, but I will remember the years of the right hand of the most
high.
that it was my frailty and folly thus to question the nature and faithfulness
of God, and to live by sense more than by faith, and suffer my self to be
transported by affliction into doubts and discomforts; and thereupon set my
self to work in another way, resolved to take out a new lesson, and not only
by contemplation, but by faith and application to recall to mind for the
chearing of my heart, and the stirring up my hope, what powerful grace and
great deliverances (the pledges of his future favors in like sort) God has
heretofore wrought and exhibited in his peoples behalf, when they were in
extremity, not suffering them to sink under them.

11 I will effectually recollect and consider what God has done of that kind
heretofore, I will remember the works of the Lord: surely I will remember thy
wonders of old.
yea, how his peoples extremities were still his opportunities to give them
wonderful deliverance, and gain himself glory and honor, and so it shall be
with me I doubt not.

12 I will more advisedly than ever I have done consider of thine infinite
power, I will meditate also of all thy work, and talk of thy doings.
and support my self by it, not only as it appears in acts of providence of
ancient and later dispensations which is admirable, but in the creation also
which thou deducedst out of nothing, and so thou can any, raise me up though
I were lower than I am; I will no more uncomfortably muse of thee and thy
doings, and make a wrong use of them, that because heretofore thou have done
thus and thus, and do not so now, and therefore thou never wilt, but that I
shall surely sink and die in this distress; no, but I will both meditate and
speak of them with cheerful apprehensions, and comfortable conclusions to my
self, that because thus and thus it has been with thy people, and so and so
thou have done for them, that these are pledges and assurances of thine
unchangeable goodness and patterns of thy power, and that therefore so it shall
be, and so thou will do for me also in like manner.

Thy way, O God, is in the sanctuary: who is so great a God as our God?
13 O Lord, much debate I have had and reasonings about thee and thy
proceedings, but thy ways and the reasons of them I find are too profound for
me, I confess my self too shallow to fathom thy dimensions, it is not reason
but prayer, nor my wisdom but thine, that must quiet my mind, and inform me
aright, for how can I that am an earthworm here below, comprehend thy counsels
and judgments that are transacted above in the heavens (inaccessible, as was
thy sanctuary, or holy of holies) by thee who art an incomparable God, indeed
the only God that do whatsoever thou will both in heaven and earth, and who
have in nothing manifested thy greatness more than in thy goodness to, and
powerful preservation and deliverance of us thy people.

14 For whom thou do not exercise common and ordinary providence, Thou art
the God that do wonders; thou have declared thy strength among the people.
but do wonders, and workest miracles; thy power has gloriously appeared
more than once, by remarkable and astonishing atchivements in thy peoples
behalf upon their enemies, witness those mighty signs and wonders wherewith
thou plaguest the Gentiles for their sakes sundry ways, and at sundry times.

15 With what power did thou specially bring Israel out of Egypt? Thou have
with thine arm redeemed thy people, the sons of Jacob and Joseph. Selah.
thou sentest Jacob and his sons thither in time of famine, to be preserved by
Joseph whom thou there advancedst; but when Joseph was forgotten, his and his
father Jacobs posterity, ill entreated by cruel taskmasters there, how with
the lives of the Egyptians, and the destruction of Egypt, did thou redeem and
deliver thy people thence? A mercy for ever to be recorded in the hearts of thy
servants.

16 When as the waters of the red sea were so sensible of thy divine presence
and power, The waters saw thee, O God, the waters saw thee: they were afraid,
the dept^s also were troubled.
O God, that as if they had been afraid of thee, and of harming thy people whom
thou then conductedst, they ran away and divided themselves hither and thither,
as it were to stand still, and with admiration to look on that mavelous
passage of thy people through them, yea, not only the superficies of the water
was thus moved, but from the top to the very bottom was that great Abbiss
removed at thy presence, and made way for the seed of Jacob and Joseph to pass
on dry land.

17 What an amazement did thou then put the Egyptians into on a sudden? The
clouds poured out water, the skies sent out a sound: thine arrows also went
abroad.
when as in the morning-watch, thou lookedst into the host, through the pillar
of fire and cloud, and did arm the whole host of heaven against them
tempestuously pouring forth rain, and emptying the clouds upon them, thundering
also over their heads, and flashing forth streams of lightning in their faces,
as if it had been a shour of darts or arrows sent from heaven to destroy them.

The voice of thy thunder was in the heaven: the lightnings lightened the world,
the earth trembled and shook.
18 It is not to be expressed the terror and trouble of that day, which made
them say, Let us fly, for God fights for Israel against the Egyptians. What
fearful thunderclaps were in the skies, and flakes of fire with flashes of
lightning that darkened the sun, and made the whole heavens seem to be of a
light fire? the earth by its trembling and quaking, seemed to think the day of
judgment was at hand, and that it was then to be consumed, and return to its
nonensity. Every way, and by every thing, did thou declare thy power to
preserve thy people, and to deliver them with the destruction of their enemies
the Egyptians, whom thou troubledst thus from above, and from beneath retarding
their flight, till the sea overwhelmed them.

Thy way is in the sea, and thy path in the great waters, and thy footsteps
are not known.
19 A memorable deliverance forever to be had in remembrance of thy people
Israel, whether in letter or in spirit, the presence and power that there was
manifested in their behalfs, conducting them safe through a way of thine own
miraculous making, that never was gone before; through the sea it self, and
after through Jordan, in like sort when it quite overflowed his banks.
Submission, and not disputation best becomes us mortals in all conditions,
that know not the ways of Gods providence, nor the reasons of them now, no more
than the Israelites knew then, why he led them to the sea side to bring them
into Canaan, nor do we know how thou will bring us out of our distresses which
thou bring us into, no more than they knew how thou would deliver them in
that their danger, when unknown to them thou openedst the sea for their passage.

20 And ledst them through it, Thou ledest thy people like a flock, by the hand
of Moses and Aaron.
by the conduct of Moses and Aaron, whom thou set over them, and
appointedst to be unto them as shepherds to a flock, with care and tenderness
to lead them, provide for them, and transact betwixt thee and them throughout
their travel in the wilderness, as Christ is to his Church and people all along
their life.

The lxxviii. PSALM.
The Prophet after an attractive insinuating preamble to gain attention, for
edification and caution from what shall be delivered, falls to depaint as in
a table, and in a compendious map to set forth the world of gracious
privileges, which peculiarly God has bestowed and conferred on Israel, and
the wonderful unspeakable things he did for them, and the many miraculous
mercies that he had vouchsafed to them from time to time, all along from Egypt
to their establishment under David and Solomon. Together with their monstrous
ingratitudes of gross unbelief, and rebellious provocations endlesly persisted
in, by all their forefathers throughout so many ages as expired betwixt their
coming out of Egypt to those days. Also interweaves the just and terrible
judgments of God acted upon them, though with much long-suffering and
unwillingness, for those their unfaithful and disobedient ingratitudes, with
their feigned repentances, and constant backslidings, and notwithstanding all,
records Gods gracious perseverance toward them, and faithful performance of
his promise in bringing that Church and Kingdom unto so flourishing a
condition, as it enjoyed under David and Solomon. Psalm lxxviii. Maschil of
(or, for) Asaph.


A Psalm, advertising the people of Israel of Gods mighty works and singular
favors to their forefathers, and their ill requitals of them: made probably by
Asaph the seer, or some other holy man of God, and committed to his successors
that bare his name.

1 THus says the Lord, GIve ear, O my people, to my law; incline your ears to
the words of my mouth.
by me his Prophet, hearken diligently to the doctrine that I am about to teach
you, give good attention to what I shall speak, for it is of concernment to you.

I will open my mouth in a parable: I will utter dark sayings of old.
2 Though it was acted long before your time; For that I am about to deliver
doctrinall truths, couched in historical examples, transacted and recorded of
old, but of good use for ever.

Which we have heard and known: and our fathers have told us.
3 It is what has been inculcated continually, by our fathers, and their
forefathers successively, from age to age have these things been taught and
pressed, the godly in every generation have been careful to derive the
knowledge of them to their posterity, for their benefit and the glory of God.

We will not hide them from their children, showing to the generation to come,
the praises of the Lord: and his strength and his wonderful works that he has
done.
4 And as it has been transmitted to us by them, with intention to pass it down
throughout all the generations of Israel, accordingly let us also that are
their children, hand it still down-ward to our posterity and theirs, even the
doctrine of the prais-worthy acts of God, those powerful deliverances that he
wrought, and miraculous mercies he vouchsafed his people in times past.

For he established a testimony in Ja^ob, and ap^ointed a law in Israel, which
he commanded our fathers: that they should make them known to their children.
5 For this was not done as a bare arbitrary act of care by our parents, but as
a duty also laid upon them by God, who gave them in charge to do so, as also to
transfer his holy covenant made up of commandments and promises, both by
doctrine, and exemplary observation of faith and obedience down to their
children.

That the generation to come might know them, even the children which should be
born: who should arise and declare them to their children.
6 That so the next generation following might learn what to know, and how to
do, by the early teaching and good example of the next foregoing, that so they
also being well instructed, and timely trained up in their tender years, might
grow so ripe and perfect, as also in like sort to convey them to their
children, as they received them from their fathers.

7 To the end that all of us from first to last, That they might set their hope
in God, and not forget the works of God: but keep his commandments.
might learn to fix our hope and confidence upon the Lord alone, and believe in
him, as a gracious and all-sufficient God unto us throughout all ages, and in
all conditions, considering and ever bearing in mind what he had don for our
forefathers, what wonders he had wrought for them, to be standing presidents
and pledges to posterity, that so they might be well acquainted both with his
works and word, by the one, to learn to believe in him, and by the other, to
reverence and obey him.

8 Thus the godly Patriarks, And might not be as their fathers, a stubbourn and
rebellious generation: a generation that set not their hearts aright, and whose
spirit was not steadfast with God.
Prophets, and teachers of old were wont to do, take pains to indoctrinate
youth in the works and ways of God, to keep still alive a godly seed, a
spiritual people to the Lord, that might not be as was for most part their
forefathers, for all their good instructions, an untractable, stiff-necked,
unbelieving people as lived upon the earth, refusing their own mercies,
murmuring, and rebelling against God, his magistrates, ministers, and oppugning
all that would have done them good, and made them happy, who, for all that God
did, or could do for them, which were admirable things, and marvelous mercies,
he could not gain them heartily and sincerely to be his, so as to believe in
him steadfastly, love him cordially, and obey him uprightly, but were with every
temptation drawn away from him, to distrust him, and to embrace sin and
Idolatry, rather than his worship and service.

9 In so much as the children of Ephraim, The children of Ephraim being armed
and carrying bows: turned back in the day of battle.
though strong enough in men and arms, furnished with those kind of weapons,
and skill to use them, wherewith they were able to gall and beat back the enemy
at a distance, and never come to handle blows; yet how cowardly, being
degenerated in faith and good conscience, did they by the just judgment of God
turn their backs and fly before their enemies, the Philistines, and caused the
rest to do so too, even to the loosing of the Ark, chiefly entrusted in their
Tribe; and after for their sinful revolting from the true worship of God to
Jeroboams Idolotrous calves, how did they and their partisans, the ten Tribes
fall before the enemy, and wast away until they were led captive and extinct.
Let us beware.

They kept not the covenant of God: and refused to walk in his law.
10 They totally fell off from God, to whom they were tied by all manner of
bonds, even by special contract and covenant, mutually stipulated betwixt God
and them, he promising to be their protector and deliverer, and they to believe
in him as such, than which they did nothing less; and no wonder, when as they
had quite forsaken him, his Tabernacle-worship at Shiloh, and his Temple at
Jerusalem, and took to high places, and Jeroboams calves, nor would they be
reclaimed by any thing God could do, or his Prophets say.

And forgot his works: and his wonders that he had showed them.
11 Most ungratefully turning their back upon, and forsaking that God that had
done such wonders for his people, whereof they were both eye, and
ear-witnesses, for they were not ignorant of what he did of old, as well as of
late, the wonders and the great things that were done by him they knew well
enough, but they set light by them, let them slip out of memory, and note,
though well enough instructed in them by our godly forefathers.

Mavelous things did he in the sight of their fathers: in the land of Egypt,
in the field of Zoan.
12 Who ever were careful to derive the memory and notice of such mercies down
to posterity, though for the generality, Israel, as well in the twelve, as in
the ten Tribes, has ever been of a degenerate revolting disposition from God,
(which should caution us to be careful;) for we have heard of the mavelous
miracles God wrought before their faces, and for their sakes, the wonderful
plagues he brought upon the Egyptians, both King and people, city and
country, all the land over, even in the very Court, and royal city it self,
whilst yet, they in Goshen felt no harm.

13 And to secure them, He divided the sea, and caused them to pass through:
and he made the waters to stand as a heap.
after he had brought them out from Pharaoh and his host, who pursued them;
why? he quite changed the course of nature, turned water into dry land, and
made the sea it self, foardable for them, fixing those fluid waters like stone
walls on each hand of them, whilst they passed through with ease and safety.

14 Nor did he leave them there, In the day time also he led them with a cloud:
and all the night with a light of fire.
but conducted them himself along the wilderness, and gave them eminent and
special tokens of his presence with them, as a guide and protector to them in
the day time, by reason of the scorching sun, going before them, encompassing,
and over-shadowing them with a cool refreshing cloud from morning to night; a
Baptismal pledge of Christ his gracious interposing and protecting his
faithful people from the justice and wrath of God, and therefore ought to have
been the more set by; as also in the night time by a pillar of fire, lightening
them when the sun was down, so that both night and day, God was careful of
them, as Christ will be of his in all times and states.

15 Once and again did God by Moses open, He clave the rocks in the wilderness:
and gave them drink as out of the great depths.
as before the waters for dry land, so now the dry and stony rocks to give them
and their cattle water in the wilderness, when they were necessitated with
thirst, he miraculously supplied them (as Christ will spiritually his people)
out of the inmost parts of the earth, in that dry and sandy wilderness, where
naturally were few or no veins or springs of water.

He brought streams also out of the rock: and caused waters to run down like
rivers.
16 In this unlikely place, yea, out of the very rocks in the wilderness did he
bring them water in such abundance, that upon a sudden it ran like a stream,
and had as perfect a current, as if it had been an ancient river in a known
channel.

And they sinned yet more against him: by provoking the most high in the
wilderness.
17 And they well requited him, for as he in mercy multiplied miracles for
them, they multiplied sins against him, every foot provoking him by murmuring
against, and misbelieving the most high and mighty Lord God, even in that very
place where he was so specially present with them, and for them in their
protection and supply.

And they tempted God in their hearts: by asking meat for their lust.
18 Their carnal hearts not making spiritual use of any the things God did for
them, either by returning the praise and thanks they were worthy of, or
improving them to the increase of faith, nor picking out the spiritual kernel
and Gospel-sense, that lay hid in those misterious, yet significant mercies;
but for carnal ends, for lust sake, putting God to it to show forth his
omnipotency, and to work still more and more miracles for them, and yet
believing never the more in him neither, nor having never the more contented
minds for having him their God so present with them, and powerful for them, but
if at any time they had not what they would, they would be discontent at what
they had, murmuring at Manna, because they had not flesh also to please their
carnal appetite.

19 Despising Manna that glorious type of Christ, Yea, they spoke against God:
they said, Can God furnish a table in the wilderness?
speaking against it, and against him that gave it, quarrelling God for what
they wanted, but blessed him not for that they had; and not only quarrelled
him, but also questioned his power, thinking because it was their wills to have
it, that therefore either it was not just in God to deny it, or that else it
was his will to have given it if he could have done it; and so they limited his
good will toward them, and power for them to just so much, and no more as at
present he did for them, thinking that he did not love them, if he did not
please them, and every while stitch saying, can God do this, and can God give
that? he has given us bread and water, but can he give us variety of meats to
such as we had in Egypt? can he please our palates, as well as sustain our
natures? No, he cannot: so they quarrelled his providence, and blasphemed his
omnipotence.

20 They could not but acknowledge what he had done to be very great things,
Behold, he sm^te the rock, that the waters gushed out, and the streams
over-flowed: can he give bread also? can he provide flesh for his people.
and to argue him to be no less than omnipotent, and yet they could not believe
in him one jot further than what they saw already done to their hands, but upon
the very next occasion questioned the self same power that but ere-while they
adored and admired, quite perverting the use they ought to have made, for
instead of arguing from his will to his power, thus, he that gave water enough,
if he please can give bread also, and he that gave bread enough, can give
flesh; and if not, seeing he does not, because he will not, we ought to submit.
They on the contrary, argue from his power to his will, and say presumptiously;
He that could give us water, no doubt if he could, would give us bread too; and
he that gave us bread, would if he could give us flesh, for that we are the
self-same people related to him, and he to us; but seeing he does not,
therefore he cannot, or if he can, why does he not? we will not believe it,
except we see it.

Therefore the Lord heard this and was wroth: so a fire was kindled against
Jacob, and anger also came up against Israel.
21 Seeing they would never cease provoking God, nor learn to believe and
submit, but still every foot murmur, quarrel, and question him; he therefore
could hold no longer, but however he was willingly deaf to them once and again,
yet he could not always bear them, (though they were his people, and for
Jocobs sake was loath to punish them,) but at last let them know he saw, and
heard their carriage before, but passed it over in silence and patience, which
now he would do no longer, but made it appear how ill he resented their
baseness by inflicting both a severe and strange kind of punishment upon them,
even a fire, the fire of the Lord burnt amongst them at Taberah, kindled and
maintained by, and from the anger of the Almighty, which fearfully flaming up
toward heaven, consumed many of them that were in the uttermost parts of the
camp of Israel.

Because they believed not in God: and trusted not in his salvation.
22 Because they submitted not themselves to God with quiet and contented minds,
in the faith of his power and promise, and assured hope of his grace and
providence to be answerable in their behalfs for their preservation and
provision, still as there was cause.

Though he had commanded the clouds from above: and opened the doors of heaven.
23 24 Although their eyes were witnesses, what God in their necessities had
done already, as to bread, how he had strangely altered the course of nature
for them; And had rained down Manna upon them to eat: and had given them of the
corn of heaven.
for whereas the corn that sustains us ordinarily, and naturally grows out of
the ground, God at this time and place in their need, extraordinarily ordained
the clouds over their heads plentifully from heaven, to distill down Manna which
fell round about their camp, and lay like dew upon the earth for them to
gather, thus miraculously did God send them provision for their hunger, as it
were corn from heaven to sustain them.

25 Insomuch as that rather than God would break his word, Man did eat angels
food: he sent them meat to the full.
or suffer them to perish for want of sustenance, he did supernaturally supply
them; and whereas he could have done it with materials of nature, terrestrial
corn or bread, he chose rather to do it with the bread of heaven, such food as
nature never did produce, extraordinary provision, as well as in an
extraordinary way, descended from the heavenly mansion of the blessed angels,
to show in what a degree of honor and amity, God admits his chosen people that
are on earth, fellow servants, and of the same household with the angels,
whereof God is the Lord, as really by faith feeding them with Christ the son of
God, that spiritual soul-sustaining bread of life (Mediator of angels and men)
figured by Manna, as the angels do feed their eyes and desires in continually
beholding him in heaven, and are there sustained by him in that their blessed
and unchangeable state; nay, he gave them not only bread, but flesh too in
abundance.

26 27 28 For in regard they tempted him, He caused an East Wind to blow in the
heavens: and by his power he brought the South Wind.
and mis-doubted his power to do it, therefore to vindicate his omnipotency,
(not in favor and respect to them*) he by a South-west wind which he then
raised, He rained flesh also upon them as dust: and feathered fowls like the
sand of the sea.
and caused to blow full upon the place where they pitched from the sea-ward,
And he let it fall in the midst of their camp: r^und about their habitations.
brought home to their doors infinite of Quails, which fell as thick as rain,
and lay for a days journey like sea sand round about their camp at
Kibroth-hattaavah two cubits high upon the face of the earth.

So they did eat* and were well filled: for he gave them their own desire.
29 30 So that they both saw, and felt by experience, that God could do what
they thought he could not, They were not estranged from their lust: but whilst
the meat was in their mouths.
even furnish a table in the wilderness with dainties, far fetched upon the
wings of the wind, such as they fed not on in Egypt, whereof they had plenty,
and eat their fill; for God stinted them not, but gave them enough to glut
themselves, (and so they did) of that they so inordinately desired, not to
sustain or suffice nature, but to palliate their lusts, wherein God gave them
the full length of teather, abridged them not; but withal, this sweet meat had
sour sauce; even whilst these unbelievers were greedily feeding upon these
dainties, without confessing their sin, and giving the glory to God,

The wrath of God came upon them, and slew the fattest of them: and smote down
the chosen men o^ Israel.
31 The wrath of the Lord was kindled against them, and the Lord smote the
people with a very great plague, which God so disposed, as that it chiefly
swept away the more insolent carnal-minded ringleaders in this mutiny; they
that having been used to dainties in in Egypt, could not be without them in the
wilderness, but whether God would or not must have them, or murmur and quarrel
for want of them, and set the rest to do so too; these chief mutiners principal
men in the camp of Israel, did God chiefly slay by the plague, to affright the
rest.

For all this they sinned st^ll: and believed not for his wondrous works.
32 But nothing could reclaim this stubborn people, nothing that God could do
for them, or against them, no blessings though miraculous, no punishments
though never so formidable and capital, could do good upon them, to make them
leave their murmuring, and live by faith.

33 Therefore whereas he promised them Canaan, Therefore their days did he
consume in vanity: and their years in trouble.
if they had believed in him, and been obedient to him; contrarily he adjudged
them to wander out their days in that wilderness where they so murmured and
misbelieved; even all in effect that came out of Egypt, wasted out their lives
in a vain unprofitable pilgrimage there, to their exceeding great trouble, and
in Gods disfavour for forty years space after they were arrived at the skirts
of Canaan, in which time they were all destroyed by their sins, and Gods just
judgments.

34 They were a people that God could do no good on by mercies and benefits,
When he slew them, then they sought him: and they returned and enquired early
after God.
but the better he was, the worse they were, only when for their
rebelliousness God was forced to fall heavy upon them, and to destroy them,
sometimes by one judgment, sometimes by another; then upon the same principles
that before they murmured against him, would they then seek unto him; the one,
for self-pleasing, the other for self-saving: when the fire was burning, and
the plague consuming, then down on their knees, and up with their hands,
promising any thing to be spared; Oh, what a reformed, and changed people they
will be! then they post as fast as they can to Moses to pray for them, and save
their carcasses, and desiring but to know their sin; Oh, how would they then
repent of it and their duty! how they might but please God for the time to
come, and they would never fail to perform it!

And they remembered that God was their rock: and the high God their redeemer.
35 Then there was none but God with them, they could then remember all the
great deliverances he had wrought for them, and recount them one by one, how
this time, and the other time God saved them from being destroyed by their
enemies, and his own judgments; then they could give him his titles, and
acknowledge his attributes of Sovereignty and Omnipotency; he that they never
thought well of, nor could afford a good word, now is become their only
savior, they cannot say too much of him, nor give too much to him.

Nevertheless, they did ^latter him with their m^uth: and they lied unto him
with their to ^gue^.
36 But all this was but to deceive God, to carry fair toward him to work their
ends upon him, pretending sorrow for sin, and resolution of amendment, when as
all that was spoken by them was but from teeth outward, so long as the blow
smarted, never meant as they spoke, nor made good any thing they said.

For their heart was not right with him: neither were they steadfast in his
covenant.
37 For all was but pretenses to serve their own turns, there was no true inward
remorse for all their show of sorrow, nor no sincere change, for all their fair
promises, their hearts were as wicked as ever, and as bad principled toward
God, breaking promises as fast as they made them, yea, the grand charter, the
covenant it self so solemnly contracted,, and so often renewed between God,
their forefathers, and themselves; that God would be their God, and that they
would be his people, and walk thereafter; this they made not good, but
notwithstanding all Gods promises to them, and theirs to him, they sinned
against him, deviated from him, and falsified with him,

But he being full of compa^^ion, forgave their iniquity, and destroyed them
not: yea, many a time turned he his anger away, and did not stir up all his
wrath.
38 But the Lord having chosen them for his people, and remembering the ancient
league of amity and friendship that was betwixt him, and their forefathers,
could not find in his heart to do to them as their sins deserved, but being a
people that for his names sake he would be good unto, and preserve himself a
Church and holy seed amongst, he from time to time with patience and pity
overcame their provocations, and his own hot displeasure that justice called to
destroy them; but mercy staid his hands, and moderated his fury,, so that his
punishments were rather examplary than otherwise, never destroying all that
offended, which yet justice called upon his wrath to do again and again.

39 For the Lord knew if he should give way to his anger according to the
instigation of his justice, For he remembered that they were but flesh: a wind
that passes away and comes not again.
and their demerit, they that were mortal and short lived by nature, would
quickly perish under his hand, and come to naught, even in a moment, if he took
that course, he should destitute himself for ever of a Church and people upon
earth, and quite overthrow the design of his grace, for of them Christ was to
come, which must not be frustrated.

40 There is evident testimony of Gods long-suffering, How often did they provoke
him in the wilderness: and grieve him in the desert.
for how often did they provoke him, murmuring and quarrelling time after time in
the wilderness, where God did miracle after miracle for their sakes, and still
they were the same men persisting to sin against God, and by their ungrateful
unbelief, and stubbornness to grieve his patience, and irritate his anger, even
there where they were so at his mercy, having nothing supplied to them by art
and nature, but were at his immediate finding, who notwithstanding all their
provocations there, did either provide them food and raiment, for which they
neither dug nor span.

Yea, they turned back and tempted God: and limited the holy one of Israel.
41 Yea, they appostatiz'd many and many a time, breaking all engagements, and
committing old sins upon new occasions, never wanting any thing, but presently
fall a murmuring; yea, they threatened God to go back into Egypt again, if they
might not have their wills in the wilderness, and thus provoked, and tempted
him to destroy them, that would fain have saved them, every foot questioning,
and mis-believing his power, faithfulness, and good will toward them,
notwithstanding his gracious promises, and wonderful performances, if they had
not all things they had a mind to.

They remembered not his hand: nor the day when he delivered them from the
enemy.
42 And the cause of this was, because they were a sinful ungrateful people,
never heeding mercies longer than God wrought them, nor valuing them for any
other end, than self-pleasing and preservation, never regarding them as to God,
or the bettering of their faith, and obedience unto him, but so soon as they
had sucked the honey, they despised the flower: all mercies (though miracles)
were transient things perished in the deed done, even that great one, when with
such an out-streched arm he brought them out of Egypt, and set them free from
Pharaoh, the very day and hour whereof they ought never to have forgotten.

How he had wrought his signs in Egypt: and his wonders in the field of Zoan.
43 Yea, every jot of that wonderful deliverance ought to have been treasured
up in everlasting rememberance, which yet was quite forgotten, what clusters of
miracles there grew upon the stem of that one only deliverance? what clear
tokens of his omnipotent power and goodness he made to appear then, and there
in his peoples behalf, by those ten plagues brought successively, for their
sakes, upon the King and kingdom of Egypt, in Court and country; The story is
well known, but not so well remembered.

44 How miraculously he turned all the waters of Egypt into blood by the stroke
of Moses his rod, And had turned their rivers into blood: and their floods that
they could not d^ink.
the famous overflowing river of that country, with all their lesser streams;
yea, their ponds, and cisterns also all the land over was turned into blood, so
that the fish died, the river stunck, and the Egyptians could not drink of the
water, no not of Nilus, whose streams could not purge it.

45 Also when that would not do to get Isreal's release, He sent diverse sorts of
flies among them, which devoured them: and frogs which destroyed them.
he multiplied more plagues upon them, sent grievous swarms of several sorts of
promiscuous venomous flies, and noisome worms into the house of Pharaoh, and of
his servants, and into all the land of Egypt, so that the land was corrupted
with them, and many of the Egyptians destroyed by them. Aaron also brought
frogs out of the waters of Egypt so abundantly, that they covered the whole
land, went up into Pharaohs house, his bedchamber and bed, and into the house
of his servants and people, their ovens and kneading-troughs, yea, crept upon
the person and persons of the King and people, and destroyed many.

46 He also utterly destroyed the fruits of the earth, He gave also their
increase unto the catterpiller: and their labor unto the locust.
to the loss both of their husbandry and harvest, by sending (upon Moses his
streching out his rod over the land of Egypt) an East Wind over all the land
which brought into, and scattered all over Egypt such infinite of caterpillars
and locusts exceeding grievous, never was there any such, nor shall be,
covering the face of the whole earth, darkening the land, devouring every green
thing both upon the ground, and growing on trees, herbs and fruits.

He destroyed their vines with hail: and their syromore trees with frost.
47, 48. He furthermore sent so terrible a hail, and great quantities of hard
frozen ice as brake the trees, vines, and sycomores, destroyed the herbs, yea,
the very men and beasts that were in the field; He gave their cattle also to
the hail: and their flocks to hot thunderbolts.
for it came tempestuously, accompanied with thunder and fire that ran along
upon the ground; so that there was hail, and fire mingled with the hail, very
grievous, terribly tormenting and destroying all it light on.

He cast upon them the fierceness of his anger: wrath and indignation, and
trouble, by sending evil angels among them.
49 God did infinite of ways magnify and manifest the power and terror of his
wrath, indignation, and anger, and the ardencie of it also against those
enemies of his people, to be as an everlasting monument to his Church, of his
love and care over them, and to their enemies of his fearful displeasure: for
in the fierceness of his wrath he gave them into the power of the Prince of the
air, and his emissarie, evil angels, by whose means and operation many of those
judgments which were inflicted upon Egypt, were wrought and terribly executed.

He made a way to his anger, he spared not their soul from death: but gave
their life over to the pestilence.
50, 51. These plagues, and more than these he sent upon the Egyptians, which
yet were all but forerunners of the last, which was worst, and most capital of
all the rest; And smote all the firstborn of Egypt* the chief of their
strength in the tabernacles of Ham.
wherein his anger did most appear, when as he sent a plague amongst them, that
at midnight destroyed the firstborn in every house, and caused such
lamentation in Egypt, as never was, nor shall be the like; for each father and
mother there, lost the first-begotten, their dearest child, the staff of their
age, the flower of Egypt, throughout all the families of that cursed people who
were the posterity of Mizraim, second son to Ham, cruel oppressors and mortal
enemies to the Church and Israel of God.

52 The posterity of Sem, But made his own people to go forth like sheep: and
guided them in the wilderness like a flock.
whom God chose to be a people to him peculiarly related; his own both by
choice and covenant, and these in despite of their enmity to them, and empire
over them, he conducted by the guidance of Moses and Aaron (himself especially
being present) out of Egypt from under their burdens, and from amongst their
cruel taskmasters, even every man, woman, and child of them (as loath as
Pharaoh was to part with them) into the wilderness through the red sea, where
he had most tender care of them to protect them, and provide for them as a
shepherd over his sheep.

53 And for all that Pharaoh with his power and malice could do, And he led
them on safely, so that they feared not: but the sea overwhelmed their enemies.
God preserved them, as he could not keep them in Egypt, so nor overtake them
when they went thence (though in eager pursuit after them) to do them any hurt,
for God made them a passage through the sea it self, where they went safely,
and without fear of drowning, but Pharaoh and his whole host were overwhelmed
in those waters.

54 After that he had led them from station to station, And he brought them to
the border of his sanctuary: even to his mountain, which his right hand had
purchased.
provided for them time after time, preserved and defended them from one enemy
after another, till he brought them safe to the very skirts of Canaan, the type
of heaven, a land long before promised them, and designed for the special place
of his worship, and residence of his Church; where when they were ready to
enter, and he to give them possession, how did they then also murmur and
disbelieve? so that that generation was not permitted to enter, but wandered in
the wilderness till they perished there, but their posterity lived to enjoy
it: God brought them into possession of this promised land, by as great
victories and miracles, as their forefathers had seen in Egypt, and the
wilderness; casting out the inhabitants from before them in every place where
they came; yea, the scornful self-confident Jebusites, by the hands of his
servant David, whom he made able to dislodge them from of mount Sion, that
strong fort so long detained, and possess it for his special use and service,
placing his Sanctuary there.

He c^st out the h^athen also before them, an^ divided them a^ inheritance by
(...): and made the tribes of Israel to dwell in their tents.
55 As great and gyant-like as the natives of Canaan were, and as high and
strong as were the walls, yet God made way for his people to pass through the
land, as conquerours where ever they came, no enemy could stand before them,
but were either put to flight, or taken and killed. So that they were enriched
with the spoils of the land which they became Lords and masters of: the
heathen-native Canaanites (by Gods just judgments, and mighty power) being
ejected, the whole country was apportioned amongst them as they thought good,
each tribe being possessed of those cities, towns, and houses that fell to
their lot, which were built to their hands.

Yet they tempted and provoked the most high God: and kept not his testimonies.
56 Yet these Israelites to whom God gave possession of this promised land,
notwithstanding all the wondrous works he wrought for them, and the terrible
judgments they saw executed before their faces, and by their very hands upon
their Idolatrous enemies; yet did they from time to time, even in the land of
Canaan, do as did their forefathers in the way thither, provoke the Lord to
anger, even the God of whom they had had such experience for his power to
punish them in case they sinned, and faithfulness to fulfill his promise, in
case they believed and obeyed, which they did neither.

57 Never cared for God further than to serve their turns upon him, But turned
back and dealt unfaithfully like their fathers: they were turned aside like a
deceitful bow.
when they had need of him, then they could flatter and dissemble with fair
promises, and pretended good affections just as did their forefathers, and made
good nothing they said, but fell off presently from God, both disbelieved and
disobeyed as did their perfidious ancestors before them, whom therefore God
destroyed in the wilderness and would not suffer to enter Canaan, which yet he
gave to these their posterity, in hope they would take example from their
predecessors sins and his punishments, to walk more closely and believe more
firmly: But they utterly deceived his expectation, and warped from the rule he
gave them to walk by, both in faith and manners, as an arrow deviates from the
mark when shot by an unsteadie hand, or out of a crooked wrycast bow.

58 For in stead of frequenting his tabernacle, For they provoked him to anger
with their high places: and moved him to jealousy with their graven images.
to worship him there as he appointed, they built altars in high places, an
invention of their own, not commanded of God, and so provoked God to anger by
worshipping, not only the true God in a false manner, but even other Gods,
graven images, strange things for the chosen people of the living and great God
to worship, especially after such and so wonderful declarations of himself and
his power, whereby they grievously incensed him, to see them go a whoring in
this sort, to whom he bare such conjugal affections, being his only spouse,
and of whose reciprocal respect and love to him he was so jealous.

59 When the Lord saw this and heard the cry of When God heard this, he was
wroth, and greatly abhorred Israel.
their ungrateful backsliding in this manner come up to heaven, he could not
hold, but grew extreme angry at such base abuse and rejection of him, and the
more he had loved them, the more now upon this occasion he hated and abhorred
his own chosen Israel.

So that he forsook the tabernacle of Shiloh, the tent which he placed among
men.
60 So that having cast off his people that would not worship him, he cast off
the place too where he was to be worshipped, afforded no protection to Shiloh
nor presence there, where the Ark and Tabernacle had been so long the pledge of
his presence, where he has vouchsafed to dwell and only there of all the
earth, in his Tabernacle as in a tent, whom the heaven of heavens cannot
contain.

And delivered his strength into captivity, and his glory into the enemies
hand.
61 But in anger and discontent at such ingratitude and neglect, from a people
that he had done so much for, and took such delight in, he at last even gave up
his Ark, that pledge of his presence, and consequently of his gracious and
powerful assistance, by which and for which he had given them so many
deliverances from and victories over their enemies, into their enemies hand,
whom he then made absolute victors over them and the Ark too, suffering the
Philistines to take it prisoner, and carry it away captive into their own
country, and so left Israel naked and destitute of divine power and
protection, and stripped off the visible sign of the presence of the invisible
God amongst them and for them, a most glorious privilege afforded them above
and beyond all the whole World, which they lost; and the Philistines (in
punishment of their sins and to the everlasting shame and reproach of their
cowardice, specially Ephraims) took and carried from them.

62 And to show their strength was gone when God had left them, He gave his
people over also unto the sword: and was wroth with his inheritance.
and suffered his Ark, the token both of him and it, to be taken by the
uncircumcised Philistines, and how little he cared for them that cared not for
him, he utterly forsook his people that day, and let the enemy kill and slay
as they would themselves, so that there fell that day at Eben-Ezer thirty
thousand footmen, they cowardly deserting the battle and fled every man to his
tent, and this was the issue of their provoking God to anger, they lost him and
themselves too.

63 For the jealousy of the Lord which was kindled against them suddenly
consumed them, The fire consumed their young men: and their maidens were not
given in marriage.
in his fierce displeasure did he expose them to the merciless sword of the
Philistines, which hewed down so many thousands of the choice young men of
Israel that day, which so unpeopled them that the maids could not have
husbands, there not being men enough to marry them, nor if there had, would
those times (the saddest that ever befell Israel) have been oportune for
bride-feasts, when all eyes were full of tears, and hearts full of sorrow at so
great disaster upon such a slaughter, and the loss of the Ark of God their
strength and glory?

64 At which time also Hophni and Phinehas, Their priests fell by the sword:
and their widows made no lamentation.
the two sons of Eli, that waited upon the Ark were likewise slain, wose widows
were so transported with the loss of the Ark, as the loss of their husbands was
swallowed up in it; for Phinehas his wife giving up the ghost at the dolor of
it, her last words were, The glory is departed from Israel for the Ark of God
is taken: forgetting her husband.

65 The Lord himself was amazed at what was Then the Lord awaked as one out of
sleep: and like a mighty man that shouteth by reason of wine.
done, to see himself as it were taken prisoner, his strength gone like
Sampsons, and as it were a binding by the Philistines to be made their pastime
and reproach, as he was: whereupon the Lord, whom the Philistines thought they
had vanquished as well as his people, having the Ark their prisoner, or that he
had quite cast off care either of it or them, on a sudden he alone fell foul
upon the Philistines, by his own immediate power in their own country, he took
them to task for the rescue of his Ark, and vindicating his honor from their
insolences, and laid about him like Sampson awakened out of his sleep when his
strength was upon him, or as some mighty Giant enraged and transported with
wine and passion, dealing judgments on all hands to every Town and people,
Lords and Commons where the Ark came, at Ashdod, Gath, and Ekron, destroying
them with deadly destruction, so that their cry went up to heaven.

And he smote his enemies in the hinder parts: he put them to a perpetual
reproach.
66 For the plague he sent amonst them made them die a pace, tormented with
grievous pain and horror, the disease being sore Emerods in their secret
hinder parts. Neither could their God Dagon stand before it, but paid his head
in homage to it when it came into his house; so that the Ark made such
destruction wheresoever it came of them and their Gods, that these great
conquerours made no brags of their booty, but sent it home again, and glad they
were to be rid of it; accompanied with the Images and representations of those
so shameful Emerods in their secret parts, by the advice of their priests sent
as a trepass offering, but ordered by providence to be indeed a perpetual
monument and memorial among the Israelites of that disgraceful punishment and
ignominious disease God inflicted on them, to whom they to their own shame were
thus enforced to give glory, even to the God of Israel, and ask him pardon,
whom they thought they had overcome and taken prisoner, when they had his Ark
captive.

67 But though God thus plagued his enemies, Moreover, he refused the
Tabernacle of Joseph: and chose not the tribe of Ephraim.
and rescued his Ark out of their hands, and brought it home to Israel, yet to
show his displeasure against them too, he abandoned Shilo quite, and would not
suffer that testimony of his presence to return any more thither, whence it
was taken captive for their sins, but refused to reside and be worshipped any
longer in the tribe of Ephraim, the sons of Joseph behaved themselves so ill,
within whose lotment Shiloh was, where his Ark had so long sojourned, and he
had been so much neglected.

68 But instead thereof chose Jerusalem, But chose the tribe of Judah, the
mount Sion which he loved.
mount Sion there, which he preferred to all the earth to be the place for his
Ark to reside on, there in the tribe of Judah did he choose to fix his presence,
appoint his worship (where he knew he should be faithfully served to his
content) and established the Kingdom there also, which both Kingdom and
Priesthood in the tribe of Judah shall continue, and be preserved, when as
Ephraim and that opposite Kingdom of the ten tribes with their Idolatrous
service shall be quite extinct, and led away captive.

69 There did he build himself a glorious Temple, And he built his sanctuary
like high palaces: like the earth which he had established for ever.
in the glorious flourishing times of Solomon for his Ark to abide in
immoveably, and with it his presence beautified, and enriched with all the
ornaments, and precious things that nature or Art could contribute to it,
raised upon a mount exceeding sightly for situation, and it self stately for
building and Architecture, there to flourish and abide firm, as the earth, by
the mighty power of God protecting that, as he supports this; for so shall his
Church spiritual which Christ shall build and beautify (figured by the Temple)
be established upon the earth as the earth, and in heaven for ever.

He chose David also his servant, and took him from the sheep-folds.
70 And as that tribe and place was honored with the temple and sacred service
also so, with the Kingdom, and that eminent servant and Kingly type of the
Messiah, David, who was chosen thence to rule his people, whom he advanced
thereunto from a mean condition, even from keeping his fathers sheep, in token
of Christ's abasement before his glorious and sovereign advancement over his
Church and Kingdom.

From following the ewes great with young, he brought him to feed Jacob his
people, and Israel his inheritance.
71 From taking care of his fathers flock, the yeanning ewes and tender lambs,
did the Lord raise him to be the Kingly shepherd of his own espoused people,
that have been his inheritance ever since they were Jacobs posterity, that he
might yield protection to these, and deliver them from their enemies, as he did
those from the Lion and the Bear, and in tender love and care administer mercy
and justice to them, instructing them in the fear of the Lord, as Christ shall
do his Church.

So he fed them according to the integrity of his heart: and guided them by
the skilfulness of his hands.
72 And David did not fail of his duty, no more shall Christ of his, but with
an upright honest heart both toward God above him, and those under him, did he
discharge his place, providing for them, protecting of them, and administering
to them, and indeed throughout his reign ruled them very prosperously with much
sagacitie of wisdom, and happy success in all his great undertakings. The
spirit of God being with him, as he shall be with Christ.

The lxxix. PSALM.
The Psalmist sadly relates to God the condition of his people, the land, the
holy City, the Temple, under either the Assyrian or Antiochus, what cruelty
and devastation was every where executed, what reproach he and they were fallen
into by it, and prays for redress, and remarkable judgment upon their cruel
oppressors, and the blasphemers of his name, promising everlasting remembrance
of his mercy and praise for it, if vouchsafed. Psalm lxxix. A Psalm of (or,
for) Asaph.


A Psalm made either by Asaph himself in a prophetical prediction of Jerusalems
calamities, or committed to his successors bearing his name by some man of God
that made it after they fell out.

1 O God that did choose and set apart this land of Canaan, O God, the heathen
are come into thine inheritance; thy holy Temple have they defiled: they have
laid Jerusalem on heaps.
specially Judea for thy self, and Church to inhabit and to worship thee in,
and did drive out them that were not thy people, and tookest and keptst
possession of it hitherto, till now, that the heathen no whit related to thee
have reassumed it, broken in with rage and cruelty, and dispossessed both thee
and thy people, for now Jerusalem which thou have formerly so wonderfully
preserved from them, and the Temple there, that place of thy special presence
and sacred worship, have they also mastered as well as the rest of the land of
Israel and Judah, the one of them, they have done all manner of spite to for
thy sake, defiled that sacred place with the blood of thine own people that
were wont there to worship thee, and introduced their profane Idolatries into
it; The other, they have devastated, the walls and houses are demolished,
inhabitants slaughtred, all ruinated.

2 It is not to be expressed the outrages of the enemy and the miseries of thy
poor people, The dead bodies of thy servants have they given to be meat unto
the fowls of heaven: the flesh of thy saints unto the beasts of the earth.
they torture them to death that adhere to thee, and will not apostatize and
desert thy Laws and ordinances, to profess and practice their Idolatry and
superstition, and after death will not afford them burial, but expose them
above ground as not worthy the common courtesy of nature, to have so much as a
burying place on earth, whose souls are with thee in heaven, but lie like
common carrion, and are suffered to rot and stink, and be torn in pieces and
devoured by ravenous beasts and birds.

Their blood have they shed like water round about Jerusalem: and there was
none to bury them.
3 They have made havoc of all thy faithful people, that for piety sake
resorted to and inhabited in and about thy holy City Jerusalem, shedding there
the blood of such holy Martyrs unmeasurably, and by strict watch and barbarous
edicts kept the bodies of such precious souls unburied, nor would suffer
without imminent peril of their lives, nay, certain ruin, any of their
brethren that were left alive to do that office of charity and humanity for
them, nor indeed could they if they would, the dead were so many, and the
living so few.

We are become a reproach to our neighbors, a scorn and a derision to them that
are round about us.
4 We, O Lord, that through thy grace and powerful assistance were wont to be
the terror of the heathen round about us, and by thy presence and worship
amongst us were heretofore the glory of all the World; now they that were our
slaves and subjects are our Lords and masters, and use us not only cruelly,
but abuse us scornfully, reproching and deriding us together with thee, and thy
worship, because of our present condition, and theirs; none pity us, no not
our next neighbour-nations, but scornfully taunt us.

How long, Lord, will thou be angry for ever? shall thy jealousy burn like
fire?
5 O Lord, take notice of it and be moved to vindicate thine own dishonor, and
have some compassion also upon thy distre^sed people; for, Lord, we know well
enough that this could not befall us if our sins and thine anger were not the
causes. But, Lord, remember thou have been angry heretofore, but never after
this sort, thou wast wont to commix mercy with displeasure, Lord, be not less
good to us than to our forefathers, let there be an end of our misery and thy
fury, and let not our whoredoms and thine enraged jealousy quite consume us
as fire does straw.

6 Lord, Pour out thy wrath upon the heathen that have not known thee, and upon
the Kingdoms that have not called upon thy name.
such fury would better become thee toward thine enemies than thy chosen
people, these indeed for their sins may deserve punishments, but let utter
destruction be the portion of them that neither know nor worship thee, that
have neither relation to thee nor commerce with thee, nor thou know never
will, but in their pride and ignorance contemn thee and serve other Gods.

7 And such are they that have thus cruelly butchered us thine only Israel,
For they have devoured Jacob, and laid wast his dwelling place.
thy friends Jacobs posterity, and by slaughter, captivity, and devastations
have unpeopled and ruinated the whole land where we have dwelt so long, and
which thou promisedst to him and his posterity after him, which yet now are
cast out of it by these profane heathen.

8 O for mercy sake muster not up the provocations of old, O remember not
against us former iniquities: let thy tender mercies speedily prevent us: for
we are brought very low.
those murmurings against thee, mistrusts of thee, apostatizings from thee that
we have ever been guilty of from the very first, to make war upon us for them
now, but forgive and forget them, for we shall never be able to stand under
them. And instead of remembering them, call to mind thy tender mercies and
bowels of compassion which thou have ever professed to be in thee in thy
peoples behalf when they have been in misery, and greater never befell them
than these we now are in, for we are at the very last gasp, to so low and
miserable an estate are we brought, as thy people have scarce a being, but
certainly will have none at all shortly, such sorrows and sufferings will make
a final end of them, if thou in mercy speedily prevent it not by some redress.

Help us, O God of our salvation, for the glory of thy name: and deliver us,
and purge away our sins for thy names sake.
9 Which, good Lord, vouchsafe us, Help us out of this miserable destructive
condition, thou that only can do it, and who we cannot choose but hope wilt
do it, because thy glory is so much concerned in it, and thou as well as we
suffer so much by it: Though (we confess) we can not scarce hope by reason
of our sins, which are greater than our sufferings, but, Lord, as our benefit
will be great, so thy glory will not be small, if thou will do away sins and
sufferings by thy pardon and power, which therefore we beg of thee.

Wherefore should the heathen say, where is their God? let him be known among
the heathen in our sight, by the revenging of the blood of his servants which
is shed.
10 For as things now stand thou have no honor, we are punished, but the
heathen are not converted. Thy justice and terror upon us has no other
operation upon them to drive them into contempt and insultation, not only over
us, but thee, for they stick not to say where is the God of the Hebrews! he
that was wont, he could deliver them. This, Lord, they say in derision of thee,
and thou suffer it to go unpunished, though thou thus punishest us. But,
Lord, let us few that are left alive of the many thousands of Israel, though in
captivity, yet be remembered and pitied by thee, let our enemies know, and us
see that thou art a God still and the same God too as able as heretofore, by
some remarkable and just vindication of that deluge of blood of thine own
people, and precious servants that has been shed, and cries for vengeance
against them.

11 Yea, Let the sighing of the prisoner come before thee, according to the
greatness of thy power: preserve thou those that are appointed to die.
Lord, let both the innocent blood already shed, as also the unjust sufferings
and miserable calamities of those of thy people that are yet alive, the
imprisonments and cruelties practiced upon them, and the heavy sighs and
direful groans which in those pressures are forced from them, come all before
thee to move with thee, as to revenge the one, so to preserve the other, which
thou have power enough to do, though they and death are not far asunder.

12 Put forth thy power accordingly in our behalfs, And render unto our
neighbors sevenfold into their bosom, the reproach wherewith they have
reproched thee, O Lord.
but chiefly in thine own, let them not escape thee for their cruelties; but,
Lord, pay them home for their blasphemies, these wicked Idolatrous heathens,
and those pitieless neighboring nations, that notwithstanding all they have
heard and seen of thee, since thou broughtest us among them, are no more
knowing of thee, nor bear no more reverence to thee, than to scorn and reproach
thee because of our misery. Good Lord, let them smart for it.

13 Who are none of thy people, So we thy people and sheep of thy pasture will
give thee thanks for ever: we will show forth thy praise to all generations.
and we that are thine only peculiar shall thereby have cause given us for
ever, to remember thy power and goodness, when thou shall thus revenge the
dead, preserve the living, and right thy self, and will never forget so great a
mercy, but will be for ever thankful to thee, and praise thee for it, yea,
our children and childrens children through all generations will we instruct,
and engage to do the like.

The lxxx. PSALM.
The Psalmist, upon the captivity of Judah, and those of the rest of the
tribes that adhered to her, and were led captive with her, indites this prayer,
wherein he minds God of his tender care of his people when they were in Egypt,
and prays for the like now, that he will appear for a few in which his Church
is as much concerned as in those many, which are in great calamity, this
prayer he enforces with an elegant Metaphor of their being as a choice vine to
him, and the enemy as a wild boar to them. Promises, if this single tribe so
many ways considerable may be re-instated and revived; that they will live to
him and to his praise.

Psalm lxxx. To the chief musician, upon Shoshannim-Edush. A psalm of (or, for)
Asaph.
A Psalm either prophetically made by Asaph himself, or some other man of God
upon the captivity, and committed to Asaphs successors, principally to him
that is most skilful upon the sweet instrument of six strings Shoshannim
whereunto it is set, for his ordering of it.

GIve ear, O shepherd of Israel, thou that leadest Joseph like a flock, thou
that dwell between the Che^^bims shine forth.
1 O God of our fathers that leddest the posterity of Jacob and Joseph out of
their Egyptian bondage through the Red sea and wilderness, as a shepherd leads
his flock, yielding them powerful protection and gracious provision; give ear
to us now in our Babylonish captivity, pity us, and do for us now as then,
who are the remainder, all that is left of those progenitors. And thou that
wast wont also to be entreated by thy people in thy sanctuary, and to evidence
thy presence there, in thy mercie-seat between the wings of the Cherubims,
vouchsafing them many a gracious answer and deliverance, when they prayed for
it in their extremity, thou that art the same God now as then, hear us the
same people though not in the same place, in Babylon appear for us calling on
thee in this our banishment and captivation.

2 At the apostacy of the ten tribes, Before Ephraim and Benjamin, and
Manasseh, stir up thy strength, and come and save us.
thou know how that many well-affected of the tribe of Ephraim, Benjamin,
and Manasseh forsook their habitations, and transplanted themselves into Judea
to be partakers of thy worship; and now the posterity of these that did cleave
so close to thee then at the defection of their brethren, are held captive here
in Babylon: Lord remember it unto them for good, and now stick close to them,
as then they did to thee, and powerfully transplant them back again into their
own country, and deliver them out of this captivity whereinto thou have
brought them, that when time was were voluntary exiles for thy sake.

3 Lord how ever our condition is very desperate and miserable, Turn us again,
O God: and cause thy face to shine^, and we shall be saved.
yet art thou able to change it to what it was, and to carry us into our own
land, and give us the enjoyment and practice of thy worship again, if thou will
but turn thy frowns into favor, and thy face upon us in stead of thy
back-parts, pardoning our sins and receiving us again into grace, we shall be a
happy people, and see good days for all this.

4 O Lord God of alsufficient and Almigtie power, O Lord God of hosts, how long
will thou be angry against the prayer of thy people?
how long will thou that have the command of all, and art able to help us,
suffer us to remain helpless and be angry at us now in our misery, for sins
committed in our prosperity? so that our prayers are of no power, but thou
rejected them and us that are thy people, and suffer as well for thee as for
our sins.

5 Thou make us altogether miserable, Thou feedest them with the bread of
tears: and give them tears to drink in great measure.
our sighs and tears are the best repast we have, the uttering of our grief is
the sustaining of our nature, which we are forced to do with bitter lamentation.

Thou make us a strife unto our neighbors: and our enemies laugh among
themselves.
6 Thou have made us an absolute prey to our neighbor nations that have long
looked for this day, insomuch that they are ready to fall out among themselves
for the dividing the spoil of us and our country, the whilst we are here
captives in a strange nation, amongst our mortal enemies, that have no better
pastime than to deride our miserable condition.

Turn us again, O God of hosts, and cause thy face to shine and we shall be
saved.
7 See the third verse of this Psalm, which is the same with this.

Thou have brought a vine out of Egypt: thou have cast out the heathen, and
planted it.
8 With no small cost and care did thou, when time was, transplant Israel as a
vine of great account, out of Egypt where it was stocked and thrive not, unto a
land where thou undertookest it should take root and grow, even Canaan which
thou emptiedst of its heathenish inhabitants, to make way for thy people, where
thou did implant, and whereof thou did possess them.

Thou preparedst room before it, and did cause it to take deep root, and it
filled the land.
9 Thou miraculously made way for their implantation by destroying and
expulsing the natives thereof, and making thy people victors still as they went
on from one end of the land to the other, insomuch as that they were settled in
it by thy special gift and grace, and enjoyed it both by right of conquest, and
long prescription of peaceable possession, and peopled it from corner to corner
successively, one generation after another for many ages.

The hills were covered with the shadow of it: and the boughs thereof were like
the goodly Cedars.
10 They multiplied by thy blessing in such sort, as that the hills and valleys
were all full of them, both best and worst of the country was inhabited and
improved; so mightily did they increase, and not only in number but in stature
also, they were tall and goodly people, such as hewed down Giants before them.

11 So far as ever thou did ordain the limits of that land to stretch, She
sent out her boughs unto the sea: and her branches unto the river.
even from the Mediterranean sea to the river Euphrates, of old appointed by
thee to be her boundaries, did thy people inhabit her in a flourishing
condition both of Church and State.

12 Lord, Why have thou then broken down her hedges: so that all they which
pass by the way, do pluck her?
since thou wast pleased to do so much for a people, and to husband and bless
this vine of thine in this sort, why have thou thus utterly withdrawn thy
protection from them, as if they had never belonged unto thee, nor had been
cared for by thee, exposing them and their land to all the outrages and
obloquies that any that have a mind will inflict upon them, and make booty
both of their persons and estates which at pleasure they share amongst them?

13 Look as a savage boar breaking into a well formed garden would demean
himself by turning all things upside down, The boar out of the wood does wast
it: and the wild beast of the field does devour it.
so has this Heathenish Babylonish tyrant the land we possessed and the people
in it, making havoc and destruction of all, old and young, root and branch, in
so ruinous a manner, as if his army had been so many wild beasts in stead of
men.

14 O Lord, Return, we beseech thee, O God of hosts; look down from heaven and
behold, and vi^it t^is vine
think it long enough to have estranged thy self thus from thy people, resume
thy grace of old toward us, we humbly pray thee, thou that have command over
all things, whose dominion is in heaven far above all earthly powers, look
propitiously from thence upon us, and own this vine of thine once again to
replant it.

15 Both vine and vineyard, And the vineyard which thy right hand has planted:
and the branch which thou made strong for thy self.
people and country, Lord look graciously upon them to reunite them, and
repossess them of that which once, by a strong hand and outstretched arm, thou
gave them; the tribe of Judah, O Lord, remember in which as it were alone
thou did uphold and maintain the Church and Kingdom of Christ, when all
besides fell from thee.

It is burnt with fire, it is cut down: they perish at the rebuke of thy
countenance.
16 This single branch, all that's left of the flourishing vine, the only Tribe
in effect of all the twelve, even it is destroyed, Judea the place where it
grew is miserably wasted with fire, and the people with the sword, in thy
wrathful displeasure have thou blasted this tender branch, which is the more
dejected at thy frowns, because thy former favors were so resplendent upon it.

Let thy hand be upon the man o^ thy right hand: upon the son of man whom (...)
made strong for thy self.
17 Let thy power and grace appear in protecting, and delivering this single
Tribe of Judah's posterity, the sole remainder of Jacobs sons, who has ever
hitherto been mightily favored and prospered by thee, even for David's sake
that man after thine own heart, who sprung out thence, and whom thou made a
mighty King ruling Jews and Gentiles, and endowing him with singular gifts and
graces, fit for that place and imploiment thou conferest upon him, out of whose
loins must also come the Messiah whom he tipified: for as he is thy Son, so
shall he be David's and Judah's whom thou have set apart for that high office
and glorious work of mediation, placed him at thy right hand in power, and
furnished him with graces fit for this imploiment, to rule, sanctify and save
thy people, his Church; even the man that is thy fellow, God and man, the
Almighty Mediator and Sovereign King, for his sake therefore put forth thy
power in poor Judah's behalf for to restore her.

So will not we go back from thee: quicken us, and we will call upon thy name.
18 Lord, if thou will do thus for us, thou will bind us to thee everlastingly,
we will then renew our covenant and keep it, which by our backsliding we have
broken, the cause of all our misery. Let us but live again, and we will not
live to our selves but to thee, thou shall have the praise of our restoration,
and the obedience of our lives and conversation

19 Lord, Turn us again, O Lord God of hosts, cause thy face to shine, and we
shall be saved.
how ever our condition is very forlorn and miserably, yet art thou, that
command the whole creation, able to change it to what it was, and to carry
us into our own land, and give us the use and enjoyment of thy worship again,
if thou will but turn thy frowns into favors, and thy face upon us instead of
thy back parts, pardoning our sins, and receiving us again into grace, we shall
be a happy people, and see good days for all this.

The lxxxi. PSALM.
The Psalmist quickens up the people of Israel to pour out praises to God, as
God himself also has commanded them to do, for all his mercies to them,
specially that great deliverance out of Egypt, and by way of caution hints
notwithstanding Isreal's ingratitude, and unmindfulness of Gods providence and
goodness, at the bitter waters in the wilderness, where they murmured and
believed not, as also after in Canaan, which cost them full dear, who else had
been always a prosperous people, and their land a plentiful land.

To him that is most skillful upon Gittith, Psalm lxxxi. To the chief musician
upon Gittith, A Psalm of Asaph.
the instrument used by Obed-edom the Gittite and his family, do I Asaph that
made this Psalm commit it for his ordering it in the Quire.

1 AS we have received mercies and favors of great extraordinary natures from
God, SIng aloud unto God ourstrength: make a joyful noise unto the God of
jacob.
so let our praises be suitable, with heart and voice let all Israel in their
solemn conventions magnify the Lord, and acknowledge all those great things
thankfully, which by a mighty hand he has done and wrought for them; Let them
with infinite exultation and confidence in God as theirs, be loud and large in
their praises.

Take a Psalm, and bring hither the timbrel: the pleasant harp with the
Psaltery.
2 All we can do will be too little, and come short of what the Lord demerits,
but let not us be wanting to the utmost of our power, but with voice and
instrument, yea, all manner of musical instruments, one and other, specially
the sweetest and choicest of them, let us sound forth his praises, that heaven
and earth may ring of us.

Blow up the trumpet in the new moon: in the time appointed on our solemn fea^t
day.
3 Be sure when you celebrate those solemn festivities appointed in the law, as
the new moon etc. That you perform it in a faithful cheerful manner* and
express it heartily by sound of trumpet, and all other ways as may most
testify your inward joy, and best enliven it.

For this was a statute for Israel: and a law of the God of Jacob.
4 This you ought to do not only of gratuity, but also of duty, for God does
not only deserve it, but has expressly enjoined it, as a statute and
everlasting law for Israel to yield obedience to, even these solemn meetings,
for solemn thanksgivings appointed of old by the God of our forefather Jacob.

This he ordained in Joseph for a testimony, when he went out through the land
of Egypt: where I heard a language that I understood not.
5 Even then did he institute it, when Joseph's posterity had the precedence
among all the Tribes, not Judah as now it is, ever since the time that God
destroyed the first born in Egypt, and thereupon ordained the Passover, when
miraculously he brought us out thence, from being imbondaged under a people
whom we understood not, saving by blows as beasts do men, they not speaking our
language nor we theirs; a people strange to God, and as strangely using his
Church, that uncomfortably sojourned amongst them without civil converse.

I removed his shoulder from the burden: his hands were delivered from the pots.
6 From the woeful slavery and cruel bondage of those Egyptian Tyrants and
Taskmasters, did God by a strong hand wonderfully deliver us, and made us
freemen to serve him of bondmen, serving them in hard labor of bearing
burdens, and doing base offices of brick-clamping, and pot-making in kills and
furnaces.

7 Thou criedst unto me (says God) in thy bondage in Egypt, Thou calledst in
trouble and I delivered thee; I answered thee in the secret place of thunder: I
proved thee at the waters of Meribah. Selah.
after also in thy danger at the red sea, and I, thou know, heard thee, and
by a mighty hand and apparent signs of favor delivered thee from the one and
the other, from on high plaguing and troubling thine enemies the Egyptians with
thunder and lightning, and delivering thee; which I thought thou would have
remembered, and for which I could not but believe thou would have been
thankful, and believing in my grace and providence in aftertimes, but did I
find it so, when I tried thy faith, meekness, and patience a little after at
the waters of strife? no, thou know I did not.

8, 9, 10 Where yet for all thine ungrateful murmurings, Hear O my people and
I will testify unto thee: O Israel, if thou will hearken unto me.
thou remembrest I did not reject thee, nor so much as punish thee, There shall
no strange God be in thee: neither shall thou worship any strange God.
but took occasion thence to enter and renew my covenant with thee, and to take
thee into my service, and make further proof of thee, whereupon I made a
statute and an ordinance, I am the Lord thy God which brought thee out of the
land of Egypt: open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it.
that if thou will diligently hearken to the voice of the Lord thy God, and
walk as my people before me, in obedience of those laws which I shall give
thee, worshipping none but me, and keeping your distance to all other Gods,
worshipped by those that are not my people, choosing me only for yours, by the
same token I powerfully and with such sign of favor brought you out of the
land of Egypt, the Type indeed of a nearer spiritual relation, whereby we are
or ought to be united; that then if thou would but do thus, if ever thou
wantedst what thou would have, and was useful for thee, it should not be
because I would not give it, for then would I withhold no needful blessings
from thee, but because thou did not ask it, the fault should be thine and not
mine, if in the faith of my gracious covenant-engagements, and their often
performances, thou will confidingly importune me, and obedientially walk with
me, so doing, and so praying, I will deny thee nothing, but supply all thy
wants, satisfy all thy desires, and give thee abundant cause of praise.

But my people would not hearken to my voice; and Israel would none of me.
11 But for all that I could do or say, these people that I had done so much
for, and said much to, to persuade and draw them to me, though I had engaged
and obliged them all the ways in the world, by covenanting with them, working
miracles for them, making choice of them, giving laws to them, yet they would
not be prevaild withal to obey my commands, nor believe in my promises, but
ungratefully and rebelliously rejected me and my service, and distrusted my
faithfulness.

So I gave them up unto their own hearts lust: and they walked in their own
counsels.
12 Insomuch as I was quite tired out with them, when I saw all my labor lost,
my goodness abused, and mine advice slighted, so that at last I even suspended
my dispensations, left them to do as they list, what their own wicked hearts
prompted to, to follow the dictates of their corrupt and carnal judgments,
and I never so much as said why do you so. But it was little for their profit.

O that my people had hearkened unto me: and Israel had walked in my ways!
13 O that this ungrateful backsliding people of mine, whom I have loved so
well for their fathers sakes, had but obeyed my voice, believed in the
promises, and kept the commandments which I gave them.

14 It should not have been with them, I should soon have subdued their
enemies, and turned my hand against their adversaries.
as it was by their own folly and stubbornness, the enemy should never have so
often got the better of them, but according to my promise and former
providence, I would have been sure to deliver them, and have made quick
dispatch of their adversaries (as they may remember I did by the Egyptians) and
made them as much in bondage to my people, as they were to them; if their sins
had not stood in my way, they had been happy and flourishing, for I would have
turned the scales, and made them as much over-weight to their enemies, as they
were to them; for it was from me that they prevailed, which they should never
have done, but perpetually have gone by the worse: if my people had not failed
of their duty, I would not have failed of my mercy to them, and judgments upon
their foes.

15 Those wicked heathenish nations, The haters of the Lord should have
submitted themselves unto him; but their time should have endured for ever.
that so often oppressed them, and warred upon them out of a hatred to them (I
know) as being my people, I would have made them stoop to their yoke, been
bondmen and tributaries to them, who should never have known what infelicity
had meant, but have been ever prosperous and fruitful.

16 And whereas their land, He should have fed them also with the finest of the
wheat: and with honey out of the rock should I have satisfied them.
the land of promise, which God undertook should be so fruitful and plentiful
for them, was instead thereof fruitless and barren many times, and they
hunger-bit and starved, they may thank themselves, their sins kept off his
blessings, else they should neither have wanted things necessary nor convenient
for profit or pleasure, to sustain nature or to delight it, for God would have
made the land exceeding fruitful, and abundantly productive of all requisite
provision, so that they should have eaten the fat and drunk the sweet, yea, the
most craggy and barren places, he would have caused extraordinarily to have
yielded them much pleasure, and store of deliverances. The earth should have
been like storehouses, and the rocks like hives.

The lxxxii. PSALM.
The Psalmist shows Princes and Magistrates what an eye God has over them,
persuades them therefore to do justice justly and impartially, and employ their
power for the defense and supportation of the helplest. But perceives men of
that rank so obdura^ed in their corrupt courses, for that, because they are
above men, they scarce think they are under God, as that though he honors them
for their places, yet he acquaints them with their natures. And prays, if
nothing will make them just and co^scionable, that God would punish their pride
and injustice, and free the oppressed.

Psalm lxxxii. A Psalm of Asaph.
A Psalm made by Asaph.

GOd stands in the congregation of the mighty: he judges among the Gods.
1 THe Kings and rulers of the earth, how great and absolute soever they
conceive themselves to be, Lording it over their subjects, and inferiors,
without consideration of the conscience and duty of their places and offices,
and of the account they owe and must pay to God thereof; yet for all that God
heeds them, though they heed not him, he is amongst their counsels and
judicatories, an eye and ear witness of their doings, and certainly, though
invisibly, overlook their proceedings, and passes his judgment upon them, and
they shall one day find him as much over them in Sovereigntie and Power, as
they are over others, to judge and condemn them for their irregularities.

2 How long will ye dare to persist in provoking the most high that sees you,
How long will ye judge unjustly: and accept the persons of the wicked? Selah.
by executing unjust judgment and falsifying your trust, by partial and
personal respects, acquitting the guilty, and condemning the innocent, casting
the scales of justice by the over-weight of private ends and by-respects,
favoring the oppressor in his wrong-doing. How long I say will you do so?

3 Be warned, Defend the poor and fatherless: do justice to the afflicted and
needy.
consider better of the matter, who it is that has preferred you above your
brethren, and why; God looks to find other fruit on such trees. As he has
given you Power and Authority, so he expects you should employ it for the ends
he gave it, and not contrary; that they that are wronged, and either for want
of means or friends cannot defend themselves, but are like to suffer unjustly,
should be supplied and supported by you, fail not therefore to do so, and to
administer justice in the behalf of the poor afflicted, that are overpowered by
men of might or violence.

4 Save the poor that are oppressed, Deliver the poor and needy: rid them out
of the hand of the wicked.
and that need your help to relieve them, set such free, and deliver them out
of the power and malice of unconscionable wicked worldlings, that seek to undo
them.

5 But a man, They know not neither will they understand; they walk on in
darkness, all the foundations of the earth are out of course.
yea a Prophet from God, may tell them over the over again of their fault and
danger, and yet they apprehend neither of both, nor indeed have they any mind
at all to understand right instruction, but put away the light from them,
choosing rather to walk in darkness, and to be unjust and wicked still. Is it
not every where thus, are not of all men Magistrates most to blame? those that
should yield the greatest support and settlement to Kingdoms and Republics,
and be a blessing to the people under them, do they not sad the the hearts of
the innocent, countenance the nocent, cause mighty distractions, and draw down
heavy judgments.

I have said ye are Gods: and all of you are children of the most high.
6 I know you think highly enough of your selves, and for my part I desire not
to detract from Majestracy nor Magistrates, the one is Gods ordinance, and the
other I have already acknowledged to be Gods, and so do still, affirm you to be
his Deputies and Vicegerents here on earth, to whom he has communicated Places
and Offices of Honor and Authority, as earthly Princes are wont to do to their
children.

But ye shall die like men, and fall like one of the Princes.
7 And as I have told you what are in a Metaphorical figurative sense, so let
me tell you also what you are, and what you shall find your selves really to
be, without any figure, that is, mortal men, such as no Titles nor distances
can exempt, or privilege from the common fate of all men, to die and rise to
judgment; for you have not laid aside your nature by taking up your Title, but
shall certainly come down from that degree you are advanced unto, and stoop to
death, as every man of what rank soever though equal with you, or superior
to you, have done before you.

8 And though you have been gods on earth, Arise, O God, judge the earth: for
thou shall inherit all nations.
yet shall you be judged by the God of heaven, who only is God indeed, and
Sovereign Judge of all the world, and its well he is so, such miserable
disorder have you brought, and will bring all things unto, if you may be
suffered in your Tyrannical and unjust ways, for nothing will reclaim you, no
doctrine, though from God himself, whether exhortation or commination; so that
my prayer shall be, that God would by his power judge you for thus misjudging
and misgoverning, and do the inhabitants of the earth right upon such Princes
and Judges as do them wrong, and let them know that the earth, yea, every
Kingdom and Country in it is the Lords and not theirs, though they Lord it in
their several dominions, as if right of inheritance and not thy donation were
their chief investiture, they pay thee no homage, therefore distrein for thy
glory as Lord Paramount, and proprietor of what they count theirs and not
thine, as one day thou will be sure to do.

The lxxxiii. PSALM.
When Senacherib instigated by his own ambition and others solicitation, was
preparing with all the power he could make to fall upon Judah, some men of God,
either good Hezekiah, or some Prophet composed this Psalm, relating the whole
design and consederation by way of complain to God: praying him to lay it to
heart, and to do for his Church and judge his enemies as he was wont, and
thereby get himself glory amongst those that are not his people, as well as
amongst those that are.

A Psalm probably committed to Asaphs successors (rather than made by himself)
by the penman of it, Psalm lxxiii. A song or Psalm or (or for) Asaph.
to be sung and played by them.

1 O God, KEep not thou silence, O God: hold not thy peace, and be not still, O
God.
do not thou sit still in silence, neither be careless of the condition that
both thou and we are about to fall into; it is high time for thee to be-think
thee, O God, concerning it.

2 Considering the vast preparations that are making of a tumultuary army, For
lo, thine enemies make a tumult: and they that hate thee, have lift up the head.
consisting of diverse confederate nations, instigated by our pestilent
neighbors and inveterate enemies the Ammonites and Moabites, who grow sure and
confident upon it to have a day, and to subjugate and do by us, as thou for our
sakes have heretofore done by them.

They have taken crafty counsel against thy people, and consulted against thy
hidden ones.
3 They have negotiated this league with much subtility and solicitation against
us the remainder of thy holy seed and chosen people, and combined their heads
and hands with the Assyrian and others to ruin, and utterly root out those few
Israelites that are left, and do possess a narrow room in this great Kingdom
which once was such* and that have no other hope nor help but thy sanctuary,
and thine own residence in it amongst us, under the wings whereof we shelter
and secure our selves, hoping by it for defense and protection against this
mighty combination and deluge, that is flowing down upon us.

They have said, come, and let us cut them off from being a nation: that the
name of Israel may be no more is remembrance.
4 Promising themselves an absolute issue in this their undertaking, utterly to
destroy us as they have done the ten Tribes, and so to put a final end to the
name of Israel, who is brought at this day very low.

For they have consulted together with one consent: they are confederate
against thee.
5 And indeed to speak humanely, it is no hard thing for them to do, such an
army as this is, made up of so many nations, unanimously agreed all of them to
war upon thee, for so thou know it is, for though it be against us, yet it
is for thy sake, because we belong to thee, and profess thee and thy worship.

The Tabernacles of Edom, and the Ishmaelites: of Moab, and the Hagarens.
6 Our near kinsmen born originally together with us of godly parents, are
chieftains and ringleaders in this confederacy against thy Church, but that is
no news, for when were they other, or how can other be expected from such a
degenerate generation? as Esau hated Jacob though his brother, so do the
Edomites (his posterity) hate us, those Arabians with their Tents and military
provision are coming against us, and with them the Ishmaelites the sons of
Ishmael that old enemy of Isack his brother, who because he could not be coheir
with him, his seed are at open enmity with us; and so are the Moabites Lots
incestuous brood, and all them that came of Hagar the Egyptian bondwoman, who
have ever hated us freemen, her Masters legitimate offspring sole heirs of
Abraham, and his promise.

7 With these kindred of ours, Gebal, and Ammon, and Amalek, the Philistines,
with the inhabitants of Tire.
are conjoined forrainers of strange names and nations, as the Gibbits
borderers upon Sidon, yea, both far and near have they commixed their forces,
for with them are the Ammonites our near neighbor that incestuous generation,
and the Amalekites Esaus posterity, also our old enemies the Philistines that
brood of cursed Ham; with the Citizens of Tire that famous place and rich
people.

8 All these have combined their forces, Assure also is joined with them: they
have helped the children of Lot. Selah.
and the better to effect their design, have joined themselves to the King of
Assyria and he with them, and all against us: that great nation is confederate
with our enemies the Ammonites and Moabites who are backed by them, and upon
whom they bear themselves so high, being confident by their means to ruin us.

9 But, Do unto them as unto the Midianites; as ^o Sisera, as to Jabin, at the
brooks of K^son.
Lord, how easy a matter is it for thee to defeat the hopes of our
adversaries, and overthrow this mighty confederate army, and deliver thy people
as thou have done heretofore: magnify thy self therefore, O Lord, put forth
thy power, do by these as we well remember thou did by the Midianites, though
they were like Graslioppers for multitude, yet with the noise of broken
Pitchards in the hands of Gideons handful of men, did thou rout them, and
set their swords one against another to their own destruction, likewise, as
thou did to Sisera the General of Jabins mighty Host, when they encamped
with nine hundred Chariots, and a strong army at the river Kishon to fight
against a small force of the children of Israel, gathered only out of the
Tribes of Zebulon and Naphtali, under the conduct of Barak and Deborah, who yet
utterly subdued them.

Which perished at En-dor; they became as dung for the earth.
10 Even that great army, with all the confederate forces of the Kings of
Canaan, which then so freely unhired, aided Jabin (when all Israel shamefully
declined Barak save those few) perished at En-dor near to Taanack by the waters
of Megiddo, where they sought to rally and re-enforce the battle, there were
they hewed down and slain by Barak and his men, hot in actual pursuit of his
victory gotten at Kison, so that their carcases lay spread there like compost
upon soil, rotting upon the superficies of the earth in multitudes unburied.

Make their Nobles like Oreb, and like Zeeb: yea all their Princes as Zebah,
and as Zalmunna.
11 Let their Nobles and great men, all the Princes and chieftains of this
aggregate body that comes to invade us, speed as did those Kings and Princes of
the Midianites Oreb and Zeeb, which were taken in their flight and beheaded.
Zeba and Zalmunna whose Host was smitten, and themselves slain by Gideons own
hand.

Who said, let us take to our selves the houses of God in possession.
12 Let these proud enemies of ours and thine come to the same end, that with
such malice and carnal confidence invade thy land and people, and stick not to
promise themselves the possession of the one, and the enslaving of the other,
and utterly to dispossess thee of both, and to ruin both thy worship, and all
those places where it was used to be performed, the Temple and Synagogues, or
to pervert and turn them to their own Idolatrous usages.

13 O God, O my God, make them like a wheel: as the stubble before the wind.
in whom we thy poor Church do trust for preservation, and defense against this
confederation, turn their projects upside down, make giddy their counselors,
and amuze their designs: let them no sooner rise but fall, have no success in
what they project or attempt, bring nothing to an issue; let them and their
undertakings be as vain, uncertain, and ineffectuall, as light and loose straw
before the wind that's scattered, and tossed hither and thither.

14 As a fire caused by thunder and lightening, As the fire burns the wood:
and as the flame sets the mountains on fire.
and enkindled with the wind, violently breaks forth, and consumes whole woods
and forests, the flames whereof reach the tallest tops of trees that grow upon
the highest mountains, formidably appearing to spectatours far and near, and
consumes them as easily as the lowest shrubs.

15 Such, So persecute them with thy tempest; and make them afraid with thy
storm.
Lord, let be thine anger, and so do thou break forth in thy fiery indignation,
upon this huge army of numerous associats that march like a wood against us; by
an Almighty power and with terrible judgments (as tempests from heaven) do
thou confound and astonish them that thus affright, and purpose to destroy thy
whole Church and people at once, to the amazement and terror of all that see
or hear it, spare neither great nor small, high nor low, but in thine enraged
jealousy destroy the destroyer, as well Prince as people.

16 So cross their designs, Fill their faces with shame: that they may seek thy
name, O Lord.
disappoint their hopes, and confound their confidences, that this enterprise
may be for their shame, not for their honor, and that by experience of thy
power to deliver thy people, and subdue thine enemies, they may be wrought
upon, and forced to beg pardon and compassion at thine hands, acknowledging
thee for sole Lord and God of all the earth; whom they now so much contemn, and
mean to despite, if thou will suffer them.

Let them be confounded and troubled for ever: yea, let them be put to shame
and perish.
17 Do thou, Lord, so affright and astonish them, as they may never dare to
enterprise against thee any more; and so shamefully defeat by some strange
overthrow this their invincible confederation, that these invadours may have,
neither heart nor power to meddle in this sort again.

That men may know, that thou whole name alone is Jehovah, art them ^st high
over all the earth.
18 That so, not only thine own people, but others, even all these Idolatrous
nations that know nothing of thee, but what thou enforcest upon them by sense
and experience, may be made to confess, that thou, who indeed art, and only
art the Almighty and everliving Lord, art not only to be acknowledged by us,
but that the whole earth as well as we, ought to pay thee Homage, as the sole
Sovereign God of Gods, and Lord of Lords.

The lxxxiv. PSALM.
David after his restauration^ from banishment, and settlement both of him in
the Kingdom, and the Ark on mount Sion: yet personates that estate in this
Psalm, and the mind he then was in; showing what longings he then had after the
sanctuary and ordinances of God, how he envied the privilege the very birds
had, and blessed the privilege others of Gods people had and he wanted, the
least whereof he would have been glad of, but still believed and hoped to find
God gracious and true of his word.

Psalm lxxxiv. To the chief musician upon Gittith, A Psalm for the sons of
Korah.
To him that is most skillful upon Gittith the instrument used by Obed-Edom the
Gittite and his family, is this Psalm committed for his ordering of it to be
sung by the Korathites.

HOw amiable are thy Tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts!
1 TO a spiritual minded man, who knows the worth and excellency of thy worship
and service in each part and circumstance of it, and how to improve it to
edification and exercise of his graces, O how delicious and affecting are thine
ordinances acted in thy sanctuary. O most mighty God of heaven and earth, and
Lord of all the innumerable creatures in both.

2 My soul which was wont to be feasted with heavenly and divine delicacies, My
soul longs, yea, even faints for the courts of the Lord: my heart and my
flesh cries out for the living God.
in the courts of thy Sanctuary where I worshipped thee, longs incessantly to
frequent them again, yea, so vehement is my desire, that the long frustration
of it makes me ready to swound away like a woman with child disappointed of her
longing. My whole man soul and body gaspeth after, and earnestly importunes to
be restored to my former communions with thee, and lively soul-quickning
participations of thee, whereof to mine unspeakable grief, I have been so long
deprived.

3 I envy the happiness of the very irrational creature, the poor birds, Yea,
the sparrow has found an house, and the swallow a nest for her self, where she
may lay her young, even thine Altar, O Lord of hosts, my King and my God.
for that they have a privilege far beyond me, they can dwell in thy land
amongst thy people, the sparrow and swallow have their freedom there, harbor
themselves and make their nests where they will, in view of and near to thy
very Altar; whereas I, a son of Abraham, an heir of the promise, one that have
a right and title to all the emoluments of thy Church and people, am
notwithstanding forced into exile among the heathen, as if I were not related
to thee, nor had no right to worship thee, O Lord, whom yet in mind and heart I
will and do worship, acknowledging no God besides thee, and adoring thee for
the sole sovereign Creator and commander of heaven and earth, and all in both,
whose subject and servant I am, though Saul will not own me for his, and in
whom I yet trust in hope to find thee gracious to me for all this.

Blessed are they that dwell in thine house: they will be still praising thee.
Selah.
4 O happy condition are they in, whose function and office makes them not only
frequenters, but indwellers in thy sanctuary; the Priests and Levites, they
have their fill of what I want, that is, opportunities to magnify and praise
thee, in the daily sacrifices and solemn ordinances there administered.

Blessed is the man whose strength is in thee: in whose heart are the ways of
them.
5 Blessed and only blessed is he that in diffidence of his own
self-sufficiency (specially spirituall-self) makes his diligent humble and
faithful resort to thee after thy prescript and rule, and lives the life which
he lives by faith in thee, and continual addresses to thee for spirit and
grace, in prayer and supplication. In whose heart is thoroughly grounded this
belief, and accordingly frames his practice, walking as all those do that
faithfully believe thus.

Who passing through the valley of Baca, make it a well: the rain also fills
the pooles.
6 And therefore overcome all difficulties for those sweet enjoyments: it is
neither length of way, nor deficiency of accommodation in the journey that can
hinder such (sure I am it should not me, if my life did not lie at stake) but
though their way to the Tabernacle lie through the dry and desert valley of
Mulberry trees, yet they can comfortably go it, and undergo with holy
resolution the hardship of it, yea, pass it with pleasure, and esteem it a
happiness they have the liberty to purchase such a benefit, as the worship and
spiritual enjoyment of God in his ordinances, which yields them such
refreshing of mind all the way they travel, as that their very bodies fare the
better, and are refreshed therewith, as it were with springs of water and
showers of rain.

They go from strength to strength, every one of them in Sion appears before
God.
7 Yea, the nearer they draw to the end of their journey, like the faithful
toward heaven, instead of being more, they are less faint and tired, gathering
strength every step they take by their near approaches to and the comfortable
expectation of what all the way they hoped and traveled for, even the glorious
privilege of appearing in the presence of God (as the saints and angels do in
heaven) resident upon his holy hill, mount Sion, where the Ark, the faithful
pledge of his presence is, there to enjoy soul-ravishing communions, gracious
audience, sweet and sensible supplies of spirit and consolation, a very heaven
upon earth, for so it signifies.

8 O God, O Lord God of hosts, hear my prayer: give ear O God of Jacob. Selah.
that have an almighty power, and that I am sure art the great commander in
chief of heaven and earth, and therefore can restore me to this happiness,
and satisfy my longing, which is infinitely enkeened by these considerations;
so that I beseech thee gratify thy poor petitioner with a gracious answer,
that I may be no longer debarred; and hear me a poor branch of the root of
Jacob, though sore against my will removed from the soil where thou have
appointed him to grow; Lord re-plant me.

9 Behold me, Behold, O God our shield: and look upon the face of thine
anointed.
O God, an exile and afflicted man, the emblem of thy militant Church, whereof
I am a member, as well as a type, whose defense and protection nevertheless
thou art, even of all the faithful, whereof I am one: consider me also in an
other capacity as the type of Christ, anointed by thy special appointment to be
King over thy people, as he shall be over thy Church. Let these considerations
move thee to own, pity, and restore me to my spiritual privileges, and
comfortable exercise of thine ordinances in thy sanctuary.

10 For, For a day in thy courts is better than a thousand: I had rather be a
doorkeeper in the house of my God, than to dwell in the ^ents of wickedness.
for my part, if I might have my choice, I speak it unfainedly, I had rather
have one days comfortable enjoyment of thee in thy sanctuary, and prize it
higher, than to live a thousand years in the very best condition this life can
afford, and be as I am debarred from thy worship, so that I might but have the
happiness to wait upon thee there, I should think the meanest office in thy
service, even a porters place to be an honor, and preferment far beyond the
condition I am in, whilst I am forced thus to inhabit among the profane, and
Idolatrous heathen, though in never so good esteem.

For the Lord God is a sun and shield, the Lord will give grace and glory: no
good thing will ^e withold from them that walk uprightly.
11 And truly, Lord, I will not despair one day to have all that thou have
promised me, and more than I desire (though rather than none at all, I should
be glad of a little either time or place in thy sanctuary;) for I know thou art
a God that wilt shine forth to the comfort, and reviving of thine afflicted
people, who in the interim thou will protect: I shall see better days, and
doubt not yet to be made happy by thy grace and favor, and to be advanced to
that glorious condition of being the Kingly type of Christ; for had not I a
special promise, yet thy general promise would engage thee, and encourage me to
believe; for certain it is, that thou will be gracious, and faithful to give
all needful and requisite blessings; and such, Lord, I desire to those that are
thine, as I am, and walk thereafter in faithful dependence, and sincere
obedience, which I do.

O Lord of hosts: blessed is the man that trusts in thee.
12 What ever my condition be, though I am far from present possession of what
thou have promised, or enjoyment of what I desire, banished both out of the
Church and kingdom of Israel, yet I dare pronounce it of all faithful ones
that patiently wait, and believingly depend upon thee, that it shall go well
with them one day, and so it shall with me because of thine Almighty power,
which shall make good thy faithfulness.

The lxxxv. PSALM.
Either at the end of the Babilonish captivity, or under Antiochus tyranny,
was this Psalm composed, minding God of his former pardoning, and
restoring-grace to his people, to entreat the same again. The Psalmist in the
name of the Church promising himself a glorious deliverance, proportionable in
some degree, and representative of that happy enfranchisment the Church shall
have by the Messiah at his coming.

To the president of the Quire is this Psalm committed for his ordering of it,
Psalm lxxxv. To the chief musician, A Psalm for the sons of Korah.
to be sung by the Korathites.

1 LOrd, LOrd, thou have been favorable unto thy land: thou have brought back
the captivity of Jacob.
thou have offered very great and gracious deliverances unto this nation thy
people, by re-estating it heretofore in a good condition after sad desolations,
and un-captivating Jacobs posterity by an Almighty hand.

2 Mercifully commiserating their sufferings, Thou have forgiven the iniquity
of thy people, thou have covered all their sin. Selah
and pardoning their iniquities, because they were thy chosen Israel, a people
peculiarly belonging to thee, though ill deserving from thee; yet though their
sins were then very great and provoking, thou wast pleased after a while to put
them out of thy sight, and receive thy people again into thy favor: we have
not forgot it.

3 As thou wast pleased grievously to afflict thy people, Thou have taken away
all thy wrath, thou have turned thy self from the fierceness of thine anger.
so thou did as graciously relieve, and release them; for what thy provoked
anger took from them, thy free grace restored it again unto them, and would
neither quite consume, nor everlastingly embondage them, but became as much
theirs, and for them, as ever thou wast against them.

Turn us, O God of our salvation: and cause thine anger toward us to cease.
4 Lord, thine anger is again miserably broken out against us, by reason of our
sins, we are fallen under heavy pressures, we are now as void of all humane
helps, as then. Thou only heretofore wroughtest deliverance, and so thou must
still. Turn us therefore, we pray thee, by unfeigned repentance, and deliver us
out of this miserable condition; thou that have been, and we hope still wilt be
a Savior to us: yea, both turn us to thee, and do thou also turn toward us
the face, and not the back-parts; let the clouds of thine indignation be
dispelled, and the sunshine of thy saving grace break forth upon us.

Will thou be angry with us for ever? will thou draw out thine anger to all
generations?
5 Will thou do by us as thou never did with any before us, will thou be
unexorable, and are our sins unpardonable more than theirs? shall thine anger
never cease, and those heavy judgments thou have laid upon us, shall they
never be taken off us, but must they be an everlasting inderitance to us, and
our posterity after us? God forbid.

Will thou not revive us again? that thy people may rejoce in thee?
6 Thou have raised thy people by thine Almighty power, when they were as it
were dead and buried, and shall the name of Israel now die in us, never to live
again? Lord, think other thoughts toward us, bring us again into a comfortable
condition, and raise us up in joy, as much as thou have cast us down in sorrow,
by the return of thy reconciled favor to us, which will infinitely rejoice us.

Show us thy mer^ O Lord: and grant salvation.
7 Let us be so happy as to see, and feel the sweet effects of thy pardoning
grace, O good God, by granting us a powerful deliverance from under this
misery and bondage.

8 As pray, I will hear what God the Lord will speak: for he will speak peace
unto his people, and to his Saints: but let them not turn again to ^olly.
so I will also expect an answer, my faith shall listen diligently to the
promise of God what it says, as also to his providence what it will speak
effectually by way of performance, for his promises are then words, he will do
as he says, and therefore I am confident how ever Gods time is now of
punishing us, so it will be of pardoning us, his people shall have rest from
these their troubles; for his Saints the invisible Church sake that are amongst
them, but let them take heed of abusing such goodness by provoking the Lord
again to wrath, with backsliding ingratitude, lest he never take their words
more.

9 Surely, Surely his salvation is nigh them that fear him; that glory may
dwell in our land.
deliverance from the Lord will make haste for the enfranchizing of all those
that faithfully wait for it, and will heartily embrace it, when it comes to the
promoting and re-establishing his worship and service again in that land of his
and ours, though we are wrongfully disseiz'd of it, and restoring it to its
former glory and splendor.

10 Our return as it shall doubtless be, Mercy and truth are met together:
righteousness and peace have killed ea^h other.
so it shall be exceeding happy, the very emblem of the salvation that comes
by the Messiah to the Church, and the glorious effects thereof, for in our
restoration there shall be an admirable commixtion of the mercy and truth of
God, thereby graciously fulfilling his promise touching the welfare of his
Church and freedom from her enemies, together with a righteous obediential
walking of his people with him in peace and tranquillity: Like as in Christ
and in the restoration that he shall make of poor distressed sinners, to a
spiritual Liberty from their ghostly enemies, sin and Satan, there shall be a
glorious reconciliation of those cross pleading attributes and properties in
Gods divine nature, and in the soul of every justified regenerate member of the
Church, for according to truth and righteousness, Man that sinned has died,
Christ being made a sacrifice, and according to mercy and peace, Man that has
sinned is saved, and God and he are reconciled, and at one in the propitiation
of his son, so that in him the Laws threatenings and Gospels, promises are
agreed, the rigor of Gods justice is fully satisfied, all things in God
peaceably accorded, and God and man sweetly reconciled, and man in his own
conscience by the faith of all these comfortably quieted.

Truth shall spring out of the earth: and righteousness shall look down from
heaven.
11 We shall serve and obey God in truth and uprightness, such sweet fruit shall
Judea yield upon our restitution, and God shall take pleasure in us, and from
heaven pour forth his righteous blessings upon us, in grace and favor to us,
as it shall be with the Church when the Messiah, that Truth of God, shall be
born in our nature of earthly parents, with what satisfactorie content shall
God then behold him, and those justified sanctified members of his here below,
as well as those glorified ones in heaven above, and how shall he bless them!

Yea, the Lord shall give that which is good: and our land shall yield her
increase.
12 Yea, the Lord shall be so reconciled to us, that our evils shall be turned
into their contrary blessings, he shall be our friend and make every thing
else befriend us for good, the creature shall be reconciled as well as the
creator, and the land that our sins have made barren and fruitless, shall by
the blessing of God upon it be restored to that fertility it had heretofore
when God was better served, and it was better blessed, and made to resemble the
plenteous spiritual blessings that Christ's enfranchized Church shall abound
with here.

13 God himself shall plentifully vouchsafe his graces, Righteousness shall go
before him: and shall set us in the way of his steps.
and make us walk to his well-pleasing in holiness and righteousness, as Christ
shall his Church, and set us in the right way, which we have so miserably
strayed from, and enable us to walk it, even the path of his precepts.

The lxxxvi. PSALM.
David in this Psalm, Psalm lxxxvi. A prayer of David.
made probably either during Saul's persecution of him, or after, in mindfulness
of that his estate personating himself as then it was with him, prays for
audience and deliverance because of his incessant intercessions and Gods innate
goodness, and promises himself what he prays for; he extols God, and
prophesies all the World shall do so too; prays for direction and
establishment under his pressures; promises praise for what God has done for
him, and relates what manner of enemies his are, as bad as bad can be, but
comforts himself in Gods opposite grace and goodness, which he prays for a
sensible sight and taste of by some remarkable act of providence and power for
him against them, to their shame and confusion, and to his corroboration and
consolation.

A prayer that David made in the time of his grievous affliction recorded as a
pattern, and for the use of every faithful afflicted member of the Church.

1 THou, BOw down thine ear, O Lord, hear me: for I am poor and needy.
Lord, that have an ear for men in my case, and heart too, Let me I pray thee
prevail for a gracious audience, and though thou be of so immense greatness,
and inhabitest heavens in unaccessable glory, yet, Lord, have regard to a poor
worm on earth, in this my deplorable helpless condition.

2 That my life, Preserve my soul for I am holy: O thou my God, save thy
servant that trusts in thee.
Lord, is in danger thou know it, and that my heart is upright toward thee
and innocent toward man, even to my very enemies, thou Lord art not ignorant
of it: Therefore in righteousness deliver me out of their hands, and save my
life which they would destroy. O Lord that art my God, both in near relation
and dear affection, save me, that thou know am entirely thine in loving
obedience, and faithful dependence and reliance.

Be merciful unto me, O Lord: for I cry unto thee daily.
3 Let thy goodness and my misery move thee to have mercy on me, O Almighty
Lord, and to vouchsafe me deliverance, for as I have cause, my pressures being
exceeding great and incessant, so are my cries unto thee vehement and
quotidian, because my faith and hope is in thee.

Rejoice the soul of thy servant: for unto thee, O Lord, do I lift up my soul.
4 Set me free from my troubles, and these despondencies of spirit that
accompany them, that I may with a joyful and thankful heart apprehend thy grace
and mercy to me, for Lord thou know my trust and confidence is in none
besides thee, as thou may perceive by my faithful and fervent addresses.

For thou, Lord, art good, and ready to forgive: and plenteous in mercy unto
all them that call upon thee.
5 For I know both from thine own word which I believe, and mine own experience,
that thou art of a gracious compassionate nature to poor distressed suppliants,
and though just to punish sinners, yet as ready to pardon penitents, and to
show mercy of every kind, both of forgiveness to humbled sinners, and of
deliverance to distressed innocents, that in the faith thereof pray earnestly
unto thee.

Give ear, O Lord, unto my prayer: and attend to the voice o^ my supplications.
6 And Lord, I am one of those, be thou therefore so to me, in thy goodness and
mercy hear me calling and crying unto thee for relief in this my distressed
estate.

7 And truly, In the day of my trouble I will call upon thee: for thou will
answer me.
Lord, that goodness of thine, and my confidence in it prompts me, what ever
and whenever I am in affliction to fly to thee by prayer and supplication,
not doubting of a gracious answer and issue.

8 There are many gods worshipped in the world besides thee, Among the gods
there is none like unto thee, (O Lord,) neither are there any works like unto
thy works.
but for my part I know none but thee, nor will pray or seek to any else, for I
am sure it is but lost labor. Thine only is the Kingdom, power and glory;
Thy works are worthy of thee, but they as they are no Gods, so there is nothing
they can do, neither god nor man besides thy self, no creature whatsoever, can
do any thing worthy a man's trust, for all that is done is either of thee or
from thee, and those things wherein thou art pleased to appear, and to put
forth thy power, how transcendent are they?

9 Yea, All nations whom thou have made shall come and worship before thee, O
Lord: and shall glorify thy name.
though it be a thing almost incredible, and seemingly impossible, considering
that ignorance and enmity that is all the world over, yet shall thou, that by
thine infinite Almighty power have made all nations, make to thy self a Church
of every people in the whole earth as well Gentiles as Jews, and they shall yield
thee not constrained, but voluntary obedience and acknowledgement under the
Kingdom of Christ, whereof my Kingdom no less powerfully brought about by thee,
shall be some resemblance; for then shall the heathen nations do thee homage
and dread thy power. I shall convince them, but Christ shall convert them,
whose people and servants they shall then be, as we now are.

10 For there is nothing impossible to God who is able to do whatsoever he
will, For thou art great and do wondrous things: thou art God alone.
his power is infinite and omnipotent, as his wondrous works declare, and the
strange transcendent things he has done for his Church in all ages, and will
do still, even make the whole world his Church, and himself to be worshipped
and acknowledged of the very heathen, they that now are Idolaters and serve
many Gods, yea, every thing for God but God, shall serve him and none besides
him, as we do.

Teach me thy way, O Lord, I will walk in thy truth: unite my heart to fear thy
name.
11 O Lord, in the hour of temptation and time of trouble which is now upon me,
thou know how apt we are to step aside, partly by ignorance, partly by
frailty; my suit therefore is, that thou would instruct me how to demean my
self, so that I sin not against thee, and to that end mind me of my duty in
every emergencie, Let me hear a voice behind me, saying, this is the way, and
my purpose is not to deviat from it, but my power must be from thee to make
good this purpose, therefore, Lord, give me such grace and courage, and such
seasonable supplement thereof, that I may be resolved to believe firmly in
thee, and to walk exactly with thee, at all essays; not staggering either in
faith or a good conscience.

I will praise thee, O Lord, my God, with all my heart: and I will glorify thy
name for evermore.
12 As I have found thee mindful of me in trouble, so shall thou find me no less
mindful of thee, and my duty to thee out of it, I will not forget nor fail to
give thee praises, and that unfeigned ones uttered from my heart in the faith
of thy power and grace, O Lord, my good God, yea, it shall be my constant
practice to praise thee, and to magnify thee in, and for them whilst I have
any being.

For great is thy mercy toward me: and thou have delivered my soul from the
lowest hell.
13 For greatly have they been manifested in thy mercy toward me, and in so
wonderfully preserving me from death and destruction, that so unavoidably
assailed me, and had certainly devoured me had not thou mightily preserved me.

14 And indeed I had need of no less power than thine to preserve me, O God,
the proud are risen against me, and the assemblies of violent men have sought
after my soul: and have not set thee before them.
considering my humane help how weak it is, and mine enemies insolency and
rage how great they are, for multitudes of such as care neither for God nor
man, that disdain to walk by any rules but their own dictates, without regard
either to mine innocence or thy severitie and justice, resolve to persecute me
to death.

15 But thou, But thou, O Lord, art a God full of compassion, and gracious:
long-suffering, and plenteous in mercy and truth.
O Lord, art as gracious and merciful as they are cruel, as pitiful as they are
pitiless, pardoning the sins, and sensible of the sufferings of thy servant,
bearing with my frailties and passing by my infirmities in these my trials, and
failest me not as I have need of thee, but have abundantly approved thy
goodness to be as large as thy truth and promise, and thy self to be every jot
as good as thy word.

16 And so let me still find thee, O turn unto me and have mercy upon me, give
thy strength unto thy servant, and save the son of thine handmaid.
thy favor and grace, O Lord, vouchsafe me, and in a time of need have mercy
upon me to deliver me; as I am thy servant, so, Lord, enable me to persevere,
give inward strength of faith and courage to uphold me in and under these
outward calamities, and power to wade through them, so as that I perish not in
them, have a gracious regard to me, who thou know am a child, not only of
thy visible but of thine invisible Church, an heir of the promise, born and
bred under thy roof, of thine own family nearly related to thee, and therefore
pray and hope for protection from thee.

17 As I stand in need of more than ordinary supportation, Show me a token for
good, that they which hate me may see it, and be asham^d; because thou Lord
have helped me and comforted me.
so also of extraordinary consolation, and mine enemies of extraordinary
conviction by reason of their arrogance and malignitie. Therefore, Lord,
vouchsafe some notable act of providence, in the behalf of my preservation, and
of power in their confusion, that they which so extremely hate me, may know
thou love me, and hate them for hating me, and be ashamed at their hating
and persecuting one whom they see thou love and preservest, and for whose
sake thou discomfits them, to be a help and comfort unto me.

The lxxxvii. PSALM.
For as much as (...) the captivity upon their return, the Iew^ were or might
b^ d^j^cted with the pa^citie of their people, and poverty of their condition,
the holy Ghost by the Psalmist animates them, and diverts the thoughts and
apprehensions of the godly, by setting forth the glorious privileges of Sion
proph^sted of old, but not yet fulfilled, saving in their sh^dows, which
shortly would be accomplished in substance, when all nations should be
ambitious to be Sionists, for the Church it self should bear that name, which
shall abound both in a numerous issue, and heavenly qualifications.

Psalm lxxxvii. A Psalm or song for the sons of Korah.
A Psalm made to be both sung and played by the Korathites.

HIs foundation is in the holy mountains.
1 THe holy, Lord God, from out all the world has chosen Canaan, a hilly
country; Jerusalem, a mountainous place; and in Jerusalem, mount Sion and
Moriah to situate his Temple, and to rest his Ark, and establish his worship
in: There had his Church (the pillar and ground of truth) the first settling,
and truth it self the first firm footing, upon which foundation (laid among
these hills) was to be built and reared, that great famous structure of the
Gentil-Church, Christ himself the principal cornerstone dug out of those
mountains, being himself the master builder.

The Lord loves the gates of S^on, more than all the dwellings of Jacob.
2 The Lord has made a special choice of and expressed therein a particular
respect, before all the rest of the land of Judah and Israel, to the hill of
Sion, situate in Jerusalem, and to Jerusalem in the whole circumference thereof
for Sions sake, where his Tabernacle, Ark, and Temple is, for there true
religion must abide, till the coming of the Messiah, and hence it must be
spread over all the world.

3 However outwardly Jerusalem is by the heavy misfortunes that have befallen
her, Glorious things are spoken of thee: O city of God. Selah.
much lessened in beauty and glory, to what she was, yet glorious prophesies of
spiritual excellencies (whereof the former splendor was but adumbrations) are
recorded concerning her, which are not yet fulfilled; O thou city of Gods
peculiar love and election, be yet comforted, and confident they shall be;
doubt it not.

4 Such glory shall shine from the tops of thy holy mountains, I will make
mention of Rahab, and Babylon to them that know 'me: behold, Philistia and
Tire, with Ethiopia, this man was born there.
and from thy holy city (as much changed as it is) as shall be resplendent all
the world over; insomuch as I dare promise thee a mighty access of
free-denizons, members of the Church, a glorious recruit of many that God shall
call from all the parts, and teach to know, and reverence him, and thee for his
sake, even out of remote countries, and from amongst thy bitter enemies, as
Egypt, Babylon, the Philistines, Tire, and Ethiopia, they shall flock to thee,
when the Messiah is known to be in thee, and being partakers of the new birth,
shall be ambitious to be called after thy name, children of the new Jerusalem.

5 And as they shall be ambitious to be citizens of Jerusalem, And of Sion it
shall be said, This and that man was born in her: and the highest himself shall
establish her.
so also to be sons and daughters of Sion; in a word, they shall think
themselves happy and blessed, that they are begotten to God, made partakers of
the spiritual and new birth, regenerated by the holy ghost, and so incorporated
in the seed and posterity of faithful Abraham, heirs of the Covenant, and
grace of salvation with us, and so naturalized into the privilege and
participation of God, and his worship practiced in the Church typified by Sion,
which new Jerusalem and her denizons, Sion and her children, shall be founded
upon the power of God, who shall uphold and maintain her to perpetuity, so
that the gates of hell shall not prevail against her. Kingdoms and Empires
shall have their period, but the Church, Christ's Kingdom, who is above all
blessed for ever, shall be everlasting.

The Lord shall count when he writes up the people: that this man was born
there. Selah.
6 Yea, the Lord himself shall name thy name upon his called and elect ones, he
shall muster them in the role of thy soldiers, and number them in the
catalogue of thy Citizens, all that are his shall also be thine, sons and
daughters begotten of God, but born in Sion, as God shall be their Father, so
Sion shall be their mother, by which name the Church it self shall be called. A
glorious privilege.

As well the singers as the players on instruments shall be there, all my
springs are in thee.
7 And as Sion shall be glorious in a numerous spiritual offspring, so in
equivalent solemnities to what she was wont to have, nay, beyond it, for
whereas all Israel had but one Temple, then every Israelite, every member of
this new Jerusalem shall be a Temple, and every one of those Temples furnished
with the substances of all those shadowish significant ceremonies; the Church
shall have no want of voices and musical instruments to praise the Lord
withal, they shall be in abundance, men of large graces and enlarged hearts.
My heart is ravished with the apprehension of the happiness of those times,
what graces, what comforts, all that a faithful soul can desire, or a hungry
soul stands in need of, shall be plentifully supplied to the Church, and the
members thereof in this new Jerusalem, and spiritual Sion, wherewith I desire
to be happy, and hereof to share, as being indeed the only comfortable
soul-refreshing music.

The lxxxviii. PSALM.
Heman a man extraordinary wise, exercised with extraordinary trouble, yea,
even all his life long, applies himself to God by a faithful insinuation,
pathetical narration of the superlative nature of his afflictions, and humble
interrogation, or expostulation touching the long continuance of them in such
extremity upon him; is in hope because God has stirred him up to pray, that
he himself will be moved to hear, and that though he live miserable, yet he
shall not die so, concludes as he began with expostulation and narration.

A Psalm made to be both sung played by the Korathites, Psalm lxxviii. A song,
or Psalm for the sons of Korah, to the chief musician, upon Mahalath Leannoth,
Maschil of Heman the Ezraelite.
and committed to him that is most skilful upon the instrument Mahalath
Leannoth, to which it is chiefly set for his ordering it, being a Psalm of
instruction, an exemplarie pattern how every sincere servant of the Lord is to
demean himself toward God by ardent prayer and humble expostulation, when his
hand is heavy upon him in the pressure of a troubled spirit, or other grievous
adversity penned by Heman, one of the sons of Zerah, of the posterity of
Judah, famous for his wisdom, 1 Kings 4.31.

1 O Lord God, O Lord God, of my salvation, I have cried day and night before
thee.
who for all thy heavy hand upon me art my souls Savior, and I am sure must be
my sole deliverer out of this anxietie, and I hope wilt be so, as my grief is
extreme, so are my complaints pathetical, and my prayers unto thee exceeding
ardent, and that without ceasing, as is my misery.

Let my prayer come before thee: incline thine ear unto my cry.
2 Let a poor mournful man have admittance, and his prayer audience with thee
the great God; estrange not thy self always, but vouchsafe a gracious
condescension to me a poor crying creature in great extremity.

For my soul is full of troubles: and my life draws nigh unto the grave.
3 For the anguishments of my soul are an inseparable burden, which are heaped
brim-full upon it, in so great a measure as the weight of them almost presses
my life and soul out of my body, and I am reduced to the very point of death by
them.

I a^ counted with them that go down into the pit: I am as a man that has no
strength.
4 By the troubles of my mind, my body is quite wasted, I am a very skelliton,
nothing but skin and bones, as weak as water, no strength left in me, so that
by all symptoms, I am by all that see me, given for a dead man, irrecoverable.

Free among the dead, like the slain that lie in the grave whom thou
rememberest no more: and they are cut off from thy hand.
5 Though I live, yet my soul is as if it were departed, for it administers no
comfortable communion to my body, which is as a corpse laid out for burying, and
I no more to be reckoned amongst the living, but a free-denizon of another
society, of that moietie of mankind which are dead; nor do I die as others, by
a natural death in the ordinary way, and by ordinary means of sickness or
old age, but I languish under a wounded spirit; God as an enraged enemy
thrusts mine heart through as it were with a sharp sword, and sends me by a
violent death down into the grave, where is ended all that care and providence
thou have over us, whilst we are living; there I shall be as it were laid out
of thy sight and forgotten, thy hand of providence which was wont to provide
and care for me, then shall be quite quite of me, and I both untimely and
violently ravished from it, as they that lose their lives by some ireful
judgment, portending thy everlasting displeasure, and disregard as well of
their souls as bodies.

6 Thou, Thou have said me in the lowest pit, in darkness, in the deeps.
Lord, have brought me into such an estate, as I can scare tell how to express
it, or find fit terms to parallel the condition, and dimensions of my misery;
I am as it were shut up under ground, excluded the society of mankind, in an
Abiss void of the suns comfortable light, a very dungeon of darkness; in the
bottom of the bottomless sea, with all the waters a top of me: so extreme
uncomfortable is this my condition, so full of horror and perturbation of
spirit, and so overwhelmed with grief, and withal so remediless.

7 For thou have afflicted me with such a weight of wrath, Thy wrath lies hard
upon me: and thou have afflicted me with all thy waves. Selah.
and so laden me with judgments, that I am even pressed to death; all
comforts are gone and life it self is going after, thou as it were have let in
the sea upon my soul, thy terrors and affrightments come so thick, one in the
neck of another, that they bear down all before them, no hope nor comfort can
stand in their way. My grief is very great.

8 Thou have made me so uncomfortable a companion, Thou have put away mine
a^quaintance far from me: thou have made me an abomination unto them. I am shut
up and I cannot come forth.
that my old friends and acquaintance separate from me, they have abandoned all
society, and converse with me, for indeed, I am like no man, nor fit company
for any, being miserably inclaved in this forlorn comfortless condition, whence
I cannot extricate my self, nor none for me, but am as without comfort, so
without hope and help.

9 I have almost wept my self blind, Mine eye mourns by reason of af^^ition,
Lord, I have called d^lly upon thee, I have stretched our mine hands unto thee.
by reason of the long duration and heavy oppression of this mine affliction:
Lord, thou know with what uncessant prayers and hands lifted up to heaven, I
have importuned thy favor, and mitigation of this my terror.

Will thou show wonders to the dead, shall the dead arise and praise thee?
Selah.
10 Lord, how long shall it be before thy mercy and truth relieve me, if it be
whilst I live, it must not be much longer deferred, if thou have a purpose to
do me good, thou must either do it suddenly before the breath go out of my
body, which truly is expiring, or else miraculously, when I am quite departed,
but that is not likely, it is not thy manner to show mercy to men dead but
living, as yet I am, I expect not to be raised out of my grave, to live again,
after I am dead, to praise thee on earth, no, therefore I hope to do it ere I
die for all this.

Shall thy loving kindness be declared in the grave, or thy faithfulness in
destruction?
11 Thy love and faithfulness will certainly be better manifested and fulfilled
in preservation and deliverance, than in death and destruction, and thy people
can better magnify thee for them living, than dead.

Shall thy wonders be known in the dark? and thy righteousness in the land of
forgetfulness.
12 Is it underground that thou will manifest thy power where none shall see
it, and fulfill thy promise in the gravem when we are in an incapacitie for it?
where nothing is taken notice of, but thy power, grace, and faithfulness will
die, and be buried with us.

But unto thee have I cried, O Lord; and in the morning shall my prayer prevent
thee.
13 But, Lord, as I have not deferred my prayers to the grave, so I hope nor
will thou thine answers, and whilst I live, that the evening of death do not
close up mine eyes, and shut my mouth, I will not cease to importune thee, and
hope to prevent so sad a farewell, by obtaining mercy before I die.

Lord, why castest thou off my soul, why hidest thou thy face from me?
14 Lord, what is the cause of this grievous desertion, and seeming rejection of
my soul? why am I thus benighted, thy face over-clouded, no beam of divine
favor shining into me, nor no spark of renewing grace glowing in me.

15 Lord, I am afflicted and ready to die from my youth up: while I su^fer thy
terrors I am distracted.
thou know, I am sure, I for my part remember well, that ever since I could
remember, I have scarce had a good day, my trials and troubles have been so
grievous, they have brought me I know not how often to deaths door, so tedious
and comfortless a life have I led, being almost always exercised, either under
the present sense or future expectation and fear of their return to my no small
torment and distraction.

16 Lord, Thy fierce wrath goes over me: thy terrors have cut me off.
it is no small matter that I complain of, thou know I have cause, for my
burden is greater than I can bear, or any man alive, that had the feeling of it
as I have: Thy fierce wrath who can stand under it, and yet I am made to bear
it, and to undergo the surges and waves thereof, which are raised like storms
and tempests in my soul ready to overwhelm it, my terrors and perplexities of
mind are such, that they have cut me off of all comfort in my self, and almost
of all hope in thee.

17 They brake in upon me like a fierce torrent, They came round about me daily
like water: they compassed me about together.
daily they do so, I have seldom any ease or quiet, they fill every crannie of
my soul, and so begirt me round, that I can come at no comfort, by no means I
can use, with complicate evils on all sides am I besiedged, so that comfort can
enter in at no door.

18 Mine intimates avoid me, Lover and friend have thou put far from me: and
mine acquaintance into darkness.
and mine old acquaintance will not now know me, I am as a man dead and buried
out of their sight, having no companion but grief and sorrow, not any to make
my moan to besides thy self, or that can or will comfort me.

The lxxxix. PSALM.
Expositours differ upon the occasion of this Psalm, some make it to be in
reference to the salling of the ten tribes from Rehoboam, others to Absalons
rebellion, others to the Babylonish captivity, to which I incline, conceiving
it prophetically to be composed by Ethan for them to use in that estate. It
contains matter of praise to God for his covenant, for his power to make it
good, which he both has done and will do. But expostulates how that captivity
and the matter of that covenant can be reconciled; and puts God in mind of
dangerous inconvenience, that must needs ensue upon breach of covenant, and
abolition of David's Kingdom, as also of the enemies reprochful blasphemies. And
concludes with faithful praises notwithstanding all seeming discouragements.

Psalm lxxxix. Maschil of Ethan, the Ezrahite.
An instruction for the people of God, how to demean themselves in public
calamities and concussions of Church or Commonwealth, by sad complaining,
humble expostulating, and earnest prayer to God; penned by Ethan, one of the
sons of Zerah of the posterity of Judah, famous for his wisdom. 1 Kings 4.31.

I Will sing of the mercies of the Lord for ever: with my mouth will I make
known thy faithfulness to all generations.
1 WHat ever befall, I will be confident of the mercies God has promised, that
they shall be fulfilled, I will set them forth and sing their praises whilst I
live, and leave them upon record to thy Church for ever to do the like: Thy
faithfulness to thy people according to thy promises, I will publish and assert
it to this age, and all that are to come.

For I have said mercy shall be built up for ever: thy faithfulness shall thou
establish in the very heavens.
2 For upon a deliberate well-grounded faith I believe, and therefore do and
dare affirm, and have ever done so in the midst of the greatest concussions
that ever befell us, that mercy shall be built up from one age of the Church to
another, like so many stories, until it come in the end like a building
perfected to its full accomplishment, the Churches perfection in her glorified
condition to all eternity. Thy faithfulness whereupon the promise of mercy
and grace is builded, and whereby it shall be fulfilled, it is engaged and
ratified to thy son, the Churches head in heaven on thy Churches behalf on
earth, therefore sure enough to be accomplished from first to last, both here
and hereafter, as well in heaven as on earth, nothing shall hinder.

3 Even this mercy which thou have declared and stipulated Covenant-wise, I
have made a covenant with my chosen; I have sworn unto David my servant.
and sworn it too (the faster to bind thee and strengthen our faith) to thy
chosen servant, even to David that Kingly type of Christ, and head of thy
people.

4 That thou will establish the Kingdom and Church in David the type, Thy seed
will I establish for ever: and build up thy throne to all generations. Selah.
and his posterity in successive generations, and in Christ the antitype for
ever, and will make his throne glorious, and his dominion to increase and
enlarge it self to all nations and all generations. Even so Amen.

5 According to which Covenant for the fulfilling thereof in the preservation
and deliverance of thy Church, And the heavens shall praise thy wonders, O
Lord: thy faithfulness also in the congregation of the saints.
thou shall manifest such power, and do such wonders as shall affect the very
Angels in heaven, who shall in the sympathy and love they bear to thy people
praise thee, as if themselves shared in the benefit, and in heaven magnify thy
faithfulness as well as we on earth, for keeping promise and remembering thy
Covenant to fulfill it.

6 For as there is none that on earth ought to be adored and magnified but God,
For who in the heaven can be compared unto the Lord? who among the sons of the
mighty can be likened unto the Lord.
so nor in heaven where he alone rules as well as here below, the Angels are
our fellow creatures and subjects, as much inferior to him as we are to them;
Yea, though they are not of humane race, propagated as we are, but by the
immediate hand of God created, as was Adam, yet there is no more comparison
betwixt them and him, than betwixt us and him, he alone is absolute and
Almighty.

God is greatly to be feared in the assembly of the saints: and to be had in
reverence of all them that are about him.
7 As God is great, yea, the sole Monarch of heaven as well as earth, so is he
there greatly had in reverence, and so ought to be of those his holy Angels and
glorified saints, as well as here of his people; they therefore have the honor
to be his servants in ordinary, domestics in heaven with him, that they may
glorify him sutably to their excellent natures and happy condition, it is
their duty, and his due.

O Lord, God of hosts, who is a strong Lord like unto thee? or to thy
faithfulness round about thee.
8 O God, that have the sole Empire in heaven and earth, and the sovereign chief
command of all creatures in both; who therefore is of strength like unto thee?
nay, of any strength at all but thee? from whom all things are, and thou only
eternally of thy self: who then can match thee in power, or in faithfulness
which is equal to thy power, and appears in all things wherein thy power
appears, be they acts of providence or created Beeings, and where is it that
thy power appears not on every side, in heaven or earth, before or behind, on
the right hand or on thy left? and of like extent is thy truth, thy promise
being as large as thy power, and thy goodness as large as both in thy Churches
behalf, for her preservation and accomplishment.

Thou rulest the raging of the sea: when the waves thereof arise, thou stillest
them.
9, 10 What was it but thy power and faithfulness, that when time was, did
dispose and rule the unruly waters of the red sea, for the preservation of thy
Church then ready to be killed or drowned, Thou have broken Rahab in pieces, as
one that is slain, thou have scattered thine enemies with thy strong arm.
by it before, and the Egyptians behind, whom thou as it were at one blow cutst
off and destroyest as one man at once, and did defeat those thine enemies,
because thy Churches, and their great preparations and bloody designs upon thy
people by a mighty manifestation of power, which thou shall ever put forth in
thy Churches behalf, stilling the storms that every where in the world she
shall meet with like a ship at sea, and preserve her, spite of all her enemies,
though never so proud and potent.

11 How can it be otherwise, The heavens are thine, the earth also is thine: as
for the world and the fullness thereof, thou have founded them.
for all is thine and at thy dispose, heaven, earth, and all things in them
both, it is thou that have given existence, and Being to the whole world and
all things in it, both sea and land, as many as they are.

12 Thou have created all things from one end of the heavens to the other, The
North and the South thou have created them: Tabor and Hermon shall rejoice in
thy name.
from pole to pole, thy Church every where from East to West, for so it shall
spread, as Judea from mount Tabor in the West to mount Hermon in the East shall
have cause of rejoicing in thy power, and faithfulness, manifested in her
behalf, and to praise thee for it.

13 Thy strength and power, Thou have a mighty arm, strong is thine hand, and
high is thy right hand.
when as thou please to make use of it, and put it forth either by means or
miracles, in an ordinary or extraordinary way, it is unresistable and
prevalent.

14 As thou have power worthy thy greatness to execute thy will withal,
Justice and judgment are the habitation of thy throne: mercy and truth shall
go before thy face.
so also justice and judgment, mercy and truth, the beauty and establishment
of thrones and dominions, these are principally and originally in thee who
governest and orders thy jurisdiction over the world, respectively to good and
bad, by them dispensing to the unrighteous enemies of thy Church, and thee,
justice and judgment, and unto her, even all thy holy ones, thou will exhibit
merciful providence, and for her fulfill faithfully thy promises, with the
gracious manifestation of thy love and favor to her in all those thy
dispensations.

Blessed is the people that know the joyful sound: they shall walk, O Lord, in
the light of thy countenance.
15 Blessed are thy people above all the world; for they only of all the world
are acquainted with the inward sense, and savorie taste of thy peculiar love and
saving grace, whispered into their consciences by the still voice and secret
workings of the spirit, to the ravishing their hearts with joy unspeakable and
glorious, as thine Israelites are inured to, and cheared with the sound of the
sacred trumpets of God in their solemn feasts and sacrifies. Such shall
comfortably run their race in the whole progress of their lives, they shall
walk in a steady course by a faithful dependancie upon thy faithful providence,
and in sweet interviews of thee, and frequent feelings of thy favor.

In thy name shall they rejoice all the day: and in thy righteousness shall
they be exalted.
16 Such as these shall all their life long have cause of rejoicing in thy
powerful dispensation of providence from time to time in their behalf, and in
thy keeping promise with them, the experience and faith whereof shall lift up
their heads above dangers and difficulties.

For thou art the glory of their strength: and in thy favor our horn shall be
exalted.
17 For their glorying is in thee, who though weak in themselves, yet are as it
were omnipotent by their interest in thee and relation to thee that art so, by
whose power and gracious favor, we that are thy people Israel, resemblancers
of thy Church, doubt not of a prosperous state both civil and sacred, and to
have the better of our enemies.

For the Lord is our defense: and the holy one of Israel is our King.
18 For the great and faithful God is our defense and protection, his power and
goodness shall preserve us as a shield, the holy Lord that has chosen Israel
to be a holy people, and that shall ever have on earth a holy Church, is the
Sovereign Lord and protector of us and it, and so shall Christ his vicegerent
be, and David his.

Then thou spa^est in vision unto thy holy one, and said, I have laid help
upon one that is mighty: I have exalted one chosen out of the people.
19 Thou, Lord, in thine own appointed time did make known thy mind by special
revelation to thy holy prophet Samuel, that thou had ordained one to be a
singular type of Christ, to give deliverance and yield protection to thy people
against their enemies, over whom thou would make him victorious, who should
be chosen from amongst his brethren by thee, above and before all others, to be
exalted from a mean condition to be King and ruler over them, as Christ in our
nature shall be exalted from the Cross to the Crown, and Empire of his Church.

20 I the Lord, I have found David my servant: with my holy oil have I anointed
him.
have by especial appointment set apart David, he is the man, and caused Samuel
to go seek and find him out in the obscure condition and place where he lived,
and from amongst all his brethren, more likely men than He, in Samuels own
eyes, to take and anoint him with oil I bid him take with him for that purpose,
to that Kingly office and typical dignity over my people.

21 I will set the Crown upon his head, With whom my hand shall be established:
mine arm also shall strengthen him.
my power shall protect him, and carry him through all oppositions, and maugre
all his enemies he shall be King, and the Kingdom established upon him, by my
might shall he overcome all his adversaries, both before and after his
inthronization.

22 Enemies he shall have good store, The enemy shall not exact upon him: nor
the son of wickedness afflict him.
but they shall never have their will of him, he shall make them tributarie,
but so shall not they him, nor shall any wicked malicious opposer of his be
able to suppress him, but he shall prevail to be King, and to flourish in his
Kingdom, spite of all gainsayers.

23 I will make it appear, And I will beat down his foes before his face: and
plague them that hate him.
how much I love him by the great things I will do for him, no enemy shall be
able to stand before him, all his foes secret, and open, that oppose or stand
in the way of his advancement, I will lay them low enough, yea, they that do
but in their hearts malign him, though they do not openly oppose him, shall
smart for it.

But my faithfulness and my mercy shall be with him: and in my name shall his
horn be exalted.
24 But as for him I will make good all I have promised, his sins and
infirmities shall not hinder me, for though I may punish them, yet will I have
a merciful respect and consideration of him, from first to last shall my grace
and truth be steadfast with him, as it shall be with my Church to the end, and
by my might and power shall he and his Kingdom flourish with great glory.

I will set his hand also in the sea, and his right hand in the rivers.
25 And be extended far and near, from the red sea to the river Euphrates, his
dominion shall be enlarged without the limits of the land of Canaan very far
several ways.

He shall cry unto me, Thou art my Father: my God, and the rock of my
salvation.
26 As a dear child and only son, as is the Messiah, so shall he be unto me,
and as a tender Father so will I be to him, and such shall he acknowledge me by
the experience he shall have of my love and care, and by the great deliverances
and victories that I will give him, and as to his only God and Savior shall
he make his applications to me.

Also I will make him my first born: higher than the Kings o^ the earth.
27 As my son the Messiah is the first born of every creature, and in all things
has the pre-eminence, so shall my servant David that figures him be advanced
to the honor of being the highest Prince on earth, blessed and accepted by me
far beyond them all.

My mercy will I keep for him for evermore: and my covenant shall stand fast
with him.
28 My mercy and truth shall be sure to keep touch with him, I will never forget
to be gracious, though I may seem severe; I will not fail of what I have
promised him, but as in grace I made my covenant, so in mercy and
faithfulness, I will make it good, nothing shall hinder.

His s^ed also will I make to endure for ever: and his throne as the days of
heaven.
29 His posterity shall continue and possess the throne till they transmit it
to the Messiah, in whom it shall be eternized, and in those that shall be
begotten to God by the sanctification of the spirit, the blessed offspring of
Christ the son of David, every of which shall reign as Kings, both on earth and
in heaven, for evermore in grace and glory.

30, 31 If his children and childrens children that succeed him in the throne
rule not righteously, If his children forsake my Law, and walk not in my
judgments.
nor order their conversation aright, If they break my statutes, and keep not
in my judgments.
but sin against me, and keep not my commandments.

32 Then will I, Then will I visit their transgression with the rod, and their
iniquity with stripes.
as well as I loved their Father David, and them for his sake, be sure to let
them know I am sensible of their sins, by making them sensible of my
corrections, neither their impiety nor injustice shall go unpunished.

33, 34 Nevertheless, Nevertheless, my loving kindness will I not utterly take
from him: nor suffer my faithfulness to fail.
I will not quite cast off the sinner for his sin, because of David my servant,
but will remember my love to him and covenant with him, so that I will pardon
as well as punish, My covenant will I not break: nor alter the thing that is
gone out of my lips.
and be faithful as well as just, they shall not frustrate my covenant, no not
by their sins, because it was of grace, no more than shall mine elect
regenerate people for my sons sake; with whom I have covenanted, and for whose
sake I will perform it to his seed and mine adopted ones, throughout all
generations.

35 I have once for all irrevocably bound my self by as deep an oath as I know
how to take; Once have I sworn by mine Holiness, that I will not lie unto David.
even by the most sacred attribute and property that is in all my divine
nature, that gives a verdure to all the rest, mine Holiness, which is indeed my
whole self, the greatest pledge I can lay to stake, the resemblance whereof my
sanctuary you have amongst you, that I will for no cause whatsoever falsify
with David, nor fail of what I promised.

His seed shall endure for ever; and his throne as the sun before me
36 That his seed Christ, the son of David, and the faithful that are begotten
by the incorruptible seed of the word, shall last as long as time lasts. He
shall reign in and over his Church by special commission and favor, as my
vicegerent and fellow in Government, as long as the sun abides in the
firmament, till all things be no more, and he give up the Kingdom into the
Fathers hands.

It shall be established for ever as the Moon, and as a faithful witness in
heaven. Selah.
37 Till then it shall be established, even so long as Sun and Moon endures,
those never-failing witnesses of my grace and providence as a faithful creator
to the children of men, for all their iniquities, notwithstanding which, these
have afforded their light and influence from the very beginning, both to the
just and unjust, shall do to the end. As the sins of the wicked, because my
grace super-abounded, has not annihilated these mercies of mankind, so, nor
shall the sins of the Godly, the sons of Christ, the son of David, make void my
Covenant of grace peculiar to my son and his seed, figured by David and his
posterity, no not for ever.

But thou have cast off and abhorred: thou have been wroth with thine anointed.
38 But, Lord, what consonancie is there betwixt this thy Covenant with David,
and the state of the Kingdom as now it stands, instead of loving kindness,
establishment, and mercy, here is nothing but utter dereliction and rejection
of his posterity and people with abhorrencie; How could thou well be angrier
with the seed of thine anointed servant than thou art, to whom for his sake thy
covenant reaches, and is to be fulfilled.

Thou have made void the covenant of thy servant: thou have profaned his crown,
by casting it to the ground.
39 Truly, Lord, to the eye of sense and natural reason, thou have broken all
the ties that were upon thee, oath, promise, faithfulness, holiness, covenant,
which seems to be quite made void, even that thou made with thy servant David
concerning the establishment of his throne and dignity upon him and his
posterity for ever. For thou have suffered as much despite to be done to that
royal diadem, as the profane ignorant Idolatrous heathen can devise to do, by
captivating King and Kingdom, contemptibly subjugated and transplanted into
another nation far remote, where they are made bon dmen, even the people and
posterity of David, his throne is thus abased of whom thou said. The enemy
shall not exact, nor the son of wickedness afflict him.

40 Instead of protection thou have brought upon it utter devastation, Thou
have broken down all his hedges: thou have brought his strong holds to ruin.
thou have quite ruinated all the strength of the Kingdom defensive and
offensive, and made the enemy absolute there.

41 He is brought to so forlorn a condition, All that pass by the way spoil
him, he is a reproach to his neighbors.
that the whole Kingdom, country, cities, people, goods, every thing are preid
upon and spoiled at pleasure by all that will, houses, gardens, vine-yards, all
the whole land is a very through-fare for all comers and goers, that take and
leave as they list themselves, there is no body nor nothing to resist them.
Those Idolatrous profane people the Ammonites, Moabites, etc. that border
about us, whom thou saidest should be under him, are got above him, and most
insultingly reproach him upon this occasion, and deridingly ask if this be the
King whose throne shall endure so long as the Sun and Moon, which extremely
reflects upon the Messiah himself, and calls in question thy covenant as to him.

42 Thou have given strength, Thou have set up the right hand of his
adversary: thou have made all his enemies to rejoice.
courage, and success to his enemies, and made them triumphant over him.

Thou have also turned the edge of his sword: and have not made him to stand in
the battle.
43 On the contrary, thou have weakened his power, made ineffectual all his
endeavors, and turned the courage wherewith he was wont to be endowed into
cowardice, and made him to fly before the enemy, who was wont to fly before
him.

Thou have made his glory to cease; and cast his throne down to the ground.
44 Thou have put an end to that honor and dignity, which thou said, nay
swearest should continue for ever, his throne which thou covenantest to
establish is utterly demolished, he is laid level with the common people, nay a
very bondsman in captivity.

The days of his youth have thou shortened: thou have covered him with sham^.
Selah.
45 Instead of estating him and his Kingdom in everlasting happiness, thou have
brought sudden and speedy desolation, it is true some few days of glory and
felicity he has seen, but they soon have an end, nay a shameful end. Lord
this is true.

How long, Lord, will thou hide thy self for ever? shall thy wrath burn like
fire?
46 Lord, instead of being everlastingly gracious, will thou be everlastingly
displeased, shall we never partake of favor and grace again, art thou utterly
estranged, and we utterly rejected? shall we be quite consumed in thine anger,
without any mixture of mercy, or mitigation of thy wrath?

Remember how short my time is: wherefore have thou made all men in vain?
47, 48 Lord, consider the shortness and vanity of my life, and by me judge of
all other men, that by course of nature are as I am short-lived, and sure to
die. What man is he that lives and shall not see death? shall he deliver his
soul from the hand of the grave. Selah.
Now then if thou thus breakest covenant, casts off thy people, nullifies thy
Church, and hereby overthrows all possibility of the Messiah and his Kingdom,
what a vain thing must it needs be for thee to have made man, if all the
happiness he shall have, is but to live a few days on earth and so die, or if
that be all the honor and service thou art like to have of him, and truly,
Lord, if thy Church and covenant be null, that is all can come on it, for none
shall be saved but thy people, and no people are so but by Covenant, if then
the one be not, and so the other be frustrate, we are all reduced into the
sinful mass of mankind, at best to live miserably and die wretchedly. This will
be the issue.

49 Lord, Lord, where are thy former loving kindnesses, which thou swarest unto
David in thy truth?
thou do infinitely amaze us, to consider what loving kindness thou have
heretofore covenanted to show to David and his seed for ever, and ratified it
with a deep and solemn Oath, obliging thee in thine infinite truth and
faithfulness to fulfill it: we are at a stand to think on this, and withal how
this thy word, and these thy works are consistent and reconcilable.

50 Lord, Remember (Lord) the reproach of thy servant: how I do bear in my bosom
the reproach of all the mighty people.
for all this, make it appear thou can keep Covenant, and preserve thy Church
and people as low as they be brought, and that thou may be moved hereunto;
Remember and take notice of the reprochful contumelious usage, thy servants
have at their enemies hands for thy sake, more than their own, and to thy
dishonor more than theirs. Weigh well to what an ebb of fortune we are fallen,
when subjugated and captivated under the insolentest and mightiest nation upon
earth, whose reprochful insufferable abuse of thy people they are forced to put
up, and with infinite patience to dissemble their grief, which goes to my heart
to think of, and am as sensible of it as if I bare the whole burden on my own
back.

51 Even those blasphemous reprochful taunts which those victorious heathen,
Wherewith thine enemies have reproched, O Lord: wherewith they have reproched
the footsteps of thine anointed.
enemies to thee, and for thy sake to thy people, do cast upon their hope in
thy promises, and their faithful expectation of the coming and near approach of
the Messiah their King thine anointed, now in this their so low, miserable, and
irrecoverable estate.

Blessed be the Lord for evermore. Amen and Amen.
52 But how ever it be, neither our misery, the enemies insolency, thy
severitie and seeming perfidie, nor our amazements upon all these shall
eradicate the faith, and hope mine heart has in thee and thy covenant, nor
stop my mouth from praising thee for it, but that I do affirm thee holy,
faithful, and gracious for all these, even to David, to whom thou will make
good all that ever thou have promised, yea, to the end of the World shall his
Kingdom last. The Messiah for all this shall come, whose shall be the Kingdom,
power, and glory for evermore. And in the faith hereof I do bless thee now, as
if it were, and pronounce thee worthy of blessing, praise, and thanksgiving
throughout all ages of the World, so long as Sun and Moon endures, so be it,
yea, Lord, dispose the hearts of thy people to believe that so it shall be,
that in the hope thereof we may praise thee, and in the happy enjoyment
thereof all ages hereafter may do so too.

The xc. PSALM.
This prayer of Moses in likelihood was made by him, some time before his
death, betwixt the Israelites, being inhabited Canaan, because of their
murmuring and misbelief, when the spies brought an evil report upon the land,
in that long peregrination of theirs in the wilderness, and the time they
entered it: wherein he first mentions the continual care that he the
everlasting God has had over them, in all their travels and sojournings, and
next the often afflictions and destructions, to which their sins and his
displeasure brought them, and the great deliverances he has afforded them, as
it were a resurrection from the dead. Then declares how its worse with them his
people than the rest of mankind, for though all must, and do perish by frailty
and casualty, yet his wrath is upon none so sore as them, they perish by that
more than th^se. All life is short and all old age wearisome, but their
shortest and wearisomest of any, he prays that a good use may be made both of
the natural and supernatural brevity of their lives, and that God would after
so long estrangement be gracious to them, and make good his promise touching
the promised land, and their happy condition therein.

A Psalm being a Prayer made by Moses, Psalm xc. A Prayer of Moses the man of
God.
that extraordinary servant and Prophet of the Lord.

1 LOrd, LOrd, thou have been our dwelling place in all generations.
ever since we were thy people, even from Abraham and so downward, successively
we have wandered and sojourned as strangers in one place after another by thy
appointment and providence, who have still gone along with us, provided for us,
and been a harbor, shelter, and protection to us in all places, and throughout
all ages to this day, as thou will be to thy Church to the end of the world.

2 There is no God besides thee who art eternal, Before the mountains were
brought forth, or ever thou had formed the earth and the world: even from
everlasting to everlasting thou art God.
the Creator of all things, for before the huge mountains, which seem to have
had no beginning, but to have been from everlasting, yet before them thou had
thy being when they had none, nor no appearance of any, both which thou
causedst, providing the Abyss and huge concave of the sea to receive the
waters, which till then overflowed their highest tops, yea, before the earth
both sea and land, and heavens too had any existence, thou, Lord, had thine,
and formedst them as now they are. Before the world was, thou wast, for else it
had not been; yea, before time was, even from everlasting thou wast God, and so
shall be to everlasting, even when time and all this world shall have an end,
and thy peoples God from their everlasting predestination, to their everlasting
glorification.

3 Living and dead, Thou turnest man to destruction: and say, return ye
children of men.
man's sin and frailty, thy power and mercy appears; For thou often bring him
to the point of ruin, and yet pronounces a reprieve and lengthenest his life
as we well know, that else would soon expire under thy hand, when thou laiest
it upon him, and when death it self has swallowed him, thou by thine Almighty
power shall command the grave to give up her dead, after she has long detained
them, and make all mankind at last to live again at the resurrection, whereof
we have been a figure.

For a thousand years in thy sight are but as yesterday when it is past, and as
a watch in the night.
4 For, however we judge and measure things by time being subject to futurity,
and so think a little a great deal, and that which is short to be long, but to
thee who comprehends Eternity, and before whose eyes all things past and to
come are present, a thousand years are nothing, they are as it were at an end
so soon as begun, what time past is to us, such time to come is with thee, an
hour, day, year, age, are all alike, even all the time we lie in the grave,
though a thousand years, which to our thoughts seems a kind of Eternity, it is
to thee but as a piece of a night, a few hours, the watch of one Centry.

Thou carriest them away as with a flood, they are as a sleep: in the morning
they are like grass which grows up.
5, 6 Lord, how in thy displeasure do thou sweep away the sinful sons of
men, what examples of it have we seen both amongst our enemies and our selves,
In the morning it flourishes, and grows up, in the evening it is cut down
and withers.
like an overflowing torrent that bears down all before it, so vain a thing is
man, and so frail a thing his life, as transient or momentary as a sleep or
dream, as short-lived as grass. In the youthful part of their time, which is
as it were the morning of their age, they are strong and busy for a while,
like unto grass which in the morning of the day is green and flourishing, and
before night is mowed down and withered, so short and uncertain is the life of
man.

7 We of all men have experience of it, For we are consumed by thine anger, and
by thy wrath are we troubled.
that have so often and so many of us perished in thy displeasure, and by
terrible judgments been strangely and suddenly slain to the amazement and
terror of the rest.

8 For our sins and provocations, Thou have set our iniquities before thee, our
secret sins in the light of thy countenance.
as such times as thou have been pleased to take notice of them, and to reckon
with us for them, which thou have done very severely, even those sins which
we had thought thou had scarce taken notice of, the murmurings and secret
misbelief of our hearts, these thou have clearly seen, and we have felt as
much, thy grace and favor being be-clouded toward us by their interposition.

9 Insomuch as we that had a flourishing time of it, For all our days are
passed away in thy wrath: we spend our years as a tale that is told.
when first we came out of Egypt, having the light of thy countenance shining
sweetly upon us for some season, are now in a quite other condition, and for a
many years have wandered and wasted away in thy displeasure, our carcases
falling in the wilderness, vainly and unprofitably exhausting our time, living
uselesly, and dying regardlesly.

10 The ordinary rate of man's life is seventy years, The days of our years are
threescore years and ten; and if by reason of strength, they be fourscore
years, yet is their strength labor and sorrow: for it is soon cut off, and we
fly away.
and if by special blessing or bitterness of constitution, any surmount that
number, and attain to fourscore, yet by reason of the infirmities incident to
old age, that surplusage of time is of little or no content saving that they
live, so accompanied is that remainder of their life with pains and irksomness
(such as we have had our shares of in this time of thy disfavour) for their
strength then is not vigorous, merely yields subsistence and being, but no
well-being, and that very being so frail and feeble, that almost any thing
serves to annihilate it, so uncertain and transient is our life always,
especially then at that decrepit age, that we are gone in a moment.

Who knows the power of thine anger? even according to thy fear, so is thy
wrath.
11 We have had experience of thine anger and thy power to execute it, though in
a remiss degree, what infinite numbers of us momentany short-lived creatures
have untimely perished by it? and not reached that proportion of years, which
our infirm natures might else have attained unto, and yet have thou been
merciful to us too, considering how able thou wast to have cut us all off at a
blow, for it can neither be expressed nor conceived, how Almighty thou art to
vindicate thy dishonor upon such sinners as we have been, if thou would have
stirred up all thy wrath, and put forth thy power to the uttermost, but this
terror of thine is hid from most men's eyes, the world has not the faith of
it, because they have not the fear of thee, only thine own people, nor they
neither, saving such of them as thou have by an inward call begotten to thee,
and made to fear thee, have any right understanding of the greatness of it,
they that filially fear thee, which is the true knowledge of thee, do only
tremblingly reverence thine irefulness.

So teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom.
12 Naturally we know nothing, neither the power of thine anger, nor our own
brevity of life and imbecility of nature, thou must teach us not only what
concerns thee, but what concerns our selves also, doctrine will not do it, it
is thou that must be our teacher, else we shall never learn practically and
profitably to know we are mortal. Lord, therefore pity our stupidity,
teaches us even what we know already; for common truths that are of greatest
use, though they be most known, yet they are oft-times least understood; for we
live as if we should never die, though we know nothing is more sure, nor more
uncertain than death, such fools are we and void of true wisdom till thou
inspire us with it: make us then so to know the momentanies of our loves, as
thereby to be instigated to make it our first and chiefest care to seek and
secure to our selves a blessed eternity after them, especially we that are
under thy heavy displeasure, and consumed by it day by day; let the loss of
this earthly, incite us to look after a heavenly Canaan.

13 O Lord, Return (O Lord) how long? and let it repent thee concerning thy
servants.
call to mind that ancient love, wherewith thou lovedst our forefathers, and
those many acts of grace, which we their children have participated from thee
formerly, to persuade with thee, to reassume that temper toward us, and to be
again gracious to us. We, Lord, think it long till we be received into favor
again, do thou think so too we humbly pray thee, and put an end to this thy
displeasure, that has so long lain heavy upon us. Yea, let what thou have
already done seem too much, at least, Lord, do no more so, but cease to destroy
us, and take us into grace again, whom thou have honored above all the world,
with the title of thy people and servants.

14 O satisfy our longing desires after mercy, O satisfy us early with thy
mercy; that we may rejoice, and be glad all our days.
and do it betime, whilst some of us are yet left alive, before the sun be set
upon us all; Lord, spare that remnant that are not yet consumed, and let us see
some token for good, that may again revive us, and persuade us of thy
reconciled favor toward us, which would make us quite forget all our sorrow
passed, for the joy we should conceive thereat, and be happy men for time to
come.

Make us glad according to the days wherein thou have afflicted us, and the
years wherein we have seen evil.
15 Lord, let thy mercies hold some proportion with thy judgments, especially
toward us thy people, against whom, though thou have denounced some threats,
yet have thou made us many more promises, therefore call to mind the number,
nature, and long continuance of our afflictions both in Egypt, and since we
came thence, especially this long peregrination of ours, ever since thou
swarest we should not enter into thy rest, now at last to have some
commiseration, and another while to let us taste of mercy, as we have done of
misery, and to have a surviving joy to succeed our long-lived sorrow.

Let thy work appear unto thy servants, and thy glory unto their children.
16 Lord, thou have engaged thy self in a great undertaking, even to give this
thy people the land of Canaan in full possession and dominion, some progress
its true thou have made toward it, by our deliverance out of Egypt, and
conduct through the wilderness to the skirts thereof, but the complement of it
we would fain see, which we had seen ere this but for our own default, which we
pray thee at last obliterate, and make good thy promise of possession in our
sight and time, and of that glorious state and condition, which shall be to thy
Church and Kingdom in succeeding ages, let after-generations see it in its full
splendor.

And let the beauty of the Lord our God be upon us: and establish thou the
works of our hands upon us, yea, the wo^k of our hands establish thou it.
17 And let the blessing and favor of the Almighty and our good God, be with
his people for ever, to make them beautiful and glorious in the eyes of all
nations, who in the absence thereof, are the abject despondent people living.
And make succesfull all their great undertakings in enterprising Canaan,
driving out and destroying those many Kings and great people, the enlarging
their borders and dominion into remote countries, and building of the Temple;
whatsoever, Lord, thou have promised to do for them, give them hearts
faithfully to believe it, and in the faith thereof courageously to undertake
it, and indefatigably to persist in it, and succesfully to prosper in all
things unto an establishment in a full fruition, absolute dominion, and
glorious condition of Church and Kingdom.

The xci. PSALM.
The Psalmist prophetically declares Gods great care for the welfare of the
faithful, commends it by his own testimony and example, and therefore exhorts
them to walk with a holy carelessness in midst of dangers upon assurance of his
de^ence. Brings in God himself, promising to the faithful deliverance
temporal, and salvation eternal. Psalm xci.


1 HE that by faith is firmly fixed upon God, HE that dwells in the secret
place of the most high, shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty.
making him his never-failing refuge, and wholly confiding in his sure though
invisible protection, at all essays shall be as secure and safely preserved,
as the Almighty power of God can tell how to protect him, which he need neither
fear nor doubt of.

2 I believe, I will say of the Lord, he is my re^uge, and my fortress: my God
in him will I trust.
and therefore I will and dare with boldness affirm as much of the Lord by mine
own experience of him, as I recommend unto others to make trial of, how that
he is the only refuge and fortress, even this my God that I have ever in all
straits and concussions fled unto, and never found him falsify his word or
fail my trust, therefore I both have and will trust in him, and rely upon him
and him only, fall back fall edge.

Surely he shall deliver thee from the sn^re of the fowler: an^ from the noysom
pestilence.
3 Let me and mine example persuade with thee to do so too, surely thou shall
not repent thee, but find the happy fruits of it, in his gracious and powerful
preservation of thee, neither men nor devils, by power or policy, shall be able
to do thee any hurt, they may endanger thee, but thine extremity shall be his
opportunity; no nothing, though in its own nature never so destructive and
inavoidable, the plague it self, that uncomfortable all-devouring disease,
shall not annoy thee.

He shall cover thee with his feathers, and under his wings shall thou trust:
his trust shall be thy shield and buckler.
4 He shall take care of thee, and by his Almighty power secure thee from
danger, as a Hen does her Chickins, wherein the more thou trusts the more thou
may, such experience shall thou have of him and of his faithfulness; cast but
thy care on him and trust firmly in him, and thou shall find him true of his
word, and true to thy trust, and thy self better safeguarded by thy faith in
his faithfulness, than by any humane helps, or warlike accommodations
whatsoever.

Thou shall not be afraid for the terror by night; nor for the arrow that
flies by day.
5 Thou shall therein apprehend such safety, and thy mind find such recumbency
as that nothing shall disquiet thy peace, no time, place, person, nor thing
shall be cause of fear to thee, for day and night shall thou have sweet repose
in his protection, both against natural evils, and supernatural extraordinary
judgments, which as they come immediately from him, so are they ordered by
him, how mortal and sudden soever they seem to be.

6 Thou shall be antidoted, Nor for the pestilence that walks ie darkness:
nor for the destruction that wastes at noonday.
and fearless of the plague of pestilence that infecteth secretly, and
spreads here and there uncertainly and insensibly, and where it rages leaves
sad spectacles of natures frailty, sinners mortality, and Gods heavy
displeasure, to be seen and lamented by all in all places, in streets and
houses frequently and openly, dying night and day.

7 And though by Gods just judgment and secret dispensation, A thousand shall
fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right hand: but it shall not come
nigh thee.
men die and fall as thick as hail round about thee by the pestilence, which of
it self knows no difference, nor makes none, betwixt one man and another, whose
natures are alike mortal, and their constitutions alike apt to infection, yet
shall God whose judgment it is, and whose will it performs, so order and
dispose the dispensation of it, that thou shall be as it were shot-free, when
thousands, and ten thousands drop dead at thy feet.

8 Thou in thine own person shall feel no harm, Only with thine eyes shall
thou behold: and see the reward of the wicked.
thou shall only be a spectatour of other men's destruction, and Gods judgment
executed upon sinners, by sudden and untimely death, overtaking many thousands
that misimploied their lifetime, living in sin and impenitency, and would have
continued so.

9 Because thou have done as I do, Because thou have made the Lord which is my
refuge, even the most high, thy habitation.
thou shall speed as I have sped; for God his promise and performance shall be
one and the same to all believers, and therefore as I made him my refuge, and
so he was, so thou doing the like, he shall be the like, even the Almighty God
from heaven, shall safeguard thee as well as me, if thou take sanctuary in him.

There shall no evil befall thee, neither shall any plague come nigh thy
dwelling.
10 So doing, thou shall be like Israel in Egypt, when the first born were
smitten, how ever it happen to others, thy faith shall secure thee, yea, both
thee and thine, even from commonest judgments.

For he shall give his Angel^ charge over thee: to keep thee in all thy ways.
11 For all the powers of heaven shall be imploid to preserve thee if there be
need; besides both the ordinary and extraordinary providence of God, he shall
double his guard upon thee, yea, not one but many, nor many, but all the Angels
of heaven shall stand charged with thee, if there be cause to protect thee,
from miscarriage by any power or accidents on earth, whilst thou walk in
ways pleasing to God, and believe steadfastly in him.

They shall bear thee up in their hands: least thou dash thy foot against a
stone.
12 For as the faithful have many and great enemies, so have they many more and
greater friends; If Satan and his Angels lay stumbling blocks in thy way, God
and his Angels shall either remove them, that is, enable thee to keep on thy
course without making a stand or turning back, thou shall either not stumble,
or so as not to fall, thou shall catch no hurt though thou may be endangered.

Thou shall tread upon the lion, and adder: the young lion and the dragon shall
thou trample under feet.
13 Manifold dangers and fierce enemies, men and devils the faithful shall meet
with, secret plotters and open assailers, but neither the one nor the other
shall do them any hurt, but instead thereof both they and their attempts shall
miscarry; Gods faithful people shall take no hurt by the most hurtful
creatures, be they never so poisonous or ravenous, nor by men of like
dispositions, to whom the godly are great eyesores, living amongst them they
are a trouble and vexation to them, against whom they act their rage and malice
but to their own destruction.

Because he has set his love upon me, therefore will I deliver him: I will set
him on high, because he has known my name.
14 Besides my doctrine and example, hear God himself bespeaking thee with
promises as from his own mouth, whom I his Prophet personate. Because (says
he) he that is faithful, has out of love to me and my faithfulness put his
affiance in me, he shall have no cause to repent him, I will not deceive him,
he shall not miscarry, I will deliver him out of trouble and danger, set him
quite out of gunshot, they shall as soon hurt heaven as him, because out of a
right understanding and belief of my power and faithfulness, he has honored
me by believing in me, with suitable recumbency.

15 Such an one shall but ask and have, He shall call upon me and I will answer
him: I will be with him in trouble, I will deliver him, and honor him.
if he be in trouble I will have an eye to him, and an ear for him, if he call
for deliverance it shall come at his call, I will deliver him, and in such a
manner, as that because he honors me, I also will honor him with special
marks of my favor, such as his very enemies men or devils shall honor or envy
him for, here on earth, and reward him with glory in heaven.

16 Thus will I preserve and lengthen his life to his own desire, With long
life will I satisfy him, and show him my salvation.
maugre all that would shorten it, he shall know I can and will save him if he
trust in me, yea, my everlasting salvation more worth than my temporal will I
open his eyes to see, and desire above it, and if he believe me for it, he
shall be sure of it, and he that has the comfort and assurance of that by my
spirits ascertaining it unto him, will have no cause to think I break faith
with him, or deceive his faith in me, whatever happen.

The xcii. PSALM.
The Psalmist for the better sanctifying of the Sabbath, having penned this
Psalm, shows the proper and adequate service of that day, is to praise the Lord
for his manifestations of himself, and thank him for his gracious and
beneficial administrations to his people, richly declared in his works of
creation, redemption, providence, and just judgments; all which are nothing in
the eyes of worldlings, that mind the creature and not the Creator, but how
ever they neglect God, yet be neglects not to punish them and bless his people,
who by him and in him shall be happy here and hereafter.

Psalm cxii. A Psalm or song for the Sabbath Day.
A Psalm to be both sung and played by voices and instruments, principally of
use upon the Sabbath Day, for its better celebrating and the peoples edifying,
when then they are solemnly assembled to serve the Lord.

IT is a good thing to give thanks unto the Lord: and to sing praises unto thy
name, O most high.
1 IT is an acceptable service to God, and a commendable imploiment for his
people to be much conversant, specially on the Sabbath Day, in the meditation
and recollection of all the benefits of what nature soever, which God has and
does bestow upon us, whether of creation, providence, or redemption; and to
have our hearts affected and enflamed with them, so as to be exceeding
thankful for them: And to view and consider his power, goodness, and mercy
manifested and exhibited in them, so as to be moved thereby with reverence,
love, and admiration, devoutly and solemnly to worship before him, and to
celebrate his glory and praise, as the great and only God worthy of honor.

To show forth thy lovingkindness in the morning: and thy faithfulness every
night.
2 Our duty is to take continual notice of thy continued and renewed benefits,
and always to have our hearts upheld thereby in a sweet gratuitous frame and
temper, with the eye of faith piercing into the love and faithfulness,
answerable to his grace and promises, which shine forth in them, that should
take us more than the things themselves, and cause our thanksgivings far beyond
them.

3 Which cannot be too solemnly celebrated, Upon an instrument of ten strings,
and upon the Psaltery; upon the harp with a solemn ^ound.
all the music of the Temple is too little to do it, therefore lay out your
utmost strength and skill you that are especially appointed to that honor and
service, and gifted for it, resembling the heavenly Quire, raise up your
hearts, and in that holy place, at the appointed times tune up all your
instruments, those chiefly that are most affecting and heart-ravishing, to this
work, chiefly on this day.

4 For though, For thou, Lord, have made me glad through thy work: I will
triumph in the works of thy hands.
O Lord, thou art exceeding beneficial to all mankind, yet of all the world
thou have done most for us, which I and the rest of thy peculiar people have
cause to remember and acknowledge, and with joyful hearts to praise thee for,
especially for that transcendent work of mercy, in chosing us from out all the
world to be thine, which together with those concomitant powerful
dispensations and manifestations of thy self in our behalfes from time to time,
gives cause to me and them to triumph, and glory in faith and hope.

5 O Lord, O Lord, how great art thy works! and thy thoughts are very deep.
how unconceivable is thy power and wisdom in all thy decrees, counsels, and
dispensations toward both thy Church and the enemies thereof, in thy strange
providence and mavelous judgments?

6 Which yet are little taken notice of by most men, A brutish man knows
not: neither does a fool understand this.
so worldly minded and sensually disposed are people ordinarily, that God is
not in all their thoughts, spending their time more like beasts than men of
reason, minding the creature more than the Creator, who is never so much as
owned, much less honored by the earthly minded, and wicked Athiesticall
persons of the world in any thing he does, though never so remarkable.

When the wicked spring as the grass, and when all the workers of iniquity do
flourish: it is that they shall be destroyed for ever.
7 Neither the hazardous condition that they themselves are in, in this their
earthly felicity, which they take to be a special note of Gods peculiar favor
to them, that they can sin and yet prosper, when others that are holy and
strict in their ways are at an ebb-water, in poverty and misery: not
considering that God gives wicked men their hearts desire here, lets them swim
in plenty and pleasure for a while during a short life, that they may complete
their sins to the sum total, and he his judgments even unto everlasting
destruction in endless pains, never to enter into his rest.

But thou, Lord, art most high for evermore.
8 They neither understand themselves nor thee, O Lord God, never imagining that
thou rulest in the highest heavens, and thence judge of all men and their
actions here below: But whatever their vain thoughts are, thou art the
everlasting King of thy Church and people, and the righteous judge of thine and
their enemies, and so they shall find thee to be to the worlds end.

For lo, thine enemies O Lord, for lo thine enemies shall perish: all the
workers of iniquity shall be scattered.
9 For as sure as Gods in heaven, so sure shall the wicked of the earth however
they prosper, and whatever they may think of themselves compared with other
men, come to ruin and utter destruction; for though they think God their
friend, yet does he know, and reckon them for his enemies, and as such, shall
his proceedings be toward them, for all evil doers though they be many, and
the godly few in all ages and places, they shall be weeded out and consume away
by the hand of God upon them, they and their felicity shall part and be
everlastingly separated.

10 But as despicable as the godly are in the eyes of worldlings, But my horn
shall thou exalt like the horn of an unicorn: I shall be anointed with fresh
oil.
they shall have their turn, I and other thy faithful servants shall see
better days, when they shall see worse, principally in heaven that everlasting
sabbatism; when our turn comes to rise, then they shall fall, and there is no
doubt but that day will come, when we shall be made able by thee, whose
faithfulness is engaged for it, to lift up our heads, and enjoy those
everlasting consolations hoped for, and those divine honors of being Kings and
Priests unto thee.

11 The faithful shall not fail of the grace promised them, Mine eye also
shall see my desire on mine enemies, and mine ears shall hear my desire of the
wicked that rise up against me.
and the justice to be executed upon their enemies, but they shall undoubtedly
be both eye, and ear-witnesses of the righteous judgments of God upon the
wicked of the world, that hate and persecute them.

12 The righteous however they be decried and depressed by wicked worldlings,
The righteous shall flourish like the Palm Tree he shall grow like a Cedar in
Lebanon.
yet shall God so bless them, that they shall out-grow their miseries, and
overtop their enemies: Gods Church and his people of whom it consists, shall
grow in grace until they arrive in glory.

13 Those that are Israelites indeed, Those that be planted in the house of the
Lord, shall flourish in the courts of our God.
which by the spirit and faith are made members, and have taken rooting in the
family and Church of God, shall thrive and come on prosperously in spiritual
graces, by use of holy means in frequenting his sanctuary, and sanctifying his
Sabbath to Gods glory, their own assurance, and unspeakable rejoicing. They
that are rooted here in grace, shall grow up from grace to grace, and be
crowned at last with eternal life in the heavens.

They shall still bring forth fruit in old age: they shall be fat and
flourishing.
14 These trees and plants of Gods own planting, by a divine supernatural
supply of spiritual sap and nourishment, contrary to the course of nature, the
elder they grow the better, they shall flourish and fructify both on earth and
to all eternity in heaven.

To show that the Lord is upright: he is my rock, and there is no
unrighteousness in him.
15 Thus shall both the wicked perish, and the godly flourish, to show that
however by outward appearance of providence and weakness of faith, the Lord
seems oft-times to us to go against himself and break his word, yet its nothing
so, the Lord for all that, is faithful, true of his promise, a never failing
refuge to every true believer, and there is no such thing as our sinful
imagination and unbelief-fancy of him, not the least u^righteousness in word or
deed.

The xciii. PSALM.
The Psalmist goes about to settle the faith of the Church in the Empire, and
omnipotency of the Lord her God, together with his faithful engagements, the
holy performances whereof she is bound to believe and rely upon for ever.
Psalm cxiii.


THe Lord reigns he is clothed with majesty, the Lord is clothed with
strength, wherewith he has girded himself, the world also is established that
it cannot be moved.
1 THe Church and people of God ought to know and believe this for an infallible
maxim in practical, as well as dogmaticall divinity, that The Lord reigns.
He that is their God is God and King of all and over all: the empire and
regalitie of the whole world is his, the resplendent majesty whereof appears
in all created Beings in heaven and earth, and in that power which he so
effectually and dexterously manifests for his Churches preservation, and their
enemies confusion, whereby the world also is centred so firm as upon a basis,
so that though it hang like a ball in the air, yet it is as firm and immovable
as the fixed mountains.

2 This dominion of thine, Thy throne is established of old: thou art from
everlasting.
O Lord, glorious in its administrations of protection and government, has
ever been, never was there any vacation of it, and as it has been, so it shall
be from everlasting to everlasting, as thou thy self art.

3 As in nature thou, The floods have lifted up, O Lord, the floods have lifted
up their voice: the floods lift up their waves.
Lord, have ordained in the waterie element thereof, v^^y formidable and
dreadful agitations, as in the tempestuous ragings of the sea, and the
overflowing of great waters making a hideous noise; such storms and
concussions are raised on land too, even all the earth over against thy Church,
tossed as a ship at sea, and boistrously handled by wicked and unreasonable men
that rage against her, ready to be swallowed up and devoured by them.

4 But as high as these waves and tempests of danger and destruction to thy
Church do mount, The Lord on high is mightier than the noise of many waters:
yea than the mighty waves of the sea.
yet is the Lord in heaven both higher and mightier than they, be they never so
terrible for noise and number, he can allay and quiet them at his pleasure, yea
though the Church be as a boat in a storm at sea in the midst of gusts and
surges, God can preserve it, and will; for as he raises sea-tempests, and
therefore can lay them, so he by his providence and appointment sends
landstorms, and therefore can order and quit them in like sort.

Thy testimonies are very sure: holiness becomes thine house, O Lord, for ever.
5 And as thou art powerful, so art thou faithful, we need no more doubt of
the one than of the other what thou have promised; as thou have power, so
likewise have thou will to perform it. Thy grace of protection is as certain
and infallible, as thy power is omnipotent. The obediential faith of thy holy
performance of all that thou have promised, becomes thy Church, the house of
the living God, which, O Lord, ought to be fixed and established by it, and in
it for ever, what ever befall her.

The xciv. PSALM.
In some very heavy pressure that lay upon the people of God in general, by
by the heathens, or else upon the faithful under the wicked Kings and Judges
of Israel, this Psalm seems to be made, wherein God is earnestly called upon to
take off the yoke which lay so heavily upon them by the tyranny and
persecution of bloody and (...) hemous wretches, whom be counsels to do
better; and from their abuse of Gods own clemency to their own perdition,
shows the blessed estate of Gods own people, because of Gods fatherly
chastisements. He acknowledges God for his sole support, which is his comfort
when he is at a loss, and is confident God will not always suffer tyrants to
sit in his seat, and rule over his Church, but that he will find a time to
judge them, Psalm xciv.
and deliver her out of their hands.

O Lord God, to to whom vengeance belongs: O God to whom vengeance belongs
show thy self.
1, 2 O Almighty and righteous Lord God, who have power, and to whom of right
it belongs to revenge the injuries and oppressions of thy Church, appear in her
behalf, Lift up thy self thou Judge of the earth, ^ender a reward to the proud.
so that both she and her oppressors may see thou do so. Let her proud
insulting enemies feellingly find that thou that art judge of all the earth,
favourest her cause and do her right upon them.

Lord, how long shall the wicked, how long shall the wicked triumph?
3, 4 Lord, it is not without cause that we cry to thee, for as our pressures
have been very great, so they have been very long. How shall they utter and
speak hard things? and all the workers of iniquity boast themselves.
The wicked have had a long reign, and lorded it with a witness over the good,
and by reason of thy delay they glory in their doings, as if either thou
could not or would not punish them. And what they think they stick not to
speak, even blasphemies against thee, and cruelties against us, and the more
wickedness they commit, the more they give themselves content, boasting one to
another, and vying one with another who can do most mischief, thy impunitie
being their immunitie.

5, 6 They make pot-sheards of thy people, They break in pieces thy people, O
Lord: and afflict thine heritage.
O Lord, loading them with such merciless oppressions and afflictions, even
thine own chosen and peculiar heritage, They slay the widow and the stranger:
and murder the fatherless.
and that because they are so, as they break their very hearts, and leave them
not the name or face of a people scarce upon earth, destroying all before them,
mercilesly breaking all laws humane and divine, respecting neither age nor sex,
pitying none in any kind or condition, though never such objects of compassion.

7 And so hardened are they in their wicked courses, Yet they say, The Lord
shall not see: neither shall the God of Jacob regard it.
and so presumptious by thy forbearance, that they are confident thou regardest
not what they do to thy people, nor never will call them to account for it,
making a very aw-word of the God of Jacob.

8 Be men of more understanding, Understand, ye brutish among the people: and
ye fools, when will ye be wise?
than to harbor such vain thoughts of so great a God, ye, that though ye be
heads and chief among the vulgar, yet are as void of understanding and true
judgment, as the common people themselves; be not still so foolish to persist
in wickedness, provoking the Lord, but consider that the end must needs be bad,
and that you will repent when it is too late.

9 For weigh with your selves whether it be reasonable to think, He that
planted the ear, shall he not hear? he that formed the eye, shall he not see?
that you can either act such things or speak such words, and God not see nor
hear them that gives ears and eyes to all men living, shall the author of
those senses be senseless?

He that chastises the heathen, shall not he correct? he that teaches man
knowledge, shall not he know?
10 He that is Judge of all the earth and punishes the very heathens for their
exorbitancies and unjust oppressions among themselves, shall not he much more
be righteous to revenge the wrongs done to his own people? and have you such
mean thoughts of God, as to judge him any thing less than omniscient? think you
to escape or deceive him that gives you your selves the knowledge you have, and
all men else?

The Lord knows the thoughts of man, that they are vanity.
11 The Lord very well knows what vain and wicked thoughts men naturally have of
him, how they abuse his clemency, as if he neither saw, heard, regarded, nor
will judge them for their wickedness, because he delays to do it.

Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest, O Lord: and teach him out of thy
law.
12 Therefore what ever the world think of the godly under afflictions, yet
blessed is the man that is so much favored of God, as to be chastised for his
faults, and admonished of his duty to Gods commandments, whilst he suffers
others to run riot without check or control.

That thou may give him rest from the days of adversity, until the pit be
dug for the wicked.
13 That he may make him meet for the inheritance of the saints, prepare him for
heaven, which shall be the end of his course, which is accompanied with
sorrows, as hell shall be of the wicked when they are prepared for it by a
consummation of the number and measure of their sins, by their liberty of
sinning.

For the Lord will not cast off his people, neither will he forsake his
inheritance.
14 For whatever we through shortness of spirit, and impatience under
afflictions may think of God, as if he had disregarded his people, yet its
nothing so, God may cast them into afflictions, but not because he rejects
them, but because he loves them, he will find a time to make it appear so, that
for all that, nay, that therefore he is their God, and they his dearly beloved,
because he does afflict them, when as he saves them by it, suffering others to
go to hell for want of it.

15 But how ever things seem to be topsi-turvie, But judgment shall return
unto righteousness, and the upright in heart shall follow it.
the wicked a top of the wheel, and the good under it, yet there is a time when
the world shall be set right again, each man shall be paid his wages, God shall
take the government into his hands, whereas now the reins seem to be let loose,
and in righteousness judge the good and the bad, which is the time that all
upright-hearted sincere Godly-ones long for, and in hope of it shall
notwithstanding, all obstructions, follow it in the way of piety.

16 Who is there beside thee, Who will rise up for me against the evil doers?
or who will stand with me against the workers of iniquity.
O Lord willing or able to deliver me from under this tyrannical oppression of
wicked workers, surely none in all the world. If thou do not save me, I
perish.

17 Yea, Unless the Lord had been my help my soul had dwelt in silence.
had not thou when time was been a present help, so near was I to
destruction, I had certainly died, and been silent in the grave instead of
being now speaking to thee, and praising of thee.

18 When I concluded with my self, When I said my foot slippeth: Thy mercy, O
Lord, held me up.
there was no way but death, then of a sudden beyond expectation in so eminent
a danger, did thy mercy appear to my wonderful preservation and deliverance.

19 When I was at the fullest of anxious cares, In the multitude of the
thoughts within me, thy comforts delight my soul.
and troublous thoughts were revolved in my breast, by reason of my desperate
condition what would become of me, then when I but cast the eyes of my mind upon
thine all-sufficiencie and faithfulness, I was presently quieted, and never am
so deep plunged in sorrow but these bladders bear me up again, and make my joy
and hope surmount them.

Shall the throne of iniquity have fellowship with thee: which frames
mischief by a law?
20 Lord, will thou that art the Judge of all the World not judge righteously?
shall the wicked escape thee, as they do the corrupt Judges here on earth? No
thou will not suffer tyrants and persecutors of thy people always to rule over
them in thy stead, whose King thou properly art, such as make laws flat against
thine, enact sin, and legitimate their unjust and mischievous practices against
thy people.

They gather themselves together against the soul of the righteous; and condemn
the innocent blood.
21 They conspire and plot the destruction of the righteous, yea, sit in
judgment upon the godly as upon malefactors, and right or wrong condemn them
to death, though they can find no just accusation against them.

But the Lord is my defense: and my God is the rock of my refuge.
22 But maugre the malice and injustice of mine enemies, I doubt not of defense
from them, I have found God an all-sufficient refuge and safe hiding place, and
my faith is in him as it was, therefore I fear not but to find him the same God
now, as ever heretofore in my defense and preservation.

And he shall bring upon them their own iniquity, and shall cut them off in
their own wickedness: yea, the Lord our God shall cut them off
23 Yea, he shall compass my deliverance, and the deliverance of his Church by
her enemies confusion, their fall shall be her rise, what they purpose against
Gods people shall redound upon themselves to their own mortal wounding, this
our good and Almighty Lord God is able to do, and to the glory of his
faithfulness and praise of his power, he shall effect it to all men's admiration.

The xcv. PSALM.
David, as appears by Heb. 4.7. was author of this Psalm, wherein he incites
the people solemnly, unanimously, and affectionately to sing praise and thanks
to God, for his grace to them, and his greatness in himself, and over the
world, and not to be like their forefathers, rebellious, and unbelieving, but
to hear and obey, lest imitating their sins, they share in their plagues.

1, 2 O How meet a thing it is for all us Israelites, Psalm xcv.
the adopted people of the Lord, O Come let us ^ing unto the Lord, let us make
a joyful noise to the rock of our salvation.
frequently to meet together, and with willing minds and thankful hearts to
set forth the praises of the Lord in solemn assemblies, Let us come before his
presence with thanksgiving, and make a joyful noise unto him with Psalms
let us unanimously and cheerfully do so, even sing aloud the praiseworthy
preservations that he the Rock of our salvation has in all ages vouchsafed
unto us. Let us joyfully repair to his sanctuary in the faith of his presence
according to his promise, with our hearts full-fraught with the memory of his
mercies, and our lips gratuitously pouring out the praises of them before him
there, singing joyfully with all the melodious harmony of voices and
instruments, the Psalms made for that purpose.

3 For who is there like him, For the Lord is a great God: and a great King
above all Gods.
or who is besides him worthy of worship? He only is God, great in might and
majesty, doing whatsoever pleases him, the only Potentate, whose is the
kingdom, power and glory. The maker of all things, besides whom there is no
God, though, falsely and abusively, there are gods many and lords many, as
heathenish idols, civil majestrates, glorified Angels, yea, devils also bear
that name, but he is above every thing so called, and commanded them as well as
us.

4, 5 What is there that he has not fashioned and framed in all the world, In
his hand are the deep places of the earth: the strength of the hills is his also.
and consequently which are not at his command and dispose: The sea is his and
he made it: and his hands formed the dry land.
from the bottom of the bottomless sea to the top of the mightiest mountains in
the whole earth; for both land and sea were made by him, and possessed of those
places they enjoy, at first he commanded the al-over-flowing waters now the
sea, to the abyss prepared for them, that the face of the earth might appear
above them for the use of man and beast, and so it did.

O come let us worship and bow down: let us kneel before the Lord our maker.
6 O let me exhort you again and again, cheerfully and jointly with unanimitie
and gratuitie, to frequent the tabernacle of this immense majesty, there to
worship him in all the ways and ordinances he has appointed, and adore his
great and glorious name, by humbling and prostrating our selves before him with
lowly hearts and bended knees, in token of giving our whole selves a living and
reasonable sacrifice unto him, as a homage due to so Almighty a God and our
Creator, of whom, we as well as all other things had our beeings and have
still.

For he is our God and we are the people of his pasture, and the sheep of his
hand: to day if you will hear his voice,
7, 8, 9 Nor is that all, but besides the common interest of Creation, he is our
God by special Election, who governs us not only by common providence as all
mankind, Harden not your heart, as in the provocation; and as in the day of
temptation in the wilderness:
but by special gubernation as his Church and chosen people, to whom, and on
whom he has bestowed his saving truths and ordinances for us to feed upon,
When your fathers tempted me, proved me, and saw my works.
and grow by unto everlasting life and happiness, we are not of his flock which
he turns out to the wide world, as sheep-masters do some sheep to commons and
fallows, but we are his pasture-sheep, yea, his cades brought up at hand, his
very domestics, these privileges we have if we know how to use them, and walk
worthy of them, obedientially hearkening to the voice, and submitting to the
guidance of this shepherd of Israel, and not after so much and so long
experience as we have of him, his goodness, faithfulness, and power, at this
time, above what our forefathers had formerly, and the light that now shines
amongst us, toward the perfect day more than it did then, harden our hearts as
they at Meribah and Massah, the place where they chid with Moses, and with
ungrateful unbelief questioned the power and presence of the Almighty,
whether he were with them, and would or could supply their want of water, after
the great things he had done for them all along from Egypt thither, when as he
expected far other from them, considering what things he had even then done for
them, but much more for us since then, and therefore expects much more from us,
for this was in the wilderness long ago, during their peregrination there,
short of our times and what we have seen, when yet God expected even then and
there their faith and obedience, to have been answerable to his care and
providence, and therefore there proved them purposely; but instead of
hearkening to the voice of Moses, and of his miracles, to trust in him
faithfully, and walk before him humbly, in a meek and patient depending on him,
and seeking to him in their necessities, they speak rebelliously, mutined and
murmured at God and his servant ungratefully, and instead of submitting
themselves to the will and dispensations of God, to be proved by him, that they
might have opportunity to show forth their faith and obedience in and to him
that had done such great things for them, they turned it to a contrary use,
obstinately tempting and proving him, by misbelieving and questioning his power
and goodness, instead of meekly yielding to be proved by him, and answering his
expectations by suitable returns. These were our progenitors, of whom we come,
and of whose sins we therefore ought to beware.

10, 11 And this they did, Forty years long was I grieved with this
generation: and said, It is a people that do err in their heart, and they have
not known my ways.
not only once but often, nor out of frailty, but obstinacy, Nothing I could
do or say (says God) could reclaim them, but they persisted the self same men
from first to last, from the Red Sea to the skirts of Canaan forty years
together, Unto whom I swear in my wrath, that they should not enter into my
rest.
perpetually vexing me with their unbelief and rebellion, even all the
generation of them, scarce a man that did other, insomuch that at last, after
so long trial and experience of them, I concluded that there was no good to be
done, they are a people whose hearts are not upright with me, that err not of
infirmity, but obstinacy; and for all that, by my word and works, I have
taught and assured them thus long of my love, care, power, and faithfulness,
yet have not they learned in all this time, nor never will* being wilfully
blind and perversely inconsiderate, how to walk and demean themselves toward
me, by honoring of me with their faithful dependence, humble submission, and
hopeful expectation of my goodness and power to appear for them and be
extended to them, and to return me praise and thanks, love and obedience, that
so a perpetual intercourse of friendship and sweet correspondencie might have
been traded betwixt us for ever as I intended. But so hateful and vexatious
was their carriage, and so infinite and endless their provocation, that at last
when I had tried them to the uttermost, had brought them to the very borders of
the promised land, and saw they were still the same, as unbelieving and
murmuring as ever before, it made me past patience, so that in my rage I swear
(never to revoke it) that so unworthy a people that I saw neither was nor never
would be good, do all that I could, I say, I swear they should upon no terms
nor entreaty enter into and be possessed of the end of their travels, the type
of heaven, that resting place the land of Canaan, but should wast their days,
and end their lives in the wilderness, where they had so sinned against me,
even the whole generation of them, which I made good to the last man of that
rebellious crew. Let us fear and tremble, hearken and obey, praise and give
thanks, lest we the offspring of such progenitors be guilty of their sins, and
partake of their plagues, be cast out as they were kept out, of this good land.

The xcvi. PSALM.
This Psalm was ^ndited at the remove of the Ark to its settled abode upon the
hill of Sion in Jerusalem, being in substance all one with that 1. Chron.
16.23. to 33. wherewith David, ravished in spirit, and prophetically disposed,
stirs up all the world, Jews and Gentiles, to praise the Lord for the Kingdom
of Christ, which was approaching, which that typified, yea, and all creatures,
the most irrational and unsensible ^or the general Iubilee that shall then be,
the happy restoration begun, and not long to perfecting. Psalm xcvi.


1, 2 O What a joyful day is this, O Sing unto the Lord a new song: sing unto
the Lord all the earth.
to see the Ark brought after all its travels to its place of abode, the holy
mount in Jerusalem. This new mercy deserves a new song, Sing unto the Lord,
bless his name: show forth his salvation from day to day.
yea, extraordinary praise and thanks, not only from us, but from all the
world, the Gentiles as well as Israelites, which from Sion shall have the glad
tidings of salvation published to them, news worthy of new songs and ineffable
praises to be given to God, whom we nor they can praise enough, nor bless that
infinite goodnese of his, in vouchsafing the grace and knowledge of his
salvation to us so eminently in this type of Christ's peaceable and glorious
Kingdom, which they shall have really and indeed everlastingly amongst them,
worthy everlasting praises for them.

3 Spread the glorious tidings of Christ and his approaching Kingdoms far and
near, Declare his glory among the heathen: his wonders among all people.
let it be told the Gentiles, for they shall share in it, and glorify for it
let all that he has done for his Church, and promised to do, those wonderful
things of sending his Son, calling the Gentiles, and spreading his Church over
the face of the earth, be made known all the world over, to prepare them for it
with joy and thanks to receive it.

For the Lord is great, and greatly to be praised: he is to be feared above all
gods.
4 For the Lord shall be better known, though now they are ignorant of him, and
set light by him, valuing stocks and stones before him, yet the time will come
when they shall know, that this our God, is the only great and praiseworthy
God, and as well worthy to be worshipped and honored of them, instead of those
false and fond gods, they now serve, as of us. That there is none like him, nor
none but him.

For all the gods of the na^ions are idols: but the Lord made the heavens.
5 For all other gods which they ignorantly worship every where; (for all the
world lies in darkness) are but dumb and deaf Idols, made of wood and stone,
or at the best but creatures; the Lord only is the Creator, that made the
whole world, the glorious and beautiful heavens, and reigns therein alone.

Honor and majesty are before him: strength and beauty are in his sanctuary.
6 In the midst of unaccessible Honor and Majesty, which no man can see and
live, communicating thence some beams and rays of his heavenly and Divine
properties of grace and power, in that spiritual splendor that powerfully
shines out of his holy sanctuary, into the souls and spirits of those that in
faith and sincerity worshipping him there, have their hearts thereby
strengthened in believing, and their graces enlivened by the fresh
communicating of his ordinances, and effectual answers to their prayers against
their enemies.

Give unto the Lord (O ye kindreds of the people) give unto the Lord glory and
strength.
7 All ye people, whether sons of Adam, or of Abraham understand the Lord
aright, so as to honor him worthy of himself, by glorifying him as the only
God of power, yea, the Lord Almighty.

Give unto the Lord the glory due unto his name: bring an offering, and come
into his courts.
8 Worship not other gods instead of him, nor yet together with him, let him
rule alone in your hearts, that rules alone in the world, pay your tribute and
do your homage to him at his sanctuary, neither worship any God but him, nor
him in any other manner than as he has appointed, sacrifice to him upon his
own altar in his own courts.

9 Let all, O worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness: fear before him all
the earth.
far and near, come and welcome too, do as we do, worship the Lord in his holy
sanctuary; O that the whole earth would turn to the Lord, Gentiles as well as
Jews, as when Christ comes they shall have as free access to worship God as we,
and their worship as well accepted then, as ours is now.

10 Publish to the heathen what God has made known to you his people, Say
among the heathen that the Lord reigns: the world also shall be established
that it shall not be moved: he shall judge the people righteously.
How that the Lord only is God, and that the kingdom of the world, as well as
of Israel, belongs to him, and that his Church shall flourish every where as
well as here, which is not long to; all things shall be brought into a better
order, one God in Christ shall be worshipped, and steadfastly believed in,
instead of those mutiplicitie of gods, and extravagancies of worship that the
world is distracted with: He shall take upon him the kingdom of the Gentiles as
well as of the Jews, they shall take laws from him as well as we, and be
subjected to his righteous judgments as we are, who now are a lawless people,
void both of the knowledge and fear of God.

11 When that day comes, that we shall be no more under the Law, Let the
heavens rejoice, and let the earth be glad: let the sea roar and the fullness
thereof.
but under Grace, it shall be like the restoring of all things, a very first
fruits of it: Christ when he comes to enter upon his Gospel-kingdom, shall give
cause of joy to all things above and below, heaven, earth, land, water, and to
all creatures that live in and replenish all elements, shall be glad to be from
under his spreading confusion and chaos of ignorance and disorder, now
abounding under the time of nature and the curse, and to be reduced under the
headship and government of the reconciling and peacemaking Mediator, author
of light and life, as the forerunner of their final and absolute deliverance
at his second coming.

Let the field be joyful and all that is therein: then shall all the trees of
the wood rejoice
12, 13 All the earth, and all the creatures in it, shall have cause of
rejoicing, even the irrational and the unsensible (like as also all the wide
world of Gentilism) for its deliverance from the bondage of corruption, Before
the Lord, for he comes, for he comes to judge the earth: he shall judge the
world with righteousness, and the people with his truth.
then certainly begun, which is not far off, being till then made subject to
vanity, and its restorement into the glorious liberty of the children of God
then assuredly hastening. The whole creation in the mean time groaning and
traveling in pain together; waiting for the adoption and day of redemption, to
come from the presence of the Lord, which is not far behind the coming of the
Messiah, nay he himself is that King and Judge that comes to that very end and
purpose, to put an end to confusion and unrighteousness, and to create himself
a righteous Church out of the unrighteous world, that now is nothing else: and
a people that shall know Holiness and Truth from lies and vanity, whom he
shall bless, and the creature for their sakes, and ease them of the curse that
lies upon them, by taking it upon himself; dispensing grace and mercy to the
good, judgment and wrath to the wicked: by whose righteous government, the
whole creation shall be rendered much more acceptable in the eyes of the
creator, and so the creature partake of the first fruits of its redemption and
restoration, and the assured hopes of the speedy compleatment and finishing
thereof so much desired by it.

The xcvii. PSALM.
This Psalm is a prophecy of the kingdom of Christ in the time of the Gospel,
when he is come in the flesh, amplifying it in its certainty and universality,
together with its dreadful concomitants, as to unbelievers and contemners of
it. The joy that it shall be of to all the Israel of God. And concludes with an
animadversion to sincerity in contradistinction to formalitie, and the
happiness of such, maugre all enemies and evils that shall befall them. Psalm
xcvii.


1 THe glorious kingdom of Gods sole regencie by Jesus Christ is near at hand,
THe Lord reigns, let the earth rejoice: let the multitude of Isles be glad
thereof.
whereby error and vanity that has hitherto prevailed over the face of the
whole earth shall be extinguished, and the light of the gospel of salvation
shall shine like the sun into all the regions, to the unexpressable joy of the
whole earth, yea, it shall spread in its saving efficacy and virtue, from out
Judea where it has long been confined, to the remotest and unfrequentedst
corners and countries of the world, by land and sea.

2 You know how terribly the Lord appeared when he came down from heaven to
earth, Clouds and darkness are round about him: righteousness and judgment are
the habitations of his throne
to give the Law on Sinai, his terror and Majesty shall be every whit as
great at his second coming, to bring and publish the Gospel, as dreadful shall
he be to the contemners and disobeyers thereof as of the Law, for righteousness
and judgment shall be administered in, and are essential to his
Gospel-kingdom, and not to the Law only, as Gospel-sinners shall be sure to
find.

3 Whithersoever his Gospel Grace and mercy goes, A fire goes before him, and
burns up his enemies round about.
and wheresoever it is published, there goes along with it wrath and judgment,
which shall certainly and heavily fall upon the enemies and refusers thereof,
for the defense of it and his Church every where.

His lightenings enlightened the world: the earth saw and trembled.
4, 5. Recollect and enumerate all the terrible things that accompanied the
mighty and dreadful majesty of Almighty God, The hills melted like wax at
the presence of the Lord: at the presence of the Lord of the whole earth.
when he gave the law on mount Sinai, thunderings, lightenings, earthquakes,
etc. and the same dreadfulness accompanies the Gospel for its vindication and
protection, upon contemners and against opposers.

The heavens declare his righteousness: and all the people ^ee his glory.
6 The heavens declare him to be a faithful Creator, one that in mighty
long-suffering and patience toward the sons of men, keeps his promise made to
Noah after the flood, causing the lights and influences of heaven to keep their
natural courses, and afford their benefits even to the heathenish idolotrous
nations, notwithstanding their sins, who are eyewitnesses of his manifold
glorious dispensations every where, in all the parts and places of the world.

Confounded be all they that serve graven images, that boast themselves of
idols: worship him all ye gods.
7 Who see not their sin and folly in taking the benefit of Gods creatures, such
glorious ones as shine from heaven, and yet fall down to the stock of a tree,
and worship it for God; a strange stupiditie. O that therefore the time were
come, which certainly shall come, and is not long to, of that gospel light
which shall shine like the sun upon the face of all the earth, to the
conversion or confusion of all idolatrous nations, who now in this time of
ignorance God bears with, but when light is come into the world, if then men
love darkness more than light, they shall be, and so let them be, destroyed,
all that are so wilfully blind and brutish, as still to worship and confide in
idols, and set them in opposition to the only true God made manifest in
Christ. All ye supposed gods, cease to deceive men, now let truth take place;
ye living oracles, feigned deities, disclaim the superstition and adoration
wherewith the foolish people worship you, tell them you are no Gods, that God
in Christ is only to be worshipped, do you exalt him and abase your selves,
that his Kingdom may come amongst the deluded heathen.

8 What joy will it be to the faithful Israel of God, Sion heard, and was
glad, and the daughters of Judah rejoiced; because of thy judgments, O Lord.
at that day when Christ shall come, and shall shine out of Sion as the Sun out
of the East, his Kingdom taking rise from thence to the fall of Idols and
Idolatry every where, the happy predictions of the near approaches, and the
early dawnings of it being heard and seen shall be unspeakable joy to them,
because the truth of all those ancient long looked for promises and prophesies,
are then immediately to be fulfilled in the universal Sovereignty and Empire
of Jesus Christ, who comes to judge the world and rule his Church.

9 For however the world is grossly mistaken by fancying other divinities
besides thee, For thou, Lord, art high above all the earth: thou art exalted
far above all Gods.
as if the Government were not thine, and thou were not God alone; yet thou will now set their judgments right, and let them know, that none can pretend
to Godhead but thy self, as heaven is thy throne, so the earth is thy
footstool, and shall be subdued unto Jesus Christ, for that in him thou shall
be magnified beyond all that are called Gods, who shall then appear to be what
indeed they are, Lying vanities, and so shall be accounted of.

10 Great shall be the numbers of Professors, Ye that love the Lord hate evil,
he preserves the souls of his Saints, he delivers them out of the hand of
the wicked.
and pretenders to Christianity, infinite will give their names to Christ, and
be ambitious to have his name named upon them in those days, but there is more
belongs to it than so. He that is indeed the Lord Christ's, a loyal subject of
his Kingdom, and member of his Church, must sincerely love him, and that must
appear by an upright walking with him, and believing on him, he must fear to
offend him, and therefore hate sin because it does so; and so doing be fearless
as touching his salvation and preservation, faithfully relying upon the truth
and providence of God for both, maugre both his ghostly and temporal enemies;
which God may suffer to hazard his Church and people for the trial of their
faith and exercise of their graces, but never to ruin them.

Light is sown for the righteous, and gladness for the upright in heart.
11 For when ever God seems to plow and harrow his Church by persecutions and
troubles, that is, his and her seeds-time, then is he but husbanding his field,
weeding and clodding it, all that time of darkness and infelicity is but the
seed-season and preparatory, to the breaking out of greater favor and grace
upon her, which he preserves in store; she shall not lose but gain by it, when
the spring and harvest comes, her joy shall be redoubled when the eclipse is
over. Thus shall it be not with all professors, but with the incorrupt and
pure in heart, who are the Lords as well within as without, in affections as
actions, whose ends and motives are principled from God and for God, by faith
in him and love to him.

Rejoice in the Lord, ye righteous: and give thanks at the remembrance of his
holines^.
12 Let such righteous ones, though they meet with never so many rubs in the
way, be so far from being dismayed at them, as to go on with full sails of
assurance and joy in God, making no stop, but overtopping all fear by faith,
still casting their eye upon Gods never-failing faithfulness, and being as
thankful for a happy issue and deliverance out of their afflictions, as if
they had it, because of the engagement of Gods holiness which cannot deceive
them.

The xcviii. PSALM.
This Psalm is as if it had been made by John Baptist himself, pointing out
Christ and his Kingdom already come through the propinquity and certainty of
it, showing sorth the prais-worthy deliverance and universal benefit that to
Jew and Gentile shall accrue thereby, yea, to the very irrational and
unsensible creatures, whereupon be excites all, rational and irrational, to
praise the Lord proportionably.

A Psalm to be sung. Psalm xcviii. A Psalm.


1 O what wonderful occasions from time to time has God given his people
Israel, O sing unto the Lord a new song, for he has done mavelous things;
his right hand and his holy arm has gotten himself the victory.
of frequent and fresh praises by deliverance upon deliverance, and all of them
so strange and miraculous, that we could not have the face to ascribe them to
any but to him, to whom we have endited and sung many a new Psalm for new
mercies, all which temporal salvations, and our thanksgivings for them were
but prefigurations of that one only salvation of his Church by Christ God
incarnate, whose powerful triumphant death and holy life, active and passive
obedience, has gotten so glorious a victory to his everlasting praise, over
all the spiritual enemies of his elect and faithful people; which as it is
the deliverance whereof all others were but adumbrations, so ought it to have
the praise above them all jointly or severally. A Quire of Angels are but fit
to celebrate this great and Gospel salvation, the good news whereof ought much
more to set the spiritual Priests and people of God on work to praise him for
it, that are saved by it.

The Lord has made known his salvation: his righteousness has he openly
showed in the sight of the heathen.
2 The heathen people have admired our salvations, and wondrous deliverances
many a time, which the Lord has wrought for us in their sight and hearing; But
they shall have much more cause to admire their own, when God shall proclaim
the year of Jubilee to the Gentiles, and bring them by the redemption of the
Messiah (which is at hand) out of the power of Hell, sin, death, and darkness;
setting wide open to them the door of life that were shut out, and Preaching
salvation of free grace to all the world according to his promise.

He has remembered his mercy and his truth toward the house of Israel: all the
ends of the earth have seen the salvation of our God.
3 The promised Messiah which was to come of the seed of Israel our Father, and
in whom is to be accomplished all those covenanted engagements, and Gospel
promises made with Abraham of grace and mercy, pardon and atonement, God in
faithfulness and fullness of time has sent him (in whom all the nations of the
earth are to be blessed) for the benefit both of Jews and Gentiles; whose
all-sufficient merit, and common salvation, shall in the fame and promulgation
of it, extend it self by a gracious and free tender to all people, in all
places of the world without exception; our God is their God, in and through
Christ, and his salvation both ours and theirs, they being through grace
adopted and ingrafted into one stock with us, the faithful seed of faithful
Abraham, every where sharers in the blessing.

Make a joyful noise unto the Lord, all the earth: make a loud noise, and
rejoice, and sing praise.
4, 5, 6 We a corner of the world, a few in comparison of the whole, O how were
we wont to resound, and echo out the Honor and praises of the Lord in that
only Temple, Sing unto the Lord with the harp: with the harp, and the voice of
a Psalm.
with all manner of musical Instruments and Voices, for our temporal and
comparatively petty deliverances from earthly enemies, With trumpets and sound
of corner* make a joyful noise before the Lord, the King.
and humane captivities and imbondagements. O with what ineffable rejoycings in
the superlativest manner we could devise, did we magnify the Lord, and set the
Crown of all glory upon his head. How much more now are his praises to exceed,
when as all the earth is his Church, Christ himself the Savior, and the terms
to and from which we are saved are heaven and hell; the subject of his
salvation, our precious souls as well as mortal bodies both redeemed, not
only into a capacity but certainty of spiritual and eternal life, and freed
from death of both sorts. What praises are enough for this? how can the
redeemed of the Lord, each whereof is a Temple, and each Temple a Quire,
sufficiently extol the Lord the King Christ Jesus, dead and risen, yea,
ascended into glory. Go not less in the praises of such a Savior for his
salvation in the universal Catholic Church, than we did for ours, in our
particular national Sinagogue, But let your faith praise him in full
assurance, your joy in heart-ravishment, your love by being such as many waters
cannot quench, your hope anchored within the vail. Let all these graces by a
joint harmony, like the voices and instruments of the Temple be sublimated to
their highest sphere of activity, in the celebration of joyful praises of his
coming from heaven to earth to redeem his Church. Yea, all that is within you
praise his holy name for so great salvation, wrought not only by the power (as
all the rest were) but also by the person of God himself, whom you ought
therefore with studied thankfulness and elaborate expressions of joy and
honor, entertain and usher into the world, worthy his greatness, and best
expressing your high esteem of such unvaluable grace.

Let the sea roar, and the fullness thereof: the world, and they that dwell
therein.
7, 8, 9 These three last verses being the same in sense and almost in letter
with the 11, 12, 13 (being also the three last) verses of the 96 Psalm, Let the
floods clap their hands: let the hills be joyful together.
see the Paraphrase upon them for the explanation of these. Saving that those
words in the eighth verse of this Psalm let the hills be joyful together,
Before the Lord, for he comes to judge the earth, with righteousness, shall he
judge the world, and the people with equity.
signify, that as all people are admitted into the same privilege with the
Jews by Christ, so all places have the same fellowship in propriety and title
to God and his worship, as has the hill of Sion once his peculiar. John 4.21.

The xcix. PSALM.
The Psalmist probably upon some deliverance magnifies the Lord in relation to
his people the Jews, and their happy condition above all people, exciting them
to praise God answerably to his mercies and righteousness, even that God, which
has ever been their God, and done great things for them by his servants of
old. Psalm xcix.


THe Lord reigns, let the people tremble: he sits between the cherubims,
let the earth be moved.
1 THe Amighty God whose throne is in the heavens, is pleased in behalf of his
Church and chosen people to make it appear, that he also has dominion upon
earth, by their powerful preservation and their enemies destruction, therefore
let the heathen people our neighbor nations that so malign us, take it into
serious consideration, and tremble to think of provoking him by injuring his
Church; Let them rather, and all the rest of the Gentiles, with a reverentiall
fear submit themselves to his regiment, and be gathered into the number of his
people, worshipping him not after their own imaginations, but in the manner and
place that he has appointed, the Temple, where only he has fixed his
presence upon the mercy-seat between the Cherubims, which condescension of the
great God of heaven, full of incomprehensible majesty and holiness, to reside
on earth, ought to make even the whole creation sensible of it, by way of
Allegiance and subjection to him, and honor of the place where, and the people
amongst whom, he is pleased to erect his throne.

2 Wonderful great has the power of God appeared in the preservation of his
people, The Lord is great in Sion, and he is high above all people.
and the defense of his holy Temple, in the behalf whereof he has mightily
approved his wisdom and power infinitely to exceed all humane policy, and
strength of the great Sages, and confederate forces of the world, which sundry
times he has dissipated and strangely defeated.

3 O therefore, Let them praise thy great and terrible name, for it is holy.
let thy people, who have been so extraordinarily blessed by thee, return
answerable thanks unto thee, and praise thee for those righteous and terrible
judgments executed upon their enemies, wherein thou have manifested such
Almighty power and gracious providence, and have thereby approved thy self a
holy God, faithful of thy word and promise.

4 And as well righteous, The Kings strength also loves judgment, thou do
establish equity, thou executest judgment and righteousness in Jacob.
as holy, not exercising a Tyrannical absolute Arbitrary power over the
creature, yea, though thou can, yet thou will not, but affectest to subject
thy proceedings to the rules of righteousnese, ordering thy power by thy
justice, and putting it forth by way of judgment, which thou both justly and
severely executest upon sinners and enemies to thee and thy people, unto whom
both by thy works and word, president and precept, thou hold forth and
recommendedst equity and righteousness for them to walk thereafter, yea, thou
art not partial to thine own people the seed of Jacob, no more than to the
heathen, but if they sin they smart for it, in righteousness thou punishest
them as well as others.

Exalt ye the Lord your God, and worship at his footstool for he is holy.
5 Magnify and praise, O ye his people this your God, the only Lord, come,
frequent his Temple the only place on earth, where he that sits in heaven is
pleased to be present, there bow down with adoration and reverence before him,
as at the footstool of the great and glorious Majesty of heaven, worshipping
him in spirit, with holiness of heart, abasing your selves, and exalting the
Lord who only is holy, and his worship holy, all other Gods throughout the
world being vain Idols, and their worship sin and superstition.

Moses and Aaron among his Priests, and Samuel among them that call upon his
name: they called upon the Lord, and he answered them.
6 That God that has made himself known to you, as by eminent Miracles, so by
eminent Messengers, such as the memory of them is famous and honorable amongst
you, how much more ought God to be so: Moses and Aaron those chosen worthies,
that in the beginning were prime Rulers and Peers of his Church, and Samuel an
honorable Prophet in the after-ages of it, what gracious answers did he
vouchsafe to their prayers. These holy men, powerful intercessours, Types of
the Messiah, the great Mediator of his Church, how ever and anon were they
heard when they prayed for the people, and what salvation was vouchsafed still
at their request?

He spoke unto them in the cloudy pillar: they kept his testimonies and the
ordinance that he gave them.
7 These Saints and servants of God had familiar communication with him, as
Moses and Aaron, all the way in the wilderness they had God present with them,
ordering and advising their course in that great charge that lay upon them,
whose command and covenant they faithfully delivered over to the people, and
observed themselves.

8 These holy men were beloved and honored by the holy Lord God, Thou
answeredst them, O Lord our God: thou wast a God that forgavest them, though
thou tookest vengeance of their inventions.
who for us his peoples sake put them into office, made them intercessours,
yea, effectual prevailing-ones (such as Christ shall be) many a time passing
by the sins of Israel for their sakes, whom thou did not, nor would not
have punished, but forgiven and forgotten too, had not iterated provocations
and backslidings from thee and thy commandments to Idolatry and will worship,
forced thee to take vengeance, and minded thee of the abuse of former
long-suffering, which then thou also reckonedst with them for, when once thine
anger did break forth.

9 See the fifth verse of this Psalm, Exalt the Lord our God, and worship at
his holy hill: for the Lord our God is holy.
only the word holy-hill here instead of footstool there means the same
thing: viz. The Temple built upon his holy hill mount Sion.

The c. PSALM.
The Psalmist excites the Church and people of God among the Gentiles as well
as Jews to praise the Lord and embrace his salvation so freely bestowed upon
them, who are so dear to him, whom therefore he would have turn proselites
apace, and lose no time, but glorify him both now and hereafter, for his grace
to his Church in all ages.

A Psalm penned to stir up the people to praise the Lord. A psalm of praise.


O give thanks and sing forth the praises of the Lord, MAke a joyful noise
unto the Lord, all ye lands.
and of his great and gracious salvation in Christ, all ye people of the earth,
not Jews only but Gentiles also, every where, where the glad tidings of it
come to entertain it joyfully, and praise him for it thankfully.

Serve the Lord with gladness: come before his presence with singing.
2 Cast off all old superstitious and vain worship of false gods, readily
embrace his truth, take the Lord for your God, and give your selves to him to
be his people, count it your happiness to be so, that you may have the honor
and privilege to be admitted to put up prayer, and to offer praises to him as
your God, that once were aliens and without God in the world; now Christ has
taken down the partition wall, and brought God and you together again, be much
with him in faithful and grateful praising of him.

Know ye that the Lord he is God, it is he that has made us, and not we our
selves; we are his people, and the sheep of his pasture.
3 Learn this lesson well, that the Lord is God, and that he only is so, you
that have been used to Idolize other gods, do so no more, own him, and honor
him for the only Jehovah that has being, and has it of himself; and that is
the sole Creator of all men, we made not our selves, and then nothing else but
he did, nay, it is he that has begotten us again, he has of and by his grace
made us new creatures, this we are sure is as much of him, and as little of our
selves as the former, those that are his people, may thank him they are so,
their souls had never been renewed nor saved by any thing they themselves could
have done or suffered, vocation, justification, and sanctification are the
gifts of God to his Elect: as are all the faithful of what nation soever, of
whom we Israelites now his peculiar are a type, and as he has done us in the
manifestation of grace, and administration of providence, such singular love
will he bear to his Church for ever.

4 Seeing we are to be all one Church, Enter into his gates with thanksgiving,
and into his courts with praise: be thankful unto him and bless his name.
begin betime, join fellowship with us in the worship of this one only true
God, do as we do now, frequent his holy Temple, worship him in the Courts and
Ordinances thereof, whilst they are, till they cease, and then in holy
Christian assemblies, worship him in spirit and truth, be thankful to him and
magnify him, for the unspeakable goodness and power manifested in so great
salvation.

5 For, For the Lord is good; his mercy is everlasting: and his truth endures
to all generations.
though we be evil, yet the Lord is good, and though our sins provoke his
judgments against us, yet his long-suffering and mercy is like himself,
everlasting, we have found it so, and so shall his Church in all ages, his
faithfulness according to the covenant of grace, shall not fail on his part,
though it be too often broke on ours, it shall be perpetuated in Christ, and
for Christ to his Church.

The ci. PSALM.
David drawing nigh toward the possession of the Kingdom so long promised and
delaid, to forward the accomplishment, preingageth himself to God, that he will
praise him for it, when he has it, and serve him faithfully in it, both as a
King and a pater-familias, in walking uprightly and avoiding sin carefully,
neither countenancing it in himself nor othors, whether in City or Country,
Church or Commonwealth, but on the contrary, the good and godly shall be they
he will prefer and employ. Psalm ci. A Psalm of David.


A Psalm made by David.

1 O Lord, I will sing of mercy and judgment unto thee, O Lord, will I sing.
when thou shall in favor to thy servant have seated me in the throne, I will
magnify thy free grace and merciful beneficence, in bringing me out of such
trouble and hazard unto such an honor and dignity, as also thy righteousness
and justice, when thou shall have executed those judgments upon mine enemies,
which thou have threatened.

I will behave my self wisely in a perfect way, O when will thou come unto me?
2 When thou have advanced me to it, I hope I shall walk worthy of it, my full
purpose is with godly wisdom to order all mine affairs, and not be as most
Kings are, wise to their own and their Kingdoms destruction, by exercising
their policy to advance their tyranny, and governing by no rule of reason or
justice, but by the arbitrary dictates of their own inordinate appetites, I
purpose to be wise with other manner of wisdom, and to tread in quite other
steps, in obedience to thy Laws and dispensation of Justice and good government
to my people, when they are mine. Lord, when shall that day be, that thou will
come in the full accomplishment of thy promises to me; I hope I shall not give
thee cause to repent thee whenever it is, for my purpose is to be both a good
King over my people, and a careful head over my Court and family, to breed my
successors, and rule my servants and officers as well as my subjects in the
fear of God, giving good example in my place to all under me both of innocence
and sincerity.

I will set no wicked thing before mine eyes: I hate the work of them that turn
aside.
3 I will watch against the temptations incident to that estate and condition
whereof it is full, and will therefore purposely avoid occasions of evil,
whereby I know beforehand I shall miscarry: if not carefully shunned, specially
then when my power is almost equal with my will, therefore in a holy fear of
sinning I will turn my back upon allurements; refuse their offers, and walk in
a steady resolved course of holiness and righteousness, without coveting an
evil covetousness, abusing my power to gratify unlawful desires, for I hate
warping and backsliding, such defection is extreme distasteful to me, by Gods
help such corrupt thoughts shall never lodge in my breast, nor such wickedness
hang at my heels to hinder my progress in piety and good government, though I
know beforehand the baits that will lie in my way, but I will not stoop to
take them up.

4 I hope then to be rid of this heart, A froward heart shall depart from me: I
will not know a wicked person.
which now by reason of my bitter afflictions is sore put to it, and often
enclines to discontent and untuneableness, but I hope then to be free from the
temptation, and consequently from the distemper, and to be never the prouder
for mine honor, which I come so hardly by, and which whenever I have it, it
must be of thy free gift, but of meek demeanor both toward thee above me, and
my fellow-brethren though subjects, under me. And as I will not allow of
wickedness in my self, so nor in any other, no wicked person, nor no person in
the practice of any wickedness, shall have my countenance to credit him.

5 I know how incident Princes are to be misled by whisperers, Who so privily
slandereth his neighbor, him will I cut off; him that has an high look, and a
proud heart will not I suffer.
and what false reports they hear by giving ear to flatterers and back-biters,
to the unjust prejudice of the innocent, but I will take a course with such
men, I will watch mine ears as well as mine eyes, and will severely punish
those that I catch doing so, nor shall any proud vainglorious fool draw me
from an humble walking with God, such shall see that I know humility and
Sovereignty are not incompatible but consistent, I will neither pride it over
my brethren, my self, nor suffer any else because of his place or office about
me to do so.

6 My countenance shall be to the good and not to the bad, Mine eyes shall be
upon the faithful of the land, that they may dwell with me: he that walks in
a perfect way, he shall serve me.
and my care shall be to find out such as are faithful and sincere-hearted
toward God, to entertain and employ such who I know will also be faithful and
incorrupt in their places, the man that is a practiser of piety and honesty,
and in the course of his life walks steadily in those ways, is he that I will
be solicitous to enquire out, and prefer both in domestic and republic
offices.

He that works deceit shall not dwell within my house; he that tells lies
shall not tarry in my sight.
7 If I may know it there shall no crafty dissembler, nor undermining oppressor
harbor under my roof, nor be imploid as any Minister of mine, he that
misinforms me thinking thereby to delude me, advantage himself, or disadvantage
another, such an one shall pack out of my doors, he shall have no favor but
all the discountenance I can give him.

I will early destroy all the wi^ked of the land: that I may cut off all wicked
doers from the city of the Lord.
8 It shall be my first and chiefest work, to weed out the notorious deboisheers
generally in the Kingdom, that have inured themselves so to sin in Saul's
licentious reign, as their is no hope of their amendment: and as it shall be my
first work, so it shall be my constant course impartially to punish evil doers
all the land over, and specially in Jerusalem the place of Gods peculiar abode
and worship, that I may as near as I can bring all my people every where to be
Gods people, holy worshippers of him by working a thorough reformation among
them; most especially will I expunge them out of the sanctuary from officiating
there, where such men are a scandal, and an eyesore to God and all good men.

The cii. PSALM.
The Author of this Psalm in the name and person of the Church then in
miserable captivity in Babylon, but near the end of it, prays for speedy
relief in their lamentable oppression, and from under Gods own indignation, and
how desperate soever their condition seems, yet he comforts himself, and in
himself the Church with Gods never failing-nature and truth, which shall give
existence to his Church, and consequently restoration, according to the
prefixed time then at hand, which will be joy to his people and honor to God,
both in present and after-ages amongst Jews and Gentiles, for it shall be an
occasion to convert some, and a figure of the great restitution that shall be
made by the coming of the M^ssiah. He magnifies Gods eternal being, and
assures the Church therefore an everlasting existence however frail in her
self. Psalm cii. A Prayer of the afflicted when he is overwhelmed, and pour^th
out his complaints before the Lord.


A Prayer made for the use and direction of the godly, when he or they are so
grievously afflicted, as they seem to be overwhelmed therewith, and his or
their burden so unsupportable, that it forces him to pour out his soul in sad
complaints before the Lord, in the dolor and anguish of his heart.

1 O Lord, HEar my prayer, O Lord and let my cry come unto thee.
hear the prayer of thy servant and servants, even of thy whole Church whom I
personate complaining to thee in great misery and bondage, to the enforcing of
them to vehement importunities, which, Lord, shut not thine ears against, but
give them audience and gracious admittance into both thine ears and heart.

2 Though our sins have caused thy frowns and disfavour, Hide not thy ^ace from
me in the day that I am in trouble, incline thine ear unto me: in the day when
I call, answer me speedily.
yet let our miseries move thy mercies, and be entreated after so long an
estrangement of so many years bondage, at last to resume thy grace, and to
shine forth in favor upon us, and to take our condition into consideration,
yea, Lord, now thou have put it into our hearts to pray hopefully, be entreated
to answer us speedily, by delivering and restoring us effectually, let it not
be long to.

3 Our whole life in this condition we are in, For my days are consumed like
smoke: and my bones are burnt as an hearth.
is spun out to an unprofitable length, our time is unusefully spent, wasted,
and consumed, without honor to thee or good to our selves; This long lingering
oppression the sorrow we sustain under it, because of the sense of thy heavy
displeasure and thy Churches desolation, has dried up our radical moisture,
and quite changed the constitution of our natures, that our bones if visible
are dried and discolored as an hearth that has long lain under a hot
scortching fire, as we have under the fire of affliction.

My heart is smitt^^, and withered like grass: so that I forget to eat my bread.
4 Thou have cut up all my earthly comforts as it were by the roots, I can think
of nothing of that nature comfortably, my heart and they are parted by thy
judgments, as the grass is from the earth by the hand of the mower, and as it
withers for want of union and communication of sap and moisture, so is my heart
shrunk and exhausted within me, by the utter absence of thy grace and favor,
finding no content the whilst in any thing, though never so necessary, insomuch
as nature forgets to sustain it self, feeds upon sorrow instead of bread,
having almost lost all appetite and digestion through anguish of heart.

By reason of the voice of my groaning, my bones cleave to my skin.
5 By reason of the expense of spirits, through my continual mourning day and
night, uttering my grief in groans and sighs for want of words, my nature is
totally impaired, and my flesh so wasted that my skin and bones are met, I am
become a very skelliton.

I am like a Pelican of the wilderness: I am like an Owl of the desert.
6 I am in a most solitary mournful condition, no representation in nature can
sufficiently depaint it, an exile, a bondslave. Chaldea and Assyria yield us as
much comfort, as if we were in a wilderness, our cohabitation with the
Babylonians is worse than the greatest solitariness upon earth, the mournful
Pelican and hated Owl, that therefore converse alone in desert places without
pity or society, so much as of one another, do best resemble us, for so are
we a banished and a scattered people in a far country, in an uncomfortable
unsociable state.

7 As my sorrow takes away my stomach, I watch, and an^ as a sparrow alone upon
the house top.
so also my sleep, and keeps me waking, so that I scarce take any rest, nor in
this disconsolation have I any to comfort me, but each of us are separated from
other, as a sparrow from his mate, lost to our country, and lost to one
another.

8 All the mischief our enemies can heap upon us by word or deed we are sure
of, Mine enemies reproach me all the day: and they that are mad against me, are
sworn against me.
they shamefully reproach us, and in us blaspheme thee, they are implacable and
outrageous against us, have sworn the destruction of us all, even of thy whole
Church sooner or later.

9 And they use us accordingly more like dogs than men, For I have eaten ashes
like bread, and mingled my drink with weeping.
exposing us to all manner of hardship through the extremity of our pressures,
and grief for them, forcing us to take no content in any thing, no not in our
ordinary repasts, our provisions being so bad and unsavorie, and our sorrows
making it worse than it is, feeding more upon sackcloth and ashes, weeping and
mourning, than either bread or drink.

10 And this, Because of thine indignation and thy wrath, for thou have lifted
me up and cast me down.
not so much for my sufferings though they be great, but for thy wrath and
indignation appearing in them and threatened by them, which is the more apparent
and the grievouser in this; that thou wast once so gracious and beneficial, the
memory whereof now aggravates our misery exceedingly, that thou should be
so changed, and enraged against a people so nearly related and dearly beloved
for whereas no nation flourished like us, we are now no more a people, but a
scattered vassalaged company of men and women, as if thou had raised us of
purpose to make our fall the greater, and made us therefore happy, that we
might become the more miserable, like a man that to break a thing in pieces,
lifts it on high with the greater violence to dash it against the ground.

My days are like a shadow that declineth: and I am withered like grass.
11 Thy poor Church, O Lord, whom I personate to thee, it is even at
sunsetting, it is but a shadow of a Church and people, no substance or Being
left, and that shadow too is extinguishing, it is expiring like the shadows
that toward sunsetting, now are, and anon are not, so soon as the sun is gone
down. Like the grass that is mown, withered with the sun and sapless, such are
thy people miserably parched with grief and sorrow, and utterly comfortless.

But thou, O Lord, shall endure for ever, and thy remembrance unto all
generations.
12 Thus it is with thy Church she is at last gasp, she has as it were received
the sentence of death in her self; But thou that art her God, her support and
strength can never die, nor she, as considered in thee, interessed in thy
faithfulness; though in outward appearance she be perishing, yet thy truth past
in promise to her, which is thy self, cannot fail, thou will certainly remember
to make it good to the uttermost period, even to the Worlds end shall it
endure, and therefore so shall thy Church, as low as it is brought at present.

Thou shall arise and have mercy upon Sion: for the time to favor her, yea,
the set time is come.
13 Therefore, Lord, though we seem to be dying, our faith begins to sprout, we
are in hope that these our greatest extremities are thine immediate
opportunities, and that as thou have lifted us up and cast us down, so now thou
casts us down to lift us up. Yea, we are very confident our sorrows are
shorter-lived than we, that we shall outlive them for all this, yea, we shall
see a speedy end of them, and that thou art even now about to show thy self for
us, and to restore thy Church, and in mercy pardon her sins which thou have
punished all this while, and suddenly ease her of her miseries which she has
so long undergone, and make Sion that was the glory of the whole earth
flourish again, for as thou art mindful of thy promise, so are we, that is
that livens our faith, and clears our heart, even the thought of the expiration
of the seventy years which is now drawing on, the time appointed, prophesied,
and promised by thee to end our captivity and restore us to mercy; which time
is now accomplished and revives our hopes.

14 For such is the love thy servants bear to thee, For thy servants take
pleasure in her stones, and favor the dust thereof.
thy worship, and the place appointed for it where thou have promised thy
presence, that it is not the devastations which before hand they know they
shall find there, that does any whit discourage them, no, they are joyed to
think that ever they shall set footing there, and see that sacred rubbish that
remains of that glorious fabric, what travel or pains so ever they undergo,
which they purpose to re-edifie.

15 When thou have thus wonderfully brought about our restoration after so
long captivity, So the heathen shall fear the name of the Lord: and all the
Kings of the earth thy glory.
and the re-edification of that thy ruinated Temple, what an amazement shall it
put the heathen into, how shall they admire thine omnipotency that thus raised
the dead, and saved us as a brand out of the fire. Yea, the Princes and
potentates of the whole earth, hearing shall be stricken with astonishment at
so glorious and Almighty a work.

When the Lord shall build Sion, he shall appear in his glory.
16 When the time comes which is now at hand, that both thy spiritual and local
Sion, O Lord, shall be restored and repaired by thee, thy worship and
worshippers in statu quo, O how glorious will thou then appear in the eyes of
Jews and Gentiles?

He shall regard the prayer of the destitute, and not despise their prayer.
17 And this be confident of, that as God at this time has extraordinarily
stirred up his people to hope, and pray to be delivered out of his destitute
condition, and made them more than ordinarily sensible of the loss of their
country and happy privileges they there enjoyed, and ardently desire to
return thither again, so will he effect it, and not let them lose their labor
and pray in vain.

This shall be written for the generation to come; and the people which shall
be created, shall praise the Lord.
18 This deliverance like that out of Egypt, shall be upon everlasting record
and renown for all posterity, and after-ages to admire, and be strengthened
thereby in the faith of Gods all-sufficiencie, truth, and grace. And those of
us that shall be gathered together again into the land of Judah in a formed
body, and an orderly way of worshipping the Lord, from out this confusion and
Chaos, where we are neither a people nor a Church, but a scattered mixture of
vagrant folk, O how shall we jointly praise the Lord, and his power that has
thus raised us from the grave, and as it were created us again out of the very
dust, nay, the nothing, whereinto we are resolved, as Christ shall his Church.

For he has looked down from the height of his sanctuary: from heaven did the
Lord behold the earth.
19 For from heaven which his sanctuary was wont to represent, has the Lord
heard and seen our moans and miseries, though he be there in unaccessable
glory and majesty, yet from that height has he vouchsafed to pity us here
below that are no better then the earth we tread on.

20 And to hear the groans we sent up to him in that sorrowful condition, To
hear the groaning of the prisoner, to loose those that are appointed to death.
and save the lives and restore the liberties of his people, a poor remainder
of them who were destined to death and destruction, as well as the rest that they
killed in hot blood, having sworn to root us all out, every mothers son, and
not leave us a name upon earth.

21 This shall the Lord do, To declare the name of the Lord in Sion: and his
praise in Jerusalem.
to the end his people so heard and so saved, may magnify the glorious power
and rich grace of God in Sion as aforetime, and praise him in Jerusalem his
royal City and place of special residence.

22 Which they shall do when they are embodied there again, When the people are
gathered together, and the Kingdoms to serve the Lord.
and reduced from that dissipation and confusion they now lie under, which
shall be a lively adumbration of the calling of the Gentiles, and the gathering
of Church and Kingdom from out the Kingdoms of the earth, every where to
believe in and and worship him, many whereof shall be won and induced to give
in their names unto him by that great deliverance, like as when that great
Jubilee and jail-delivery by Christ himself shall be, which is not far behind.

23 Long have we looked for his coming, He weakened my strength in the way; he
shortened my days.
and much has his people suffered in the profession of his truth, and for it,
in the interim, the whilst they have lived in expectation of that happiness,
even to the loss of many, yea, almost of all his whole Church here in Babylon,
(as must be the lot of the Church inhabitant in this world to suffer even death
it self in way to the end, the salvation of their souls.)

24 But I put my self before the Lord in the name of his faithful people, I
said, O my God, take me not away in the midst of my day:
and poor Church still remaining,

(...) The ciii. PSALM.
Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits.
2 O thou soul of mine that art of such transcendent excellency to all
sublunarie created beings, and so adapted for to praise the Lord above them
all, do not thou bury thy talent in a napkin, nor steward it unseeming thy
trust, to whom he has committed such praise-worthie endowments, and on whom he
has bestowed such thank-worthie benefits natural and divine, which thou art
bound, no, never to forget, neither all nor any of them, but to sum them up in
thank-ful praises to his name.

Who forgiveth all thine iniquities, who heals all thy diseases.
3 Who has called thee to be faithful, and of his only good grace has freely
in the merits of his son forgiven thee all thy sins, justified thee from their
guilt, and pardoned their punishment, so that from an heir of hell thou art
translated to be an heir of heaven; And has also enabled thee by the spirit of
regeneration, to walk worthy so rich grace in mortifying thy lusts, and
raising thee to newness of life and conversation by his sanctifying quickening
graces bestowed upon thee.

Who redeemeth thy life from destruction: who crowns thee with loving
kindness and tender mercies.
4 Who to save thy life lost his own, gave it a price for thee, the virtue
whereof has influence every day and hour upon thee, (O my soul,) for every
trespass thou committest, dying virtually as often as thou sinnest, whereby thou
art kept from perishing everlastingly, as else thou had done, and would do
continually, and though the body wherein thou do officiate do die a
temporal death, and lie down in the grave as all men must, yet at that instant
shall thou be translated to live with him in Heaven, that died for thee on
earth, instead of being sent to Hell according to thy demerits; and at the
resurrection shall have a happy reunion with a glorified incorruptible body,
having honored and enriched thee here with the first fruits of glory,
pardoning, protecting, regenerating, justifying graces more than I can
enumerate, because of his love and mercy to thee, and for no cause else.

5 Who feasts thee with Spiritual and Heavenly dainties suting thy taste and
appetite, Who satisfies thy mouth with good things: so that thy youth is
renewed as the Eagles.
answers all thy prayers touching requisite graces and comforts, so that
whenever thy stock of either seems to be spent, thy graces enfeebled and thy
comforts exhausted, then at thy request comes God with sweet and seasonable
supplies, and makes them, and so thee that wast a dying, to live again,
vigorous and active like an eagle, that by casting her beak and feathers and
new-ones coming in their stead, resumes her former agilitie and strength till
then disabled; so is thy regenerate part, and sanctified habits by fresh
auxiliaries, and immediate breathings revived, when at a loss.

6 And not only in spiritual soul-desertions, The Lord executes righteousness
and judgment for all that are oppressed.
but also in external bodily afflictions does the Lord appear seasonably, for
when I was oppressed and opened my case to God, pleading mine innocence and
mine enemies injury, how did he judge my cause against them and upon them? and
so will he do for all his faithful upright innocent people in their wrongful
pressures, in a season most comfortable and profitable he will deliver them,
and judge their oppressors.

7 Witness his wonderful works of old in the deliverance of Israel out of
Egypt, He made known his ways unto Moses, his acts unto the children of Israel.
he did foretell to Moses what powerful and terrible judgments he would bring
upon the Egyptians, and how wonderfully in truth and righteousness he would
enfranchise his people, and what he said he did, all he told to Moses by
promise, he made it good by experience, in the sight of all the twelve tribes
Isreal's posterity, he faild not in a tittle, nor shall his Covenant of grace
made with our redeemer Christ touching his redeemed.

The Lord is merciful and gracious, slow to anger and plenteous in mercy.
8 And as the Lord betwixt man and man is pitiful to the oppressed, especially
to his Church, and terrible to their enemies. So is he also betwixt himself and
them a very graciously disposed God, in respect of the sins, and deserved
punishments of his people, as Israel well experimented all along the
wilderness, exceeding ready to show mercy, and to pardon sin and punishment
when it is petitioned for, not easily provoked, nor apt to anger, as they
found, and extreme ready to grant forgiveness of one sin after another; if the
sinner pray it uprightly God will grant it willingly, even the pardon of all
our sins, though both many and great, as theirs were.

He will not always chide: neither will he keep his anger for ever.
9 And when he does visit our sins upon us, for he will not always bear with
us, so nor then will he be always wroth against us, punish us he may, destroy
us he never will, no nor yet be always angry at us or frown upon us, his face
shall clear up, and his favor shine forth after a while, faithful prayer will
scatter those clouds.

He has not dealt with us after our sins, nor rewarded us according to our
iniquities.
10 We of all the World have cause to acknowledge him such an one, he has not
done by us as we have deserved, our experiences from time to time have made
good all his gracious properties, of grace, long-suffering, and plenteous
mercy, having ever been a God exceedingly bearing with us, and forbearing of
us though a provoking ungreatful people toward him.

11 For the immensity of his mercy is superlative to any natural comparison,
For as the heaven is high above the earth: so great is his mercy toward them
that fear him.
no dimensions can proportion it, the height of heaven above the earth does not
resemble it to us, such, and beyond it is his mercy in preterition and pardon
to his people that unfeinedly repent them of their sins, and with full purpose
of heart Covenant to fear and serve him.

12 Consider the heavens, either for height or wideness, As far as the East is
from the West, so far has he removes our transgressions from us.
and which you think is the greater for the help of your faith, conclude that
so great and greater is the mercy of God toward such as turn to him, and walk
with him sincerely. The East and West shall as soon come together as the sins
of such shall be laid to their charge how grievous so ever they have been, for
at a greater distance and disproportion has God sundred a penitent sinner, and
his sins even as far as infinite is from finite, Christ himself who is God
having taken them off of him, upon himself.

13 You that are earthly parents, Like as a father pitieth his children: so the
Lord pitieth them that fear him.
know what are the bowels of a father to a child, when with tears and prayers
it begs pardon for its offenses, such (for such comparisons we are fain to use
for the help of our natural apprehensions) and far greater are the earnings of
God, and his compassions toward those that in the faith of his mercy repent
of their transgressions, beg pardon of their punishments, and promise and
perform upright obedience.

14 For the Lord knows of what brickle matter we are made, For he knows our
frame, he remembers that we are dust.
he remembers how transitory our natures are, so that should he deal with us
after our sins, and would punish us according to our provocations, he would
have no people left on earth to serve him, or to carry on the existence, and
being of a Church, so that our frailty moved him to mercy, and not to do as
sin would have him, cut our short lives shorter.

As for man his days are as grass, as a flower of the field, so he flourishes.
15 Man being no better than grass, both sprung out of the earth, has a little
time of Being allotted him here, wherein he takes some contentment during part
of that little in his youthful season; as a flower that has its month to
spring, flourish, and decay in, so at best is man's condition by course of
nature, but besides that naturally he is so frail and momentany, he is subject
to be cut off by infinite accidents that his sins expose him to if God did not
guard him, as a field-flower that lies open to men and beasts, wind and
weather.

For the wind passes over it, and it is gone; and the place thereof shall know
it no more.
16 Subject to be despoiled of its beauty, and laid along by every blast that
blows, and as gay as it is, now appears, straightway it disappears, and is not,
and such is man.

But the mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting upon them that
fear him: and his righteousness unto childrens children.
17 But for all this that man is of himself thus subjected by sin to return to
dust and nothingness every moment, yet is the mercy of God long-lived, his
Church and faithful people, who shall never fail upon the face of the earth,
shall find that it shall never fail them, but they and theirs throughout all
generations that believe in him and filially fear him, shall have the benefit
of it, grace and protection.

To such as keep his Covenant: and to those that remember his commandments to
do them.
18 Even all in all ages that enter Covenant with God, and are careful and
conscionable in the keeping of it, by steadfast believing in him and exact
walking with him, in universal obedience to all his commandments, seasonably
and respectively calling to mind his will and their duty as occasion requires,
to do accordingly in all occurrences.

19 The glory of the Lord is most perspicuous in heaven where his throne of
dominion and rule is principally placed, The Lord has prepared his throne in
the heavens: and his Kingdom rules over all.
and he in his excellencies far more conspicuous there than the creature here,
does or can represent or demonstrate him, (being seen of us thereby as but
through a glass darkly) from whence yet he extends his Sovereigntie hither,
ordering and governing as well all things here as there, especially his Church,
and that for ever.

20 As the Lord appears most glorious in heaven, Bless the Lord, ye his angels
that excel in strength, that do his commandments, hearkening unto the voice of
his word.
so you his glorified angels that excel all other creatures in all manner of
excellencies, whose strength though derivative and created, yet exceeds all
humane power, yea, all humane imagination, who are as fellow creatures so
fellow servants with us, yielding obedience to his commandments as well as we,
and do his will revealed and commanded from his mouth, as we from his word, do
you I say with us and for us, bless the Lord, and praise him both in his
greatness and goodness.

21 You that are so many millions, Bless ye the Lord all ye his hosts, ye
ministers of his that do his pleasure.
waiting upon him and ministering at his pleasure what he commands, do you, even
that whole heavenly army of glorious and mighty angels, again and again bless
and praise him, that is as much above you in power and place as you are above
us.

22 And as his dominion is as well over the earth and all things there, Bless
the Lord all his works in all places of his dominion: bless the Lord, O my soul.
and in the firmament above the earth, as in heaven, so ought his praises to be
extended. Even every creature that he has made (for so far extends his
governance,) in all places, throughout all ages, ow him all the honor that in
their kinds, and after their created abilities they can do unto him. But
chiefly, O thou my soul, that art not only beholden to God for a created
being, but for redemption and salvation, which of free grace he has vouchsafed
thee, a mercy far exceeding all mere created bounty, do thou therefore above
all in heaven and earth, praise the Lord, and bless his holy name answerable to
thine engagements so far beyond theirs.

The civ. PSALM.
This Psalm as it is subsequent to the last, so it is coherent with it, made
doubtless by the same Author, the beginning and end of both being alike, and
the argument not unlike. The one treating of God as a gracious redeemer of his
Church and people, and the benefits that redownd thereby, the other as a
powerful Creator of all things, heavens, earth, seas and all things in them,
together with their orderly conservation and provident preservation. All which
things strikes the Psalmist into admiration, and puts him upon engagement to
constant meditation and praise, wishing none might live, Psalm civ.
that live not to the Lord in like sort.

BLess the Lord, O my soul, O Lord my God, thou art very great, thou art
clothed with honor and Majesty.
1 O Thou my soul, my best and principal part, praise thou the Lord, the Lord
Almighty which is the only true God whom I worship and serve, Thou, Lord, art
wonderfully great in power and dominion, the whole frame and order of nature in
the great work of creation show thee to be such, specially the heavens, (whose
situation is above as thou art,) which as in a mirror show forth thine
incomparable honor and Majesty in those glorious lights, which is the
visiblest representation of thee to our capacities, thy throne being there.

Who coverest thy self with light, as with a garment: who stretchest out the
heavens like a curtain.
2 Thou have spread the light over our heads throughout the aerie element, so
that it is filled therewith, and the Heavens where thou art, seem to be covered
thereby from our sight, who can only see on this side those supernal
luminaries. And as the light, so that vast expanse of heaven, thy Princely
pavilion is drawn between thine unaccessible Majesty and us, like the curtains
of a royal Tent.

3 Who, Who lays the beams of his chambers in the waters, who makes the
clouds his chariot, who walks upon the wings of the wind.
as he has laid the foundation of the earth, which is his footstool in the
depths of the sea, so has he laid the floor of his upper loft, the heavens
(where principally he resides as great men do above stairs) amongst the clouds
that spread like a sea far and wide over our heads, on which he seems to ride
as great men do in Chariots, directing the uncertain motions thereof hither and
thither, and so also disposes of the winds in their swift transition, and
sudden mutation, to go and do as pleases him.

4 Who therefore has made the glorious angels, Who makes his angels spirits,
his ministers a flaming ^ire.
those heavenly messengers of his, not of such natures as we sublunaries are,
but spirits, agil and active to come and go of his errands, and do his pleasure
here below instantly and effectually as far distant as it seems, making those
celestial ministers of his to execute his fiery indignation, either visibly
appearing as flames of fire as sometimes they have done, so the Israelites were
consumed in the wilderness, or invisibly destroying his enemies, but suddenly
and terribly like as fire devoures combustible matter.

5 Who also has by his transcendent supernatural wisdom so established the
earth upon its center, Who laid the foundations of the earth: that it should
not be removed for ever.
as a house upon a firm foundation, so that though it be pendent as a ball in
the air, and therefore seems nothing more moveable, yet indeed there is nothing
more immovable, all the winds and storms that overthrow other things that have
foundations, cannot stir this that has none, but from the first creation to
the uttermost dissolution of all things it shall continue firm.

Thou coveredst it with the deep as with a garment: the waters stood above the
mountains.
6 In the first creation thou did overflow all the earth, and encompassed it
with those waters that are now the sea, they then spread themselves over the
earth as a garment over a man's body so that no dry land appeared, the
mountains as well as the valleys were then under water.

At thy rebuke they fled: at the voice of thy thunder they hasted away.
7 Until thou wast pleased to command the contrary, and then when thou
preparedst that great Abyss to receive them that now contains them, and biddest
them contrary to their nature that would still be overflowing all, and
drowning the whole earth, to retire into it as into their mansion and place of
abode, they in reverence and obedience to thee, their Creator made have to
their confinement at thy appointment; Thy word of command pronounced with such
power and Majesty as if the heavens had thundered upon them, so awed them, that
it made them yield ready obedience, and give place to the surface of the earth
to appear above them, that ere while were so far above it.

They go up by the mountains: they go down by the valleys unto the place which
thou have founded for them.
8 But when as thy pleasure was otherwise made known, they in post have, break
through thick and thin, nothing could stay them, mountains could not dam them,
nor level and flat valleys hold them, from speeding their course to the place
thou had appointed for them, so effectual was thy command, that ascending and
descending, up-hill and down-hill was then alike easy to them, they could rest
no where till they were imbodied in the Abyss that thou createdst for them to
be their elemental place and station.

9 And as by the force and efficacy of thy command they were thus withdrawn
from overflowing the earth, Thou have set a bound that they may may not pass
over: that they turn not again to cover the earth.
into the depths prepared for them, and made to yield a ready obedience to it,
so by the same Almighty power, are they now kept in that station by no more
visibler bounds than the bare sands, that they cannot return to that universal
inundation, though by their mountainous waves and raging violence, they show
their propensitie and inclination, and that a supernatural power only
restrains them.

10 Which water he returns again amongst the hills and valleys, He sends the
springs into the valleys, which run among the hills.
not as it would by a deluge, but as he wills by an orderly and useful way of
springs and rivers, which though issuing from the salt sea, yet are so strained
through the veins of the earth, and thereby refined that they are made fresh,
and are refreshing to all creatures both in mountains and valleys, where they
spring up and run down.

11 To the satisfying of all sorts of beasts, They give drink to every beast of
the field: the wild asses quench their thirst.
where ever bred and fed by natures instinct, whether on hills or in dales,
those that are out of man's reach to provide for, and of themselves have no
forecast as other creatures have, yet does the Lord, out of his all-sufficient
storehouse, so dispose it, that they have no lack, but as he has ordained the
fields to give them meat even in the most desert places of the earth, where the
foot of man never trod, there also has he ordered nature to give them drink,
by springs and rivers rising and running here and there for the quenching of
their thirst, and maintaining the life that God has given them.

12 The fowls of the air resort thither also as well By them shall the fowls of
the heaven have their habitation, which sing among the branches.
as the beasts of the field, selecting by special instinct such places as are
well watered to be conversant in; building their nests, and chirping out their
notes in those trees that grow in and about them, being thereby maintained
fresh and green fittest for them.

He waters the hills from his chambers: the earth is satisfied with the fruit
of his works.
13, 14 And as thus he provides for one part of natures sustenance, the
quenching of thirst, so also for the satisfying of hunger, he as a faithful
and bountiful Creator and benefactour, He causes the grass to grow for the
cattle, and herb for the service of man: that he may bring forth food out of
the earth.
supplies the creature in both, and therefore waters the earth it self by
seasonable and plentiful showers, even the high hills and barren mountains have
the influences, and dew falls off the clouds from heaven upon them, to the
satisfying and quenching of their thirst too, so that thereby the earth is
every where made fruitful by the Lords thus husbanding of it, and caring for
it, and brings forth every creature in its kind, and according to the nature
thereof both grass and herbs for food for man and beast, as it was at first
appointed to do, which otherwise would be barren and fruitless.

And wine that makes glad the heart of man, and oil to make his face to shine:
and bread which strengthens man's heart.
15 Nor does the Lord cause the earth of it self only by his own husbandry to
bring forth mere necessaries to sustain nature, but also by his blessing upon
man's art and industry, makes it bring forth far better things than herbs,
which as they are of near affinity with grass, and appointed for the food of
man, to humble him into the apprehension of some kind of equality with the very
beasts, so to show his supremacy above them, he also has bountifully enriched
the earth for his sake with store of creatures of a higher kind, and of better
nutriment, and that not only to sustain, but delight nature in a lawful and
moderate sort, as wine to cheer the heart within, and strengthen the stomach;
oil and sweet ointments to fresh his countenance without, and refresh his
senses, and corn whereof bread is made, that staff of man's life, wherewith
above all it is supported.

16 What is there that has life, The trees of the Lord are full of sap: the
Cedars of Lebanon which he has planted.
that God does not provide for, or that can live without him of what kind
soever, whether they be creatures rational, as man, sensitive as beasts, or
vegetive, as herbs that grow upon the surface of the earth, or trees that lift
up their tops on high, they also wheresoever they are, take root by his
appointment, and grow up and increase to their height, breadth, and bigness by
the thriving moisture he affords them, watering the earth with showers which as
well gives sap sufficient for them, as for the meanest shrub or herb that
grows thereon. Those famous trees of Lebanon which exceed all others in the
world for height and growth, were such by his special blessing, being intended
and put to a special use, the building of the temple.

17 Them has he ordained to be a place of harbor and delight to the fowls of
the air, Where the birds make their nests: as for the stork, the fir-trees are
her house.
where they secretly make their nests out of harms way, each according to their
natural instinct, as the stork in the fir-trees, because the highest of all the
rest.

18 All things, The high hills are a refuge for the wild Goats: and the rocks
for the conies.
and all places have their use and property, and each creature its several
disposition, way, and means of life and preservation, as the high trees harbor
birds, so the high hills the wild goats, the unaccessible rocks they are not
uninhabited neither, the coneys climb them though other creatures cannot, and
so secure themselves, and there propagate their kind, by a natural instinct
given them of God, of self-preservation.

He appoints the moon for seasons: the sun knows his going down.
19 Nor are the earth and the things thereof only ordered by him, but the
heavens also and those glorious luminaries that so orderly succeed one another,
and measure out time into days, nights, months, years, yea, the several
seasons in each year, as summer, winter, spring, Autumn, all these are
regularly squared out of God, by the sun and moons vicissitudes, declensions*
altitudes, and augmentations.

Thou make darkness and it is night: wherein all the beasts of the forest do
creep forth.
20 And as thou have made the day and the light thereof, useful for some
creatures that converse more orderly and civilly than others, so again have
thou ordained the night and the darkness thereof, to be the time when beasts of
prey and rapine, take their turns, and come out of their dens and caves, by a
wise and gracious providence, awing their natures by the day light, that then
other creatures, as men and cattle, may with more security go about their
business and sustain their natures without hazard of their lives.

The young lions roar after their prey: and seek their meat from God.
21 The stoutest and ravenousest of all beasts, by a special hand of restraining
providence, even the very lions are afraid of the light, that they themselves
may not affright other creatures, and therefore do they also, yea the fiercest
of them, the young lions in the night-season only rouse themselves out of
their dens, and after their kind make known their want to their kind make known
their want to God by roaring for their prey, for as ravenous, and strong as
they are, they cannot be their own carvers, but depend upon God; what his
providence has appointed to fall in their way, without their knowledge or
expectation, that, and only that must serve their turns to satisfy hunger,
and sustain nature, who else would devour all at once.

22, 23 As the sands bounds the seas, The sun arises they gather themselves
together: and lay them down in their dens.
so it is as strange that the mere daylight should serve to enervate the fury
of such ravenous savage creatures, which yet it does, Man goes forth to his
work: and to his labor until the evening.
for no sooner the sun rises, but they, as if they were driven by herds, of
their own accord cease their ranging, and not one, but all the kind of them by
special instinct and providence, go tamely to their dens, and lay them down to
sleep then, when men and cattle take their turns to go forth to work and feed,
which till the sun go down again, that their time come, they do securely.

24 O Lord, O Lord, how manifold are thy works! in wisdom have thou made them
all: the earth is full of thy riches.
when I enter into the consideration of each particular work of creation, and
providence wherein thou appearest, how am I at my wits end to think how
numberless they are! a few may serve to strike us into admiration of them, and
all the rest, to see and consider the powerful wisdom that has given them
such beings, ways of subsistances without confusion, or destruction of
themselves, and one another, as soon would fall out amongst both the elements
and creatures, did not thou overpower them by thine hand, and overruled
them by thy wisdom, infinitely is the whole earth replenished every where, and
enriched with thy bounty and goodness, nourishing and bringing forth creatures
animate, and inanimate for the use one of another, and all for the glory of
thee, the sole and great Creator of all things.

So is the great and wide sea: wherein are things creeping innumerable, both
small and great.
25 And as the earth, so the Sea, which by its own vast dimensions (if there
were nothing else) does sufficiently manifest this power and greatness; but
especially if we consider how full fraught that Element is; for, as infinite of
Fishes are there, as Beasts here on earth, not only of individuals* but of
several kinds and quantities, all which (as many as there are, though
innumerable, yet) have room enough there to swim, a motion like that of
creeping creatures, that on earth glide upon their bellies.

There go the ships: there is that Leviathan, whom thou have made to play
therein.
26 There sail the ships too and fro, trading from country to country, even as
men pass and repass about their business on land. There is that singular fish
the Whale, that for greatness so far exceeds every living creature; the Lion,
or King of all the rest, that by his strength and greatness sets forth thine
who have made him, and placed him in that element (inoffensive to man) which is
so large and capacious, that as great as he is, there is room enough for him to
take his pleasure, and disport himself by swimming and moving hither and
thither, as a bird in the air, and with as much ease and dexterity, as the
least fish in the sea.

These wait all upon thee: that thou may give them their meat in due season.
27 All these forementioned creatures, in what station or element soever they
are, whether birds of the air, beasts of the field, or fishes in the sea, as
they have all of them their beings from thee by creation, so also their
well-being by providence, wonderfully providing suitable sustenance for each
creature, and each kind, as many and diverse as they are, and do not only
provide it for them suitable to their natures, but administer it to them
seasonably, not suffering them to be their own carvers, who out of their
ravenous and irrational disposition would keep no mean, but thou restrainest
them, and at fit times do exhibit a meet measure and proportion of food to
them, and till then, nor beyond that, they cannot carve for themselves none of
them all.

28 What thou please in providence and bounty to bestow on them, That thou
give them they gather: thou openest thine hand, they are filled with good.
that they must have and no more; it is not their power and strength, nor their
rage and ravenousness that can make them exceed the limits thy providence sets
them: they gather what thou let fall in their way; whilst thou suspendest
to give, they cannot have, be it for a longer, or shorter time, which thou art
pleased to do ordinarily in such a manner as may adapt their natures with
appetite, and delight to receive the blessing intended for them, and then to
bestow it. And this is true of all living creatures, as well men, as others;
for it is not the advantage of reason, but thy dispensations that makes
fruitful seasons, and gives seasonable accommodations.

29 And as all things have their being and existence from thee, Thou hidest thy
face, they are troubled: thou take away their breath, they die, and return to
their dust.
so also their determination and period. If thou seem to be displeased with
them, or to absent thy self from them by suspension of needful things in the
usual way of providence dispensed, then are they at their wits end, know not
how to shift for themselves. And this thou art pleased to do, as to provide for
them whilst thou have determined them to live, so to take away either meat or
stomach when thou have appointed them to die, none of them being able to
lengthen his life one minute or breathing time, beyond their determined period,
for their subsistence is by the breath of life thou have breathed into them,
which when thou drawest back, they instantly expire, and in a very small time
after rot, and consume to the dust* whereof at first all liveing creatures were
made, than which their bodies are no better, when their souls cease to act in
them, and depart from them.

Thou sendest forth thy spirit, they are created: and thou renewest the face of
the earth.
30 And thou as soon and with as much ease make new creatures, as dissolvest
the old; for as the one is by withdrawing or detaining thy breath, so the other
is but by inspiring, or breathing of it forth upon liveless materials, and
presently the creature is formed into a living existence of what kind soever,
and so by a continued succession and propagation, do thou replenish the
whole earth with one generation after another, as it were a new creation, and
by the self-same spirit that then at the very first moved upon the face of the
waters when all things were formed.

The glory of the Lord shall endure for ever: the Lord shall rejoice in his
works.
31 This glorious fabric of the world, and the creatures in it by succeeding
generations shall endure as long as time it self lasts, so long will the Lord
carry on the creation, and for his pleasure sake manifest his glorious power in
making, and providence in preserving the works of his hands in orderly
progression.

32 And as thus living creatures are at Gods making and marring, He looks on
the earth and it trembles: he touches the hills, and they smoke.
so the earth it self is cherished with Gods favor to it, as if it were a
sensible creature, and dejected even to trembling and amazement at the
dispensations of his frowns and displeasure, the great stupendous mountains
are but as stubble to the fire, if the Lord do but actuate the least token of
his anger upon them, they also are extremely troubled and affrighted, or
annihilated and consumed for all their greatness, like other things,

33 Such are the works of God, I will sing unto the Lord as long as I live: I
will sing praise unto my God, while I have my being.
and so resplendent his greatness, and goodness in them, as that not a day
shall go over my head wherein I will not out of the serious consideration, and
happy impression they make upon my spirit, give glory to God, and will sing
their praises to him day by day, not for a fit, or in a humor, as hypocrites do
when he humors them, but how ever it go with me, in weal or woe, him will I
worship, and his name will I magnify, nothing shall hinder whilst God lends
me life.

34 I will not, My meditation of him shall be sweet: I will be glad in the Lord.
as most men do, overlook his works, and see nothing praiseworthy in them, the
commonness of them shall not so blind mine eyes, but I will consider them, and
his praiseworthy attributes that shine forth in them, I will not let mine
heart stick in the creature, it shall be my footstool to lift me up to the
Creator, to take a view of his excellencies and properties, there shall mine
heart lay out it self and suck in their sweetnesses, which shall rejoice and
establish it, because of my relation to, and interest in such a God so
wonderfully qualified; I will improve my meditation into application, my
thoughts shall not be merely speculative, but practical to the warning, and
working of my heart usefully toward God, when my head is employed about the
creature.

Let the sinners be consumed out of the earth, and let the wicked be no more:
bless thou the Lord, O my soul. Praise ye the Lord.
35 Those that will not honor and serve such a God that has done all these
things, furnished the earth with such excellent commodities, whereof they reap
the benefit, it is pity they should live upon it to devour the creature,
without magnifying the Creator; especially they that abuse so much goodness,
and turn grace into wantonness, making the creature against its nature to
disserve the Lord by their perverting the use of it unto sin and Idolatry; I
would such were in their graves that discontent God, and discommode the godly.
But what ever others do, O my soul, do thou thy duty, muster up all his
mercies, meditate all his works, be thou affected by them to praise him for
them, and return the glory of his Attributes that shine forth in them. And all
ye whose souls are like mine, even all that are faithful and upright in
heart, do as I do; let him have his due praises as well from you, as from me.

The cv. PSALM.
This Psalm made by David, as appears by part of that song upon the Arks remove
to Jerusalem, 1 Chronicles. 16. Exciteth the people of Israel to be thankful to
God, to praise him, and in faith to seek him, for all that he has done in the
behalf of them and their forefathers of old, in that he chose them, entered
covenant with them of all the earth; for which covenant sake he had so
infinitely befriended them ever since, in the Patriarks sojournings, Joseph's
preferring, Isreal's preserving in Egypt, and wonderful deliverance thence,
their provision and conduct in the wilderness, and possession of Canaan; and
lastly shows the final cause of all the service of God, and what should be the
result. His praise. Psalm cv.


1 AFter so many and great mercies as God has afforded you above all people, O
Give thanks unto the Lord, call upon his name: make known his deeds among the
people.
even to the settling the Ark of his presence amongst you upon his holy hill,
the resting place of it and him; be not unmindfull of, nor ungrateful for
them; but pour out your souls in thankful acknowledgements of them all to the
Lord, especially of this, tending so much to the perfecting and full
accomplishment of the happy condition of this Church and Kingdom, so long
since promised and foretold, and to that purpose frequent this place of his
special residence here, to worship him, pray to him, and praise him, yea, every
where, where you come and have opportunity, publish the great things he has
done from time to time, and the wonders he has wrought in behalf of his chosen
Israel, to get him glory both amongst Jews and Gentiles.

2 Make it your business to praise the Lord every way, Sing unto him, sing
Psalms unto him: talk ye of all his wondrous works.
and by all manner of means, sing forth his praises with heart and voice, in
Psalms solemnly sung, and Quire-like with all the Art and Melody, that musical
instruments added thereunto can make, and at your own houses as well as at his,
busy your selves about him, when you have not opportunity to glorify him one
way, do it another way; speak and discourse of him and his works wrought for
you, to the keeping them alive in memory and affections, both your own and
others, at home and abroad as you have occasion.

Glory ye in his holy name: let the heart of them rejoice that ^ear the Lord.
3 Make your boasts of God ye that are so nearly related to him, both of what he
has done, and of what he is able and has promised to do for you, be strong in
faith, and with assured hope and confidence rejoice in the Lords future favor
and grace to his people, have no doubts nor fears to the contrary, only
frequent his sanctuary, and there worship him, and open your hearts in
faithful prayer unto him.

Seek the Lord, and his strength: seek his face evermore.
4 You know where the Lord is to be sought, and where he will be found, his Ark
is both the pledge of his strength and favor, there you may have them for
asking, therefore be not lazy, lose not such pearls for the digging; though it
cost you some travel, yet such gains will quit your cost; bestir you therefore,
come, often, at least as often as he requires you and your posterity after you,
keep him now you have him, never forsake him, and he will never forsake you.

Remember his marvelous works that he has done: his wonders, and the
judgments of his mouth.
5 And when you do come, come warm in affection, carry along in your hearts the
faithful and grateful memory of what wonderful works he has already
heretofore wrought in your behalfs, the better to possess you of his power and
good will toward you, and to animate you in faithful prayer toward him, that
you have found so faithful and true of his word both of promise to you, and of
judgments to your enemies, as he threatened.

6 What I have spoken by way of exhortation, O ye seed of Abraham his Servant:
ye children of Jacob his chosen.
I speak it to you and you only that are the Israel of God, heirs of promise,
the people of his covenant which he made with Abraham your father, and his
faithful and obedient servant, who as you come of him, so I exhort you to
inherit and imitate his graces, that his God may be yours; as also your more
immediate father Jacob, that holy Patriarch, chosen of Gods free grace, and you
in him to be his peculiar Church and people, when as his elder brother Esau,
and the Edomites his posterity were and are rejected, and given up to serve
other gods, yea, all the world but you.

7 He only is the Lord, He is the Lord our God: his judgments are in all the
earth.
and has vouchsafed us the honor to be his only people of all the earth,
which for our sakes he has every where judged, and punished the nations
thereof in several parts of the world, where we and our forefathers have
sojourned, in case of violence and injury done us, which in most places we
have met with.

8 We have cause thankfully to bear in mind, He has remembered his covenant
for ever: the word which he commanded to a thousand generations
how graciously God has always born us in mind, in all places and conditions,
never forgetting us nor the promise of protection and mercy he of old made to
us, at no time, but has faithfully performed the covenant on his part which he
commanded us to trust in and yield obedience to on our, Thereby to maintain a
blessed and mutual correspondencie of interest and relation of him for ours,
and we for his everlastingly.

9 The covenant which of old laid the foundation Which covenant he made with
Abraham: and his oath unto Isaac.
of friendship and relation betwixt God and us in our fore-father Abraham,
promising to be his God, and the God of his seed, in case they would be his
people, walk before him, and be perfect by a steadfast faith, and upright
obedience, which covenant he reiterated to Isaac, and reinforced with an oath
to increase our confidence, and engage us deeper in reciprocal love and
gratuituosness.

And confirmed the same unto Jacob for a law: and ^o Israel for a^ everlasting
covenant.
10 Which he further ratified to Ja^ob by a legislative sanction, more
uchangeable than the laws of Medes and Persians, and not only whilst his name
was Jacob, but after he had the name of Israel, which was to endure to him and
his posterity, even all the faithful Israel of God, and so was the Covenant
entailed upon him.

Saying unto thee will I give the land of Canaan: the lot of your inheritance.
11 As is evident by that promise of the investiture of his offspring into the
land of Canaan, which by lot was to be divided for a sure possession and
inheritance, which we see literally fulfilled this day in ample sort, and so
shall spiritual Canaan, heaven it self be given to Gods spiritual Israel by
virtue of the same covennant.

When they were but a few men in number: yea, very few and strangers in it.
12 And this promise did he make to Israel, not when they were a numerous body
of many hundred thousands, as after by his blessing they multiplied unto, but
then when he in the nature of a Pater-familias, with some sons, and a few
servants, guest-waies, sojourned here and there in the land, then wholely
inhabited and possessed by many and great nations, altogether strangers to him,
and he to them.

When they went from one nation to another: from one Kingdom to another people.
13 When God by appointment and providence led them from place to place without
any settlement, wandering amongst nations, first one, and then another, of
strange language, and different religions, now in this Kingdom, and anon in
that Republike.

14 And for all they traversed the earth in that sort, He suffered no man to do
them wrong: yea, he reproved Kings for their sake^.
and many Princes and people picked quarrels with them, that to speak humanely,
had been able to have swallowed them up; yet the Lord so protected them, that
they were still preserved, they and their flocks wheresoever they went, and
those that did attempt to wrong them, as Pharaoh, King of Egypt, and Abimelech,
King of Gerar, by taking Sarah from Abraham, were made to restore her, and glad
to cry Peccavi.

15 For God had warned them of him, Saying, Touch not mine anointed: and do my
Prophets no harm.
what manner of man he was whom they offered to wrong, how that he was a chosen
vessel and an extraordinary servant of his; a Prophet, and therefore at their
uttermost peril if they persisted to wrong him, or his, or to harm them in the
least. And the same protection he afforded him, he afforded to the rest of the
Patriarks, Abraham's successors in their itineraries, so that Isaac and Jacob
sojourned amongst them as he did safe enough from harm amongst strangers, and
those that bare them no good will, by the mere over-awing power of God, moving
the hearts of the Kings, and rulers of the countries where they came, to think
reverently of them, and treat them well for his sake, whose in special manner,
and in extraordinary relation and profession he made it known to them, they
were consecrated peculiarly above all men, for the instructing and propagating
a Church unto him, that were to come out of their loins.

Moreover he called for a famine upon the land: he brake the whole staff of
bread.
16 And when the Lord was pleased to command that great famine to be, which
happened in the days of Joseph, over the whole earth, so that in no countries
was bread, that chief support of man's life, to be had.

He sent a man before them: ev^n Joseph who was sold for a servant.
17 No more in Canaan where Jacob and his sons sojourned than any where else,
yet the Lord was so mindful of and provident for them, that he took a course
beforehand to provide for them, and therefore so disposed it by his
providence, that Joseph who proved so famous a man afterward, he, by the error
of his brethren that sold him: but by the overruling hand of God, was carried
into Egypt, and there sold of them for a servant to Potiphar, who after
commanded all Egypt, and sustained his father and brethren there during that
long famine.

Whose feet they hurt with fetters: he was laid in Iron.
18 But first he under-went great hardship, was sold as a slave, falsely accused
by his mistress, wrongfully imprisoned by his master, with cruel usage there
for a time, being laid long in irons, which te into his own flesh, and were
extreme painful to him, and that for no offense of his.

Until the time that his word came: the word of the Lord tried him.
19 This life he led during the time that God had ordained him so to do, till
the time came wherein God purposed, and had promised in a dream long before,
that better should befall him, till then what God had ordained and decreed
concerning the humbling him, and exercising of his faith and patience, did thus
happen to him for his trial.

20 But when that time was come, The King sent and loosed him: even the ruler
of the people, and let him go free.
then though he was a prisoner, an abject person, and a stranger, an Hebrew, no
Egyptian, yet did God so bring things about, as even he in this estate was made
known to the King, who by express command, sent no meaner a man than his own
Master, Captain of the guard, that had the chief custody of the Kings
prisoners, and himself had cast Joseph among them, to loose him, and bring him
into his presence, and took such contentment in him, that he not only
commanded him to be set at liberty;

21 But made him chief next under himself in honor and command, He made ^im
Lord of his house: and ruler of all his substance.
over all that he had in his dominions at home and abroad, domestic or
republic.

22 All Pharaohs great men and officers were at and under Joseph's command, To
bind his Princes at his pleasure: and teach his senators wisdom.
what he directed was done, yea, the wisest of his counselors were ordered by
him, and received orders from him.

23 By whose means his father and brethren were all well provided for in that
time of extreme famine, Israel also came into Egypt: and Jacob sojourned in the
land of Ham.
for by the leave of Pharaoh he sent for Israel, even Jacob and all his sons,
and their families to come into Egypt to him, whither accordingly he and they
came, and sojourned there among the posterity of Cham, of whom came the
Egyptians, being there sustained by the plenty that Joseph had stored up in
that land.

24 And the Lord did greatly multiply the seed of Israel his people whilst
they were in Egypt, And he increased his people greatly: and made them stronger
than their enemies.
insomuch that the Egyptians grew to be afraid of their numerousness, least
they should be able in time to over-master them in their own land, which fear
turned into enmity against them.

He turned their heart to hate his people: to deal subtly with his servants.
25 Insomuch, that as well as at first, they were received amongst the
Egyptians, and for all the good offices Joseph had done to that nation, yet the
Lord so ordered it according to his predictions, that Egypt soon after grew
ungrateful and unmindfull of all that was past, and so hated Israel as they
laid plots to suppress them, and keep them so at an under, that they should not
multiply after that sort, and to imbase and enervate their spirits, that so by
base drudgeries imposed upon them, they should never have the courage to
attempt their liberty and departure thence, but should serve the Egyptians
everlastingly for slaves and laborers;

He sent Moses his servant; and Aaron whom he had chosen.
26 Which they were a long time, till the appointed period came, and that they
cried to the Lord by reason of their insupportable pressures. And then did the
Lord miraculously preserve Moses, and sent him as his great Embassabour to
Pharaoh, he and Aaron, these two only he chose to carry on and perfect that
great work of Isreal's deliverance out of Egypt, the one of them his
extraordinary Prophet and servant, and the other afterward his High Priest.

They showed his signs among them, and wonders in the land of Ham.
27 Which deliverance was marvellously compassed by strange and miraculous
wonders, wrought by these men through the power of the Almighty, to let those
Egyptians, the posterity of Cham that cursed progenitour, see what a God of
power the God of Israel was.

He sent darkness and made it dark: and they rebelled not against his word.
28 The Lord therefore at Moses his stretching forth his hand toward heaven,
when Pharaoh would not let Israel go, sent strange and extraordinary darkness
both for its nature and continuance upon the whole land of Egypt. Yea, what
ever the Lord commanded those two faithful servants of his to do or say in the
whole transaction of this great business betwixt Pharaoh and him for the
deliverance of his people, they failed not either in their messages or
commands, but though with never so much peril to themselves, did whatsoever
they were appointed of God continually, and all creatures obeyed as readily.

29 By their Ministry, He turned their waters in o blood, and slew their fish.
when Pharaoh would not yet let Israel go, God also turned the waters into
blood throughout all the land of Egypt, every where, both in their rivers,
pooles, and houshold-cisternes, so that neither they could drink it, nor the
fish live in it but were killed.

30 Also by Aarons stretching out his hand over the waters of Egypt upon
Pharaohs further hardening, The land brought forth frogs in abundance, in the
chambers of their Kings.
God brought infinite of frogs upon the land, like grass that grows upon the
ground, which dispersed themselves into all places, so that Pharaoh and his
Princes, even their very bed-chambers were full of those crawling creatures, no
place free.

31 Furthermore Aaron stretched out his rod upon the dust of Egypt, He spoke,
and there came diverse sorts of flies, and lice in all their coasts.
and the dust became lice all the land over, which crept upon man and beast;
also God commanded and there was likewise grievous swarms of several sorts of
uncouth flies in all the land, thus with base vermin did the Lord plague the
proud Egyptians for lording it over his people.

32 There where uses to be no hail nor rain, He gave them hail for rain: and
flaming fire in their land.
the Lord at Pharaohs refusal to let his people go, sent, by the hand of Moses
stretched forth to heaven, a grievous storm of hail mixed with fire, and
accompanied with terrible thunderclaps, which fell as thick as rain from the
clouds, the hail and fire killing and consuming all without doors that was in
the field.

He smote their vines also and their fig trees: and brake the trees of their
coasts.
33 Yea, so forcible was the storm, and so extraordinary the hail, that it
spoiled their vines, fig trees, and brake all other sorts of trees also
throughout the coasts and quarters of Egypt.

He spoke, and the locusts came; and cater-pillars, and that without number
34, 35 After this, the Lord commanded an Eastwind to blow, which brought
strange kinds of locusts and cater-pillars, And did eat up all the herbs in
the land: and devoured the fruit of their ground.
in such an infinite number, that they darkened the land, which every where
throughout all Egypt devoured every thing that was green, herb or tree, which
the hail had not consumed.

He smote also all the firstborn in their land: the chief of all their
strength.
36 When nothing else would do, he smote all the firstborn in Egypt both of men
and beast, King and people, so that in one night the flour of all Egypt
perished because of Pharaohs hardened heart, that would not let Israel go.

He brought them sorth also! with silver and gold: and there was not one feeble
person among their Tribes.
37, 38 Whereupon according as God had foretold, Pharaoh let Israel go, and glad
he and his people were to be rid of them, for whose sake God had so destroyed
his country, and by the conduct of Moses the Lord led them thence, Egypt was
glad when they departed: for the fear of them fell upon them.
when first he had given them favor in the sight of the Egyptians, to depart
to them their Jewels of silver and gold and raiment, all which they carried
away with them to the spoil of the Egyptians, and their own exceeding
enriching, and though they were so many hundred thousands, yet of all that
number in none of all the twelve Tribes, was there any one, that for all the
plagues that had befallen the Egyptians, amongst whom they lived, was a hair
the worse, nor that either by their cruel usage, hard burdens, old age or
sickness was creepled or enfeebled, unfit for travel, but every man, woman, and
child, was lusty and strong to undertake their journey.

39 Nor did God leave them when he had thus delivered them, He spread a cloud
for a covering: and a fire to give light in the night.
but provided for them in and along their journey through the wilderness,
ordained supernaturally a cool refreshing cloud in the daytime, to wait upon
them and travel along with them, which like a Canopie covered them from the
scorchings of the Sun in that hot desert, as also in the nightime for light
to travel by, he gave them a pillar of fire, in both which he himself
conducted them.

40, 41 And as he provided for them light and shade for their well-being and
better traveling, The people asked and he brough^ quails: and satisfied them
with the brea^ of heaven.
so did he above the course of nature, which could not then and there supply
them, He opened the rock and the waters gushed out, they ran in the dry places
like a river.
give them livelihood and things necessary for their strength and being, as
meat and drink, and both by extraordinary and miraculous means, Manna that
memorable bread and dew-fall of heaven, they had it in abundance, enough to
serve that huge Host during all the time of their travel in the wilderness,
besides which, when they asked (though not in that manner they ought) he gave
them further provision, and by a wind which he caused to blow, brought Quails
that fell round about the Camp, enough to serve that numerous people, also when
they were thirsty he caused the rock of Horeb upon Moses his smiting it to
open, and the waters to flow forth of it, which ran in that desert wilderness
along as they traveled as it had been a river, that there had its natural
course, for the sustenance of them and their cattle.

For he remembered his holy promise, and Abraham his servant.
42 For though our fathers in that their journey did often sin grievously
against God, and tempted him to have destroyed them, rather than thus
miraculously to provide for them, yet was he still mindful of his sacred and
gracious engagement, which he had promised and sworn concerning the people he
had made choice of, how he would be their God and possess them of the land of
Canaan, and therefore would he not for his own holiness sake break his word, as
also for his faithful servant Abraham's sake, to whom he made that promise, and
whose seed by promise they were.

And he brought forth his people with joy, and his chosen with gladness.
43 Thus from first to last was the Lord propitious to, and protector of his
Church and people, whom he brought out of Egypt with an Almighty hand, after so
long and cruel an embondagement delivering them, and at the red sea destroying
all those their cruel taskmasters and mortal enemies the Egyptians in their
sight, and there setting them for ever free from them, to the infinite joy of
those his people and chosen ones, when they thus saw themselves so dear to God,
and regarded by him, and so freed from their adversaries and hardship.

And gave them the lands of the heathen: and they inherited the labor of the
people.
44 And so at last as well as at first, was he faithful to his promise, and
powerful for his people, bringing them to the land of Canaan which he wholly
bestowed upon them, and estated them in it, where they possessed Houses and
Cities that they built not, and Vineyards that they planted not, he destroying
and driving out before them the heathenish inhabitants, and nations that
possessed it, made them Lords of it, which we hold and possess at this day, and
have done ever since by that tenure of the gift of God.

45 All which benefits the Lord bestowed upon them to the end he might win
their love, That they might observe his statutes, and keep his laws. Praise ye
the Lord.
gain their hearts, and engage them in dutiful and obedient walking toward
him, according to those laws and commandments which he had given them,
especially to be observed in this very land, for as they were his special
people, so he chose this for the place of his special worship before all the
world, and to that end gave it them. Be you therefore for your parts now and
hereafter, O ye Israelites, mindful of these his mercies to praise him for
them, and of your duties, to walk worthy of them.

The cvi. PSALM.
In some great and general affliction and dispersion of the Jewish nation,
probably that under Antiochus. The Psalmist exhorts, for all that, the
Israelites to believe in and praise the Lord for his goodness of old to that
nation, and which remains in him still to it, if they walk holily. He
confesses God just in punishing as well them as their forefathers for their
sins, and prays, that he will hold on in the vicissitude of his mercies, and
deliverances as well as of his punishments. Confesses that they have always
been shameful sinners, and great provokers of him from Egypt all along,
throughout the wilderness, as also in Canaan it self, nevertheless he let them
perish, though often made them smart as they well deserved, his covenant and
mercy were ever prevailing motives, and so prays they may be still to effect
their present deliverance and restoration: and promises thanks and praise for
it, exhorting all Gods people in what ever condition, always to give the Lord
his due praise by remembering his past, and believing his future and infallible
grace and goodness to his Church.

PRaise ye the Lord, O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good, for his mercy
endures for ever.
1 LEt not our sins and misdeservings though they have been great, and our
sufferings for them manifold, any white detract from what is due to God of
praise and thanks, for those great and gracious mercies which he has expressed
to, and bestowed on us his people in the days of old, and that goodness that
still remains with him in our behalves as bad as we are, by virtue of his
covenant, which makes, that neither his mercies shall determine, nor we be
destroyed, but that we shall ever reap the benefit of his gracious engagement,
till all be fulfilled that is promised concerning us and his Chruch to the end
of the world.

Who can utter the mighty acts of the Lord, who can show forth all his praise?
2 Who is able to tell what wonderful things the Lord has done, and what
Almighty power he has showed in his Churches behalf, since he was first
pleased to select and own a people for himself out of the rest of the world, no
tongue can reckon his praiseworthy mercies and miracles since then?

Blessed are they that keep judgment: and he that does righteousness at all
times.
3 And as God has been, so he will never fail to be, they that be faithful to
him he will be so to them, so that who ever they are that in conscience to God
walk closely to the rules of Justice and Piety prescribed by him, to do
thereafter, and what man soever makes it his constant course to do righteously,
without being drawn or tempted into ways of impiety and iniquity, that man or
nation of men shall be blessed of God.

Remember me, O Lord, with the favor that thou bear unto thy people: O
visit me with thy salvation.
4 Lord, order my ways so as that I may share in that blessing, bless me with
the sight and sense of thy gracious favor toward me, such as thou bear
unto those that are thy chosen people and faithful obedient servants. Let me,
O Lord* have the comfortable inward feeling and assurance of thy saving grace,
and good will toward me freely bestowed, let it often affect my heart, as so
many sweet visits and gracious Messages sent from God into it.

5 That I may enjoy the happiness appropriated to thy chosen, That I may see
the good of thy chosen, that I may rejoice in the gladness of thy nation: that
I may glory with thine inheritance.
and rejoice with those saving joys, thy faithful and adopted ones are and
shall be made partakers of, whereof the often deliverances and manifold joyful
preservations of this nation of thine, sometimes from fear of imminent
destruction, and sometimes from under real imbondagements, has been lively
figures; that I may boast of thee and mine interest in thee such as all thy
people have, and we though unworthy have found it so.

6 For notwithstanding all our privileges and special favors, We have sinned
with our fathers: we have committed iniquity, we have done wickedly.
which thou have showed us from time to to time, both we and our forefathers
have ill* requited thee, being rebellious, ungrateful, and very perverse.

7 Our fathers made not application and benefit of those admirable Miracles
thou for their sakes wrought in Egypt, Our fathers understood not thy wonders
in Egypt, they remembered not the multitude of thy mercies, but provoked him at
the sea, even at the red sea.
to the ends thou did them, for the strengthening of their faith in thee, and
the assuring of thy love to them, they had but carnal considerations of them,
valued them as transient things without any result or improvement either of
thee to them, or of themselves to thee thereby, supinely forgot them, even all
those many miraculous wonders thou shewedst upon the Egyptians in mercy to
them, whereby thou so powerfully compassed their deliverance, for so soon as
ever thou broughtest them out of Egypt, the very next trial thou made of
them at the red sea (that remarkable place where thou did so wonderfully
preserve them) they instead of addressing themselves in humble and thankful
sort to seek deliverance from thee, of whose power they had had such foregoing
immediate experiments, fell into misbelief, hard and unworthy thoughts of thee
and thy servant Moses, even for their very deliverance out of Egypt, as if thou
had done all for them to no other end, but to bring them thither to be
destroyed.

Nevertheless, he saved them for his names sake: that he might make his mighty
power to be known.
8 Notwithstanding their unthankful provocations, yet would he not take
vengeance on them, nor let those enemies triumph in their destruction, from
under whose power he had newly delivered them, but for the honor of his own
name that was named upon them, they being now noted more than ever for his
peculiar people, and for the further glorifying of his power and grace in their
behalves he brought them safe out of that inextricable strait by an Almighty
hand, for ever to be had in thankful remembrance.

He rebuked the red sea also; and it was dried up: so he led them through the
depths as through the wilderness.
9 For rather than he would there let them perish, and dishonor himself, though
they deserved it, he wrought a Miracle beyond any the rest, contrary to the
course of nature commanded the very Sea to give place, and divide it self to
make them way, and for all its propensity to return into its course, God
conjured it to abide as a Wall on their right hand and on their left; which it
did, and could do no other until they were quite passed through the bottom of
it upon the dry land, as if it had been part of that Wilderness which afterward
they traveled.

10 And thus with infinite long suffering and glorious power did he save them,
And he saved them from the hand of him that hated them, and redeemed them from
the hand of the enemy.
because they were his chosen people, out of the hands of Pharaoh that perfect
enemy of theirs, that pursued them with a deadly design, either to have reduced
them into bondage, or slain them all upon the place.

11 And these waters that thus gave way to preserve our fathers, And the waters
covered their enemies, there was not one of them left.
so soon as they were all passed over, and God had revoked his word of command,
they presently returned into their Channel, and closed again upon the whole
Host of the Egyptians, all which were drowned therewith, so that not a man of
them escaped.

12 The gladsomness of that deliverance by such a Miracle, Then believed they
his words, they sang his praise.
made them for all their hard hearts at present, whilst the sense and memory
of it was warm (which lasted but a while) to credit what God spoke by Moses
touching his good will to them, and his safe and certain bringing them into the
land of promise, and for a flash, they were as full of faith as a bladder full
of wind, and sang the praise of his rich mercy, goodness and power manifested
in that their so late and great salvation, with abundance of joy and delight in
God.

13 But alas, They soon forgot his works, they waited not for his counsel.
neither this faith nor praise was out of any well grounded principle toward
God, but out of the present sense which self-love had of the present good-turn
he did them, for they had not traveled above three days from the red sea to
the waters of Pharaoh, but there they were at old ward, falling into unbelief
and discontent against God and Moses, and forgot all that was past, as if it
had never been, even all those wonders within and without Egypt that God
wrought for them, to have gained their hearts to believe in him, and rely on
him, but it would not be, all was one, they were in cold blood, the self-same
men at one time as at another whenever God tried them, and would never in an
humble gratuitous belief of him make their addresses to him, and enquire of him
in this or that strait, but streight-way fell foul, ready to fly in Moses his
face, and consequently in Gods, so soon as ever they at any time suffered, they
had not patience nor piety in the faith of his former transactions, which they
had experimentally seen managed to the best of advantage and opportunity, to
wait upon such his wise and seasonable dispensations, as might accordingly in
the issue still most evince his glory, and conduce to their spiritual benefit
and edification, as his precedent acts had done.

But lusted exceedingly in the wilderness, and tempted God in the desert.
14 But they were a carnall-minded people, nothing spiritualized nor bettered
toward God by all he^ did for them, but made their belly their God, settting
light by Angels food, for they saw nothing Angelical or Divine in it being
mere sensualists, inordinately lusting after belly-chear, and variety of
acates, in the very Wilderness where they saw and knew that by course of nature
nothing could be had, they must either be supernaturally maintained or starve,
yet in that barren place where God notwithstanding had so long and often
miraculously supplied them with all needful things, they were not therewith
content, but murmured for superfluities, questioning the power and not
submitting to the will of God, as if what they wanted, and had not as they
desired, was because he had not power to give it them.

15 But the Lord to vindicate his power which they had impeached, And he gave
them their request, but sent leanness into their soul.
saying, who shall give us flesh to eat, or, can God furnish a Table in the
Wilderness? and to let them see the unprofitableness of creature-contentment
though in never so great abundance, if not sanctified by the word of God and
prayer, sent them their desire, even plenty of Quails-flesh to their bread, but
they had better have been without it, than to have had it given them in anger
accompanied with judgment, as it was, not only bodily, so many perishing at
Kibroth Hataavah with meat in their mouths, and so destroying instead of
nourishing them, for being obtained; but not in Gods way, though it was his
gift, yet it wanted his grace, was empty of blessing, being no act of favor,
and therefore pleased the sense but edified not the soul, the proper tendency
of all he bestows, and the best effect even of temporal benefits, which else
are a shell without a kernel, blessings accursed, and so was this to them,
feeding on it a month together gluttonously without fear or spiritual
descerning, till at last it wrought their overthrow by surfeiting, instead of
nourishing, for God gave them up to wear it as they won it, spend it as they
got it to wit, lustfully, which excess and carnal mindedness he severely
plagued both in body and soul.

16 They gave themselves up to studied provocations, They envied Moses also in
the
not only murmuring upon emergentcases, but by combination conspiring among
themselves against Moses and Aaron those approved holy men, and special
servants of the Lord, one whereof, to wit Aaron was his declared High Priest
officiating in special before him for their good, in expiating their sins, and
diverting (Christ-like) Gods judgments, yet no relation of them to God, nor of
advantage to themselves could persuade, but these men whom God had substituted
in those places of conduct and Priesthood, and set so many seals upon, must at
their pleasure be removed, suspected after so long experience to be Impostors,
and another government and Preist-hood, agitated by other men, must be erected,
and this which God had ordained, demolished.

The earth opened and swallowed up Dathan, and covered the company of Abiram.
17 And it is never to be forgotten, what fearful vengeance God executed upon
the chief ringleaders of that conspiracy, and with what a fearful death he
visited them, causing the earth to open and swallow up Korah, Dathan, and
Abiram, those chieftains with all that belonged to them, and to close upon them
in the sight, and to the amazement of all Israel, so that with a fearful cry,
they being yet alive, went down into the grave by Gods extraordinary judgment,
like as men do that being dead are by course of nature buried.

And a fire was kindled in their company, the flame burnt up the wicked.
18 Besides which, there came out a fire from the Lord, that wonderfully and
dreadfully consumed the two hundred and fifty men that offered incense, chief
Partisans with Korah and his accomplices in this wicked combination.

They made a calf^ in Horeb, and worshipped the molten image.
19 Also that shameful apostasy of theirs, that after they had been witnesses
of so much power in so many miracles, and upon mount Sinai had seen such
evident tokens of an unexpressible God, yet that then immediately upon that, in
Horeb they should go about (as they did) to represent him in the similitude of
a calfe, and think to serve him that made them by doing honor to it, that they
themselves had newly made.

20 And so they exchanged that glorious privilege they had above all the
world, Thus they changed their glory into the similitude of an ox that eats
grass.
in worshipping the only true and living God, the Honor of Israel, into the
sordidness of base brutish Idolatry, heathen-like worshipping, for the
Creator of heaven and earth, a creature, and that none of Gods neither, but
their own, even the senceless similitude of a living ox, the highest perfection
and chiefest good of which imaginary deity, is but to maintain alive a
sensitive soul one degree above vegetives, the grass it feeds on, which both
man and beast tread under their feet.

21 And this must be their God that brought them out of Egypt, They forgot God
their savior which had done great things in Egypt.
forgetting him that did so indeed, that so mightily saved them, and delivered
them from thence, which was the Lord Almighty, as his works right well made
manifest, which he wrought there for them.

22 In that land of their enemies the posterity of Cham the accursed, Wondrous
works in the land of Ham, and terrible things by the red sea.
whom the Lord so extraordinarily plagued for their sakes, as also after at the
red sea, when he completed their deliverance by the Egyptians fearful end,
and sudden destruction of their whole host.

23 This stupid sordidness and ungrateful mindlesness made the Lord exceeding
wroth, Therefore he said that he would destroy them, had not Moses his chosen
stood before him in the breach: to turn away his wrath, least he should destroy
them.
insomuch as he would have bribed Moses by promise of raising himself a people
out of his loins, to have let him destroyed them that had so misshapen him, and
shamefully denudated themselves, but Moses chosen to represent Christ in the
conduct and Mediatorship of his people, by an effectual intercession prevailed
to stay his hand when he was ready to strike, and to beg their pardon, at least
their reprieve, so that God was entreated by him, and did at that time spare
them for his sake.

Yea, they despised the pleasant land: they believed not his word.
24 And as if all the way had been too little from Egypt to Canaan to provoke
God, they to approve themselves no changelings, when they arrived at the skirts
of the promised land, and were to take possession, fell a mutining against God
as a deluder of them, vilifying Canaan that Type of heaven, and heaven on
earth, where God had chosen to fix his gracious presence, and to be worshipped
there of all the places in the world, and of them before all other people, and
had promised him in that place so many blessings both spiritual and temporal,
and which it self was a good land and so reported by the faithful spies,
though misrelated of the rest, which spread like a Gangreen among that corrupt
multitude, crediting their false Alarm of the penury of the land, and their
impossibility to master it, for all that God had said to the contrary of the
one, and promised concerning the other.

But murmured in their tents, and hearkened not unto the voice of the Lord.
25 And murmured against God and Moses, Caleb, and Josua, weeping and mourning
for their misfortune in leaving Egypt, and being beguiled with fair promises of
just nothing, for no better esteem had they of Canaan, neither believing it
worth the fighting for, nor possible to be gained, and therefore sat
discontented in their Tents, and would never attempt it, for all that either
Gods promises and miracles, (which as signs and previous pledges spoke unto
them;) or that Moses, and those faithful spies his servants said to the
contrary in way of encouragement, could do.

26, 27 Whereupon the Lord was so enraged, Therefore he lifted up his hand
against them, to overthrow them in the wilderness.
that he was even as it were fetching his full blow at them to have destroyed
them root and branch, from ever being a people more, To overthrow their seed
also* among the nations, and to scatter^ them in the lands.
in the wilderness where they had so extremely misbelieved, tempted, and
provoked him so many several times against the clear light of so many wonderful
and gracious miracles, and utterly to disinherit them Canaan, offering to make
Moses a greater and mightier nation, and to scatter them like vagabonds, and
for bondmen amongst those heathenish borderers, and to let them kill and
conquer them at their pleasure; but for Moses, who prevailed now also with God,
to spare their lives and mitigate his displeasure.

28 After all this in stead of repenting and confessing their sins, They joined
themselves also unto Baal-peor, and ate the sacrifices of the dead.
they continue and increase their provocations, divorcing themselves from God
and his worship, and took them another husband, even the abomination of the
heathen, turned worshippers of Baal-peor the Idol of the Moabites, first
committing carnal fornication with the daughters of Moab, and then at their
persuasion spiritual whoredom with their Idol, imitating their manners
throughout, for in stead of eating the sacrifices offered to the living God as
they were wont, they gave themselves to sacrifice, and to feast with the
sacrifices o that senseless liveless Idol, as the Moabites did, and in all
points turned perfect Idolaters like them.

Thus they provoked him to anger with their inventions: and the plague brake in
upon them.
29 Thus from time to time and especially at this time by this grand apostacy
worshipping other Gods of their own choosing, and rejecting him that had chosen
them, did they extremely provoke him to anger, insomuch as he sent a sore
destroying plague among them that soon dispatched twenty four thousand of that
rebellious Idolatrous crew, it cost so many of them their lives before it
ceased.

Then stood up Phinehas, and exe uted judgment: and so the plague was stayed.
30 But the Lord would not destroy them all, therefore so soon as Phinehas
grandchild to Aaron had in zeal to God, in the face of the congregation
executed justice upon Zimri a man of Israel, and Cozbi a Midianitish woman, by
running them both through with a javelin in the act of uncleanness, the Lord
upon that stayed the plague that it went no further.

And that was counted unto him for righteousness, unto all generations for
evermore.
31 Which act of zeal and justice was by God graciously accepted as a price of
singular service, and well rewarded with the covenant of the everlasting
Priesthood to him and his seed, perpetuated in Jesus Christ himself the son of
God, the atonement-maker and appeaser of his fathers wrath.

They angered him also at the waters of strife, so that it went ill with Moses
for their sakes.
32, 33 Also at Meribah, those waters of strife where the children of Israel our
predecessors chode with Moses, and consequently strove with the Lord, whereat
he was angry; Because they provoked his spirit, so that he spoke unadvisedly
with his lips.
yet made not the least semblance of it to Moses as at other times in like
provocations, but without once mentioning their sin or his displeasure, bid
Moses not smite the rock, for the Lord who has mercy on whom and when he will
have mercy, was then at that time purposed to show no signs of bitterness by
word or deed, but with an absolute preterition to sanctify himself amongst
them, and magnify his patience and free grace even after so many apostacies,
and therefore though he bid Moses take the rod, yet but speak to the rock,
sending that meek man upon as meek an errand, but he contrary to his nature
and office of Mediator, and to God his present frame and disposition, being
himself in passion, rendered God so, and in diffidence of his grace miscarried
in his message, and misrepresented him, angerly smiting the rock and that
twice, in stead of but only giving the word of command to it, as God bad him,
and also falling fowl upon the people, having no such commission, with
imbittered terms, distrustful interrogations, and misimplications, in stead of
declaring to the glory of God his admirable grace and patience, that without
uttering an angry word, sent him to command the rock to give them and their
cattle water. So that God was now displeased at Moses, (whom they had caused to
miscarrie) so far as to discharge him from conducting the people into the land
of promise.

34 Nor yet when God had brought them into Canaan were they better minded, They
did not destroy the nations, concerning whom the Lord commanded them.
but still followed their own inventions in stead of his commandments, and
therefore did not execute Gods just indignation and judgments upon those
sinful heathenish nations, the inhabitants, whose sins were then ripe, and of
whom the Lord would have had the land wholly purged, that it might be pure and
completely consecrated to him, (as are his regenerate people, his Church, that
land of uprightness) and so they rendered free to serve him there, from their
temptations to the contrary.

But were mingled among the heathen, and learned their works.
35, 36 But by a foolish sinful piety together with a spirit of contradiction
they spared them, made compacts, yea, And they served their idols: which were a
snare unto them.
marriages with them, and so lived neighbour-like with those whom God hated to
the death, and commanded them to do so, to figure out, that mortal and
irreconcilable enmity that the regenerate part ought to maintain against the
remainder of corruption in the people of God; And what followed of this their
indulgence? why, their own corrupting with their heathenish manners and
worship, and consequently Gods alienation and their undoing. For they
degenerated thereby so far as to forsake the true God of whom they had had
experience, and worshipped the idols of those heathenish nations, with whom
they cohabited and mixed themselves; as God foretold them so it fell out, that
if they did not root out the people, they would be caught in those Idolatrous
traps and so incur the vengeance and wrath of God, and so they did.

Yea, they sacrificed their sons and their daughters unto devils.
37 Yea, they proceeded so far as to worship strange unheard of idols, indeed
devils, (for they that worship not God, worship him,) and after as strange a
manner; most barbarously quite contrary to the Law, either of God or nature,
offering their own very children in sacrifice to those idol-devils, and made
their sons and daughters pass through the fire to Molech, the abomination of
the Ammonites.

And shed innocent blood, even the blood of their sons and their daughters,
whom they sacrificed unto the idols of Canaan: and the land was polluted with
blood.
38 And so made that land which God allotted for to be a type of heaven, and
sanctified to himself out of all the earth, an Aceldama, defiling it with most
unnatural parricide, shedding the blood of poor innocent infants, even their
own very children, whom in stead of bringing them up in the knowledge of God,
and dedicating them to him, they, as if he had had no title to them, offered
them in sacrifice to the idols of that country, whereas they should have
destroyed both them and their gods, that it might have been a pure place for
the holy God to have resided in, but they polluted it more than ever with the
murderous bloodshed of their children, his chosen.

39 Thus in stead of being a people holy to the Lord, Thus were the^ defiled
with their own works; and went a whoring with their own inventions.
they became abominable in his sight, as bad as the heathen themselves, and
worse by forsaking the Commandments and service of God, yea, that conjugal
union that was betwixt God and them, by mutual choice and covenant, in stead
thereof doing what ever their own corrupt minds suggested, walking by no rule
but the dictates of their own deceived hearts, which led them to commit all
manner of folly with all sorts of idols.

40 The jealous God could not see himself thus dishonored by a disloyal people
and not be angry, Therefore was the wrath of the Lord kindled against his
people: insomuch as he abhorred his own inheritan^e.
wherefore he gave way to his wrath to wax hot against them; and though he had
chosen them with a purpose to set his delight upon them, yet now his mind was
changed, and he lothed them as much as ever he had loved them.

41 And in stead of subduing their enemies under them, And he gave them into
the hand of the heathen; and they that hated them ruled over them.
he subjugated them to their enemies, even the heathen, those whose country
they possessed, who therefore hated them, those did he make to have dominion
and Lordship over them.

42 Those mortal enemies of theirs tirannized over Their enemies also oppressed
them, and they were brought into subjection under their hand.
them, they being tributaries and in vile vassalage to the nations that they
themselves had in part, and should in whole have subdued, but that their sins
turned the scales.

Many times did he deliver them, but they provoked him with their counsel, and
were brought low for their iniquity.
43 Nor did he quite cast them off, but had still an affection toward them, and
ever and anon took pity on them, and delivered them, by such men and means as
he appointed, out of their thraldom and vassalage, but nothing would serve to
reclaim them; when they were out of misery they again fell to their apostacy,
with deliberate and voluntary election deserting God and his worship, whom
therefore still he corrected as they back-slided, and made them stoop to their
enemies that would not stoop to him.

Nevertheless, he regarded their affliction when he heard their cry.
44 Nevertheless his compassion was such toward them, that whenever in their
affliction they cried to him, and owned him for their God, whom out of it they
would not, he would still hear them and grant them deliverance out of their
misery.

And he remembered for them his Covenant, and repented according to the
multitude of his mercies.
45 For the Lord was still mindful of his Covenant, to do them good because of
it, though they of themselves were so exceeding ill deserving, and having
chosen them for his people he could not quite reject them, but though their
provocations were endless, and he made them smart for them, yet their
afflictions no sooner appeared to have wrought some change in them for the
better but straightway he changed toward them, pardoning their sin and
removing their punishment, because his mercies were like himself infinite.

He made them also to be pitied of all those that carried them captives.
46 Nay, the Lord was so tender toward them as to overruled the hard hearts of
their imperious enemies to show them favor that of themselves hated them to
the death, death, insomuch as they were highly advanced under some, and
strangly discharged and set at liberty by others that led them captive.

47 O Lord, Save us, O Lord, our God, and gather us from among the heathen, to
give thanks, unto thy holy name, and to triumph in thy praise.
as we remember thy mercies of old, so be thou pleased to do so too, act for us
now as then, save us out of this trouble and gather us again out of this
dispersion from among the heathen, into a community; settle us in our proper
inheritance and thine, there to return thee thanks as ou^ forefathers were
wont to do in all such cases, and magnify thy power, in the praiseful
acknowledgement whereof, as also of thy grace and goodness toward us thy
people, thou thereby wilt give us infinite cause to rejoice and glory.

48 And how ever we smart deservedly for our sins, Blessed be the Lord God of
Israel from everlasting to everlasting: let all the people say, Amen. Praise ye
the Lord.
yet let the Lord be glorified. Let us not forget his surpassing mercies to
this nation; but bless him, that whatever our demerits have been, yet has ever
approved himself like himself faithful and gracious, and so will ever be to his
people, who ought therefore in the memory of past, and the faith of future
mercies, to bless him for it whilst the world endures, and to this let all
Israel subscribe and consent, one and other, for it is their duty and the
Lords due from them. Therefore fail not on your part, let nothing discourage
you from thus praising the Lord, and mark the issue.

The cvii. PSALM.
The Psalmist publish^th the Lords goodness, and stirs up his Israel both in
letter and spirit to be thankful for it, so many ways extended to them in all
dispensations of what nature soever. Yea, all afflicted ones whom though in
justice God punish for their sins, yet he spares them when they cry unto him;
for men's folly enforces God in goodness as well as in justice, to teach them
wisdom by chastisement, which so soon as they have learned they are released,
which providence and dispensations the Psalmist would not have lightly
over-looked, but solemnly acknowledged, together with those admirable
sea-providences in preserving and delivering men out of the jaws of death, that
King of fears; as also his just and powerful transmutations in nature, upon the
land as well as at sea, and the righteous and gracious government he exercises
upon the oppressor and oppressed respectively, which to the godly-wise ought to
be great rejoicing, to see such love in such providence.

O Give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good: for his mercy endures for ever.
1 LEt us give God his due praise and thanks for all those great and gracious
mercies which he has expressed to, and bestowed on us his people, and that
goodness that still remains with him in our behalfs by virtue of his Covenant,
which makes that his mercy shall not determine, but that we shall reap the
benefit of his gracious engagement, till all be fulfilled that is promised
concerning his people to the end of the world.

Let the redeemed of the Lord say so, whom he has redeemed from the hands of
the enemy:
2 Let us and all the redeemed of the Lord to the worlds end speak forth our and
their praiseworthy experinces, of God his goodness and mercy, whom he has
mightily rescued from under the cruel captivity of our deadly enemies, whether
temporal or spiritual, Pharaoh or the devil, by Christ or Moses.

And gathered them out of the lands, from the East and from the West, from the
North and from the South.
3 And whom he has chosen from among the confused heap of mankind to be
peculiarly his, and gathered far and near his elect from out all places on
earth to inhabit heaven, as he did us his Israel first out of Mesopotamia,
whence Abraham and his family was called, and after that out of Egypt to be
possessors of Canaan.

They wandered in the wilderness in a solitary way, they found no City to
dwell in.
4 In passage whereunto they had many a weary step in a desert wilderness, as
the godly must exspect in their pilgrimage here, and during all that time had
no settled habitation, but sought one to come, as the faithful must do, who like
strangers and wayfaring men here on earth live upon the promise and
expectation of heaven hereafter.

5 All that while having nothing to sustain them, Hungry and thirsty, their
soul fainted in them.
neither bread nor water, but what providence (and that extraordinary)
administered to them, which did supply them, but not till God had tried and
humbled them with the want, (yea, very great want) even of needful and
essential accommodations, as spiritually he orders his Church and chosen people
during this their peregrination.

6 When they were necessitated and saw that by no ordinary course of nature,
Then they cried unto the Lord in their trouble, and he delivered them out of
their distresses.
nor no humane help they could be supplied, they cried to the Lord for what
they lacked, and he never failed them when they did so, but super-naturally
supplied to them, both bread and water, and protection too when their
necessity required it; and that Moses faithfully craved it for them, as
spiritually he provides for and sustains his Church, when their
soul-necessities sends them, and Christ's intercession recommends them to him.

7 And he guided them by his own special conduct with a visible pillar of cloud
and fire, And he led them forth by the right way, that they might go to a City
of habitation.
continually protecting and directing them the way that was most for his glory
and their good, though to their carnal eyes least seeming so, toward the land
of Canaan there to settle them in tranquillity, and rest and possess them of
Towns and Cities ready built and provided to their hands; like care to which he
takes for his Church spiritual, affording them invisible conduct all along this
life in the manifold windings and turnings thereof, which is the best, though
seemingly not the nearest way to heaven where they shall enter into their rest,
and be everlasting inhabitants of the new Jerusalem, the City which has
foundations, whose builder and maker is God, purchased and prepared for them by
Christ.

Oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his wonderful
works to the children of men.
8 Oh that all men that every where participate of the goodness of God, some
more some less, some in one kind some in another would make answerable returns
to him, and take faithful notice of his admirable works of providence
principally to his Church, but generally to all, to praise him for them and
acknowledge his grace and goodness in them.

For he satisfies the longing soul, and fills the hungry soul with goodness.
9 For its he that fills the hearts of men with food and gladness, and the souls
of penitents that hunger and thirst after righteousness with enough of it.

Such as sit in darkness and in the shadow of death, being bound in affliction
and iron.
10 Such as either in body or soul are in a comfortless condition, and have the
sentence of death really, or in their own sense and apprehension, past upon
them, and are detained in outward bonds, or trouble of spirit, or both.

Because they rebelled against the words of God, and contemned the counsel of
the most high.
11 Because they have sinned against the Law of God written in their hearts, or
the word of God written in the Scriptures, and refused to be ruled by his
reason, who as he is the Lord of all things, ought also to be theirs, and they
obedient to his dictates.

Therefore he brought down their heart with labor, they fell down and there
was none to help.
12 Therefore did the Lord and does still upon occasion so load them with
outward or inward sorrows, either by enemies, cross accidents, or desertions,
that they are made glad to confess their folly, and to humble themselves before
the Lord, (whom they before set light by) when they find themselves helpless in
any other way, than by the powerful hand or free grace of God.

13 Then they used and are wont to make their addresses to God in such
inextricable extremities, Then they cried unto the Lord in their trouble, and
he saved them out of their distresses.
and he both has done and of mercy will still in such cases, when their
troubles have wrought so good effect, hear the cries of afflicted suppliants,
to ease and deliver them.

14 Out of that disconsolate condition whereinto he cast them for their
rebellions, He brought them out of darkness and the shadow of death, and brake
their bands in sunder.
that he might humble them, and then be gracious to them.

15 (Oh that all men that every where participate of the goodness of God would
make answerable returns to him, Oh that men would praise the Lord for his
goodness, and for his wonderful works to the children ofmen.
and take faithful notice of his admirable works of providence, principally to
his Church, but generally to all, to praise him for them and acknowledge his
grace and goodness in them.)

16 For in such cases when and where the afflicted have turned to the Lord by
sorrow for their sin, For he has broken the gates of brass. and cut the bars
of iron in ^^nder.
and strong cries after mercy, what infinite difficulties has he broken
through and removed? and his power and providence is the same for ever to
extricate and give relaxation to such afflicted ones, all ages have made this
manifest.

17 Men void of the fear of the Lord which only is true wisdom, Fools, because
of their transgressions, and because of their iniquities, are afflicted.
or that have it, yet foolishly by temptation or negligence deviate from it,
and to gratify their lusts by impiety or iniquity displease the Lord, these
thereby bring evil upon themselves.

18 God so severely chastizing their sins with inward Their soul abhors all
manner of meat, and they draw near unto the gates of death.
or outward pains in body or mind, that they are brought to that pass to abhor
the very sight and taste of all manner of meat which should sustain nature, and
are brought in all men's seeming to deaths door.

Then they cry unto the Lord in their trouble, he saves them out of their
distresses.
19 Then they use to make their addresses to God in such inextricable
extreamities, and he both has done, and of mercy will still, in such cases,
when their troubles have wrought so good effect, hear the cries of afflicted
suppliants to ease and deliver them.

He sent his word, and healed them, and delivered them from their destruction.
20 For so soon as his rod drives them to him, he cannot but (as he was wont)
compassionate them, and therefore as by his command the affliction (whatever it
be) befell them, so also at his word they are cured how deadly soever the
disease be, his command is enough to restore them to life and liberty.

Oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his wonderful
works to the children of men.
21 Oh that all men that every where participate the goodness of God, would make
answerable returns to him, and take faithful notice of his admirable works of
providence, principally to his Church, but generally to all, to praise him for
them, and acknowledge his grace and goodness in them.

And let them sacrifice the sacrifices of thanksgiving, and declare his works
with rejoicing.
22 That men would note the works of God, and be so sensible of his benefits,
especially his own select people, as to be thankful for them both inwardly in
heart, and outwardly also celebrate them with sacrifices according to the rule
in such cases, and with joyful hearts join in the memorizing and magnifying of
his works of power and grace at his sanctuary.

They that go down to the sea in ships, that do business in great waters.
23 Seamen and merchants that trade in foreign Countries and commodities, and
so are necessitated to venture themselves in the deep and main Ocean and are
exposed far from land among the storms and surges incident to great waters, in
unsteady ships.

24, 25 These have daily and visibly experience of the power of God raising the
winds, These see the works of the Lord, and his wonders in the deep.
and by them causing terrible storms and tempests that swell the seas with
mountainous waves. For he commands, and raises the stormy wind, which
lifts up the waves thereof.


26 That hoise the vessel they sail in, in an instant as high as the clouds,
They mount up to the heaven, they go down again to the depths, their soul is
melted because of trouble.
so that the face of the waters under them show like a valley from an hill, and
on a sudden they descend again as low as before, they were high viewing the
waves pendent over their heads as if the whole Ocean would overwhelm the ship,
whereat their hearts so misgive, that every moment they expect death, which
seems inevitable.

27 Thus they continue tossed and tumbled hither and thither at the pleasure of
the waves, They reel to and fro, and stagger like a drunken man, and are at
their wits end.
the ship not being able to keep any course, reeling first on this side and
then on that as the winds blow, or the waves beat upon it, like a man that is
drunk, nor know they how in the world to help or save themselves, but give all
for lost both the ship and all that is in her, their fears so amazing them that
they can exercise neither Art nor strength, nor if they could, would it avail
in such concussions of winds and waves.

28, 29 Then in self-despair, Then they cry unto the Lord in their trouble,
and he brings them out of their distresses.
when all creature-hopes are at an end, they usually apply themselves to God
(seldom before,) and then he lets them see his power in their weakness, He
makes the storm a calm, so that the waves thereof are still.
and that their extremity is his opportunity, makes the storm a calm, and
quickly reduces their fears and the seas outrages to a peaceable period.

30 Then they are as much overcome with joy as before with fear, Then are they
glad because they be quiet, so he brings them unto their desired haven.
when their lives are as it were restored, and their troubles removed, thus the
Lord is gracious to them, and brings them that ere while valued not their lives
and lading at any thing, safely to land in the port they so often prayed to be
in, when they were ready every foot to sink.

Oh^ that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his wonderful
works to the children of men.
31 O that all men, that every where participate of the goodness of God, would
make answerable returns to him, and take faithful notice of his admirable works
of providence, principally to his Church, but generally to all, to praise him
for them, and acknowledge his grace and goodness in them.

Let them exalt him also in the congregation of the people, and praise him in
the assembly of the elders.
32 Let such mercies be every where memorized, and in all companies praise-fully
related, whether in congregations ecclesiastical those solemn meetings of his
people in the sanctuary; or civil, in juridical and magistratical conventions
of Rulers and Governors, that all may hear and fear, and praise the Lord
Almighty.

He turns rivers into a wilderness, and the water-springs into dry ground.
33 We see what alterations and changes in nature are wrought in many places of
the world, how he dries up rivers, and causes drought where before was plenty
of water.

A fruitful land into barrenness, for the wickedness of them that dwell therein.
34 How for the sins of the inhabitants and abuse of his mercies, he makes many
a fruitful land and country barren and fruitless, we have known it to be true
in ours, than which none was more fertile, when God blessed it, nor none more
sterril, when our sins cursed it

He turned the wilderness into a standing water, and dry ground into
water-springs.
35 And on the contrary, when he bespeaks blessing to a place, it shall be
blessed, The dry and desert places of the earth he can and does often times make
fruitful and habitable, furnishes them with springs and water courses that were
like the torrid zone.

And there he makes the hungry to dwell, that they may prepare a City for
habitation.
36 And there many times he bestows the outcasts of other nations, the poor
and abject people, yea, his own persecuted ones, causing them by providence
there to set down their staff to plant colonies, and begin a new Commonwealth
in peace and quiet from their oppressors and contemners, and to prosper by
degrees from rude beginnings and scattered dwellings, to cohabit in Towns and
Cities.

37 And to exercise husbandry, And sow the fields and plant vineyards, which
may yield fruits of increase.
plowing and planting, fields and vine-yards and reduce them by Gods blessing
thereupon to a yearly and orderly increase, like other places long inhabited.

38 The Lord also in time by his blessing multiplies them (as we know he has
done us, He blesses them also, so that they are multiplied greatly, and
suffers not their cattle to decrease.
from a very few) to a considerable and numerous people, and (with them)
proportionably increases their cattle, the whilst they please him.

39 But when they have forgot their low beginnings, Again, they are minished
and brought low through oppression, affliction, and sorrow.
and Gods great blessings, grow proud and sensual, practice wickedness in stead
of honesty and piety, God soon changes the scene, he that raises them up
quickly casts them down, and as before he blessed them with freedom, and
preserved them from evil, so now he lets them loose to every vexation and
affliction, when they become a vexation unto him, chastising them with wars,
plagues, and civil oppressions, that minisheth their number, impoverisheth
their plenty, and renders their lives uncomfortable.

40 Nor does the Lord only afflict wicked and degenerated underlings, He
pours contempt upon Princes, and causes them to wander in the wilderness,
where there is no way.
but Kings and Princes also are judged by him; If they forget their duties unto
him, he makes their people do the like to them, and casts their honor in the
dust at home and abroad, rendering them scornful and contemptible, and
intricates them into such Labyrinths of troubles, that all their policy and
King-craft cannot extricate them, or show them a way out.

Yet sets he the poor on high, and makes him families like a ^lock.
41 And as he pulls down unjust and wicked Princes from the top of honor and
voluptuousness into penury and disgrace, so on the other hand is he as mindful
to protect and deliver the poor oppressed people from under the inhumanity of
such tyrants when they cry to him, and makes them able to overtop their
oppressions and oppressors, by advancing them and abasing these, blessing them
with a numerous offspring, and making them able in a state of liberty and
freedom to spread forth their branches that ere-while were stocked by tyranny
and oppression, witness our condition under, and from under Pharaoh.

The righteous shall see it, and rejoice; and all iniquity shall stop her
mouth.
42 Those that have eyes in their heads, the godly-wise shall take notice of
such dispensations of justice and providence, respectively to good and bad, and
shall rejoice in confidence and hope of Gods goodness to them, and in the
goodness of their conscience and conversation toward him, when they see that
God takes notice of men and their manners, and that sooner or later he will
make it appear so, and as the good rejoice to see the reins of government in
Gods hand, so the wicked are sorry for it, and down in the mouth to see they
are under judicature, and not lawless as they hoped they had been.

Who so is wise, and will observe those things, even they shall understand the
loving kindness of the Lord.
43 Those whom God has endowed with grace and spiritual understanding (the
only true wisdom,) and will set themselves faithfully and heedfully to
consider and observe his judgments upon wicked oppressors, and his strange
providence in the behalf of the innocent and humble suppliant, to deliver,
bless, and prosper him, as he has done us: They shall experimentally perceive
the love and tender affection the Lord bears his people that sincerely serve
him, trust in him, and call upon him, and how safe and comfortable it is to do
so.

The cviii. PSALM.
A Psalm made by David, Psalm cviii. A Song, or Psalm of David.
to be sung and played by voices and instruments.

THis 108 Psalm is made up, O God my heart is fixed: I will sing and give
praise, even with my glory.
or composed of the two latter parts of two foregoing Psalms. Awake Psalterie
and harp, I my self will awake early.
viz. the 57. and 60. which being joined together upon the same, or like
occasion of success and victory do here make one entire Psalm. I will praise
thee O Lord: among the People: and I will sing praises unto thee among the
nations.


Therefore, For thy mercy is great above the heavens: and thy truth reaches
unto the clouds.
for these five first verses of this Psalm, Be thou exalted O God above the
heavens: and thy glory above all the earth.
see the Paraphrase upon the five last verses. viz. the 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. of the
57. Psalm, they being the same.

And for these eight That thy beloved may be delivered: save with thy right
hand and answer me.
last verses of this Psalm, God has spoken in his holiness: I will rejoice, I
will divide Sechem, and meet out the valley of Succoth.
see the Paraphrase upon Gilead is mine, Manasseh is mine: Ephraim also is the
strength of mine head, Judah is my lawgiver.
the eight last verses. Moab is my wash-pot, over Edom will I cast my shoe:
over Philistia will I triumph.
viz. the 5, Who will bring me into the strong city? who will lead me into
Edom.
6, 7, 8, 9, 10, Wilt not thou, O God, who have cast us off? and wilt not thou,
O God, go fo^th with our hosts?
11, 12. of the 60. Psalm, Give us help from trouble: for vain is the help of
man.
they also being the same. Through God we shall do valiantly: for he it is that
shall tread down our enemies.


The cix. PSALM.
David does promiscuously and prophetically in this Psalm treat of Christ and
himself. And though Saul, Doeg and Judas be eminently to be understood, one, or
all of them by the third person singular, in diverse verses; yet for most part
he intends thereby his enemies in the general, as they were united in
conspiracy against him, together with the nation of the Jews, embodied (as it
were) in one ^oint combination against Christ, as appears by the third person
plural, used in other verses, chiefly in the 20th, which is a summinarie, and
explanatorie conclusion to his foregoing maledictions, showing the persons he
meant them to, and for what. And so passes from his adversaries to himself,
where Christ is still here and there to be taken in. Praying as their
confusion, so his preservation, argued from Gods mercy, his own misery, and
the glory that God will get, and praises that he will give thereupon.

Psalm cix. To the chief musician A Psalm of David.
To him that is the first and principal of all the Quire, do I David, that made
this Psalm, recommend it for his care and ordering it to be sung.

HOld not thy thy peace, O God, of my praise.
1 O Lord, as I know thou art not regardless of my unjust calumniations, so I
pray thee make it appear upon my calumniators; let them find thou take notice
of the wrong they do me, O God, who has all my life long given me cause to
praise thee for thy goodness, and with whom I am well accepted, though of men
rejected, as the Messiah shall be.

For the mouth of the wicked and the mouth of the deceiptful are opened against
me: they have spoken against me with a lying tongue.
2 For such as make no conscience of what they say, and that studiously abuse
the ears of Saul whom they know hates me; they spare not to let fly aginst me
all manner of lies and slanders, to gain them his favor, and me his dis-favour.

They compassed me about also with words of hatred: and fought against me
without a cause.
3 They do me all the wrong they can, in word, or deed, reproching and
threatening me on all hands, as if they would eat me up alive, and causelessly
with open violence attempt to take away my life.

For my love, they are mine adv^rsaries: but I give my self unto prayer.
4, 5 Nay, I did not only walk inoffenssively toward them, but did them many
actual good offices, And they have rewarded me evil for good: and hatred for my
love.
and ever expressed my self a friend to them as occasion served, and the more I
have endeavored to express my love and loyalty, the more I am requited with
hatred and malignity, seeking my life that have saved theirs, as the Jews do
Christ's; but as he, so I, desire, nor seek not revenge, or like for like, as to
my self, but refer me and my cause to be judged by God, upon whose faith and
protection I cast my self, praying only deliverance from them, and that they
may be of better minds.

6 But in zeal to thee, Set thou a wicked man over him: and let Satan stand at
his right hand.
as they are enemies to thy Church and people, and forerunners of those that
shall betray, and murder the Messiah, and as a Prophet and public person, so
I wish that their deserts may over-take them; let them reap oppression as they
sow it; let those that hate and persecute me for thy sake, because I am thy
select and anointed servant, be as the Jews and Judas shall for betraying and
crucifying the Lord of life, how shall the one be captivated to the heathenish
Roman Empire, and the other exposed to Satan, that enemy of mankind to prevail
against him, and destroy him, even with his own very hands, by making away
himself?

7 Let them find such favor as shall Judas at the hands of the Chief-priests
and Elders upon his repentance, When he shall be judged, let him be condemned:
and let his prayer become sin.
even to be judged and condemned from his own confession out of his own mouth;
yea, both by God and man be unpitied and unpardoned.

8 Let them not live to the end of their lives, Let his days be few: and let
another take his office.
as they may be prolonged by nature, but cut short their days by some violent
and unnatural death, such as Judas shall die, and possess another more worthy
of their place and office, as Judas his Apostleship shall be transferred upon
Matthias, and the Jewish privileges translated to the Gentiles for crucifying
Christ.

Let his children be fatherless: and his wife a widow.
9 As the sin of my persecutour, and Christ's crucifiers, is communicative, and
tends to the destruction not of me only, but of Christ his Church and Spouse
also, so let their punishment be derivative, let their wives and children
become widows and fatherless by their untimely ends, pitied and relieved of
none, for that they oppress, and are merciless to the innocent and afflicted.

Let his children be continual vagabonds, and beg: let them seek their bread
also out of their desolate places.
10 Let my persecutours prosperity be hateful, as shall the Jews amongst all
nations; let them that have made me an exile out of my own Country, among the
heathen Idolaters, be themselves, and their children after them, no better, but
be like the wandering Jews, that when they have crucified the Lord of glory,
shall not be restored into Canaan as aforetime, (out of their captivities) but
be continual vagabonds, a dispersed people in all countries, glad to beg an
abiding place any where, being hateful every where, and driven so from place
to place, that very necessity shall enforce them to take up, and seek relief
in the most abject desolate places of the world, such as will scarce yield them
to keep life and soul, and glad they may.

Let the extortioner catch all that he has: and let the stranger spoil his
labor.
11, 12 Let them become a prey to all manner of men; let the griping usurious
extortioner, so entangle their estates in bonds and bills, and use upon use,
that they may never be able to come out of debt, Let there be none to extend
mercy unto him: neither let there be any to favor his fatherless children.
till the creditor seize on all they have, and turn them out of doors a
begging; let them find no manner of mercy, but be esteemed as enemies of
mankind; every where, where they are, let them be made a prey, counted for
intruders, and exposed to the spoil and rapine of the inhabitants, and natives
of all countries where they come, as a people not fit to be entertained any
where into scocietie and protection; both they and their children, though never
so fatherless, and destitute, let them be relict and deserted of all, according
to the curse of guiltless blood, which they brought upon them and theirs; so
let it be with them, and upon them.

13 Let my persecutours by the sword of thy justice, Let his posterity be cut
off, and in the generation following let their name be blotted out.
weilded in the hands of their enemies, be quite cut off; let them be destroyed
root and branch, so that after a while, no succession, or name of them may
remain, (though in, yet) not over Israel, but the rule thereof be utterly and
for ever trans-ferred from them to another, as shall befall the rebellious
Jews, Christ's persecutours, by the Romans, no name, nor place of any such
nation, (once so famous) shall remain, but be quite blotted out, a Lo-ammi or
vagabond people they shall be at best, and Christian, written in the room of it
in the next age of thy Church, which shall be among the Gentiles, to whom thou will trans-fer thy grace and favor for ever.

14 Let the persisting in the same sin of abrenunciation, Let the iniquity of
his fathers be remembered of the Lord: and let not the sin of his mother be
blotted out.
and blaspheming Christ by their scattered progeny, bring to remembrance the
guilt of all their stiff-necked predecessors transgressions, and rebellions
ever since they were a Church, espoused to thee their Lord and husband, the
punishment whereof was then sparingly inflicted by thee, but now upon divorce,
and putting away, let justice and judgment run down like a torrent upon them
without any mixture and stop of mercy.

Let them be before the Lord continually: that he may cut off the memory of
them, from the earth.
15 As the blood of Christ shall always appear before God, so let the sins of
them do that murtherously shed it, that as they would have destroyed the
Messiah, whom yet God raised again, so his vengeance may root out them, either
to have no being, or to be hateful and odious where ever they are.

Because that he remembered not to show mercy: but persecuted the poor and
needy man, that he might even slay the broken in heart.
16 Let such things befall mine enemies, whose mercilesness to me does in a
figure pourtray out the usage of Christ himself; for as they show me no more
mercy in misery, but are the more cruel and pitiless, by how much I am the
more miserable, and the more they see me implunged into distress, and
insupportable grief of body and mind, by so much the more eagerly lust they
after my life to take it away, thus shall it be with him, and so as aforesaid,
let it be with them.

As he loved cursing, so let it come unto him: as he delighted not in blessing
so let it be far from him.
17 Let the cursed calumnies and balsphemies, of mine and his enemies, wherein
they are so conversant, bring like evil upon their own heads, as they intend to
others; let their curses light upon themselves that refuse salvation and
blessing, and put it far from them when God graciously visites them with it,
renouncing me for their King, and Christ when he comes for their Savior.

As he clothed himself with cursing, like as with a garment: so let it come
into his bowels like water, and like oil into his bones.
18 Let such as take the curse, and bring the guilt of mine and Christ's
guiltless blood upon themselves, have enough for it, as they are ambitious to
be known to be his crucifiers, and my persecutours, and voluntarily involve
themselves into so great a sin, and the deadly consequences that attend it, by
acting the one, and laboring the other, so let it be unto them, let hardness
of heart, blindness of mind, and seared consciences, be the cursed product of
such wicked bloud-suckers.

19 Let the guilt and curse they so sinfully bring upn themselves, Let it be
unto him as the garment which covers him; and for a girdle wherewith he is
girded continually.
never depart from them, but stick by them, and accompany them in all places
and throughout all ages.

20 Let these foresaid maledictions be the judgment and reward of mine, Let
this be the reward of mine adversaries from the Lord, and of them that speak
evil against my soul.
and my Lord Christ's adversaries, who can right himself and me, though all men
join together to wrong us, and devise to take away both good name and life it
self, as mine enemies and his do endeavor, and shall in great measure effect;
but woe be to them by whom such offenses do come.

21 But Lord, But do thou for me, O God the Lord, for thy names sake: because
thy mercy is good, deliver thou me.
as much as others are against me, and mine Antitype, the Lord Christ; so thou
that art his God and father, and in him mine, be thou as much for me and him,
for thy covenant and righteousness sake, wherein and whereby thy grace and
faithfulness is engaged to approve thy self a merciful good God, protector of
the innocent, and deliverer of the oppressed, be thou so to me, let my
preservation and deliverance from mine enemies by thine Almighty power,
adumbrate Christ's powerful resurrection out of the grave, whence thou shall
raise him, and the Churches final deliverance out of all her terrestial
miseries by thy mercy, both whom I personate.

22 Let both thy mercy, For I am poor and needy: and mine heart is wounded
within me.
and my misery move thee, who am low brought by reason of outward afflictions,
and inward fears and terrors which affect me deeply, and distress me sore, as
Christ himself shall be with complicate evils, within and without, in soul and
body-sufferings.

I am gone like the shadow, when it declineth: I am tossed up and down as the
locust.
23 My life seems to me by reason of mine imminent dangers that threaten death
every moment, to be but as a shadow when the sun is setting, ready to
extinguish, and whilst I do live, I have no setlement, but am harrowed hither
and thither, from place to place, by the incessant persecutions and various
contrivances of mine enemies to take away my life, even as the grasshopper, that
never rests in a place, but by every blast of wind is driven to and fro.

My knees are weak through fasting: and my flesh fails of fatness.
24 My sorrows are so great, perils so many, and mind so restless, that through
voluntary abstinence, and involuntarie faintness, and decay of nature, I am
become stomackless and strengthless, my joints enfeebled, and my flesh
macerated.

I became also a reproach unto them: when they looked upon me, they shaked
their heads.
25 And this my misery was so far from moving mercy, or pity in my
persecutours, that they rejoiced to see it, and mocked at me, yea, and at thee
too for it, reviling me with taunting terms, saying in derision, Is this the
man that must be King of Israel? and in disdainful diffidence of any such
matter, wagging their heads at me, by that reproachful gesture, scornfully
concluding the contrary, like as they shall demean themselves to Christ
hanging upon the Cross, pass by him, look upon him, and in that dolorous
posture afford him no other pity then scornful nods, and bitter mocks.

Help me, O Lord my God: O save me according to thy mercy.
26 I am in a condition so desperate, hopeless, and friendless, that none but
thy self can or will stand me in any stead. But though it be so with me, yea,
if it were worse, if worse could be, I would not doubt either thy power, or
mercy, nor shall the badness of my condition overthrow my faith of relation,
but I still believe thee to be as my God, in Christ, so as able and gracious to
deliver me, as powerful and faithful to raise him, which I pray thee to do
for thy mercies sake in him.

27 That my wicked and ungodly enemies may by experience of thy just judgments
upon themselves, That they may know, that this is thy hand; that thou Lord have
done it.
and evident signs of favor unto me, know thou have done it for me, because
none but an Almighty power and goodness, could have effected it, as shall
appear to be in Christ his resurrection, and Jews dispersion.

28 Their cursed wishes, Let them curse, but bless thou: when they arise let
them be asham^d: but let thy servant rejoice.
false slanders, and wicked devices, Lord, frustrate them, nay, let them bring
forth quite contrary effects, the more ill they intend me, let the greater good
befall me, and let the evil befall themselves, let them do nothing that they
may have cause to brag of in the issue, when they are most confident, let them
be least successful in what they unjustly attempt, but let me have cause to
make my boasts of thee, and rejoice, when as they hang their heads for sorrow
and shame,

29 Let mine adversaries have no cause of insulting over me, Let mine
adversa^ies be clothed with shame: and let them cover themselves with their own
confusion, as with a mantle.
but be ashamed of all they have done, when they see that it is not against me,
but thee they did it, by the event; let them see what a fair thread they have
spun, that ends in nothing but shame and confusion, that that is the web they
have taken so much pains to weave for themselves all this while.

I will greatly praise the Lord with my mouth: yea, I will praise him among the
multitude.
30 When thou shall have so done, whereof I am most sure and certain, then will
I publish thy praises, and magnify thy mercies in the sight and hearing of all
thy people, by Sacrifices and Psalms.

For he shall stand at the right hand of the poor: to save him from those that
condemn his soul.
31 For all my sad condition, and the grievous plight I am in, yet it shall
appear God is not so far from me as they think for, but that he is at hand to
help, when his mine, and their time is come, spite of what they can do to
hinder; and notwithstanding their confidence because of their power, and my
poverty, yet he can, and will save me from those that in their own thoughts
have adjudged, and concluded me to death.

The cx. PSALM.
David that Kingly Prophet, and sweet singer, in this Psalm shows the glorious
exaltation of Christ in our nature at Gods right hand, there to rule as sole
sovereign, whence it shall come to pass, that by his divine spiritual
omnipotency, his Gospel shall be effectual to the creating this King, a
Kingdom of loving loyal subjects maugre all his and their enemies and opposers;
specially upon his first inthronization and royal nuptials; his Church shall
get ground spite of the devil, and all those earthly Potentates he s^ts on
work to hinder it. Such power has he by virtue of his Kingly office to protect
his people against men and devils, and of such ^fficacie is his Priesthood with
God, able to save his Church to the uttermost, ever living to make
propitiatory intercession for them in the heavens. And he concludes with
rendering the reason of all this his high esteem, and powerful prevailancie
with God, and power over angels and men, even because for the effecting of this
his Mediatourship and man's redemption, he shall drink of a full cup, the bitter
waters of affliction shall be poured out upon him, and wrung out to him with an
Almighty hand.

Psalm cx. A Psalm of David.
A Psalm which David made in the spirit of Prophecy.

THe Lord said unto my Lord, fit thou on my right hand until I make thine
enemies thy footstool.
1 GOd the Father in his eternal council and covenant, said to his son, who is
God and man, my Lord and Savior, (whose resurrection, ascension, and sitting
at Gods right hand in dominion and power, I shadow out in mine advancement from
my low and troublelous state, to the throne and scepter of Israel) for that
thou who art my fellow in the Godhead, have undertaken to do my whole will in
the Redemption of man, and condescended to take his nature the better to effect
it, and therein has effectually wrought it, by dying for sin, but being
without sin, has conquered death which could not hold thee, and art risen and
ascended into heaven. I give thee therefore, there all power and authority in
that very nature, to rule and exercise sovereign and supreme Jurisdiction over
the Church, which thou have purchased by thy blood, together with the empire,
and absolute dominion of all things else, for the Churches sake, whose King and
sole Mediator thou art; and this thy government, I give thee to execute in a
throne of majesty, equal with my self in the highest heavens, thence in thy
humane nature with divine power to dispense and transact all things belonging
to this thy Kingdom, whilst there is any Church, or that I have any people on
earth to be governed, officiated for by thee, even until I who am as solicitous
of thine honor as thou art of mine, by my power dispensed by thy self, shall
have subdued unto that thy humane nature (once so contemptible) all thine
enemies whether devils, men, or things, Jews or Gentiles, that shall oppose or
not submit to thy regiment; yea, death it self, or whatsoever shall impede the
completing of that glorious Kingdom of thy Mediatourship, in, for, and over
the Church, bone of thy bone, and flesh of thy flesh, until thou have fulfilled
her number, and safely brought the last man and member of that thy mystical
body to heaven, there in body and soul to be glorified with thee; till then I
say, shall this royal office of thine continue, whereof having then given me a
just account according to thy undertaking, and my covenant thou shall deliver
up the regal state and Kingdom of that thy Mediatour-ship in the humane nature,
into my hands as God alone, for ever after of my self in the divine nature,
only to govern that glorified Church, which by a mighty, and outstretched
arm thou have bought, and brought thither, there to remain in perfect happiness
with thee, and under me for ever.

The Lord ^shall send the rod of thy strength out of Sion: rule thou in the
midst of thine enemies.
2 The Lord Almighty, who is able to bring to pass great things by weak means,
shall raise up glorious lights in Jerusalem and Jurie, where thou first
manifests thy self, as Aopstles, Evangelist, etc. that shall give light to them
that sit in darkness, the glad tidings of the Gospel, which is the mighty
power of God to salvation, that rod of Moses to save Israel, shall by these his
emissareis be held forth and preached to the Gentiles, people of all nations
and languages, whereby they that now are foreigners shall be brought within
the pale, and shall take laws from thee, and be subjected to thee, O blessed
Savior, that art advanced in the humane nature (wherein thou sufferedst) in
such power and glory at the right hand of the most high God, there by his
appointment to sway the Scepter of thy Mediatorian Kingdom, by the power
whereof, the preaching of the Gospel, through the eternal spirit accompanying
it, shall maugre all opposition of Gentilism, who now are thy professed
enemies, and then shall strongly oppose thy Kingdom, prevail to set up thy
throne in the hearts of thy chosen all the world over, who shall every where
make glorious profession of thy name, and own thee for their Lord and King,
spite of all earthly opposing powers, and contemners of a crucified Savior,
who shall be no more able to hinder thy Church from flourishing, than thee from
rising out of the grave.

3 Those that are given to thee of God the Father, Thy people shall be willing
in the day of thy power, in the beauties of holiness from the womb of the
morning: thou have the dew of thy youth.
and redeemed by thee out of the world, when thou shall have offered thy self a
propitiatory, and taken possession of thy Kingdom at his right hand; through
thy mission of the spirit thence, and his mighty working by the word upon the
hearts of those thy people, they shall thick and threefold be converted,
neither the pravitie of their natures, nor their long accustomed Idolatries
shall obstruct their ready and cheerful compliance with the Gospel, but shall
willingly embrace the tender of grace, and come under thy governance in the
Church; which shall then so multiply as to assemble and conveen in all places
for the exercise of Christian religion, as thy people the Jews do at the
beautiful and holy Temple, (that type of Christ) in which Christian
Synagogues, especially in the first breaking forth of the light of the Gospel,
as the morning sun upon the face of the earth, shall be born unto thee out of
the then pregnant productive womb thereof, begotten by the holy Ghost in those
thy first loves and nuptial embraces of the Church, thy Spouse, immediately
upon thine ascension and investiture into glory, an offspring spread far and
wide upon the whole earth, as innumerable as the dew drops which insensibly
fall from the heavens, as the spirit shall then invisibly upon their hearts at
the preaching of the word.

The Lord has sworn, and will not repent: thou art a Priest for ever, after
the order of Melchisedeck.
4 For the great God of heaven by his everlasting decree, and immutable oath,
revealed for the consolation of his people, and corroboration of their faith,
has, never to revoke it, conferred upon thee their Mediator and Savior, the
honor and office of that everlasting Priesthood (not temporary, as the
Levitical, but) without change or succession, pourtraied in Melchisedeck. Yea,
to be a King and Priest in one person as he was, and none else; to typifie that
glorious privilege to belong to thee and none other; who therefore at thy
Fathers right hand for thy Church and people, transacts a royal Priesthood of
righteousness and peace according to the office, person, and name of
Melchisedeck, King of Salem.

The Lord at thy right hand shall strike through Kings in the day of his wrath.
5 The Lord, the God and Father, who only has the preheminencie of thee, as
thou have under him of of all things else, shall employ his power for the
advancement of thine honor, and revenge of thy dishonor, wrathfully
destroying Kings, Kingdoms that shall oppose themselves, and hinder the coming
of thy Kingdom in thy Churches growth and felicity, in the time when he thinks
fit to judge them for it.

He shall judge among the heathen, he shall fill the places with the dead
bodies: he shall wound the heads over many countries.
6 Thou who art paramount, the only He, or the promised Messiah, for the
Churhes comfort shall rule the world, the Gentiles shall be under his
Judicature, he will preserve his people that are converted to him, and profess
his name every where among the heathen, taking vengeance on their enemies, whom
he shall remarkably destroy, as he was wont to do the enemies of Israel. The
earthly Potentates of the world, shall find him to be above them; if they
bruise his heel, afflict his people, (as they will in all places) he will
bruise their heads, their greatness shall not privilege them at all.

7 If you will know the reason of this high preferment of Christ in our nature
at Gods right hand, He shall drink of the brook in the way: therefore shall he
lift up the head.
and of the power and head-ship he has there, it is because he shall drink
deep of the wrath of the Almighty, streamed down upon him in the way thereunto,
and for the obtaining thereof, by suffering a cursed death upon the Cross, with
bodily torments, and unutterable soul-agonies, the unavoidable means of
effecting his Mediatour-ship, and man's redemption; therefore shall he upon that
full and faithful discharge of his office here upon earth, ascend unto, and
sit for ever at the right hand of his Father which is in heaven, to act there
the glorified part thereof, in full power^, and absolute dominion over all
there and here, Angels and men, Jews and Gentiles, friends and foes.

The cxi. PSALM.
The Psalmist first gives the word, and then the example for praising the Lord,
which he tells us Gods works gives us cause enough to do, if we consider them
well; especially to his Church, supplying them in their need, possessing them
of the promised land, fulfilling his promises of grace to them, and for their
sakes his judgments (threatened) upon their enemies, for which he looks his
commandments should be respected, which are as binding to us, as his covenant
to him; and through grace his covenant is as binding to him, as they are to us.
Therefore he shows a man is never wise, (pretend what he will) till he have
gotten God upon this lock, to be his, by being Gods in faith and obedience. And
concludes as he begun, with invitation to praise him. Psalm cxi.


PRraise ye the Lord, I will praise the Lord with my whole heart: in the
assembly of the upright, and in the congregation.
1 LEt all of us be diligent and cordial in praising the Lord. I will not be
wanting on my part, and in mine own example herein, for he shall have the
heartiest thanks that I can give him, both in lesser meetings of entire
Israelites, that voluntarily, and frequently assemble themselves to perform
such holy exercises, as also in those more solemn, rare, and mixed
congregations that at times appointed assemble themselves at thy Sanctuary.

The works of the Lord are great: sought out of all them that have pleasure
therein.
2 Greatly does the Lord appear in his wondrous works of Creation, Providence,
and Redemption; his manifold attributes are made manifest therein, yet not to
all, but only to those that in love to God, love to busy their minds in the
practical contemplation of him, in them, that they may affect their hearts
toward him with suitable frame of thankfulness and praise, for the greatness
and goodness they are sensible of thereby.

His work is honorable and glorious: and his righteousness endures for ever.
3 All that he has done declares him to be for honor and power,
incomprehensible, nor shall one word fail of all that he has spoken concerning
what he will do, his Prophesies and promises; yea, and his threatenings too,
are as sure to be fulfilled as those which are already.

He has made his wonderful works to be remembered: the Lord is gracious and
full of compassion.
4 The Lord has done such memorable and admirable things for his Church in all
ages, as are never to be forgotten, but with praise and thanksgiving to be had
in everlasting remembrance, his grace in choosing, and compassion in relieving
and pardoning his people, is worthy our best observation and memory.

5 He has provided for his Church all along the Series of their successions,
He has given meat unto them that fear him: he will ever be mindful of his
covenant.
and in all their peregrinations, so that when in humble and faithful
addresses, they that feared him at any time sought unto him, they had supply of
needful mercies, both for themselves and others, that though they were of the
visible Church, yet did not so well deserve at his hands, their sins and
murmurings being enough to have made God unchurch them, but that he was
mindful of his covenant made with our forefathers, Patriarchs, and Prophets,
Types of Christ* not to do it; of which, as then he was, so still he is and
ever will be mindful, to be as good as his word in sparing and pardoning his
people, and blessing and preserving them, when in fear of him, and in the faith
of his covenant, they in humble-wise seek his favor toward them.

6 He made manifest enough his exceeding great power in those miraculous
victories he gave his people Israel over the Cananites, He has showed his
people the power of his works, that he may give them the heritage of the
heathen.
when they entered the promised land, which had been long possessed and
inhabited by those heathenish Idolaters, whom the Lord rooted out, to establish
them in it.

7 The things he has wrought have not only been Acts of power, The works of
his hands are verity and judgment; all his commandments are sure.
but also of Truth and Justice, his promises as well as his power have been
written in legible Caracters in those his wonderful dispensations to and for
his Church, as also his righteous judgments long before threatened to such
wicked wretches, and as his works have approved the faithfulness and
infallibility of his promises and comminations, so that other part of his word,
the Law of Commandments, a safe rule to walk by, is likewise as firm, God looks
they shall be obeyed by his people as certainly, and undispensably, as he gives
them leave to expect his promises and threats to be fullfilled by him for them.

They stand fast for ever and ever, and are done in truth and uprig^tness.
8 Both the one and the other, his word and works, commands and providence as
to his Churches preserving and governing, are built upon a firm foundation, the
good pleasure and free grace of God according to his word and covenant, and as
inseparable companions go together, God is good, and does good to those that
are good and keep his commandments, and ever will be so, his truth and
faithfulness binds him to be so, and to do so to such as in truth and
uprightness serve him.

He sent redemption unto his people, he has commanded his covenant for ever:
holy and reverend is his name.
9 The Lord from time to time when his people were in jeopardy or the thraldom
for their sins, if they cried unto him, and humbled themselves before him, he
delivered them, he has established his covenant of free grace as firm as any
Law, and has bound himself by the one as firmly, as us by the other, so that
his people shall ever find him to be the same unchangeable God for their good,
always provided they walk worthy of him, and becomingly toward him, in
reverence of his Majesty and obedience to his holiness.

10 A man that has never so much worldly wisdom, The fear of the Lord is the
beginning of wisdom, a good understanding have all they that do his
commandments; his praise endures for ever.
and lives in sin, is for all that, all that while but a fool, till in the
faithful application of Gods saving goodness, he be an altered man, and
fearing to offend him, is careful in all things to please him, then and never
till then he begins to be wise, with that which is true wisdom, for only they
have a right understanding both of the chiefest good, and their chiefest end
(what is best for themselves, and why they were made) that fulfill the will of
God their Creator, living thereafter, for therein is great reward. As his
mercy and faithfulness is and ever shall be firm to his faithful and obedient
people and Church in her preservation, and her enemies confusion, so ought to
be his praises as long and large as his benefits, which shall have no end.

The cxii. PSALM.
The Psalmist stirrs up the people of the Lord in works to praise him, the
benefit whereof will be theirs, their persons and posterities will be blessed
by it, in woe as well as in weal will God graciously visit such. He shows, a
charitable minded man is much set by of God, and by faith and a good conscience
in the worst of times, enjoys himself happily spite of those that malign him,
his liberal giving to the poor shall enrich him, when as the covetous wretch
for all his carking and caring shall suffer want, and envy his abundance. Psalm
cxii.


1 LEt the Lord have his due praises, PRaise ye the Lord. Blessed is the man
that fears the Lord, that delights greatly in his commandments.
for his great deservings and admirable excellencies that appear to be in him,
by what we see done by him, and that not only vocal but real, for he
principally praises him, and is certainly blessed of him, that with a filial
fear dares not offend him, and with a faith working by love is careful in all
things to please and obey him, whose happiness is holiness, and sin his
greatest affliction.

His seed shall be mighty upon earth: the generation of the upright shall be
blessed.
2 Nor will God determine his blessings upon himself, but extend them further
even to his posterity walking in his ways, witness our forefather Abraham, how
did the Lord multiply his seed according as he promised, and like blessings
has he in store for faithful Abraham's faithful offspring, who walking as he
did with an upright heart before God in perfect obedience, shall be as he was,
blessed in their own persons and posterities.

Wealth and riches shall be in his house: and his righteousness endures
forever.
3 God will both increase his family, and provide well for it, whereof our
times, and the times of our forefathers and Scripture-records have given good
testimony. He and his shall reap the benefit of his and their righteousness by
a Series of blessings, successively transferred by virtue of the covenant made
to him and them for many generations.

Unto the upright there arises light in the darkness: he is gracious, and full
of compassion, and righteous.
4 And though God does not always bless him that is of an upright heart, and
righteous conversation with external affluence; for his dispensations, though
agreeable to wisdom and justice, are various; yet this, such an one may be sure
of, that he shall find God most trusty in his greatest trialls, and no such
cloud of tribulation shall ever over-shadow him, but the sun of righteousness
shall shine through it upon his soul, with healing consolations in his wings;
for God whatsoever he may seem to be by his outward dispensations, is in his
native disposition very gracious and tenderly affected toward such, and just
to fulfill his goodness promised them, in one kind or other, but especially in
spirit.

5 The worldly minded man thinks he is happy and rich in laying up, A good man
shows favor and lends; he will guide his affairs with discretion.
but the good and godly differ from him, for they think themselves happy and
enriched by laying out, knowing, that as God favors them with blessings of
this life, so they ought to show favor unto others that want them, as
stewards, not owners of that they have; And therefore he that out of the love
he bears to God, loves his brother also, will not stick upon occasion to show
his love by his lending, yea, his care shall be so to walk as to credit his
profession, more than to benefit himself, to get and spend neither sinfully nor
profusely, but with a good conscience, and in an orderly sort, so that thereby
what he has may be blessed, and he made able to lend and not to borrow, and to
his power to supply others that by providence are enforced to borrow, and
cannot lend like himself.

6 Surely how ever the world think their liberality and charity is the next way
to beggary, Surely he shall not be moved for ever: the righteous shall be in
everlasting remembrance.
because Mammon is their God, yet it shall be otherwise with him, that in the
faith of God with godly wisdom expends what he has in pious uses, he shall
never be ashamed for so doing, though the world count it folly, he shall find
it both wisdom and providence so to do, he and his estate shall be upheld, when
many of those miserly diffidents, shall fall and come to lack, for God will
never forget to reward and be favorable to those, that in conscience and love
to him have laid out their store upon his that wanted.

7 Such an one shall have such provision laid up in God, He shall not be afraid
of evil tidings: his heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord.
and be so secure in him, as that he shall not fear the changes of times, nor
hazards and losses approaching, as they shall, that have much wealth and are
little conversant in faith and charity, who are ready to make away themselves
upon the very report of such things, having an evil conscience.

His heart is established, he shall not be afraid, until he see his desire
upon his enemies.
8 Though because he is good, therefore he may have many enemies as commonly it
falls out, yet shall he not care nor fear the worst they can do unto him,
having God and a good conscience to take his part and side with him, he shall
be as well satisfied and firmly persuaded of mercy to him, and judgments upon
them, as if he saw them already executed.

He has dispersed, he has given to the poor; his righteousness endures for
ever; his horn shall be exhalted with honor.
9 He has not hoarded up his pelf, but has scattered it here and there, by
lending and giving it amongst the poor as he saw them to want, like as seed is
cast into the ground, of which he shall reap the blessing. The righteous man
shall gather the fruit of his charity and beneficence, it shall follow him into
heaven, to be rewarded there, yea, and here also, God shall manifest his good
acceptance of his pious liberality, by blessing and prospering him both in his
estate and estimation.

The wicked shall see it and be grieved, he shall gnash with his teeth, and
melt away: the desire of the wicked shall perish.
10 So that the wicked covetous wretch shall to his grief behold himself
out-stript, his wisdom befooled by that which he counted foolishness, and the
highway to beggary, he shall be ready to eat his own flesh for envy at the
prosperity and increase of the righteous, the whilst his substance melts away,
and wastes insensibly like snow before the sun, notwithstanding his pains and
care to get and keep, his hopes and desires shall fail him, he shall attain
neither riches nor honor.

The cxiii. PSALM.
The Psalmist invites to the praises of God, specially his servants, and that
in all ages and places, both for his transcendent greatness, and for his no
less goodness, which his dispensations make to appear very remarkably, for
which again he excites them unto praises. Psalm cxiii.


1 LEt not the manifestations of God his power and goodness, PRaise ye the
Lord, praise O ye servants of the Lord, praise the name of the Lord.
in his works of creation and salvation be buried in ignorance and silence, but
take faithful notice of them, and give him grateful praises for them; it may
be the blind world neither will nor can, but you his sanctified and redeemed
ones, that profess to serve him, and not to be of the world, though in it,
specially ye Levites chosen by himself to that office, do you make it your
employment. Let him in his greatness and goodness be magnified by all that
serve him either by office or calling, whether Levites in letter or spirit,
praise ye the Lord.

2, 3 As largely as the power, Blessed be the name of the Lord, from this time
forth and for evermor^
wisdom, and goodness of God is declared for time and place, so let the
praisefull acknowledgements of him and them be extended in like sort, From the
(...) the sun unto the (...) down of the (...) the Lords name is (...) be
praised.
let none in no ages nor regions of the world, that have eyes in their heads
and tongues in their mouths be silent, but bless and praise him always in all
places as he well deserves.

4 The Empire of the whole world is the Lords, The Lord is high above all
nations, and his glory above the heavens.
he is King of Kings and Lord of Lords, his dominion is over all the earth, but
his throne in the glorious splendor of it is more, especially in the heaven of
heavens, where in brightness he exceeds the sun, which as it is under him
(though above us) so it is short of him, who from the highest top of Majesty and
Honor commands and orders all things, the heavens and the earth, which are as
far beneath him in glory, as in situation.

Who is like unto the Lord our God, who dwells on high?
5, 6 Who is like unto the Lord for greatness, that has his throne higher than
not only we can see, Who humbles himself to behold the things that are in
heaven, and in the earth?
but conceive* heaven that is so far above us, is under him, and the great men
of the earth, who in comparison of the vulgar are called Gods, are as far below
him as above them; Yet this God of greatness out of no less goodness, daineth
himself to be ours, and his Churches God, though but a parcel of people
compared to the world; whom yet he owns for his subjects and favorites, even
he to whom it is an abasing, considering the superlativeness of glory, that he
the Creator has above all creatures whatsoever, to condescend by way of rule
and governance to take notice of the things that are, and are done on earth,
nay, and in heaven also, so far are all below him that are made by him, and so
absolute and perfect is he in and of himself, from whom all things are, and to
whom nothing adds, neither Angels nor men.

He raises up the poor out of the dust, and lifts the needy out of the
dunghill:
7, 8 Yet does he agitate affairs here below, and dispose of his creatures as
best pleases him, and is most for his glory, That he may set him with Princes,
even with the Princes of his people.
many times raising men from an abject low estate and great poverty to honor
and opulency, yea, from the very lowest stair to the highest step of fortune,
as David from the sheepfolds to be King over his people Israel instead of Saul.

9 And in like sort by his Almighty power and good will he opens the womb that
was shut, He makes the barren woman to keep house, and to be a joyful mother
of children: praise ye the Lord.
and causes her that was in despair of having children by being long without,
to conceive, turns the grief of her barrenness into a joyful fruitfulness,
making her dry breasts give suck, and she to be mother and nurse of many
children. Take ye notice of these his greatness, goodness, and wonderful
dispensations to praise him for them, and the excellencies that shine forth in
them.

The cxiv. PSALM.
The Psalmist records a narrative of the rev^rend apprehension which the
senseless elements of earth and water had, at the Majesty and presence of the
Lord, when he went along with his people Israel from Egypt to Canaan, to
instruct them much more to do so, and wishes the earth it self would still
convince them of their duty when they neglect it, and are mindless of his
fore-past wondrous providence. Psalm cxiv.


1 WHen by the wonderful working of God the children of Israel went out of
Egypt, WHen Israel went out of Egypt, the house of Jacob, from a people of a
strange language.
entirely the whole twelve Tribes according to the families of Jacobs sonns,
when they I say were so marvellously rescued out of their long and grievous
captivity under the Egyptians, a people that ruled over them, as men rule over
beasts, rather by blows than words, being of strange language and estranged
affections, pitiless toward them;

2 The posterity of Israel were then the people of all the world he made choice
of, Judah was his sanctuary and Israel his dominion.
declaratively by signs and wonders to be their God and King, and that his
presence was as really and eminently amongst them, as ever after it was in the
most glorious times of the Church, when his sanctuary (the token of his
residence) was situate in Jerusalem Judahs lot, and the thrones of David and
Solomon were there erected.

The sea saw it, and fled; Jordan was d^iven back.
3 The red sea above its nature was made sensible of the power and presence of
the Lord with his people, insomuch as it reverently and submittingly withdrew
it self out of its place to make way for him and them to pass through, so
likewise did Jordan at their entrance into Canaan stop his course, and divide
his waves for the Ark (the pledge of God) and his people to pass through his
Channel.

The mountains skipped like ram^, and the little hills like lambs.
4 The famous mountain Sinai in the wilderness, when God to give his Law to his
people descended down upon it, the whole mount as great and ponderous as it
was, quaked greatly, and all those contiguous hills bordering upon it did the
like, so that by their motion they seemed rather to be sensible and living
creatures, than clods of earth.

What ailed thee, O thou sea, that thou fleddest? thou Jordan, that thou wast
driven back?
5, 6 O ye elements of earth and water, that by nature are without sense and
motion, saving to your center, what therefore was the cause that at those times
the sea and Jordan of themselves against nature, Ye mountains, that ye skipped
like rams, and ye little hills like lambs?
and no Art of man concurring did so withdraw. And that mount Sinai with the
adjacent hills so strangely moved and stirred like living creatures, was it
natural or supernatural? Why, the God of nature appeared and inspired them
above their natures, to teach his people the reverence and fear they should
conceive, when they draw nigh to him as he then did to them.

7 O the Majesty and terror of the Lord our God whose sanctuary and presence
is among us, Tremble thou earth at the presence of the Lord: at the presence of
the God of Jacob.
how ought it to affect us, that thus affected the senceless elements? still O
earth do thou instruct us, show us that holy fear and reverence, we that are
Isreal's offspring ought to perform to Jacobs God, when we forget it, by
trembling now as then at the representation and manifestation of himself.

8 Mind us of those miracles he wrought for our forefathers in the wilderness,
Which turned the rock into a standing water, the flint into a fountain of
waters.
the faith and usefulness whereof ought not to be let slip, with what Almighty
power he provided for them in their need, causing the dry and hard rocks
miraculously to supply so many hundred thousand men and cattle with plenty of
water.

The cxv. PSALM.
In some extremity or captivity by or under the heathen, as that of Babylon or
Antiochus, etc. This Psalm was made; wherein the Psalmist by an argument of
concession, taking their deliverance for granted, first makes his onset upon
God, and then by interrogation enforced from the heathen blasphemy, and his
peoples fidelity in him, and scorn of all Gods besides him, and God-makers:
Then comes to exhort Israel though low brought, to trust firmly in God for
better, which be enforces by an argument of Gods unchangeableness to his
Church; and the absolute necessity thereof, for if his Church perish, his
praise perishes, and then all things come to nothing. Psalm cxv.


NOt unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give glory, for thy mercy,
and for thy truths sake.
1 O Lord, when thou shall (as we know thou will) have delivered us out of this
miserable condition, we promise before hand, we will not rob thee of thy glory,
it shall be no merit nor motive out of thy self that shall cause it, thy power
and goodness, thy mercy and faithfulness must be it must do it, and when it is
done they alone shall wear it, we will acknowledge and ascribe it to nothing
else but thee, our great and gracious redeemer.

Wherefore should the heathen say, where (...) now their God?
2 What ever our demerits are, yet be more mindful of thine own honor than (by
our destruction and captivation, that declaratively are thy people above all
the world, and so taken notice of by the heathen) to expose thy self to their
scorn and obloquy, and to give them thereby occasion to insult blasphemously
over thy power and faithfulness, our trust and confidence, as if our profession
and thy promises were mere delusions; and that thou can not help us, or have
quite rejected us.

But our God is in the heavens, he has done whatsoever he pleased.
3 This, Lord, as to them will be the issue, though neither their Blasphemy nor
our misery shall abate of our faith and acknowledgement of thee, both to be our
God in covenant and adoption, and the sole God that in heaven art glorious, and
from thence rulest all things, and orderest all dispensations here on earth, so
that nothing befalls us thy people by any humane power that thou could not
have hindered if thou would, it is thou that have set them on work thus to
do by us in justice for our sins, else a hair of our heads could not have
perished by them.

4 It is not their Gods, Their Idols are silver and gold, the work of men's
hands.
but our own God that is able to do us harm, for they are but Idols at the
best, made of Gold and Silver, nor are they so much as their own makers, but
have their being from men, that have their being from thee, they make them that
made not themselves, and therefore must they needs be goodly Gods:

5 That are utterly liveless, They have mouths but they speak not: eyes have
they but they see not.
bare Statues and resemblances, for man's workmanship can go no further, he
cannot give life, and consequently neither sense nor motion, and therefore
though they have the fashion of a mouth, yet are they speechless, having
neither Soul nor Organs to animate and enable them, and so they have the
fashion of eyes as well as man can imitate, but are as blind as Beetles.

6 Likewise they have the similitude of ears, They have ears but they hear not:
noses have they but they smell not.
but are as deaf as doore-nails, and of noses, but smell neither sweet nor
sour.

7 They have very artificial hands, They have hands but they handle not: feet
have they but they walk not, neither speak they through their throat.
but can do nothing with them, and fashionable feet, but can neither go nor
stand, but as they are otherwise upheld, and their neck serves merely to hold
their heads on their shoulders, but is of no Organicall use at all for speech,
etc.

8 And they that make them are as void of true understanding, They that make
them are like unto them: so is every one: that trusts in them.
as they of sense, that can so against the light of reason think such things
fit to be worshipped which they make, and which made not them, and that when
they are made are but inanimate statues, short of all living creatures even the
meanest, and what must they then be that put confidence of good or evil in
such, but irrational senceless people, and as little able to do good or hurt as
they, saving thou the only living God orders and appoints them.

O Israel, trust thou in the Lord: he is thy help and thy shield.
9 O ye sonns of Israel your fathers, with whom and his seed God made an
everlasting covenant, whatever befall you, let not an evil heart of unbelief to
depart from the living God, to dumb and deaf Idols, possess you, as he has
peculiarly chosen and adopted you for his people from out all the world, so do
you him for your God, from all other Gods, trust in him, rely upon him for
your sole helper and defendour against these Idols and Idol worshippers, which
can do you just so much hurt as he for your sins permits them, and no more.

O house of Aaron, trust in the Lord, he is their help and their shield.
10 O ye Priests and Levites that are the successors and assistants of
faithful Aaron in that high office of Preist-hood, and more immediate
worshippers of the high God within his holy Temple, do you exemplarily declare
your faith of and in the Lord alone that has so highly honored you above your
brethren, that he is of power all-sufficient, and faithful of his word and
promise to protect and restore his people, and you, to their places and your
employments.

Ye that fear the Lord, trust in the Lord: he is their help and their shield.
11 But chiefly you that are nearer and dearer to God than any external
adoption or office can make men, you that are Israelites indeed, spiritual
Priests and Levites, the adopted and called of the Lord, that have the spirit
of reverence and godly fear in you, do you, as I hope you will not fail to do,
trust assuredly in God, for he is your help and shield against worse enemies
than these that can but destroy the body, and that do but serve to typifie the
power that our ghostly enemies have over us by sin, as these for sin, and
Gods greater power to deliver us from them, as from these, which he will
certainly do.

12 No doubt is to be made of it, The Lord has been mindful of us, he will
bless us, he will bless the house of Israel, he will bless the house of Aaron.
but that as God has done, so he will do, exercise mercy in deliverance, as
well as justice in afflicting us, if we seek to him, and that he see us
mindful of him, he will be so of us, as ever heretofore in like case, to ours
now he was wont to be, Israel and the Priesthood is still dear to him for old
love to our forefathers and the covenant he made with them, and for Aaron his
servants sake that Preistly type of our powerful Mediator, and therefore will
he certainly bless us with joyful deliverance and restoration.

13 Yea, He will bless them that fear the Lord, both small and great.
for his covenant sake he will bless Israel and Aaron according to the letter,
but thank them for it that amongst you are so in the spirit, with whom properly
and principally that covenant is made, these, of what outward condition soever,
high or low are dear to God, whom he will certainly bless and the rest for
their sakes.

14 You are the men that have the promise of this life and of a better, The
Lord shall increase you more and more, you and your children.
as you are the blessed seed of blessed Abraham, in whom his name is upheld,
because his faith is inherited by you, so shall the Lord raise you up faithful
successors, a more numerous offspring than ever yet his Church produced, from
generation to generation shall the faithful, your heirs and successors,
flourish and multiply.

You are blessed of the Lord, which made heaven and earth.
15 As you are the promised seed, so are you heirs of the blessed promise. He
that by his Almighty power made the heavens and the earth, is your God, and for
your sakes made he them, and with both heavenly and earthly blessings will he
bless you.

The heaven, even the heavens are the Lords: but the earth has he given to the
children of men.
16 The Lord made both and governs both, but so that heaven, the heaven of
heavens which is superlative to all the rest, is the more immediate place of
his glorious residence and inhabitancy, and the earth of man's, which he has
bountifully furnished with all needful things for his sustentation and
existence there.

The dead praise not the Lord, neither any that go down into silence.
17 And why has the Lord done so, lent me life and livelihood here below, but
that they should employ their time and improve those blessings to the praises
of him in the highest, for its true, that God made the earth and all things in
it for man, but he made man for himself for his praise and glory, who yet
praise him not, but serve other Gods, all the world but we, so that if we
should perish that are his only Church on earth, the praises of the Lord would
cease upon it, which must not be; whilst it is to have a being, he is to have
a people that shall glorify him.

But we will bless the Lord, from this time forth and for evermore; Praise the
Lord.
18 Therefore O Israel, O house of Aaron, and especially ye that fear the Lord,
trust in the Lord that he will be your help and shield, for the Lord will not
unchurch himself, no nor us neither, we are the people (though unworthy) that
his name is and shall be named upon, chosen out of all the earth, so that how
ever we are at the graves mouth, yet deliverance will come, and we shall be
restored, else nature must be dissolved, which cannot be, considering what
promises are yet to be fulfilled. Therefore be confident in hope, and in the
faith hereof engage our selves for future, when God shall so bless us, that we
will answerably bless and praise him, yea, in full assurance let us begin at
present, and be doing in that duty now as well as hereafter, that the Lord may
see the useful existence of a Church for ever on earth, for that they always,
and they only praise him. What ever your condition be then, though it were
worse than it is, which at present is bad enough, be sure to praise the Lord,
for which you live, and have your Beings, and in you all the world, which else
should cease.

The cxvi. PSALM.
David being possessed of the Kingdom according to promise, looks behind him to
see the difficulties God carried him through, to mind himself to his mercies,
and his own engagements for them. And in the first place offers the Lord his
affections, promises him his faith for future, because of what is past, and
therefore excites his soul to comfortable confidence and peaceable
acquiescence, together with a gratuitous walking with God, recalling his offs
and ons, he is in an ecstasy, how to return to God that brought him out of
them, and resolves to celebrate his praises in the most public and solemn
manner according to the prescript of the Law. Assuring all Gods people from his
example, that in their greatest danger, God has the greatest care. Magnifies
the Lord that has made him his servant and freeman, for which he will
publicly praise him.

1 I Cannot express how much the Lord is endeared to me for the grace he has
vouchsafed me, I Love the Lord, because he has heard my voice, and my
supplications.
my heart is glued to him in affection, such love has he showed to me, and
such care over me in all mine extremities, whenever I minded him of me and
craved his help, that I am bound to love him as long as I live, and from my
very heart I do so.

Because he has inclined his ear unto me, therefore will I call upon him as
long as I live.
2 The Lord has got my custom, I have had such faithful and good dealing from
him, as if my condition were never so bad, I would seek no where else, for
always when necessity wrung me I cried, and when ever I cried the Lord heard
and helped; and this course I am resolved still to take, whenever I have
occasion, and doubt not of the same success.

The sorrows of death compassed me, and the pains of hellgate hold upon me, I
found trouble and sorrow.
3 I cannot but recount my bygone difficulties, how that many a time I gave my
self unavoidably for a dead man, so near have I been to mine end in mine own
apprehension, that I made full account of my grave, the very pangs of death
have seized on my soul, and it was seldom other with me.

Then called I upon the name of the Lord; O Lord, I beseech thee, deliver my
Soul.
4 Yet though my danger and fear was never so great, so that in all humane
probability and visibilitie of means I was as good as gone, yet my faith would
still have a saying to God, pray I must, and did, and I no sooner gave the word
but God took the Alarm, if I but named my Soul, it was enough, and oft-times my
surprises were so sudden, and danger so emergent, that I had scarce time to do
that, which though they made my prayer short, yet sharp, they helped to put an
edge upon mine affections, and when I prayed for my soul, it was with my soul,
which in an ejaculation was quickly in heaven, and had as quick dispatch there.

5 For there had I the attributes of God presently to speak for me, Gracious is
the Lord, and righteous^ yea, our God is merciful.
his grace, justice, and mercy, and had an answer accordingly: Let others be
encouraged by mine example to trust in the Lord, and seek to him, for they
shall find as I did, that God is freely good, and free of his goodness,
faithful of his promise, yea, though objections lie in the way, thy sins and
his judgments flash in thy face, yet be not daunted if thou be one of us,
belongest to God; for he is merciful to pardon and pity thee, and in an
instant will break through all to do the good.

6 Those that suffer being innocent, The Lord preserves the simple: I was
brought low and he helped me.
although they be shiftless and have not worldly wisdom to do withal like
other men, yet if with honest hearts they bequeath themselves to God, and
unfainedly trust in him, he will find ways to befool their enemies, and make
good their confidence, I am sure none can be in greater danger, nor have less
hope of help (but from him) than I a poor innocent man, and more than once or
twice, and he alone served my turn, I never miscarried, but was ever delivered
though many times strangely, yea, miraculously from time to time, till he
brought me to this I am come to.

7 Be thou therefore at peace within thy self, Return unto thy rest, O my soul,
for the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee.
and recumbent upon God, O my soul, that has by his means gone through so many
difficulties, and through him thy benefactour art arrived at so great
happiness, out of all the storm that have blown over thee.

8 For the Lord has as it were raised me out of the grave, For thou have
delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and my feet from falling.
so near death was I many a time when thou delivered me, and has now made me a
livesman again, in the full accomplishment of thy promise, whereby I am
comforted beyond all my fore-past sorrows, which are as it were forgotten, and
set me free from all those deadly traps and gins that were laid for me, by my
mortal enemies.

I will walk before the Lord in the land of the living.
9 Now that God by his power and mercy has raised me to this estate, and
brought me through those many perplexities to possess his promise, I doubt not
of his further favor and protection, but in confidence thereof, I will
comfortably and conscionably labor to discharge my place and high office, as
in the presence, and to the well-pleasing of the Lord that has set me over his
people, compared to whom, all the world is in darkness and shadow of death.

I believed, therefore have I spoken: I was greatly afflicted.
10, 11 O the several frames of heart and tempers of soul that I have passed
through in my trials, sometimes chearing up my self with the faith of Gods
promises, I said in my have, All men are liars.
that they should certainly be fulfilled, and then could I hopefully address my
self to God, and comfortably bespeak and encourage my soul to wait upon the
Lord, at another time I have been as much dejected and cast down, and upon a
surprise when my fear has been great, because my danger was imminent, I have
not stuck in that perplexity of mind to think and say within my self, all that
the Prophets had foretold concerning my succession to the Kingdom was a mere
delusion, and that I must needs perish before that day could come, that they
and their predictions would certainly deceive me and come to naught, and that
they speak not of God, but of themselves.

What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward me?
12 Now when I look back and consider what a world of dangers, nay, deaths I
have past, what dismal apprehensions and perplexities of mind I have waded
through, what admirable deliverances the Lord has wrought, and how often and how
strangely I have been preserved, and now what an absolute complement he has
given to all those promises which I thought never to have seen fulfilled, and
conclusion to my miseries, which many time I thought would have made an end of
me, before I should thus have seen an end of them. I am at a stand, and in an
ecstasy, how, and what to return to this good God, I am now in perplexity by a
plenitude of happiness, for the Lord has so laden me with benefits that I
know not what to say, nor do, to, or for him in any proportion to them.

13, I will take the cup of salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord.
14 I may fancy many ways, and things to my self to gratify God with all,
and when I have done I am never the near, I will pay my vows unto the Lord, now
in the presence of all his people.
for imaginary retributions and will worship he will not accept. Therefore I
will content my self to do what he has bid me, (for when I have all done I
must live and die his debtor,) I will therefore make a feast to all Israel, (
which he did at the bringing up of the Ark,) and then and there offer my
peace offerings, and in the sight and hearing of all the Lords people, with the
cup of blessing and gratulation in mine hand, will joyfully and thankfully
publish the praises of my God, and make open acknowledgement of the manifold
benefits and deliverances from first to last that I have been partaker of; The
mercies I gained by prayers and vows in mine extremity, I will wear them by
praise and sacrifice now in my prosperity, all Israel shall be witness.

15 I have found it by experience, Precious in the sight of the Lord is the
death of his saints.
and speak it knowingly for the comfortable support of other of Gods people in
affliction, that however they may unadvisedly misjudge themselves, as exposed
of God in a regardless manner to the malice and fury of their enemies, when
their lives are endangered, yet its far otherwise. The Lord makes more account
of the lives of his holy ones, which he will suffer no man nor men on earth to
have the command and dispose of, but only himself, they are too precious to be
set so light by, and therefore be confident such cannot miscarrie by any
policy, power, or malice of men whatsoever, but by special commission from
God, for special purposes, and when they do miscarrie by his ordination, they
still remain dear to him as well dead as alive.

Oh Lord, truly I am thy servant, I am thy servant, and the son of thy
handmaid: thou have loosed my bonds.
16 Blessed Lord, I now well perceive those words true which sometime I thought
to be false, how that thou have indeed ordained me to the honor to be thy
servant, and that in an eminent manner, which truly is my highest title, and
preferment to be thy servant, and the son of thy spouse and handmaid the
Church, visible and invisible; and thus to be delivered by thee from a state of
thraldom and misery, to a condition free to serve thee, is infinite goodness.

I will offer to thee the sacrifice of thanksgiving, and will call upon the
name of the Lord.
17 For which I will magnify thee, and with public praises and peace offerings
will make my thankful acknowledgements of thy power and goodness to me-ward.

I will pay my vows unto the Lord, now in the presence of all his people.
18 And what I vowed in my misery, when I prayed for mercy, I will accordingly
perform it, now that thou have set me free to do it, all Israel being witness.

In the courts of the Lords house, in the midst of thee, O Jerusalem, praise
y^ the Lord.
19 Openly, in the public convention of all thy people at thy sanctuary in
Jerusalem, the place appointed for thy solemn sacrifice-worship, there upon
thine Altar will I offer my sacrifice of thanksgiving in the view of all
Israel, and in their hearing, praise thee; with me praise ye the Lord all his
people.

The cxvii. PSALM.
The Psalmist in Prophecy of the calling of the Gentiles, and uniting all in
one Church through the head Christ, exhorts all to praise the Lord for so great
goodness, and rich mercy so freely extended. Psalm cxvii.


1 O All ye nations and people throughout the world, O Praise the Lord, all ye
nations: praise him, all ye people.
Gentiles as well as Jews, praise the Lord, praise him every where without
exception.

2 For his saving grace and mercy by the redemption of Christ is extended unto
both, For his merciful kindness is great toward us: and the truth of the Lord
endures for ever: praise ye the Lord.
in him we are made one Church that were a divided people, and an undeserving,
the one as well as the other, his grace alike free and his goodness great to
both of us: For, for his promise sake once delivered, and never to be reversed,
has he done this for us, and as well all other promises as this will he
perform to the end, for and concerning his Church, his faithfulness cannot
fail, though our sins deserves it should. Therefore in the faith of his
faithfulness and love of his goodness that has made all partake of Christ, let
all men praise the Lord.

The cxviii. PSALM.
David seated in the throne quickens up the people and Priests of the Lord unto
thanksgiving for his endless mercies to his Church, as himself in the behalf
thereof, which he personated had experimented, whereby his faith was raised to
an holy insultation over his enemies for the future. Further shows the
happiness that God has brought to his Church by the change of him for Saul,
and the glory he has got to himself, which for his part he ingageth himself
to celebrate solemnly in his sanctuary, which upon this occasion both he and
the rest of the righteous will, now they may, frequent. There he will praise
him for making him as in humiliation so in exal^ation the type of Christ.
Prays for the Churches happiness upon this wonderful change, pronounces
certainty of blessing to himself and Christ, in the office and errand God sets
them in, and sends them about. Concludes with the manifold hearby praises of
God both from himself and the people, whom he exhorts always to be praise-ful
as God is gra^iously faithful. Psalm cxviii.


O Give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good: because his mercy endures for
ever.
1 LEt us be mindful of the goodness of God to be thankful for it, whose mercy
to his Church and faithful people never failed, nor never shall.

Let Israel now say, that his mercy endures for ever.
2 Let his adopted people, now in this their flourishing condition, give him the
glory of those many mercies which ever since they were known by, the name of
Israel they have successively in all ages partaked of.

Let the house of Aaron now say, that his mercy endures for ever.
3 Let the Priests, and Levites their adjutants, that occupy Aarons place and
office in the sanctuary, now that they are reduced into such a form and model
as never before of worshipping the Lord, acknowledge his mercy, and the
succession of it to them according to promise from their first progenitors.

Let them now that fear the Lord say, that his mercy endures for ever.
4 Yea, let those that are Gods Priests and people indeed, that believe and obey
him, say now if God be not as good as his word in showing mercy to his Church;
those I mean that fear his name.

5 I have had my share of sufferings in which I personate the Church, I called
upon the Lord in distress: the Lord answered me, and set me in a large place.
and yet I can say, and do, that his mercy endures for ever, and so shall she
in all ages, for when ever the Lord put me to it, and that I was distressed, I
put him to it, in humble wise I minded him of his promise, and this way my
constant custom, and so it was his, ever when I did so to deliver me all along,
till now that he has set me quite at liberty from my troubles, and enlarged
my happiness as you see.

6 I have had such experience of the Lords being for me against mine enemies,
The Lord is on my side, I will not f^ar: what can man do unto me?
that however I look never to be without, yet that shall not trouble me,
neither their power nor their plots, for he that could deliver me then, can and
will much more protect and prosper me, now that he has brought me to this
estate.

7 I have ever found it, The Lord takes my part with them that help me:
therefore shall I see my desire upon them that hate me.
and doubt not but I ever shall, that God blesses me and those that side with
me, many or few, with good success, which makes me confident that as I have
had, so I shall ever have the better of mine enemies, what, or how many soever
they be, and in stead of ruining me, I shall ruin them.

8, It is better to trust in the Lord, than to put confidence in man.
9 I have found it better, and so shall who ever tries it, to put confidence in
God than men, of what number or degree soever, It is better to trust in the
Lord, than to put confidence in Prince^.
and mine enemies have found the contrary, for by that means I a despicable
lone man am preserved and exalted, and they for all their honor, and power
above me are destroyed by his Allmighty hand so much above them.

10, All nations compassed me about: but in the name of the Lord will I destroy
them.
11, 12 I have been as the Church always shall be, the mark that all men have
shot at, I had all the world against me, and none for me but God, his power
was, They compassed me about, yea, they compassed me about: but in the name of
the Lord I will destroy them.
is, and ever shall be my sole trust and confidence, O with what deadly hatred
from time to time have I been hunted, and how many times has my life been
endangered that I could see no way to escape, They compassed me about like
bees, they are quenched as the fire of thorns: for in the name of the Lord I
will destroy them.
and yet I have escaped, God has always preserved me, and in stead of mine
enemies destroying me, he has destroyed them, and I am confident I must, and
shall ever do so, God inabling me as he has done, I have been as hard beset as
a man that has a swarm of bees about his ears, not knowing 'ith world how to
avoid them, ready to fall upon me on every hand with deadly devouring hatred,
which though it was very terrible for the time, yet the Lord put an end to it,
made their malice to me the destruction of themselves like thorns consumed in
their own flame, and so shall he ever enable me against all mine enemies I am
confident, and that they shall never have better success.

Thou have thrust sore at me, that I might fall; but the Lord helped me.
13 Mine utter ruin, as an obstruction to this preferment has been strongly
endeavored by him that had no small power in his hands, nor small malice
toward me, but God has both preserved me, and advanced me, maugre all that
Saul could do and all his accomplices.

The Lord is my strength and song: and is become my saltion.
14 The Lord alone was my defense, and the ruiner of mine enemies, who else had
ruined me a thousand times over, the glory and praise belongs to him, and he
shall have it, who has perfected his promise, given me final deliverance from
all those troubles, and seated me above the reach of those mine enemies.

The voice of rejoicing and salvation is in the Tabernacles of the righteous:
the right hand of the Lord does valiantly.
15 What cause of rejoicing has God given to the families in Israel that fear
the Lord? how glad are they to see this day, and such a change of things? I and
they so preserved and delivered from the malice of those, that hated and sought
the ruin of goodness and good-men, and now to see them conquered and quite
subdued, and that by so apparent providence and Almighty power, must needs
rejoice them greatly.

16 It is he that deserves, The right hand of the Lord is exalted: the right
hand of the Lord does valiantly.
and I hope shall accordingly have the honor of it, who by his sole power and
victorious providence has mightily effected it.

17 As near as I have been to destruction many and many a time, I shall not die
but live, and declare the works of the Lord.
and as hopeful as mine enemies were of it, so that both they and I my self
have given me for a gone man, yet God has purposed otherwise, die I must not,
and therefore die I did not, but am alive at this day, and in a good condition,
preserved purposely of God, by example and acknowledgement to manifest and
magnify what he has done for me, and what he can and will do for his Church,
whose person I bare, and represented in all my troubles and enfranchisements.

18 The Lord gave mine enemies much power over me, The Lord has chastened me
sore: but he has not given me over unto death.
so that I under-went sore trials, and sad chastisements to teach me to know my
self and sin, but though he gave them liberty to afflict me, yet not to destroy
me, as they hoped to have done, but maugre their malice has preserved my life,
though often endangered.

19 O ye that are the porters and door-keepers of the Lords holy sanctuary,
Open to me the gates of righteousness: I will go in to them; and I will praise
the Lord.
a place of late years disfrequented and sequestered from good and righteous
men, that properly have only right and title to it, Now by Gods good
providence the case is well altered, I and other such as I am, that with
upright hearts desire to serve the Lord, have liberty and opportunity to do it,
therefore set the doors of the courts of the Tabernacle wide open for us, that
I and they may comfortably come and worship the righteous Lord, there specially
present, and give him the due praises of all his faithful performances, of
those his gracious promises touching me, and his Church in my time.

This gate of the Lord, into which the righteous shall enter.
20 I mean I say the gate of the Lords own Tabernacle, where he is so peculiarly
resident, and will therefore there be especially worshipped, set that open for
me and all my fellow-saints and servants of God, who as of right they ought, so
now I have power they shall have free access unto it, having been too long
secluded.

I will praise thee, for thou have heard me, and art become my salvation.
21 Lord my heart is full, and there I am purposed to empty it upon thee in most
affectionate thanks and praises, for thine often audiences, gracious and
effectual answers, and principally for this complement of all thy promises, in
saving me from mine enemies, and advancing me to the Kingdom so far above their
power to hurt me.

The stone which the builders refused, is become the head stone of the corner.
22 Insomuch as now I, who heretofore was, by Saul and his Grandees, those great
Artificers of State, hatefully persecuted and disdainfully rejected, as
unworthy and unfit for this preferment, like a refuse stone that is broken and
cast out of the way by master-workmen, as altogether useless and unserviceable
for building, and as the Messiah (whom I prefigure) shall be by Cajaphas with
his confederates the chief Priests and Scribes, those ringleaders of the Jews
who shall despightfully use him and cruelly crucify him. I say, I, that was
thus refused am advanced from this my despicable condition, to fit in the
throne and wield the Scepter of Israel, upon whom under God, the Government and
welfare of Church and Commonwealth principally depends, even as it shall be
with Christ, (whom both in weal and woe I typifie) he shall rise again from the
dead, and be gloriously advanced even in his humane nature, so much contemned
and hardly used, to be Savior, Mediator, and King of and over the Church,
consisting then of Jews and Gentiles united in him, and supported by him,
maugre her enemies, as the sides and weight of a building are by a principal
binding corner stone, against all blasts.

23 This strange transversion of a persecuted abject to become a King, This is
the Lords doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes.
and a contemned, condemned, crucified man to be the sole Savior and Monarch
of the world, is by the holy and wise ordination and effectual operation of God
brought to pass, both which are worth our wonder and admiration, to see
persecution produce dignity, and death life and glory.

24 This day of mine inthronization resembling that of Christ's resurrection,
This is the day which the Lord has made, we will rejoice and be glad in it.
and glorious exaltation at his fathers right hand, is the time and means
whereby God has and will make good all his promises of grace and happiness to
his Church, who lives therefore that has the faith and acknowledge of these
things, and joys not that he has lived to so happy an hour, as to see them
thus fulfilled?

25 O Lord, Save now, I beseech thee, O Lord: O Lord, I beseech thee send now
prosperity.
its a day indeed, that thy Church has cause to be glad of, and so she is, and
prays thee to add to her joys, and that now from henceforth all those blessed
promises of happiness to thy King and people may be effectual, and they
prosperous.

26 As Christ himself who is the Messiah, Blessed be he that comes in the name
of the Lord: we have blessed you out of the house of the Lord.
and sent of God for the good and salvation of his people is blessed, and
diffuseth blessings to his people, whom they again that are his Priests, and
the living Temples of the living God do gratify with the return of blessings
in behalf of his Kingdom, praying the increase and consummation of it, and
offering the sacrifice of praise to him, that by Gods gracious emission came to
offer himself in sacrifice for them. So let David the anointed of the Lord, for
the good and welfare of his Church, and to be a type of Christ, be blessed in
his own person, and a means of much blessing unto Israel, and blessed of them
again with a prayer and praise to God for him and his Government. Yea, let the
Priests of the Lord that wait upon the Altar, whose office by the Lords special
appointment it is to bless his people, discharge their sacred function in
performance of that holy action, from out that sacred place (where they
immediately attend the Lords service) upon David and his people the figure of
Christ and his Church, and let him and them be blessed accordingly, both of
Priests and people that worship within or without, in the Courts of the
sanctuary of the Lord.

God is the Lord, which has showed us light, bind the sacrifice with cords,
even* unto the horns of the Altar.
27 God has approved himself to be the Lord omnipotent, for that he has
brought us out of a miserable estate, void of temporal, but especially
spiritual felicity, having of late nothing but confusion amongst us in Church
and Kingdom, and reduced us to a comfortable condition in both, principally in
the enjoyment of the Doctrine and ordinances of his saving truth and holy
worship, which by David and Christ that blessed type and Antytipe are made to
shine forth upon the Church and people of God, after the dark times of Saul's
reign and Gentilism, like as the sun comforts and lightens all creatures, when
the darkness is past, for which unspeakable and unvaluable mercy, let us
therefore bring those offerings and sacrifices the Law appoints, accompanied
with sincere and hearty praise and thanks-givings before him, and tie them with
cords ready for their oblation, and that in abundance, answerable to his
benefits, and for the larger expression of our praises, in proportion to those
Holocausts of Hallelujahs that shall be offered under Christ's regiment. Let the
people by their frank and liberal offerings find the Priests store of work in
their sacrificing employment at the Altar.

28 For my part I am resolved to lead the way by mine example, Thou art my God
and I will praise thee: thou art my God, I will exalt thee.
unto thy praising and magnifying, and I confess cause I have to do so, if I
consider how much thou have done for me, and how thou have made choice of me to
this place, and office of honor and service.

29 As I begun, O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good: for his mercy
endures for ever.
so I conclude with hearty advice and instigation, to be mindful of, and
thankful for the goodness of God, whose mercy to his Church and faithful
people never failed, nor never shall.

The cxix. PSALM.
This Psalm by the Author of it (which some say, and by many circumstances
probably was David, in his flight and exile) is divided into 22 parts,
according to the number and order of letters in the Hebrew Alphabet, each part
containing eight verses, and the first word of every verse in each part
beginning with the same letter that is prefixet to the part it self, as it is
in order and succession in the Hebrew A. B. C. which its conceived was done for
help of memory. The Psalm is without title, and for the matter of it, drives
on no one particular subject, but partly by the Psalmists own example, and
partly by rule is represented what is requisite to enter a man into, and carry
him through a holy life, specially in an afflicted state; which are
promiscuously scattered throughout the Psalm, promises, precepts, documents,
prayers being variously intermingled, and to be taken notice of accordingly by
the Reader as they happen in his way, as also the Authors exalting Gods grace
and decrying self in his own person, a president for all, and a confutation of
all self-opinionists or justiciaries, whether Papists, Armenians, in judgment,
or practice, m^n morally righteous, or carnally confident, Israelitish
Christians which worship God, but not in the spirit, and rejoice but not in
Christ Jesus, having confidence in the flesh, contrary to Paul Phil. 3.3. and
David throughout this Psalm.

Aleph.
Aleph. Is the first letter of the Hebrew Alphabet, and is therefore here
according to order prefixed to the first part of this Psalm, to signify that
it is so, and so do all the rest of the Letters in their rank and order, as
they are prefixed to each part, signify alike numerarie orderly succession of
the rest of the parts of this Psalm, for instance, The second letter Beth
signifies that to be the second part, and the third letter the third part, and
so of the rest.
BLessed are the undefiled in the way, who walk in the Law of the Lord.
1 ALl men would be blessed, but certainly happy, and only happy is, here,
and shall be hereafter, that man, that seeks not after a sensual sinful
felicity as most do, but on the contrary throughout the whole course and
trade of his life, approves himself as one that walks toward heaven in heavens
way, in conscience to God, avoiding the spots and stains of every sin in heart
and life, that may render him unpleasing or unsightly with God, and strives to
walk exactly in holy obedience to all his commandments to his well-pleasing,

Blessed are they that keep his testimonies, and that seek him with the whole
heart.
2 Yea, they only do and shall partake of true happiness (peace of conscience
and favor with God) which deviate not into by-ways of their own fancying, but
keep constant to an obediential walking with him, according to the rules he in
his word has prescribed and commanded, and that set so high a rate upon his
grace and favor, as to overvalue it to all other happiness, and therefore
pray for it as their chiefest good, and strive to walk worthy of it in all
well-pleasing, with sincere and entire obedience.

3 Nor dare they transgress or willingly contract the least guilt of any known
sin upon themselves, They also do no iniquity: they walk in his ways.
out of a filial fear of displeasing God, and forfeiting his favor, but
carefully tread his paths, which only lead to life and true happiness, and
bring with them sweet peace of conscience and seals of sincerity.

4 And if it be asked what is the cause of the blessed man's exact walking, Thou
have commanded us to keep thy precepts diligently.
and not taking the liberty that others do to sin, it is because he prefers
Gods will before his own, because the holy God strictly commands holiness,
therefore is he strict in observance to do thereafter, to keep all, and break
none of his commandments.

5 Lord, O that my waye^ were directed to keep thy statutes.
let other men take other courses, my prayer is and ever shall be, that I may
be so happy as to be enabled by thee to walk in well-pleasing to thee all my
days, and in all my ways, according to the rule of righteousness.

6 Others think shame of holiness, Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have
respect to all thy commandments.
but I count it my glory, yea, the more holiness the less shame, to come short
of duty and sincerity is only shame-worthy; make me therefore in sincerity of
heart, and integrity of life, to do thy whole will with my whole heart, and
then (and never but then) am I as I would be, because then and only then I am
as I ought to be, able to look God and man in the face, free from an evil
conscience.

7 Truly, I will praise thee with uprightness of heart, when I shall have
learned thy righteous judgments.
Lord, if I know mine own heart, and I take it to be upright toward thee,
there is nothing that thou can give me or do for me, shall better please me,
and more oblige me to praise and thank thee with an honest gratuitous heart and
conversation, than thy teaching of me by thy word and spirit, to know and do
thy commandments, the only righteous rule of faith and manners.

I will keep thy statutes; O forsake me not utterly.
8 O Lord, my purpose of heart is to keep thy commandments, and to walk exactly,
in faith, love, and obedience, as thou enjoynest, but alas, I know mine own
imbecility, and the necessity of thy continual inablement hereunto by thy
spirit and grace, which if withdrawn, I am at a loss, therefore, Lord, in pity
of my weakness, and in prosecution of the good work begun in me, that desire to
fear thy name, leave me not to my self, nor lead me not into temptation, to
buckle with it in mine own strength; let no sin cause separation, though
correction, but remember mercy, and renew in me a right spirit when I do go
wrong, as who does not.

Beth.
Beth. The second letter of the Hebrew Alphabet, signifying the second part.
Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way? by taking heed thereto
according to thy word
9 Young men are aptest to go astray, and therefore had need to be inquisitive
and circumspect of themselves, and their ways, how to avoid the pollutions of
mind and manners, whereunto their age prompts them, with a more than ordinary
aptitude, and doubtless, (I speak it knowingly) the only remedy for such
distemperature, is, for them to be conversant in thy word, and thence to
observe with a childlike disposition, what pleases and displeases thee, their
heavenly father, and in conscience thereunto, carefully to regulate their
inward and outward man accordingly, by believing and obeying.

10 O Lord, With my whole heart have I sought thee: O let me not wander from
thy commandments.
thou know my heart to be perfect with thee, (for thou have made it so) how
that I have neither been partial nor unsincere in mine obedience, but entirely
endeavored always in all things to please thee, as desirous above all things
of thy grace and favor, fearing to forfeit it, which, good Lord, grant I may
never do by going astray from thy precepts, therefore I beseech thee watch over
me, that no temptation mislead me on the right or left hand out of the way of
thy commandments, in which I desire to walk from one end of my life to the
other without deviating.

11 I have, Thy word have I hid in my heart, that I might not sin against
thee.
Lord, stored up thy word in mind and memory, especially such, and so much of
it as I knew was of present and practical concernment to me in my condition,
with full purpose of heart to keep close thereunto, and not sinfully to suffer
my self to be seduced therefrom, what ever happened.

12 Thou, Blessed art thou, O Lord: teach me thy statutes.
Lord, art only blessed, in, and of thy self, from whom as from a fountain
flows forth all derived blessedness unto thy creature, which thou art wont to
confer most upon them that please thee best, as a gracious remuneration of
their love and service, Lord, therefore teach me to know, and enable me to do
thy will revealed in thy word, that I may partake thy blessedness, be sharer in
thy holiness and happiness, here and hereafter.

13 As I have found thy law useful to me, With my lips have I declared all the
judgments of thy mouth.
by my knowledge of it, and framing my course of life according to it, so have
I endeavored to make it to be to others, and therefore have I according to my
measure of light, and the duty of my place and office, taught it publicly and
privately, not concealing any truth I knew might make for thy glory and their
edifying: when I had opportunity of time and occasion.

I have rejoiced in the way of thy testimonies, as much as in all riches.
14 My delight and care (I bless thee for giving me such an heart) has been
more to hear, understand, and practice those things which in thy word are
testified to be thy will, and more sweet peace and consolation have I had, when
I have been so happy, as to attain the knowing and doing of them, than they
that set their hearts to heap up riches, when they have their desire of
opulency and affluence.

I will meditate in thy precepts, and have respect unto thy ways.
15 Therefore, whereas worldlings cast in their minds, and occupy their thoughts
how to enhance their earthly store, because their delight is there, my
meditations shall be otherwise employed, my care and thoughts shall be how to
know more and practice better thy will revealed, for therein is my delight, and
thereto will I bend my mind, studying how best to please thee.

I will delight my self in thy statutes I will not forget thy word.
16 To know and do what pleases thee, shall be a pleasure unto me, yea, nothing
shall more delight me, and therefore am I fully purposed to make thy word the
subject of my meditation day and night, and the rule of mine obedience in weal
and woe.

Gimel.
Gimel. The third letter of the Hebrew Alphabet, signifying the third part.
Deal bountifully with thy servant, that I may live and keep thy word.
17 Lord, thy promises to thy people are comprehensive of all good things; as
thou have made them, so fulfill them; Let me thy servant reap the blessed
fruits of thy grace and bounty according to them, touching life temporal and
spiritual, grant me both, and what conduces unto both, as a faithful creator
and gracious redeemer, that by grace I may live both the life of grace and
nature.

18 Lord, Open thou mine eyes, that I may behold wondrous things out of thy
law.
thou know what great impediments there are that hinder our knowledge and
acquaintance with thee, even in those things thou have revealed, of which yet
we are ignorant, and seeing, we see not, there being a twofold vail that
interposeth betwixt a right understanding and them, the one over our hearts,
blindly mistaking the mind and meaning of the spirit, and stumbling at the
stumbling stone the letter. The other over thy law and covenant it self,
expressed in dark and typical umbrages and dispensations, full of wondrous
divine excellency in their signification and antitypicall meaning, but
impossible to be understood, but by thy more than litterall revelation.
Therefore dispense thy spirit, who only knows the mind of God, and can only
make it known unto thy servant, draw aside thy curtains of my blindness, and
thy laws darkness, that in thy light I may see light, and be made able to
behold the mystical and spiritual tenderness of thy whole law and covenant,
both in the moral and typical dispensation of it, which unfolded to a
spiritual eye, are admirable and ravishing, portraying as in a table the
divine history and mystery of man's redemption and salvation, with all that
heavenly wisdom, free grace, and Almighty power that shines therein.

19 I am thine, I am a stranger in the earth, hide not thy commandments from me.
and properly belong to another world, only here I must for a time lead a
transient life, because it is thy will more than mine, who though I am in the
world, yet not of the world, but in mind and heart estranged from it, therefore
seeing it is thy pleasure that I must live mine appointed time to serve thee on
earth, take it into consideration, what divine light and guidance is requisite
so to do, and vouchsafe me it proportionably, least I wander out of thy way,
the world and flesh with which I here converse being strangers, and estranged
thereunto, and apt to mislead me, if thy word and spirit be not always a light
and guide unto me.

My soul breaks for the longing it has to thy judgment at all times.
20 Lord, my soul is as the broken and chawned earth in time of drought,
laboring always in unsatiable desire after the soul-nourishing and refreshing
knowledge of the divine excellencies, comprehended in thy righteous precepts
and covenant-dispensations, as it does incessantly after rain, that so I may
always live the life of faith, and fear, love, and obedience.

Thou have rebuked the proud that are cursed, which do err from thy
commandments.
21 That's my desire to understand the fear of the Lord, that I may walk humbly
with my God, for the proud disobedient gainsayers of his will, that have taken
cursed and displeasing curses, the Lord has sooner or later met with them, as
they are hateful to him, so he has made it appear upon them by heavy
judgments.

Remove from me reproach and contempt, ^or I have kept thy testimonies.
22 Which I am confident shall still be their portion, even the portion of my
proud disdainful enemies, who think scorn of me, and basely asperse me,
because of my faith in, and obedience unto God, but, Lord, I hope that both I,
and they are accepted at thine hands, and that thou take notice of mine
Ismaelitish persecution by mine arrogant foes, and wilt find a time to quit me
of them, who thou know has not been ashamed of thee, nor deserted either my
faith or fear of thee, for fear of men.

23 I have been the byword of high and low, Princes also did sit and speak
against me: but thy servant did meditate in thy statutes.
those that should have been by their places men of more integrity and good
example, yet did not they stick to abuse their authority, and me, by casting
scorn upon me in the audience of others, but I patiently bear it, and my
thoughts the while were upon thy word and my duty, in such cases, that so I
might approve my self to thee, not caring to be judged by man's day.

24 And though I had cause enough of sorrow and trouble, Thy ^e^timonies also
are my delight, and my counselors.
yet my comfort is they made me not break covenant, nor falsify my faith, but
still I kept a good conscience, and followed my rule, and had the comfort of it
in mine own spirit, not consulting with flesh and blood, what to do at such
times when temptations were sore upon me, but with thy word, which I knew was
the will and wisdom of God, the mighty Counselor and Prince of Princes.

Daleth. Daleth.
The fourth letter of the Hebrew Alphabet, signifying the fourth part.
25 I am exceeding low brought by thine afflicting hand, My soul cleavet^^ unto
the dust: quicken thou me, according to thy word.
my discomfitures make my life a very death, oh, do thou raise me, restore
comfort, and thereby life unto me, according as thou have graciously promised.

26 For I have not hid mine offenses, I have declared my ways, and thou
heardest me: teach me thy statutes.
but confessed and declared them to thee, as I have done every thing else in
the whole course of my life. I have always acquainted thee how it was with me,
in my temptations and troubles, and I have ever found thee gracious, and so
doubt not still to do; speak peace and holiness therefore now to my soul, that
I may sin no more, but learn to love and serve thee.

Make me to un^derstand the way of thy precepts: so shall I talk of thy
wondrous works.
27 Lord, instruct me, and overpower my natural pravity and corrupt
disposition, to walk holily and steadily in the fear of thy name, and obedience
of thy commandments, by thy renewing of my joys, and strengthening of my
graces, so shall I magnify thy power in my weakness, and animate the faith of
others.

My soul melts for heaviness: strengthen thou me according unto thy word.
28 The sense of my sin and thy displeasure for it, lies so heavy upon my
spirit, that I sensibly decay and wast under it, speak reconciliation and
absolution to me, that may revive and restore me, according to thy promise of
grace and mercy to poor penitents and suppliants, such as I am.

Remove from me the way of lying: and grant me thy law graciously.
29 The sin that has brought me into this distemper is my want of faith to
carry me through, and my making now and then in extremity of temptation lies my
refuge, which repents me that ever I did so, the Lord forgive it, and remove
that spirit of fear and diffidence that caused it, that I may no more tread in
such bypath; of thine own free goodness, grant me the mercy and grace
promised in thy word, and exhibited in the typical ordinances of thy law.

I have chosen the way of truth; thy judgem^nts have I laid before me.
30 Lord, how ever I have slipped through frailty, yet thou know the bent and
bias of my heart is to love truth and not falsehood, it is the way I have chosen
to walk in, and have used the means that might aw me to it, and direct me in
it, by serious pondering thy righteous commandments, penally inhibiting such
sinful aversations, though, my grace being weak, my endeavors through
temptation have sometimes been ineffectuall.

I have stuck unto thy testimonies: O Lord, put me not to shame.
31 I have not ordinarily, no nor willingly at any time given the reins to my
corruption, though otherwhiles they have been too strong for me, but have
carefully and conscionably in the main and course of my life, though troublous
and temptatious, walked exactly, and kept me closely to thy will, testified in
thy word, O Lord, therefore compassionate me in this my sin, and trouble for
it, and so order my ways, that I sin no more, to provoke thee against me, to
the loss of thy favor, and the forfeiting my self to mine enemies.

32 I have been faithful though with some failings, I will run the ways of
thy commandments when thou shall enlarge my heart.
which if thou will but please to pass by, and renew thy favor to me, and
grace in me, whereby my heart may again be comforted, and consequently
enlarged, and enabled, (for thy joy is my strength) then do I promise for my
self, being confident in the power of thy grace, to yield universal and
cheerful obedience to thy commandments, maugre impediments.

He. He.
The fifth letter of the Hebrew Alphabet, signifying the fifth part.
33 I know my whole life throughout is to be expended in thy service, Teach me,
O Lord, the way of thy statutes, and I shall keep it unto the end.
but how to persevere with unwearied and unvaried constancy I see not, but by
thy special and spiritual guidance, who can either order mine affairs to
be free from temptation, or teach and enable me to wade through them, without
warping from the rule and way of thy commandments: pity therefore my weakness
and humane frailty, and by thy spirit supply and prompt me continually, so
shall I do what else I cannot, avoid sin, and persevere in holiness all my
life, in all the various alterations of it.

Give me understanding and I shall keep thy law; yea, I shall observe it with
my whole heart.
34 How many are befooled with worldly wisdom and carnal reason, Lord, thou
know, and truly so shall I amongst the rest, if thou be not more
merciful unto me, to teach me better, yea, contrary to such things as those
principles dictate; even the wholesome rudiments of thy law and covenant
dispensation, which if thou will of thy good grace vouchsafe to do, I shall
gladlier serve thee than sin; yea, if thou will effectually lead me, I will
gladly and cordially follow and obey thee in whatsoever thou command, for to
will is present with me, but how else to perform I see not.

Make me to go in the path of thy commandments: for therein do I delight.
35 Both the will and the deed is thine and of thee, now therefore as thou have
enabled me in the one, for through thy grace my heart is biased to obedience,
so that my desire is to it, and my delight is in it, so do thou no less
graciously and powerfully enable me in the other, let me through thine
assistance be as able as willing to do thy will, always, in all things.

Incline my heart unto thy testimonies, and not to covetousness.
36 I know, O Lord, naturally I have the same corrupt and inordinate affections
in me as others have, as ready upon temptation to warp world-ward as another
man, but I know thou have my heart in thy hands, and though I cannot rule it,
thou can, so that I pray thee have an eye to it, and keep an hand over it, to
dispose and bend it the way of thy will, and from the worlds allurements of
pleasure or profit, let grace supersead me from corruption, specially of
covetousness the root of all evil.

Turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity: and quicken thou me in thy way.
37 Let not my outward senses be caught, and sinfully transported with the baits
of the flesh, or of the world, but give me a sanctified understanding to
believe truly, and not seemingly of sublunary things, and to know them to be as
in their own natures they are, vain and transitory, that can convey no
permanent nor substantial good or content to a man, but delude him with the
shows thereof by a false medium, carnal concupiscence, and that serves to
steal the heart from God, but, Lord, avert both eyes and heart from them, give
me such active graces, and lively affections, that may have continual
influence into all the parts of body and soul, and so dispose them in love to
thee, and desire of heavenly things, that as dead to the world, they may
comparatively be indisposed to all things else.

38 Lord, Stablish thy word unto thy servant: who is devoted to thy fear.
fulfill those promises of grace and goodness, wherein thou stand engaged
unto thy servant. Thou that art Jehovah in thy Being, be so in thy word by
giving it a being in all those gracious promises it comprehends and exhibits,
and wherein thou have caused me to trust, in confidence whereof I have wholly
cast my self upon thy grace and providence, minding always to serve thee, more
than how to provide and shift for my self, as men of the world do.

39 Let not thy servant sin against thee, Turn away my reproach which I fear:
for thy judgments are good.
thereby to provoke thee against him to the loss of thy favor, the forfeiting
of thy protection, and the exposing me to mine enemies scorn and insultation,
which I exceedingly fear, as well for thy sake who art so deeply concerned in
me, as for mine own. If at any time I do fall, Lord, let not that be my
punishment, be thou and not they my Judge, for that thy judgments are like thy
self, righteous and good, but theirs are like themselves, merciless and wicked.

Behold I have longed after thy precepts^ quicken me in thy righteousness.
40 Thou know my heart is perfect toward thee, take notice of it, O Lord,
how my desires and affections are upright and sincere to the knowing and doing
of thy will according to thy word, give me a spirit of power and enablement, as
well as of will and desire, according to thy righteous, as well as gracious
engagements, for thou art as just to fulfill promises, as to inflict
punishments.

Vau.
Vau. The sixth letter of the Hebrew Alphabet, signifying the sixth part.
Let thy mercies come also unto me, O Lord: even thy salva^tion a^cording to
thy word.
41 And as I desire that thou will enable me with a spirit of holiness to walk
uprightly in the way, so also that in mercy thou will remember me concerning
the promised end, that it may effect that for me, even my preservation in, and
my deliverance out of my sad condition and many dangers, as thou have engaged
thy self to do.

So shall I have wherewith to answer him that reproacheth me; for I trust in
thy word.
42 By this means I that now only live by promises, unpossessed of the thing
promised, and therefore cannot at present effectually convince men of carnal
understandings and void of faith; shall then be able demonstratively to stop
their mouths, that now flout me for mine improbable hopes and foreign
expectations, and because I bear my self upon thy word which they think will
never be fulfilled, but I am otherwise persuaded; therefore, O Lord, let not my
trust be deceived and they in their presumptuous impiety confirmed.

43 And let me never so sin against thee, And take not the word of truth
utterly out of my mouth, for I have hoped in thy judgments.
as thereby to have mine own mouth stopped, and despoil my self of what thou
have promised me, whereof, in faith of thy truth and goodness, I have openly
declared my confidence according to thy word, which, Lord, let me never have
cause to retract, nor to speak less in praise of thy faithfulness, but more, by
thy turning promises into performances, according to the hope I have had in thy
just fullfilling what thou have promised me, and threatened mine enemies.

44 So shall thou oblige me, So shall I keep thy law continually: for ever and
ever.
when I am delivered out of these heavy pressures which lie upon me, as so many
clogs and hindrances, (which I shall never forget) without making bawks in
mine obedience, (which through temptation I have been forced to do, and fear I
shall still do without thy powerful prevention) in love and thankfulness to
serve and please thee, the utmost hour of my life, if set at liberty.

45 Yea, And I will walk at liberty: for I seek thy precepts.
when thou have enfranchized me out of these encumbrances of fear and care, and
made me a man of liberty and authority in Israel, I will as thy freeman and
servant carry and demean my self, in all manner well-pleasing, walking in the
way of thy service, and keeping all thy commandments, which never shall be a
burden or bondage to me, for to be at liberty, and to have ability, and
opportunity to learn and do thy will according to thy word, is that I beg above
any thing, and which I should esteem as my greatest felicity.

46 When thou have advanced me, I will speak of thy testimonies also before
Kings: and will not be ashamed.
I also will advance thee, and execute the office of a Prophet, as well as of a
King, and think it no shame to do so, by declaring to others as occasion is
offered, what thy will and word is, even to Kings and mighty men of the earth,
with whom I shall then be of equal level, and so have opportunity in that
condition to converse more with them, than now I have, and I promise to improve
it when I have it.

And I will delight my self in thy commandments, which I have loved.
47 And then will I as a man set at liberty from restraint, run the ways of thy
commandments, by daily and frequent doing them, my delight shall be to be
conversant in thine ordinances, which I have longed for, and heartily loved,
and desired to be an actour in, but hitherto have been an exile from them,
which has set a vehement edge upon mine appetite, which then I will satiate.

My hands also will I lift up unto thy commandments, which I have loved, and I
will meditate in thy statutes.
48 For then both heart and hand shall act for thee, my whole man, with my whole
might, shall be set on work to know and do thy whole will in thy law revealed,
which I have dearly loved and longed to do, and will perform them in spirit as
well as in letter, for when my mind is free from these distractions, it shall
move in a higher sphere, and be active in and about the Gospel-sence of thy
laws and ordinances.

Zain.
Zain. The seventh letter of the Hebrew Alphabet, signifying the seventh part.
Remember the word unto thy servant, upon which thou have caused me to hope.
49 Be mindful of thy word of promise, and voluntary engagements made to me thy
chosen, though unworthy servant, touching grace, preservation, and deliverance,
upon which as thou have commanded me, so also have thou effectually
overpowered, and enabled me by thy spirit, to rest in assured hope of thy
faithfulness, and my happiness thereby.

50 Throughout all my long and tedious trial where with thou afflictedst me,
This is my comfort in my affliction: for thy word has quickened me.
I have nothing to bear up upon but this, and I bless thee for it, this serves
the turn to do it, thy promise through faith does comfort and cordialize my
heart, and has done many a time, when to sense and reason I have been a dead
man.

51 My faith, The proud have had me greatly in derision: yet have I not
declined from thy law.
and I for my faiths sake, have been exceedingly slighted and scorned by mine
enemies, men of proud and carnal minds, yet have I neither been afraid nor
ashamed of my cause or confidence, but have stuck to thy promises in faith and
obedience, waiting the fulfilling of them.

52 I was ever confident that as mine enemies had their time, I remembered thy
judgments of old, O Lord, and have comforted my self.
so thou would have thine, and that I should see thee as just in reward and
punishment as heretofore, when by miracle thou savedst thy people, and
destroyedst thine and their adversaries, the consideration hereof, knowing thee
to be the same unchangeable God in omnipotency and faithfulness, has always
born up my heart comfortably in hope of no worse success.

53 And were it not for thy word of promise, Horror has taken hold upon me:
because of the wicked that forsake thy law.
and works of power and providence, that the faith of these are a stay to me, I
were of all men most miserable, for the horrid insolences, and unjust
violences of my wicked and graceless enemies, that have no fear of God before
their eyes, but reject both thee and thy precepts, it makes me tremble to think
of it, and the heavy judgments that will befall them for it, so, at present I
feel the evil effects thereof, being driven to extreme straits and perplexities
both of body and mind, by these impious lawless wretches.

Thy statutes have been my songs in the house of my pilgrim age.
54 For my life is no better to me by their persecution and prosecution of me
from place to place, than a perpetual pilgrimage, so that my dwelling is no
dwelling, for I am in a continual peregrination, restlesly changing my
station, sometimes in caves, sometimes in deserts, and sometimes in exile and
banishment, yet every where and at all times the memory and meditation of thine
engagements and promises concerning me, which bind thee by grace, as laws do us
by duty, and are thy statutes, as well as are thy commandments, have cheared up
my heart, and were, as my songs, and instruments of music heretofore were wont
to be unto me, at leasurable times in mine own house.

I have remembered thy name, O Lord, in the night, and have kept thy law.
55 I have made it my employment, and set my seriousest thoughts on work upon
the minding and meditating thy faithfulness, power, and justice, when others
have been refreshing their bodies with rest in the night season, then have I
been refreshing my weary and careful mind, with pondering thee in thine
excellencies, O Lord: and have been so settled in mind thereby, as I have taken
up a resolution by carnal and sinful shifts, never to prevaricate what ever
come of me, but to persist in faith and holiness to the end.

This I had: because I kept thy precepts.
56 These soul supportations, renewed graces, and heart comfortings, the Lord
vouchsafed me in the meditations of him, his promises, and properties, because
I was conscionable and careful to walk always in all things to his
well-pleasing, therefore did he reward and sustain me with these divine
cordialls, and comforts, in the time of my comfortless peregrination.

Cheth. Cheth.
The eighth letter of the Hebrew Alphabet, signifying the eighth part.
57 The comforts and confidences of worldly men, Thou art my portion, O Lord, I
have said, that I would keep thy words.
are in worldly things, there portion is here below in things (I bless my God)
too low for me, who have no happiness, contentment, or confidence short of God,
who is all in all to me, and as, Lord, thou art mine, so I have fully purposed
to be thine, and to yield thee faithful and fruitful obedience in dependencie
on thy promises, and conformity to thy precepts.

58 Lord, I entreated thy favor with my whole heart: be merciful unto me
according to thy word.
thou know what value I have always set on thy favor, how above all
blessings I have lain at thee for that, as more to me than all besides, so that
before and above all, have I preferred and sought it as my choicest and
chiefest happiness, and therefore beg of thee that I may ever be blessed with
thy grace, mercy, and truth, vouchsafed and fulfilled according to promise.

59 Fearful was I to offend, I thought on my ways, and turned my feet into thy
testimonies.
and forfeit that thy favor I set so much by, and therefore was always
solicitous and thought-ful of the steps I took, whether they tended to thy
pleasing or displeasing, and if at any time by temptation or frailty I began to
be misbiassed, or that actually I deviated before I was awar, I quickly
(through thy grace) recollected my self, and faced about.

60 When I found mine error I soon quit it, I made have, and delayed not to
keep thy commandments.
no reasonings of flesh and blood prevailed to make me persist, but by the
power of thy grace, I broke through all impediments to serve and please thee.

61 Wicked men by wicked ways have prospered and thriven, The bands of the
wicked have robbed me: but I have not forgot thy Law.
and by combination have turned me out of all, and enriched themselves with my
spoils, but for all that I have stuck to my tackling, held close to faith and a
good conscience in believing, and doing as I was appointed, and left their
punishment and my vindication unto thee.

At midnight I will rise to give thanks unto thee: because of thy righteous
judgments.
62 And it no whit repents me, but exceedingly rejoices me of that thy gracious
supportation of my faith, yea, such peace of conscience it brings with it, and
such a seal of special favor it is unto me, according to thy righteous
engagements to be thus enabled to walk holily, as that the thoughts thereof are
more sweet and refreshing to my mind, than sleep to my nature, and make me
suspend the one, even in the season thereof, to feed upon the other, and make
thankful repayment of my debts and endearments contracted thereby.

I am a companion of all them that fear thee: and of them that keep thy
precepts.
63 Thy ways, and they that walk in them, are my delight, I fear thee my self,
so I love all those that do so, I have no pleasure, as not in wickedness, so
nor in wicked men, but the outcasts of the world, such as I my self am, that
fear to offend thee, and desire to please and serve thee, these have my heart,
and with such will I stand and fall, live and die.

The earth, O Lord; is full of thy mercy: teach me thy statutes.
64 As a faithful Creator thou have plentifully provided for man and beast,
nature is well stored with varieties of created conveniences for all kinds of
Beings upon earth, which also are mercifully continued, though long since
forfeited by the fall. But, O Lord, there is one thing necessary, and a mercy
more worth than all these, and that is to be able to see and seek a happiness
that is above nature, and that grows in no earthly soil, to have a frameable
and teachable heart, Lord, grant me that, write thy Law in it, and let both thy
precepts and promises be believed, and obeyed by me, That is my desire.

Teth. Teth.
The ninth letter of the Hebrew Alphabet, signifying the ninth part.
65 I have not found thy grace or truth to fail me, Thou have dealt well with
thy servant, O Lord, according unto thy word.
but as I have endeavored to approve my self a good servant, so, O Lord, have
I found thee a good master, true of thy promise, and as good as thy word.

66 Lord, Teach me good judgment, and knowledge: for I have believed thy
commandments.
give me a right understanding of things that differ, let me not mistake
falsehood for truth, nor evil for good, but teach me to know the thing that good
is, and dispose mine heart and affections practically thereunto, for so far as
I have been taught by thy spirit, I have gladly embraced and conscionably
obeyed, and not refused either belief or subjection to any thy commandments.

67 My very afflictions through thy grace and faithfulness, Before I was
afflicted, I went astray: but now have I kept thy word.
are become wholesome physic and good documents to me, for I was apt to wander
out of thy way, until I smarted for my folly, but now I have learned another
lesson, and have ever since run another course, kept close to thy will revealed
in thy word without hearkening to the dictates of corrupt reason, tending to
self-pleasing or self-saving, which before were too prevailing.

68 Goodness of all kinds, Thou art good, and do good, teach me thy statutes.
O Lord, is natural to thee, so it is not to us in any kind, for there is none
good but God, and flows plentifully from thee, as all creatures but man
especially can witness, of whose bounty they have their beings, and those
beings their subsistencies all the world over, but Lord it is thy saving
goodness that I pray to partake of, my soul is more to me than my body, and
grace than nature, therefore do I beg special and supernatural grace and wisdom
to know and do thy will, which I prefer before common and natural benefits, the
pleasing of thee before either profit or pleasure to my self, of thy goodness
grant me this, which is part of the divine nature, and only makes man like to
God in being and doing good, which I would both be and do.

The proud have forged a lie against me: but I will keep thy precepts with my
whole heart.
69 My proud disdainful enemies that fear not God, nor care not what wickedness
they commit in word or deed to discredit me, have falsely aspersed me for a
traitorous conspiratour, and that it is my ambition, not thy determination that
puts me upon expectancie of the Kingdom, but I am resolved, this slander shall
not stagger me, but in confidence of thy truth and mine own integrity, I will
persist to serve thee in sincerity of heart, who I know wilt vindicate mine
innocence, and make appear their forgerie.

Their heart is as fat as grease, but I delight in thy Law.
70 Their worldly pomp and plenty has made their hearts so gross and carnal,
as that their consciences are benumbed and senseless, and their minds puffed up
with pride and arrogance, they sin without restraint, and scoff at piety as
pusillanimitie, but thy Law is my delight, though not theirs, I am troubled
when I break it, and glad at heart when I do and can keep it through thy
gracious enablement.

It is good for me that I have been afflicted: that I might learn thy statutes.
71 Yea, such is my love to holiness, that I never think it a dear purchase
whatsoever it cost me, and therefore value mine afflictions, which in mercy
thou sentest to beget in me a teachable and tractable heart to thy
commandments, above their prosperity that hardens their hearts in ignorance
and carnallitie.

The Law of thy mouth is better unto me, than thousands of gold and silver.
72 Thy word and Law written in my heart, effectually taught and wrought there
by thy spirit, however it is counter to my corruptions, yet because as it is
thine, (so pliable have thou made my will to thy will) even therefore do I
praise it, and apprehend my self more enriched with my knowledge of it and love
to it, than if I had the wealth the world so dotes on in never so great
abundance.

Iod. Iod.
The tenth letter of the Hebrew Alphabet, signifying the tenth part.
73 Thou, Thy hands have made me, and fashioned me; give me understanding, that
I may learn thy commandments.
Lord, that made me was pleased to difference me from other creatures, by
endowing me with natural capacities above them, so that though I have lost my
created perfections of righteousness and holiness, yet not my created and
passive capacities of thy renewing them again in me, my soul has the same
faculties, and my body the same parts and Organs thou gave me at the first,
in, and upon which thou art able to re-imprint thine image; vouchsafe me I pray
thee thy renewing grace more and more, powerfully enlighten my dark
understanding, incline my whole man, O Lord, to the loving and obeying of thy
whole will, I am still thy creature, renew thy likeness.

74 If Lord thou will strengthen thy graces in me, They that fear thee will be
glad when they see me: because I have hoped in thy word.
and enable me to hold out steadfast in faith and holy obedience to the end, and
then reward thine own graces in me with a happy issue and close of things, how
will it rejoice the hearts of thy servants that fear thee, and hope in thee?
when they shall see me have overcome all my miseries, and be possessed of my
hopes and thy promises, because of thy gracious enabling me to hold out in
affiance of thy word, it will affect them greatly.

75 I know, I know, O Lord, that thy judgments are right: and that thou in
faithfulness have afflicted me.
O Lord, that thou art righteous in what thou say, and do, thy word and
thy works are consentaneous, thy faithfulness is fulfilled in my very
afflictions though seemingly otherwise thy judgments and mercies, and shall
conduce to bring about thy promises made to me.

Let, I pray thee, thy merciful kindness be for my comfort; according to thy
word unto thy servant.
76 Let, I pray thee thy mercy of favor and grace long since promised me, be
in the faith of it a continual comfort to me, yea, Lord, comfort me thy servant
chosen and called, with the accomplishment of it, according to thy word.

Let thy tender mercies come unto me, that I may live: for thy Law is my
delight.
77 Make me inwardly sensible of those tender affections which thou bear me,
that they may help to revive me in this comfortless condition whilst it lasts,
and express them also in outward manifestations, let me see thy pity and
compassion in a comfortable deliverance and conclusion, that I may live free
from these troubles which makes my life a very death, for how ever by frailty
I have and cannot but offend thee, yet thou know thou have mine heart and
good will in all things to serve and obey thee, that is my desire, and in that
I delight.

Let the proud be ashamed, for they dealt perversely with me without a cause:
but I will meditate in thy precepts.
78 Let not me therefore miscarrie by the hands of proud men and evil doers,
that are lawless and scorn subjection, Lord, let them miscarrie in their
designs and evil purposes, for thou know how contrary to their consciences
they have persecuted me as nocent, when as they know me to be an innocent
person, but their dealing shall not make me forget my duty, I will keep mine
eye still fixed upon that, and walk steadfastly in the way of thy precepts, in
confidence of my reward and their punishment.

79 Give me such remarkable deliverance and so change the scene, Let those that
fear thee, turn unto me, and those that have known thy testimonies.
that those of thy people that truly fear thee, and have been savingly
enlightened by thee, whom my afflictions have staggered, or that have been
misled by delusions and false reports, may see convincing signs of thy special
favor to me, and purposes concerning me, and thereby be encouraged and invited
in the faith of thy promises, and my innocent cause to take part and join with
me, against mine enemies.

80 Let me be enabled by thy gracious assistance to keep faith and a good
conscience steadfast to the end, Let my heart be sound in thy statutes; that I
be not ashamed.
that I lose not the prize by falling short of the goal, fainting either in
faith or duty, and so render my self and cause a laughing stock to mine
enemies, which is it they would have.

Caph. Caph.
The eleventh letter of the Hebrew Alphabet, signifying the eleventh part.
81 Lord, My soul faints for thy salvation: but I hope in thy word.
I have waded through many and grievous troubles, and with much long-suffering
have a long time eagerly longed and looked for thy promised deliverance, almost
to the exhausting of my soul and spirit in sighs and groans after it, but yet
it comes not, nevertheless I am still sustained in faith, and am resolved to
live and die in expectation of thy promise, no length of time, nor trouble,
shall null my hopes, nor, I am confident the thing I hope for.

82 I have waited long and dreely looked for the accomplishment of thy promise,
Mine eyes fail for thy word, saying, when will thou comfort me?
even to the weakening of my sight and impairing my senses, every foot thinking
within my self, as my mind gave me and occasion was offered, that sure this is
the time, and that the opportunity, that I shall be delivered, but still I am
prolonged and put off, sighing out my hopes, with, If not now Lord, when then
will the time be, and what the means that must fulfill thy word, and my desire?

For I am become like a bottle in the smoke: yet do I not forget thy statutes.
83 The scorching sun of adversity has almost quite exhausted my radical
moisture, my spirits which should animate my members, and extrinsical parts are
spent with continual grief by reason of afflictions, and disappointments of my
longing expectations, which lingringly consume and wast me into leanness and
deformity, like a bladder or a skin-bottel hung up in a chimney, that in tract
of time will parch and crack and shrink up into wrinckles not like it self, and
so am I become, yet though nature thus decays, grace does not, by thy goodness
to me I am, for all that, upheld in care and conscience to do thy will, and
believe thy word.

How many are the days of thy servant; when will thou execute judgment on
them that persecute me?
84 Lord, how long too, is the end of my miseries? consider how much of my life
is already spent and wasted in them, even of mine, who am appointed and
designed by thee for great and special services in thy Church, therefore
consider me who would fain be employed, to shorten these days; when shall they
that unjustly would cut me off, be themselves justly so served? and I set free
to serve thee.

The proud have dug pits for me, which are not after thy Law.
85 Mine enemies that scorn thy commands, and me thy servant, have not only
persecuted me with open violence, but with cunning craft and dissimulation
sought my life, for their will is their Law, and not thy word, to which they
yield no manner of obedience, nor bear no regard, but practice what them list
though never so wicked and unjust, so it serves their turns.

86 But, All thy commandments are faithful, they persecute me wrongfully, help
thou me.
Lord, I have another estimate of thy commandments, I set not so light by them,
for I am sure they come from a faithful God, who may suffer the wicked for a
time to sin against them, but the punishment due to those that break them,
shall befall them, and so shall the reward promised to them that keep them; in
the faith whereof I do and will innocently persevere, and pray thee to make it
good, in my help and deliverance from, and upon, these treacherous and unjust
persecutours.

87 Mine enemies, They had almost consumed me upon earth: but I forsook not thy
precepts.
men of the world, that take all ways and advantages upon earth against me,
had what one way and other by their continual vexations and my griefs almost
brought me down to the grave, and got the better of me, had not thou been
above them, and heaven more my friend than earth, where I had no help, but when
I was at lowest, hopeless and helpless, as to outward appearance, I still kept
faith and a good conscience, hoping in thee.

88 Lord, Quicken me after thy loving kindness, so shall I keep the testimony
of thy mouth.
give me to enjoy that happy condition which of thy free grace and loving
beneficence thou have promised me, which will be as a resurrection to life from
death, after so many sorrows as I have undergone, so shall thou both engage and
enable me, when I am set free from these hindrances to do thy whole will and
walk in thy Law, which bears the stamp of Divine and royal authority upon it,
and therefore is worthy of reverend and solemn observance and obedience, which
then I will be sure to pay to it, but now I cannot.

Lamed.
Lamed. The twelfth letter of the Hebrew Alphabet, signifying the twelfth part.
For ever, O Lord, thy word is settled in heaven.
89 Thy word and decree, O Lord, is as firm as thy self, no chances nor changes
here below can make void what thou above have determined shall be, nor can time
it self wear out, what thou that art eternal before all time have appointed.

Thy faithfulness is unto all generations: thou have established the earth, and
it abides.
90 Our faith may bear it self boldly upon thy faithfulness, which according to
thy word of truth and promise is always the same, how ever matters frame or
seem to be out of frame, therefore it is that the world is not long since
dissolved, because thou have decreed and promised the continuance of it,
therefore, and for no natural cause does the earth thus long subsist in nature
and order.

They continue this day according to thine ordinances: for all are thy servants.
91 All created Beings according to their several natures, stations, and
operations, are as at the beginning, thou in wisdom determinedst them, which
else of themselves would run into confusion and destruction, what Laws thou
gave them they keep, and thereby are themselves kept and preserved, for all
the elements and elemental creatures as they are made by thee, so they are made
for thee, to be at thy ordering and dispose, and so they are, and not at their
own, and it is well for us and them, they are so.

Unless thy Law had been my delights: I should then have perished in mine
affliction.
92 And surely, Lord, I hold by the self-same tenure the creation does, as it
had been long since dissolved and annihilated, but for the Law of orderly
existence thou laidst upon it, whereby ever since it retains a beautiful being,
notwithstanding the contradictions that are in those primarie principles the
elements, as also the strange concussions and alterations that time and sin
has brought forth; So unless I also had thy righteous word to stay my heart
upon, and to cheer up my soul with, which I knew would not fail me in those
various providence and strange agitations which I have undergone, I could
never have lasted thus long, but had long ere this been in my grave, by the
outward pressures and inward griefs I underwent.

93 I have cause all the days of my life thankfully to remember and bear in
mind, I will never forget thy precepts: for with them thou have quickened me.
and I hope I shall, thy faithfulness, according to what thou have ordained in
thy word for me to trust in, and yield obedience to, many a time in mine
extremity when my spirit was ready to sink and die within me, thou have
therewith comfortably revived and cheered me, and set me upon my feet.

94 Let me to the end have experience of thee to be the self-same God in truth
and goodness, I am thine, save me: for I have sought thy precepts.
preserve me in, and deliver me out of this my sad condition, let nothing fail
me that thou have spoken, who am related in a nearer propriety to thee than
that of creation, I am thy son and servant, not passively but actively, by a
gratuitous intrinsical principle, as thou have chosen me, so I have chosen thee
for my Lord and Master, and thy Laws for the rule of my faith and manners, and
always consult them to that purpose.

95 I have been in a many a sore temptation and imminent peril of my life by
sinister plots and practices of my ungodly adversaries, The wicked have waited
for me to destroy me: but I will consider thy testimonies.
and still am, yet will I not deviate by sinful shifts, but study to keep
faith and a good conscience, for so art thou engaged to my security by thy
word the testimony of thy truth.

I have seen an end of all perfection: but thy commandment is exceeding broad.
96 There is but a finite and transitory good in the very best things that are,
their natures are too narrow to give either full content to a man's mind, or
stay to a man's heart, being subject to alter or end, as I have found by
experience, and know by reason, but thy word is all-sufficient, nothing
pertaining to holiness or happiness, stay or contentment, is wanting in thy Law
or Divine dispensation, nor shall be to him that believes and obeyes it, for
the dimensions of it are as large as thy self, in truth and goodness infinite,
and permanent, superabundantly soul-satisfying.

Mem.
Mem. The thirteenth letter of the Hebrew Alphabet, signifying the thirteenth
part.
O how love I thy Law? it is my meditation all the day.
97 I for my part see so much goodness, and find so much settlement in and by
thy word, that the love of it far transcends the love of all things else, I
cannot express the affections I bear it, they are so ardent toward it that
they set my mind on work continually upon it, my thoughts and meditations are
day and night taken up with the consideration and application of the blessed
soul-affecting Divine truths and benefits, contained and exhibited in that Law
and word of thine.

Thou through thy commandments have made me wiser than mine enemies: for they
are ever with me.
98 By thine instructing and enabling me to walk according to the rule of faith
and righteousness commanded in thy word, thou have thereby prospered me above
mine enemies, and made this mine holy simplicity to be too hard for their
subtilitie and craft, which has never yet taken effect against me, but come to
naught and ever will, whilst by thy grace I abandon the wisdom of the flesh,
and walk in the wisdom of thy spirit and word, which I am careful to do
always in all things, and prosper by it.

99 I have had the benefit of education, I have more understanding than all my
teachers: for thy testimonies are my mediation.
and humane helps, as to the affairs and literature of the world, and conversed
with men of understanding, and seen the ways that they have gone in the
managing of their transactions, and when I sum up all the wisdom that ever I
have learned and known, I both count it and find it to be but foolishness
compared, with the study and practice of those holy and righteous rudiments
thy word dictates, wherein I bless thee, I have through thy grace, being taught
of God, out-stript all humane teaching and teachers, by delightning to know,
and do thy will revealed for my direction and supportation.

100 Yea, I understand more [than the ancients: because I keep thy testimonies.
I find by experience though young, that godliness is greater wisdom and better
succeeds a man's affairs, by the blessing of God according to his promises
thereupon, than the advice and counsel of the grave senators and sages of the
world, who pretend and justly to great wisdom by advantage of years and
experience, yet with reverence to those hoary heads, I like my wisdom which is
thine, better than theirs, and find sincerity the best policy, and that the
best wisdom is to do thy will, which accordingly I endeavor.

101 I have I bless thee, I have refrained my feet from every evil way: that I
may keep thy word.
ever since thou taughtest it me been of that mind, and my practice has been
answerable, for my care was still at no rate to sin, but in every thing to
tread the steps thy word has chalked me out, and leave the rest to thee.

102 I have not suffered my self to be misled, I have not departed from thy
judgments: for thou have taught me.
and seduced by mine own or other men's counsels from keeping thy commandments,
which I am sure must judge me and all men else, for I bless thee thou have
taught me better by thy word, and overpowered me by thy spirit to yield to
those thy teachings, which therefore have been to strong for my temptations,
which else had been too strong for me.

How sweet are thy words unto my taste! yea, sweeter than honey to my mouth.
103 I cannot express for any to understand, but my self that feel it, what
pleasure and contentment thy covenant of grace and adoption with its
concomitant promises, and precepts of holiness and happiness believed and
applied, brings to my soul and conscience, beyond all earthly comparisons, honey
to my palate is not comparable.

Through thy precepts I get understanding: therefore I hate every false way.
104 I make thy precepts my study and meditation, whereby I get, by thine
assisting grace, good understanding and enablement to avoid by-ways of sin and
errou^, tending to thy displeasing, whereunto I am tempted, but make constant
resistance, and from my heart detest deviation, as knowing holiness only leads
to happiness, and has the promises both of this life, and of that to come.

Nun.
Nun. The fourteenth letter of the Hebrew Alphabet, signifying the fourteen
part.
Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path.
105 Lord, throughout this untrodden path of mine where there are so many ways
to miscarrie, and the right way so hard to hit, the world and Satan without,
flesh and corruption within, counselling this and that to make me stumble and
fall: my manner is to silence them all, and consult thy word the Divine light
whereof of guids me out of, and dispels those mists and fogs that carnal
reason, taking advantage of my present temptation, casts before mine eyes, and
sets me into and leads me on in the path of thy well-pleasing, which I choose
to walk.

106 As Lord thou have been pleased to enter covenant with me, I have sworn,
and I will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous judgments.
of pardon, acceptance, and grace, so also have I stipulated with thy Majesty,
and bound my self by solemn vow for ever to be thine obedient and faithful
servant and subject, and by thy gracious assistance I am accordingly purposed
to walk in conformity to thy Law, the righteous rule of thee my righteous
Judge.

107 My affliction and grief is very great, I am afflicted very much: quicken
me, O Lord, according unto thy word.
remember Lord it is for thy sake, and by thy providence befallen me, therefore
grant me what thou have promised me, comfort in, and deliverance out of my
calamities.

108 Thou know, Accept, I beseech thee, the freewill-offerings of my mouth,
O Lord, and teach me thy judgments.
O Lord, I am debarred from sacrificing to thee, as else I would, but that
which is the substance of those ceremonies, the free-will-offerings of praise
and thanksgiving, those I can and do offer, which I pray thee accept, and
shall give me cause so to do by teaching me to know, and do thy righteous
precepts in all my difficult cases, and great temptations.

109 I am in perpetual peril of my life, My soul is continually in my hand: yet
do I not forget thy Law.
imminent danger and destruction is ever at hand, yet through faith in thee
they do not distract or afright me from my duty to thee, and thy commandments,
but I call them to counsel, and have them in mind at every turn.

110 I have been attempted upon and my life laid for by wicked dissemblers that
rather than their lives would have had mine, The wicked have laid a snare for
me, yet I erred not from thy precepts.
and cared not how nor which way, yet I have not revenged my self, nor taken
indirect ways against them, as they do against me, but have committed my cause
to thee and kept thy commandments.

Thy testimonies have I taken as an heritage for ever; for they are the
rejoicing of my heart.
111 I have abandoned all confidence and contentment in every thing, saving thy
precious promises, and covenant-ingagements, the testimonies of thy love,
wherewith alone I am sufficiently enriched, and as well by voluntary election,
as outward necessity have chosen thy free grace testified in thy word, as my
chief and only portion to be happy by for ever; for my heart can take felitie
in nothing else, comparatively to them, they rejoice me above my sorrows.

I have inclined mine heart to perform thy statutes always, even unto the end.
112 And as I have chosen thy free grace for ever to be happy by, so in like
sort have I given my self a free-will-offering unto thee again, for ever to be
thine, in love, and thankful obedience to thy commandments.

Samech.
Samech. The fifteenth letter of the Hebrew Alphabet, signifying the fifteenth
part.
I hate vain thoughts: but thy Law do I love.
113 Temptations have wrought upon my corruptions and suggested this thing and
that to me, tending to misbelieving and misdoing, but though I could not hinder
my mind from entertaining the thoughts of them, yet I always set my will on
work to dismiss and oppose them, they had no room in my heart, though they
intruded into my head, for there thy Law kept them out, which has anticipated
mine affections, and sequestered them to it self from all Heterodox suggestions
to the contrary.

Thou art my hiding place and my shield: I hope in thy word.
114 I abhor all sinful shifts and carnal securities, thou only art my
security and defense what ever my danger be. Thy word of truth and goodness do
I fly to, and confide in, and in no earthly refuge whatsoever.

Depart from my ye evil duers; for I will keep the commandments of my God.
115 This is the full and final purpose of mine heart, therefore all that are
not thus minded, I renounce them as no friends nor counselors of mine, they
that do evil and would have me do so, avaunt, for I am resolved what ever others
think, say, or do, to stick to my principles and to my God, to be saved in the
way of faith and Godliness, or to perish.

116 This is my purpose, Uphold me according unto thy word, that I may live:
and let me not be ashamed of my hope.
but, Lord, the power of performance is from thee, and truly therefore do I
purpose it, because thou have promised it, thou have said I shall, and
therefore is it that I say I will, fail me not then I beseech thee neither of
grace nor protection, but grant me both, that neither by my sin, nor thy
desertion I perish, but may live holily and hopefully to thy glory and my
comfort, and never have cause by my miscarriage either in sin or success, to be
ashamed of my confidence, or frustrated of my expectation.

117 Do thou, Hold thou me up and I shall be safe: and I will have respect unto
thy statutes continually.
Lord, support and preserve me, and then I am sure not to fall (as on the other
hand if thou do not uphold me, I am sure not to stand,) whereby I shall be
confirmed in well-doing, for thy grace can only establish me, and thy gracious
performances will strengthen and engage me more and more in faith and obedience
to the end.

118 Thou have made examples good store in several ages of the world of thy
dislike of wicked workers, Thou have trodden down all them that err from thy
statutes: for their deceit is falsehood.
worldly wise, and carnal confident men, by executing vengeance, and bringing
fierce destruction upon them, and made it appear plain enough, how vain and
deceiveable such ways and confidences are, which thy word does not warrant,
and that truth and safety are only there to be had.

119 I well know of what value and esteem wicked men, Thou put away all the
wicked of the earth like dross: therefore I love thy testimonies.
how ever the world thinks of them, are of with thee, and what ends they make
compared to the godly, they are to thee as refuse dross to refined silver, and
so shall be differenced and distinguished by thee, in thy wrath they shall be
consumed with all their earthly confidences, and go out like a snuff, whilst
those that serve thee, and were as dross in the worlds eye, are notwithstanding
highly esteemed of thee, and safely preserved by thee, both living and dead
they are precious to thee, therefore do I stick to what thy word warrants and
testifies to be thy will, that I obey, love, and delight in, spite of the
wicked of the world, their hatred and contempt of me and it.

My flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy judgments.
120 I see such effects of sin and so well know the doom of sinners, that I fear
more to offend thee and incur thy displeasure, than any evil that can else
befall me, from which I chiefly pray to be delivered.

Ain.
Ain. The sixteenth letter of the Hebrew Alphabet, signifying the sixteenth
part.
I have done judgment and justice: leave me not to mine oppressors.
121 Thou, Lord, know mine innocence and the uprightness of mine heart and
conversation to my very enemies in this very cause, wherein I am so wrongfully
and injuriously prosecuted and persecuted, neither thinking nor doing them
evil, no not evil for evil, therefore in thy righteousness take part with the
righteous, and leave me not to the mercy, or rather expose me not to the
cruelty of mine oppressors that seek my life.

Be surety for thy servant for good: let not the proud oppress me.
122 Do thou in grace and faithfulness own thy servant and his innocent cause
for thine, to protect him and it, from the violence of his clamorous
bloodthirsty adversaries, let them not by their potencie, which makes them
proud, wrongfully ruin me as they desire to do.

I have waited long and dreely looked even to the weakening of my sight, Mine
eyes fail for thy salvation, and for the word of thy righteousness.
and impairing of my senses, for thee to deliver me, and fulfill the word of
grace, thy promise of salvation, which thou the righteous God have made unto
me, and will undoubtedly fulfill in righteousness.

124 Lord, Deal with thy servant according unto thy mercy, and teach me thy
statutes.
thou know the hardship I undergo, the temptations wherewith my faith and
holiness is assaulted and endangered. Good Lord, have compassion upon me, that
am and desire to be thy faithful and obedient servant, and in tender mercy
deal gently with me, lead me not into temptation, but deliver me from evil, I
know my frailty, therefore in self-diffidence I pray thee, at every turn stand
by me to instruct and enable me what to do, that I err not.

125 Thou have honored me to be thy servant both by effectual calling, I am
thy servant, give me understanding: that I may know thy testimonies.
and special designment to extraordinary employment in thy Church, therefore
furnish me with such a measure of illumination and sanctification, that I may
walk worthy my high calling, and evermore to the end approve my self that which
I am by a proportionable measure of grace, enabling and assisting me to know,
and do thy will constantly.

126 It is high time, It is time for thee, Lord, to work: for they have made
void thy Law.
O Lord, for thee to show thy self in some remarkable manner against my proud
enemies, and to execute judgment upon them, nor so much for my sake as thine
own, for such is their presumption that they care as little for thee as me,
slighting thy Law and scorning obedience to it, as if it were a thing of
naught, to no purpose and of no authority.

Therefore I love thy commandments above gold, yea, above fine gold.
127 And surely, Lord, so ill do I like their manners, that I love thy
commandments the better for it, because they are so contrary to them, the less
they set by them, and the more they value the wealth of the world, the more I
value them, and the less I set by it, for swine know not the worth of pearls,
no treasure under heaven is so precious and profitable in mine eye, nor indeed
in it self, or to the possessour, as thy Law and Commandments are to the
sincere professor and practiser of them, the holy dictates of a holy God
making both holy and happy them that know and do them which I desire, and
good, Lord, grant me to do, above all things, as alone sufficient, to make me
both rich and happy to my hearts content.

Therefore I esteem all thy precepts concerning all things to be right: and I
hate every false way.
128 As black sets forth white, and a crooked line a straight one, so does mine
enemies ways thy commandments in their purity and rectitude, their deformed
and crooked courses of impiety and iniquity makes the line of thy precepts
much more straight and right in mine eyes, yea, those that carnal sense and
corrupt reason can worst approve of, to me through thy grace they are most
precious and desirable, as tending to nearest perfection and likeness with thy
self, and on the contrary, as I love thy Law which they hate and make void, so
do I hate what they love, sinful deviations and prevarications.

Pe.
Pe. The seventeenth letter of the Hebrew Alphabet, signifying the seventeenth
part.
Thy testimonies are wonderful, therefore does my soul keep them.
129 Man's reason and understanding is both contrary to, and infinitely short of
comprehending the holy and high mysteries of salvation and Godliness revealed
in thy word, which nature could never have known nor taught us, had they not
been supernaturally revealed, being the hidden uncreated wisdom of God, taught
and wrought in the souls of thy servants by extraordinary illumination, and of
special grace and favor, therefore for their Divine nature and worths sake,
which in mercy thou have opened mine eyes to see, though others do not, do I
love and delight in them, meditate and obey them, even lay out my whole
strength upon them.

130 In whomsoever, The entrance of thy words gives light: it gives
understanding unto the simple.
and at what time soever, thy word by the efficatious working of thy spirit
first takes saving and sanctifying impression, there, and then, and never till
then, the sun of righteousness rises with light and healing, to the expulsion
and dispersion of that deadly darkness that naturally benighteth every soul;
man though otherwise never so worldly wise, is but a very fool, vain, and
ignorant both of truth and goodness, till thou write thy Law in his heart, that
and only that is true wisdom, and they and only they have true understanding
though otherwise never so foolish.

131 I for my part never longed more after meat and drink in my greatest
extremity of hunger and thirst, I opened my mouth, and panted: for I longed
for thy commandments.
nor any creature living, than I did for the incomming of thy word with power
into my soul, when it was under the guilt and dominion of sin, O the sighs and
groans that I incessantly breathed forth, after my transforming, and thine
inabling grace to believe and obey.

132 Thou, Look thou upon me, and be merciful unto me, as thou usest to do unto
those that love thy name.
Lord, know how I longed and still do to serve thee out of a sincere and
hearty love to thee; Let therefore thine eye of grace and compassion be upon
me, mercifully to keep me from falling into sin, or by sin into thy
displeasure, as thou have promised, and in thy goodness art accustomed to do to
such as thou know I am a lover of, and hoper in thy grace, truth, and mercy.

Order my steps in thy word, and let not any iniquity have dominion over me.
133 Let my whole conversation and course of life by thy spirit, according to
thy word, the rule of holiness and righteousness, be powerfully overruled and
ordered in all things, and let not my innate pravity by force or subtility of
temptation in no case overmaster thy grace, and make me sin against thee, whom
I desire to serve.

Deliver me from the oppression of man: so will I keep thy precepts.
134 My greatest temptation and fear is the unjust violence and cruel
persecution of mine enemies, thou that art the Almighty and gracious Lord God,
set me free and deliver me from the injuries of proud malicious minded men, so
shall I be engaged and enabled when set at liberty, thankfully and cheerfully
to serve and please thee.

Make thy face to shine upon thy servant: and teach me thy statutes.
135 Bring me out of this comfortless darksom condition threatening thy
displeasure, whereby I have nothing but troubles without, and sorrows within,
let me by deliverance see the sky clear up upon me, let thy favorable aspect
break forth from under this cloud, and Lord, it is as well the light of grace
as comfort, of sanctification as deliverance, that I beg of thee, the one
without the other will but little profit nor please me.

Rivers of waters run down mine eyes: because they keep not thy Law.
136 So deeply am I affected with the opprobries and contempt that thou
undergoest by the wicked of the world, specially mine enemies who turn grace
into wantonness, and make thy impunity their immunity to sin, that it is a
greater trouble and grief of heart to me than any I undergo in mine own behalf,
and costs me as many sighs and tears the injuring of thee in thine honor, as
my self in my peace and innocence, which I should be as glad were vindicated,
and they punished as I delivered.

Tsaddi. Tsaddi.
The eighteenth letter of the Hebrew Alphabet, signifying the eighteenth part.
137 Let other men that love to live in sin think as contemptuously as they
will of thee and thy Laws, Righteous art thou, O Lord, and upright are thy
judgments.
yet art thou, and they righteous, and so they shall find when according to
those Laws thou passest a just and righteous sentence upon them for their
wicked disobedience.

138 What thou have testified to be thy will in thy word, Thy testimonies that
thou have commanded, are righteous, and very faithful.
by commanding it to be done, is just and righteous in it self, and tends to
make men so if rightly performed, yea, happy also, thy commands having their
rewards, which to the faithful shall be faithfully performed.

139 I sustain no small grief by my persecutours in mine own person, My zeal
has consumed me: because mine enemies have forgotten thy words.
but if I know mine own heart, it is far short of what I undergo for thy sake,
the contemptuous neglect and slight esteem, which my proud enemies have of thy
commandments, making a trade of sinning, has so affected me, to see thee thus
dishonored, and thy Law unregarded, that mine ardent apprehension of it, in
fervor and affection to thee, and holy impatience against them, has meagred
and impaired me much.

140 That for which others dislike and refuse thy word is, Thy word is very
pure: therefore thy servant loves it.
because it is in its own nature pure, and tends to the refining their natures
and corrupt manners, which wicked worldlings cannot abide. And for this very
reason sake do I love it, and delight in it, because it is such, and has that
gracious operation with it, for that I am thy servant and do long more and more
to be so in all manner of holiness and righteousness, whereof it is the perfect
rule and pattern.

I am small and despised; yet do I not forget thy precepts.
141 I have temptations of poverty, persecution, scorn, and what not, that put
me to it, yet I swerve not, nor cast not off thy yoke, though in the condition
I am in, I draw hardly in it through very rough and un-even ways; I am not
mercenary, earthly felicity is not it that moves me to, nor shall infelicitie
remove me from my duty, and allegiance to thy precepts.

Thy righteousness is an everlasting righteousness, and thy Law is the truth.
142 No Lord, it is the perfection of thy righteous will in thy word that draws
me to it, so that nothing can separate me from it, because it is, ever was, and
shall be, the only unchangeable certain standard for holiness and happiness,
life and salvation, and of that absolute truth and infallibility is thy Law and
the rudiments thereof, that all else are living destructive vanities, that
differ from it, and conform not to it.

Trouble and anguish have taken hold on me; yet thy commandments are my
delights.
143 I am under arrest, never at liberty, but a perpetual prisoner to outward
trouble, and inward grief, and yet faith and a good conscience comfort me, for
I am sure if I be faithful to thee in obedience, thou will be so to me in
gracious recompense, thy word is my warrant

The righteousness of thy testimonies is everlasting: give me understanding,
and I shall live.
144 The righteousness which thou prescribest in thy Law to be observed and
obeyed, is the only absolutely unchangeable infallible rule to be holy and
happy by, teach me and guide me in the knowledge and practice of it, and I
doubt not the consequence, because of thy faithfulness, preservation temporal
and salvation eternal, how deadly and desperate soever my condition seem, will
certainly be the issue.

Koph. Koph.
The ninetenth letter of the Hebrew Alphabet, signifying the nineteenth part.
145 Thou, I cried with my whole heart, hear me, O Lord; I will keep thy
statutes.
Lord, know the faithful and affectionate addresses I have made to thee in
this my distress, not as men naturally do by instinct of fear and grief, but of
faith and hope, Lord, therefore hear me praying in spirit, and grant my groans,
and what thou have or shall command me I will gratuitously observe, and by thy
grace make good my word.

146 It was thou alone that I put my confidence and hope in, I cried unto thee,
save me: and I shall keep thy testimonies.
in this my need, do not therefore deceive thy servant, nor frustrate my
expectations, but according to thy promise and my dependence, preserve, and
deliver me into a free and comfortable condition, wherein I may be able as well
as willing to do those things which are held forth in thy word to be thy will
and pleasure.

147 Night nor day have I ceased to solicit thee, I prevented the dawning of
the morning, and cried: I hoped in thy word.
my first thoughts are upon thee, I no sooner wake but my heart falls to work,
and before I can see I am bespeaking thee in prayer, for delay does not abate
but sharpen the edge of my hope in thy promise and faithfulness.

148 Yea, Mine eyes prevent the night watches, that I might meditate in thy
word.
early and late do I give my self to meditation and faithful consideration of
thy word, for to strengthen and direct me, consulting it at all times about all
things to be ruled by it.

149 Let me prevail, Hear my voice according unto thy loving kindness: O Lord,
quicken me according to thy judgment.
not, Lord, for my merits, but for thy grace sake, which I have ever in mine
eye, both as thy word specifies it, and thy works have always manifested it
to the faithful. Let my soul be evermore upheld in lively hope and expectation,
by the faith of thy respective righteousness of justice and mercy to me and
mine enemies, and let me effectually be delivered by it.

They draw nigh that follow after mischief: they are far from thy Law.
150 I am sharply assaulted and sorely pursued by mischievous minded men, void
of all conscience, to mine exceeding great hazard, such as greedily covet to do
evil, but are far from the thoughts or care of well-doing, diametrically
opposite in their ways to thy word, have no fear of God before their eyes.

Thou art near O Lord: and all thy commandments are truth.
151 Blessed be thy name, though they persecute me, and seemingly endanger me,
yet art thou as near to help, as they to hurt, and thou would not have
commanded me and thy faithful people so often in thy word to believe in thee,
wait for thee, and not to turn aside from thee to false refuges, and
unjustifiable courses, but that in faithfulness thou will protect and preserve
them that do so, and not let them be disappointed by so doing.

Concerning thy testimonies I have known of old, that thou have founded them
for ever.
152 For thine injunctions of that nature, they are as true and stable, and many
as firmly be believed in, as thou thy self, and have been in all ages
experimentally approved so to thy Church, and are so to be to thy people for
ever; grace and salvation shall always be their portion.

Resh.
Resh. The 20 letter of the Hebrew Alphabet, signifying the 20 part.
Consider mine affliction, and deliver me; for I do not forget thy Law.
153 Lord, consider mine affliction according to the nature and pressure of it,
which thou know is grievous, and let it move thee in compassion and mercy
to deliver me out of it, as thou have promised: For, for all my distemperature
I carefully and conscionably bear in mind both for my supportation and
direction, what thy word the rule of my life and foundation of my faith
exhibites, to walk thereafter, not fearing God the less for fear of men.

154 Thou know the goodness of my cause, Plead my cause, and deliver me:
quicken me according to thy word.
mine innocence, and the solitary helplesness of my condition, how all is
against me, and none for me, doing me all manner of wrong in word and deed, so
that I have none to fly but thee, and accordingly do I make mine humble
address to thy justice and mercy, to undertake and engage for me against mine
enemies, maintain, defend, and deliver me, and it from my wrong doers, cheer up
my heart in thy promises concerning it, and set me free from this impendent
death and destruction, as thou have promised.

155 I know thee too righteous to patronize mine enemies, Salvation is far from
the wicked: for they seek not thy statutes.
and their cause against me or mine; thou will not let me perish and them
prosper, but contrarily I know and am confident such wicked wretches are so far
from being saved and preserved by thee as that they shall be destroyed, for
they are under no promise, judgment belongs to them who neither care to know
nor do what thou have commanded.

156 Though mine afflictions be great and sorrows manifold, Great are thy
tender mercies, O Lord: quicken me according to thy judgments.
yet thy mercies are so too, wherewith thou tenderly compassionates thy people
under wrongful sufferance, O Lord, therefore cheer up my heart in the hopeful
expectation of thy righteous power and goodness, and faithfully fulfill it in my
actual deliverance.

157 I have had as much provocation to sin, Many are my persecutors, and mine
enemies: yet do I not decline from thy testimonies.
and temptation to diffidence, as can well be imagined, considering my manifold
dangers by open and secret enemies, and my wrongful injurious usages by word
and deed of my many slanderous bloudy-minded persecutours; Yet do I keep faith
and a good conscience, obey thy word, and will for all that.

I beheld the transgressors, and was gr^eved: because they kept not thy word.
158 Mine enemies and wrong-doers did not only trouble me, as to my self, but
it sadded me exceedingly for thee, to see thee so contemned, and thy word which
should be a Law to them, so despised by them, walking quite contrary.

Consider how I love thy precepts; quicken me, O Lord, according to thy loving
kindness.
159 Hereby thou may perceive the dear affection I bear to thy word and will
revealed in it, I beseech thee take notice of it in way of gracious
remuneration, and Lord, encourage me to hope, and do thou fulfill all that in
thy loving kindness and grace, thou have promised to those that do so.

Thy word is true from the beginning, and every one of thy righteous judgments
endures for ever.
160 Thy promises have lost nothing of their virtue and vigor by their long
standing, but are, as thou thy self art in goodness and faithfulness to thy
people, the same that ever they were, and so shall all thy righteous
engagements be to the end, no one word shall fall to the ground that thou have
spoken in way of promise to be believed in, or of reward to be hoped for, but
shall certainly be fulfilled to thy people and Church in one age as well as
another, hereafter as heretofore, and now as well as either.

Schin.
Schin. The 21 letter of the Hebrew Alphabet, signifying the 21 part.
Princes have persecuted me without a cause: but mine heart stands in aw of
thy word.
161 Mine enemies, as they have not been few, so nor mean, for the chief have
been chiefly against me, men of might and greatness that should yield
protection and right to the innocent and oppressed, contrarily they have turned
their power upon me to oppress and wrong me, to whom I never gave cause of
offense, but I am, I bles thee for it, not so transported with the fear of man,
as to forget God, thy word, the duty and reverence I ow to it, has taken such
rooting in my heart, that no earthly powers can extirpate it.

162 Whenever I have been hard beset by temptation, I rejoice at thy word, as
one that finds great spoil.
and thy word through grace has seasonably minded me of my faith and duty, it
has joyed mine heart beyond expression, no victor has joyed more in the
unexpected spoils of a conquered enemy.

163 All false ways and refuges are an abomination to me, I hate and abhor
lying: but thy Law do I love.
my mind and affections can entertain no treaty nor agreement with them, they
are utterly against the hair with me, but thy Law is as consentaneous and
connatural, as they are contrary and heterogenial, I love it at my heart.

164 Continually does my heart ejaculate thy praises, Seven times a day do I
praise thee: because of thy righteous judgments.
every foot am I lifting up my soul in way of thankful acknowledgement of thy
grace vouchsafed me, in seasonable and effectual revealing thy righteous truths
unto me, for my support and guidance, daily as I have need, which draws forth
praises proportionably.

165 What outward troubles soever happen unto thy people, Great peace have they
which love thy Law: and nothing shall offend them.
yet in the sincere filial affection they bear to thy word and will, to live up
and walk according to it, herein do they enjoy transcendent peace and happiness
surmounting all misery, for so they know they please thee, and are accepted of
thee, and having God and a good conscience on their side, what can trouble them?

And for my part what thy Law requires, Lord, I have hoped for thy salvation,
and done thy commandments.
that have I constantly and diligently endeavored to perform, both by firm
believing and exact walking. Thou Lord, know my hope of salvation has been
in thee and thee only in all my troubles; and my ways and works have been
ordered by thy precepts, not by mine own corrupt suggestions.

My soul has kept thy testimonies: and I love them exceedingly.
167 Nor have I served thee either formally or hypocritically, with outward
shows, or for base ends in the ways and works of obedience, but with an honest
sincere heart have I done thy commandments in love to thy righteous will
testified in thy word, which has my heart above all things.

I have kept thy precepts and thy testimonies: for all my ways are before thee.
168 Thy whole covenant and dispensation of thy will as well in one thing as
another, have I in faith and obedience carefully observed, without wilful
swerving. Thou know what I say to be true, who from heaven have beheld me
every step I have gone in this my troublesome pilgrimage of persecution, and as
thine eye has been upon me, so has mine eye been upon thee all the while, as
upon an all-seeing righteous judge and gracious rewarder, to aw and encourage
me.

Tau.
Tau. The 22 letter of the Hebrew Alphabet, signifying the 22 part.
Let my cry come near before thee: O Lord, give me understanding according to
thy word.
169 Lord, let me find favor in thine eyes, and my earnest prayer have audience
at thy throne of grace, in a thing so reasonable and consonant to thy mind, as
is this my request, to wit, that thou would give me a good and perfect
understanding of thy will effectually to be taught me by thy spirit at all
times, and in all things as occasion requires and thy word dictates, and which
is no more than thy word promises.

Let my supplication come before thee: deliver me according to thy word.
170 And as I pray to be heard concerning a good understanding to guide me in the
way, so also that I may have a gracious audience, and comfortable answer
concerning the end and determination of these my troubles, Lord, deliver me
from them, as well as order me in them, for so also is thy promise.

171 If thou will be the guide of my life, My lips shall utter praise; when thou
have taught me thy statutes.
and powerfully instruct me how to walk well-pleasingly all along this hour of
temptation, and time of trial in the end thereof, when thou shall have done so,
I will pour forth praise to thee in solemn wise at thy sanctuary.

172 Then will I magnify the faithfulness and righteousness of thy word, My
tongue shall speak of thy word: for all thy commandments are righteousness.
and teach others to trust in it and walk by it, for that they shall be sure to
find in the end, as I have done, that all it says is yea, and Amen, certain
and infallible, materially righteous it is in it self, and effectually so to
all that keep and observe it.

173 Lord, Let thine hand help me: for I have chosen thy precepts.
take my part who have taken thine, strengthen me against and deliver me from
mine enemies, and out of this my perilous state, fight for me, for I fight for
thee against the world and the flesh, and have chosen to embrace thy precepts
before their allurements, and preferred thy will in all things before their
suggestions to the contrary.

174 I have not sinfully shifted as I have been tempted to do, I have longed
for thy salvation, O Lord: and thy Law is my delight.
but have persevered in a faithful expectation and hopeful longing still for
thy promised salvation and deliverance, for, O Lord, thou know mine heart is
fixed upon nothing with contentment and confidence, but thy
covenant-dispensation for my welfare and happiness.

175 Do thou therefore tender me accordingly, Let my soul live, and it shall
praise thee: and let thy judgments help me.
let it not be in the power of mine enemies to deprive me of my soul, by taking
away my life, but preserve it, (as thou have redeemed it) from destruction,
that I may live by thy mercy and not perish by their cruelty that seek my
death, so shall I lay out and spend the life thou give me, in faithful
affectionate praises of thee all my days. Lord, let thy righteousness be
employed for me in my defense and preservation against mine enemies, their
cruelty and oppression, according as thy word holds forth for me to trust in
and rely on.

I have gone astray like a lost sheep, seek thy servant: for I do not forget
thy commandments.
176 In this wilderness of troubles that I am in, driven up and down from thy
presence and people like a sheep wandered from the flock, and out of the
Shepherds ken, I have, I humbly confess lost my way, and stepped aside out of
the direct and straight path I should have trod, by infirmity and frailty. O
thou that art my Lord, and God, the shepherd of my soul, whose I am, and whom
I desire to serve, bring me back again into the un-erring path of thy precepts,
and enjoyment of sweet communion with thee and thy people, by freedom from
these my troubles and temptations, for I have not cast off thy Law, though
through strength of temptation I have warped, but recollect my self and
remember thy commandments, approving and justifying, as holy and desirable, to
conform thereunto.

The cxx. PSALM.
David grounding his hopes upon former experience of mercy, prays to be
delivered from that sad disaster which Doegs slanderous misre-presentation of
him to Saul had brought him into. Prophetically he delivers his doom for it,
and sadly laments his own banishment by it, whereof he shows the necessity,
and pleads his own integrity.

A song of degrees.
Why these Psalms are called songs of degrees is unresolved amongst expositors,
nor is the thing much material to be known, but it is concluded most probably
for one of those two reasons. Either from the ascending of the voice by a
gradual rising in the tune, or else, because the Levites or Priests did sing
them in the ascent of the stairs to the Temple, or else standing upon the tops
of the stairs, or on some high place above the people, where either they sung
them alone, or begun them to the people, the better to be seen and heard. Psalm
cxx.


1 I Have had experience of Gods good grace to me, IN my distress I cried unto
the Lord, and he heard me.
for heretofore when I have been in jeopardie, I put up my earnest prayer to
him, and truly I was heard in what I prayed for, had deliverance and
preservation out of my danger.

2 And this incourageth me still to apply my self to him when ever I have need,
Deliver my Soul, O Lord, from lying lips, and from a deceitful tongue.
or that any thing aileth me; Good Lord, look upon my wronged innocence, the
cause of my cruel persecution, and deliver me from the mischievous false
reports suggested against me by Doeg to Saul, that fawning sycophant and lying
informer, for which I run hazard to lose my life if God preserve it not.

3 Thou art in hope to get favor and preferment for this thy wicked
officiousness, What shall be given unto thee? or what shall be done unto thee
thou false tongue?
whereas thy reward shall be of a far other nature, I doubt not but God will
requite thee, he will give thee thy desert, and pay thee thy wages for such
service done against his chosen, thy false and slanderous tongue shall have its
recompense.

4 Even the mischief that by falsehood it brings upon me, Sharp arrows of the
mighty, with coals of juniper.
exasperating the displeasure and implacably inkindling the anger of Saul
against me to destroy me, shall justly by a mightier hand be retorted upon thy
self, for God shall one day let thy conscience loose upon thee, which shall be
as so many pointed arrows in thy bosom shot from an Almighty arm, yea, the
unutterable torments, and unquenchable fire of hell it self shall be thy
portion.

Woe is me, that I sojourn in Mesech, that I dwell in the tents of Kedar.
5 Woe is me that by thy pernicious lies I am persecuted and driven into exile
from the enjoyment of Gods ordinances, and Communion of his people in the land
of the living, to wander in strange places, and cohabit amongst Gentiles void
of the knowledge and fear of God, and common humanity, as bad to me as if I
were in the barbarous and savage country and confines of Arabia, being forced
out of the pale of the Church to shift for my life.

My soul has long dwelt with him that hates peace.
6 My life has been in a great deal of danger along time, and sundry ways in
the land of Canaan where I inhabited as long as possibly I could, being loath to
leave it till I must needs, laboring by all means possible to be in peace with
Saul, that I might be quiet, but nothing would do to gain his good opinion, or
persuade with him, such deadly hatred does he and his party bear me, and so
irreconcilable are they to me.

I am for peace: but when I speak, they are for war.
7 Lord, thou know how I have labored for atonement, and how much I desire
peace contrary to what is falsely suggested against me, as if by rebellion I
sought to get the Kingdom, nor can I be heard speak for my self to acquit mine
innocence, but am condemned and proscribed, nothing will serve them but my
blood, that they are resolved to have, and with hostile rage proclaim it.

The cxxi. PSALM.
The Psalmist abasing all false and earthly subtersuges, advances God only in
his valuation, and recommends him for sole protector to the whole Church and
every member of it, to trust in and rely upon, promising to such in his name
safety against all annoyances and direction and success in their affairs and
enterprises.

See the title of the 120 Psalm. Psalm cxxi. A song of degrees.


1 MAny men have many refuges and different confidences, I Will lift up mine
eyes unto the hills from whence comes my help.
whereunto in time of danger they fly, and wherein they trust, but for my part
I put more confidence in faithful prayer addressed toward the sanctuary of
God, that pledge of his presence situate upon those hills Moriah and Sion in
Jerusalem, than in the highest mountain or strongest Fort on earth, thence is
my help and hope, and from thence will I seek and expect it in greatest danger
(like as the faithful shall from heaven, where shall be their confidence, and
whither the Churches prayers shall be addressed in all emergencies.)

2 Because the Lord God is there as in heaven, My help comes from the Lord,
which made heaven and earth.
especially resident for mine aid and assistance, no Idol God do I mean, such
as the heathen worship and expect aid from, but the only true God, that by his
Allmighty power made heaven and earth, from him and only him, who both can and
will bestead me and all the faithful, it is that I hope for help, and so shall
they.

3 Be thou confident of it for thy self, He will not suffer thy foot to be
moved, he that keeps thee will not slamber.
and let others for themselves be so too that are his, and trust faithfully in
him, that he will protect and have a care of such, that they shall not miscarry
by any power or malice on earth, no accident or emergencie can befall thee, that
he is not privy to, whose eye is never off his church and every member of it,
yea, upon every member of that member, from head to foot

Behold, he that keeps Israel shall neither slumber nor sleep.
4 Take it for a truth infallible, That God, that by his covenant of grace has
taken upon him the guidance and guardianship of his faithful Church and people
will never break his word, his protection is not as man's is, subject to
miscarriage, and who himself had need be protected, but he is omniscient as
well as omnipotent, he sees and knows all things always, so that nothing at
no time acts without him, nor can act against him to the prejudice of his
people.

The Lord is thy keeper, the Lord is thy shade upon thy right hand.
5 And what he is to all his whole Church, that he is to every one, each member
may apply the covenant and promises to it self that are made to the body,
touching grace and protection, that God is particularly his undoubted helper
and preserver, yea, that always at all times in all perils he is at hand to
shelter and shield him.

The sun shall not smite thee by day; nor the moon by night.
6 Night and day will God protect thee from whatsoever would annoy thee, no
created Being whatsoever of it self has or shall have power to offend thee:
The creatures above thee in the heavens, sun, moon and stars, whose influences
and operations thou of thy self can not avoid by any humane wisdom or power,
are yet subject to God and under him, and shall have no more power to hurt thee
through his gracious providence and protection over thee, than a worm under thy
feet.

The Lord shall reserve thee from all evil: he shall preserve thy soul.
7 Fear neither less nor more, great nor small, for God shall certainly protect
thee as well from one evil as another, especially thy soul, whether respecting
life temporal or eternal, shall have a special guard, fear that least, because
as it is most of wroth in it self, so also in Gods esteem and valuation.

8 God is every where in all places at all times; The Lord shall preserve thy
going out, and thy coming in, from this time forth and even for evermore.
thou need not put cases of fear and doubt to thy self of this though not
that may befall me, and then though not now, for whatsoever thou do, and
whither ever thou go, God is with thee and it, and will ever be so to keep
thee from evil, and bless thee with good, and to prosper thee in all thy ways
of well-doing, believe it steadfastly, and live comfortably in the faith thereof.

The cxxii. PSALM.
David overjoyed to see the universal concord and conformity in his people for
the bringing the Ark to Jerusalem, and worshipping the Lord there, as God had
appointed; the more to sharpen them to it, and ingratiate it to them, highly
commends the prerogative of that place and that people by reason of it: and
therefore exhorts them not to degenerate, but in love and zeal still to labor
and pray for the happiness of it, promising happiness to those that do so, and
so does he himself, and shows the reasons why.

See the title of the 120 Psalm, Psalm cxxii. A song of degrees of David.
the Authors name superadded here.

1 HOw infinitely did it rejoice me to hear and see such an universal unanimity
in my people Israel to submit to, I Was glad when they said unto me, let us go
into the house of the Lord.
and approve of the transportation and fixing the Ark and sanctuary in
Jerusalem where God had appointed it, with desire and forwardness to worship
God there, without the least scruple or question.

2 Saying, Our feet shall stand within thy gates, O Jerusalem.
amongst themselves with rejoicing, now is the time, and Jerusalem is the place
that God will fulfill his promise by giving his Ark a settled condition, which
hitherto has moved and removed from place to place, and together with his Ark
his Church and people Israel, who have been both for worship and Government in
an unsettled and various state, but now shall there be an happy establishment,
as both Christ and the Church by Christ shall have at his glorifying.

Jerusalem is builded as a City, that is compact together.
3 And indeed a blessed and desirable place Jerusalem is exceeding lovely, for
uniformitie of structure, order in Government and harmony of hearts and
affections in the inhabitants toward the true worship of the only true God,
stately and strong both in men, and materials, sweetly composed and well
compact, a City specially blessed of God to represent the happy condition of
his Church both under Christ on earth, united by faith in him their head, and
with Christ in heaven.

Whither the tribes go up, the tribes of the Lord, unto the testimony of
Israel, to give thanks unto the name of the Lord.
4 It is the most beautiful place of the world, and enriched with the most
singular and Divine privileges of any on earth, being a resemblance of heaven
it self and the Church both there and here, for as thither the twelve tribes of
Israel, a chosen generation out of the whole world do congregate and ascend to
the mount of God, solemnly to worship him before the Ark the testimony of his
covenant and presence with his people, so shall his elect the Church of the
first born all the world over be gathered to Jesus, and ascend into the
heavenly Jerusalem, evermore to praise him in that general assembly the
celestial Quire of innumerable Angels, and spirits of just men made perfect,
Yea, by spirit and faith they shall meet in one body mystical on earth, and
with raised affections worship one God in Christ, that blessed Emmanuel the
mediator of the new testament upon mount Sion in spiritual Jerusalem, the
Church, that City of the living God.

5 And as Christ's Priestly office is established and clearly held forth in the
sanctuarie-worship in Jerusalem, For there are set thrones of judgment: the
thrones of the house of David.
so also is his Kingly in those thrones of honor and justice civil and
ecclesiastical, erected and perpetuated there in the royal line of David and
his posterity, Kings of Judah, the figure and progenitors of Christ according
to the flesh as is his tribunal in heaven, where he has dominion over his
Church and the whole world, and from whence he shall come to judge all flesh at
the latter day.

6 Many are the enemies of this flourishing City Jerusalem, Pray for the peace
of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that love thee.
as shall be to the Church, yea, all the world is against it, and the worship
and Government that is in it, but yet we need not fear, for God is for it, able
to preserve it in peace and prosperity maugre all its adversaries, if our sins
and carnal presumption do not indispose him to it. Therefore all ye Israelites,
specially ye that with a spiritual understanding are enlightened to know the
worth and excellency of the place, which is in the world as the sun is in the
firmament, mystically comprehending all that Divine light and life, that the
sun of righteousness the Messiah shall illuminate the world withal when he
comes to save his Church as Gods High Priest, and take possession of his
Kingdom, as King of Kings and Lord of Lords; do you serve the Lord and seek to
him for the continuation of his grace and favor to it, and his blessing upon
it, that it may be evermore happy with his love and presence, and as a
consequent thereof, have rest and quiet from its enemies. And of this be
confident, that they that thus for Christ and religion sake, under that notion
and relation, sincerely love, pray for and endeavor the happiness of it;
shall, how ever it may suffer by other men's sins, and formal hypocrisies,
within the pale, or without by external violence of Gentile enemies, be
themselves happy and blessedly rewarded of God, with grace, peace, and
protection in their own particulars.

Peace be within thy walls, and prosperi^ie within thy palaces.
7 It is and shall be my hearty prayer, that the Lord will preserve thee as
from outward foreign enemies, so also from intestine civil broils and
disunions, in peace, unanimity and concord within thy self, as the Church shall
be in heaven, and ought to be on earth; as one, so at one, under their one and
only head the Lord Christ. And that the throne of David, his royal seed, and
successors over his people Israel here in Jerusalem may successively flourish
in peace and prosperity and by the blessing and favor of God be established
in judgment and righteousness there administered in honorable equipage, as
shall the Prince of peace, Christ Jesus the righteous his throne and dominion
over his Church be for ever in heaven.

For my brethren and companions sake, I will now say, Peace be with thee.
8 Nor am I a self-seeker in my well-wishes to this place, no, the Lord can
witness for me that I desire the good and happiness of all the faithful, yea,
of all Israel, as mine own, who to me are as dear as my nearest kindred and
acquaintance, by that relation natural and civil that God has given me to
them, knowing right well that in the peace and prosperity of it, the
Government and worship in it, consists the happiness and tranquillity of all
Israel, chiefly the Israel of God, whose heaven upon earth Jerusalem is, where
they worship and serve the God of Israel, seek his face and enjoy his presence,
therefore pray I for her prosperity and welfare, that they may be blessed
with her and by her, who are interessed and concerned equally in her felicity
with my self, I as the head, and they as the body.

9 It is the zeal I have to the Church and glory of God that makes me pray
thus, Because of the house of the Lord our God, I will seek thy good.
and for which I will spend and be spent, therefore will I lay out mine
uttermost endeavors to compass the good and welfare of Jerusalem, that that
singular happiness and privilege of the sanctuary, and sanctuarie-worship of
the Lord God of Israel, who there is present with us his people, and from
thence hears our prayers, and to which appertains so many excellent promises,
and by it to us redounds so many precious privileges and benefits; and where
is performed the only true honor and service to the only true God in all the
world. Therefore for these reasons do I, will I, evermore pray, and faithfully
endeavor the good of this place, and so let all others do that are good,
together with me, as members of the Church and body mystical, typified in this
resemblance.

The cxxiii. PSALM.
The Church and people of Israel being at present either under Babylons
captivity or Antiochus his cruelty, some Prophet or holy man of God bespake
the Lord in this pathetical short psalm in her behalf, uttering much of the
spirit in few words; for afflictions commonly swell the heart too big for the
mouth, which makes him here to pray rather by signs than words, with his eyes
rather than his tongue, yea, with both he presses hard upon God for free grace
to show them mercy in their unspeakable misery, professing their patient
waiting till then.

See the title of the 120 Psalm. Psalm cxxiii. A song of degree^


1 WHat the present distress and calamities of thy poor Church and people
Israel are, UNto thee lift I up mine eye^, O thou that dwell in the heavens.
thou Lord know right well, utterly helpless and hopeless, forlorn and
disconsolate, none on earth favoring us, showing any mercy or compassion to
us, but exercise all manner of cruelty and scorn toward us; yet, Lord, in thy
Churches and mine own behalf I am an humble suitor to thee in the agony of my
heart, who, I dare not, can not, believe, have quite forgotten to be gracious,
though thou seem so as things frame here below, but, O thou that inhabitest
the heavens, and have thy reserves of good will and pleasure there known to thy
self, unknown to us, but hoped in by us, and power to bring them to pass,
though to us impossible, as much above all sublunarie powers as heaven is above
earth, to thee there, with groans and sighs lift we up our eyes, speechless
with grief, for thee graciously to look down upon us here in this our calamity.

Beho^d, as the eyes of servants look unto the hand of their maiters, and as
the eyes of a maiden unto the hand of her mistress: so our eyes wait upon the
Lord our God, until that he have mercy upon us.
2 Look how bondmen and bond-women, who by their condition are (as we) exposed
to hard and uncourteous usage, depend upon the free grace and beneficence of
their masters and mistesses, can challenge nothing, no wages, nor reward, but
wait with patience till pity and compassion move them to extend their hand of
favor and good will to them; so do we under this just deserved punishment of
long and grievous thraldom by cruel taskmasters, humbly and patiently wait
till thine own mercy move thee toward us a sinful undeserving people, yet thy
people, and thou our God by grace and election, which hold us in hope.

Have mercy upon us, O Lord, have mercy upon us; for we are exceedingly
filled with contempt.
3 Good Lord, take our case into consideration and commiseration, to pity us at
last, and to show mercy to us, a people that are made the very scum and scorn
of our proud imperious enemies, who for thy sake, whose name we bear and whose
we are, do Lord it over us with disdain, which imbitters our sorrows and breaks
our hearts.

4 Yea, Our soul is exceedingly filled with the scorning of those that are at
ease, and with the contempt of the proud.
Lord, it is not to be spoken how afflictive the reprochful vilifications of
our insolent enemies are to us, who judging by events, because of our
calamities scoff and scorn us as a vain besotted people, that believe in we
know not what, and worship we know not whom, and boast themselves unmeasurably
over us, our God, and religion, to our unutterable grief, because of their
superiority and present felicity, which puffs them up with pride and
contempt, even to blasphemy.

The cxxiv. PSALM.
David minds Israel in their prosperity of their adversity, to make them
mindful of God, praiseful to God, and evermore dependent on God, as his Church
and people ought ever to be, in their transmutations of estates and fortunes.
Psalm cxxiv.


See the title of the 120 Psalm, A song of degrees of David.
the Authors name superadded here.

1, 2, 3 NOw that the Lord has been pleased to bring us to the happy
condition we are in, IF it had not been the Lord who was on our side; now may
Israel say:
we should do well to look back, we the Israel and and Church of God, If it had
not been the Lord who was on our side, when men rose up against us:
and consider from the beginning to this day, ever since we were a people
chosen of the Lord out of the world to name his name upon, Then they had
swallowed us up quick, when their wrath was kindled against us.
what a world of enemies we have had, and perils we have waded through before
and since we came into this land, where we have been a continual eyesore not
only to the natives remaining in it, but to all the mighty nations and
Gentile people bordering round about it, who severally and jointly by
combination of great men and Potentates, have sundry times and ways subtly
projected, and violently attempted our utter abolition, which to speak humanely
was inavoidable, had not the Lord our good God miraculously from time to time
delivered us from their fury, and preserved us a people to this day, maugre
all they could do (as he shall his Church spite of the wicked world its power
and malice) who else long ere this had been no people nor nation, but destroyed
again and again, by those many mighty barbarous enemies of ours that on all
hands from all quarters have assailed us, with most mortal and bloody purposes
greedy to prey upon us; and with that odds of strength, that they were able to
have devoured us, and as it were swallowed us alive, as easily as the great
fish does the little ones, or the savage and ravenous beast tears his prey in
pieces, if God had not overpowered them, and been for us against them when we
were altogether unable to make resistance, which now we should do well to weigh
seriously, and in all humility to acknowledge thankfully to his praise and
glory.

Then the waters had overwhelmed us, the stream had gone over our soul.
4, 5 Yea, to consider that when all mankind was as it were against us, and we
were like sheep in the midst of Wolves and Bears, that with mighty power and
rage have broken in upon us like an unresistable torrent, Then the proud waters
had gone over our soul.
able to overrun the whole land and destroy man, woman, and child, as easily
as the sea, or some mighty river drowns the country when it breaks the
banks, and with pride and confident disdain made sure to do it, and no doubt
had done it long ere this, but that God would not let them, but still preserved
and wonderfully delivered us from being swept away with a total destruction as
was intended, and easy else to have been effected by them.

6 O let us lay it seriously to heart, Blessed be the Lord: who has not given
us, as a prey to their teeth.
and heartily bless and praise the Lord our God, for so long preserving, and so
many sundry times delivering us by no less than miraculous power from the
cruelty, and outrage of such barbarous bloody enemies, and that has not been
provoked by our sinful ingratitude, himself to give us for a prey to their
destructive malice, as in justice he might.

7 But has brought us notwithstanding all their power, Our soul is escaped as
a bird out of the snare of the fowlers; the snare is broken, and we are escaped.
malice, and treachery, wherewith we have been long ensnared and endangered on
all hands into a state of liberty and freedom, not only given us our lives
for a prey, but a liberty from them, yea, a superiority above them, insomuch
as now we are as much too strong for them, as they were wont to be too strong
for us, and have them as much at an under as they had us, their strength is
become weakness, and by his goodness our weakness is become strength, too
strong for them.

8 Let the power and goodness of God have the praise and glory of what is done
and wrought for us, Our help is in the name of the Lord, who made heaven and
earth.
both as to our preservation and exaltation, and as in time past we have found
him, so for time to come let us believe in him, as ought the Church and people
of God to do in all ages of the world: Let us and they magnify his power and
goodness in all estates and times, not despairing in adversity, nor presuming
in prosperity, but in the one hopefully, and in the other humbly believe in
him as our all-sufficient and only deliverer and preserver, not fearing, nor
Idolizing an arm of flesh or second causes, but rely on, and seek to the only
true God that made all things, and disposes all things, and is able to help
above all power to hurt, if we believe; and to hurt above all power to help, if
we presume.

The cxxv. PSALM.
For the encouragement of the faithful and sincere hearted, the Psalmist tells
them, as what they must meet with, so what they may trust in, firm protection
in their sorest affliction. And adds prayer to promise. But bids the
hypocrites, hands off, tells them their doom, that are in, but not of the
Church, to whom only blessedness belongs. Psalm cxxv.


See the title of the 120 Psalm. A song of degrees.


THey that trust in the Lord shall be as mount Sion, which cannot be removed,
but abides for ever.
1 BElieve firmly in the Lord, and you shall be established, every such an one
is as dear to God as mount Sion it self, where is his Temple, Ark, and all his
sanctuarie-worship, every faithful servant of God, being spiritually all these,
a living Temple, Priest, and sacrifice, a very heaven on earth, in whom God is
really, more than typically present, and to whom belongs all the promises made
to the Church in general, so that though he may be externally assaulted, and
seemingly endangered with ghostly enemies, and manifold temptations and trials,
as Jerusalem by the Gentile nations round about, yet shall the same invincible
guard and protection be upon him, and them that so believe, as upon it, so that
the gates of hell shall never prevail against them to un-establish or
disinterest them, as to the rock whereon they, and the whole Church of God are
built unmoveably by faith, Christ Jesus.

As the mountains are round about Jerusalem, so the Lord is round about his
people from henceforth even for ever.
2 See you the hills that compass this City Jerusalem, hence let your faith,
helped by setting your imagination on work, raise a suitable Idea of Gods
encompassing his faithful Church and people, yea every such one, by his
Almighty power and guard of Angels for their sure defense, and preservation
against all assaults of the world and devil, who also surround them, and this
is as everlasting as those mountains; an infallible truth for all and every
faithful servant of the Lord in all ages, and places of the world now and ever
to trust unto.

3 Not that the godly are in this world exempt from oppression and temptation,
For the rod of the wicked shall not rest upon the lot of the righteous: lest
the righteous put forth their hands unto iniquity.
no, for they are the great eyesore of Satan the Prince of the world, and all
his malignant instruments, and natural Subjects, the men of the world, which
with their utmost malice and power shall labor to afflict the faithful, as the
Gentile nations do Israel, and, partly for their sins, partly for their trial
and exercise of their graces, which God sets much by, they may be permitted to
sit sore upon their skirts, and put them to it, but this be sure of, that the
siedge shall be raised before the Town be taken, no afflictions, nor afflictors
by what ever wicked practices, shall any longer be permitted to oppress the
righteous than they have grace to sustain them under it; God always gages one
by the other, afflictions to the faithful are often less, never more; tempted
they may be and sint, hey may by their frailty and strength of temptation, but
fall away by sinning they never shall, for God is faithful, who will not
suffer them to be tempted above that they are able, but will with the
temptation make a way to escape, that they may be able to bear it.

4 This is thy promise which as in faithfulness it is Do good, O Lord, unto
those that be good, and to them that are upright in their hearts.
made, so as faithfully shall it be performed to those that are faithful and
holy, but thou will be sought unto by them and for them, for thy promise and
its performance is of grace not of debt, even to the righteous themselves; O
Lord, therefore be entreated in the name and for the sake of all thy people, to
be ever mindful of it to do according to it in time of need; Let mercy and
protection be extended seasonably and effectually to those that themselves are
good, and suffer in a cause that is good by those that are evil. Yea, bless
with all manner of blessings those that in sincerity of heart believe in thee,
and are careful to please thee with integrity of soul, and universalitie of
obedience active and passive.

As for such as turn aside unto their crooked ways, the Lord shall lead them
forth with the workers of iniquity: but peace shall be upon Israel.
5 But as for those linsy-woolfy professors, Israelites after the flesh, that
have a room in the Church, but no firm rooting in religion, that serve the Lord
in show, and not in substance, neither know him perfectly, believe in him
firmly, nor serve him sincerely, either with a right heart, or by a right rule,
but are divided in their faith and affections, trusting and obeying by halves,
deviating into by-ways and carnal confidences of their own to their own
self-pleasing; such hypocrites. counterfeits in piety, how ever commixed with
the Godly, partakers of their outward privileges and formal worshippers of the
same God in the self-same ordinances, yet the all-seeing and heart-searching
eye of God knows them, notes them, and esteems them, as bad as the very
Gentiles who worship Idols, these making an Idol of the true God when they
worship him, and their reward and portion shall be alike, judgment shall be
pronounced against them both, and they cast out, the vile from the precious,
which here are undistinguished, into the place of execution and torment
together. But blessed are they that are Israelites indeed, that worship God in
spirit and in truth, who only are the Israel and Church of God, grace and
peace from God their Father, through Christ their Savior, shall be their
portion, interessed in their consciences, to their unspeakable consolation
here, with assurance of glory hereafter.

The cxxvi. PSALM.
This Psalm shows the excess of joy the Jews, specially the Godly, had at Gods
wonderful infranchising them after their long captivity in Babylon, which the
heathen themselves admired God for, but much more his people, who pray for
accomplishment of those happy beginnings, and promise out of their own
experience and ^aith, that all Gods people that undergo afflictions patiently,
shall have them end happily.

See the title of the cxx. Psalm. Psalm cxxvi. A song of degrees.


1 AFter we had endured a long and grievous captivity in Babylon, WHen the
Lord turned again the captivity of Sion; we were like them that dream.
(the figure of Satan and Antichrist) exiled out of our own country, and from
the privileges we there enjoyed of worshipping God in Jerusalem, at last when
the set time was come, prefixed long before by Jeremiah's prophecy, and that
according thereunto, the Lord so miraculously moved the heart of Cyrus, a
heathen Potentate, to proclaim our liberty with so much unexpected favor and
accommodation for our journey, and entertainment at our journeys end when we
came into Canaan, with leave there to dwell, and to rebuild Jerusalem and the
Temple, and there to worship God as formerly. It was so great a mercy after so
long a misery, so unexpected and improbable, considering the disproportion of
our abject condition, and Cyrus his greatness, not worth his taking notice of,
and so strange to come of himself, an Infidel and Pagan, together with the
suddenness of it, and the over-joy we conceived at it, that we know not whether
we apprehended it sleeping or waking; we could scarce believe our own ears,
what we heard of it, or our own hearts what we thought of it to be real,
fearing the certainty, and yet hoping the truth.

Then was our mouth filled with laughter, and our tongue with singing: then
said they among the heathen* the Lord has done great things for them.
2 But when we had overcome our amazement, and were come to our selves, and had
digested the certainty and wonderfulness of the thing; O the unexpressable joy
that we were in, like men besides our selves, not knowing how to vent our
passions, sometimes congratulating it amongst our selves, with inarticulate
laughter, and hands lifted up to heaven in stupefied admiration,
other-sometimes, more soberly resolving our joy into articulate expressions of
thanks and praises, expressed in Psalms and Hymns. And as God overpowered the
King to grant it, so he convinced the very heathens in their kind to magnify
him for it; those with whom we were captive, could not but see and admire the
finger of God in this their own very act of our deliverance, so much against
their nature and interest, and to acknowledge both the transcendencie of the
King, and of the power that wrought it to the glory of our God, whom they were
forced to magnify in our behalfs, that formerly had contemned both him and us.

The Lord has done great things for us: whereof we are glad.
3 Surely we can say no less of it, than they; that the Lord has wrought
wonders for us; yea, let us at least go one step beyond them, as we have cause:
If they that are blind Idolaters, and bare spectatours, are yet so far
enlightened by it, as to have the sight of God in it, and to magnify (though
not gratify) him for it; let us do more, every way indear it, that are the
immediate subjects of so rich mercy, not only see his power and greatness,
(as they do) but admire his love and goodness, thank him for it as a benefit
inestimable, as well as praise him for it as a miracle, and with a holy avarice
take the praises out of their mouths that are no sharers in it, and
appropriate both him and it wholly to our selves, by a joyful welcome of God
again amongst us in his declarative goodness, and thankful acknowledgement of
his favor.

4 O Lord, Turn again our captivity, O Lord, as the streams in the south.
go on to show thine omnipotency, as in begetting and beginning, so in the
progression, and perfecting this great work of our return from captivity, and
re-establishment in Canaan, that as the sun in its season, makes streams like
rivers to run in the droughtie deserts of southern countries, where naturally
there are none to the refreshing of the thirsty traveller, by dissolving snow
and ice from high hills, and remote parts; so, O Lord, let thy favor, now it is
returned upon us, go on to move and melt the heathenish hearts of Cyrus, his
Princes and people on our behalfs, and to our infinite rejoicing, to forward us
homeward to Judah out of this our Babylonish captivity under them, which with
so much hardship we have long endured, as also the frozen and carnal hearts of
thine own very Israel, to accept this opportunity, and offer themselves
willingly (as thy people shall do in the day of thy power, and Gospel-jubilee,)
in one joint complete body, universally, and unanimously to return (as rivers
by instinct run toward the sea from whence they came) to repossess and
replenish our desolate country, that as a wilderness is uninhabited, except by
barbarous and savage people, without form or beauty of Church or
Commonwealth, and neither for fear or sloth, in respect of difficulties, or
dangers in the journey or at the journeys end, faithlesly draw back, choose to
stay and refuse to go, as carnal Christians will the tender of grace, embracing
rather this present world.

They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy.
5 The Lord will never quite forsake his people, we are a perfect emblem of his
faithfulness to the faithful, that submit to him and wait upon him; O the sad
hearts that we left our country withal at the command of God, by his prophet
Jeremiah, to put our necks into this long Babylonish yoke, but our sins and
Gods decree had so destined it, either so or worse, therefore though with great
renitencie, as the needy husbandman in time of dearth, casts his corn which
should stustain him, for seed into the ground, in hope of future gain by
present loss, so we with a willing willingness, for obedience sake, put our
selves into thraldom, loath to displease, and as loath to leave our liberty and
country, in hope and expectation of a joyful return and deliverance as the
Church and people of God shall ever have out of their sufferings) from out this
bondage, as now it is made good unto us, our joy surpassing our sorrow a
hundred fold.

He that goes forth and weepeth, hearing precious seed, shall doubtless ^ome
again wi^h rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with him.
6 We are set for the encouragement of the Church in whole, and in every part,
for what is true in the general, is applicable to each particular, the members
singly sharing the promise among them that is made to the body jointly,
therefore may all and every one that is godly, be confident that what precious
faith and patience in obedience to God they sow in affliction, they shall at
last reap it again in reward and consolation: God will wipe all tears from
their eyes, let them not fear it how improbable soever, as he has done from
us; Jeremiahs good sighs that went out of Canaan submittingly, carrying along
with us the faithful hope and expectation of Gods engagement, though loath to
depart from that good land which God had given us to worship him in, but yet
did put our selves upon adventure, and have outlived our sorrows, and at last
enjoy those promises in their accomplishment, though after so many years, in
all which time God has preserved us, and his promise sustained us in hope, and
now at the appointed period, delivered us by an Almighty hand, and strange
providence, to our admiration, and joy unspeakable, and should encourage us to
take the opportunity God has now put into our hands, not consulting with flesh
and blood to break through all difficulties, and discommodities, either in the
journey, or at the journeys end, which fear and faithlesness may represent to
deter us, in confidence, that as they that obedientially came; do live to go,
so they that in this imperfect condition adventures upon God, obey his call,
and rely upon his grace, shall in like sort be enabled to undergo, and survive
all imaginable evils, and have their faith and patience abundantly rewarded
with grace and peace, and themselves at last established again in quiet in the
holy Land and City.

The cxxvii. PSALM.
This Psalm is conceived to be penned rather by Solomon himself, than by David
^or him, and to be a compendium of his Ecclesiastes: the style and matter owns
him, the subject it treats being politics, government civil, and domestic,
the part appointed him by God more especially to act both in scripture, and in
practice, which he handles not as a mere moralist or Philosopher, but as a
divine, instructing in all civil and natural affairs, to eye God by faith, and
to make him the efficient and final cause in all public transanctions, and
private business or blessing, else we take course to set God against us, and so
to loose all our labor in all we do, and in all we hope and desire. And
shows what is the best, and most desirable blessing under heaven, that brings
most happiness to a man's self, and makes him most useful to the public; to
wit, a numerous and godly offspring.

Psalm cxxvii. A Song of degrees for (or as in the margin, of) Solomon.
See the Title of the 120. Psalm, the Authors name super-added here.

EXcept the Lord build the house, they labor in vain that build it: except the
Lord keep the city, the watchman waketh but in vain.
1 MOst men act upon their own principles, in their own affairs and callings,
without any eye to God, or faith in God for direction, or success, apprehending
issues naturally to ensue upon use of means, as they project and design;
whereas it is far otherways, for the Lord is all in all, nothing can prosper
without him; it is not enough toward the building of an house, (whether
materially, or civilly considered,) to have the persons and things that conduce
thereunto; the art of Artificers, and the wisdom of a Pater-familias will not
serve to erect, or order and well govern it, or raise and enrich posterity
without the blessing of God; he can, and does therefore often times blast their
endeavors, and befool their skill, because he is not made the first cause, and
the last end; not sought to for a blessing, nor intended to be blessed for the
success, when second causes are set up above him, and a man is his own Idol,
and kisseth his own hands. And as in government domestic, so in that which is
civil and popular, there is the same error committed: men of place,
Statesmen, and politicians stand on their heads (like children) and shake
their heels at heaven; but let such learn from me that know it, and by the
blessing of God have as much wisdom, if not more, than other men, that it is
neither wise for sight and advice, nor vigilancie and diligence, nor power and
strength; it is indeed nothing either in a military, or civil way that can
order, or secure any country, place, or people, from foreign, or intestine
evils, but the gracious, provident, and watchful eye, and ruling hand of God;
none can prevent accidents, overruled hearts, frustrate designs, bless
endeavors, but the Lord alone, infinite unexpected occurrences will, nay,
shall purposely fall out, to endanger and deceive them that are carnally
confident in an arm of fleshly wisdom, strength, or diligence, if not to ruin
them. Therefore use the means, but subserviently, trust in the Lord only, seek
him, and seek to him faithfully and self-denyingly, else look not to succeed or
prosper, or not to be blessed but cursed in prospering, either in the one or
other.

2 How do men moil and toil in the world, It is vain for you to rise up early,
to sit up late, to eat the bread of sorrow: for so he gives his beloved sleep.
some to compass riches, others, other designs, their heads and hands in
continual action, scarce allowing themselves time to cherish, and sustain
nature by sleep or food, which very repasts are also imbittered by inordinate
carefulness through diffidence and vnacquaintance with God, not considering
that all they do is fruitless and labor lost, if God pronounce not a Fiat, and
say not Amen, to what they design and solicit, though never so eagerly, which
yet is certainly true, if they did believe it, and knew to live by faith, how
would it moderate and quiet their thoughts, make their lives much more
comfortable, and enjoy themselves, and the blessings God gives them with
contentment; for so do all they that inwardly feed upon the sweet sense and
assurance of Gods love, and are happier in that, than the cares of the world
can make them; and whose hearts by believing are stayed on the Lord for this,
he recompenceth it into their bosoms with recumbancy of spirit, so that they
enjoy him, themselves, and the blessings less or more he bestows upon them,
free from perplexities, with abundant soul-satisfaction, and continual quiet,
which carking wordly-minded men loose, and their labor besides.

Lo, children are an heritage of the Lord: and the fruit of the womb is his
reward.
3 And as some men's ambition and contentment, is in honor and riches, and such
like earthly felicities, whereto they bend themselves with might and main, and
think to compass them by wit and industry, but are deceived: so others desire
to be rich in children, and a good desire it is, if moderated by submission,
and mixed with faith, but in this also do men and women miscarrie, having their
expectation more upon natural causes, in natural production, than upon Gods
supernatural agencie. Whereas, it is nor strength nor pregnancie of nature in
either sex that can assure posterity; but the power and free-gift of God, that
can only make parents happy with a happy issue, which he dispenses of grace
to whom he pleases.

As arrows are in the hands of a mighty man: so are children of the youth.
4 A numerous and virtuous offspring is an unspeakable blessing of God, he that
has them is fitted by them for all assaies, as a strong and valiant man
skilful in martial affairs, and plentifully provided of ammunition, darts, and
arrows, can with honor and advantage to himself, and them that employ him, for
offense, and defense discharge them hither and thither; so a father blessed
with an hopeful and plentiful issue in the flower of his age, is himself
blessed by it, and of God made to be a blessing to the commonwealth where he
lives, being thereby more than ordinarily useful, fitted to do God and it
service in any kind, sacred, civil, and military, as God disposes and adapts,
so he has them to dispose of, for public weal in Church or State.

5 There are diversity of imaginary happiness, Happy is the man that has his
quiver full of them: they shall not be ashamed, but they shall speak with the
enemies in the gate.
but certainly of all earthly ones, this is really the best, and that man the
happiest that has his house and family well filled with such living riches,
that no money can purchase, for they are (if good, and got by prayers, and
faith) the immediate gift, and extraordinary favor of God to him that has
them, who thereby is strengthened against the wrongs and oppressions that men
in a solitary condition are subject unto, and able to stand the commonwealth
in stead in opposing open enemies, or suppressing civil injuries.

The cxxviii. PSALM.
The Psalmist to undeceive the world, sh^ws who, and who only is a blessed
man, he that fears and obeys God, and sh^ws every such an one the favors he is
in with God, both as to his own particular, his family and post^ritie, the
Church, whereof he is a member, and the commonwealth, whereof he is a part,
all these shall fare the better for him, whom God will bless both in his
person, and in all his relations.

See the Title of the 120. Psalm. Psalm cxxviii. A Song of degrees.


1 ALl men would be blessed men, BLessed is every one that fears the Lord,
that walks in his ways.
but few take a right course for it, nor indeed do they either judge that to be
blessedness which is so, or that to be the way to it, which only is so; for as
to the favor of God they see no such matter in it, as that it should make them
happy or blessed, conceiving of spiritual things with carnal apprehensions,
knowing no felicity but what is earthly and sensual, and for the fear of God
that leads to his favor, and obedience to his commandments, which he rewards
with blessedness: these they skill not, it is against the hair, and loath they
are to purchase God, by being good. But let deluded worldlings think how they
please: The God of truth tells thee, who ever thou art, that if thou will be
blessed of him, (and otherways thou can not) thou must with a reverential
filial fear in the faith of him thy God and Father, do his will, and not thine
own, please him, not thy self, and so doing, thou and every such one shall be
as surely blessed, as God is faithful.

(...) thou shall eat the labor of thine hands: happy shall thou be, and it
shall be well with thee.
2 For God whose thou art, will also be thine, not only in the grace of
salvation, but also in the grace of providence and protection, if in his fear
and faith thou usest the means soberly, he will bless them successfully to thy
contentment, so that though he give not to surfeit thee, yet to suffice thee he
will, thy labor shall not be in vain in the Lord, nor cursed of the Lord, as
others are, but though thou work for thy living, yet thou shall be able to live
by thy work, which shall maintain thee and thine, and that happily and
contentedly (which many that have much, do not;) for thou shall have the favor
of God to thee, and the blessing of God upon thee, in what thou do and have,

Thy wife shall be as a fruitful vine, by the sides of thine house: thy
children like olive plants, round about thy table.
3 Within doors and without shall God bless thee, with what ever blessings he
knows convenient for thee; if thou be in a married condition, whilst others
that are so, either have no children, or have them taken from them when they
have them, or are cursed to them, if not taken from them. Thou that fear God
he will provide better for thee, thy wife and thou shall with conjugal comfort
behold the blessing of the Lord upon your marriage bed, in her fruitful womb,
and thy hopeful issue; children wherein thou may have comfort, and not a
few, nor short-lived, which shall delight thee to look on them, and see God in
them enriching thee by his gift, with what rich men cannot purchase by their
wealth, and with them will give thee sustenance for them; if he send thee
mouths, he will also send the meat.

4 O that men would effectually believe this, Behold, that thus shall the man
be blessed, that fears the Lord.
and take out this lesson, that they that in conscience to God fear to sin, and
do good, are the blessed of the Lord in their own persons, and shall be blessed
of the Lord in what is theirs, and find all true that I have said.

5 The God of Israel shall upon thy prayers made at, The Lord shall bless thee
out of Sion, and thou shall see the good of Jerusalem, all the days of thy life.
or toward the place of his presence and pledge of his Covenant, the Ark and
Mercie-Seat in his Sanctuary upon Sion (the type of Christ in heaven,) hear
thee and bless thee, as he has promised to do, and thou shall be a means not
only to procure blessing to thy self, but to the whole Israel and Church of
God, typified in Jerusalem, which shall fare the better for thy sake and such
as thou art, and thou and they for its sake reciprocally as parts, and whole,
as shall the Church and members mutually in all ages.

6 Yea, Yea, thou shall see thy childrens children and pea^e upon Israel.
thy piety shall preserve thee in grace and favor with God, and make thee
both blessed in thy self, and a blessing to many others, yea, to the whole
Israel of God; thou shall thy self be blessed with long life, and happy days,
and in thy family and relations, with children, and with childrens children,
which shall be a rejoicing to thee to behold, and walking in thy ways (who
walks in Gods) shall to many generations fare the better for thee, and inherit
the grace and faithfulness of God promised to the righteous and their seed,
yea, the Church and commonwealth, whereof thou art a member, and wherein thou
live, shall prosper for thy sake, and such as thou art, grace and peace from
God and with men, shall thy prayers and godly walking procure them.

The cxxix. PSALM.
The Psalmist lays forth the common state of the Church, for her present
comfort under her present affliction, the Jews (as is conceived at this time
being under those pressures that besel them after their return out of their
grievous Babylonish captivity, by their wicked envious pick-thank neighbors,
the Samaritans, endeavoring their subversion by accusing them to the Persian
Kings, encourageing the ^aithfull by late experience in Gods faithfulness, for
the Churches preservation, and her enemies disappointment and destruction,
which with a prophetical prayer, equivalent to a promise he foretells and
desires.

Psalm cxxix.
See the Title of the 120. Psalm.

Many a time have they afflicted me from my youth, may Israel now say.
1, 2 WHen was the Church and people of God, which for the paucitie of them in
the world is as it were but one man amongst a many, Many a time have they
afflicted me from my youth: yet they have not prevailed against me.
ever without afflictions and enemies at any time, in any place, among any
people on earth? from the very beginning in Abel, and so along through all the
Patriarks quite down to us from Egypt till very now, whose fortune therefore is
not singular in that at present we undergo, but common with all the faithful
in all ages, this you know to be true, and yet this world of wicked enemies
which the poor Church has evermore had, and which many and many a time has
crushed them sore, yet could never through the overruling hand of our
Almighty and good God, prevail to supplant and eradicate it as was their aim
and desire to have done, no, nor never shall, no more now than heretofore, fear
it not.

3, 4 The poor Church and people of God, The plowers plowed upon my back: they
made long their furrows.
have undergone great hardship by the ungodly men of this world, to whom it
has been meat and drink to afflict us, The Lord is righteous: he has cut
asunder the cords of the wicked.
(witness our late Babylonish taskmasters) and as much pains have they taken
to do it by plots and practices, as the plowman does to tear the ground in
pieces, and as cruelly they have handled us, so far as ever God gave them
leave, (and so they shall Christ himself) whose husbandmen they are, and ever
have been, and the Church his field, wherein thereby he has always sown his
seed and reaped his harvest; that has been the use he put the Churches
afflictions and persecutions to, always notwithstanding them, approving himself
righteous and faithful to his word and promise of grace, and so is still, and
ever will be, to remember mercy, though the wicked world know none, to abate
of what it intends against them both for length of time, and measure of
affliction, as we have experience in our late deliverance, and to disappoint
their purposes and machinations as he has always done, to his churches
preservation and their destruction, in his own time, and by his almighty power
maugre their malice.

5 And as, Let them all be confounded and turned back that hate Sion.
Lord, thou have ruined Babylon for our sakes, so vouchsafe still to appear for
thy Church against her enemies, bringing them all to confusion that would do so
by Sion the place of thy worship, and type of thy Church for ever, let not
their malicious combinations, and wicked projects take effect against the type
or antitype, but utterly and shamefully defeat and frustrate them, for it is
for thy sake that they bear evil will to thy place and people.

Let them be as the grass upon the house tops: which withers before it
springs up.
6, 7, 8 Lord, let such haters of God and godliness, however they seem to
flourish, and overtop thy poor Church, Wherewith the mow: silieth not his
hand: nor he that binds sheaves his bosom.
come to naught, both they, and all their wicked designs: as the light corn
that makes a fair show on the ridge of an house, for want of rooting withers in
a moment before it ripen, Neither do they which go by, say, the blessing of the
Lord be upon you: we bless you in the name of the Lord.
and comes to any perfection by the heat of the sun, and is of no use nor
regard; so let always the Churches enemies, that are under a curse, and not a
blessing; and at present our persecuting neighbors be blasted, and in thy
wrathful displeasure destroyed both their persons and purposes; let neither
the one, nor the other ever come to good, like those empty ears; let them be
found, by those they curryfavour with, a dissembling, lying generation, great
promisers, and no performers, and find favor accordingly. Let not those that
are spectatours of us and them, whose pendulous judgments the event will
preponderate (the common error of the world, to judge and side according to
success;) let them not have cause by their prospering against us, to bless
them, and curse us, and to misuse thy name against thine own people, in behalf
of thine, and our enemies, by blessing those whom thou cursest, and cursing
those whom thou blessest.

The cxxx. PSALM.
The Psalmist sore afflicted under the sense of sin and misery, cries to the
Lord for mercy, making mercy his only plea for himself, and encouragement to
persist in the obedience of faith, and patient waiting, and eager longing for
appearance of grace; And draws his practice into precept to all the faithful
people of God, willing them to hold out, hoping in mercy for deliverance
through Christ, whatever be their pressure, sin, or suffering.

See the Title of the 120. Psalm. Psalm CXXX. A song of degrees.


1 IN the extreme agony of my spirit, OUt of the depths have I cried uno thee,
O Lord.
now that I am to mine own sense, and in all appearance quite overwhelmed with
outward distress and inward terror, death on the one hand ready to devour me,
my sins, and thy wrath on the other hand, grievously afflicting and affrighting
me; yet, as from the bottom of this gulf, and sea of miseries, have I sent
forth mine ardent prayer in the faith of thy power, and hopes of thy goodness,
O Almighty, and merciful Lord.

2 In such a case as this, Lord hear my vioce; let thy ears be attentive to the
voice of my supplication.
Lord, let me not speak to a deaf ear, but graciously grant me audience, yea,
watch for my prayers at such a time, for they shall never fail thee, neither do
thou fail them, especially in such straits.

3 If thou, If thou, Lord, should mark iniquities: O Lord, who shall stand.
O Lord, who art the righteous and terrible Judge of all the world, a jealous
God, and a consuming fire, does take strict notice of our sins, to take us to
task, and punish us for them, according to our deservings by the law of
righteousness, and rule of justice; alas, in such a case, what man can stand
before thee in his own justification, either to acquit himself, as sinless, or
to make satisfaction, being sinful, or in case he be able to do neither, as no
man can, how shall he be able to bear and undergo thy judgment, and heavy
displeasure for sin, without sinking under it? no flesh can do it.

4 But the case is otherways with thee toward poor humble hearted sinners,
But there is forgiveness with thee: that thou may befeared.
and suitours, to such thou stand not upon such terms of strictness, for
thou have proclaimed pardon to all such, which by faith they may take out and
plead for themselves, as also a gracious acceptance of their weak but filial
services, whereby they may be and are encouraged, knowing thy loving kindness
and mercy, to worship and serve thee, both by believing in thy promises though
with much mixture of unbelief, and doing thy commandments though in frailty and
weakness, short of perfection which none can reach, yet in sincerity.

I wait for the Lord, my soul does wait, and in his word do I hope.
5 Though my sins be heavy and mine affliction burdensome upon me, and have
been so along time, yet I despair not, but in the faith of his forgiveness and
compassion, I wait for the sun to break out from under this cloud, my soul is
in continual expectation of it, and so long as I have his word for it, I will
hope and look for deliverance and mercy, what ever be my fears and dangers.

My soul waits for the Lord, more than they that watch for the morning: I
say, more than they that watch for the morning.
6 My soul longs for, and looks out after, the comfortable appearance of the
grace of God, to set me free from these my tedious insupportable miseries of
his disfavour and the sad effects thereof, with as eager a desire, yea, far
more earnestly and affectionately do I, and will I, hold on to expect it, than
ever the poor weary Watchman or Centry that has been kept waking all Night,
prays for Daybreak that he may be discharged, and have his liberty to take
his rest.

Let Israel hope in the Lord, for with the Lord there is mercy; and with him is
plenteous redemption.
7 What ever be the afflictions of faithful Israel the people of God, let them
for all that by no means relinquish their hope in the Lord his power and
goodness, but hold out, in the assured confidence that God both is merciful in
himself however he seem, and will be so to them sooner or later in compassing
their deliverance, which he that so wonderfully redeemed their souls, can
easily, and will certainly, do, by ways and means they never dreamed of, be
their case never so desperate.

8 Yea, And he shall redeem Israel from all his iniquities.
let not sin it self dismay Gods people, though they may fall into them, and by
them into sad afflictions, yet despair not, but believe, pray, and wait, and
then where sin has abounded, grace shall at last much more abound, so that
neither the number or greatness of their sins should make them hopeless or
desperate, but live by faith upon the promise both for pardon of sin and
punishment, for God is as able to deliver us (by his mercy) from his own
justice as man's malice, and will do it to his faithful Israel, by and for the
sake of his son Christ, God and man, our propitiatory sacrifice, and merciful
mediator or High Priest, who to effect and perfect our redemption is certainly
to come into the world, and after he has suffered, shall ascend into glory,
which shall be fulfilled and his Church thereby saved.

The cxxxi. PSALM.
David acquits himself of ambition to the Kingdom, or in it, now he has it,
being merely passive in the first, and no self-seeker in the last, but one that
accounts himself appointed by God for the good of his people, as Christ for his
Church, which is their exceeding great happiness, and should be their
encouragement.

See the title of the 120 Psalm, Psalm cxxxi. A song of degrees of David.
the Authors name superadded here.

1 THou Lord know however I have been misjudged by some through weakness,
LOrd, my heart is not haughty, nor mine eyes lofty, neither do I exercise my
self in great matters or in things too high for me.
by others through perverseness, to be an ambitious self-seeker, as touching the
Kingdom of Israel, and those high dignities spiritual and temporal that are
concomitant to it, how that herein I am wronged, for that I never had any such
aspiring thoughts, but as comparatively I was a mean man, so I always had a
lowly heart, and as were mine inward affections, such was and is mine outward
comportment, I overlook not my brethren with an imperious countenance as most
Kings do their subjects, counting them their vassals. Nor do I of mine own
accord for ambition sake, as most Princes are wont, put forth my self beyond my
self and calling to enlarge my dominions, how ever I may be censured
considering the great things I am called unto, but walk by the dictate of Gods
word and spirit in all mine undertakings both in matters of Church and State
for the good of both, that is my rule, and this is mine end and aim.

Surely I have behaved and quieted my self as a child that is weaned of his
mother: my soul is even as a weaned child.
2 My behavior neither heretofore nor now, either was or is such as should
deserve to be so thought of, I think I have gone through mine afflictions with
another spirit than ambitious worldlings show, in the exercise of much
patience, as seeing God in all, waiting and submitting to his will and
providence with a childlike temper and carriage, not seeking my self, or mine
own either untimely or ambitious advancement, had I, then I would have steared
a far other course, as others do that do so, made a noise and a bussle in the
world, taken all advantages, not been merely passive, as I was both in regard
of God, and mine adversaries, but active against mine enemies, as they were
against me, yet I did no such thing, but stayed the Lords leisure, and in all
things submitted to his pleasure, without repining or precipitancie, living all
the while by faith without using either unlawful means, or lawful means
unlawfully, to compass the Kingdom from Saul, and I bless God now I have it, I
am not altered, I am no more proud of it now, than I ambitiously coveted it
heretofore, but am every whit as much at Gods dispose, who as he gave it, so I
know to what use and end, for his honor and service sake, and not for mine,
and hereunto stands my heart only affected, to advance him, and to be ordered
by him, as Christ's shall be whom I prefigure, who yet shall be censured as I am.

3 This I would have Israel know, Let Israel hope in the Lord, from henceforth,
and for ever.
That the Kingdom was not my seeking, but the mere gift of God for their good,
and advancement of their happiness, (as the Church is Christ's) which I would
have them know for their comfort and encouragement, to believe and hope in the
Lord accordingly for time to come, as I have done in time past, if so, they
shall find him faithful of his word, as he has been to me, in making them a
happy people under my regiment, and those that come of me, as the Church and
spiritual Israel shall be in all ages, whilst the world endures, under the
governance of Christ the Messiah that Prince of peace and Lamb of God that
takes away the sins of all those who are Israelites indeed, that believe and
hope in his name.

The cxxxii. PSALM.
Solomon (as is most probable) at the complete finishing and furnishing of the
Temple, made this Psalm, much of it being the same with the prayer he made at
the dedication, wherein he prayer-wise minds God first of David's faith and
zeal, as also of the peoples in his time for the promotion of the glory and
worship of God at Jerusalem, which now being brought to perfection in the
perfecting of the Temple, he prays, that God would turn his promises to David
into performances by vouchsafing himself to be present there, and his blessings
both to the Priestly and Kingly office, that they may flourish to the rejoicing
of the godly, especially in his own time and person, according to those
especial promises and prophesies concerning him, who also is an extraordinary
type of Christ, and his glorious Kingdom.

Psalm cxxxii. A song of degrees.
See the title of the 120 Psalm.

LOrd, remember David, and all his afflictions.
1 LOrd, remember thy servant David, that type of Christ thy son, what sad
sufferings by thy ordination he underwent for the good of thy Church and
people, what miseries he sustained in his faithful dependence on thee and thy
gracious promises made to him, and for his sake to his posterity, yea, to the
whole Kingdom of Israel, which are still of force to thy people, whom, by and
for him thou have blessed accordingly (as through Christ thou will the Church)
and we pray thee still go on to do so, to bless both him and them, let his name
and sufferings be still precious with thee, and efficacious to us as Christ's
shall be after his death and departure, carrying in mind thine engagements of
grace and mercy to his people and posterity for his sake.

How he swear unto the Lord, and vowed unto the mighty God of Jacob.
2 Call to mind the wonderful zeal he had for thee and thy worship, which made
him infinitely solicitous in it, solemnly swearing, affectionately and freely
vowing to, and before thee the Almighty God of Jacob, that holy Patriark and
progenitour of him and all Israel, (whom thou did bless and powerfully
preserve, and promisedst to bless his seed after him) as follows.

Surely I will not come into the Tabernacle of my house: nor go up into my bed.
3 Surely I will not rest my self contentented with the advancement of my royal
throne, and erecting of mine own house and palace in the City of David, it is
not the flourishing of my Crown and Kingly office that my heart is so much
fixed on, as thereby to forget the Priestly office and worship which is to go
hand in hand, and by which and for which it must be, that both I and my Kingdom
must be preserved, therefore though I have built me an house fit for me, yet
will I take no pleasure to dwell in it, nor enjoy the benefits and conveniences
of it.

4 Nay, I will not give sleep to mine eyes: or slumber to my eyelids.
I will not sleep in quiet, nor take any comfortable rest with content of mind.

5 But with a longing desire will watch at what time, Until I find out a place
for the Lord: an habitation for the mighty God of Jacob.
and by what way and means (the season being now at hand) God will reveal to me
the place long ago forespoken of that he would choose to set his name, pitch
his Ark, and build his temple there, where he has promised his constant abode,
his presence and residence for ever, and from whence he will eminently yield
protection and assistance to his people the seed of Jacob, calling on him as he
did, whom he assisted mightily against his enemies, and so will them from
thence against theirs.

6 Lo, Lo, we heard of it at Ephratah, we found it in the fields of the wood.
we have heard of the several transplantations and removes thine Ark has made,
one while residing at Shiloh within the tribe of Ephraim, another while, after
thou had miraculously rescued it from the Philistines, in the house of
Abinadab at Kiriath-jearim, a place of plains and woods, whereby the iniquity
of the times, and obscurity of the place it was disfrequented, and scarce
taken notice of to be there, where yet David found it out, and whence he with
the approbation and applause of all Israel removed it to Jerusalem,
preordained, and by thee revealed to him, to be its place of residence, where
accordingly it now is to be frequented, and thou to be worshipped in that
solemn manner befitting the present State of thy Church.

We will go into thy Tabernacles: we will worship at thy footstool.
7 Whither we thy people generally and unanimously will resort with cheerful
obedience to thy holy sanctuary and temple, where thou that art in heaven art
pleased by typical umbrages to vouchsafe thy real presence and residence, and
there we will worship thee as thou have ordained, and only there henceforward,
as the Church shall for ever worship God in Christ, only accessible in his
humane nature, where is the fullness of the Godhead bodily.

Arise, O Lord, into thy rest: thou and the Ark of thy strength.
8 And that prayer, which has been so often made by Moses in the itinerarie
removes of thine Ark, now do I prefer, and do thou, Lord, fulfill, as it were
once for all, now possess thy self of this holy mountain, and take thou up thy
rest and residence there, where thou have promised to dwell amongst thy people
in a state triumphant, (such as both Christ and his Church shall have after
their afflictions) even on mount Sion in the Temple, where thine Ark is at last
situate, the sign as of thy presence, so of thy powerful goodness in thy
peoples preservation, and their enemies confusion, to remove no more, neither
thou nor it, but there to abide, a blessed God amongst a blessed people.

Let thy Priests be clothed with righteousn^s: and let thy saints shout for joy.
9 Now, Lord, let thy Church flourish, that has been long under the wheel, let
it at last bear the character of thee, the Almighty and merciful God, in
holiness and happiness, both Priests and people, let those in thine abundant
faithfulness, not only ritually but really, by the sanctifying graces of thy
spirit be holy to the Lord, as their office holds forth salvation, so let them
in life and conversation so walk before thee, as that thou may bless and
preserve them, and thy worship and people by their means. Let the time to come
bury the memory of thy Churches former infelicitie by a glorious resurrection
of all things, to the highest pitch of heavenly and spiritual luster, in
temporal and typical resemblances, to the ravishment of thy faithful servants,
and sanctified ones that have long looked for this triumphant condition of
Christ in his Churches felicity and the Temples glory.

10 Yea, For thy servan David's sake, turn not away the face of thine anointed.
grant I pray thee my request put up in behalf, as, of thy service, and
servants, the Temple, and Kingdom in general; so, more particularly in mine own
behalf, in whom they are so eminently concerned, and that for the sake, and in
the name of that typical mediator and faithful servant of thine (the blessed
type of thy blessed son the Messiah) David my father, with whom thou plightest
thy faith by promise and Covenant to be his God, and the God of his seed after
him, to bless them, and make them blessings to thy people, Lord, make me so
happy, whom thou have by especial appointment ordained to be his immediate
successor in this high dignity and office of being King over Israel, before
whom I pray thee honor me with a gracious acceptance of my service in building
thee an house, by some extraordinary token of favor, and by effectual
answering my prayer, put up in their and mine own behalf at that thy Temple,
that they may see thou favourest me, and for that cause may have me and my
Government in honor, and estimation as they had my fathers, and be blessed as
by him and his Government, so by me and mine.

11 Thy faithfulness is my confidence and comfort, The Lord has sworn in truth
unto David, he will not turn from it, of the fruit of thy body will I set upon
thy throne.
thou have of thine own free grace engaged thy word of truth, that is as
infallible thy self, by a firm and lasting promise to David (that lived and
died in thy favor, a lively type of the Mediator Christ) that thou will not
do by him as by Saul, let him be King for term of life only, but out of his
own loins should proceed his successor whom thou will choose, as thou did
David himself from among all his brethren to govern his people after him, as is
verified this day in me thine anointed.

If thy children will keep my covenant and my testimony that I shall teach
them, their children also shall fit on thy throne for evermore.
12 Nor has thy favor to him determined in his immediate seed, but is extended
by thy gracious promise to a successive establishment of the throne of Israel
in his seeds seed, in case they walk worthy so rich mercy, treading in the
steps of their father David by keeping the Commandments of the Lord in faith
and godliness, without deviating or stepping aside to carnal confidence or
will worship, even so long as it is to endure, to Christ's coming, and in him to
eternity.

For the Lord has chosen Sion: he has desired it for his habitation.
13, 14 For the Lord has foretold the prosperous condition of his Church in the
days of David and his seed, This is my rest for ever: here will I dwell, for I
have desired it.
how his Ark should then have rest, his temple be built where he would reside
among his people by special presence of goodness and faithfulness, in Sion long
defore designed for this honor but not revealed till David, and to him it was
made known, that that was the very place where he would establish the Kingly
and Priestly office of his beloved son, the Messiah, in their lively
prefigurations whence he will by his anointed Kings and Priests rule and bless
his people if they forfeit not so great blessedness, as from heaven he shall
his Church, in and by Christ's mediation, the only High Priest and Potentate
ascended and sitten down for ever at the right hand of his Father in the
heavenly Jerusalem, whose blessed exaltation unto the execution of those
offices there, is the desire and delight of his soul, as being only well
pleased in him, and reconciled by him, therefore so is Sion here, which is the
representation of him and them.

15 I will multiply blessings (for so thou have said) upon the whole land for
Sions sake, I will abundantly bless her provision: I will satisfy her poor
with bread.
that she may be provided with all manner of store for holy services. Let not
the poor Israelite fear to bring his offerings, and disfurnish himself to
worship me as I have appointed, for if the service of my sanctuary lessen his
store, if there he seek me faithfully, he shall carry such a blessing home
with him, as he shall have no cause to repent him, for I will both bless him
with livelihood (let him not fear it) and bless it to him.

16 The Priests that there officiate in consecrated garments, I will also
clothe her Priests with salvation: and her saints shall shout aloud for joy.
shall be in like manner clothed upon with the saving and sanctifying
righteousness of the Messiah, which in their zeal and faithful discharge of
their places they shall hold forth to the example and edification of their
brethren, who in the sincerity of their hearts shall bless the Lord for such
happy times, wherein so much of God his grace and favor appears in blessing
them with a holy Priesthood and Divine worship, and powerfully protecting both
it and them.

17 I will bless Sion, There will I make the horn of David to bud: I have
ordained a lamp for mine anointed.
and there shall David my servant be blessed, not only in himself during the
time of his regencie, but after him his successor and Gods anointed King
Solomon shall far exceed him in power and glory, whose wisdom, which I shall
give him to govern by, shall shine with that brightness, as shall wonderfully
increase his fame and dignity the world over, who shall be a lively pattern of
the anointed Messiah that also shall spring out of the stock of David, that
spiritual Solomon, the Prince of peace and mighty counselor.

His enemies will I clothe with shame: but upon himself shall his Crown
flourish.
18 And his enemies that would not he should rule over them, but oppose his
advancement, or disturb his Government, I will shamefully cut off both them and
their enterprises, but him will I bless with a flourishing reign of glory and
affluence, at home and abroad, resembling Christ both in his own happiness, and
his enemies confusion.

The cxxxiii. PSALM.
David being received of all Israel for their King by common and joint consent,
after much disagreement and war among the tribes, some being for and some
against him; He shows the happy condition they were now in upon the change,
how amiable and acceptable unity had rendered them to God, what a flourishing
Church and Commonwealth they had and should have by it, and that nothing can
be a greater blessing to them, nor shall be to the Church and people of God in
all ages, than for them to honor their father and head in heaven, by living in
brotherhood here on earth.

A song of degrees of David. Psalm cxxxiii.
See the title of the 120 Psalm, the Authors name superadded here.

BEhold, how good and how pleasant it is, for brethren to dwell together in
unity.
1 COnsider well the singular mercy of God in uniting all the tribes, sons of
the same father both by nature and adoption, that were so far asunder, at
deadly feud, and open war among themselves to the hazard of the whole, had not
God graciously overruled them to peace and unity under one head and to be all
of one heart. And as the mercy so the good and benefit of this union is
worthy your consideration, to move you to cherish and nourish it all you can,
for besides that Harmony of hearts is it self an unestimable Jewel and
beautiful ornament in the Church, and among the people of God, a very
resemblance of that concord and consort which shall be in heaven, the
commodities also that issue thence to the public, and every man's particular
weal is very considerable and impulsive, how thereby all things go well and
happily forward in Church and Commonwealth, the worship and service of God
that flourishes, the re-publick that does the like, things are now orderly
constituted, magistracy maintained, people protected, justice administered, and
whereas before we weakened our selves by civil wars, now we are strong to
defend our selves, and offend our enemies round about us. In breef, it renders
us acceptable to God, comfortable to our selves and an astonishment to our
adversaries; both profit and pleasure, yea, all manner of good that can be
named is complicate in, and productive from this one comprehensive mercy of
concord; we for our parts find the sweet of it, and so shall the Church of God
always, especially after such sour dissentious as we have waded through.

2 If I would compare this brotherly union of us, It is like the precious
ointment upon the head, that ran down upon the beard, even Aarons beard that
went down to the skirts of his garment.
and so of the people of God in all ages, in the pleasurable and delectable
part of it to any thing, it must be to a nonsuch, for such it is, and I cannot
liken it to any thing that in all points better resembles it, than that rich
sacred odoriferous ointment made by the special appointment of God himself (for
so is peace and unity in his Church) for the consecration of Aaron and his
sons to their holy office and service, which being plentifully poured upon the
Highpriests head, did diffuse it self down to his beard, and so from thence to
the holy vestments from top to toe; such, in perfect analogy, is this general
amity wrought by God among us, in the sweet savor and blessed effects of it;
God by me your King and head, (consecrated as it were to mine office by this
your unanimous consent and election, as with an holy unction, as well as by
Gods immediate designation) conveighing the benefit and sweetness thereof,
through the blessing and mediation of the Priestly office and service, as by
Aarons beard, down to you again, and so you made happy in the sweet and
comfortable benefits and blessings of both, by means of amity and unity with
them and among your selves; like as the Church mystical united to her head
Christ at Gods right hand in glory, and at brotherly love and amity in it
self, shall be unspeakably blessed with those Divine influences of grace and
spirit, derived from her King and Priest Christ Jesus, by the mediation and
ministration of his Evangelists and Gospel Ministers, down to all the members
of his body, partakers of the sweet fruits and benefits of all his offices,
and thereby consecrated a sweet savor, even Kings and Priests to God with the
selfsame spirit or holy unction, to their infinite honor and consolation.

As the dew of Hermon, and as the dew that descended upon the mountains of
Sion, for there the Lord commanded the blessing, even life for evermore.
3 And as brotherly love and concord is a pleasant and amiable thing in it self,
and sweet and acceptable with God, so also it is exceeding; profitable, and
brings with it abundance of blessings, peace, God is wont to bless with
plenty, whereas wars and discord are accompanied with curses and scarcity.
Look how the fruitful dew that falls upon, and from mount Hermon that fertile
hill down into the fields of Bashan, and so abundantly enricheth them to the
owners benefit, or look (which is indeed a properer comparison, for brotherly
love is a celestial benefit) how the spiritual dew is dispensed from God in
heaven on those holy consecrated mountains, Sion and Moriah, where he
vouchsafes his presence unto his people, who resort thither to worship him, and
where they meet with soul-enriching graces and consolations, othergets
blessings than the dew of Hermon, which makes them abound in faith and
godliness to their own eternal as well as temporal felicity; such like is
peace and love among the Israel and people of God, it self is a special
blessing from heaven and brings with it all manner of blessings from thence,
both temporal and spiritual, if ever we mean to be rich and happy, this is the
way, to live and love as sons of one father, and mother, God and the Church,
members of one body under one head the Messiah, as all Israel shall be through
love and obedience to David and his successors ruling in Sion, as types of
Christ.

The cxxxiv. PSALM.
David being a man of fervor and affection in the service of God, gives a
watchword to the watchmen of the Temple, the Priests and Levites, and in them
to Gospel Ministers, not regardlesly to pass over their duties, but to be
employed for the whilst, as Christ himself is for ever, in praying for the
people and Church of God, and blessing both God and them, and that in a
proportionable zeal here, to Christ and his saints in heaven, in their
respective employments there.

See the title of the 120 Psalm. Psalm cxxxiv. A song of degrees.


1 YOu that are by the special appointment and ordination BEhold, bless ye the
Lord, all ye servants of the Lord, which by night stand in the house of the
Lord.
of God chosen (as Christ himself) from among all your brethren, and preferred
to the honor of sanctuarie-administration continually in his presence,
consider the place you hold, whom and what you personate, even Jesus Christ in
his Priestly office at the right hand of God, who ever lives to make
intercession and offer thanks-givings for his Church to his father, have that
always in your eye, and be active suitably, stand not idle in your offices,
nor keep not sleepie centry in the sanctuary, but as your turns come to watch,
do service there as well night as day, rouse up your spirits, call to mind the
moral meaning of your employments, which is to improve your nearer interest in
God (by virtue of your offices) for the good of his Church and people, as
Christ does in heaven, continually through Christ presenting to God in the
Churches behalf the spiritual sacrifices of praise and thanksgiving for his
mercies vouchsafed, together with prayers and supplications for the
continuation and constant gracious dispensation of them still as there is need.

Lift up your hands in the sanctuary: and bless the Lord.
2 I say again busy and lay out your selves in those sacred and religious
employments of praise and prayer, neither idle nor nifle out your time and Turn
in the sanctuary, nor yet with formalitie or hypocrisy do you do your service
to him, as bare pretenders, but as holy and real performers, clap your wings in
your night-watches, let your hearts be in heaven, and your hands in token of
the fervor of your spirits lifted up thitherwards, and so bless the Lord not
betwixt sleeping and waking, but with the whole soul and body too, considering
he whom you worship is a spirit, and his proper place of residence is above in
the heavens, whose service there for condiscention sake you personate in the
sanctuary here in types and shadows, wherein you must not stick, but by them
mount up higher, even to him where he is in spirit and faith externally
manifested by suitable comportment of bodily action and expression, such as are
significant and adorative, commensurable to Gods glory and greatness, your own
hearts purity, faith and fervor, and the Divine condition of the
Church-Triumphant in heaven.

3 Your office is double faced upward and downward, The Lord that made heaven
and earth bless thee out of Sion.
you are in Christ's stead like Jacobs ladder, on which and by which blessings
are to ascend and descend, for as you are the mouth of the Church and people of
God, to offer him their thanks and praises, blessing him continually in their
behalfs, (as Christ does the father for the elect;) so likewise are you to be
the mouth of God down to his people to bless them from him, which doubtless is
as an honorable, so a full employment, if you set your selves to do it as it
ought to be done with that zeal and reverence the Church owes to her head, and
with that delight and love, the head has in and to his body and
fellow members. Pray therefore for, and as presenting the person of Jesus
Christ that effectual mediator, in his name also faithfully bless ye the
Israel of God that do worship him in Sion, his place of residence, with the
blessings of his special protection and salvation who is the only true God,
and Allmighty master of heaven and earth.

The cxxxv. PSALM.
The Psalmist quickens up the people of Israel in general, the Priests and
Levites more particularly, but most especially the faithful of both sorts to
magnify and praise the Lord, and this he does by way of argument taken from
the congruitie, delectabilitie, and duty of it from such a people to such a
God, who as he is greatly to be preferred for his self-sake, and the excellent
power that is in him, so for the effects of it toward them, the grateful
memory whereof should ever be upheld for his glory and his peoples faith
sake. All other Gods being but puppits, he only is God, and only to be
blessed as such, especially of them that are his only people and Priests, his
Church, preferred by him of all the world, to that honor, who therefore ought
to honor him how and where he will be worshipped. Psalm cxxxv.


PRaise ye the Lord, praise ye the name of the Lord, praise him, O ye servants
of the Lord.
1 O That all sorts of people would consider their duty of praising God,
conscionably to discharge it in spirit and power, to magnify him for his
greatness as Lord of and over all, yea for his excellent attributes and
properties not only absolute, but relative of grace and goodness, and for his
alonenes, for as there is no God like him, so there is no God but him; O ye
servants of the Lord chosen by him and set apart for that purpose, what ever
others do, forget not you your duties, not only of your persons but of your
places, to praise the Lord worthily with hearts enlarged with the apprehensions
of him and his manifold excellencies.

Ye that stand in the house of the Lord, in the courts of the house of our God.
2 I mean ye Priests and Levites principally, be you especially conversant in
this service of praising the Lord in his holy Temple, where you are privileged
to administer like to the glorified saints in heaven that stand in his presence
for ever more praising the Lord. Yea, and all others also that are admitted to
the participation of grace, and that worship him in his ordinances though at
greater distance, whether Levites or people, whose persons and praises
faithfully tendered in spirit are yet really accepted and graciously regarded
by the God of Israel, whose presence is as well in the courts which also are
sanctified, as in the Temple it self (with his Church on earth, as well as in
heaven.) Praise ye therefore the Lord, ye that worship him without as well as
within the holy sanctuary of our God, both Priests and people.

3 Be not so much awed by fear to praise the Lord, Praise ye the Lord, for the
Lord is good; sing praises unto his name, for it is pleasant.
as induced by love, for those lovely excellencies of grace and goodness that
are in him, and shine forth from him to his people, let the faith and
experience the Church has had thereof in all ages, tune your voice and
instruments to the exaltation of his name, in praiseworthy commemoration of
all the good he has either promised or performed, which to do is delightful
to God, and every good heart.

4 Surely, For the Lord has chosen Jacob unto himself, and Israel for his
peculiar treasure.
we far above all the world are debtors to God; ow more in way of praise than
ever we can pay him, for this unestimable mercy and privilege of adoption to
be his peculiar, to name his name upon, and marked out of all the great fold of
the world for his people, and the sheep of his pasture, even we, a poor
hand-full, that came out of the loins of one man, our Father Jacob, that he
should choose him and his out of all mankind to set his love upon, and thus to
honor, as to esteem none else worth reckoning of, but us, and us as his
treasure and Jewels of value, whom he only sets by, as he shall by his Church
and people in all the world, and only by them.

5 Under what notion soever we apprehend God, For I know that the Lord is
great, and that our Lord is above all Gods.
he is worthy our uttermost praises, whether as good to us, or as great in
himself, who indeed is of that immensitie, as that his positive admits of no
comparative degree, he is abstractly great, even greatness it self, in power
and majesty beyond humane apprehension and capacity, in the faith whereof yet
we ought to praise him, for so his people best know him, and that not only as
absolutely and essentially so, but also relatively and derivatively so to us,
this great God being greatly our God; his greatness as it is superlative to all
greatnesses, whether humane powers or imaginary deities, so his grace shall
extend it accordingly unto our protection and preservation against them, and to
the confusion of men and Idols that are set against him or us his Church and
people.

Whatsoever the Lord pleased that did ^e in heaven and in earth.
6 I mean the great and mighty God, the sole Sovereign and Monarch of all the
world both heaven and earth, who of his mere will and by his only word made
all things to be that they are, from the highest to the lowest, whether in the
heavens above or in the earth beneath, or in the waters under the earth, and
the invisible depths of both down to the very center, and as he commanded them
to be, so he rules and commands them now they are, to be, and do what he would
have them, and not otherwise, to his praise and his peoples security.

He causes the vapors to ascend from the ends of the earth, he makes
lightn^ngs for the rain: he brings the wind out of his treasuries.
7 He creates ruin by appointing and impowering the sun from all parts of the
world, sea and land, to exhale the vapors which we see ascend on high into the
middle region of the air, where they engender clouds, and those clouds rain,
which by his providence is dispersed and dispensed all the world over, what the
earth sends up in exhalations from all parts, it receives down again every
where for its use in showers and dews. Yea, what a piece of Artifice do our
eyes behold, when by the force of thunder, he sends lightning and rain, fire
and water, out of one and the same cloud, so that when we see the one break
forth, we conclude the other not far behind, as if naturally fire produced
water, which are so contrary, but yet are made to cohabit till, and be
subservient, when he pleases to dispose of them in storms and tempests. The
wind also blows when, where, and how he lists, and not otherwise, how unruly
and boisterous so ever it seem, it breaks not prison of it self, but is let out
of its restraint by him, without whose will and pleasure it cannot so much as
breath, who is the God of nature, ordeining and ordering her in all causes, and
all their effects, how rare soever, beyond our knowledge, and above our reach
transacted in the heavens, whereof these are few instances.

8 Yea, Who smote the firstborn of Egypt, both of man and beast.
and on earth too, where not a few things praise-worthie have been wrought by
the same Almighty power for his people Israel, whereof we will enumerate some,
a few of many, as, the high and mighty slaughter he made of the firstborn
both of man and beast in Egypt, with a strong hand bringing his people thence,
spite of Pharaohs power and oppugnation.

9 He wrought miracles, Who sent tokens and wonders into the midst of thee, O
Egypt, upon Pharaoh, and upon all his servants.
and made strange demonstration of his heavy displeasure by manifold
judgments, destructive signs and prodigies, in the midst of thee, O Egypt, for
their sakes, when his people the Israelites had no harm there, forcing thereby
hard-hearted Pharaoh, thy King, and his courtiers, to acknowledge his power,
and at last submit to his will.

10 Nor in Egypt only did he do wonders and execute judgments upon his
Churches enemies, Who smote great nations, and slew mighty Kings.
but when by a mighty hand and the destruction of the Egyptians, he had
brought them thence, by the same outstretched arm did he lead them through the
wilderness, destroying all that made opposition to them, both Princes and
people, though far greater and every way better provided then they, wayfaring
men were.

Sihon King of the Amorites, and Og King of Bashan, and all the Kingdoms of
Canaan.
11 As for instance. Sihon the King of the Amorites, and Og that mighty man the
King of Bashan, who opposed their passage, these Kings and their people they
destroyed on the other side Jordan, and on this side even all the Kings and
Kingdoms of Canaan, thirty one in number; those under Moses, these under Josua,
were subdued by the Lord, who fought for Israel against all their enemies.

And gave their land for an heritage unto Israel his people.
12 And he that is Lord of all the earth, as before he had promised to Abraham,
so now he fulfilled his word by an effectual possession and implantation of his
people Israel in the lands and possessions of all the foresaid Kings and
Kingdoms, gave them to them and their heirs for ever, which he has ever since
preserved to and for them, and their posterity, with as Almighty a hand, as at
first he gained and gave them.

Thy name, O Lord, endures for ever, and thy memorial, O Lord, through all
generations.
13 The glorious manifestations thou have always made of thy powerful goodness,
and gracious faithfulness in the behalf of thy people against their enemies,
ought to be renowned for ever hereafter in all ages, which also shall produce
experiments answerable to those thy properties, which are ever the same in thy
Churches behalf, who shall transmit the grateful memory of thy former mercies
and miracles down from age to age, and from one generation successively to
another, to thine everlasting glory and their corroboration and comfort, in
the faith of thy faithfulness to thy covenant and promises, (the grand charter
of the Catholic Church) theirs as well as ours, made to them as to us.

For the Lord will judge his people, and he will rep^nt himself concerning his
servants.
14 For the Lord is his peoples according to covenant, so that though he do,
yea, must both in justice and mercy chastize them for their aberrations,
thereby to humble and reduce them: For impunitie would argue him no father, nor
they no children; as sure I say as he is both just and gracious to lay the rod
upon them for sin, so he is as merciful and faithful to take it off again, when
of sinners they become penitents, and renew their covenant to be his, he will
soon be theirs, and repent as well as they, and then woe be to their enemies, we
have and shall ever find it so.

15 That he has ever approved himself the only God of power to deliver us
when the time has come, The Idols of the heathen are silver and gold, the work
of men's hands.
maugre all the Powers on earth that have been against us, and their gods to
boot, which cannot preserve them that worship them, against the power of the
Almighty whom we only serve of all the world besides, which is heathen, and
their gods mere Idols, at best made of gold and silver, nor are they so much as
their own makers, but have their Beings from men, they make them that made not
themselves, therefore must they needs be goodly Gods.

16 They are mere liveless statues, They have mouths, but they speak not; eyes
have they, but they see not.
without sense or motion, able neither to speak nor see, having no better
mouths, nor eyes than man can make them.

17 Their ears are like their eyes, They have ea^s, but they he^r not, neither
is there any breath in their mouths.
the one blind, the other deaf, and their mouths as breathless as speechless,
for such an inversion of nature, as men to make Gods, can produce no better
effects.

18 And they that make them are as void of understanding, They that make them
are like unto them: so is every one that trusts in them.
as they of life and sense, that against reason can think such things fit to be
worshipped for Gods, which are their creatures, not they theirs, and so is
every one (that seeing what they are, and knowing whence they come) puts
confidence of good or evil in them, both their Gods and they are alike
blockish, and as void of power as understanding, as plainly appears, when our
God appears for us against them.

Bless the Lord, O hou^e of Israel, bless the Lord, O house of Aaron.
19 Let therefore your faith and zeal be laid out upon no such imaginary
deities, nor your fear upon any earthly powers, do you that are the posterity
of Jacob, from whom you have the name of Israel given of God himself, walk
worthy such a father and servant of the Lord, by honoring and praising him,
and him alone, all of you own him and honor him for your Lord and God,
specially you that are his in principal place and office by special
designation, you Priests the sons of Aaron, let your zeal exceed as much, as do
your engagements.

Bless the Lord, O house of Levi; ye that fear the Lord, bless the Lord.
20 And you that are of an inferior rank in the Priesthood, ye Levites,
remember also your engagements to honor, and praise the Lord, who has called
you to so sacred an office about his Temple, do your duties worthy your
places; but because no doubt too many are, as formal people, so formal Priests
that serve the Lord, if at all, more in show than sincerity, therefore my
exhortation is chiefly to you both Priests and people that are regenerate,
Israelites indeed, Priests of the Lord as well as of the Temple, endowed with
the true fear of God, and sanctifying graces of his spirit, you are they that I
hope and exhort, and that God looks should honor and serve him with praise and
thanks in faith and spirit, worthy your selves and him your God, as a chosen
generation, a royal Priesthood, a holy nation, a peculiar people, that ye
should show forth the praises of him, who has called you out of darkness into
his mavelous light.

21 Let all Israel, Blessed be the Lord out of Sion, which dwells at
Jerusalem. Praise ye the Lord.
whether in power or profession, his visible or invisible people, of what rank
or quality soever, Prince, Priest, people, resort unto the place appointed for
his solemn worship, mount Sion, where his sanctuary is seated, and there join
their forces and affections to bless and serve him, who is especially present
there, of all Israel having preferred Jerusalem to be the place of his
residence, and of all his glorious dispensations where he will be blessed of
his people; and whence he will bless them again that honor and serve him.
Therefore fail not on your part, praise him, and pray to him, that is and will
be your God if you do so.

The cxxxvi. PSALM.
This Psalm for the magnifying of mercy, it is thought was sung daily in the
Tabernacle and Temple. 1 Chronicles. 16.41. Jer. 33.11. and this clause for his
mercy endures for ever, so often repeated was sung by turns of the Levites, and
often used for the burden of the song at solemn celebrations of remarkable
mercies. 2 Chronicles. 7.3. and 6. and 20.21. The drift of the Psalmist is to
advance covenant-mercie, that Church privilege in the eyes of the faithful, as
the great and almost only thank-worthie benefit, by which God himself, and
all that is Gods, is his Churches, the fountain of all good, general, special,
of creation, and providence, to the world, to the Church, which therefore we
should behold in every thing, and thank God for in all things. Psalm cxxxvi.


1 GOds greatness is better known and more taken notice of than his goodness, O
Give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good: for his mercy endures for ever.
but this ought principally to be his peoples study, to see all he does as
well the acts of his grace, and that a stable covenant-grace, as of his power;
Therefore ye that are so, be sure to do so, be thankful to him, and faithful in
him for his goodness sake, that is so transcendent even to the sins of all
mankind in general, who live, move, and have their beings, in and from, him
notwithstanding them, and to his Church in particular, as appears by his many
gracious promises and great performances temporal and spiritual in goodness
made, and in mercy made good; sin cannot finally hinder the current of his
grace, which is as himself everlasting, as in being, so in acting, an ever
overflowing fountain, whose mercies therefore are renewed every morning.

O give thanks unto the God of Gods: for his mercy endures for ever.
2, 3 Exalt him in his greatness, yea, in the full dimensions of it,
superlatively prefer him to all things in heaven and earth, O give thanks to
the Lord of Lords: for his mercy endures for ever.
principalities, powers, or imaginary deities. Praise him as such, but withal
be thankful to him that is such, so great, and yet of such condiscention in
continual dispensation of mercies; for the consideration of his goodness
sets forth his greatness with greater beauty and sweetness, which by reason
thereof becomes a useful property and encouragement to his Church and people
to draw nigh to him, and trust in him for ever.

To him who alone does great wonders: for his mercy endures for ever.
4 And as for his mercy sake he is to be honored in what he is essentially,
being thereby that to us, and for us which he is in himself, so also in what he
does, for his mercy and free grace, it is the cause of the manifestation of so
great power in all those glorious works of wonder, wrought so apparently by the
immediate hand and finger of God, (who only is Almighty, for, and in his
peoples behalfs) in all their dangers notwithstanding all their sins, as we can
witness in an everlasting Series of them.

5 Free grace and mercy is and ought to be the salt that seasons all things,
To him that by wisdom made the heavens, for his mercy endures for ever.
as what you offer to God is seasoned with the salt of the covenant, so let all
the considerations you have of God his acts or attributes, works, or wisdom, be
salted and seasoned in like sort, with the thankful memorial of covenant-grace,
without which all God is, and all God does is as nothing; for grace only gives
verdure to and propriety in all, (yea, and in himself that is more than all)
not only his works of wonder to his Church in particular, but even his
wonderful works in common of creation, are to be considered, not as acts of
power and wisdom only, but his mercy in both is chiefly to be considered, ^s
that which makes the very heavens to be heavens to us; as at first they were,
so still to be, glorious and excellent in their beauty and use, be thankful
therefore to the God of everlasting grace, ever when you behold the heavens,
and admire his wisdom in those works of nature.

6 Yea, To him that stretched out the earth above the waters, for his mercy
endures for ever.
whethersoever ye look upward or downward, and whatsoever ye see in heaven or
earth, that shows you God under any notion, see mercy in it, and so be
thankful for it, as the dry land and habitable earth which wonderfully
declares his power, being so great a superficies by his appointment above the
waters that were above it, and would be so again, but that his decree stands
firm, our sins have not let them loose from their restraint, because his
never-failing grace and mercy overrules them now as did his word of command
at first, therefore whenever you see him in the one, do not over-see him in
the other, for what power created, powerful mercy has continued.

To him that made great lights, for his mercy endures for ever.
7 How many are enlightened by those two glorious luminaries that shine in the
firmament, that either see not God by them, or if they do, but with a natural
notion of temporal benefit, and common goodness, and are not thereby raised in
their thoughts to see him a God in covenant, and that therefore as at first, in
goodness he made them, so in mercy he continues them for the use of man.

The son to rule by day, ^or his mercy endures for ever.
8, 9 The sun to give light by day wherein man is to labor, and therefore has
need of greater light, and the moon that other great, The moon and stars to
rule by night: for his mercy endures for ever.
but lesser light, together with the additionals of infinite stars, all which
giving less light, seasonably shine in the night, the time appointed properly
for rest, and improperly employed in business, which yet more or less cannot
well be avoided, and therefore has his goodness afforded, and his wisdom
ordered these gradual lights to shine so opportunely and successively, as man
has more and less need of them, and so also his mercy does and has continued
them for these many thousand years, notwithstanding so many millions of sins;
never therefore see these lights or by them, but see Gods grace and mercy
shine through them, and be thankful for it and them.

To him that smote Egypt in their firstborn: for his mercy endures for-ever.
10 If mercy be the motive of common natural benefits, why God gives them and
we enjoy them, and be to be seen in them as thank-worthie, how much more in
those special and supernatural benefits and miracles wrought for his Church in
peculiar, surely we are not to forget them, nor his mercy in them, but as to
magnify it in his acts of creation, which are common, so much more in those of
providence and preservation to his people in special, as that of his killing
all the firstborn of Egypt both of Prince and people, man and beast, when they
would not let Israel go, which is for ever to be memorized and recorded by his
firstborn the Church, as a special fruit and effect of that covenant-mercie,
by which she is, and shall ever be preserved, thereby to be corroborated.

11, 12 Whereby he rescued his embondaged people Israel, And brought out Israel
from among them: for his mercy endures for ever.
even all of them, by a mighty hand of power, With a strong hand, and a
stretchedout arm: for his mercy endures for ever.
which his mercy set on work, from their cruel Taskmasters, whose power
through mercy wrought that their deliverance, maugre the Egyptians powerful
opposition; remember it, see mercy in it, and thank him for it, yea, let your
thoughts run descant upon it, double and treble your sense of it, and thanks
for such a mercy, the great seal, and firstborn mercy of his everlasting
covenant to his Church national.

Yea, To him which divided the red sea into parts: for his mercy endures for
ever.
go from circumstance to circumstance, see a succession of miraculous mercies,
and all of them springing out of that everliving root and mother-mercie,
covenant-grace, as before in Egypt, so out of Egypt at the red sea, which by
almighty mercy (being one) was divided into two (as it were) walls of water,
on each hand them, and a great distance of dry land betwixt.

14 Through which he made all Israel to pass with safety, And made Israel to
pass through the midst of it: for his mercy endures for ever.
the divided sea never offering to unite, the whilst they and their cattle
journeyed through it.

15 But on the contrary when hard-hearted Pharaoh that pursued Israel after he
had let them go, But overthrew Pharaoh and his host in the red sea: for his
mercy endures for ever.
ventured after them, God the second time made dreadful slaughter of the
Egyptians, even of Pharaoh and all his host, causing the sea to return and
destroy all them, who else had destroyed all Israel, a mercy indeed as well as
a miracle, and so to be taken notice of; admire therefore the one, and thank
him for the other, (by an eye of faith see mercy all along, yea,
covenant-mercie, such as makes God himself to be yours, as well as his
benefits, and that by a tie of grace, which through grace is never to be
dissolved, else your digestion of benefits themselves is crude and not
nourishing,) as therefore this was typical, so let your apprehension of it be
spiritual, see a blessing as well as a benefit in it to Israel, which is the
much more sweet and beneficial consideration, and bless ye the Lord for
blessing his people, with so gracious as well as great deliverance.

To him which led his people through the wilderness: for his mercy endures
for ever.
16 And as in your minds you revolve and carry on the story of Isreal's march
from Egypt through the sea, and so from the sea, where they took an everlasting
fare-wel of Pharaoh, through the dry and desert wilderness, where God lead
them all along as a shepherd his sheep, providing for them, meat, drink, and
clothes, shade, and protection miraculously, but no less mercifully, their
provocations and his admirable patience showed it, and proved it too to be such
a mercy, whose motive is in God, and therefore everlasting like himself, a
mercy that dures for ever, else had it and the Church for ever there received
an end, for which then as such, we are to thank and praise him, and to mind
that mercy in a parallel line quite along, through all our consideration of the
story.

17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22 And as before he overthrew Pharaoh for their sakes in
their entrance into the wilderness, To him which smote great Kings: for his
mercy endures for ever.
so now at their going out of it and entering into Canaan, And slew famous
Kings: for his mercy endures for ever.
by virtue of that his everlasting mercy, Sihon King of the Amorites: for his
mercy endures for ever.
patience, And Og the King of Bashan: for his mercy endures for ever.
and long-suffering exercised for so long together upon a people of so great
provocations, And gave their land for an heritage: for his mercy endures for
ever.
did he destroy potent Princes and Kings that were famous warriors, Even an
heritage unto Israel his servant: for his mercy endures for ever.
by them a wayfaring people, as Sihon King of the Amorites, and Og the Giant
King of Bashan, who opposed them, and so utterly subdued them, as that in stead
of leave to pass, he gave livery and seisin of all they had to his people
Israel, whose sword and service he made use of against them, and well rewarded
their labor and travel, making them conquerours and heirs of the conquered,
both beyond and on this side Jordan in Canaan, whose lands they have to this
day, and where they are to serve and worship him, mercy gave it and mercy
has continued it, our sins could neither hinder the getting nor the keeping
it, because though sin breaks on our part, yet grace keeps covenant on Gods
part, thank and admire the God of so rich, infinite, and everlasting mercy in
all and every passage from first to last, of his dispensations and Isreal's
provocations.

23 Indeed we cannot say that ever his mercy failed us, Who remembered us in
our low estate: for his mercy endures: for ever.
he remembered us many and many a time, when we forgot our selves toward him,
giving us the inheritance of that mercy he long since passed over by Indenture
and covenant to our forefathers, insomuch as our extremity was but his
opportunity, always when our miseries and dangers were greatest, mercy and
deliverance was nearest.

24 Yea, And has redeemed us from our enemies: for his mercy endures for
ever.
he has redeemed us from our enemies with the blood and slaughter of them,
when but for mercy we had been slaughtered by them, or been perpetual bondmen
to them; and that many a time with successive deliverances by never-failing
mercies.

Who gives food to all flesh: ^ for his mercy endures for ever.
25 Nor do his people only thus fare the better for his mercy, but for their
sakes all creatures living do so too, his covenant of grace made everlastingly
with his Church in special has influence upon the creation in general, the
world subsists by it, and for it, and all flesh living is plentifully provided
for, with suitable and seasonable food by reason of it, temporal benefits are
bestowed on the Churches enemies for the Churches sake, and on those out of
covenant, because of the covenant, and them it pertains to, according as he
promised to Abraham, saying, In thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be
blessed.

O give thanks unto the God of heaven: for his mercy endures for ever.
26 You therefore that have such privileges to be the Lords adopted, heirs of
the covenant and covenant-mercies, do not you degenerate, own this God for your
God, that has thus owned us by his special mercies for his peculiar people,
even the only true God whose throne is in the heavens, no vain earthly Idol;
give, as, is due, praise and thanks to him for his mercy, and especially for
that it is made over to you, and all the faithful Israel by a covenant of
grace, as unchangeable and everlasting as God himself.

The cxxxvii. PSALM.
The Psalmist in the name of the whole Church led captive into the empire of
Babylon, and Judah and Jerusalem miserably destroyed, shows their behavior
there, how uncomfortable their condition was, that could joy in nothing,
derided in captivity with the very worship of God, (their glory) which
notwithstanding they resolve to glory in, and in nothing comparably; He prays
and prophecies against Edom and Babylon that they may be rewarded, as they have
done, and deserve. Psalm cxxxvii.


1 WHen the Lord brought that great judgment upon Judah, BY the rivers of
Babylon, there we sat down, yea, we wept, when we remembered Sion.
the ruin of all at once by the Babylonian, who destroyed many and carried the
rest captive, when in that condition we were far advanced into that Kingdom;
and from our own country, the solitary consideration of it seized sadly upon
us, no earthly nor pleasurable improvements here could give allay to our
sorrows, but with restless repose we sat down, as the rest did, by those
pleasant rivers, where notwithstanding we were capable of no content or
refreshing, except it were by venting of our grief in tears, which whilst they
rejoiced, we shed abundantly at our rememberance of so unvaluable a loss as is
Sion, to be driven from the enjoyment of God and his worship there, and to
leave it in that desolate estate, which no earthly felicities could recompense.

2 Whereupon though the Priests and Levites in the midst of that general
plunder and devastation, We hanged our harps upon the willows, in the midst
thereof.
in their zeal to the memory of Gods worship in the Temple preserved their
instruments, and carried them as fellow-mourners into captivity with
themselves, thinking to mitigate and mix their sorrows with some musical
refreshings, yet when at leasurable times and delectable places by clear
streams under cool shades they were invited to it, their hearts misgave, their
fingers failed them, sorrow so overwhelmed their spirits, that it put all out
of tune, them and their instruments, which in the condition and place they were
in, they as useless hung by, untuned and unstrung, upon the willows, their
grief increasing by their sight, in stead of lessening by their use, when they
apprehended them and themselves jointly and totally captived in the midst of
their mortal enemies far from Jerusalem, which too was left as desolate, as
themselves were disconsolate.

For there they that carried us away captive, required of us a song, and they
that wasted us, required of us mirth, saying, sing us one of the songs of Sion.
3 And the rather, for that the Babylonians insultingly called to us to sing and
be merry, laughing at the misery they had brought us into, being now their
prisoners far from home in their own country, having laid ours quite wast, and
with deriding insolence commanded us to profane the worship of God, which we
were wont solemnly to celebrate in his Temple upon Sion, by making them merry
with one of those sacred songs.

How shall we sing the Lords song in a strange land?
4 But we took courage, and disdained to do it at their command, though in that
condition, resolving to expose our selves, rather than Gods sacred service to
heathenish der^sion, and therefore made answer. Though we are your prisoners,
yet we are servants to the Lord our God, and must obey him before you, who has
commanded those songs (you require) to be sung in a sacred manner to him only,
and in the place appointed by him, his Temple in Jerusalem, and not to be
profaned to any other use in any other place; nor, were it lawful, are we in a
condition to sing, that are as you see such sad spectacles of misery and
misfortune in a strange place, and captives to a strange people that understand
not our language, much less our musical ditties.

5 If any worldly contentment whatsoever bury in me (who personate, If I
forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her cunning.
in that I speak, Gods faithful servants, Priests and Levites, uttering their
thoughts) the sad rememberance of the Churches desolations, that my grief for
thee, O Jerusalem (that was wont to afford such sacred solace in Gods worship,
now under scorn and derision) be not ever in my thoughts, above pleasing my
self or others, let me forfeit the privilege of that gift and honor God has
given me of celebrating his divine praise and worship; let mine hand fail to do
its duty, when I fail of mine to thee, and all my skill forsake me, If I abuse,
or use it to any other purpose than God has appointed it for his worship in
his Temple, do mine enemies what they can.

6 Nay, If I do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my
mouth: if I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief joy.
if I let out my hopes or joys toward any thing comparable to thy restitution;
if any thing (though in this estate) take up my mind and heart more than that,
so that I make it not the continual subject of my desire and prayer, let me be
dumb, and my tongue cease to speak, especially to sing and celebrate thy
praise; if above all desires I desire not, and above all joys rejoice not in
the happy recoverie, and flourishing estate of Jerusalem, and Gods worship
there, as my sole and only solace, how ever both it and we are here in
derision.

7 O Lord, Remember, O Lord, the children of Edom, in the day of Jerusalem: who
said, Raze it, raze it, even to the foundation thereof.
as thy people forget not Jerusalem now in her, and their captivity, so, nor do
thou forget her enemies hereafter, in the day of her prosperity; let the cruel
despite the Edomites, (those sons of Esau, old enemies, though near of kin to
Jacob and his posterity) together with the other bordering nations, be upon
record against them, that with greater hatred than the very Babylonians
themselves, (whom they stirred up against us) helped to demollish that sacred
city, encouraging them and one another to do it to the full, not to leave one
stone upon another, desiring the utter abolition of it and its memory for ever,
so insatiable was their malice. Lay therefore thy vengeance upon Edom, by the
hand of thy people (when thou shall restore them,) and let them do in Edom
according to thine anger and fury, as by thy Prophet thou have foretold they
shall.

O daughter of Babylon, who art to be destroyed: happy shall he be that
rewards thee, as thou have served us.
8 O thou great and mighty Empire, now in thy prime, that take thy
denomination from famous Babylon, the mother-citie, who for all thy pride and
potencie wherewith thou now insultest over others, and us especially; as thou
art the rod in Gods hand for our punishment at present, so the time shall come,
and that assuredly, that thou shall be cast into the fire, lamentable
destruction is preparing for thee, and shall in the time appointed befall thee
unavoidably by the Medes and Persians, the Princes and people whereof shall do
by thee, as thou have done by us, utterly ruin and captivate the whole Empire
with reciprocal cruelty to that we have found at thine hands; for all thy might
at present, this is true of thee, and so thou shall find it; neither thy great
city Babylon, nor its Empire, shall escape one jot better than our poor
Jerusalem and Judah, but confusion and desolation shall be thy portion, for
they shall prevail against thee, and be victorious.

Happy shall he be that takes and dasheth thy little ones against the stones.
9 Remember how thou tyrannizedst in thy victory over us, deflowring, ravishing,
butchering, even poor innocent infants, taking pleasure in barbarism and
cruelty, such measure shall be met to thee in those days. Cyrus and Darius
shall revenge our quarrel, and right our wrongs, and with like success, and no
less delight in blood shall they recompense thee with utter subversion, even to
the slaughtering men, women, and children, without sparing sex or age; none
pitying your condition, but rejoicing at your misery, no more than you pitied
us, but rejoiced at ours, and thought it your felicity, so shall yours be
theirs.

The cxxxviii. PSALM.
David having got through the worst of his troubles under Saul, whom God had
dispatched, and being earnested of the whole Kingdom by possession of a
considerable part, st^^ds as it were, and admires what is past, and the
wonderful progress already made by God in the fulfilling of his promise,
promising himself cause of praising God for the rest that is behind; and
promising God the actual performance of it, who has never failed him in his
need, but upheld his faith, which upheld him. Which wonderful grace of his
exaltation, shall shine as the sun in the firmament, to give light and
conviction to all the Princes round about that hear of it, to their admiration,
and Gods glorification. And lastly he recommends by experience, an humble
suffering State, before a proud presumptuous one, not doubting of Gods
perseverance in mercy toward him unto preservation, and in judgment toward
his enemies unto their utter confusion.

A Psalm of thanksgiving, Psalm cxxxviii. A Psalm of David.
of David's making.

1 LOrd, I will praise thee with my whole heart: before the Gods will I sing
(...) unto thee.
I am neither unmindfull of, nor unthankful for the great things thou have
done, and wilt do for me; but will (not with hypocrytical semblance, as too
many do that worship thee,) but with an honest and sincere heart give the glory
of them wholly to thee, and those opportunities that may most advance thy
praise, will I take more especially to celebrate it, even then when the
greatest concourse of heaven and earth is present, when the Princes of thy
people Israel, and thy people with their Heads and Elders, are solemnly
congregated at thy sanctuary, and thine Angels (those blessed spectatours) who
are there figured by the Cherubims, attendants upon the Ark, that sacred
representation of thine own presence, be present also, even in the sight and
hearing of these created powers and principallities, celestial and terrene,
will I with cordial affection, and musical adoration, celebrate thy praises
that art God of Gods, and Lord of Lords.

I will worship toward thy holy Temple, and praise thy name for thy loving
kindness, and for thy truth: for thou have magnified thy word above all thy
name.
2 Yea, both in thy Sancturay, and out of it, will I memorize thy praiseworthy
goodness to me, wheresoever I am, the face of my soul shall turn like the
needle of a dial by sacred instinct toward thee in that holy repesentation of
thee, the Ark of thy presence, when fixed upon Sion where it is to have its
residence for ever; in the Temple which shall be built thereon, thither-ward
will I worship thee that art there, wheresoever I am, (even as thy Church from
all places on the earth, shall Christ their head in heaven) and magnify thy
power and goodness so clearly demonstrated on my behalf in those acts of grace
and favor, and of no less truth and faithfulness vouchsafed me in my manifold
protections, wonderful deliverances, and happy establishment in the Kingdom,
according as long since thou promised, and foretold by thy Prophets, which
considering the greatness of the thing, the remoteness of time, the
improbability of means, the distance of my condition, and the difficulties
intervening; these things considered, though all thine attributes of greatness
and goodness shine with a beautiful luster in thine accomplishment thus far
advanced, yet thy faithfulness in fulfilling those thy so unlikely promises and
prophesies, out-shines, and be-dims them all, for they being known to all, and
believed of few or none, because of those interposing improbabilities, now they
are fulfilled in a good measure in their view, and to their admiration: it
makes thy truth to bear the bell, comparatively nothing else is thought of, thy
power nor mercy, (saving in subservience thereunto.) It is magnified of all,
and above all.

3 In my calamitous estate when as I cried unto thee, In the day when I cried,
thou answereds^ me: and strengthenedst me with strength in my soul.
as I did often and many a time, thou still heardest and answeredst me
graciously, and gave me inward supportation, strengthening me by faith in
that thy word, to undergo my time of trouble with patience, and wait for the
promised time of my deliverance with confidence.

4 All, All the Kings of the earth shall praise thee, O Lord, when they hear
the words of thy mouth.
even the heathen Kings that have little knowledge or sense of God, round
about, when they hear and understand how this thing is brought to pass, that I
am become King of Israel, a poor persecuted abject man, how that it was
foretold by thy Prophet that it should be so, and answerably fulfilled by thy
power, it shall convince those very infidels to believe and admire thee, for
thy word of truth, and the wonderful unquestionable truth of that thy word, to
the praise thereof.

5 Yea, Yea, they shall sing in the ways of the Lord: for great is the glory
of the Lord.
they shall be ravished in their spirits at the consideration of circumstances
and providence, and shall not contain themselves, but in praisefull
expressions shall vent their apprehensions of thee, touching those strange and
circumferent ways thou have taken, and untroden paths of unlikely means and
providence which thou have made use of, to bring to pass thy purpose toward
me, so manifestly shall thou appear even to them, to be the sole author of it,
and so glorious shall thou appear in those manifestations of my preservation,
exaltation, and mine enemies confusion, notwithstanding the great disproportion
that was betwixt me and them.

6 For though the Lord be in heaven, Though the Lord be high, yet has he
respect to the lowly: but the proud he knows afar off.
swaying there the universal scepter, and that such greatness seems to be at
too infinite a distance and disparitie to one man of mankind, and he also a
mean one as I was, that he should regard him; yet is that no cause of disregard
in God; I have found it so, that this almighty glorious Lord, and heavenly
Potentate, is, notwithstanding respectfull of the poor in spirit, that suffer
wrongfully, and walk dependingly on his grace to relieve and protect them;
whereas those that walk presumptuously to God, or oppressively toward their
brethren, and think their places, or personal excellencies (as Gods on earth)
engage him, or prefer them in his favor, such shall find that humble
adversity is more regarded of God, than proud prosperity; he is near to those
that to the world seem to be far from him, and far from those that upon
mistaken grounds, think themselves near unto him, and much respected by him,
for such he knows indeed, but with no good intentions toward them, to judge
them, not to save them, I and mine enemies have found it so, and so shall
others too.

7 The experience I have had of thy power and faithfulness, Though I walk in
the midst of trouble, thou will rev^ve me, thou shall stretch forth thine hand
against the wrath of mine enemies, and thy right hand shall save me.
makes me confident for future, that however I may have troubles still, yea,
though my life be a continual war-fare, and that I may seem to be crushed by
them, yet my greatest extremity shall be but thine opportunity, even from the
grave it self as it were, will thou restore me (as thou shall Christ.) Mine
enemies rage against me, shall enrage thee against them, and instead of hurting
me, they shall undo themselves, for in judgment shall thou mightily destroy
them, and with almighty mercy preserve me from them.

8 What the Lord had purposed and promised concerning me, The Lord will perfect
that which cocerneth me, thy mercy O Lord, endures for ever* forsake not the
works of thine own hands.
though it seem impossible to be brought to pass, yet, he that has thus far
advanced it, will as certainly perfect it, as he will the Kingdom of Christ; it
shall not miscarrie by any malice or power of men; for God is not as man, to
say and unsay, do and undo; the works and calling of God are without
repentance, what thou, O Lord, in mercy purposes to, and for thy Church and
people, that thou will in mercy perfect; thy Covenant is an everlasting
Covenant, as mercy moved thee to it, so nothing shall remove thee from it, or
make the grace and faithfulness of God of none effect; in mercy therefore
persevere to finish, and lay the top-stone of grace concerning me, who am
brought thus far onwards toward it, by thine almighty goodness and
efficiencie, who has done all that has been done; and so must do still.

The cxxxix. PSALM.
David to evince God of his integrity, and freedom from close hypocrisy (a
sin too common in the world) uses several arguments of his knowledge of Gods
omnisciencie, omnipresencie, and omnipotency, as appears in his works of
creation, but specially in himself so artificially framed, for which (with
reverence and fear) he magnifieth and praises God; as also for his gracious
purposes toward him, which also are ever in his eye, as the one to deter him,
so the other to affect and dispose him better, than to dissemble with such a
God, who is severe against sinners, with whom therefore he dare hold no
correspondencie in their wicked ungodly courses, but from his heart abandons
them, and bears them as much ill will that are so minded toward God, as if
they were open enemies to himself, for all which, both on his integrity of
heart toward God, and sincere hatred of sin and sinners, he puts himself upon
Gods soul-searching inquisition, praying if he be in any thing mistaken, God
would rectify him.

Psalm cxxxix. To the chief musician, A Psalm of David.
To him that is the first, and principal of all the Quire, do I David (that
made this Psalm,) recommend it, for the care and ordering of it to be sung.

1 O Lord, O Lord, thou have searched me, and known me.
that art all-seeing and all-knowing, thou have exercised me under many trying
temptations for a long time, and what has been my behavior under them, thou
know right-well, having put me to it, thou know me by it, what mine heart
is, and how it stands affected toward thee, and thy commandments.

2 Thou know me throughout, Thou know my down ^itting, and mine uprising:
thou understandest my thoughts afar off.
in thought, word, and deed, all the actions of my life are apparent to thee
(from one to another) of what kind or nature soever they be, none excepted;
yea, my very thoughts (whence originally spring those mine actions) are also
known unto thee, yea, before my mind conceive them, thou fore-seest them, much
more before I act them, whilst I think them.

3 Wheresoever I am, Thou compassest my path, and my lying down, and art
acquainted with all my ways.
whithersoever I go, whatsoever I do, night or day, thou art with me, and
know both me and it, nothing can escape thee, no time nor place, for thou art
present with me every step I take, and every thing I do all my life long, to
judge both it and me.

4 For there is not the least word which at any time I have a purpose to speak,
For there is not a word in my tongue, but ^o, O Lord, thou know it
altogether.
but sure enough thou know it before I utter it; yea, the motives and ends
whereupon, and whereunto I do speak it, are known to thee, though oftentimes
they are concealed from man, who can judge only by the letter, but thou
know the spirit.

5 Thine omnipresencie has, Thou have bes^t me behind and before, and laid
thine hand upon me.
and does begirt me round, there is no avoiding thee, if one had a mind to it;
for as thou willest, or permittest, so it is, and must be; even as a child in a
man's hand is guided which way he will, so am I by thine all-disposing hand of
power and providence in all I do, think, or speak.

6 Lord, Such knowledge is too wonderful for me: it is high, I cannot attain
unto it.
such incomprehensible wisdom as thou have, that thus wonderfully know all
things before they are, and when they are, in their causes, motives, ends, is
too deep for me to fathom, and too high for me to climb, being a peculiar
property of thine, the only wise God. I stand at gaze and admire it, and thee
the God of it, that is the nearest that I a poor finite foolish creature can
come to so infinite a wisdom.

7 Had I a mind to shift out of thy sight or knowledge, Whither shall I go from
thy spirit? or whither shall I flee from thy presence.
as those have that walk in ways of wickedness, whither can I go to do it, or
how possibly can I avoid thy presence that art both omniscient and omnipresent

If I ascend up into heaven, thou art there: if I make my bed in hell, behold,
thou art there.
8 There is neither height nor depth that can obscure or hide me from thine
all-seeing eye, or ubiquitarie being: if I could ascend into the heavens, there
I should be sure to find thee, where thou art more especially, or if knowing
and fearing that, I run into the contrary extreme, and by death seek a burying
place out of thy sight, why, it is utterly impossible: For the earth, and under
the earth, the very grave it self is visible to thee, thy sun shines into it,
though ours do not, there thou art in power and presence, as well as in any
other place, knowing and disposing every crum of dust.

If I take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the uttermost parts of the
(...).
9 If in any instant, as the light upon sunrising disperseth it self, I could
convey my self from where I am, to the remotest parts of all the world, over
sea as well as land, thinking by so sudden shifting my place and sight, to so
great distance, to quit thy presence, and deceive thy sight, as one may man's;

Even there shall thy hand lead me, and thy right hand shall hold me.
10 But I should find I am mistaken, and that as swift as I may conceive my self
to move, thou will out-go me, and be there with me, and before me, conveying me
all the way thither, if ever I come there, and ordering me there as here; and
where instead of being at liberty and free from thee to do mine own will, I
shall find my self under thy cognizance and power, not able to stir a foot,
think nor act one jot more or less, than thou dispenses and disposes.

If I say surely the darkness shall cover me: even the night shall be light
about me.
11, 12 If according to humane apprehension, I foolishly imagine and persuade my
self, that though by transmigration of place I cannot in the day time shift thy
sight, Yea, the darkness hides not from thee, but the night shines as the
day: the darkness and the light are both alike to thee.
yet no doubt when the sun is down, and that I can see nothing, nothing (not
God himself) can then see me, but that I am then at mine own dispose to do what
I fancy without discovery, even that very darkness, midnight it self shall,
though indeed it be a cover from man that sees by created light, yet shall it
(respecting God) be none at all, who sees not by a borrowed light as we do, but
by his own, and so sees all men, and all their actions, always, night as well
as day, there is no difference to his uncreated allseeing eye that needs no
help, nor is capable of no hinderance.

13 And Lord, For thou have possessed my reins: thou have covered me in my
mothers womb.
no wonder thou should thus know and discern me, in all places and touching
all things, thoughts as well as deeds, within as without; for from my very
first initiation and beginning to be, wast thou in me and with me, yea, thy
power made me, therefore thine eye saw me, even my most inward parts were then
ordered by thee in their being, and so have they been ever since in their
acting, as my very reins are in me, so art thou in them by thy power and
efficacy, even in all those secret closeted parts of nature, which thou
causedst to be thus externally covered over with flesh and skin in my
conception, whereby (though born into the world) they are yet hid from man's
eyes, but not from thee and thine, who as thou framedst and made them in the
dark womb, where and when no man saw them, so under this skin covering are they
also open, and perspicuous to thee.

14 And though divine art and skill in framing my many inward parts, I will
praise thee for I am fearfully and wonderfully made: mavelous are thy works,
and that my soul knows right well.
and their concurrences, be thus hid from mine eyes, yet so much knowledge have
I of it, as to know my self both within and without to be wonderfully framed by
an incomprehensible power and wisdom, that makes me astonished at the
consideration of it, and fear and reverence thee* the God of such
transcendencies, and never shall my mind reflect upon my self that am thine
Artifice, but with praise to thee, the great and wise Artificer. Yea, Lord,
which way soever we look, either with the eyes of mind, or body, we cannot but
acknowledge all created substances in the heavens, and the earth in their
several kinds, and orderly sub-ordinations, to be all and every of them
marvellously framed, and extreme wisely contrived and disposed, which has not
taken me up a little time, nor a few thoughts, but many, and many a serious
consideration have I had of them, and of thee, thy power and greatness
manifested in them, to glorify thee answerably: my soul has not been idle
touching thy works in general, and mine own fabric in particular, both body
and soul, which thou have so marvellously made and endowed, but been studious
in practical Philosophy, wherein, in a sanctified way (studying the creature,
for the Creatours sake, and mine own spiritual improvements) I have made good
proficiencie.

My substance was not hid from thee when I was made in secret: and curiously
wrought in the lowest parts of the earth.
15 All that I am, my bones, veins, and sinews, every thing of me was known to
thee, even from the very first conception of them, when nature made my several
parts, and of them an entire body in the unseen cavern of my mothers womb,
there they were most artificially framed, joynted, and contrived, and all this
by thee in heaven, seemingly at infinite distance, and in (as it were) the
darksom cells and concaves of the earth where no light comes (for such is the
shop thou made me in) where yet thou saw and orderest all the mavelous
proceeding of my conception, and formation here below.

16 Thou saw and knew me when I was in my Chaos, Thine eyes did see my
substance yet being unperfect, and in thy book all my members are written:
which in continuance were fashioned, when as yet there was none of them.
mine Embrio, even in that confused slimy congealed lump and substance of mine
original matter, before nature had concocted and digested it into any form of
parts and members, which yet in thine eternal decree and praeordination were
appointed to be, and which for that only reason, and by thine only power,
concurring with thy will, was in process of time (such, and so long) as thou
have ordained for nature to ripen, and heat and moisture to bring to maturity
in, at last formed into a comely and beautiful order, worthy the name of thy
creature, and bearing thine Image; even this did thou produce out of most
unlikely materials by thy skill, in thy time.

17, 18 Nor art thou only admirable in thy creative power and goodness, How
precious also are thy thoughts unto me, O God? how great is the sum of them?
but otherways also; thy word declares by manifold promises and prophecies,
very gracious and merciful intentions, If I should count them, they are more in
number than the sand: when I wake, I am still with thee.
and inclinations toward me in a special manner, and thy works of grace and
providence have also shown as much, which I can better admire, than number, for
they are numberless, which occupy my thoughts continually day and night,
always but when I am asleep.

19 And as my thoughts are of thy wisdom, Surely thou will slay the wicked, O
God: depart from me t^erefore ye blo^dy men.
power, and goodness, so also am I mindful of thy justice and holiness, how
that thou will be meet with wicked workers, and pay them in their kind; they
that unjustly seek to destroy others, shall themselves justly be destroyed by
thee the righteous God and judge of all the world, therefore will I keep me
free from partner-ship with them in those their evil and injurious ways of
wrong or revenge; no such guilt will I bring upon my head, and so I declare my
self; I fear thee though they do not.

For they speak against the^ wickedly, and thine en^mies take thy name in (...),
20 For they stick not presumptuously to despise and despite thee by open
blasphemies, and reproaches of thy justice, power, and faithfulness, scornfully
abusing (in the height of their pride, and malice against thee and thine,) all
those thine excellencies which thy people fear, and reverence thee for

21 Thou, Do not I hate them, O Lord, that ha^^ thee? and am I not grieved with
these that rise up against the^?
Lord, know how little good will I bear to wickedness, and wicked men, I am
far from having fellowship with them that I see bear an evil will toward thee,
thy worship, or people; my very heart rises at such with indignation, out of
zeal to thee, and it is no small trouble to me, to see wicked men to provoke
thee, and bear themselves so contemptuously toward thee so great a God, as they
do.

I hate them with perfect hatred: I count them mine enemies.
22 Yea, from my heart root do I abominate wicked men, in their wicked courses;
nor do I dissemble the matter, but profess my self no friend or favourer of
them, no more (nor so much) than if they were mine own very enemies, and hated
me; for my love to thee, makes me more sensible of the dishonor, and
indignity that is done thee, than my self, and worse can I endure it, or them
that do it.

Search me, O God, and know my heart: try me and know my thoughts.
23 And in regard many that are mine enemies, are also thine, such as perversely
sin against thee, as well as injure me, and that therefore I may play the
hypocrite, and dissemblingly make show of hatred to them for thy sake, when
covertly it is for mine own, thinking thereby to commend my self unto thee, and
gain upon thee by such a profession, therefore do I willingly lay my self open
before thee, and uncover every corner of my heart for thee to see into it,
whether it be not as I say, and that my thoughts and affections in this point
be not sincere and upright, against wicked men, purely for wickedness.

24 Yea, And see if there be any wicked way in me, and lead me in the way
everlasting.
spare not to make such discovery of me, whether (although I speciously seem to
hate their persons, if yet secretly I love not their ways, and could find in
my heart to practice wickedness as they do, rather than piety; yea, if there
be any the least root of bitterness remaining in me, or the least sin
unmortified or abetted by me, whereby I may incur thy displeasure that art an
all-discerning God, or grieve thy spirit who am judge of mine, and if there be
any such unknown to me, for I know man's heart is deceitful, convince me of it
and convert me from it, that by thy gracious and powerful manu-mission I may be
set free from thraldom to sin, that leads to perdition the reward of every such
transgression, and by thy no less gracious and powerful manu-diction be ordered
and enabled in my whole man through my whole life, to walk in a perfect way of
holiness, that only leads to everlasting life, and thy well pleasing, this
Lord is my desire.

The cxl. PSALM.
David in way of prayer makes his complaint against his wicked and violent
persecutours Saul and Doeg, and the rest of their considerates, that by a saint
combination, plot and labor to take away both his life and good name, by all
underhand contri^an^^s that may be. Therefore he applies himself to God that
has preserved him from open, now to protect him from secret violence, and
bring the evil they intend to him upon themselves, yea, remarkable judgments
upon such imp^nit^nts. And promises himself and all others that suffers in a
good cause with a good conscience as he does, happy deliverance, and their
enemies confusion.

Psalm cxl. To the chief musician, A Psalm of David.
To him that is the first and principal of all the Quire, do I David, that
made this Psalm, recommend it for the care and ordering of it to be sung.

DEve^ me, O Lord, from the evil man: preserve (...) from the violent man.
1 O Lord, that know the wrong I sustain by being thus unjustly persecuted of
Saul and his accomplices, that most wickedly and unmercifully prosecute me to the
death, that never wronged him nor them in all my life, do thou that art a
righteous Judge of oppressors, and a gracious God to right the oppressed,
undertake my cause and me, to vindicate the one and protect the other, from the
bloody intentions of my causeless cruel enemy and enemies.

Which imagine mischiefs in their heart: continually are they gathered together
for war.
2 Whose hearts are full of cursed contrivances how to mischief and undo me, and
to take away both my good name and life, laboring to increase their party, and
stir up others against me daily by false suggestions plotting all manner of
ways and means by joint advice, and endeavor to wage war upon me that would
fain be at peace.

They have sharpened their tongues like a serpent: adders poison is under their
lips. Selah.
3 They labor to wound mine innocence as deep as they can possibly, by lying
and slanderous reports of me, and vermin-like spit their venom at me behind my
back, by prejudicing the people against me with their false calumnies, which
they have ready at hand to poison all ears that will give them the hearing; It
is their continual practice.

4, Keep me* O Lord, from the hands of the wicked, preserve me from the violent
man, who have purposed to overthrow my goings.
5 The good Lord watch for me to save me, as they do against me to undo me, and
keep me from their destructive malice and power that have put in practice every
way in the world to compass my ruin; The proud have hid a snare for me, and
cords, they have spread a net by the way side: they have set grins for me.
Sela^.
with extreme and unappeasable violence does Saul seek my life, and to that end
has laid snares to catch and entrap me, that I should not escape him, as yet I
bless thee I have done, and pray still I may do by thy powerful preservation
and deliverance of me from him, and those proud presumptuous wretches his
Partisans that disdain the purpose, though of God himself as touching me to be
King over them, and therefore try all conclusions, and use their utmost
endeavors to disappoint it by subtle stratagems and wicked devices, laying as
it were traps and toils, nets and grins, all manner of engines to catch me that
craft can device, the way they think I take, as if I were some wild beast, or
monster among men, of a perilous nature, and dangerous consequence, not fit to
live; They are restless to ruin me.

6 In this my hazardous condition when I was thus waylaid on all hands, I said
(...) Lord, thou art my God: hear the voice of my supplications, O Lord.
I repaired to God as always I do, to extricate me out of it, by faithful
prayer, pleading my propriety in him and his grace, which of grace he had
vouchsafed me, minded him of it, and prayed him for it, to lend me an hearing
ear in my very great need, for deliverance and preservation.

7 Saying, O God the Lord, the strength of my salvation; thou have covered my
head in the day of battle.
O gracious God, the only Lord Almighty, the sole power I trust in and depend
upon for safety, I have found thee a deliverer and preserver in former dangers,
when my life has laien at stake, and been in hazard by open violence in the
day of battle against the enemy, as now it does by secret machinations of
inveterate deadly foes, no less endangering it.

Grant not, O Lord, the desires of the wicked, further not his wicked devi^e,
least they exalt themselves. Selah.
8 And as I pray for my self by virtue of mine interest, and near relation to
thee, so give me leave to pray against my wicked enemies, that are also thine,
that what they desire to bring to pass against me, may not take effect, blast
thou their wicked designs, which I am sure can take no place if thou do not
more or less allow them, which I pray thee do not, but the contrary, least
they vain-gloriously magnify their cause, and disparage mine, and being
fleshed with success, blasphemously set light by thee, as well as me, compared
with themselves, which else they will be sure to do.

As for the head of those that compass me about, let the mischief of their own
lips cover them.
9 As for the chief hunts-men, the principal ringleaders, and occasioners of
this my trouble and persecution, Saul and Doeg, that set the multitude on work
to betray and entrap me every where where I come, whom they have deceived and
misled by their false reports; let that they intend to bring upon me, even
destruction, fall heavily and unavoidably upon them, that they may by no means
escape it, but in thy justice, be themselves taken in the net they laid for
others.

Let bu^ning coals ^all upon them, let them be cast into the fire; into deep
pits, that they rise not up again.
10 Let such impenitent reprobate minded men come to an exemplarie end by some
severe and formidable judgment, as did Sodom and Gomorrah, consume them
utterly by thy vengeance and fiery indignation, yea, by sudden and fearful
destruction, as thou did Korah and Dathan, remove them once for all from off
the face of the earth, where they do so much mischief in opposing thee and the
coming of thy Kingdom, that they may rest in perpetual darkness of death,
which only can stitle them and hold their hands, and whence they shall never
more return to do as they have done, being thereby everlastingly disposed of.

11 Lord, Let not an evil speaker be established in the earth: evil shall hunt
the violent man to overthrow him*
let not any man (much less mine enemies) by lying and slandering and such
wicked unworthy ways prosper in his designs, against the plain and sincere
hearted, least it encourage other earthworms that know not God, nor care not
for heaven, to take the like courses, when they see them thereby brought to
ruin, and the wicked contrivers succesfull and fortunate against them. No, I am
confident and dare pronounce it in the name of the Lord, that the wicked
purposes and contrivances of the ungodly bloodthirsty man, be he higher or
lower, wherewith he hunts others to the death if he could catch them, shall
follow him at heels, and drive him into such a trap and snare at last, that he
shall never escape, even utter destruction.

12 And on the other hand I dare promise as much for God on the behalf of them,
I know that the Lord will maintain the cause of the afflicted, and the right of
the poor.
that for his sake are unjustly wronged and persecuted, be they never so poor,
and their oppressors never so potent, God will patronize both them and their
cause against the wrong-doers, stand to them, and appear for them to do them
right, and justify their innocence, of this I am confident, for his truth is
engaged for it, and his glory is concerned in it, I doubt not to find it so in
mine own particular, though it fare ill with me now.

Surely the righteous shall give thanks unto thy name, the upright shall dwell
in thy presence.
13 Sure enough the time will come that they that with a good and honest heart
manage a righteous cause, though they may and must be content to suffer for a
time, as long and as much as pleases God, yet they shall see a happy end of
their sufferings, and the miserable catastrophe of their oppressors to their
exceeding great cause of joy in, and thankfulness to God, that by his grace and
power has brought it so about beyond expectation or probability: They that are
upright and so hold out under affliction, keeping a good conscience toward God
and man, patiently waiting and enduring, shall happily survive their
afflictions and afflictours here, so that God shall lead them through, and land
them safe on the other side, (as I doubt not he will do me) where the residue
of their days they shall propitiously enjoy the Lord for their God, or if they
miscarry in them (as so he may permit) yet shall they not miscarry by them, but
shall be happier in heaven, whither they shall translate them, than earth could
have made them, in a full fruition of him there in that glorified estate,
whither no sorrow shall follow them.

The cxli. PSALM.
David and his men being in great danger by Saul's surprise, probably either in
the wilderness of Engeddi or of Ziph, and having opportunity and temptation of
revenge, prays that God would deliver him both from death and sin in that
strait. Is greatly troubled that so many innocents should so prosecute him
through misunderstanding, wishes they would take another course more agreeable
to charity, for whom yet his charity shall move him to pray, that they may not
perish with their malicious misl^aders, in hope, that when they are removed out
of the way by Gods just judg^ments, these will then be reduced and hear reason,
though now their ears are charmed. And lastly represents his, and his partisans
perilous case to God, but withal, his faith in God, praying for his own
deliverance and his enemies subversion.

A Psalm made by David. Psalm cxli. A Psalm of David.


1 LOrd, LOrd, I cry unto thee, make have unto me, give ear unto my voice when
I cry unto thee.
no danger is so great nor eminent as to stifle my faith or stop my mouth, but
be it what it will be, I make my moan unto thee, even now in this mine
extremity, wherein I am not a little concerned, nor thee, to make have to my
rescue, being sore laid to; be not therefore a stranger to me, nor deaf to hear
me, but graciously compassionate my misery, and hear me effectually now and
always, when in such straits I supplicate thy Majesty.

2 Let my prayer, Let my prayer be set forth before thee as incense, and the
lifting up of my hands, as the evening sacrifice.
which I daily put up unto thee in the virtue of Christ's mediation, ascend and
be accepted of thee, as the Type thereof that perpetual fragrant
incense-offering, burnt each morning in the sanctuary, and let my supplication
the spiritual sacrifice of a faithful heart be as pleasing, as the appointed
meat offering every evening.

3 Lord, Set a watch O Lord before my mouth, keep the door of my lips.
my temptations are great and provocations many, suffering so unjustly and
ungratefully as I do, under a tedious and trying persecution that exercises
all the faith and patience I have, and were it not for thy supporting auxiliary
grace, would be too hard for me, notwithstanding mine, which can of it self ill
grapple with such adversaries and adversities, without out-breaches of
corruptions, whereto my mind and mouth in thoughts and words are over prone,
therefore good Lord, carefully keep and restrain me, that through sinful
impatience or incogitancy, I sometime or other forget not my self, and
imprudently let fall either words or rash discontent toward thee, or of
sinful revenge toward mine adversaries, unworthy the Mediator and Lamb-like
patience of him, whom I prefigure in these my durances, but may patiently wait,
and bear what is thy pleasure to the utmost time and measure, as he shall, not
sinning so much as in word or thought.

Incline not my heart to any evil thing, to practice wicked works with men that
work iniquity: and let me not eat of their dainties.
4 I well know mine own natural inclination what it is, how prone to evil mine
heart and affections are, specially upon temptation, yea, to any or to every
evil of words or actions how vild soever, and that unavoidably, if thou decline
it not; thou must bend it the contrary way by thine over-powering efficacious
grace grace-ward, or else it will warp sin-ward, with the weight or attraction
of temptation; I have no confidence in it but only in thee, in whose hands are
all hearts, and mine more especially; dispose thou (...) therefore to good and
not to evil, to right and not to wrong-doing of no kind, less, nor more, let no
temptation, in no condition, upon no occasion, prevail with me to sin, but so
establish my heart, and strengthen my graces, that I may make constant
resistance without envying their happiness, that prosper by undue courses,
whilst I in the practice of piety find nothing but misery; keep me from being
taken with their golden baits of earthly felicity to the loss of heavenly, for
that shall be their reward that live in sin, how sweet soever it is at
present to their corrupt tastes, and so shall it to be mine, if I leave the way
I am in of serving thee to serve sin, whence, Lord, deliver me.

5 O that I might be free from the temptations of these wicked malicious
persecutours, Let the righteous smite me it shall be a kindness; and let him
reprove me, it shall be an excellent oil, which shall not break my head: for
yet my prayer also shall be in their calamities.
Saul and his chieftaines, that so impiously against their own consciences
traduce me to the people, and unworthily seek my life by all sinister courses,
tempting me to the like wicked ways of revenge and retaliation, which I find I
can hardly forbear, so injurious are my sufferings, and hazardous my condition,
it being humanely impossible to shift them by lawful and conscionable courses,
without taking all advantages as they do. And that the well-meaning innocent
people that perpetrate nothing of malice, but through credulity and misprision
are misled to do that they do against me: O that they would not so err, but
would question and blame me to my face in a fair and friendly manner, as
becomes one toward another, touching what they hear and too easily take upon
trust. I should take such dealing exceeding kindly, and interpret those
reproofs no acts of enmity and hostility, but friendly and good offices. Who
though they do not so, but suffer themselves thus to be misled to the wronging
me in this sort, yet wish I no ill to them, but pity them for their unhappy
engagement in so bad a cause, and shall be heartily sorry when any hurt befalls
them for it, as I know there will, which when it does, I will pray for them as
for my self.

6 When the time comes for God to execute vengeance on their Rulers and
Commanders, When their Judges are overthrown in stony places, they shall hear
my words, for they are sweet.
who now so bewitch the people, and that they fall by the sword in mount
Gilboa, and the Kingdom so unexpectedly be translated to me, then will the
people be brought to a right understanding of me, when I shall declare to them
that I never sought the Kingdom, as they had been made believe, but it was the
purpose and good will of God to cast it upon me for their good, and the
happiness of all Israel which shall follow thereupon, they shall then be won to
believe and hope so to their comfort, when they see it so wonderfully brought
about merely by providence, and Gods just judgment, maugre the malice and
power of mine enemies (their seducers) to the contrary.

Our bones are scatter^d the graves mouth, as when one cutteth and cleaves
wood upon the earth.
7 The danger of me and all that take part with me in regard of its eminency and
mine enemies rage, is as great as great can be; sure we are all of us to be
slain if taken, and that in a barbarous cruel manner too; hewn in pieces and
piecemeal exposed above ground, no mercy alive nor dead can such Traitors, as
we are counted to be, expect, but the uttermost rigor and exemplary severity
that can be inflicted, are we sure of.

But mine eyes are unto thee, O God the Lord: in thee is my trust, leave not my
soul destitute.
8 But, Lord, in this strait of me and mine, I am not so dejected as to let fall
my faith, nor to cease prayer, but to thee a gracious and omnipotent Lord God,
to whom belong the issues from death, do I in the vehement ardency of my spirit
make mine address for relief in this mine extremity; my confidence is more
because of thee, thy power and goodness, in which I trust, then is my fear by
reason of my dangers greatness, therefore be not wanting to save my life, which
I give for lost if thou save it not, for other help or helper I have none.

9 I know nothing is impossible to God, Keep me from the snare which they have
laid for me, and the grins of the workers of iniquity.
the snares and grins that mine enemies lay privily for me are known to thee,
though by mine ignorance I may be hazarded, yet by thy providence I hope to be
prevented. Keep me from being caught which else I shall be, and from being made
a prey to malicious bloodthirsty men, that are void both of piety and humanity.

10 Let my wicked enemies be overtaken in their own projects by thy just
judgments, Let the wicked fall into their own nets, whilst that I withal
escape.
who art able to ensnare them in, and by their own craft, and to make it appear
that simple honesty is the best policy, and wicked policy the greatest
simplicity and most self-destructive, make them manifest examples of it, by
thine out-witting and mine escaping them, but their not escaping thee.

The cxlii. PSALM.
David shut up in the cave at Engeddi by an in raged multitude, lays seidge to
God by servent and incessant prayer, who (he confesses) saved him by his
wisdom and contrivance when his own had almost undone him. He shows his heart
made some excursions toward the creature, but in vain, and quickly with-called
it self, and betook it again to God, as to all that was left him, and therefore
presses hard upon him for deliverance particular and general, that he and the
righteous may once be acquainted that now are strangers, and may jointly praise
him.

David's instruction to the faithful in time of extremity to pray as he did,
Psalm cxlii. Mas^hil of David; a p^ayer when he was in the cave.
when he was hid in the cave of Engeddi, begirt with Saul's Army.

1 AS was mine extremity, I cried unto the Lord with my voice: with my voice
unto the Lord did I make my supplication.
so was mineimportunity, I was hard beset, and I beset God as hard, incessantly
urging my condition upon him, again and again iterating it in his ears, so that
I gave him no rest whilst my danger lasted.

I poured out my complaint before him, I showed before him my trouble.
2 I made my moan unto him how injuriously my life was sought, for him to right
me, and how my danger increased to a very crisis, for him to relieve me, showed
him how nothing humanely was betwixt me and utter destruction, if he interposed
not, death was unavoidable.

When my spirit was overwhelmed within me, then thou knew my path: in the
way wherein I walked, have they privily laid a snare for me.
3 When I was at my wits end, and knew no way to escape, when I thought this
thing and that thing, but saw safety in nothing that I could imagine, then
had thou designed the way of my deliverance, how I should come out of that so
eminent peril, else I could never have been preserved, for that which I took
to be my safest course, there to hide my self in the wilderness of Engeddi,
proved of all other my greatest dangers, mine enemies were too cunning for me,
and all the shift I could make, and by their subtility and secrecy had
certainly surprised me, had not thou mightily prevented it.

I looked on my right hand, and beheld, but there was no man that would know
me, refuge failed me: no man cared for my soul.
4 I ruminated with my self, and thought (as men in such cases are apt sometimes
to hope and sometimes to fear) that sure this or the other man would intercede
to Saul for me, and stand up in the defense of mine innocence to save my life,
and that I had some friends and acquaintance yet left me, that would appear for
me in such a time of need, but there was none, all were against me, not a man
for me, all sought my ruin, none pitied my case, nor offered to speak a word in
my behalf, when my life lay at stake, so utterly destitute was I, and humanely
helpless.

I cried unto thee, O Lord, I said, thou art my refuge, and my portion in the
land of the living.
5 My last and best refuge was therefore to thee, O Lord, whom I earnestly
beseeched to be helpful to me in that so great extremity, showed thee how all
helps else failed me, that thou only and alone wast left me to fly to, and
hope in, who art the stay and strength of mine heart, my never-failing
deliverer, and how that being stripped of all interest and propriety in the
promised land, and all in it (as if I were an utter stranger and no Israelite)
nothing is left me but thy self, a naked God in promise is all my part and
portion therein.

6 Lord, Attend unto my cry for I am brought very low; deliver me from my
persecutours, for they are stronger than I.
forget not thy servant that is so mindful of thee, whose all in all thou art,
but make this mine extremity thine opportunity, hear me effectually that cry
unto thee ardently, as mine extremity enforces me to do, having as it were one
foot within the door of death, never man was nearer it and escape, be thou that
art Almighty my powerful deliverer from my potent enemies, and bloody
persecutours, that so surround me, and so far surpass me.

7 Deliver me from out this present danger and inclusion, Bring my soul out of
prison, that I may praise thy name: the righteous shall compass me about: for
thou shall deal bountifully with me.
yea, put a final end to my persecution, whereby my life is held in continual
danger, and set me at liberty from the oppressing power of mine enemy, that as
thy freeman (when freed) I may glorify thee, thy power and goodness that has
done so great things for me. And then shall the good and well-meaning people
(though now misled too many of them) flock about me with admiration and praise
of thy wonderful works in my strange, manifold, and manifest deliverances, by
the good hand of God to me, which shall clearly show it self to the conviction
of all, that I am the man which under thee must rule over them, as Christ over
his Church.

The cxliii. PSALM.
David under great persecution and trouble, prays earnestly that God would
not, as he might, proceed against him in relation to himself, but against his
enemies in relation to him, for though as to God he was a sinner, to them he
was none, who therefore injuriously sought his life to his extreme perplexity.
Yet he comforts himelf in God his former mercies, and prayers to him for
present deliverance, and perseverance in holiness, and concludes with prayer
for his own preservation and his enemies destruction.

Psalm cxliii. A Psalm of David.
A Psalm made by David.

HEar my prayer, O Lord, give ear to my supplications in thy faithfulness
answer me, and in thy righteousness.
1 MY calamities are such as put me upon vehement and often supplications to thy
Majesty for deliverance; O that thou would hear me once for all, by putting
a period to my misery, according to the faithfulness of thy promise in that
behalf, and the gracious nature that is in thee in justice to deliver the
oppressed.

And enter not into judgment with thy servant: for in thy sight shall no man
living be justified.
2 Let not mine afflictions be the punishments of my sins, as I confess they
justly may, for then shall I be hopeless and they endless, but remember me
under another notion, as one chosen and called through grace to be thy servant,
and that in eminent place in thy Church, consider me as such I pray thee, in
mercy to pardon and pass by my sinfulness, for it is not mine innocence but thy
clemency that must acquit me as to thee, though as to mine enemies I dare plead
it, but not as to thee, who art a God of pure eyes, and see sin enough in me
and every one else, seem he never so righteous in the eye of the world or his
own, utterly and for ever to sentence us to hell, much more to punish us here.

3 It is justice betwixt me and mine enemies that I sue for, For the enemy
has persecuted my soul, he has smitten my life down to the ground: he has
made me to dwell in darkness, as those that have been long dead.
to be of grace vouchsafed me, for they have unjustly hunted after my life for
a long time together, and have brought it as near to death as could be
possible, and banished me the society and communion of men, to seek sanctuary
in wildernesses and caves, solitary and desolate, disregarded, and given of all
for lost, never to recover any better fortune, no more than for a man that is
dead and buried to arise.

4 Which uncomfortable forlorn castaway condition does grievously affect me
with trouble of mind, Therefore is my spirit overwhelmed within me: my heart
within me is desolate.
and makes my heart as void of comfort within, as my life is without.

5 Yet, I remember the days of old, I meditate on all thy works: I muse on the
work of thine hands.
Lord, do not I altogether count my self, as others do, but for all I am so as
I am, my hope is still in thee, I consider how it has been both with my self
and other thy servants of old; what difficulties they have waded through, what
deliverances and preservations they have had, and from what an ebb-condition
thou have by thy mighty power and goodness raised them, and truly this holds
mine head still above water, and sustains me in faith and hope.

6 So that I cease not to pray, I stretch forth mine hands unto thee: my soul
thin steth after thee, as a th^rsty land. S^la^.
my danger stops not my mouth, nor makes me desperate, but in the hope I have
in thee (though destitute of all else) I make my fervent addresses to thee,
with an eager desire to be heard and to enjoy the fruits of thy promises, never
did the chawned earth more need and desire the rain to moisten it in time of
drought, than does this heart of mine thirst after the supplement of grace in
this my calamity. Thou Lord know it.

7 And therefore accordingly vouchsafe to expedite help unto me, Hea^ me
speedily, O Lord, my spirit saileth: hide not thy face from me, least I be like
unto them that go down into the pit.
for truly such outward miseries, inward perplexities, and forcible
heart-breathings after thee, will quickly expire me, I cannot long live under
such heavy burdens and depressions of nature, they will consume me, if thou
do not quickly afford some reviving by timely redress, and effectual
favor, which I beseech thee to do, least death and destruction seize suddenly
upon me, which (to speak humanely) I am within a very little of.

Cause me to heathy loving kindness in the morning, for in thee do I trust:
cause me to know the way wherein I shall walk, for I lift up my soul unto thee.
8 Whilst yet there is hope before life extinct, make have to help me, and as
it were to revive my dying decaying spirits with some cordial of grace and
timo^s deliverance, for my trust is still in thee for it, how low soever I am
brought; point me out by thy singer of direction and hand of providence, how I
may come safe out of this inextricable labyrinth of troubles, wherewith I am
encumbered, and know no way to escape them but by immediate and miraculous
mercy, for which I am an humble suitour to thee, with all the powers of my soul
that is left me.

Deliver me, O Lord, from mine enemies: I fly unto thee to hide me.
9 Thy effectual grace in my powerful deliverance is mine humble and earnest
suit, I put up unto thee, that mine enemies who seek and make sure of my life,
may not destroy it, which they will certainly and suddenly do, if thou prevent
not, to whom only I fly from them, for no place on earth can escape them.

Teach me to do thy will, for thou art my God: thy spirit is good, lead me in
the land of uprightness.
10 And as I beg to be preserved by thy power out of the hands of mine enemies,
so by thy grace out of the power of my corruptions, which by reason of my
temptations are very stirring and hardly suppressed, inclining me upon occasion
to deviate, but my trust is in thee, and prayer unto thee for this as well as
that, sin being as death to me, therefore for thy goodness sake which has so
freely and so fully engaged thee to be every way a gracious God unto me, and
specially in soul-concernments. Lord, teach me at every turn and in every
strait what is thy will, and how to obey it, by the powerful energie of thy
spirit, which himself is good, and can make me so, by his efficacious
impowering my spirit thereunto, maugre all temptations within or without, yea,
all my life long effectually dispose me to walk in the way of holiness and
righteousness, which only leads unto everlasting life, the new heavens and new
earth, wherein dwells righteousness; a pattern whereof shall be that
flourishing estate of thy Church in holiness, shortly to be accomplished to
thine Israel by and under me a figure of Christ, which, good Lord, teach me how
to attain to, that my sins debar me not so great a blessing.

11 For the glory of thy power, Quicken me, O Lord, for thy names sake: for thy
righteousness sake bring my soul out of trouble.
which is so highly esteemed and little feared by mine enemies, do thou
manifest it, in (as it were) my resurrection from the dead, for such am I in
effect, and in all humane appearance; and for thy faithfulness sake both in
point of grace and justice, be mindful of me thy servant wrongfully oppressed
and persecuted, to set me free from these deadly dangers I am continually in.

12 And of mere compassion to me in so great misery undertake my cause and
quarrel, And of thy mercy cut off mine enemies and destroy all them that
afflict my soul: for I am thy servant.
that without cause am thus persecuted to the death by violent and bloody
enemies who are untreatable, and from whom I must never expect other, till thou
shall disable them to destroy me, by destroying them, which I pray thee do, as
an act of mercy to my wronged innocence, let none escape, that would not have
me do so, that my soul may be free from these distractions to serve thee, for
thereunto through mercy am I designed, and by grace am I called.

The cxliv. PSALM.
David being in part possessed of the Kingdom, blesses God for that, which he
acknowledges to be of him, as also all his achievements and deliverances, and
aggravates the greatness of God goodness to him from the baseness and disparity
of him to God, whom he prays extraordinarily to stand for him against, and rid
him of his remainder of enemies, as bad as the rest, and promises upon final
deliverance to tune all his instruments to his praise, as the sole Savior,
specially of him; and again iterates his request, that the times of Isreal's
tranquillity under him and his may hasten, that they may once be happy after
so much misery, which then they shall be, with the ample possession of
temporal felicities of all kinds, and God to boot, which will make them or any
people happy that are so blessed.

Psalm cxliv. A Psalm of David.
A Psalm made by David.

BLessed be the Lord my strength, which teaches my hands to war, and my
fingers to fight.
1 MAgnified be the Lord, for his praiseworthy goodness to me, in so
marvellously inabling me beyond either natural ability or acquired skill, to
do things so much above my self in soldiery, as through his assistance I have
done to mine own and all men's admiration, and to such wonderful success as I
have had thereby.

My goodness and my fortress, my high tower and my deliverer, my shield, and he
in whom I trust: who subdueth my people under me.
2 But it was the Lord, and of him only, who has and does show me so many
favors, and is so bountiful and beneficent to me as I cannot express it, but
in the abstract of goodness it self, so freely are they acted, and so
manifoldly multiplied; to descend into particulars were infinite, but what can
be imagined by way of offense to mine enemies, or defense to my self, that the
Lord is, and has been to me, and I am confident so will be still: He it is
that has brought and will go on irresistably to bring this stubborn
stiff-necked people of Israel to submit to me as their King, who so hardly are
removed from their prejudices concerning me, and brought to believe the truth
of promises touching me.

3 Lord, Lord, what is man, that thou take knowledge of him? or the son of
man, that thou make account of him?
I cannot when I reflect upon my self and thee, the disproportion 'twixt my
nature and essence, frail mortal dust and ashes here below, and thy spiritual,
eternal, incomprehensible Being and infinite Majesty in heaven above, but
admire, That such an earthworm as man (the whole kind whereof is at best but as
the drop of thy bucket) subject to generation and corruption, should be so
regarded of thee as to expend and lay out so much of thy wisdom, care, and
providence upon him, especially considering what he is become by sin, not
worthy the name of a creature, that by nature is thine enemy, and that yet
thou should exercise so much grace and goodness toward him sundry ways.

4 Man in respect of thee, Man is like to vanity, his days are as a shadow
that passes away.
is as the most vain, and emptiest thing in the world is to him, for substance
a thing of nothing, and for duration as momentanie and uncertain is his life,
subject to time and change, as the shadow which is as transient as the sun is
moveable.

5 Yet such is thy goodness to this poor inconsiderable creature, Bow thy
heaven^, O Lord, and come down: touch the mountains and they shall smoke.
that thou art pleased to work miracles many times for the preservation of a
very few, yea, of one single person that belongs unto thee, and to descend as
it were from thine imperial throne of Divine Majesty, to help here on earth
wonderfully, when thine are in extremity, and so, Lord, vouchsafe to do now,
manifest thy presence, as when in thick and darksome clouds thou formerly
descendedst, and made the mountains seem all on fire under thee, such let be
thine outgoings against mine and thy Churches enemies, consume those
mountainous powerful adversaries that oppose themselves against thee in thy
wrathful displeasure; a little whereof will serve to do it, as high and mighty
as they are in their own vain imaginations.

Cast forth lightning, and scatter them: shoot out thine arrows and destroy
them.
6 Thy peoples extraordinary dangers have produced extraordinary, and
miraculous effects of providence for their preservation, and so let it do
still, let thy power be now as evident, as when with thunder and lightening
thou foughtest for them, destroyedst and discomfitedst their enemies heretofore.

Send thine hand from above, rid me, and deliver me out of great waters: from
the hand of strange children.
7 When earthly helps fail, from heaven do thou send succor, and set me free
from this deluge of trouble, and troublesome adversaries that break in upon me
like an unresistable torrent, let me not fall into the hands of those that
though they are visible Israelites, of the seed and family of Jacob, yet by
their wicked malicious deportment, might be as well infidels and heathens, and
as much charity and humanity may I expect from those, as these.

Whose mouth speaks vanity: and their right hand is a right hand of falsehood.
8 Who are perfect proficients in all kind of treachery and dissimulation,
practicing nothing else but how they may deceive and entrap the innocent, no
tie can hold them, whatsoever they promise they break, and their contracts,
though never so solemnly smitten, are but snares and traps, one can believe
nothing they say or do, so false are they.

I will sing a new song unto thee, O God: upon a ^saltery, and an instrument of
ten strings will I sing praises unto thee.
9 As thy mercies multiply, so shall my praises, which hitherto have gone along
foot by foot with all thy gracious dispensations, every remarkable mercy has
inspired me afresh, and brought forth a suitable Psalm of praise and
thanksgiving, and so shall they that are to succeed; when thou shall complete
mine establishment, and work out my final deliverance, I will not be behind
hand to express it to the full, in a full and open acknowledgement, answerably
magnifying thee with the uttermost of my skill, both by voice and instrument
tuned to thy praise.

10 And I will say, It is he that gives salvation unto Kings: who delivers
David his servant from the hurtful sword.
that the Lord alone is worthy to be magnified by all his vicegerents upon
earth, who disposes of Kings and Kingdoms as pleases him, none, though never
so great, standing or prevailing by their own power, but by his, either in
victory over their enemies, or peaceable government over their people, and I
least of all, who am most of all bound to acknowledge his protection and
deliverance of me out of (otherwise) unavoidable deaths, yea, many an one,
that had else swallowed me up, had not his hand of power answered his word of
promise in the preservation, and preferment of me to this place of honor, and
service to rule his people Israel.

11 Thou have made some good riddance of mine enemies, Rid me, and deliver me
from the hand of strange children, whose mouth speaks vanity, and their right
hand is a right hand of falsehood.
but more remain, do by these as by those, who are no better, Israelites at
large, only by birth-priviledge have they got the start of heathens, savouring
the things of honesty and truth no more, than they. See further the 7 and 8
verses foregoing of this Psalm.

12 Settle us in a peaceable and prosperous condition, That our sons may be as
plants grown up in their youth; that our daug^ters may be as corner stones,
polished after the similitude of a palace.
by ridding out those that stand in the way of Isreal's welfare, and
flourishing estate under me and mine, that the times may come, which are not
far off, according to the date of thine ordination and promise, when we shall
have even a heaven upon earth, thy blessings of all sorts abounding to us, and
our posterities, and the Commonwealth be peopled, (and re-edified as it were)
with handsome well educated youth, the effects of peace, both men and women,
that has been so long unpolished and in the rough, void of all order and
comeliness.

That our garners may be full, affording all manner of store, that our sheep
may bring forth thousands, and ten thousands in our streets.
13 And when the blessings of corn and cattle shall to admiration be poured out
upon us in so great abundance, as ever, either room within doors can receive,
or pasturage without (all the land over) can maintain.

That our oxen may be strong to labor, that there be no breaking in, nor going
out, that there be no complaining in our streets.
14 And when by peace and plenty our beasts of labor and burden shall be
blessed with strength thereto, and the Kingdom enriched therewith, and that
there shall be no more wasting, robbing, plundering, spoiling, killing, and
captiving as lamentably has been by invasions and inroads of cruel enemies,
nor no need of flying for our security or fighting for our defense, but that
in stead of wringing our hands, and wailing our misfortunes at home, we may
carry sorrow to our enemies doors abroad, whilst nothing but peace and
tranquillity is in the borders of Israel.

Happy is that people that is in such a case: yea, happy is that people, whose
God is the Lord.
15 O the blessedness of such a change, what a happy age will be that brings
with it such an affluence of posterity, peace, and plenty, which are the
riches of a Kingdom, and thus shall it be with us, nothing shall be wanting to
the perfecting our felicity even in these, above all the nations upon earth,
and which is more worth, and sets a Crown upon the head of all the rest, God
himself will be ours to bless us and remain with us, whose grace and favor is
our greatest felicity when our felicity is at greatest, a happiness of all
other most desirable, and an enjoyment incomparable, when, and to whom God
vouchsafes it, as in goodness and faithfulness, under the reign and government
of me and mine now at hand, he will to us his peculiar people.

The cxlv. PSALM.
It is noted of this Psalm as also of some others tending to praise, (as Psalm
111, 112) that they are written according in the Hebrew Alphabet, each verse
beginning with the letters as they lie in order of succession, some only
pretermitted. This particular Psalm it is conceived was composed when the
Kingdom of David flourished, wherein he insists much upon the supremacy and
empire of God over all in general, and his people in special, promising as high
as he is to set God above him, confessing him only to be great, that rules and
does all by an Almighty power and greatness, consounding his enemies, and
exercising all manner of grace to his Church and people, and though just, yet
beneficent, deserving praise from all, but his saints especially, who are under
the covenant and Kingdom of grace, which has been so powerfully administered in
their behalfs, and shall continue to the end of the world, as it has done from
the beginning, for the preservation of his people by him, who is pitiful to the
oppressed to right and raise them. He shows his goodness to be universal, and
that as all things have an instinct toward him, so he toward, them, to do
them good, and as he has given them ^ Being, so he maintains it, which he does
by manifold dispensations of good creatures in sit seasons. And whose
transcendencie appears chiefly in this, that nothing falls out in the
administration of his government, but what is holy and righteous. And though he
be bountiful to all, yet is he graciously propitious but to few, and yet to all
those (which yet are but few) that serve him in sincerity, salvation is there
portion, and destruction the wickeds. For all which he promises to magnify
God, and bespeaks all else to do so.

A Psalm made by David, Psalm cxlv. David's Psalm of praise.
wherein himself praises God abundantly, and incites all others to it
exceedingly, by setting forth before them his praiseworthy acts and
excellencies.

1 THou Lord have highly exalted me, I Will extol thee, my God, O King: and I
will bless thy name for ever and ever.
and so will I thee, as well thou deservest at my hands, I will magnify thy
bounty to me, and do my homage to thee the King of Kings, and more peculiarly
of me thine anointed, who hold what I have by thy donation, and am what I am in
subordination to thee, the Sovereign Lord of all the Kingdoms of the world, but
more especially of mine. Thy greatness and goodness shall for ever be
acknowledged and magnified by me whilst I live, were I to live everlastingly,
and I will leave it upon record to posterity to do so too.

Every day will I bless thee: and I will praise thy name for ever and ever.
2 The memory of thy mercies shall never depart from me, nor shall the duty of
thanksgiving be intermitted by me, time shall not cancel them, but day by day
will I recount and recall them, and afresh magnify thee for them, and bless
thee that blesses me, yea, live I never so long, they shall never die, but all
that I am, or shall ever be, I will be it of thee, and acknowledge it to thee,
thy praise and glory.

Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised; and his greatness is
unsearchable.
3 In Majesty, power, and grace, transcendent is the Lord, the worlds sole
Sovereign, and how ought his praises to be suitably superlative, whose
greatness in glory, and every other excellency is infinite and
incomprehensible, rather to be admired than understood by men of finite and
shallow capacities, as his works declare.

One generation shall praise thy works to another, and shall declare thy
mighty acts.
4 The world shall never be without matter of praise, that shall set forth the
immensity of thee the Lord, whose praiseworthy works of power, justice, and
mercy, shall be renewed upon the face of the earth continually, every
generation shall have a succession of them, which shall accordingly by thy
people be observed, and transferred in their gratulatorie memorials from one to
another, the fathers shall tell and teach what their forefathers taught and
told them, and the additions thou have made in their time of works of wonder,
and acts of power and grace to their posterities, and they to theirs to the
worlds end.

5 I for my part will extol thee in the age that I live in, I will speak of the
glorious honor of thy Majesty; and of thy wondrous works.
and leave a copy for after-ages, to write by, and do the like in exalting thy
supreme superlative honor and glory, that is essential to thee, the Sovereign
Majesty of heaven and earth, and in magnifying thine Almighty power so
wonderfully specified in the works of creation, preservation, and destruction,
acted and evident in the world respectively to good and bad.

6 Those that give themselves to observation as I do, And men shall speak of
the might of thy terrible acts: and will declare thy greatness.
shall have cause enough whilst the world endures, to extol thy powerful
justice upon thine and thy Churches enemies, in the terrible execution of it by
formidable judgments, such as former ages have been full of, and after-ages
shall not be wanting in, and I will be sure to do my part toward it in
preaching thy Sovereign justice and power, how able thou art to confound them,
and how terribly thy displeasure shall be executed upon evil doers, wicked
despisers of God and oppressors of his people.

7 Such faithful observers shall also have abundant matter stored up in memory
of thy goodness and mercy, They shall abundantly utter the memory of thy
great goodness, and shall sing of thy righteousness.
yea, manifold and remarkable mercies to thy Church and people, which they
themselves shall bless and praise thee for, and teach them to others, even to
succeeding generations, to be remembered of them in like sort, and shall rejoice
exceedingly in their own, and the Churches constant experience of thy faithful
performances of thy gracious promises freely made, and in righteousness made
good touching thy blessings to them, and thy judgments upon their enemies.

The Lord is gracious, and full of compassion: slow to anger, and of great
mercy.
8 They shall have cause to magnify Gods manifold gracious properties by
manifold sweet experiences, and to say of him as he by Moses says of himself,
That he is as good as great, Gracious, in promising and performing,
Compassionate, over his people in their afflictions, though afflicted for their
sins, which he is slow to punish, and very forbearing to execute his just
displeasure where and when, or as often, as it is deserved, and as ready
mercifully to forgive their sin, when committed, and remove his judgments when
inflicted, upon their repentance, as they themselves can wish, be their sins
what they will, never so great, he can and will forgive them, upon conversion,
and repent of his punishing when they repent of their provoking.

The Lord is good to all: and his tender mercies are over all his works.
9 And though covenant-grace and pardoning mercy be the portion of his own
peculiar, yet to those that are not so but strangers, yea, enemies to him, he
is beneficial, even to all good and bad God is good, and declares it by large
dispensations of manifold good things creative and providential: Though sin
has brought an overflowing deluge of displeasure into the world, and shut up
the whole creation, man and all things that were made for his use, under a
curse and Divine severity, yet cannot this hinder on Gods part his being
merciful, who freely extends his liberal beneficence to every creature,
supplying their wants, maintaining and taking care for their subsistencies,
from the least to the greatest.

10 There is nothing in the whole world in that its kind and nature sets not
forth thy praise-worrhy goodness and greatness, All thy works shall praise
thee, O Lord: and the saints shall bless thee.
O thou Sovereign and sole Lord thereof; and above all thy peculiar people
chosen and called have cause, not only for common mercies, whereof together
with the rest of the world they liberally partake, to praise thee, but for
special love tokens of grace and favor, which the world knows not what belongs
to, wherewith thou peculiarly blessest them, shall they actively bless and
magnify thee in love and thankfulness.

11 Thy saints, They shall speak of the glory of thy Kingdom, and talk of thy
power.
they shall not by bare instinct, or mere necessity of nature passively praise
thee, as others do that are subjects at large of the Kingdom of thy power
only, but as those that are received into grace. shall they magnify the
glorious excellency of that thy Kingdom of grace, (as well as of power)
whereof more especially they are subjects; and knowingly, in the comfortable
experience of their own hearts, declare the happiness of that estate
transcendent to any worldly one both for dignity and security, the King of
saints being the only Lord God glorious in Majesty, and omnipotent in power,
as his acts declare.

12 From the enlargements of their hearts, To make known to the sons of men,
his mighty acts, and the glorious Majesty of his Kingdom.
in the love and admiration of thee, they shall publish to the world, that so
best understands thee, the memorable achievements which thou have in sundry
ages brought to pass thereby to spread thy fame, and gain thee the glory of
thine omnipotency, and sole Sovereigntie over the world, the pomp and power
thereof, as sundry times and ways upon sundry nations and mighty potentates
thou have made it manifest, by demonstrative evidence in thy Churches and
peoples behalf.

Thy Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and thy dominion endures throughout
all generations.
13 Yea, all the excellent prerogatives and properties of thy Kingdom and empire
shall they preach and promulgate, to gain thee the precedencie of worldly
honor, which though never so great, yet is transient and momentanie, on top of
the wheel to day, and under it to morrow, whereas thy dominion and
Sovereigntie, as it excels in power and dignity, so in permanence and
perpetuity, thou can crush earthly Kingdoms, their Princes and people, but
they with all their might and malice can neither crush thee nor thine, neither
weaken thy power, lessen thy glory, nor extirpate thy Church, but as thou, so
it, maugre all the world is of an infinite date, no period can be put to
either, for both shall everlastingly endure, and every age shall make it appear
so, by the admirable works of governance, and powerful preservation of thy
Church and Kingdom, founded upon an everlasting covenant.

The Lord upholdeth all that fall: and raises up all those that be bowed down.
14 Otherwise his Church had been extirpated many a day ago, every age lifting
at it, so that it has been under sore dejections, and grievous oppressions,
yet still upheld, and in its lowest condition made to keep its feet, to have a
Being, and raised in time to a well-being in despite of its potent adversaries,
by the Lord, whose power many a time has underpropt it, and his grace restored
it, when it was low brought, and who indeed in righteousness is pitiful to all
that are wrongfully oppressed to right and relieve them, and has power to do
it, be their condition never so bad, especially if they trust in him and seek
to him, whose Kingdom over the world is chiefly exercised in administering
justice and mercy for and toward the afflicted.

15, 16 Whose goodness is as universal as his greatness, The eyes of all wait
upon thee, and and thou give them their meat in due season.
and providencially extends it self to every creature that he has made, which
also by instinct of nature it self, Thou openest thine hand and satisfiest the
desire of every living thing.
waits upon providence, seeks after, and endeavors its own means of
subsistence, every one what is proper to its nature and kind, as by and from
God his ordination and especial dispensation, thus acknowledging his
supremacy, both man and beast, even the whole creation: And he orderly in a
suitable and seasonable manner supplies unto them food of several kinds, in
several seasons of both time and opportunity, for sustaining the nature, and
satisfying the hunger of all creatures of so many several kinds as are in the
world, and of every individual of each kind, by his liberality and bounty so
universally extended over the whole earth, and providently dispensed to the
sundry particulars in it, which is only then had when he gives it, and
therefore had, because he gives it, none being able to supply their own wants,
much less worthy to share in the honor of the worlds providing for, both which
is of the Lord alone, who makes second causes instrumental to him, and useful
to man, the power and governance of all creatures being his, which therofore
brings forth and increases, because he appoints, and is satisfied, because
he dispenses.

17 Manifold dispensations there are in the world toward good and bad, The
Lord is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works.
that seems strange to us, but in this also is God and his government
admirable and transcendently praiseworthy, that nothing he does be it never so
discrepant, to humane reason, and rules of policy amongst men, but he is both
righteous and holy in so doing, for his will being the only rule of both, his
works can none of them disaagree from either.

The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him, to all that call upon him
in truth.
18 His government and dispensation, though it be to and over all, yet
principally and primarily does it belong to the faithful; as near as he seems
to others, yet is he far enough from them, and as far as he seems from these,
who have the greatest share of adverse fortune in this life, yet is he near
unto them. They that profess him publicly by adoration and worship, and withal
serve him sincerely in faith and affection, that offer to find him fervent not
fained prayer, they shall be sure to find him a propitious God to a gracious
heart accompanied with a holy life.

He (...) the (...) that fear (...) will h^ar their cry, and will save them.
19 Such as take care of him, he will take care of them, they that fear to sin
shall be satisfied with good; such God will hear and answer graciously, as hear
and obey him conscionably, and though sometimes by extraordinary trials he may
put them to it to ask, yea cry hard for ease before they have it, yet that is
but to try and exercise their graces with patient waiting and fervent
importuning, till the time, the set time be come which he has determined in
himself as most opportune for him and them to be relieved and answered in, and
then, though not till then, they shall be sure of it, when their fears are
greatest, and their hopes (humanely) least.

The Lord preserves all them that love him: but all the wicked will he destroy.
20 The Lord will keep promise with all that fear to offend him, out of love and
desire to please him, he may venture them, but he will not lose them, his eye
is over and his hand under them, for he has not many such that so love him, nor
therefore are there many that are so beloved of him, and so they shall find
that wickedly transgress against him, that as he has powerful grace in store
to preserve the one, so has he vindicative justice to destroy the other, which
shall certainly fall to their lot every mothers son of them, his Kingdom is
administered by mercy and justice, and so the good and bad shall find.

21 My mind shall meditate of these thine admirable excellencies of several
kinds exhibited to the world in general and thy people in particular, My mouth
shall speak the praise of the Lord: and let all flesh bless his holy name for
ever and ever.
, both which are wholly under thy dominion and dispensation, subject to thy
greatness, and sharers of thy goodness, respectively common and special, as
also of thy mercy and justice. My mouth shall extol them and praise thee the
God of them, that art so great in power, so gracious in providence, so rich in
mercy, and so severe in justice, and let mankind in general in all times and
places, who ought to know thee under all, and do know thee under most of these
notions, whereof they have daily and frequent experience, bless and magnify
thee in all thy holy attributes and properties, that so shine forth in thy
works of mercy, power, and righteousness, all the world over, in all the ages
of it.

The cxlvi. PSALM.
David exciteth all, especially Gods people, and most especially himself, to
praise the Lord; principally by trusting in him, and distrusting all but him.
Man both great and small being a perishable creature, and God only to be
relied on, but then that must be the true God, and that also by a true faith,
acted upon his power, goodness, and never-failing faithfulness, and that is
every condition, believing in God with a like never-failing stedfastness,
though our estate be various and miserable, for that to the good he is ever,
graciously inclined, and to the wicked quite contrary. As also for the
perpetuity and unchangeableness of his throne and dominion over his Church and
people, for their protection throughout all ages to the end of the world, does
the Psalmist again excite to praise him, concluding as he began in this, and so
do every of these 5 concluding Psalms. Psalm cxlvi.


PRaise ye the Lord: praise the Lord, O my soul.
1, 2 AS it is the duty, so I wish it were the practice of all, especially his
people to be constant and conversant in praising God, who himself is so
constant and conversant in praise-worthie dispensations of several sorts, While
I live will I praise the Lord: I will sing praise unto my God, while I have any
being.
and what I admonish others of, I do much more so to my self, that have cause
beyond all men to praise the Lord, and that with my whole heart throughout my
whole life, as well he deserves, that I should spend and lay out my utmost
strenght and best affections in praising him, which I will be sure to do
whilst my tongue can wag.

Put not your tr^st in Princes, nor in the son of men, in whom there is no help.
3, 4 But let your praises be real, give God the praise of your faith, which is
thank -worthy, when in your hearts you set up his throne above all
principalities and powers, His breath goes forth, be returns to this earth:
in that very day his thoughts perish.
trust in him solely and wholly, let not worldly appearances dazzle your eyes,
and make you disparage God by preferring others to him, though they be never so
great and powerful Kings or Princes; trust in nothing short of God, no not in
all the power of flesh, which it self is mortal and perishable, and to you or
whomsoever trusts in it, will prove deceitful, not being of power, though never
so powerful to stand us in stead, further than God wills and assists, their
preparations and projects being like themselves, die when they do, and how soon
and sudden that may be none knows; and for ought he knows what ever he is, if
he be a man, that very instant, when his undertakings and preparations are the
greatest, and his and thy hopes by reason of them are at the highest, he and
all the arm of flesh (thou trusts in) may expire, breathe his last, which, him
for ought, every breath he breaths may be, and then this goodly confidence of
thine in man, whom thou make a God of, as from the earth he came in the first
creation, so to earth he returns by dissolution, the fate of all flesh, one and
other, and so all thy hopes built upon such imaginary helps as he or they
promised and designed, fall to the ground, are in an instant annihilated, and
come to nothing, though never so wisely forecast, and humanely hopeful.

5 Happy, Happy is he that has the God of Jacob for his help, whose hope is
in the Lord his God.
and only happy is he or they, that contradistinguished to all false
Heathenish Gods or creature-confidence, has his assurance in the only true
God, the sole creator (who is the God of Israel, his servant Jacobs
posterity) for his helper and defender, the anchor of whose hope is cast in
firm ground, Divine not humane, such as will not drag after him as do all other
hopes in all other helps, Gods or men, that has his heart fixed upon the Lord
and none other, and that also by a Divine not a humane faith, the faith of
adoption, such as Jacobs was, first being regenerate by him and so believing in
him by a faith of gracious propriety unto salvation, as his God as well as
Jacobs, and then hoping on him for faithful performance of his promise of
security, and preservation as to Jacob, so to him, being the faithful seed of
that faithful Patriark to whom he is alike engaged.

6 That thus I say with a true and unfeigned faith trusts in the true God, Which
made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that therein is: which keeps trust
for ever.
in him that has his being of himself, and gives being to all things else, as
the heavens, earth, and sea, and all things in them, and that not only as an
Almighty, but also as a gracious benevolent God, neverfailingly faithful of
his word and promise of grace to all in all ages and cases that confide in him,
and therefore as well willing as able to do them good, who himself is as well
good as great.

Which executes judgment for the oppressed, which giv^th food to the hungry:
the Lord loses the prisoners.
7 That be his wrongs never so great, his necessities never so pressing, his
case never so desperate, yet holds up his hope in his God, and supports his
faith by his power and goodness, justice and mercy, waiting believingly upon
the Lord as knowing him, though free in his gracious dispensations, yet just to
dispense his righteous judgments, which shall sooner or later certainly and
most seasonably be executed upon oppressors, for vindication and relief of
those that are oppressed, and in like sort though he let the faithful suffer
want, yet to believe in him for supply by virtue both of his promise and pity,
and that principally when they are in their greatest necessity; and though
they be in actual bondage and imprisonment, yet to have their hearts at liberty
in the midst of their thraldom, in the faith of his power and faithfulness to
release and relieve them, which when the time comes for him to do, no bolts nor
bars can hinder him.

The Lord opens the eyes of the blind: the Lord raises them that are bowed
down: the Lord loves the righteous.
8 Be a man's condition what it will, and of what nature soever, faith and
affliction must always go together, and that makes him a happy man in his
greatest unhappiness, whether they be those external and bodily ones
aforementioned, or that he be implunged into inward inextricable perplexities of
mind, and difficulties of affairs, that his own or other men's councels cells
cannot wind him out off, yet must he believe in the only wise God to direct
him, whose very creative power and goodness we should allegorize, and improve
them into the faith of providence as occasion offers, arguing fom things
natural and corporal, to things supernatural or spiritual, and proportionably
believing the one as the other, that Jehovah who can and does give bodily eyes
to see with, and sight to those eyes, can and will as well enlighten the eye of
the mind in time of need; and as he cures the impotent and crazed in body, so
is he the same to comfort and relieve the distressed in spirit: yea, he or they
that are righteous, and does righteousness, it is not any thing under the sun
that befalls them within or without, in body or mind, in way of trial or
trouble, that should make them think one jot worse of themselves, as to God his
love and care of them, but first to know themselves to be faithful, and that
they suffer not for evil doing, and then to be confident in God, and of God his
love and faithfulness, but not otherwise.

9 No, it is not the solitary condition of the stranger or exile that can
render him unhappie, The Lord preserves the strangers, he relieveth the
fatherless and widow: but the way of the wicked he turns it up^side do (...).
or exposed, (as in such cases we are apt to fear it will) if he believe in the
Lord Almighty, who is abler to preserve him, than man is to oppress him, we
his people have found it so, when and where we are strangers, for that
notwithstanding, we were strangely preserved and powerfully delivered. Nor need
the widow and fatherless give all for lost, when God takes away their earthly
supports, if they marry him, and secure themselves under his wings by faith,
they shall find him to supply the want of all earthly relations and
accommodations in and from himself, by his faithfulness and mercy. But no such
thing can I promise to the sinner that loves, and lives in sinful ways and
courses, nothing but subversion and misfortune is his lot by any thing the
promises speak; for to him of due belongs only the threatenings and curses of
the word, not the blessings and mercies of the covenant; as the good by faith
and hope are finally happy in all unhappiness that can, or does befall them;
so the wicked in their seeming felicities are both finally and totally sure to
conclude in misery, and utter frustration of their confidence and forecast.

The Lord shall reign for ever, even thy God, O Sion, unto all generations.
Praise ye the Lord.
10 And as the Lord Jehovah is faithful and Almighty to do as aforesaid, so is
he also everlasting, and therefore also worthy and solely to be trusted in, and
relied on, he is not like earthly Princes, that may be, and are many times
dethroned whilst they live, or if not so, yet mortal, and sure to die, and so
not to be trusted in, but of the same power and faithfulness to all faithful
ones for ever in all ages, to do them good, protect and save them, spite of all
worldly power or malice. Such a God is thy God, O Israel, whom thou worshippest
in his sanctuary upon his holy hill, Sion of which accordingly he will bless
and preserve as the type of his Church universal, which as his, shall be upheld
by him, who himself is everlasting, whilst the world endures. Therefore praise
ye the Lord, (trust in him, and in nothing else) all ye that are now, or shall
hereafter be his people, the true worshippers of the only true God.

The cxlvii. PSALM.
David exceedingly exciteth the people of God, his Israel, to be frequent and
conversant in praising the Lord, by sweet motives and powerful arguments
proper and common, showing sometimes his tender care in special over his
Church, then again illustrating him by his native excellencies, also by his
gracious, just and different dispensations to good and bad, all having relation
to his people, whom he again stirs up to the duty of thanksgiving and praise,
by acts of powerful providence above and below, to beast and birds. He further
cautionizeth them not to be misled in judgment, so as to think the favor of
God, or success from God is attainable by humane inducem^nes or probabilities;
no, but by faith and holy fear, which being the things that indear us to God,
he again incites gods people to praise him for the privilege of such truths
revealed, and such graces exhibited, whereby they are so blessed and prospered
with peace and plenty by him, who as Lord paramount commands the whole
creation, and is obeyed by it both in heaven and earth; but he is Isreal's, and
Israel his after a more peculiar and excellent manner than any other nations,
or all the worlds besides, for which he concludes they ought to praise him
answerably. Psalm cxlvii.


1 O Ye people of the Lord be much busied in praising him, PRaise ye the Lord,
for it is good to sing praises unto our God: for it is pleasant, and praise is
co^ly.
no greater testimony of a good heart toward God, than to be praisefully
affected and disposed; nothing we can do more profitable and available to our
selves, for it keeps the heart in a holy frame and tunableness in the exercise
of faith, and love to Godward, and gains upon him exceedingly, who is much
delighted with that kind of service and sacrifice, to have the honor done him,
and homage paid him that's due unto him from the creature, specially his people
that do it with faith and understanding; it is a work well becoming these, to
magnify the Lord both for what he is in himself considered, and also to them
in grace and gracious dispensations.

2 Who indeed deserves praise but he*. The Lord does build up Jerusalem: he
gathers together the outcasts of Israel.
That is all in all, specially to his Church; it is he that lays the
foundation of it in election, and builds it progressively by faith and
sanctification, and finisheth his work of grace, and his peoples happiness in
glorification, like as out of all the world, Jerusalem is the chosen place of
his worship, and Israel a chosen people to worship him, both which he of mere
grace by an Almighty power does bless and build up unto a flourishing state
and condition, and that notwithstanding their many enemies. Yea, he brings his
people Israel out of their several misfortunes and dispersions, to be the sole
subjects of his Kingdom, and to be united under me their head, his substitute,
in a formed Church and Commonwealth, thereby to live happily, and serve him
acceptably, as in like sort he shall call his chosen all the world over into
one body, his Church, under one head Christ to serve and honor him, and
partake of his happiness. It is he that does both the one, and the other.

He heals the broken in heart, and binds up their wounds.
3 God many times is pleased to break and bruise his people with outward
afflictions, and inward depressions of mind and conscience by the weight of
sins, guilt, or his dis-favour, but it is but to find his grace and spirit
work, to show his skill, and to verify his word, who heals them again with
the balm of Gilead, the light of his countenance arises upon such a soul after
some conflict; for God is tender over his people, specially in distress, and
most specially in soul-agonies, when they pant under a troublesome spirit: he is
the true Samaritan that pours in wine and oil, and binds up the wound of his
Church and chosen, which the world without or trouble within has made.

He tells the number of the stars: he calls them all by their names.
4 He that can number the numberless stars from one end of the heavens to the
other, and knows them particularly and distinctly one by one, as many as they
are, having indeed made them all, and ordained each one its orb and office,
causing them to appear and act in their seasons orderly and successively
without confusion, notwithstanding their infinite number, as also their
variable, manifold, and inter-winding courses: he as well knows the number of
the stars on earth, as in heaven, his people, wheresoever dispersed upon the
face of the whole earth, to gather them into his body, as Israel into Canaan
from their dispersions, yea, every particular person and member of his Church
universal, knows he to bring him in, in his season, age, and generation, and
both where and how to employ him, in what station of the world, and place in
his Church for the service of him and it.

5 For as the Lord is great in knowledge, Great is our Lord, and of great
power: his understanding is infinite.
so also in power; there can no bounds be set to either, he is infinite in
understanding past our capacity, a fit object of of our faith, and subject of
our praise in all his proceedings.

6 As appears by the certain conclusions he brings out of uncertain
providence, The Lord lifts up the meek: he casts the wicked down to the
ground.
how those that meekly, and humbly undergo their time and portion of
sufferings, (the share of all his servants) wherein they seem to themselves and
others to be forlorn and helpless, he by an Almighty hand, beyond
imagination, relieves and releaseth them, makes them able with joy to overtop
their sorrows, how despicable soever they were in the eyes of the world,
whereas on the contrary, those that with worldly, pomp and affluence are
lifted up to do wickedly against him, or his Church oppressing them, or
contemning him; these, as high as they are in power and pride, and though they
seem to the world and themselves, in respect of their present condition to be
as immovable as a mountain, God notwithstanding, nay, therefore ruinates them,
and lets the world see the difference of good and bad, of them that fear him,
and also of them that fear him not.

Sings unto the Lord with thanksgiving: sing praise upon the harp unto our God.
7 Consider the thank-worthy goodness of God, to stir you up to zeal and
gratitude when you praise him in Psalms and Hymns, which neglect not to do,
even to do with all your might, and the best of your skill, both of voice and
instrument, and all too little to give God his due, specially we his peculiar
people, cannot do too much in this way, who by special privilege are the only
people of all the world, that worship the only true God.

Who covers the heaven with clouds, who prepares rain for the earth, who
makes grass to grow upon the mountains.
8 For it is he that by his power so alters the face of the heavens (as we often
see) from serene and clear, suddenly over-spreading them with thick and dark
clouds, so disposing it for the use and benefit of the earth, that needs as
well rain as fair weather, which he transmits by those clouds so convoked, and
thereby causes the earth to fructify, which else would be barren and like
fallow land; yea, the very mountains are made pasturable by this means, that
are not capable of the benefit of floods like lower grounds, yet by his
blessing from above are useful, and productive of grass and herbs.

He gives to the beast his food: and to the young ravens which cry.
9 And so provideth sustentation for the irrational creature, making nature to
supply the want of art and husbandry to the very beast, and that variously
too, according to the several kinds thereof, in apt times and places, producing
suitable food to the several Species of that vast Genus, and the birds as well
as beasts are sustained and provided for by him, yea, those that we least set
by, the raven, that though it be not meat for man, yet God (it being his
creature) provides meat for it, and that too, when they are young, and early
forsaken of the old, and so want skill to shift for themselves, yet have they
their cries heard which nature has taught them to put up, and their need
supplied by God, who even hears them.

10 Think not that it is any created excellency, He delights not in the
strenght of horse: he takes not pleasure in the legs of a man.
that commends men to God, he is not moved by such objects, and arguments as
man is, he bestows not his blessings upon man, either by or for his own, or the
creatures strength or exceellencie, to give success either therefore, or
thereafter.

11 No, The Lord takes pleasure in them that fear him: in those that hope in
his mercy.
that whch moves with God, is his own graces, active and stirring in the hearts
of his people; if you would be blessed of him, and be in favor with him, then
with filial fear endeavor his pleasing in all you do, and avoid the contrary,
and so walking before him, confidently trust in him for grace and mercy;
chearup your hearts in hope of his goodness and faithfulness toward you, this,
and only this is the way to be accepted of him, and blessed by him.

12 Wherein you that are his Church and people have the odds of all the world,
Praise the Lord, O Jerusalem: praise thy God, O Sion.
who for those extrinsecal created privileges of men, and horses may go beyond
you, but not as to God: it is your intrinsecal graces wrought by him, and
active toward him, that prefers you above all the world in his esteem. O
therefore praise the Lord, ye his Israel, his Church and chos^e, that have the
happiness to congregate at Jerusalem, to worship him there in his holy
mountain, which he has peculiarely set apart for the place to be worshipped in,
like as you for the people, (representing his church universal chosen out of
the world) to have the honor to worship and serve him from all others, on whom
he bestows his grace, and in whom he only takes content and pleasure; no
creature but the new creature, (since the fall) being delightful to him; for
which, they therefore that are so, ought to praise him, even for this their
happy propriety and interest in him.

For he has strengthened the bars of thy gates: he has blessed thy children
within thee.
13 Whereby it is that Jerusalem (both real and mystical) is fortified against
all earthly power by divine protection, stronger than horse or man; the sons
and daughters of the Church, whereof God is the father, is blessed in that
their relation and interest, and are under the Lords special care and power for
their preservation, as Jerusalem with the inhabitants, and faithful
worshippers therein, is and shall be secured by the special presence of God
there resident.

He makes peace in thy borders: and fills thee with the finest of the wheat.
14 To whom he gives peace and preservation, spite of her many enemies, even in
all the borders of Israel, who by the blessing of God in their own land, enjoy
peace and tranquillity, as his Church and people shall peace of conscience,
yea, and with peace, plenty, and that of the best of earthly blessings, of the
flower of wheat, the staff of temporal life, like as his Church shall be
happy, as in peace of conscience, so in Angels food, the joy of the holy
Ghost, testifying the mind of God, his love and favor toward them, the best
upholder of life spiritual.

He sends forth his commandment upon earth: his word runs very swiftly.
15 This thy God, O Israel, is he that commands all the world over, and
whatsoever throughout the whole creation he pleases effectually to will, is by
all creatures obeyed accordingly, and can be no other; nothing can give
impediment to his will, all second causes being at his beck to do his pleasure,
so that the word of command is no sooner given to any creature, or creatures
from one end of the world to the other, but it is obeyed, and the thing acted
that he commanded, the whole course of nature being nothing else, but a ready
and actual fulfilling of those things which he commands.

16 Witness the several and wonderful effects thereof, He gives snow like
wool: he scatters the hoar frost like ashes.
how in the winter time by Gods appointmen and transmutation, the earth is
quite changed in form and complexion, being covered over with snow, a white and
light substance, as sheep with w^oll, which he transmits from above, and makes
the hoarie frost lie upon the face of the earth scattered and dispersed, as
ashes when they are blown about by the wind.

17 Also the hail when it falls, He casts forth his ice like morsels: who can
stand before his cold.
it is he, that as he formed it above, so sends it down below, not in one
entire coagulated body, as is the nature of ice, which would overwhelm and
destroy the creature, but in those showers and dispersions piecemeal, as we
see. Who lives that is not sensible of the pinching weather that in winter time
he is pleased to send, and that is able to endure the extremity of cold
without helps and arts whereby to keep them warm.

18 And as before he sent out his word, He sends out his word and melt^th
them: he causes his wind to blow, and the waters flow.
and that caused them to be both snow and frost, when and whilst they were, so
when he pleases to change the scene, and that the earth and waters shall
return to their proper elementarie appearance again; he does but give the word,
and it is done; as it made them, so it dissolves them; he commands but a moist
thawing wind (for the winds also are his, and at his dispose) to blow, and that
melts the snow and ice into the water, whereof it was congealed, and so
reduces the rivers, which in that could season were bound up with a firm
unmovable body of ice, into their motion and current as before, with an
overflowing augmentation, by the dissolving of those waterie Meteors.

He shows his word unto Jacob: his statutes and his judgments unto Israel
19 By the word of his power creative and providential, he is thus seen and
known all the world over, no people nor nation but partake thereof evidently.
But to Israel, Jacobs posterity, his Church and chosen people, does he besides
that, hold forth another manner of word, to wit, a word of grace, declaring his
whole will to them, and government over them, not only as a Creator, but a
Lord and Savior, and so also owning them for his, not only as creatures, but
sons and servants under the dispensations of grace on his part toward them, and
laws and ordinances of holiness and righteousness on their part toward him.

He has not dealt so with any nation* and as for his judgments, they have not
known them. Praise ye the Lord.
20 This peculiar privilege has the Israel of God above the whole world
besides, and that by the mere and free grace of God, all nations in nature
being alike to him, it is neither the people, nor the place that makes the
difference, but his election, which for any reason out of himself might have
passed upon any other people, as well as you; they might have had the sun of
righteousness, the star of Jacob risen in their Hemisphere, the word and will
of God, savingly, and sanctifyingly revealed to them, as it is to you, and you
have been in darkness, as they are at this day; but in mercy it is quite
contrary, you have what they want, and they want what you have, even all the
world are in darkness, and in the shadow of death for want of the word of light
and life, of holiness and righteousness on his part and theirs, but you, be ye
therefore stirred up to suitable praise and thanksgiving, O ye his peculiar
people, for such rare and singular mercies and benefits, so peculiarly bestowed
upon you.

The cxlviii. PSALM.
David being himself a man of a praisefull spirit, and an enlarged heart to
Godward in that way, feeding that happy temper by frequent observations and
and deductions. He also factours for God, and negotiates in this Psalm with all
things, in all places to be industrious in his duty, he summons heaven and
earth to pay their tribute, and do their homage to the most high God, for all
they themselves are, and have, as being the maker of them, and giver of that,
and who himself is all that, and much more. And the better to effect his design
when he has first bespoke them in the general, from heaven to earth, he also
makes a scedule, or enumeration of several created existencies of both sor^s,
and of different rancks, ages, and sexes, exciting them all severally by name,
to make up a joint harmony and Quire, according to their utmost capacities of
praisefull solemnization to the Lord paramount. But principally, and above all,
his Church and chosen people, so much obliged to him beyond all, for his (...)
love to them in exalting them so high in his favor, by Covenant-in^^^est.
Psalm cxlviii.


1 ALl creatures that have their being from the Lord, PRaise ye the Lord:
praise ye the Lord from the heavens: praise him in the heights.
one and other in their several kinds, places, and offices wherein he has
disposed them, set ye forth his glorious greatness and goodness, unto the
praise thereof. More particulary all ye rational and irrational one, whose
position and residence is above in the heavens, whether within the Imperial, or
on this side it, be occupied in his praises according to your several natures,
some actively toward God, others declaratively toward men, which is the end
of all our beings, and of that your advancement also into such a superiority of
place, and excellency of nature and offices, above sublunaries.

Praise ye him all his Angels: praise ye him all his hosts.
2 But in particular, principally and primarily, ye that are his glorious
Angels, the immediate favorites and domestics in the court of heaven, which
in infinite number he has created to serve and honor him there, and dignified
with eminency and proximitie to himself above all his creatures, even to the
numberless number of you his heavenly hosts do I speak, who are ordained to do
his commands, that commands in chief over all created beings how excellent
soever; do you I say, who ow it, and are enabled to it above all, join with the
rest of your fellow creatures in this duty of praise (your proper office) to
mend the music.

Praise ye him sun and moon: praise ye him all ye stars of light.
3 Also you inanimate creatures that possess the suburbs of those celestial
mansions, and in your kinds are glorious and excellently useful, endowed with
singular proprieties, and significant representations of the greatness and
goodness of him that made you that you are, and honored you with the places
you hold, and the offices you perform: even all the Lunaries of heaven, great
and small, sun, moon, and stars, that by day and night according to your
appointments and capacities enlighten the earth, and the inhabitants thereof,
act you your part in praising the Lord by doing his will, and manifesting his
power and glory, run your courses, keep your orders, do your offices, that all
times and seasons which are ruled by you, that are ruled by him, may exalt him.

4 From the lowest to the highest of all those several spheres, Praise him ye
heavens of heavens: and ye waters that be above the heavens.
all which are above the firmament, wherein are diversely situate, first the
fixed stars, and then the moveable planets in their several and subordinate
orbs, and the ponderous clouds that weigh so heavy, containing such oceans of
waters in you, and yet hang so high above the aerie regions; all you excellent
creatures of several natures in your gradual existences above in the heavens,
do you declare (as indeed you do) the praiseworthy work-manship of him that is
above all, that has so orderly disposed you in that vast expanse, such variety
and infinite of created lights and clouds, fire and water that do severally
inhabit those upper lofts and chambers over our heads, without confusion,
intermixtion, and destruction of nature, which else would follow.

5 Do you and every of you jointly and severally according to that power, Let
them praise the name of the Lord: for he commanded, and they were created.
wisdom and goodness that shines forth in you, declare the glorious skill of
such celestial arts, to the praise of the Artificer in those admirable
transcendent properties of his, who was able to bring forth such things of such
use, and in such an order by his mere fiat, he but bid them be, and they were;
he made use of no other tools or instruments to build so great and strange a
structure, but his bare word of command, which gave being to all those
celestial altitudes, with the stars and meteors that inhabit them.

6 And as his word gave them a being at first, He has also stablished them for
ever and ever: he has made a decree which shall not pass.
so also did he command their perpetuity, and orderly existence and influence
to the last, wherefore it is, that they have continued all this while, and must
do so, from one generation to another to the end of the world, not by the power
and efficacy of their own natures (which in that regard are as all things else
are, reductive to a nothingness every moment) but by his eternal decree and
edict past upon them is it, that these supernatural creatures are the same in
existence that ever they were, as also in their motions and operations, which
are guided by God his appointment and providence, unalterably to those ends and
effects, for which he has ordained them.

Praise the lord from the earth, ye dragons and all deeps.
7, 8 So also all ye creatures though in inferior situations, who yet have the
same Creator, and are the products of the self-same wisdom and power, Fire and
hail, snow and vapor, stormy wind fulfilling his word
that the heavens and the things contained in them are, whose habitations are
in these lower parts terrestial, or aerial, do you also praise him. Let the
great God have glory from all his wondrous works, one as well as another,
from of the globe of the earth and sea here below, as well as from heaven on
high. Let his immense power be magnified in framing such depths, as well as
heights, even those vast and profound seas, adequate for those huge and
formidable whales, and sea-dragons which he has made and disposed of there as
their proper place and element. And so ye exhalations and meteors (whether of
fire or water) that by the force of the sun are drawn from the earth into the
air, and there by an Almighty power severally disposed of into diverse forms
and beings, and to several ends, and all as pleases God, whether unto thunder,
lightenings, hail, snow, rain, mists, storms and tempests, all of you jointly,
severally, as God pleases to use you, sometimes for good, sometimes for evil
whose will in both you must, and do obey, acting as by him, and not your
selves; so for him to fulfill his command, and do the errand whereon he sends
you; set ye forth the power and greatness of God to his praise in doing his
pleasure.

9 And ye earthly heights, Mountains and all hills, fruitful trees and all
Cedars.
as well as waterie depths, ye hills and mountains of several quantities and
dimensions, higher and lower, greater and less; also ye trees that grow upon
the earth of several natures, to several uses, some for fruit, and some for
timber, as all of you are of and from the Lord, so are you for and to him, you
ought to be to his praise, who gave you your several kinds and existences, for
the use and benefit of man.

10 Ye that exceed these vegetives (which yet are excellent in their kind
toward the making up the beautiful frame and order of nature) you, Beasts and
a^ cattle, creeping things and flying fowl.
I say, that are a form higher in the creation; ye animals endowed with sense,
as well as life, and first ye four footed beasts, and cattle of several sorts
and kinds which are so manifold, great and small, one and other; yea, and you
(that by gods ordination are under the same Genus, but of a far different
Species) that instead of going upon feet, are wonderfully facilitated to creep
upon your bellies, as also you several fowl that live in another element, the
air, dexterously conveying your selves by flight from place to place, with
wings instead of feet, do you in your several kinds, natures and places, set
forth the Almighty power and wisdom of the Creator of all things.

11, 12 And you who enjoy the best of beings, Kings of the earth, and all
people, Princes, and all Judges of the earth.
next the angels, comprehending the perfection of all living creatures, Both
young men and maidens: old men and children.
vegetative, and sensitive, with a superaddition of a reasonable soul: you men,
and of men principally, you that are principal: ye Kings and great men of the
world, lead you the way, and go before others in good example, that have so
much cause above others to magnify God, and celebrate his praise. And all ye
people also, not only in, but under authority, both high and low, do you the
like. Chiefly, ye great men, look you to it, to whom it principally appertains,
and who for the most part are most deficient, and too high to do homage; but be
your power or wisdom never so great, yet be so wise and lowly, as to let God be
both greater and wiser, and be you never so beneficial in your places, yet let
God be acknowledged the best benefactor by you, and those that are under you,
who is above all, as in greatness, (the sovereign King, and Judge of all the
earth,) so in goodness, administering righteous judgment, and yielding just
protection. And though principally, yet not only does this duty of praise
belong to great men, no nor yet to men, whether you respect their age or sex,
for though their privilege in both regards engage them comparatively beyond
others, yet it belongs to all of all ages and sexes both men and women, to them
that are in their prime for mind and body, with strength and beauty, as young
men and maids, and them also that are growing to it, or gone beyond it, old men
and children; for as in civil government there are degrees of places and
offices higher and lower, as princes and peopele; so in nature there are, and
must be degrees of ages and succession of generations, as fathers and children,
both which are respectively thereby beautified with orderly subsistence, which
else would be a confused paritie, each setting forth the praiseworthy wisdom
of God in their gradual subordinations, as high and low, so young and old, some
governing, some governed, one generation coming, another going, to the praise
of the God of nature, that so orders things in the great Commonwealth thereof,
and in that variety of creatures, ages, and sexes, as to produce so beautiful
and orderly a progression from one end of the world to the other.

13 All the whole creation consisting of infinite particulars, Let them praise
the name of the Lord: for his name alone is excellent, his glory is above the
earth and heaven.
never all of them to be enumerated in their several kinds and capacities, let
them join in this harmony of Halelu-jah; celestial and terrestrial creatures,
every of them severally, and all of them jointly, make up a Quire of praising
God for his praiseworthy excellencies of several sorts specified, in their
several kinds, some (as men and angels) actually offer up, others (as all other
creatures) declaratively set forth the greatness and goodness, power, wisdom,
and glory of their maker, who therefore made them, and who excels all created
excellencies, all and every of them being but borrowed from the fountain of his
sole sufficiency. He only is originally, and they derivatively good, whose
transcendent, Majesty and glorious excellency inherent in himself, is
infinitely superlative to all earthly Majesty's, and all natural excellencies,
whether in the heavens above, or the earth here beneath, yea, though you could
fancy them all in one collective body, and frame an Idea of all created
perfections (the glory, riches, beauty, order, of all creatures) in one
entire resplendencie and representation yet is he alone infinitely beyond them
all, in all their several excellencies jointly considered, and to be praised
both above them, and for them, who himself both is all, above all, and all in
all.

He also exalts the horn of his people, the praise of all his saints; even of
the children of Israel, a people near unto him. Praise ye the Lord.
14 He is worthy praise from all creatures for what they are, and have
derivatively from him; but that which is of greatest note, and most
praise-worthie, is the Crown of all the rest, which he has set upon his
peoples head, his Covenant-mercie and grace, and that not only in promise, but
performance, having in and by me (as he has and shall spiritually by and in
Christ) wonderfully blessed and prospered his people, brought them out of all
their sorrows, and set them above all their enemies, and therefore is he if to
the creatures, much more to his elect and chosen people, especially the called
and sanctified ones among them, matter of praise, who has exatalted and
preferred them to that praise-worthie privilege of being his in a peculiar
singular way of grace and adoption, differing from all men and all creatures
besides: I mean his Israel, the people of his Covenant made with their
forefathers, specially they that are in Covenant, the faithful seed of
faithful Abraham, Isaac and Israel, a people that through grace are precious
and nearly related to him, not for any inherent natural excellency, or
meritoriousness in them above the rest of the created world, which far
out-strips them in motives of that nature, but because freely chosen,
especially if effectually called, grace being the only motive that made him
difference them from, and indear them above all the world for sons and
servants, redeemed out of the hands of all their enemies, and exalted to
participation of fellowship and glory with Christ, the head of his Church,
whom respectively Israel and I resemble. Therefore as he has thus exalted you
above all, so do you him, with praise proportionable to his goodness so
superlative and peculiar.

The cxlix. PSALM.
David in these five last Psalms is treating upon several Theams to enlarge the
praises of God in the hearts and mouths of men, principally of his people, and
therefore he intermingles common and created, with special and peculiar
excellencies and benefits, of which latter sort this Psalm consists. viz. of
Gods singular good will to his people and saints, whom he styles here and else
where (in diverse Psalms) by the name of Israel, because Israel was or ought to
be such, not only in outward election, but inward vocation, for such (at
least) they figured, and therefore are the terms promiscuously used. And these
he would first have lay a foundation of joy in believing, and knowing their
superlative happiness in their near relation to, and interest in God, and Gods
in them, and favor to them, and then to make the result of that their joy,
excess of praise; yea, he would have them discern their condition, as well
glorious and honorable, as beneficial, and joy thereafter in absolute
certainty and tranquillity of mind praise-fully and proportionably enlarged.
And concludes with a prophetical prayer of Isreal's happiness now under him (as
the saints shall have certain and triumphant felicity by Christ) in their
enemies vanquishments both many and great, to the utmost of what is promised
and threatened respectively, for which honor he would have them as to be
sensible of it, so to be praise-full for it. Psalm cxlix.


1 O Ye the people and chosen of the Lord out of all the earth, PRaise ye the
Lord: sing unto Lord a new the song, and his praise in the congregation of
saints.
be you conscionable and careful to give God his praises which he deserves,
specially at your hands above all the world besides, let not your praises, that
are heirs of grace, and partakers of such preheminences, be like the sons of
nature, the children of this world, who inherit but the good things thereof,
raise up your hearts to a higher pin, celebrate you his name after another
sort, as he is singular in goodness to you, so be you in gratefulness to him,
yea, let every special mercy, which in special grace at any time he
vouchsafesh unto you, be solemnized afresh from time to time by thanksgiving,
with praiseful affections and united harmony in Temple-musick at the solemn
meetings of his people, there to worship and honor him, especially his saints.

Let Israel rejoice in him that made him, let the children of Sion be joyful
in their King.
2 Well may Israel afford to sing special praise and new songs to the Lord, whom
he has pecualiarly chosen out of all the world, and so made them as it were a
new people, begotten again out of the lost-lump of mankind, not only by the
power of creation as at first, which in effect the fall dissolved, but by the
grace of adoption and covenant, smitten freely with their fore-father, and in
him with them. Let this prerogative royal exceedingly affect the whole Church
and people of God, thankfully and praisefully toward him, and comfortably in
themselves, by the faithful apprehension of so rich mercy vouchsafed them, as
to be not subjects at large as the whole earth is, but even sons and servants,
chosen by him to be his, to serve and worship him in Sion, where and how he
has appointed, out of all the world besides, that follow their own inventions;
and condiscending himself to be theirs in grace, protection, and government, so
as to none else.

Let them praise his n^me in the dance: let them sing praises unto him with the
timbrel and harp.
3 Let them be so ravished with this peculiarity of the grace, mercy and love
of God unto them, as to lay out themselves again upon God with the utmost of
their strength, skill, and affection in his praises, by all ways and means as
may best express them to his glory, and increase of their own grace and
consolation.

4 For though all mankind be degenerated by the fall, For the Lord takes
pleasure in his people: he will beautify the meek with salvat^^^.
so that he that made them has no pleasure in them. Yet has it pleased him to
elect a few out of many, an Israel whom he has made and (as it were)
re-created to be his and to serve him, and in these he takes contentment, to do
them good and to receive the returns thereof in praise and thanksgiving from
them, and to that very end will he show himself powerful for them, and gracious
to them that meekly wait, and faithfully depend upon him in delivering and
exalting them after a wonderful sort to the admiration of all the earth, that
shall have them in singular esteem for a non-such, for such a people serving
such a God of salvation as is not in the world besides, like as he shall crown
his sanctified ones, his faithful spiritual Israel, and their graces with the
eternal salvation in heaven, triumphant over all, and out of all this worlds
miseries to his unspeakable praise, and the worlds wonder that here despise
them, as the Gentiles did us, till God wrought a change.

5 Let the Lords people his holy ones, Let the saints be joyful in glory: let
them sing aloud upon their beds.
which all Israel should be, consider the glorious state and condition they are
advanced into by being so, even the sons of the most high, heirs of heaven, a
glory beyond all earthly pre-eminence or created excellency whatsoever, and
in this let them comfort themselves, both above all comforts and discomforts
the world can afford or inflict, and with joyful praises magnify the Lord that
has done so great things for them, and with sweet peace and tranquillity of
mind possess their souls to the un-utterable consolation thereof. A type of
which, is that blessed condition God is investing his Church and people Israel
into at present, by and under me, making them triumphantly glorious over all
their enemies abroad, with abundance of security and peace at home, wherein
they ought exceedingly to rejoice, and joyfully to praise the God of heaven,
that has thus advanced them, and altered their condition, even as those
glorified saints in heaven do, and shall, that there enjoy an absolute and
everlasting rest.

Let the high praise^ of God be in their mouth, and a two edged sword in their
hand.
6, 7 Let Israel observe the singular mercies to them, surpassing all to all
people, and the mighty victories which God bestows upon them over their
enemies (types of the saints adoption, To execute vengeance upon the heathen,
and punishments upon the people.
and the conquests they shall have over their corruptions, and the Church her
adversaries) which by the power of his might shall be subdued, thereby to fill
their mouths with proportionable praises to a God so great and graciously
good. Let them be strong in strength, and with a mighty irresistible power
prevail against all opposers as indeed they shall, like as shall Christ by his
word and spirit in the mouth of his Ministers to the setting up of his Kingdom
all the world over; Israel shall be prevalent over the heathen and Gentile
nations round about, that have so cruelly vexed and plagued them, their turn is
now come to be under, and ours to be over, to revenge and punish Gods
dishonor, and his peoples miseries upon them, as the Church shall triumph over
the wicked at the glorious appearing of Christ's Kingdom.

8 Yea, To bind their Kings with chains, and their nobles with fetters of iron.
as well Princes as people shall be brought into subjection, Israel shall have
dominion over all her enemies of what rank so ever, and shall lead captivity
captive under me, as Christ and his Church shall do, overcome at last their
over-comers; we shall have a resurrection out of our long endured miseries, and
be freemen, when as ours and the Churches enemies, how great soever, shall
have their declension and abasement, no power on earth can hinder the powerful
decree of heaven, nor resist the execution thereof, when the set time is come
as now it is, neither Kings nor nobles, who then shall be but like other men,
easily vanquishable for all their power and authority, as they shall be by
Christ, either brought into subjection and fealty to him in his Kingdom of
grace, or led in triumph by him at his appearing in his Kingdom of glory, when
his Church shall be triumphant.

9 What the Lord has promised in his peoples behalf, To execute upon them the
judgment written: this honor have all his saints. Praise ye the Lord.
and threatened to their enemies, is now to be fulfilled, even their
destruction or subjection, not by their own power, but by the power of his word
and promise, who is faithful and almighty, therefore shall it come to pass,
and in the faith thereof shall they prevail under me, as shall the Church of
Christ under him, either ministerially to vanquish them, or ultimately to
triumph over them in a final and total destruction. This glorious privilege
have the people of God, his Israel, which are or should be saints; and his
saints, his really sanctified and adopted ones, which are indeed his only
Israel, thus by the power of his might and the faithfulness of his never
failing promise to overcome or overthrow all their rebellious opposers, and
oppressors. Therefore both one and other, Israel now and Israel hereafter,
even all the people of God, chew the cud upon this your happy condition,
through the mercy and grace of God in Christ, and praise him for it.

The cl. PSALM.
David, never weary of this theme, presses hard upon all, principally the
Church and people of God to praise the Lord, and that both in and by his
commanded worship, as also by the book and borrowed helps of nature, creation,
and providence, and the glorious manifestations he makes of hims^^f herein, and
this to be done with Heart and Art, to the utmost of both. He concludes, that
all flesh by nature is bound to do it, and Israel by grace. Psalm cl.


PRaise ye the Lord, praise God in his sanctuary: praise him in the firmament
of his power.
1 YE that are the people of the Lord, be much employed in this singular service
of praising and magnifying him, that is so much yours above others, and that
have his peculiar residence amongst you in his sanctuary, the resemblance of
heaven, where is his proper residence, such is the condiscention of his Divine
greatness and Majesty to be worshipped, as in heaven by glorified saints, so
also here by sanctified ones, which be sure you neglect not, that are his
chosen privileged people, worhsip him here below with your minds above, as you
extend your voices, so enlarge your graces, eye him, and reverence him in his
heavenly sanctuary, when you draw nigh to praise him in his earthly, where he
principally resides in glory and Majesty, even above the firmament which so
manifests his greatness, and magnifies his power in the infinite extension of
it, and the variety of excellent creatures that are in it, to draw your soul
upward; though your bodies are prostrate, and to give you to understand, that
it is the great God of heaven, whose wonders shine in the firmament above, that
you are to magnify in your sanctuarie-praises here beneath.

2 Whose works of power are not only in the firmament, Praise him for his
mighty acts: praise him according to his excellent greatness.
but extended (like it) every where upon the face of the whole earth, for all
which both above and below you ought to praise him, and that with faith and
reverence proportionable to such powerful efficatiousness, that can bring forth
such wonderful effects of creative and providential omnipotency, as every
where he does, especially for his people, all which shows, with what
surpassing greatness he excels, whose throne is so high above all, and his
power in and over all; the glory and reverence whereof as he expects it, so we
ought to render it with praisefull adoration, that are the peculiar people of
such a God.

3, 4, 5 Muster up all your forces to this work and duty, Praise him with the
sound of the trumpet: praise him with the psaltery and harp.
Praise him in his sanctuary with the utmost expression can be made, Praise
him with the timbrel and dance: prai^e him with the stringed instruments, and
organs.
tune all your stringed instruments, and that unto the highest key, and make
your wind instruments speak out aloud. Let nature, Art, Praise him upon the
loud cymbals: praise him upon the high sounding cymbals.
and grace, put forth themselves to the utmost, with the highest affections and
utmost expressions celebrate his praises on earth as in heaven, who deserves
it, and whose deserts do far transcend it.

6 Let all flesh breathing give glory to God their Creator, Let every thing
that has breath, praise the Lord. Praise ye the Lord.
and praise his name that is so praise-worthie in the eyes of all, by the
manifold manifestations of his infinite and superlative excellencies, in their
own particulars, and in the whole creation so plainly appearing; but most
especially ye that are especially the Lords, praise ye the Lord, not only for
the generality of greatness and goodness, that all the world partakes the
knowledge and benefit of, but be ye so ravished with the peculiaritie of the
grace, mercy, and love of God to you respectively, as to put forth your selves
in a return of praise above nature, suitable and acceptable, magnifying grace
with grace, singing and making melody in your hearts to the Lord your God.

FINIS.

