VINDICIAE SABBATHI, OR, AN ANSWER TO TWO TREATISES OF MASTER BROADS.

The one, Concerning the Sabbath or seventh Day.

The other, Concerning the Lord's Day or first of the Week With a survey of all
the rest which of late have written upon that subject, by GEORGE ABBOT.

Psalm 36. 9. In thy Light shall we see Light.

LONDON Printed by I. D. for Henry Overton and are to be sold at his shop
entering into Popes-head-Alley out of Lumbard-street Anno 1641.

TO HIS MVCH HONORED FATHER IN LAW Mr. WILLIAM PUREFEY OF CALDEcoate in
Warwickshire, Esquire.
SIR.
THe times favoring truth it becomes every one, now that God has given
opportunity, to bring out of his store both new and old as he is provided. This
which I here present to you and the World is both, for it deals with our
primitive English Antisabbatarians, Breerewood and Broad, but chiefly with the
latter, because none else (that I know of) have undertaken him being not in
print, and therefore known, but to a few as also with the whole cluster of our
modern Writers upon that subject, which are too many to name except with an
etc. For the plot of the times ha^s been against the power of Godliness, which
could never been pulled down whilst the Sabbath stood upright, and therefore
our Patrons of impiety have rightly projected to take that out of the way which
stood so much in theirs, and to remove that same holy interruption which God in
his care and wisdom had put to our days and ways of Worldly natures, that
so they might bring all to a level, by paring away Sabbath^ and Sermons, which
was the only way to mount them to the height of their design of bringing
Godliness to a form, and all things (but Episcopacy) from ius Divinum to i^s
Humanum, that they may be all in all; but all this while they have kicked
against the pricks for which they now smart, nor could they expect other then
that they which opposed the rest of God should have their own rest molested,
for God will find a time to bring truth to light, though she wade through a
long Eclipse, and to shut up error in darkness, and her abetters in disgrace as
now they are, for with the froward he has threatened to show himself froward,
and he has made it good, to the praise of the glory of his power.

Your ever obliged Son in Law GEORGE ABBOT.

Dear friend,
I Doubt not that God shall have honor by this Book from others, let him have
the honor of it from your self. When we come to give up our accounts, we
must acknowledge our receipts, first as from God, Matthew. 25. 20.
Master thou deliveredst me five talents; then our gain and improvement by
and of them unto God, for we trade for our Master and not for our selves.
There is light in the Treatise, more then has shown in former times or
Authors, as the declaration of Christ to the World was progressive, so is the
illumination of the spirit, not only in particular Men's Souls, but in the
whole Church, which must have her growth as well as particular Men, and what if
somebody in after times may stand on your shoulders, and see further, let God
yet be gloryfied, though he make the feet of posterity to stand as high as our
heads, so we (blessed be God) have shorter shadows then our predecessors,
and still the more light arises the less shall be the shadows, till they be
none at all. It was Gods providence that brought Mr Broads Manu-script to your
hands, and that thereupon stirred up your spirit to do something against the
fresh forces that should come in now of late, to fight against the Sabbath. God
did not tell you his Errand when he sent the Book to you, but the event is the
finger that points to Gods providence, as Time is the Mid wife of Truth. God
found out you who being vacant from other employments might the better work in
this Vine yard, you, who being not ambitious of humane (...) named learning,
should keep close to the Scripture, the spirit, and reason, without doting
upon names of Fathers etc. which we in these times are mad upon, and so hinder
our own growth by putting their old spectacles on ou^ Noses which dim our
Eyes, and think it not Scholler-like to go beyond Aristotle.

This I must needs say, the whole Book savours of spiritual matter, and
argues that it came from the Spirit, and promises to breed Spirit in the
Reader, and truly all Scripture-knowledge should be written as the Scripture
was, and that is by the carriage of the holy Ghost. Holy men wrote (says he)
as they were carried by the holy spirit, so should, so are holy men carried
now, not by selfe-humours and ends. Let the wilful blind slight it, (...) 2.
15.
bark and scorn it, yet the spiritual man is judged of no man though
himself discern all things. God will most probably reveal his Sabbath, to
them that best keep it here, and that shall enjoy his Sabbatisme hereafter,
and they are his people. I verily believe thus much of the Book that it
overthrowes and confutes the Antagonists, and if they can produce no better
reasons and records then they have, it will be Master of the field, for me
thinks Mr Broad is very weak and loose when compared with yours. I could wish
your Book a speedy birth if any, that it might give pauze to others that
intend any thing of that kind to the Press. Commit it to Gods patronage, for
he is the fittest Patron it can have. My Prayer shall be that your spirit may
be such as may procure a blessing on the Book, by giving it to God first, and
then his Church, in a spirit of Humility and self-denial; see Gods providence
and his assistance, see your end in Writing, Printing; see what a seasonable
time and opportunity of good; and be confident of this that in spiritual men
it will breed spiritual knowledge and affection, whether it carry them in all
points of judgment or no, Vale.

The Author of this answer desires the Reader to take notice of these things:
Broad faithfully transcribed, and my answer following, saving that in some
places you shall find some things passed by without answer, which I take to be
not much material, and therefore to avoid tediousnes I pass them, but I had
not dealt faithfully, if I had not transcribed them being his.

Lord and Gideon) lead me, which are the best satisfiers of godly and
reasonable men, though where his Quotations come into my way, I have not
utterly balked them.

BP White, Dr Heylin and Mr Dow came forth, and therefore for their sakes I
have in diverse places enlarged my Book; wherein I have removed those
stumbling blocks which seem to lie in the way of this doctrine of the
Sabbath, by answering their colorable arguments against it.

That whereas Mr Primerose has put out another Sabbath of later Edition, I
have also perused it, and such things as I found any whit materially to clash (
de novo) against some particulars in this Answer, I have particularly answered
them, not naming him because they are so very few, the rest of his Treatise
receiving answer herein, upon the occasion of other men's Arguments.

If perhaps you find not every collateral Argument

VINDICIAE SABBATHI.
Broad.
MAster Breerewood in his Treatise of the Sabbath.

1. Nature teaches to set apart Page 24. 41.
some time for the worship of God, but not one day in seven, nor a whole day,
neither yet to forbear all work in that time as the Israelites were bound to
do on the Sabbath.

2 Gods Commandment touching the Sabbath, Page 64. 40. 41.
was first given in the wilderness, it being limited to the Jews Sabbath, only
the Jews Sabbath is vanished, and Gods Commandment was not, nor could not, be
translated from the Jews Sabbath, to the Lords day.

3 We are bound to keep the Lords day not by Page 37.
any divine Commandment, but by the constitution of the Church only.

Thus has Master Breerewood written in his book, and more I do not write in
mine, but it will be said yet in answer to an objection, he will have the
generallity of Gods Commandment to be moral and perpetual. Answer. It is
true, and I cannot sufficiently marvel thereat.

The Objection he frames against himself is this. Page 4^.
If the old Sabbath vanished and Gods Commandment was limited, and fixed to
that day only; then is one of Gods Commandments perished. Hereunto to he
answers that the generality of that Commandment is a Law of nature and
remains. The law of Nature touching the sancti^ying of some time, and Gods
command touching the sanct^fying of the seventh day were two diverse laws, The
one a general law only, the other a special law only.
But if there be a generallity of that commandment how was that commandment
limited and fixed to the Sabbath only? Further he should have considered that
the like may as well be said of the precepts of Holy Days. Nature teaches to
have some times of vacancy, for one reason God appointed the Sabbath to be a
time of vacancy, for other reasons the holy days. Shall not the law of nature
now be the general of all these precepts indifferently, as well of the
precepts of the holy days as of the precepts of the Sabbath.

Answer.
In this thing I must take Master Breerewoods part against you, for hereby is
the moral D^r. Heylin quoteth the schoolem. n, Patt. 2. page 163. saying, that
the fourth Commandment is placed in the Decalogue, in quantu^^ est preceptum
morale et natural, that is, say they, Quantum ^d hoc quod homo depu tet
^^^uod, tempus vit^e s^^ ad vac (...) di^i^is. page 162 So Bishop White makes
the Law o: Nature to be involved in the 4th Commandment page 121. and is still
obli ga^^y to the worlds end, Page 1^0.
law of God kept entire without a mayme, which is very requisite, seeing that
the Decalogue is granted to be an explanatory reinforcing of the law of entire
Nature imprinted in us by creation (but much defacedby our fall) and being
honored with those eminences of priority, and signs of perpetuity immediately
from God himself upon Mount Sinai, Such as were his twice writing them with
his own finger, Touching this priority of Gods own writing them, see how
emphatically it is expressed by God himself, Exodus 24. 12. in way of su^
ereminency, by virtue of that ^r^viledge, to those which Moses had written a
little before, ver. 4 Moreover also s^e this difference lively intim^ed by
Moses Deuteronomy. 4. 13, where he makes the Covenant to consist in the ten
Commandments written by God himself, and speaks in the following verse, in
way of dimination of the other lawesin comparison of them calling them statutes
and judgments which were 1. taught by him, and secondly to be observed in the
land whither they went to possess it.
and voted also by his Spirit through the mourth of Moses to be the Ten
Commandments (...) 1 Deuteronomy. 4. and put into the Arc as perpetual rules for
the Catholic Church, whereof it was a Type. None of all which Prerogatives
was the Ceremonial law crowned withal, for that it was as a vanishing shadow
suitable only to the Hemispheare of those times. But the decalogue being the
very Law of Nature explained and redelivered, must as well now as ever have for
its substance a general aim at all men; though in some circumstances it may
be more peculiar to the Jews then others, by reason of the time, place, and
people, to whom it was renewed; Like as almost all other Scripture is for
substance common and for circumstances proper, because they were most an end
written occasionaly. Put case then that this Commandment was given only to
the Jews (as you affirm) and so were abrogatiue; yet may the Law of Nature
be well presupposed and included in it; (as you your self afterward
acknowledge, it is in your 8. Chapter in the answer you give there to the fifth
opinion) for who knows not that in those ten words much more is meant then
manifested, So that if so it be granted that the Law of Nature and this Law be
not the same in all points yet are they not two diverse laws but the same in
substance And thus much in effect Master Breerewood affirms in his second
Tract: page 3. Moral (says he) is that which pertains to manners; 1. Either
by the instinct of Nature as belonging to the inward Law written in our hearts:
or Secondly, by the instruction of Discipline as being of the outward Law
pronounced of God, as that of observing the seventh Day: so that it may
beetermed Natural, as being, not of the institution of Nature; but of the
disciplining of Nature: Not of Nature as it was f^rst ordained of God, but as
after informed by him. For indeed this fourth Commandment both as it was at
first instituted in Paradise, and now revived on Mount Sinai, is but the law of
Nature explained and enlarged according to the will of God in this particular
for reasons and uses, whereof created nature was not capable but by revelation.
And what though the Law of nature be the generality, as well to the precepts
of the Jewish holidays as of the Sabbath, this shows the superexcellency of
the Sabbath above them therefore, and its equality with nature seeing God makes
use of it so especially, to exhibit the commandment of nature by, amongst the
Laws thereof.

But now in that opinion, wherein you and Master Breerewood jumpe, I must
differ from you both, to wit, that now only the general Law of nature
remains (which is that some time is to be sanctified to Gods worship) and
that this fourth commandment, which you call Gods special commandment, is
utterly abrogated. For as for the Law of nature which consists only in an
indefinite sequestring of some time to the service of God, it comes infinitely
short of that compleatnes and solemnity of time which our necessity requires,
and which God deserves at our hands, and which (if he may be his own
spokesman) he commands also. Indeed to set apart some time as perhaps an
hour in a Day, or some such like time for prayer or meditation, it may be
nature or conscience would affirm it requisite; but to set a part so much
time, and in so solemn manner as (it seems) God looks for, and our state
requires, neither nature nor conscience will so prompt us, either now, or (as I
think) in innocence. And therefore as I may well conclude that, that first
institution of God concerning the Sabbath, was rather a supply to nature then
any Law in nature (which our Antisabbatarians unnecessarily labor to disprove)
Though I must say of some argum^nts of some former Writers of this subject of
the Sabbath (who not then finding opposition which has been an ordinary
means in the course of Gods providence, for the more diligent inquisition
after the truth of God and happy discovery thereof) as Hierome says of the
Fathers. How that before Arrius rose up. They delivered some things innocently
yet less varily, and such as cannot avoid the calumny of pe^verse persons.
and superadded of God after created nature by immediate and special
revelation; So I have just cause to believe that this was for many special and
perpetual respects. For left God his solemn and public worship to have
been arbitrarily ordered by nature, and not have by himself determined a
special time therefore, it would have fallen out very cross to Gods
intentious, either being slenderly and seldomely performed, or at least very
confusedly and disjoyntedly, seeing that so many men have so many minds, and
so many several and various occasions, which by man would never have been
determined at once (to have kept so solemn and complete a portion of time as
it seems God expected, especially seeing nature never suggested it) if God by
an overruling mandat had not put it past posse and velle: As he did the eating
of the Passover though a man were in a journey or were unclean, by a law
made, Numb. 9.
which he who is not the God of confusion wisely foresaw and prevented. So
that though some time even by nature is taught to be set apart for Gods
worship (which I deny not) yet I say, that this is more private and personal,
not so solemn and public as God would have it, and therefore may be
arbitrary without disorder and distraction, which the other cannot if left to
man's free will, and therefore is purposely revealed of God, and is no law
innate in nature because of the reason aforesaid; for nature does not discern
of numbers: or why God should chose to be worshipped on the seventh day rather
then on the eight or ninth: but a commandment on the by, of equal force,
antiquity and perpetuity with nature, prescribed as a rule coincident with
nature for the Church of God in all ages to imitate. And to this purpose
speaks Marius; Marius in Genesis 2.
Since (says he) it is the Law of nature that some time be peculiarly
insinuated for the worship of God, it was meet that that should be determined
by a positive Law.

But against this, it will be objected: Why might not time as well as place,
be left to the disposition and authority of Man to appoint? seeing, that time
and place be alike necessary in nature to all actions.

I answer, Answ.
time and place are in nature alike necessary to all actions in genere, but so
is not this or that particular time or place; save where by positive Law it is
made so: God did appoint the seventh day for solemn worship and left all
places at liberty, till it pleased him to design one only place for
Sacrifice-worship under the Law, the necessity whereof being now abrogated by
the Gospel, the place is left to choice. One time may agree to all the world
for worship, but so cannot one place.

Again it will be objected, Obj.
that Bishop White, page 33. lays it down as an essential Character, that
Laws and Preceps merely positively moral oblige, only the Persons or State,
or Nation and Republike upon which they are imposed by the Lawgiver, or to whom
they are published by a legal promulgation. So page 38. If it be a precept
merely positive it can oblige those people only upon whom it was imposed:
Also page 77. he says flatly, that although the seventh day Sabbath had not
been a legal Ceremony, yet if it were only a positive moral precept, the
obligation hereof ceased under the Gospel. So that by this rule the Sabbath
should not be of universal obligation being only positively moral.

To all which himself gives the Answer page Answ.
27. where he says, Laws positive are common and general either for all
mankind, as the Law of Polygamy and Wedlock with in some degrees mentioned, or
else for one nation Republicke or Community of people. So that we see through
forgetfulness his Character does not hold, but that a positive moral Law may
be perpetual and universal (as well as national) of which sort we have
reason to reckon the Sabbath, because it and the Law of Polygamy (which he
instanceth in) were Twins, both brought forth in the state of Adams innocence.

Broad.
I praise God for the coming forth of Master Breerewoods book, The difference
is in ^ manner only verbal for we both hold that the general law of nature
remains, and again that Gods special Commandementis abrogated.
for though there be some difference between us, yet mean Scholars are able
to judge of it, might I have spoken with him I doubt nothing, but that we
should soon have accorded in less then an hou^es space.

Answer.
I could wish you had perused Master Richard Byfields reply to Master
Breerewoods book, before you had sent abroad this Manu-script, that so you
might have thanked God for that which had been thank worthy. But that you may
not be a stranger to him, I will be bold to bring you acquainted by putting
you the oftener in mind of him in this my Answer. Touching the substance of your
difference mentioned in the Margin, I have already spoken to it, and shall have
more occasion as I go along.

Broad.
I published not long since a treatise of the Sabbath having this Title,
Tractatus de Sabbatho in quo doctrina Ecclesiae primitivae tractatur and
defenditur. And for proof, that the Doctrine of the primitive Church was such,
as is therein taught and declared, besides certain sayings of Augustine and
others. I alleged the testimony of Master Calvin in his institutions.
V^bratile veteres n^ncu^are s^lent. The ancients (not only some of the
ancients) accounted the fourth commandment shadowish (not only partly
shadowish) Inst. lib. 2. Cap. 8. Sect. 28.
If any be able to show that we (Master Calvin I mean and my self) have
mistaken the Doctrine of the primitive Church in this matter. I greatly
marvel, that they have not gone about it hitherto. If none be able to show
this, as it seems none are (for doubtless many want no will) then is it no
less to be marvailed at. That the Doctrine of the primitive Church finds no
better entertainment amongst English Protestants. Is it credible that the
primitive Church should not keep one of Gods Commandments? That such a
greevous error should befall the godly learned Fathers, as to esteem that
Commandment shadowish and temporal, which is moral and perpetual?

Answer.
Here you would seem to beg credit to your opinion by Master Calvin's authority
who because he quoteth the exposition of the ancients in this case, you would
insinuatingly persuade to give some countenance to your Tenet. But that the
World may know, how he held in this particular, his opinion is sufficiently
manifested in his commentary on Genesis 2. where he says, that first God rested,
and that then he blessed this rest, that in all ages among men it might be
holy, or he de^icated every seventh day to rest, that his example might be a
perpetual rule. Moreover we must know (says he) this exercise is not
peculiar to one either age or people only, but common to all mankind.
Wherefore when we hear that by Christ's coming the Sabbath was abrogated,
this distinction must be taken to. What appertains to the ordering of humane
life, and what peculiarly agrees to the old signs. That the Sabbath figured
the mortification of the flesh (I say) was temporal, but that from the
beginning it was commanded men that they should exercise themselves in the
worship of God it ought deservedly to endure even to the end of the World. And
besides this, he that observes what follows upon 'his instance of the
ancients in his institutions, shall find that there he says how that though
they say true, yet they touch but half the matter. And therefore does he
largely discuss it afterward, wherein he shows his opinion to be thus
much, that the institution of the Sabbath for the better and more solemn
performance of Gods worship and refreshment of his creature, was with a
perpetual intent, because of necessary use to all men in all times, Sect. 32.
but in regard it was again given to the Jews it had somewhat peculiar in it,
which by Christ is abrogated, and yet the force, use and reason of the
commandment in regard of its substance, as it was given both at the first, and
as it was repeated does still remain. So that he confesses that there was
something peculiar to the Jews which hung at it, but that withal there is a
substance in the commandment it self which it is sacrilege to violate, the
use thereof being universal both to persons and times, so that in alleging
him you bring in, testem sine testimonio.

And put case there was some what, that was more proper to those people and
those times, then to these in this fourth commandment as well as in the first
and fifth (for as I have said, almost all scripture had some circumstantiall
peculiarity and propriety to those people and those times to whom it was
immediately given, which yet nothing hindered the universality of the
substance) yet as the reasons in those commandments evangelically construed
are of present force and being, even in these our times, though the letter
strictly construed be not: so this commandment, or the Sabbath may have
somewhat more proper to them in it (for so is that manner of expression the
stranger within they gates) or at least belonging to it (such as was their not
preparing Mannah, and kindling of fires) which yet is so far from
extinguishing the whole commandment, For it cannot be denied but a
commandment may be of force to me, though every circumstance of it do not
concern me.
as that the very type it self is of lively use to us under the Gospel, and
of present force and being also (although not therefore of a like religious
nature to us as it was to them) but in an Evangelicall sense, that is in
respect of the inward and spiritual holiness thereof, not properly of the
outward and literal. For though the outward Sanction By this word (sanction) I
mean positive holiness which was in their carnal and external worship.
of that rest being admitted to be typical may be extinct, because that the
typicalnes of things are not properly parts but accidents, and conducing helps
to our profession and worship that live under the Gospel: which if true and
real is spiritual, John. 4. See Master Hildersham lect. 39. 40 upon the place
where he opposes the Spirit wherewith we are to worship God in our times, to
the Ceremonial worship which was in the time of the Jews, in respect it was
an external and carnal worship see also, Romans 7. 6.
Yet is not the holy use of this rest extinct, either as it is conducing or
necessary to the present sanctifying of the Lords day, or as it is
significative, pointing us to, and minding us of our heavenly Sabbatisme.

Obj. But you will say, how can we reject the typical holiness and yet retain
the sense?

Answ. 1. We refuse the whole Law as a covenant, and yet we retain it as a
rule, for the perfection of that Church respectively to the foregoing times
(which is called the time of nature) belongs to us; but the imperfection of it
respectively with our Church, ended with it self, and belongs not to us.

2. If the Sabbath had had its original after a Jewish manner, to have been
instituted upon the fall, and so to relate to Christ, then we could have
retained it no more then the rest, but we derive this from the primitive
institution in paradise principally, and from the Jews only by way of
enforcement or conveyance, as we do water first from the fountain and then
from the pipe. And though this rest had in it a typical signification at
first, yet never a typical sanction, but only by accident of the Jewish
discipline then, when types were in fashion; (as I may so speak) like a fresh
River which running through a piece of the Sea is made brinish, but being quit
of it, it re-assumes its own nature.

So that then the commandment is not abrogated as a special commandment, but
the speciality I mean not such a speciality as Master Br^^r^wood does.
which belonged to the Sabbath, or to this general commandment is rather
ended, which did consist of those occasional interventions of Mannah, kindling
fires, and double sacrifices, and (if you will) of the foresaid sanction of the
very rest it self (which as I have said being significative, happily had in
their times an holiness belonging to it) which did peculiarly belong unto the
Jews, and which were no parts of the substance of this commandment, which in
that respect is as well common to us as to them, the reason annexed being of
like and equal force to all from the creation. For the annexing of
extrinsecall and adventitious circumstances, does not any whit harm the
nature, and morality of the Sabbath, no more then Paul's circumcising of Timothy
(which in respect of the season was needful) did annull, or do injury to
baptism: nor then a sign of an Inn or shop being pulled down, annulles or
impaires an house.

So that their rest is common to us but in a riper sense, for the grouth and
stature of our times so much overtopping theirs, the Lord looks that we
should answer his expectation, as well as obey his commandment, in sanctifying
a more excellent and Evangelicall Sabbath to him, then ever they were able to
do. The Church of the new Testament (says Master Perkins) has more knowledge
and more grace then the people of the old Testament had, and in that regard
ought to have more zeal and greater alacrity in the worship of God then they
had, that it may exceed the Jews according to the measure of grace Greater
mercies require greater and better duties.
received. The Arguments of love being not so forcible to prompt obedience, in
the time of the Jews, as in ours, they being under the old covenant, and the
Spirit not so stirring then, as now, the obedience was rather performed to the
commandment then to the commander; For God in their time passed under the name
of a Lord, implying them to be servants, and their obedience to be
serviceable obedience, but now in our times he passes under the name of a
Father, implying us to be sons and our obedience to be filial and
spiritual. And yet as spiritual obedience was, even then, due to God, and
expected by him, though not with that eminency of expectation, as of us: So the
types and Sacramental umbrages which now are of use to us (being performed in
conscience to Gods commandment) have their holiness suitable and respective to
our times; but not in that degree, not in that kind of positive and
intrinsecall holiness as in the times of the Jewish nonage. Like as in the
spring time while the sap is weak and but coming, all that we expect from
trees is flowers, but when a riper seasoninsueth, then we look for riper
fruit; so that then the prime and beauty of these flowers cease, though their
virtue remain. And by the punishment that God so severely annexed to the not
performing the rites of the two Sacraments, we may see the extraordinary
nature of things of that kind then, in the time of their Pedagogie; for he that
was uncircumcised and that eat leavened bread in the passover, was to be cut
off.

And therefore did God intend their rest (as may well be gathered) to be a
positive part of their sanctification, because of the typical use thereof,
which yet he does; not do to us, and yet he accounts our not resting a
profanation of the Sabbath, and all employments which hinder his worship and
conduce not to the sanctifying of that day to be sins. Like as Christ who,
whilst he was upon the earth, accepted small things at his Apostles hands,
but after he was ascended and had given gifts unto men he looked for other
services: or as a Pater-familias that having a boy and a man to wait at his
table, the boy if he can fill a cup of beer, and shift a trencher, by reason
of his nonage, he is willing to take it as a good part of his service, but to
his man he gives better wages, and therefore expects better service at his
hands, he looks that he should be able to furnish and disfurnish the table
with grace to his Master, and yet not to neglect those lesser things. Or (which
better expresses my meaning) as of children we require a bodily service in
saying their prayers and graces and catechism, and though they have little, or
no understanding and sense of that they say, yet we take it in good part till
they attain to more knowledge and ripenes of years, and then we look for
suitable performance thereto. Even so the Lord he expects from us an high
degree of sanctifying his Sabbath, even a ravishment of Spirit, which service
we can never perform if we do not rest. A Christian and Evangelicall use
therefore of this Sabbaticall rest is still in force to us, though the Jewish
sanction may be determined, for their precise resting was with respect to the
formal holiness in the rest; but we are to rest with respect to its final
holiness of furthering Gods more substantial worship, and the spiritualizing
our own minds by it, and thus does the whole commandment for substance and
use remain to us, the difference being only in some occasional
circumstances. Like as one in answer to an Anti^oni^n (that objects because the
Tables of stone wherein the Moral Law was written were removed with the
Tabernacle and other like adjuncts therefore the Mosaic^l Law is ^^erly
abolished) says: Must it needs follow that because the Tables of stone wherein
the Law was written be abolished, that therefore the Law^ it self is utterly
abolished together with them, were the Tables of stone so essential to the
Moral Law, that it had neithe^ birth before them nor being after them, we
know that the putting them into the Arc was typical, though the Law it self
was ^orall: ^o that so ^a^re as these Tables of the Covenant had any thing
ceremonial in them, or any thing concerning other circumstances or persons,
time, place, terror, rigor, and the like being peculiar to the Church of the
Jews in tha^ estate of the Mos^^cal Pedagogy, so far I say they are removed
with the (...). Bu^ the moral Law contained in the 10. commandments could not
be ceremonial (for then should the moral and ceremonial have been
confounded, whereas even by their writtings in tables of stone, and by the
finger of God they were distinguished) neither was there then any thing for the
substance of it, nor is now (as now it stands upon record in the book of God)
but it does concern us as well as them, and therefore though the Tables of
stone be removed, the moral Law is yet continued, and has (except is
excipiendis (his properuse and force still.
as 1. Because the Sabbaths rest was significative from the beginning it might
in their times (as I have said) carry with it a typical or external holiness
(as their other types had which notwithstanding were of afar different nature
and institution to this, for they were appointed since the fall and occasioned
by it, and in themselves temporary, but this was before the fall, and given for
ever to the whole Church for a standing type) which yet it does not to us, and
yet so as the primary force and use of this is no less appertaining to us then
them. For so, that other ordinance which was instituted in innocence (marriage)
it also lasted in respect of diverse circumstances of their times and
discipline, which yet we retain pure from the first institution. Secondly,
we under the Gospel have also an alteration made of the individual but not
of the numerall day, for we now keep the seventh day (according to the
commandment, remember that thou keep holy the seventh day) but not theirs.
Thirdly, in respect also of the reason whereupon the commandment was enforced
upon them, to wit, Gods resting from the creation; For whilst the law or first
covenant was in force, the creation was in force, which still remains with us,
but subordinated to the adequate reason of our Sabbath; where to use Master
Dowes words page 24. All laws being only positive (though made by God
himself) admit mutation (at least) when the matter concerning which, or the
conditions of the persons to whom, they were given is changed. (For as the
Jewish types, so many gross and sensitive grounds and reasons are pilled of,
and swallowed up by the coming of Christ, and more spiritual ones risen in
their stead) As we see it very apparent in the 65. Isa. 17. I will (says God)
create a new Heaven and a new Earth, and the former shall not be remembered nor
come into mind. Old things are possed away, behold all things are become new.
Which to me seems a pertinent prophecy of the alteration of the Sabbath from
the Jews day to ours; it being as much as to say, that in comparison of the
excellency of the things that shall be under the Gospel, the other things
shall be nothing worth: Sense shall be swallowed up of Spirit, types of
truth; And though the creation be admirable of it self, and so also is at
this day, the consideration of it being exceeding useful, yet nothing
comparable to our redemption: Our rejoicing in the one is nothing comparable to
our rejoicing in the other. So that the ^lteration of the Jews Sabbat^ into
ours, by reason of the new creati^ which God made (...) the time of the
Gospel, does further typis^^^n^ assure us of the last and best alteration of
new Heaven and new Ea^^h ^^ok^n of in th^^ of the first of (...) which we shall
be made partakers of by the Go^spell.
As a right worthy Doctor ( Sibbes by name) observes, Gods last works are his
best works, the first being but preparatives and occasions of the later; the
new Heaven and the new Earth are the best; the second wine, that Christ created
himself, was the best: Spiritual things are better then natural. And Master
Dow page 27 says as much that the reason Drawn from the example of God who
rested upon the Sabbath, namely, when the creation was finished, endured only
till the time of the new creation, in which all things were made new by Christ,
at which time it ceased, or at least, a second reason taken from the new
covenant coming in place, the former both reason and day (become now old) are
passed away; And behold all things are become new. For this work of redemption
or new creation being the greater may deservedly take place of the other; and
as the Prophet Jeremy, speaking of the deliverance, that God would vouchsafe
his people from the Babylonish captivity, says: Behold the days shall come
(says the Lord) that it shall no more be said, the Lord lives that brought
up the children of Israel out of Egypt, but the Lorth lives that brought them
up from the land of the North: so may we say of the day appointed for his
worship, that the day wherein he finished the work of creation shall no more
be observed, but the day wherein our Lord Christ, by his resurrection from the
dead finished the work of our redemption.

Thus speaks Master Dow.

And how ever in other things the constitution of the Jewish Church and ours
differ, yet in this they are united, the Sabbath being first ordained, before
there was distinction made, or wall of partition built, for an ever-lasting
sign between God and his Church for his sanctifying it, and a perpetual rule
of duty and practice chalked out to his Church, for the direction of his more
solemn worship. Like as was his marrying of Adam and Eve in innocence, both a
perpetual type of that union which is between God and his Church, as also a
perpetual rule for the ordering of that affair amongst mankind ever after:
both which were alike given in innocence, and were alike both perpetual rules
and perpetual types unto his Church.

Broad.
This book being the last, I intend to write of this Argument, my desire is
it should be read of many before it be published, that if just exceptions can
be taken to ought I have written, or that an objection of moment be not here
fully answered, I may know it, and afterward may alter or add as there shall
be cause, John 3. 21. He that does truth comes to the light that his deeds
may be made manifest that they are wrought in God.

Broad.
2. Treatises,
1. Concerning the Sabbath or seventh day. 2. Concerning the Lords day, or
first of the Week.
Gal. 4. 10, 11. Ye observe days and months and times and years, I am
afraid of you, least I have bestowed on you labor in vain.

Answer.
You play the Soldier in the Onset, at first discharging your greatest
ordinance to impresse the greater fear, but as you use the matter you miss
the mark.

For this place of the Galath, falls far short of your aim, as you might have
perceived, if without prejudice you would have perused Master Perkins upon that
place, whose whole discourse thereof is worth inserting, if it were not too
long.

And if you examine the context you may perceive, how that the Apostle was
angry at the Galathians, for leaving Christ the substance, and betaking
themselves, even in point of justification, to the carnal observation of
Jewish shadows and ceremonies, which in comparison he calls beggarly
Rudiments, and he the rather termed them so, because they were then utterly
useless and insignificative, being fulfilled and so abrogated.

But the Sabbath is, for the equity and substance of it, still of the same use
as ever, to wit, fit for the be^ter procuring of man's refreshing, and Gods more
solemn worship. Nor is it in-significative, or ever shall be, till we sing a
requiem to our souls in heaven: For as it concluded our creation, so shall it
our salvation: And therefore by no means to be numbered with the observation
of days, and months, and years (seeing that the Apostles themselves observed
the Lords day weekly or Sabbatically, and not monthly or yearly, as were the
Jews Sabbaths and Holy Days, but in relation to the fourth commandment one
in seven, as knowing it to be a perpetual rule, not a temporary and
vanishing ordinance) which pertained to the bondage and servitude of weak and
beggarly Rudiments, of which the Apostle here only speaks.

And as it was far from the Apostles thought, to reckon any of the ten
commandments as a weak and beggarly Rudiment; so let it be abhorred of all
Christian hearts and ears.

But may some say, Obj.
is not the signification of the Sabbaths institution abrogated by Christ's
resurrection, and the coming of the Lords day?

The Sabbath is altered not abrogated, Answ.
and the signif^cation subordinated, not annulled, being instituted upon an
universal and perpetual reason, for the Sabbath was no proper Jewish type,
but the Churches type in that wherein it was typical, (as we may see in the
fourth, Hebr. 9. There remains therefore Sabbatismus a Sabbath-rest to the
people of God; which words, Willet in 2. Genesis says, conclude that both the
type remains, that is a Sabbatisme, and the signification of the type
everlasting rest; And as you may further see 12, Matthew. 8. in these words, The
Son of man is Lord even of the Sabbath Day, which words compared with the
verses foregoing; show that the Sabbath is of a ceremonious nature, for Christ
there ranks it among things ceremonial in a ceremonial sense, but with a
note of inequality; (as it is employed in that word Even of the Sabbath Day) and
is, as the rest of the moral Law, of equal continuance with the Church; which
for this cause was reviued to the Jews, because at that time they were the
only Israel and Church of God, but now translated to us under the Gospel (the
partition wall being broken down) with an alteration of circumstance according
to the season, as (Isay) was prophesied in the fore^ quoted place of Isa. 65.
17. And whereas Doctor Heyly^ part. 2. page 27. says, That it is not probable,
that the Apostle Paul, who so opposed himself against the Sabbath, would erect
a new, this had not been (says he) to abrogate the ceremony but to change
the day. I answer, that by the coming of Christ some things suffered
alteration, as well as others abrogation: wherefore the Apostles were to preach
only the abrogative types and ceremonies to be abrogated (of which sort I
prove the Sabbath to be none) and according to the nature of the new creation
to alter the other, of which sort the Sabbath was, and therefore suffered
subordination not abrogation: And therefore has the Scripture recorded it to
us (...) the name of the first day of the week, or the first day of seven
(before it style it the Lords day) in a s^gnificant opposition to the old
antiquated last day of the week. I will conclude this Answer with Master
Hookers authority (who was a confident maintainer of the morality of the fourth
commandment as you may see in his Eccles. Pol. page 377.) who speaking upon
this place of the Galath. Hooker.
says: That for as much as the Law of the Jews by the coming of Christ was
changed, and we thereunto no way bound, Saint Paul, although it were not his
purpose to favor invectives against the special sanctification of days and
times to the service of God, and to the honor of Jesus Christ, does
notwithstanding bend his forces against that opinion, which imposed on the
Gentiles the yoke of Jewish legal observations, as if the whole World ought
for ever, and that upon pain of condemnation to keep and observe them, such
as in this persuasion hallowed the Jewish Sabbaths the Apostle sharply
reproves saying, ye observe days and months and times and years, etc.

Thus you see how Master Hookers opinion was concerning this text of Paul,
only to cry down those obsolete Jewish observations, and nothing less then
to impeach the authority of the fourth commandment or the Lords day, as you
may plainly discern by turning over leaf to page 378. where he lays down
three sorts of holy times, thus, says he: Hooker.
It pleased God heretofore to exact some part of time by way of perpetual
homage never to be dispensed withal, nor remitted, again to require some
other parts of time with as strict exaction but for less continuance, and of
the rest which were left arbitrary to accept what the Church should in due
consideration consecrate voluntarily unto religious uses. Of the first kind
amongst the Jews was the Sabbath Day. Of the second those feasts which were
appointed by the Law of Mos^s; The Feast of Dedication invented by the Church
stands in the number of the last kind. The moral Law requiring therefore a
seventh part throughout the age of the World to be that way employed,
although with us the day be changed in regard of a new revolution begun by our
Savior Christ, yet the same proportion of time continues which was before,
because of reference to the benefit of creation, and now much more of
renovation thereunto added by him which was Prince of the World to come, we
are bound to account the sanctification of one day in seven a duty which Gods
immutable Law does exact for ever. Thus you have Master Hookers opinion both of
this text of the Gal. The morality of the fourth commandment, the perpetuity
of the Sabbath, and the authority of the Lord's Day.

Broad.
A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump, Gal. 5. 9.

Chrysostom. on Gal.
Why but they retained the Gospel only they would have brought in a Jewish
rite or two, and yet the Apostle says that thereby the Gospel is subverted,
to show how but a little thing, being untowardly mingled, marreth all.

Luther on Gal. 2.
Paul had note here his own business in hand but a matter of faith. Now as
concerning faith, we ought to be invincible and more hard if it might be
then the Adamant stone, but as touching charity we ought to be soft, and more
flexible then the reed or leaf shaken with the wind, and ready to yield to
every thing.

Broad.
A treatise of the Sabbath.
FOr as much as I know not, whether taking my book in hand thou mindest to
read it over to the end. I have therefore thought good (by way of prevention)
in the beginning to let thee understand, that howsoever there be difference in
opinion among the Godly learned, yet they all for ought I know agree in this,
namely, that the Lord's Day had his beginning in the time of the Apostles, and
being of so great antiquity, so generally received, and so profitable to the
Church of Christ, that it ought to be observed of thee according to the
practice of good Christians from time to time, and the godly laws of our most
Christian governor living at this present. I charge thee therefore as thou will answer it before Gods judgment ^ear, that thou do not take occasion
hence to spend the Lord's Day more licentiously; and so to dishonor God the
more, when thou have more cause to honor and praise his holy name. If thou
do, know assuredly that the Son has not yet made thee free* for none dare
wilfully abuse our liberty purchased by Christ, unless themselves do still
continue the very bond slaves of sin and Satan,

Answer.
Your admiration is worthy commendation, for it is the part of every honest man
to preserve the practice of piety, and especially in this point of the Sabbath,
in the which God so often in Scripture involueth the sum of all Religion, and
indeed it is Gods and the Churches ancient Land-marke, which being removed,
opens a gappe to all licentiousnes, and that being once let in, which is so
much thirsted after by the ignorant and common people, then farewell all
Religion.

For as Doctor Denison notes upon the 13. Neh. 2. That where the Sabbath is not
sanctified, there is neither sound Religion nor a Christian conversation to be
expected, as he is quoted by Edward Chetwin D. D. and Deane of Bristow in his
second Edition of the straight gate and narrow way to life, Page 90. Who
himself says in the same page, that the profaning the holy Sabbath of God
(for so he terms it) is contrary to Gods moral precept still in power. And
therefore if you have Faith I wish you would have taken Saint Paul's advice, and
have had it to your self in this point. For how you will preserve the duties
of the Sabbath, Read Master Richard Bifields 13. chap. against Master
Breerewoods like protestation.
and yet with the same breath cry down the authority of the Sabbath, and how
you will maintain solemn worship without solemn time (which God ever
allotted to that end) I see not, nor you know not.

And therefore what you weakly endeavor to build up with one hand, you
powerfully pull down with the other, for an error in Doctrine (especially
tending to libertinisme) is likelier to take place among men (where always the
greater part is the worse) then a bare persuasion tending to restriction. It is
as if a man should let slip a Grayhound at an Hare, and then command him to ly
down at his foot.

And therefore you might have done well, like a good Physician first to have
applied that receipt (how that a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump) upon
your self before you had prescribed it unto others. But to prevent the
spreading of this poisonous leaven, I am desirous to give you a timely
opposition by contending for the truth.

Broad.
CHAP. I. 1. What day God sanctified in the beginning.
GOd having finished the creation in six days rested on the seventh day and
was refreshed, Genesis 2. Exodus 31.
whereupon he blessed the seventh day and sanctified it. The day which God
sanctified in the beginning was the seventh and no other, even as the day
wherein he commanded the Israelites to kill the passover was the fourteenth
day and no other of the first month, the one is as expressly set down as the
other, and the reasons wherefore God sanctified the seventh day, The reason of
the Sabbaths institution vanished as a shadow with the shadow.
and commanded the Israelites to kill the passover on the fourteenth day of
the first month are alike unchangeable. For as it cannot be that the Angel
should pass over the Israelites houses on any other day of the fourteenth, so
neither can it be that God should rest on any other day.

Answer.
It is no doubt but the seventh day was the day that God only rested on, and
sanctified to a different use from the rest of the days, for having employed
these in creating things necessary for man's corporal good, he designs him
this day for his spiritual benefit, and his own special glory, (whereas it
is alleged by some, Bishop White page 42. Doctor Heylyn page 10. That God
imposed no other Law on Adam then that of the forbidden fruit of the tree of
knowledge. To this I answer:

1. That there was another Law imposed upon him even in innocence as appears
Genesis 2. 24. to wit, the Law of having but one wife and loving her.

2. That this Law of the Sabbath was a Law not of the nature of the other where
on his estate depended, but a Law of indulgence, whereto he both should and
would readily have confented (because of the blessing and benefit which should
have redounded to him thereby) had he continued in in innocence and not lost
himself and it before.)

And questionless there was no other reason why he, that could have made all
the World in a moment, should yet contrive and spin out the work of creation
into six days space, but only to this end, that he might give an example to
mankind (which was then in Adam) for ever to set a part the seventh day to his
more special and solemn worship. And the reason (of Gods resting from the
creation) why it is annexed as a reason of the commandment is, because at that
time there was no better thing, nor greater commodity, no nor any greater work
for God to rest from, or thing wherein God was more seen then in the creation.
And therefore was the Sabbath appointed on that day (having the honor to
conclude the creation) in memory of Gods goodness to man, and upon occasion of
his refreshment therein, till a greater good should befall him, and a work
wherein God should be more glorified, and then that reason to be subordinated
not annulled (because the creation still remains as a less good even unto us
under the Gospel) but as the Law is to the Gospel, or the old Testament to
the new, or as the Prophets were to the Apostles and Ministers; not in the
sense as the ceremonies were to Christ, to receive an absolute expiration the
one by the other; for it was of no such shadowish nature; and yet not so
unchangeable, but that it is as well subject to subordination upon occasion, as
the Jews deliverance out of Egypt was to their after deliverance out of
Babylon; For man was more happy, and God (as I may say) more refreshed in
ceasing from the work of our redemption then of our creation.

And therefore is Anno Mundi worthily changed into Anno Domini: And the name of
the Sabbath into the Lord's Day; For denominatio omnis fit a majori. And for
this cause although in relation to our redemption we celebrate the first day
of the week for order, yet it is the creation that makes this first day to be
the seventh in number, and good reason. For seeing God in the creation divided
time into the revolution of seven, how can or dare any that knows the
creation break the order of time by God established, and think of another
division as of. 6. or 8. etc. seeing from the beginning it was not so,
especially seeing it was purposely done of God for the Sabbaths sake, who else
could have finished the creation in the twinkling of an eye (which solemn
contrivement sure was not to create a Jewish abrogative type) and therefore is
accordingly observed under the Gospel, only mutatis mutandis.

But to come to that which you would infer, which is, that only the last day
of the seven is to be kept Sabbath: I answer:

First, that in respect of the point of time, I think I need not be large to
prove the variation of it: For I think it will be granted upon this one
instance: 10. Ios. 13. how that the Sabbath was not always observed answerable
to the first institution in respect of the point of time; for that by the Suns
standing still the week was lengthened beyond its due proportion.

Doctor Heylin page 48. alleges, that a man travailing the World Westward
may lose a whole day; now what shall that man do at his return, says he, if
to sanctify one day in seven be moral.

I answer first, Let him tell me what a Jew should have done in that case when
the Sabbath was confessedly obligatory; and so should that man do now.

Secondly I answer, that though things that are moral by nature, because they
bind always, and in all places alike, are ever the same: Yet things that are
moral only by Discipline admit variety through exigency of time and occasion.

Thus it was lawful for Adams immediate posterity to conjugate with their
consanguinity, which now (the exigency of those times being over) is utterly
unlawful by disciplinary morality: (Nay nature her self being disciplined
from the alteration of time and variety of choice, now abhorres it as utterly
undecent) so the man that having in his lawful calling of merchandising lost a
day, and had during his travel in his particular practice rent from the Church
(in her computation of time) without a schism, being lawfully necessitated
thereunto by the course of nature, may as lawfully at his return reduce
himself again unto the conformity and practice of the Church to avoid a
wilful rent and disorder; like as they that were in a journey were to keep
the Passover on a different time by themselves from the Church of the Jews,
but at their return they were to return to the Churches observation.

Secondly, but in regard of the order which I think you labor to maintain,
to wit, that the Sabbath ought to be the last, and not the first day of the
week, or else not to be at all. To that I answer, that some reasons and
circumstances even in the moral Law are occasional and so changeable, and yet
the substance of the commandment is perpetual and immutable: And as one well
observes. Diverse positive laws which are moral and perpetual and bind all
men in their generations, though they be firm and immutable in themselves and
in their obligation, yet because the duties of obedience which they impose upon
men and the men upon whom the duties are imposed are in their state and
condition mutable and changeable, and the changes and alterations of things
commanded in times places and other relations and respects do not at all
change the Law, nor prove it ceremonial and changeable. As for instance, the
Law of believing in Christ, is firm and unchangeable from the first promise
that was made of him, and yet the duty which he requires is changeable, and is
changed now under the Gospel from that it was under the Law, in circumstance,
for they were to believe in Christ to come, but we as come; for the changing of
the day now since Christ does not make v^id, but establish the Law of the
Sabbath.
As in the first commandment, where Isreal's corporeal deliverance is now
changed into Isreal's ghostly deliverance; So in the fifth commandment, the
land of Canaan is properly the land meant which had that promise belonging to
it: But now it is enlarged to all that in the fear of God obey that
commandment throughout the World. So this commandment had the reason of Gods
resting from the creation occasionally affixed unto it, because that then the
creation was Gods greatest and eminentest work, and being occasional and
appointed for commemoration, was therefore changeable whenever he should rest
from a greater work, that better deserved commemoration then that; And yet the
substance of the commandment remains unalterable, which substance or
unalterable part of the commandment consists in the number, as seven is
opposed to all other numbers, and not in the order.

But may some say, Obj.
those allegations out of the first and fifth commandments hold not parallel
with this reason of the fourth commandment, because they were only given in
the time of the Jews, but this was from the beginning.

I answer both the one and the other was given for the Churches sake, Answ.
and therefore alterable according to Gods good pleasure and the state of the
Church.

But you will further object: When do you find any thing altered, that was as
this is from the beginning?

I answer, I find the curse which was annexed to the fall of man to be taken
away and brought under by the death and resurrection of Christ: And well then
may the reason of the then Sabbath be altered by it, when the curse is
annulled, it being the Churches type or ceremony, and that thing changed
wherein the ceremony consisted, to wit, the order from last to first according
to the different state of the Church. Like as it may be supposed of the Jews
when they came to be a sedentary Church, they altered their gesture from
standing to sitting, but still retained the Passover; So we still retain the
substance of the fourth commandment, though we have altered the ceremony,
which was grounded upon Gods example; And now God having given us another
example of another rest upon another day, we imitate his example, and still
keep his commandment, by observing the number but altering the order. For
indeed as by Gods ordination and disposition, the Law and Sabbath go together,
so they fare alike; for the Law was to continue in the nature of a covenant
till Christ came, and so the Sabbath on the last day, who b^ fulfilling the
righteousness of the one, did inherit the rest of the other, being annexed
thereunto and entailed thereupon (whereof man failed by his fall) and thereupon
changed the natures of both, subordinating the Law to the Gospel; making it,
in stead of a cause procuring life, to be a rule, and an effect of life and
grace received; and so the last day Sabbath to the first, changing rest by
works, into working by rest; A happy change (if we make not our selves
unhappy by allowing a rest to the Law but none to the Gospel) for whereas
before we held by a tenure of fear, our happiness being all in the future, for
we were, all our life long, to do this, and then to live, now we hold by the
tenure of faith, and our happiness is in present, for says the Apostle Hebr. 4.
3. we which have believed do enter into rest; according to John. 17. 3. This
is life eternal to know thee, etc. showing that the life of grace in a man is
called eternal life, because it has its beginning from that life which shall
never cease, but increase to ever-lasting perfection.

So that the Sabbath is unalterable in regard of the individual number, but
not in regard of the individual day. The number being kept, the day upon
occasion might be altered. And of the truth of this we have good reason to
persuade us, for the issue proves it by the divine authority of the Apostles.
For this fourth commandment, being no Jewish ceremony, but a commandment in
the Decalogue, and equal with the Law of nature, ought for the substance of it
to be esteemed perpetual, and especially seeing that now, in one of these
senses, to wit, in the number, we see it preserved inviolable by the example
of the Apostles, and the practice of the Church ever since; and yet in respect
of the order, by the selfsame examples, altered from last to first; And*
which alteration is very agreeable to the time of the Gospel, where many that
are first shall be last, and last shall be first. Even as John Baptist, who
being the last of the Prophets, was therefore the greatest, because nearest
unto Christ: yet he that is least in the Kingdom of Heaven (that is, in the
time of the Gospel) is greater then he: So this seventh day, though the last
in order and greatest in dignity, during the supereminency of the old creation,
because of Gods example; yet now, is the number retained, and the order
exchanged from the last to the first of the week, in honor of the new
creation of the new Heaven and new Earth, which comparatively was prophesied,
and promised to ea^e out the old, in the 65. of Isa. 17. I will (says God
there) create a new Heaven and a new Earth, and the former shall not be
remembered (that is the solemnity of it shall cease, and shall give place to the
new, for else remember it we both do and must do, for the memory of both may
consist together, and the one confirm the other, in regard that our redemption
restores us to a lawful Dominion (once forfeited) over the whole work of
creation. And why must there be this change? Why, because of the greater
excellency of the second creation, which shall be solemnized in stead of the
first under the time of the Gospel, when Christ shall be come, and shall have
finished the work of my Mercy, which shall be greater then was the work of
my goodness in the creation.

Each creation must have its Sabbath of commemoration, for else should God
magnify his lesser work of creation before his greater work of redemption.
And therefore this is the day which we now celebrate, which the Lord has made
for us to rejoice in now, like as that was then.

And thus we see it in all points now fulfilled. But you will object, that
this new Heaven and new Earth is meant of the differing state of the Church
under the Gospel, to that it was under the Law: Ans. I grant it, whereof the
solemnizing of our redemption (which principally; nay I may say only, made the
change) in stead of our old and first creation (unto which we lost all right,
but that it was revived by, and therefore worthily changed into, the second) is
a principal part; And therefore has the holy Ghost expressed this change in
those terms of old and new creation, rather then any other. And as in the 2.
of Peter 3. 13. there, at the perfection of the Kingdom of Heaven, he
prophecies of a real change of the old Heaven and old Earth by an absolute
dissolution of them, by reason of the succession of a better condition to the
people and Church of God: So here in Isaiah, at the inchoation of the Kingdom
of Heaven (I mean the time of the Gospel) he prophecies of a proportionable
real change (leading unto the other) of the old Heaven and old Earth, by way
of mitigation, by reason of a more excellent benefit that redoundeth to the
Church and children of God. For those words (according to his promise) in the
aforesaid text of Peter, have reference to this of Isaiah; By the compa^ison of
which texts it is evident, that there is as well a literal as a mystical
sense in these words, which was to be fulfilled gradatim, in the Kingdom
under the Gospel (which was the time of the adequate accomplishment of their
prophecies) as well, as in the Kingdom of Heaven hereafter, which is the time
of accomplishing our prophecies, or theirs, as they are transferred over to us.

So that if you grant it requisite to sanctify a seventh day, or the seventh
day in respect of number, I say with you; but now to sanctify the last day in
the week, were to memorize our creation above our redemption; our being, above
our wel-being, and to contradict promise and prophecy, example and reason; For
in commemorations the lesser gives way to, and is enwrapped in the greater. Now
then Christ's resting, on the first day from a greater work, then that of the
creation was just cause to adjourne the great duty of commemoration, to that
day which finished the greater and more beneficial action.

But on the other hand to keep no seventh day, were likewise to go against
the example of the Apostles, and to blot out one of the ten commandments,
and so to make a moral Law Iewishly ceremonial: For there is no reason why
the Apostles should weekly celebrate the day of Christ's resurrection, if it
were not in reference to the fourth commandment; seeing that if they had meant
it as a bare institution of the Church, they might have done by the day of
Christ's resurrection as we do by the day of his birth, that is, have kept it
yearly.

And lastly, it were to cross this prophecy of Isa. 65. 17. for what reason
have we to think, that God would simply have the remembrance of the creation
lessened; nothing less; but only respectively; no more then he would have
the Egyptian deliverance forgotten, because he would have the Babylonish
deliverance remembered, but only comparatively. For he would have us, that are
under the Gospel, to celebrate the work of our redemption above the work of
our creation, and to acknowledge, the day of the consummation thereof, to be
the day which David speaks of, Psalm 118. (...), which the Lord has made,
wherein we will rejoice and be glad. In which words (as one says) I see not
how the making of the day can be intended for the common regulation of the
days in the creation, but it appears to be some dedication to an holy use
of joy and gladness (suitable to the description of a Sabbath, which is called a
delight) for our unspeakeable deliverance.

And not as Bishop W^ite would persuade page 191. that the day of Christ's
passion, was every way as blessed a day in respect of man's redemption, as the
day of resurrection. For the Apostle says, that if Christ be not risen we
are yet in our sins.

And so again whereas he says; page 298. This great work of humane
redemption was not effected by the resurrection of Christ, but by his obedience
and sacrifice on the cross; and it was fully wrought and finished upon the
passion friday, after our Savior had said consummatum est. I ask, how we had
been redeemed from, and how he had conquered, our last enemy death, if he
had not risen, And again, put case it were so, so was the work of creation
fully finished on the sixth day, and yet God sanctified the seventh day, and
on that day. 2. Genesis 2. it is said, He ended his work which he had made,
because that day gave manifest declaration of his completing the works of
creation, and so did the day of Christ's resurrection manifest the completing
of the work of our redemption.

And this day, thus prophetically extolled by David, was answerably honored by
Christ himself, and kept by his Apostles. So that in answer to Bishop White
page 302* there was at least an implicit, vertuall, and interpretative command
in the act of Christ's resurrection; For why should not we think, that Christ
had a significant meaning in prolonging his resurrection to the third day,
which was the first of the week, as well as God had, in spinning out his
creation to the seventh day, which was the last of the week, seeing Christ
could have raised himself out of the grave so soon as he was in it, like as
God could have created all things in the twinkling of an eye.

So that then, seeing God by this his resting from the work of our redemption,
has given us a new reason (in respect of eminency) of a new day, and by the
example of his Apostles preserving still the number, we in doing the like obey
his good pleasure and his Law, which is not destroyed by the coming of Christ
(for not one tittle of it shall pass away, till Heaven and Earth pass, which
is the time of the Sabbaths period) but fulfilled and explained by him,
according to the will of God, and his purpose, though not according to our
carnal reasonings and opinions. For thus is all kept whole. The reason of the
commandment hereby standing still good but not in chief: For Gods resting
from his work is now the occasion of our Sabbath, not from the work of his
creation, but from the work of his redemption, wherein he was most
remonstrated, and even redoubled in the manifestation of all his attributes to
our view, and therefore worthy of a select day, which yet alters nothing of
the substance of the Sabbath, Alexander tertius Pontifex Romans affirmat, tam
veteris quam novi testamenti paginam, septimam diemad humanam quietem
specialiter deput^sse; id est, (Interpret suarez de diebus festis cap. 1.)
utrumque testamentum approbavit more^ deputandi ad quietem humanam septimum
quemque diem hebdomadis: qu^d est formaliter deputare septimum diem, licet
materialiter non idem dies fuerit semper deputatus, and hoc modo verum est,
septimum ^llum diem in lege v^teri esse Sabbathum, in nova vero esse diem
Dominicum.

For as our changing of the bounds of the Sabbath (which in the Jews time was
from evening to evening, and now in our time is from morning to morning, in
relation to the time of Christ's resurrection) is no material change, but that
still the day remains entire, even so the change of the Jews seventh day, to
our seventh day, alters not any whit the substance of the Sabbath or fourth
commandment.

But you will say, Obj.
why was the day translated, and not rather both the days celebrated?

Because that would have crossed the good pleasure of God, Answ.
who from the beginning thought it a meet^ proportion to afford man six days
for his necessary labor, and to exact one of seven for his more solemn
worship, which also is the reason, why the Lords day was continued in the same
number, but not in the same order, so that it was not transp^sed to be
observed in any other number, but only in another order in the same number;
that so the will of God in that commandment might be observed, and yet his
resting from the wonderful work of our redemption worthily celebrated.

And therefore whereas Bishop White says page 277. that if the fourth
commandment concerning the keeping of the seventh day be moral and
perpetual, then it is not such in respect of the first and eight d^y, but of
that one only day which it specifieth in the commandment. I answer. Neither
of both is moral and perpetual, as considered in the order, but occasional
and changeable, (as the event has shown) and that each of both is moral and
perpetual, as considered in their number being unchangeable to any other
number, and therefore still so continues by virtue of the morality of the Law
of the Sabbath given to Adam, and re-given in the fourth commandment.

Now whereas you urge the appointed day of the Passover to be unalterable, in
parallel to the day of Gods rest from the creation; we clearly see the
contrary: for upon occasion the precise individual day of the Passover was
altered, as in the 9. of Numb. where he that was unclean, or in a journey was
not to eat it till the fourteenth day of the second month, where the number is
preserved entire (whereof God was ever curious) but the day is changed; even
thus upon occasion is the Sabbath altered, the number of seven being kept
entire in this, as in the other the number of fourteen, and yet a change made,
and so both the Sabbath and Passover for substance preserved, notwithstanding
the circumstantiall alteration upon occasion. Yea Hezekiahs great Passover was
kept in the second month, upon the exigency of the times, 2 Chro. 30. 2, 3.

And now that you have made mention of the Passover* besides this foresaid
liv^ly illustration, which it affords to set forth my meaning in this thing, I
would commend it as a notion worthy your consideration, whether Gods ordaining
the first and seventh day of the Passover) as also of other feasts) to be
kept holy, might not prophe^y^^^^ Sabbath of the true* Paschall lamb Christ
Ies^^ after his being slain, as well as theirs under the typical, the one to
be the first of the seven as the other was the last.

Broad.
2. When in likely hood God sanctified the seventh day.
When God sanctified the seventh day, Some con^idently teach that Ad^a kept
the first seventh day, whereas it is probable that God sanctified it not till
about the end thereof.
I mean whether as soon as it began or about the end thereof, is doubtful;
of the two the latter s^emes most probable, for God blessed and sanctified the
seventh day, because therein he had rested (not would re^^) and was refreshed.

It is the manner of men to bless that day or hour wherein some great good
has befalne them, And contrary-wise to curse that day that brings woe Ier.
10. 14.
thus God having felt, as it were, the sweetness of rest on the seventh day in
comparison of his labor in the six former, and being well refreshed is
hereupon moved to bless and sanctify it.

Answer.
You say its probable, God pronounced the Sabbath sanctified at the end
thereof, when he had rested, which for my part I assent unto, for ^o in the 2
Genesis 3. it appears to be most likely. Besides that Moses his manner of
expression in that verse, compared with the like in the first chapter, do much
persuade it: for you shall find there, that when he has related Gods five and
six days works as finished and completed by him, then follows the
blessing upon them, so in this second chapter he^ makes the blessing to follow
upon his resting as before upon his working. But what you would gather hence I
do not well perceive, yet two things in my opinion follow very naturally.

1. That hereby God would give to Adam as well a president as a precept to
regulate and invite his subsequent duty in the particular of the Sabbath. That
seeing God had chosen the seventh day to finish his creation in, and to rest
there from, and had thus made it known to Adam; with a promise of a blessing
thereunto for after-time upon due observance. That therefore Adam and his
posterity should be moved thereby, to dedicate the seventh day from the
sublunary employments of the other six to be a perpetual Sabbath unto the
Lord, not by a bare rest (for what honor has God by that) but by a sanctified
rest.

2. That it was not meant that Adam should keep the seventh day Sabbath which
God rested on, for though it was Gods seventh day, yet it was Adams second
day, which is another reason to prove your probability, for it is likely that
God himself did first rest the seventh day, that so he might by his example
(being revealed to that end) give mankind a pattern for ever after to do the
like, which is very apparent, and more confirmed by the Law concerning the
Sabbath, as it was afterward renewed upon mount Sinai to the Israelites, where
we are commanded after six days labor to dedicate a seventh to holiness,
and to that end to rest from our work on the seventh day, as God did from
his; that so by following his example we might the better obey his
commandment; not that we were to rest the selfsame day that he did, but
only in similitude and imitation, that is, to employ six days in our
necessary labor and the seventh to rest according to his example, that so we
might sanctify it according to his commandment. Which Adam had not done, if
he had ke^t Gods seventh day Sabbath.
Which Argument does much disprove that over-strict tying the Sabbath to the
precise seventh day after the creation, and proves the ^umerall day to be
only moral and perpetual, or the proportion of time which the Lord
exemplifieth there, which is the seventh day for number not that seventh day
for time.

But you will say, Obj.
did not Gods example as well oblige the order as the number, as well the last
as the seventh day?

Yes, Answ.
during the supereminency of the work of creation, but when a more excellent
work was finished, the work of our redemption, from which it also pleased him
exemplarily to rest, not on the last but on the first day of the week, and as
exemplarily by his Apostles ever after to preserve the number and proportion of
time according to the commandment, the substance of the reason which
constitutes the commandment still remaining entire (to wit Gods resting from,
or accomplishing his work) only the terminus a quo varieth the case in
respect of order.

For the transcendency of the latter displaceth the former, as the presence of
the King does the Major of a Town.

I say, at this time did the order vanish, and the day of Gods creation give
place to the day of Gods redemption as the more worthy work; And if God may
be said, in any manner of speech, to be refreshed in his resting from the
powerful work of creation, much more from the painful work of redemption.

Broad.
3. When God first commanded man to sanctify the seventh day.
IT is not said in Scripture that God presently commanded Adam to sanctify the
seventh day, If the word (sanctified) Genesis 23. imports commanded Adam to
sanctify it, why shall not the word (blessed) import also commanded Adam to
bless it.
and it is one thing for God to sanctify a day and another thing to command
men to sanctify it.

Indeed it is probable that this example of God, in working six days and
resting the seventh, Adam and his posterity should always have followed had
they continued in the state of innocence; But when Adam had now eaten of the
forbidden fruit God thrust him out of Paradise, cursed the Earth for his sake,
and set him to get his living in the sweat of his face.

Answer.
You say, it is not said in Scripture that God presently commanded Adam to
sanctify the seventh day, and that it is one thing for God to sanctify a
day, and another thing for him to command man to sanctify it: To which I
answer. That God here at the institution of the Sabbath did, as Christ by his
Apostles did at the institution of the Lord's Day, that is, by a declaratory
example appoint it as a duty unto the Church for ever after, teaching them to
set aside the seventh day (which was then the last, and is now the first day
in the week) from all secular commerce and employment wholly to trade with God
in giving and receiving spiritual commodities. Nor is there any difference in
this case, between Gods sanctifying it and his commanding it to be sanctified
by man. For besides that, to sanctify, ever signified to set apart to an holy
use, we see it to be the very voice of of the Scripture, how that the Sabbath
was made for man; that is, for his good and benefit. For man was to learn from
it, that all his happiness consisted not in his own labor but also in Gods
blessing; so that, though he labored six days together, yet the seventh
day well observed, might do him more avail then all his six days labor;
And therefore, by Gods blessing that day, is implied a reciprocal respect both
of our blessing him, and his blessing us; and by his sanctifying is intended,
his setting apart that day, for a more special communion between him and us,
by his more special blessing of us, and our more solemn worshipping of him:
For surely you will not say he sanctified it, and blessed it, that we should
superstitiously think any inherent holiness or blessedness to be in the very
day it self; And if not, what follows then? but that it must needs be meant,
that we should ever after use the seventh day to a blessed and holy end, and
expect a blessing from God thereon in so doing; for else to what use was it that
God did thus reveal himself, and his resting, and not rather conceal it, if
he had meant it only for a bare narration; But it is evident by the second
giving of the Law, what, and how he meant it, at the first thus Master
Breerewood in his second tract. page 9. The Sabbath (says he) is called holy,
not formally, for any peculiar inherent holiness it has above other days, but
finally, because it was ordained and consecrated to holy exercises in the
service of God: which gives answer to Bishop White page 40* who says, that the
second Genesis 2. 3* expresses not the manner how the Lord sanctified this day,
whether by imparting any special virtue to it above other days, or by
dedicating the same to any religious service to be performed by Adam in the
state of innocence etc. You only affirm that it is one thing for God to
sanctify a day, and another to command man to sanctify it, but show not the
difference. But you would imply, as if the sencible refreshment of that day (in
a gross sense) were the cause that made God, fall so far in love with it,
where as both you and every man knows that there are no passions of
wearisomnes and refreshment in God, that they should be meant by his resting;
but that it is spoken ad captum vulgi for our better understanding.

1. To exemplarize unto us how that spiritual and heavenly employments should
be a refreshing unto us in comparison of earthly employments; and so far we
were capable of wearisomnes, even in innocence, at to have found other manner
of refreshment in divine and spiritual things then in worldly affairs.

2. To signify the sensible refreshment and happy alteration, that we should
have had in our heavenly rest, from the state and condition that we were in
here on Earth.

But perchance you are of opinion with some, that think Adam should not have
been translated, but have lived immortally upon Earth had he not fallen: But
to this I answer, that by the curse which was annexed to the tree of knowledge,
we may know e contrario, what manner of blessing was promised and intended by
the tree of life, now the curse involued both the first and second death, here
and in hell, so etc. For a further argument I wish them to consider and compare
Romans 3. 23. with Romans
And they indeed that are of this opinion must prove the Sabbath not to
signify our rest in heaven, nor to be given in innocence.

As for your criticisme in the Margin it is not worth the weighing: The
substance of Gods institution in those words being thus much: He blessed the
seventh day, Page 202.
that is (says Master Richard Bifield) he appointed it to be a fountain of
blessing to the observer^ of that day, and sanctified it, that is, commanded it
to be set apart by men from common businesses, and applied to holy uses.

Thus Calvin on the place, this blessing (says he) Calvin^*
was nothing else but a solemn consecration, whereby God claines to himself
the studies and employments of men, on the seventh day.

Thus Master Hildersham.
in his lectures upon the 51. Psalm page 704. says, it is worth the observing
that our Savior says Mark 2. 27. That the Sabbath was at first made for Man,
for the great bene^it and behoof of Man. Man could not (no not Adam in
innocence) have been without it but with great danger and loss unto him. So
that the holy Ghost says, that twice of the Sabbath Genesis 2. 3. and Exodus ^0.
11. that he never said of any other day. That the Lord blessed that day, that
is, appointed it to be a mean of a greater blessing to man (if he keep it
as God has commanded him to do) then any other day, or any of the ordinary
works of any other day can possibly be.

So Marius on Genesis Marius.
2. He blessed it, that is, he consecrated it to his blessing to be kept of
men, and sanctified it, that is, not as if he stamped holiness upon it (as you
would imply) but because he appointed it to his sanctification and praise, and
to the holy conversation of men.

In short, He blessed the seventh day and hallowed it, that is, he digni^^ed
it with this privilege above the six days, that it should be exempted from
their profane and civil actions and negotiations, and dedicated to holy and
sacred employments.

And now whereas you say that Adam should have observed Gods example in
innocence had he stood; I think so too* Wherein you mightily contradict your
self; for why should Adam imitate that, which even now you would have to be
only an action in God, but of no exemplary use to man. But why should the
Sabbath be useful to Adam in innocence (who was so perfect) and not much more
useful to Adam in innocence (who was so perfect) and not much more useful to
the Church of God after? I would feign know. But you go on and say, that Adam
was thrust out Paradise, what then? God had his Church still which was
principally respected by God in the giving of the Sabbath. As appears, in that
as soon as God had taken and selected to himself a noted Church of the
Israelites out of the World, he renewes his institution and command of the
Sabbath to them.
As it is said in the 4. Hebr. 9. There remains a Sabbatisme to the people of
God, that is to his Church, for they are they which in the Scripture sense
shall rest from their labors, and therefore was the Sabbath still in force
though pethaps not in use; although they then, and we now ought to be so much
the more careful to keep it, by how much we stand in need of the blessing of
God, since the curse fallen upon our selves and the whole creation.

Broad.
Neither did he, or his posterity sanctify any Day in an holy rest a long time
after for ought that we do certainly find, or may probably conjecture.

1 The Jews acknowledge that they do not read of Abraham's keeping the
Sabbath, and I may add neither of any others keeping or breaking it, both
before and a good while since Abraham's time, although we do read of
Circumcision, Sacrifices and the breach of other Commandments together with
punishments for the same.

2 Before the Israelites coming out of Egypt I find no mention of Weeks
(which distinction of time the Sabbath causes) as of Days Months and Years,
whereas after their coming forth, and institution of the Sabbath mention is
made as well of Weeks as of any other.

3 Tertullians judgment is that Adam, Lib* advers, I^d.
Noah, Abraham, etc. kept not the Sabbath, and of the same opinion are many
others, so Peter: on Genesis 2.

After that God had delivered the Israelites out of the Egyptian captivity (a
figure of our deliverance from Satan's bondage) as he led them through the
Wilderness toward the Land of Canaan (a Type of the Heavenly Paradise) he gave
them Mannah to to eat, 1. Cor. 10. 3.
so that they did eat the same Spiritual meat with us, even the Lamb Christ
Jesus, slain from the beginning of the World, who though he be not called the
Tree of Life, yet terms himself the bread of Life that came down from
Heaven. This Mannah they gathered six Days; and on the seventh Day Moses
commanded them to rest (for this Commandment was first given by the hand of
Moses for ought that we do find in the Scriptures) and not long after God
called it again to their remembrance: Consider that the word (Remember) is not
used Deuteronomy. 5. nor else wherein the Law or the Prophets.
saying, Remember the Sabbath Day to sanctify it.

Answer.
The sum of this your objection is, that, nor Adam, nor his posterity, for
any thing we can find, santifyed the Sabbath day, till it was given the
Israelites by the hand of Moses I could reply, that throughout the History of
Joshua, Judges and Samuel, we find not the observation of the Sabbath. And
touching that you say you find no mention of Weeks before the Israelites
coming out of Egypt; I could put you to answer that Genesis 29. 27. fulfill her
Week: but it is truth and not victory that I seek, and therefore I rather
desire to resolve my Reader, then to pusle my opposer.


To which I answer, that whether the Sabbath was observed, or not observed, yet
notwithstanding it was of force. For 1. I ask, whether you think, those words
of Gods sanctifying the Sabbath in Innocence, were but a bare narration without
any use or efficacy toward man? Yes say you, they were spoken to man as
considered in Innocence, and had he still remained in Innocence then had he
kept the Sabbath. Whereto I reply that there was nothing that was instituted to
Adam before his Fall, but it was of force after his Fall, excepting such things
from which he was expressly debarred by manifest voice of Scripture (by the
curse and fiery sword) whereof the Sabbath is none.

Again I say if this Institution were proper only to the state of Innocence,
how comes it to be renewed unto the Israelites? and that upon the primitive
reason. Which indeed shows it to be a thing given unto his Church for special
use, and to be coequall with the Law of Nature: for we see that so soon as
God had chosen out of the world a remarkable and established Church, to which
he renewed the Law of Nature; he also, as coincident there with, renews the
Law of the Sabbath; including and determining, in this positive Commandment of
the Sabbath, the Law of Nature: like as other Commandments in the Law directly
forbid the actions of sins, inclusively the habits. 2. Exconcessis. Putting
the case the Sabbath never was kept by the Patriarchs. I answer to it two
things.

First that neither did they keep for the most part the Law of Marriage, for
generally they lived in Poligamy, and yet was that Law of force even in their
times, for one man to marry but one Woman. And therefore when the Pharisees
alleged Moses his Law of Divorcement for the priviledging them to put away
their Wives (which might better authorize their practice therein, then the
Patriarchs omission can justify our neglect of the Sabbath) but how did Christ
answer them? says he, how was it from the beginning? as who say, tell not me
of Moses his Law, which you plead only to maintain your licentiousnes, and
which was only a concessary Law granted for the hardness of your hearts; but
look beyond Moses at God, what he did in the state of Innocence, for that must
be the rule of your practice. So say I, look not at the errors of the
Patriarchs, to do what they did, when we have Gods example to the contrary.
Secondly that to draw an argument, de facto, from man's not keeping the Sabbath,
against the right and institution of the Sabbath is improper: For by the same
reason you may as well argue against the second exhibition of it, because of
the interruption which for any thing we find, it received in the time of the
Babilonish Captivity, as against the first, because it appears not that the
Patriarchs observed it in their time.
Especially if we consider man fallen, whereby the very Law of nature suffered,
but doubtless the Sabbath being grounded upon the covenant of works, and
having by the fall lost its virtue, being thereby made void, its Law was
blotted out and quite raced, by the special hand and permission of God, and
noe wonder, seeing that even in innocence, nay and after his Fall too, during
his abode in Paradise he remembered not to eat of the Tree of Life, where by he
should have lived for ever, Gen: 3. 22. by a like secret but just work of God,
(the cause we shall further see anon) being no Law of Nature, but a necessary
improvement and determination of the Law of Nature in that particular, for the
better accomodating Man for the public and more solemn service and worship
of his Creator, (and therefore was renewed when Gods Church came to be
public and national:) Damascen: de fide Orthod: lib. 4. cap. 24. says, that
when there was no Law nor Scripture, that then there was no Sabbath neither,
but when the Law was given by Moses, then was the Sabbath set a part for Gods
public worship.
as M. Breerwood implies from his observation upon the word Remember annexed:
either (says he) it is because it is not merely moral, and a Law of Nature
as the others are, and therefore being not so effectually imprinted by Nature
in the heart of man, needed a special admonition for the observance, least it
should slip out of mind etc. as it seems it had done of a long time before,
and therefore was renewed with a Memento, as who say, do thou remember to
keep holy the seventh Day, which thy Forefathers have so long forgotten.
Indeed it is evident that it was lost, and Adam despoiled of it by his Fall,
because it was written in Moses his first Tables, which were broken and defaced
by a Fall, to show the fruit of Adams fall; and renewed together with the rest
of the Law in Moses his second Tables, to show that it suffered as well as the
rest, they in the Conscience, it in the memory at the first ordeyning them, and
therefore is renewed together with the rest in the second, with a Memento
prefixed, for this Memonto imports more then a bare Memorandum, even a
different quality of this Law from the rest, else it was as requisite to have
been prefixed to the second as to the fourth Commandment; considering the
Israelites were as inclinable to Idolatry as they were averse from the Sabbath:
see Deuteronomy. 31. 16. And as touching Circumcision and Sacrifices and the other
Commandments, of the breach and punishment whereof, you say we read: I
answer, that they were either the very Laws of Nature, or else Laws given
since the Fall and upon that occasion (for so was Circumcision and Sacrifices)
neither of which is the Sabbath. Not the Law of Nature (as I have said) for
that is only to sanctify some indefinite time to the service of God, as it is
likely all those did in that time of nature between Adam and Moses (where by
the way take notice of the necessarines of the Sabbath to be in the nature of a
Law, for the better performance of Gods solemn worship, and not to be left at
man's liberty) nor is it a Law instituted since the Fall, for its root grows
in Paradise; and therefore not of force with either in that time of little
light; but lay dormant all that while, till it pleased God again to reveal
his more solemn worship to his more solemn Church: Nehem: 9. 13. 14.
And not without good reason too; for besides that our rest was lost by our
Fall till our deliverer (tipified in Moses) renewed it unto us the Sabbath was
significative in its manner of exhibition, for during the time of the Covenant
of works, we see how it was appointed in order after them, following the
works foregoing, both in the primitive institution from Gods own example, and
also in the second exhibition of it to the Israelites, to signify and imply our
Heavenly Sabbatisme, then to be as well the reward of works, as cessation from
works; and now the Covenant of Grace is come, it is made to precede the
working Days, being celebrated now on the first Day of the Week, as before on
the last, to signify that now Heaven is no longer, the reward of works (ex^ept
in an Evangelica^^ sense, and so we still rest from our Labors and our Works
follow us) now who sees not a special providence (like that of Adams not
eating of the Tree of Life during his abode in Paradise implied, Genesis 3. ^2.)
in the non ens of the Sabbath during the interim between the Fall and Moses,
which was a time when the World (as the Apostle Paul says) was without the
Law, that is, without the Covenant of the Law openly revealed to them, as
afterward it was to Israel: so in the same sense, I may say too, it was
without the Gospel, that is, without the Covenant of Grace openly revealed to
them, as not it is to us; because therein it had been clouded and
insignificative. Which signification Bishop White Page: 120, 121.
does even now commend to us from the fourth Commandment: for (says he) it is
not now a Cipher, but the letter of the commandment figureth, represents,
and consequently teaches, the leading of an holy and religious life, that we
may at last enter the Rest of Heaven Heb. 4. 11. etc. Again I would ask you,
where you find the breach of Wedlock found fault withal for their
multiplicity of Wives, or punishment executed therefore; which being no Law of
nature, but a positive Law appointed in Innocence by God, as also was the
Sabbath, not by instinct but by revelation, therefore in those times of darkness
were they alike winked at by God, for herein they sinned not against any known
commandment, (after Adams transgression) but of simple ignorance. And therefore
as the Apostle speaks, Sin was not imputed when there was no Law. Here by
the way let me take in a passage of Dr. Heylins page 123. he says, that the
Jews thought the Sabbath to be no part of the Moral Law, because they brake
it by Circumcision, as thinking Circumcision to be the older Ceremony, and
therefore gave precedence to it (not because it was of Moses but of the Fathers)
Nay (says he) the Jews so far prized the one above the other, that by this
breaking of the Sabbath they were persuaded verily they kept the Law.

These things he observes out of that text, John, 7. 22. Moses (says Christ)
gave unto you Circumcision (not because it was of Moses but of the Fathers) and
you on the Sabbath Day Circumcise a man, that the Law of Moses should not be
broken. To this I answer. 1. That from this text it cannot be gathered that the
Jews thought the Sabbath no moral Law (no more then that they can be said to
think Christ's charitable a^^ of healing the Sick man, to be no moral action
because they persecuted him for it) or if they did, it was their wilful
blindness. For Christ makes it plain (that howsoever Circumcision might, and
ought (as a part of Gods service) be done no doubt on the Sabbath Day, when it
fell out to be the eighth Day according to the Law) that it was their error,
so to overvalew Circumcision out of their superstitious respect of Moses, who
they made the Author of it to them above other Laws which are both in their
Natures higher then that, and which also Moses gave them as well as that, as
we see in the 19 verse of that Chapter: says Christ there, Did not Moses give
you a Law, and yet none of you keeps the Law, by which is meant the Moral
Law which commands Charity and Mercy, which is above Circumcision, and yet
you quarrel with me for observing this Law of Moses or rather of God: and yet
for all that are your selves so nice in observing the performance of
Circumcision for Moses his sake which is so far inferior. So in the 24 verse
he exhorts them to consider it better; that if they might and ought to observe
the ceremonial Law, on the Sabbath, by doing the works thereof, much more
ought he to do the works of charity thereon, which are the duties of the
Moral Law. 2 By the same rule he affirms the Jews not to believe the Weekly
Sabbath to be a part of the Moral Law; he may affirm them not to believe the
Sabbaths of Years to be any commandment of God at all; for a man may say of
them in that case, as he says in this, that surely had they believed them to
be the Commandments of God, that could not b^ affirmed of them which he says
Page: 143. to wit, that they were long neglected, and almost forgotten if
observed at all. 3. Neither did they prize Circumcision, as the ancienter
Ceremony, because it was of the Fathers by any thing that can be gathered from
that text, for it means no such thing but the quite contrary. For Christ
brings these words (not because it was of Moses but of the Fathers) in the way
of Parenthesis in the 22 verse, to show them their error in setting so high a
price upon Circumcision for Moses his sake, seeing Moses was not the first
founder of it, but received it by derivation from the Fathers. So that the
Jews blind conceit of Circumcision in comparison of the Sabbath (were it so as
Dr. Heylin alleges) detracts no more from the morality of the Sabbath, being
a mere misprision, then it did from Christ's act of Charity from being a moral
action, which may serve a caution, not to make the Jews superstitious
practices and blind conceits a rule and argument to regulate our doctrine and
manners by, in this particular of the Sabbath; which is too much leaned upon by
some, Dr. Heylin for one, who in the beginning of his book lays down this
Maxim, that we can have no better Schoolmaster in the things of God, then
the continual and most constant practice of those famous men that have gone
before. Amongst which famous men he brings in the Jew* in their ignorant and
superstitious practices, to overthrow Gods clear precepts, and either shut out
the light of the word, to wrest it to his own and other misguidance, as he
does the text aforesaid; which may yet be further seen in the third mistake
which he makes in the interpretation of those words of Christ in the 23 verse
(because I have made a man every whit whole on the Sabbath Day) which page: 121.
he makes to be spoken by Christ, in his own defense, in reference to the
healing circumstances that accompanied their work of Circumcision, that if
they might break the Sabbath, in healing the party hurt by Circumci^ion, so
might he: whereas it is spoken by Christ in opposition to the greevous and
hurtful nature of their action; for having formerly magnified his work above
theirs from the cause, in that his work was an act of obedience to the Moral
Law, and theirs but to the ^eremoniall, here he magnifieth it also from the
effect, in that his was an action of Mercy restoring to perfect health, and
easing of greevous pain a man that was woefully bedrid; and theirs an action of
blood procuring torment: (For where in all the Scriptue do you find the healing
part of Circumcision) I mean carnally (meant or spoken of) I will conclude, in
advice to such Expositors, both as touching their opinion of the Sabbath and
expounding Scripture, as Christ did to the Jews concerning this matter, in the
24 verse, Judge not according to appearance but Judge righteous Judgment. Now
whereas, you say that this Commandment of the Sabbath was first given to the
Israelites, when they were delivered out of Egypt by the hand of Moses,
intimating hereby as if it should be a Jewish Type and Ceremony, and as if it
should have reference to Christ after the manner of their other abrogative
Ceremonies. To this I answer. That all the rest of the Moral Law was given
them upon their deliverance as well as the Sabbath. And I do think indeed,
that God did purposely take that occasion, the better to signify their
spiritual deliverance by the concurrence of those things, both by bringing
them out of their Egyptian darkness, and at the same time making the Sunshine
of his Law (which had been so ecclypsed ever since the fall) afresh to rise
upon them.

But that the Law of the Sabbath received then a new Institution is no way
probable, but only a renewed one, as did the rest of the Moral Law into which
it is incorporated, and with which it was a share^ in the breach that Adam
made, And so was coequall or contemporary with it in the reparation.
And as may also appear by the tenor of the Commandment it self, which for
substance is nothing else but the first institution largely repeated, only
being better explained to the understandings, and suited to the condition of
those people.

Nor again is the Sabbath a Jewish Type, as appears from the difference of
their significations, for the Typs of the Jews primarily and principally had
relation to the State of the Church on Earth under the time of the Gospel,
Their Types were promises which have their impletion with us, being shadows of
good things to come in the days of the Gospel.
and secondarily or remotely to its State in Heaven; but now the Sabbath had an
immediate and proper respect to Heaven, being Gods rest, as appears both in
the manner of Gods exhibiting it in the wilderness, as you may see in due place,
and in the 4. Heb.

But if it be objected that Canaan is a Jewish Type, Obi.
and that Canaan and the Sabbath signify both of them one and the same rest in
that 4. Heb.

I answer. They do signify the same rest but in different respects, Answ.
for Canaan properly there signifies the Rest which we here enjoyed on Earth
through the Gospel, and improperly or analogically the Rest of Heaven,
relating only thereto, as True to perfect, as Beatitudo viae to Beatitudo
patriae; but the Sabbath properly signifies the rest that God rested in Heaven
from his worldly works, and which now by believing we shall rest with him
there, and improperly signifies the Gospell-rest here on Earth, relating only
to it as Perfect relates to True as Beatitudo Pat^iae relates to Beatitudo
viae, by virtue of our exchanged condition; for what the Law could not give,
that is, any present Rest but all in future, that Faith as a Gospell-priviledge
procures us. So that we which do believe do enter into Rest, even this
Heavenly Rest inchoatively. The sum of the Apostles meaning there being thus
much, that Israel (according to to the letter) not knowing the way of the Lord,
chap. 3. ver. 10. but cleaving to the Law (which was the ministration of death,
graven in stones, that is a weak and dead letter, 2. Cor. 3* 7. and the
ministration of condemnation ver: 9.) forsaking the way of faith, and the
Gospel (which is the ministration of the spirit of Power, 2. Cor. 3. 8. and of
righteousness ver: 9.) they therefore lost through unbeleife, both the
spiritual Rest on Earth, typified by the temporal rest of Canaan, which is
the rest and tranquillity of the Soul entered into by faith, justifying us, and
procuring us Peace with God, which should have redounded to them by the
Preaching of the Gospel (see the 2 and 6 of this 4. Heb.) and also the Rest
and Sabbath in in Heaven which God himself rested, and signified on the
seventh Day after his worldly works were finished, which should have ensued
and followed thereupon (see the later part of the 3. and 4. verses) whereof
we, that are Gods spiritual Israel, that do believe, are possessed already;
both vertually, in our high Priest Christ Jesus verse. 14. and personally in our
selves, by being partakers of this Gospelrest through faith on Earth, which
essentially conduces or relates to the Sabbath-rest in Heaven (compare the
beginning and the ending of the 3. verse.) Like as 5. Matthew. 6. they are said
for present to be blessed that but hunger and thirst after righteousness, and
what is the reason, why, says Christ they shall be filled: Christ means they
are entered into such an estate, as does give them right, and will bring them to
full blessedness; They are therefore for present truly blessed because they
shall be fully blessed: So here in this 4. Hebr. this Gospel-rest and
Sabbath-rest are interwouen, being continuous and of the same nature, relating
one to another as true and perfect do. So that, I say, the Apostle means,
that God swear, that for their unbeleefes sake, they should not taste nor
partake, neither his rest on Earth in the Land of Canaan flowing with milk and
honey, and where with rejoicing hearts, they should liberally have eaten the
good things of the Land; (idest) the rest of the Gospel, making their souls
flow with the milk and honey of peace of conscience and joy in the holy Ghost,
and wherein are bid to come, and eat that which is good, and to drink the
wine on the lees, and to fill themselves with marrow and fat things the
spiritual Israel of God: Neither that rest, by which God himself rested from
his works of creation verse 4. and which they also should have rested with him
in Heaven, when all things were or should be finished by consummation, verse
3. as once they were by perfection.

By their unbeleefe they made themselves incapable both of the rest of Christ
here, who should have led their souls into a land of uprightnes, flowing with
the milk and honey of righteousness, peace and joy in the holy Ghost, and of the
rest of God hereafter, that everlasting rest and Sabbath, which they should
have held with him in Heaven, resting from their works as he did from his.
They should partake neither the one nor the other, neither Christ's rest nor
Gods, indeed no rest at all, neither temporal spiritual nor eternal, neither
Canaans rest, nor the Gospels rest, nor the Sabbaths rest; For verse 3. God
swear in his wrath, that they should nor enter into his rest, no not although
the works were finished from the foundation of the World, neither beginning nor
end, less nor more, first nor last of his rest should they taste or partake of
by the works of the Law, refusing the righteousness of God by faith; For he
inlargeth his enraged malediction from one part to the whole rest. And thus
much Mayer expresses in short, in his exposition of the 12. and 13. verses of
this 4. Hebr. saying, that those words cohere with the former thus, Let us take
heed that we perish no^ for want of believing the word, being deprived of
inward rest and peace here, and shut out from the eternal rest hereafter, For
the word of God is full of life, etc.

And here note by the way from those words (although the works were finished
from the foundation of the World in the third verse) how the Sabbath keeps and
is expressed in its supereminency (which it had before, in its preferment to a
place among the 10. commandments, and precedence of rest in the wilderness) for
what do they signify, but that they should not partake of his last and
greatest rest hereafter with himself in heaven, no more then of his less and
present rest of Canaan and the Gospel.

Likewise also it appea^es, ^o be no Jewish type, from the different relations
they had to Christ: For the Jewish types did relate to him properly as the
shadow to the body being created for his sake, but the Sabbath (as the Law)
accidentally to be fulfilled and accomplished by him, because they had
miscarried by us. And in this does the supereminency of the Sabbath appear, in
that Christ for himself as well as for us is a sharer in this types
signification; For in respect of this rest, is he said to sit now at Gods
right hand, by which gesture signifying rest, is intimated, as well his resting
from the labors and pains he underwent here, as any other thing, for whereas
he had the evil and we the good of other types, of this he tastes the
sweet as well as we. And therefore he says to his Disciples, If ye loved
me, ye would rejoice because I go to my Father. Indeed Christ only inherited
the last day Sabbath, according to the first covenant, and has left the first
day Sabbath for us to inherit by the second covenant.

But you will say, Obi.
surely there cannot choose but be somewhat in it, that the Sabbath was
instituted by Moses upon the occasion of Mannah, as it appears in the 16. of
Exodus before God gave the moral Law on mount Sinai.

I acknowledge, Ans.
though the Sabbath be of a transcendent nature to the other types, yet as all
other things so also the Sabbath has reference to Christ, in regard of the
state of the Church since the fall: For as now the whole moral Law is
fulfilled by Christ for us, and therefore was given upon their deliverance out
of their Egyptian bondage: so also is the Sabbath, in its celestial
signification, made good to us now by a new accomplishment, to wit, only by
Christ: He it is now that does only make us righteous in the sight of God,
and he also it is that now alone makes us partakers of the rest of God; For
as they were to enjoy and feed upon Mannah in Heaven with rest; so they were to
have this rest by Mannah (id est) Christ.

And therefore I confess that there is very much matter in it; that thus the
Sabbath does precede the giving of the Law There was almost nothing that befell
the Israelites in the time of their being in the wilderness, but it was typical.
(like as there was in Gods giving the promise to Abraham before circumcision
Romans 4. 11. And indeed they should have made that use of this order of the
Sabbath, being instituted upon Mannah, before the giving of the Law: That the
law which was to follow did not frustrate the promise of salvation, and life,
which long before was made in Christ, Gal. 3. 17* 18. and therefore followed as
conducing to it which went before, but that the same rest or eternal
Sabbatisme, which should have been by the Law is now to be had by Christ.
) and does also follow so immediately the gathering of Mannah (and that a double
portion of Mannah) for hereby is signified, how that now our heavenly rest is
not procured by our own righteousness of the Law (though once it was annexed to
it) but that he only, who by faith does gather, and lay up a large proportion
of Christ, shall certainly have this Sabbatisme of everlasting rest in Heaven
succeed unto him, See. Romans 5. 17. (and for the very self same cause it is,
that now our Sabbath is celebrated after the day of Christ's resurrection) See
also Doctor Tailor in his Christ revealed page 268. where he says, that
Mannah fell on the evening of the Sabbath in a double quantity, signifying the
double diligence that we must use to get Christ while we are in this life,
which is as the even of our eternal Sabbath. And that upon condition of our
diligence and care here below, we shall have supply enough of all grace
without labor and gathering, when Christ shall be all in all to all Israel
gathered unto him.

So that, I say, the duty of the Sabbath followed as a Law, together with the
Law, for us always to observe, and that the signification of it went before,
to signify that our claim to this heavenly Sabbatisme is now only by Christ.

And thus you may see, how you have laid your foundation upon a false ground or
principle, by mistaking the Sabbaths, signification, and in what manner it
refers to Christ.

And thus by consequence your whole building falls to the ground, although it
be granted that the Sabbath is both typical, and ( rebus sic stantibus) has
relation to Christ also.

Broad.
What God requires on the Sabbath.
THe duties which God required of the people of Israel, He required another of
the Priests namely to offer two Lambs, Number. 28. but this I will not stand upon.
on the Sabbath were two especially.

(I.)
To rest from work, By servile the Scripture means all work except that is
bestowed about things to eat, Lev. 23. 7. 8. compared with Exodus 12. 16.
that is, to forbear the doing of every thing which is commonly so called and
accounted, as the killing ^of beasts, kindling of fires, going to plow,
travailing etc. on the first and last days of the feast of Passover, and some
other holidays only servile work is prohibited Levit. 23. 7. 8. 21. etc.
Number. 28. 18. 25. so that they might provide things to eat, Consider that the
Sabbath was ordained for a memorial of Gods resting whereas the holy days
were instituted upon other occasions.
Exodus 12. 16. No manner of work must be done in them, save that which every
one must eat, that only may be done of you. But now on the Sabbath Day they
might not do so much: For G^d never (that I find) mentioning the word servile,
both in the commandment and other places says in it, Thou shall not do any
work.

They might not bake nor sees their Mannah, Exodus 16. 23.
though on the other Holy Days they might both gather and dress it, yet they
might not so much as dress it on the Sabbath.

They were forbidden to kindle a fire which when a man belike would have done,
Exodus 35. 5.
and therefore gathered sticks, he was put to death, and be it (as some say)
though without any ground, that the manner of doing did aggravate the offense,
yet sure I am that it did not make that an offense which had other-wayes been
none, they might not then ordinarily pick up a few sticks.

(II.)
A second special duty which God required o^ the Sabbath was to have an holy
convocation, for it was not enough to worship God privately, they must go to
the assemblies and praise him in the congregation. To worship God privately was
every days duty, as likewise to do works of charity, for the Jew (as we) was
bound by the Law of nature to fulfill the nine moral commandments to the
utmost of their power every day, though indeed he might perform the duties of
piety and charity in greater measure (and therefore was bound so to do) on the
Sabbath, as having then more opportunity, idleness being unlawful at all times.

Answer.
By the first of these duties you seem to me to insinuate a Dilemma,
intimating by it that either the Sabbath is merely Jewish, or else that in all
respects both of the duty and strictnes of rest it belongs to us as to them.
Which strictnes you prove by comparing it with the other Sabbaths, which had
only servile work forbidden in them. The proof I grant, and the thing
^roved. But that the Sabbath is therefore only Jewish, or that we are bound
so to observe it, I deny upon these grounds.

1. I deny that therefore the Sabbath is only Jewish. 1. Because that though
this strict rest was typical, yet not properly Jewish, because not of the same
nature with Jewish types: For that those which were properly types in a Jewish
sense, had relation to Christ's and the constitution of his Church, as
considered properly and primarily upon Earth in its militant being, in the time
of grace during Christ's regiment: For though Aarons bearing the names of the
Tribes on his shoulders and breast, signified Christ doing the same (for his
elect) in Heaven, yet it is his elect still on Earth, not for his elect when
they shall be triumphant in Heaven and sic de caeteris.
but the signification typified in this rest was of a different nature, for
propetly it signified the Church triumphant in Heaven it self; which typical
difference may easily appear, only by comparing this Sabbath with the other
Sabbaths as shall be seen anon; And secondly, because that this strict rest
was no part of the substance of the Sabbath, but only an occasional
circumstance proper for the season of their prer^grination; For so sooone as
Mannah failed that strict rest failed, so that you never after knew them
condemned for providing their necessary food on the Sabbath Day, although you
find them often complained on for other breaches.

2. And although that thus I deny this strict rest to be properly Jewish, yet I
deny it not to be proper only to the Jews, but affirm it, both in respect
of the duty I mean here by (duty) sanction or positive holiness, else to rest
is our duty as well as theirs.
of this rest, as also in respect of the precisenes of it. 1. For the duty of
this rest, I say that, that was proper to the Jews, and not to us now; Because
that types in the time of their Discipline Which was the time that the letter
bare sway, and (comparatively) not the Spirit.
carried with them a positive holiness, being (for its continuance) ordinances
and not accidents: But now that external religion which consisted in types, is
properly no part of our worship (although the thing it self (in this
particular being a perpetual type) remains in the use and signification of
it, but as I say not in its temporary holiness or occasional precisenes (for
the Kingdom of Heaven now consists in righteousness, peace and joy in the holy
Ghost, and not in typical sanctions.

For we must understand that the Sabbath, in it self considered without
accidents was of a perpetual typical meaning, intending the absolute rest
that should be to the Church of God in Heaven, as is notoriously evident in
the fourth of Hebr. by comparing the 4. verse with the 9. and 10. For which
cause it may well be conceived to be holy, even with an external holiness, as
other types were, in the minority of those typical times, in respect of the
bare rest therein commanded; which yet in that sense is no part of our
sanctification (for our sanctification, in respect of this rest, properly
consists in the signification thereof spiritualized in our hearts, and in the
privative sense thereof; because our resting from worldly affairs is a
necessary privative means to our sanctifying the Sabbath) Like as (in the
Antitype) our rest in Heaven it self from Worldly works will be then no part
of our positive happiness, but only a privative help to our absolute
glorifying God there, as it is to our better sanctifying of the Sabbath here.

And yet for all this (as I have said before) not to rest on that day, but to
employ our selves worldlily, in inward or outward works of mind or body, in
thought word or deed, ^ill prove our sin, To prove that the Lords day is to
be observed with the like strictnes of us, as the ancient Sabbath was among
the Jews, a neighbor Minister brings this argument. If (says he) the
reasons of the command of strict rest, to the Jews, on the Sabbath belong as
well to us as to them; Then the command it self belongs as well to us as to
them: But the reasons (rendered in the 4. commandment, and in the 58. of Isa.
13. Because it is the Sabbath of the Lord, and because it is the Lords
Holy Day, and other reasons also, as because carnal works an^ employments are
impediments to the solemn and spiritual performance of Gods holy worship and
service; and again all those duties which were commanded them as essential to
a Sabbath, such as were abstinence from carnal labors and pleasures, which
destroy the nature of a Sabbath, (which is 1. to rest. 2. to rest a spiritual
and holy rest to God) These reasons (says he) belong as well to us as to them
(if any Sabbath or holy day of the Lords remains to be observed of us, which
there does, Revel. 1. 10. Where by the way take notice it is called the Lords
day, and not the Lords time, to answer an objection of some that say we are
not bound to keep a whole day holy day or Sabbath, and therefore not to rest
saving in the time of public assemblies, besides we find not any time in all
the Scriptures set apart as holy day to the Lord but a whole day was the space
of time) Therefore the commandment it self both in the negative part thereof,
not to follow labor, not to follow pleasure, and in the affirmative part, to
follow holy exercises is required of us Christians, not only by way of
Analogy, but as precise commands by just consequence.
For because hereby we both falsify our present duty which we owe to the
commandment, which injoyneth it us as a significant privative means for
sanctifying the Sabbath, and also make void the useful signification of the
typical sense, which consists in our resting from all Worldly affairs, that
we may the more fully devote our selves to things spiritual and heavenly,
such as are praising God, meditating of the life and rest to come etc. for of
that nature shall be our heavenly employment, We know the Israelites
separation from the heathen, did not make them the true Israel of God, for they
were made such only by their faithful and true serving of God; and yet if
they intermixed themselves with the heathen it was a profanation and sin unto
them: So a cessation or separation of the Sabbath Day from Worldly employments
is no positive part of our sanctifying the Sabbath (though it might be in the
time of the Jews) for that our sanctification consists in Spirit and truth,
not in the literal and outward performance of rest, and yet must we of
necessity and duty cease that we may sanctify it. For it is with the
Lord's Day as with all other things, that if it be sanctified to the end, then
it is sanctified to the means: And as the Scripture says, a man cannot serve
God and Mammon especially on this Day, but we should utterly forsake the one,
that we may more completely cleave to the other: By Mammon I mean, as well
our carnal pleasures all profits, for on that day (according to the Antitype)
all should be heavenly; If ever we did the will of God as it is done in
heaven, it should be on that day.

And as Master Hildersham observes Lect. 51. Psalm page 710. Hildersham.
God hates rioting on the Sabbath, much more then he does working on the
Sabbath: as it is plain by Isaiah 58. 13. where in one verse he names and
forbids twice the following of our pleasures, as the chief profanation of the
Sabbath Day. If thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath, from doing thy
pleasure on mine holy day, and call the Sabbath a delight, the holy of the
Lord, honorable, and shall honor him, not doing thine own ways, nor finding
thine own pleasure, nor speaking thine own words etc.

But Bishop White page 257. Obi.
objects against Sunday Sabbatizers precepts (as he calls them) concerning
the crying down of carnal recreations, and setting up spiritual duties to
be actually and without intermission continued the whole space of a natural
day, which says he can be no branch of the Law of Christ, nor yet
consentaneous thereunto, for this reason: Because the Law of Christ is sweet
and easy, Matthew. 11. 30. and his commandments are not greevous, 1. Ioh. 5. 3.

I answer, Ans.
I never knew that this was to be expounded after the flesh, but after the
Spirit: By the same rule he may cry down all fasting, all abstaining from
beloved lusts, and heavenly mindednes now under the Gospel, and quite blot out
the Apostles advice, to use the things of this World as if we used them not.

But may some say, Obi.
if rest be no part of sanctifying the Sabbath, how then are we said to
sanctify it at night when we go to bed?

Not that your rest is any sanctification of it, Answ.
no more then your spiritual labor is a breach of it, but because that in so
doing, thou do an act of mercy to thy body when thou sleep, as well as
when thou eatest at due times, and in a due measure: And indeed thou ought
to do it with this or some such like consideration, and not merely sensually
as an ox or an ass, for God should have special glory by every thing we do
that day; And whatsoever we do, without a special and spiritual relation to
God on that day, that may properly be called our work, and so our sin: For
though things necessary be lawful to be done, yet not as on the week day,
but with much more spiritualized affections and heavenly mindednes. To the same
purpose speaks one that writ upon this subject, saying, men may not do the
lawful works of their calling neither in providing meat, drink, clothes, or
other necessa^ies on the Lord's Day, with a bare respect of natural good, and
worldly p^ofit, because this is doing of his own ways and works, and not the
work of God, unto which Gods Holy Day it wholly consecrated and set apart. So
no bodily sports, recreations and pleasures are to be used merely to cherish
the flesh and refresh the body, but only such as are in very deed needful in
themselves, and used and intended by Gods people with this purpose and ^o this
end, that they may with more ability, alacrity, and cheerefulnes do the holy
works and duties of Gods worship and service which are proper to that day.


2. For the precisenes of the rest which you here speak of, I also affirm
that that was proper only to the Jews (as also to that time of their
preregrination in the wilderness) and not to us, for because it was no part of
the substance of the commandment or Sabbath, but only an adventitious or
temporary circumstance (for illustration sake) begun and ended in the wilderness.

For the Jews being a people in their time under a typical discipline, God
chose that time and this occasion of feeding them with Mannah in the wilderness
(which the Scripture calls Angels food because it came so immediately from
Heaven) the more clearly to exemplify the lively signification of the
Sabbaths rest, which being always typical, should be much more so in their
time; For they having other Sabbaths commanded them with strict rest, this must
be imposed upon them with stricter rest; else they should not learn its
proper meaning and difference: And for this cause did he command it with so
much strictnes at that time, even to their not gathering nor preparing Mannah
(when as yet their other Sabbaths were commanded them with liberty to make
ready what they should eat) the better to testify the different nature, and
eminent signification of that Sabbath above the other; For the rest of the
Jewish Sabbaths were not so absolute, because they were only appointed to
signify the rest which every believer, and the whole Church has here by
Christ on Earth* to wit, a rest but an interrupted rest, like to their rest in
the Land of Canaan, not absolute, but interrupted and of a mixed nature, in
regard of such things which are necessary to befall us in this life; whereas
the weekly Sabbath signified the rest which the company of believers should
have in Heaven (as it is in the fourth of Hebr. 9. There remains a rest
therefore to the people of God) which is absolute and without any mixture,
because that in Heaven we shall be at Gods immediate finding, as they were
th^n whilst they were in the wilderness, but never after.

And therefore did so much of that rest, as wherein it surpassed the other
Sabbaths, cease for after time both to them and us, because that God ceased to
rain Mannah, which gave life to that circumstance of strict rest, commanded
them at that time. (So that Doctor Heylins observation page 145. How that after
their return from the Babylonish captivity, in their redress of their Sabbath
sins, they had no less care of the annual Sabbaths, and Sabbaths of years,
then of the weekly; and the markets were no more restrained on the weekly
Sabbath then on the annual, might have been spared, as making nothing for his
purpose.)

And therefore so to rest now in our days, as not to provide our necessary
food, And we have Christ's example to warrant it in the 14. Luke by comparing
the 8. 12. 13. verses.
seeing God cease to rain Mannah were to create types to our selves, and to
cloud that light with a veil of our own making: For the extraordinary strict
rest was by God then only commanded, when by him they were extraordinarily
accommodated to observe it, which shall be fulfilled only in Heaven, when
again we shall only be at Gods immediate finding, and shall again eat
Angel food as they did in the wilderness. Says Doctor Tailor, Christ revealed,
page 269.
the not gathering Mannah on the Sabbath signified, that in that eternal
Sabbath we shall enjoy Mannah without means.

So that in the mean time we are not forbidden to be charitable to our
bodies by preparing necessary food. Justin Martyr. Neither think it greevous
that we drink some warm thing on the Sabbath, seeing God also governs the
World on this day in like manner as he does another days.
Although I could wish with all my heart, that we were more charitable to the
souls of our servants, then many of us are, and not on that day so to pamper
our bodies, as to starve their souls that are under our charge, and for whom
we must give account; especially if we consider that other meaning which God
had, in prohibiting the gathering and preparing Mannah on the Sabbath Day, so
much inculcated by divines, to wit, that it is not earthly but heavenly Mannah,
that is, the food and welfare of our souls, which on that day our appetite
ought chiefly to stand to, as we see by the example of Christ's Disciples,
Matthew 12. 1.

And that this strict rest was only proper to that season, and not to us, I
further prove it by two contexts

The first is out of the 16. Exodus 29. compared with the 27. where when the
people went to gather Mannah contrary to Gods commandments, Moses rebuked them
saying: Behold how the Lord has given you the Sabbath, therefore he gives
you bread for two days, tarry therefore every man in his place, let no man go
out of his place (to wit, to gather Mannah) on the seventh day; where we see
the reason of that extraordinary rest was because of Gods extraordinary
provision, See Tunius his reason in his comment upon the 26* verse of this chap.
so that when the one ceased the other which depended on it ceased also.

The second place is Numb. ^5. 32. where it is said, that (whilst the children
of Israel were in the wilderness) they found a man that gathered sticks upon
the Sabbath Day; mark the phrase (whilst they were in the wilderness) how it
seems to restrain that strict kind of rest to that place and that time, for
many worse breaches were made after they were out of the wilderness, and yet noe
such punishment inflicted.

Besides it is a rule, that every moral duty may be performed of all men, but
under the North Pole they cannot be one day without fire, and they near the
equinoctial cannot keep their meat for heat, therefore this cannot take
place among them, and so not general to all, nor perpetual to be observed
for ever.

Whereas some interpret, that Law of the Israelites not kindling fires, to be
meant in relation to the building of the Tabernacle, which though in it self
it be true, that being one end happily of that inhibition; yet it is not the
only meaning of that Law, for they were not to bake nor sees their food on
that day, as appears Exodus 16. 23. as also by the example of the man that was
stoned for gathering sticks on the Sabbath Day, which it is propable was not
for the Tabernacles use, but to bake, sees or warm some food, neither was it
lawful for them to kind^^ fires after the Tabernacle was finished, during
their abode in the wilderness. But there are others that interpret those words
of Exodus 16. 23. ( Bake (...) ye will bake to day, and sees that ye will
(...)) in this manner, that is say they, bake and boil according as you use to
do, what you think sufficient for the present day, and for the rest let it
be laid up to be baked or boiled to morrow. Which (...) be the meaning for
these reasons.

1. Because of the example of the man aforesaid, that was stoned for gathering
sticks, it is probable, to that end.

2. (...) the difference between this Sabbath and their other Sabbaths would
be confounded, whereas they were distinctly in express terms allowed to make
ready what they should eat.

And thirdly, because it would have clouded the significancy of their gathering
and preparing a large proportion of Christ, to assure them of the Sabbatisme to
come.

And fourthly, because when the Sabbath day came Moses in the 25. verse of 16.
Chap. said not as before in the 23. vers^, Bake that ye will bake to day, and
sees that ye will sees, But he says, only eat that to day, to wit, which
they had laid up baked or sodden since the day before.

And fifthly, Those words bake what ye will bake to day, and sees what ye
will sees; and that which remains, lay it up, is not meant in respect of the
indifferency of proportion, as if he had said bake what proportion and sees
what proportion ye think good; and lay up the rest raw; but it respects the
indifferency of their cooking it, intimating that they might either bake it and
sees it, or bake it or sees it as their fancy liked best, so that they did it
on that day before the Sabbath, for on the Sabbath they were not to alter the
property, but to eat what they had le^^, as they left it. In this new-sangled
fancy you shall find Doctor (...) Brahourne agreed, part. I. page 100. 101.
where to back this exposition Doctor Heylyn object^, that it were no wonder if
being baked it purified not.

To which I answer, that the wonder was that (...) kept it until the morning
(...) to the command) (...) either raw or baked, a great deal longer time
without putrefying: Though it having the formerly (...) first (which among so
many it is like was reserved of all sorts, some raw, some baked, some boiled
all which yet purified alike) it was then indeed a wonder, that it did not the
like the second time when they kept it lawfully; which shows that it was of
God, and not of the nature of the thing, both that it putrified the first time,
and that it putrified not the second time that it was kept. But to put this
upstart exposition utterly out of question, besides the reasons aforesaid: Let
them compare the 23. verse with the 5. verse whither Moses relates, and there
they shall find God commanding them to prepare that which they bring in on the
6. day; and what was that? why it follows, twice so much as they gather
daily. So that they were to prepare all they brought in, and they brought in
all they gathered, and they gathered twice as much as they gathered on the
other days. So that in sum* it is evident that on the sixth day they were to
prepare, that is to cook, or make ready by seething or baking the whole double
proportion which they had gathered on that day.

Nor is it without ground (as you affirm) to say, of this man's gathering
sticks, that his manner of doing it did aggravate his offense, for there are
these grounds to induce it.

1. Because, if it had been necessary, it had not been unlawful, no more
then David's eating the Shewbread, for Christ says in this very case of the
Sabbath, That God will have mercy and not Sacrifice.

2. It is more then probable by the context, that his Sin was out of
Presumption; for in the verses immediately foregoing it is said, He that does
ought presumptuously shall be cut off from his people, and then follows the
instance of this man's fact, as it were an example of this fault and this
punishment, which we never read afterward to be inflicted upon any.

3. We find no excuse he made for his fact, so that it either was not
necessary; or if necessary, yet occasioned by his wilful and careless neglect
of making his Mannah ready the day before, according to the Commandment and so
not excusable.

Now as touching your marginall consideration, how that the Sabbath was
ordained in memorial of Gods resting.

To this I answer, That we do not celebrate on the Sabbath the memory of Gods
bare resting, no more then we do Christ's bare rising; but we celebrate the
consummation of the work of Gods goodness in the Creation, and of his Mercy in
our Redemption, for Gods resting on that Day from the Creation, was no part of
the Sabbaths sanctification, but a cause in him why he appointed the seventh
Day to be a sanctified Sabbath unto us; no more then Christ's Resurrection on
the first Day of the Week was a part of the sanctification of that Day, but
only the cause why we sanctify it, or dedicate it to Rest and Divine
employment ever since.

And therefore in vain does B. White object p. 302. that Christ's Resurrection
was no Commandment containing an institution of a new Sabbath, in that he
erringly says (as elsewhere I show) that it was not spent in resting but in
action; seeing says he, the ground of the old Sabbath was Rest. But we do
not simply celebrate Gods rest; but his Rest or accomplishment of our Creation,
as it has relation to us, not as that rest simply respects God, for so it
is, meant only as a pattern, and serves as an occasion to beget this ordinance
of the Sabbath, as we may see by the manner of expression that is used to set
forth the Sabbaths first institution, Genesis 2. 2. 3. where Gods rest is not only
mentioned to be on the seventh Day, but also his completing the work of
Creation verse. 2. upon both which jointly, follows the institution of the
Sabbath verse. 3. and as we may also see by the prophecy in Isai. 65. 17.
where the commemoration of the benefit of one Creation shall eat out the other.

Indeed Gods resting the seventh Day was of twofold use. The one of
illustration, for thereby was signified the Rest of Gods Church in Heaven, as
appears in the 4 of Heb. The other was to give us an example of retiring our
selves from earthly things on that Day, For so on that Day God (as it were)
returned to Heaven again, only to be conversant there for ever after, having
(as it were) been absent during the Creation. As it is said Genesis 17. 22. And he
left of talking with him and God went up from Abram.
that so we might devote it to his glory: for this Resting of God was only set
as an example for us to imitate, the better to obey his Commandment.

But more are willing to observe his example, then to obey his precept, that
is, to cease from bodily labor; then to be spiritually employed in the
sanctifying of that Day, by making it a Day of holy businesses, and
consequently a day of blessing. Thus using their Rest either swinishly or
superstitiously as the Jews did theirs Ignatius ad Mag: says let us not
Sabbatize after the Jewish manner, as rejoicing in Idleness, for he that does
not labor let him not eat says the Scripture, but let every one of us keep
the Sabbath spiritually rejoicing in the meditation of the Law, not in the ease
of our bodies; admiring the workmanship of God, not ea^^ng things of the Day
before, nor drinking things lukewarm nor walking measured paces, nor
rejoicing in Dancings and mad Shoutings, and clapping of the Hands and Feet.


But such ought to know that Gods example in resting, was not the sum of his
commandment concerning the Sabbath, nor the proper duty enjoined therein, but
only the occasion of his Commandment, and a means appointed for the
fulfilling of it, as appears in the tenor of the fourth Commandment, where
it is said that because God rested the seventh Day from the work of Creation,
Therefore he blessed the seventh Day and hallowed it.

What you say of the second Duty, is true, both in the letter and in your
meaning, as I conceive it; except you mean that the sanctifying of the Sabbath
consists only of the time of public Duties, which I cannot believe you do,
because you speak of private, as well as public worship: and again because
of your adjuration prefixed to your Treatise.

Herein you give an Answer to some of your Partisans, as B. White page 140.
etc. and Dr. Heylin. page 113. 114. who says, that two things the Lord
commanded concerning the keeping holy of the Sabbath. The one in relation to
the people which was to rest, and the other in reference to the Priests which
was to offer sacrifice, but of any Sabbath duties which were to be performed
between them jointly (says he) we find not. And again (says he) of any
reading of the Law, or exposition of the same unto the people, or public form
of prayers to be presented to the Lord in the Congregation, we find no
footestep till Nehemiahs days, after their return out of the Babilonish
captivity. And again though resting from work^^ were a thing commanded, yet
(says he) the employment of this Rest to particular purposes, either of
contemplation or devotion, that is not declared unto us in the word of God, but
left at large to the liberty of the people. So also Bishop White page: 144.
says. That there should be any public or solemn reading or expounding of
the Law, every Weekly Sabbath Day, is not expressly required and commanded in
the Pentateuch, And again he says Page: 146. After the captivity the Jews
frequented their Synagogues upon the Sabbath Days, and Moses was read: but
(says he) this was not commanded in the Decalogue, or by any express sentence
or Mandat of Moses Law.

Answer. These Antisabbatarians discover a strange partiality, for where as
they jeere others, for their too precisely calling for a Scriptum est for the
proof of every circumstance; yet now when the point comes in issue for
themselves, they fly to the same way of argumentation, Non invenimus, non
scriptum est. So Bishop White page: 41. cannot find the will of God in the 2.
Gen: touching the sancti^ying the Sabbath, but brings this as an argument to
justify 3 Pr^lepsis. That there is no other means for us to know what the will
and act of God was Gen: 2. but only divine revelation, and the holy Scripture
neither makes mention of any Commandment of God given to Adam concerning his
resting upon the Sabbath Day, etc. And again page 43. There are no commanding
or imperative words, nor any sentence declaring or signifying a precept in Gen
2. And yet we plainly find an example of God in that Gen: 2. 23. 24. parallel
to this of the Sabbath (nay so^ewhat short) to pass for a Law, and to have a
binding in^erence inferred thereupon, as I have more at large observed in the
beginning of my Answer to M. Broads 7. chap.


And yet in the practice of our Church, there are some things for which not
having express Scripture, we lawfully build them upon proper deductions; as
for Baptizing of Children; we find in Scripture that the Apostles Baptized
whole Families, amongst which say we, its most likely there were some Children.

But in this matter of the Sabbath, no consequences must be allowed by our
Antisabbatarians. There must be nothing but a bare rest commanded by God to the
People, no private contemplation nor public devotion; although (as M. Broad
says) God required as a special Duty on the Sabbath to have an holy
Convocation (and so it is expressly called Levit. 23. 3.) for it was not enough,
says he, to worship God privately, but they must go to the Assemblies and
praise him in the Congregation: Idleness being unlawful at all times. And
indeed if God may be suffered to tell his own meaning, we find it plain
enough what he meant (which sure must be his command, else the Jews erred not
in seeking salvation and life by the right cousnes of the Law, though God meant
it as a ^choolemaster to bring the unto Christ) Isa^ah 58 13 where he says, If
thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath, from doing thy pleasure on my Holy
Day, and call the Sabbath a delight, the Holy of the Lord, hon^rable, and shall
honor him not doing thine own ways, nor finding thine own pleasure, nor
speaking thine own words, then shall thou delight thy self in the Lord, etc.
which shows us the meaning of those words of the Commandment, Remember that
thou keep holy the Sabbath Day, and the end of that Rest which in the
following words of the Commandment is enjoined, which (as the other
Commandments) employed more then is expressed. And Bishop White says page 146.
That some other religious actions were intended by God as the end of the
precept, notwithstanding that no other, but Rest, was formally commanded. If
then religious actions were the end of Gods command, surely then rest must be
properly enjoined as the subordinate means usefully and significantly
conducing to fulfill that end. And what a perversencs this shows in men to
dispute upon Chimeraes, and to frame ac^y arguments of supposition^s in matter
of fact among the Jews, when Gods purpose (which ought to give meaning to his
Laws, and to sway our judgments) is both known and acknowledged.

Which place of Isaiah Dr. Heylin page: 174 will have to signify a spiritual
Sabbath in abstaining from doing evil, which in the Page foregoing he says
was figured unto us in the fourth Commandment. But it is apparent that the
works and pleasures there prohibited are so our own, as that we have
intimated a liberty to use them at another time which is our own, though not
at this time which is so especially and extraordinarily Gods, so as the
employment of that time ought to be Gods in like manner (like as the works
mentioned in the fourth Commandment, are such as may be done on the six Days
though not on the seventh) but the employments and pleasures of Sin we have
no liberty to own and use as ours.

And had he consulted, Bishop Hall in locum, he might have been better
informed of the true meaning of this text, who thus senses it. If thou shall
refrain thy foot from walking (far or servdely) on the Sabbath, and
refrain thy self from doing thine own works, or taking thine own carnal
pleasures on my holy day, and shall contrarily take delight in a conscionable
sanctifying of that Day of the Lord, as that which is by thee accounted a Day
of consecration to the Lord, and worthy of great reverence and honor etc.
Wherein he gives Bishop White the shocke Page: 232. who says, That honest and
moderate recreations were not forbidden either in the Law, or in the Prophets
in literal and express terms (for no other will be allowed) as also Page:
237, says he, I find no formal or express prohibition either in the text of
the fourth Commandment, or in any other sentence of Moses Law simply
restraining the Jews and Israelites from the use of honest recreations upon
their Weekly Sabbath Day.

Besides, we find the Levites were dispersed abroad throughout all the Tribes,
and so were many of the Priests among the People, whose office it was to teach
the Children of Israel the difference between clean and unclean things, and
all the Statutes which the Lord had spoken by the hand of Moses. Levit. 10. 11.
So that it was their office to teach the People (whether with the book of the
Law or without it I will not dispute) but as it was their office to teach, so
it was the Peoples duty to learn, Both which are implicd Esi. 30. 20. in those
words. Yet shall not thy teachers be removed into a corner any more, but thine
eyes shall see thy teachers.
which was the fittest to be performed, on both parts, on holy times (appointed
to that end by God for holy Convocations) and accordingly we find the practices
of the religious Shunamite to be, who (it seems by her Husbands question) was
wont to make the new Moon and Sabbath Day the ordinary times of her repairing
to the Prophet, for the due celebration of them. And though it fall out for her
to be named alone, yet it is like it was the practice of others also that
feared God (though perchance through corruption of manners among the Jews
there was no order taken for solemn meetings) to repair and meet together,
for the celebration of those times, according as they could most conveniently
accommodate themselves for that purpose.

And to mend the matter D. Heylin Page: 141 brings the authority of Gaudentius
Brixianus and Cyrill against himself making them speak thus. The Jews (says
Gaudentius) neglecting those spiritual Duties which God commanded on that Day,
abused the Sabbaths rest unto ease and Luxury. For whereas (says Cyrill) they
being free from temporal cares ought to have employed that Day to spiritual
uses, and to have spent the same in modesty and temperance and in repetition
and commemoration of Gods holy word, they on the other side did the contrary
wasting the Day in Gluttony and Drunkenness and idle delicacies.

Moreover by his Rule we should think the Levites sanctified no Sabbath,
neither the Priests that were scattered among the People. 1. Because we find
nothing thereof recorded. 2. By this rule of separation of Priest and People,
they should indeed have nothing to do toward it, for they did not officiate
in the duty of sacrificing, nor were they Laicke People to whom rest was
commanded. Neither should we believe that Prophecy of Simeon and Levi (I will
divide them in Jacob and scatter them in Israel) to be performed as concerning
Simeon, because we find not to our understandings how he was scattered, as we
do of Levi. But it is enough for sober minds to know, that now we are ignorant
of many things in circumstance that were clear to them that lived in those
times.

But says D. Heylin Page: 148. etc. They had no Synagogues therefore they had
no Congregations before Nehemiahs time.

To which I answer, That Godwins In his Moses and A^ron page: 86.
opinion is, that they had Synagogues before, even so soon as the Tribes were
settled in the promised Land: but that they were in David's time (says he)
appears Psalm: 74. 8. where it is said That they burnt up all the Synagogues
of God in the Land, which Dr. Heylin answers Page: 149. and says. This was but
a Prophecy or prediction of David touching the future State of the Church under
Antiochus.

To which I rejoyne. That it is true, that this is Prophetically spoken by
David, but it is likely that David (as other Prophets were wont to do) took
his hint from things in present being to express future events and things by:
like as one says of Similies, Parables, and Examples, that have been alleged
by the wise, to represent the truth, that they have been derived from the
custom and nature of things, according to the known truth in that Time an
Place. But put case they had no Congregations before the Captivity, nor did not
celebrate the Sabbath spiritually in holy employments, but carnally in mere
Rest, what does this advantage D. Heylin and his party or damnify the Sabbath?
seeing that D. Heylin himself Page: 143. confesses that the breach of the
Weekly Sabbath was one cause of their Captivity, and proves it also Neh: 13.
18. who also (he confesses) were a people so averse to the due observation of
the Sabbath, as that when God had brought them again out of Captivity into the
Land of Canaan, and hereupon they had bound themselves by Covenant to a due
observation of the Sabbath, yet notwithstanding when Nehemiahs back was turned
they brake promise with God Page: 145. an unfit People to make a president: who
also (by his own confession) were as regardlesse of annual Sabbaths and
Sabbaths of years. Page: 143. as of Weekly Sabbaths. And again seeing that
after their return from their Captivity, the truly religious seeing these
Sabbath-sinnes reformed them (which is the time that we are to take notice of
them, As we are in like manner to take notice and of those times and ^^ges of
the Church since Christ, which being better settled, and freed from Gentilisme
and heresies, gave best improvement to the Lords Day, and not of those which
either through distraction or ignorance give us not so fair a president.
for the better and not for the worse,) and then we see all these imaginary
arguments confuted by their practice: for then when they saw their error and
had ^marted for it, they turned over a new leaf, then they made them plenty of
Synagogues, and holy convocations, and the Law read and expounded, and the
Statutes of the Lord taught them accordingly as it was the Priests and Levites
duty; all which shows what they should have done before they were led captive,
and therefore if they did it not at all, or if but a few of them were disposed
after this manner to keep the Sabbath before the Captivity, the greater was
their Sin, and the more they deserved to be punished of God as they were, and
the less to be regarded of us, who ought to be followers of men and esteemers
of men as they are followers of God.

Hereunto I will annexe and abstract of Mr. Hildershams upon this point of
sanctifying the Sabbath hanled in his Lectures upon 51. Psalm. Lect. 135.
Hildersham.
which though long yet not tedious to a Godly reader because profitable. It is
(says he) a singular good thing to be strict in the observation of the
Sabbath, and such a thing as God is highly pleased with, and has been wont to
reward wheresoever he finds it. To keep a bodily rest upon that Day from all
our own works, is but one particular that is required of us in the
observation of the Sabbath, nay that is (as I may say) but the outside of the
Commandment, and concerns only the outward man, the outward and bodily
observation of it. Of the fourth Commandment, (as well as of the rest) that
may be truly said which the Apostle speaks Romans 7. 14 of the whole Law. We
know (says he) that the Law is spiritual. The spiritual observation of it
by the inward man when we call the Sabbath a delight, the Holy of the Lord,
honorable as the Prophet speaks Isaiah 58. 13. That is when we can joy in
that Day, as in the Lords own Holy Day, and esteem it in our Hearts a far
greater and more honorable Day then any other Day, keeping the rest and
performing the Duties of the Day cheerfully, reverently, conscionably,
spiritually. This spiritual observation of it I say by the inward man is the
chief thing that God requires of us in the fourth Commandment, the outward
and bodily observation of it (which may be performed by a man that has no
truth of Grace in him at all) is nothing in Gods account in comparison of this.
And yet of this bodily observation of the Sabbath by the outward man, the
resting from our own works is but the least part. The exercising of our
selves upon that Day in doing of the Lords work, and spending of it in such
holy duties both public and private, as may breed and increase grace and
sanctification in us is a greater matter and more pleasing to God a great deal
then that is. No man may think he has kept the Sabbath well because he
rests from all his Labors of his calling upon that Day. So far forth the
brute beast thy Ox and thy Horse keeps the Sabbath as well as thou. For so
is the express Commandment Deuteronomy. 5. 14. Neither thine Ox nor thine Ass nor
any of thy Cattle shall do any work upon that Day. Of thee that art a man and
a Christian man God requires more then so, he will have thee not only to rest
from thine own Labors, but to spend the Day (so far as thy bodily
necessities will permit) in such religious duties as may make thee a more holy
and a better man. The Hebrew word Sabbat (from whence the Sabbath Day receives
his name) signifies not such a rest as wherein one sits still and does
nothing (as the word Noach does) but only a resting and ceasing from that which
he did before. So God is said Genesis 2. 2. to have rested the seventh Day, not
that he rested from all works, for my Father works hitherto and I work,
says our Savior John, 5. 17. but because he rested from all the works that
he had made as Moses says there. As if he had said he rested from Creating any
thing more. And so we likewise are expressly commanded to rest upon the
Sabbath, not from all works, but from such works as we did and might do upon
the six Days. God never allowed us any Day to spend in Idleness, and doing of
nothing especially not that Day. But he has appointed us works and duties for
that Day, which he would have us as carefully to go about them, as we are
upon other Days to go about the works of our calling, and when we are at
them to perform them with every whit as much diligence, and care to do them
well as we do any work we take in hand upon the six Days.

Let no man say, what would you have us to do if we do no business upon the
Sabbath Day? would you have us spend the time in sleeping or talking, or
sitting at our doors or walking abroad? How will you have us pass the time
for the whole Day? To such I answer. Thou have so much work to do, as if thou
were as thou should be, thou would complain that thou want time to
do it. And yet this work, that God has enjoined us to spend this Day in,
has such interchange and variety in it, as no good heart has cause with these
carnal professors Mat. 1. 13. to snuff at it, and to cry behold what a
wearines it is, how tedious and toylesome a thing it is to keep the Sabbath as
these men would have us to do. But the true Christian finds just cause to
call the Sabbath a delight (as the Prophet Isaiah speaks 58. 13.) for all this
work and labor that God has enjoined us in it. We have public duties to
perform on that Day in Gods House. And both the family duties, and secret
duties which we are bound to perform every Day (by the equity of that Law,
Numb. 18, 9. 10.) to be doubled upon the Sabbath Day, that we might the better
attend upon the profit by these holy works, these duties of Piety and
Religion, which are the proper works of that Day. For that is the chief end
that the Sabbath was ordained for. Remember the Sabbath Day to keep it holy
(says the Lord in the fourth Commandment) Keep the Sabbath Day to sanctify
it. I gave them my Sabbaths (says the Lord, Ez: 20 12.) to be a sign betwixt
me and them that they may know that I am the Lord that sanctify them. As if he
had said. He remembers not nor keeps the Sabbath, he regards it not nor
cares for it (how strict soever he be in resting from his own labors) that
keeps it not holy, that spends it not in such religious duties as wherein
he may know and feel by experience, that it is the Lord who (by his
Ordinances) does sanctify him, who both does begin and increase grace in the
Soul etc.

And page 704. says he, and if it so well please God to see men rest from
their own works on that Day (which yet as I told you is but the least thing
that belongs to the right observation of it) you may be sure he is much more
pleased to see men spend that Day in doing of his work in exercising
themselves in those duties of Piety and Mercy which he has appointed to be
done upon that day, especially in seeing them keep his Sabbaths spiritually
and conscionably. Certainly they that do so shall be sure to be blessed and
rewarded of God for it. To this purpose it is worth the observing that as our
Savior says, Mark. 2. 27. That the Sabbath was at the first made for man,
for the great benefit and behoof of man. Man could not (no not Adam in
Innocence) have been without it, but with great danger and loss unto him. So
the Holy Ghost says there twice of the Sabbath Genesis 2. 3. and Exodus 20. 11.
that he never said of any other Day. That the Lord blessed that Day, that is,
appointed it to be a mean of a greater blessing to man (if he kept it as God
had commanded him to do) then any other Day, or any of the ordinary works of
any other Day can possibly be.

Two sorts of blessings there be which the conscionable observer of the Sabbath
shall be sure to receive by it.

1. The first are spiritual, and they indeed are the chief blessings of all,
because they are durable and lasting, and because they concern the Soul which
is the chief and most precious part of man. And for these was the Sabbath
chiefly ordained, that God might by it in the use of his Ordinances enrich our
Souls with spiritual blessings in Heavenly things. So the Lord says, Ez: 20.
12. that he gave his Sabbaths to his People to that end that they might know
that he was the Lord that sanctified them. We shall find and know that the
Lord will sanctify us, both begin and increase saving grace in our Hearts, if
we keep the Sabbath conscionably. Yea the Lord has promised, Isaiah 56. 6.
7. to every one that keeps his Sabbath from polluting, that he will make them
joyful in his House of Prayer. And Isaiah 58. 13, 14. That if a man shall
keep the Sabbath heartily and spiritually, then he shall delight himself in
the Lord. By these two places it appears that God has bound himself by
promise to them that keep his Sabbath (not only to work sanctification,
increase of holiness and power over their corruptions which he professes in
that former place of Ezekiel, was the very end he gave his Sabbaths for, but
also) by his spirit of adoption to increase in their hearts a lively sense of
his favor, assurance that he hears and accepts their Prayers, Peace of
Conscience, Joy in the Holy Ghost which are blessings the Christian Soul
prizeth above all things in the World.

Ob. Why (may you say) may not a man receive increase of grace and spiritual
comfort in the use of Gods ordinances on any other Day, but only on the Sabbath?

Ans. Yes verily, but these promises may give him assurance to receive them
more richly and plentifully upon the Sabbath then on any other Day.

2 The second sorts of blessings that the conscionable observers of the Sabbath
receive by it are temporal, for concerning them also we have a promise,
Isaiah 58. 4. Genesis 18. 13: 48. 4. Psa: 1. 19. To conclude this point with the
authority and judgment of a learned Bishop now living Bishop Hall: Decad: 6.
Epis: 1. Gods Day (says he) calls for another respect then do common Days.
The same Sun arises on this Day and enlightens it, yet because the Sun of
righteousness arose upon it, and gave a new life unto the World in it, and drew
the strength of Gods moral precept unto it. Therefore justly do we sing with
the Psalmist, This is the Day which the Lord has made. Now I forget the World
and in a sort my self, and deal with my wonted thoughts as great Men use, who
at some time of their privacy forbid the access of all suitors. Prayer,
Meditation, Reading, Hearing, Preaching, Singing, good conferences are the
businesses of this Day, which I dare not bestow on any work or pleasure but
Heavenly. I hate superstition on the one side, and loosenes on the other. But I
find it hard to offendin too much Devotion easy in ^rophane^es. The whole week
is sanctified by this Day, and according to my care of this is my blessing on
the rest.

Broad.
CHAP. III. I. Whereby the Sabbath was Sanctified.
THe Sabbath was sanctified by resting from work. Thus Zan^hy in effect
likewise Vicest, and D. Boys and this Analys^^ natural. Some make two parts
the one affirmative, the other negative but they are out of the way.
In the fourth Commandment we have to observe.

1. The Commandment it self briefly delivered, and is thus Remember the
Sabbath to Sanctify it.

2. Then follows the explication in order, God showing what is the Sabbath,
the seventh Day is the Sabbath to the Lord thy God.

And after how it is sanctified. In it thou shall not do any work. I do not
write as many do that the Sabbath was sanctified by praying, hearing of word
and if thou marvailest thereat see at the end of the Book.


3. A reason is yielded why God requires this service, For in the six Days
the Lord made Heaven etc. Here thou see that God himself being expositor, to
sanctify the Sabbath Day is not to do any work on the seventh Day, read
also, Ier: 17 24.

II. Whereby the Sabbath was profaned.
The Sabbath was profaned by work as Exodus: 31. 14. Profanare sine vio^are;
v^cat ^o die operari, perin de at que professo. Mart: in Math: 1^, 8.


Every one that defiles the Sabbath shall surely be put to Death, for
whosoever does any Work therein, that Soul shall be cut off from among his
People. Further the Sabbath was profaned by the least work, and thus he
profaned it who only gathered sticks therein. As he that ^ateth the least
food may be said to break his fast as well as he that eats his belly-full.
So he that did the l^ast work brake the rest or Sabbath as well as he that
labored all Day.

Some would have the Sabbath profaned by Drunkenness, Lasciviousnes, Dancing
etc. In it God said, Thou shall do noe Work, not in it thou shall not worship
Idols, thou shall not drink excessively etc. for he needed not these things
being forbidden by other Commandments.


Ans: 1. If by one Sin then by another and then every man profaned the
Sabbath.

2. Any Day in the Week was as well defiled by Sin as the Sabbath, for every
Day was alike exempt from Sin.

The punishment for profaning the Sabbath was Death. If then such as haunted
the Alehouse and the like profaned the Sabbath, as well as he that gathered
sticks they should much rather in reason have undergone the punishment.

Now although the Sabbath was defiled by work and whosoever wilfully or
carefully did any work therein was to be put to Death. Yet in two cases work
was to be done on the Sabbath. In what cases the Sabbath might be profaned.


1. In case of necessity Thus the Disciples being hungry pulled the Ears of
Corn and rubbed them in their Hands, Math: 11.
which was a kind of reaping and threshing. Where their Fingers were in stead
of Hooks, and their Hands of Thresholds. Thus again the Jews pulled Oxen out
of Pitts, and thus in the time of the Maccabees they determined to fight in
their defense on the Sabbath. 1 Mac: 2.


2. When they had Commandment from God or Christ, Josh: 6.
thus the Israelites by Commandment from God compassed Jericho, and thus the
man by Commandment from Christ carried his Bed, Ioh: 5. some say that the
carrying of the Bed was a means of publishing the miracle, and thus defend the
fact, but there was other means to make the miracle known, and they will not
say (I think) that the Man on the next Sabbath might have done so again on
his own ^ead, that then which made his fact lawful was only the Commandment
of Christ, who being Lord of the Sabbath could cause any man to profane the
same when he saw good.

Answer.
Herein you go about to prove' that the' Sabbath was either only or chiefly
sanctified by resting from Work.

First, by your own Analys of the fourth Commandment wherein you would make
God to put the chiefest part of the Sabbaths sanctification in Rest.

Secondly, by your proof out of Ier: 17. 24.

Thirdly, by proving the Sabbath to be profaned by works, which again you
prove by showing how he that gathered Sticks on that Day was more severely
punished, then many a one that other ways seemed more to profane it.

1. For your proposition it self, which is that the Sabbath was sanctified by
resting from work.

To this I answer. I wish the Geneva note upon the title of the 92 Psalm: which
is a Psalm or Song for the Sabbath Day, that this teaches that the use of the
Sabbath stands in praising God and not only in ceasing from Work. Whereunto
I add Mr. Calvin upon the 2. of Gen: says he, God did not simply command man
to keep the seventh Day holy as if he were delighted with rest, but to the
end he being free from all other businesses might more willingly and quietly
apply his mind to the Creator of the World. Furthermore says he it is an holy
rest which delivers Men from the impediments of the World, that they may
wholly bend themselves to the service of God.

Secondly, I answer that it was neither only nor principally sanctified by
resting, for then any labor even about the worship and service of God had
been unlawful, and by this doctrine the best way for them to have sanctified
it, had been to have lain all Day in their Beds, But as one observes upon
Gods commanding Adam to work in Innocence, that Idleness was never Man's
happiness, much less his holiness.
and they had sanctified it better in the Night then in the Day, and every man
in his own House then in public Congregations, which but even now you your
self contradict.

Which Dr. Heylin would have us believe it is, whilst every where he would
persuade us. That holy labors and necessary were breaches of it among the
Jews, such as were Circumcision offering sacrifices, and fight or flight in
time of danger etc.

Whereas he ought to know that rest from our own works is only enjoined (
Isai: 58. 13.) that so we may be employed in Gods. And therefore Exodus: 35. 2.
It is called a Sabbath of rest to the Lord, that is, to the Lords use, like as
the same phrase in the 5 verse shows, where they are bid to take from among
them an offering to the Lord.


And therefore was not the work of Circumcision unlawful though a painful
one, nor the work of offering Sacrifices though a toylesome one, much less
works of mercy and Charity. For Christ says, Math: 12. 12. That it is lawful
to do well on the Sabbath Day. No work was a breach of the Sabbath, which was
either in it self (as were religious actions) or upon occasion lawful to be
done upon the Sabbath. And therefore in the beginning of that chapter he makes
the Disciples rubbing the Ears of Corn for hunger (occasioned in his service
on the Sabbath Day) to be equal with the Priests sacrificing in the service of
the Temple, which was in it self no profanation of the Sabbath (though in the
5 verse Christ said, Have ye not read in the Law how that on the Sabbath Day
the Priests in the Temple profane the Sabbath) for we read no such thing in
the Law, that they profaned the Sabbath.

But he means they did that on the Sabbath which the Pharisees might, through
their superstitious misprison, as well call a profanation of the Sabbath, and
count unlawful as that action of his Disciples. I deny not, but Rest from
worldly works was a positive part of the Sabbaths sanctification in the time
of the Jews, because of the holiness which did then accompany it being a Type
(and that transcendent to all the rest) as I have often said.

But that it was ever meant to be either the whole or principal part of the
Sabbaths sanctification I utterly deny: although they abusiv^ly made it so,
even to the neglect of acts of mercy (for which they were blamed by Christ the
Lord of the Sabbath as you say) by a superstitious misinterpretation of Gods
commandment (agreeing with self-love and sensuality) as you do by falsifying
the true sense of the word Sanctify.

2. To come to your Analys whereby you would prove your position to it I
answer. That in it you confound the end and the means by making the
Commandment it self which consists in the first and last words to be
expounded by the middle part, as if sanctification which always signifies to
set apart to an holy use should be properly interpreted by resting from work:
as if God would put up with negative service only; or as if that which is
negative could be the principal matter of a precept affirmative. But indeed
the rest which you would make to be the only interpretation, is chiefly and
properly of a subservient nature, serving as a significant accommodation to the
maine duty of holiness commanded as may appear.

First, by the Rest which was commanded them on their other Sabbaths was it not
chiefly removendo prohibens, by removing an impediment the better to devote
them to services which was then enjoined them, of feasting and sacrificing and
humbling their Souls, and does not the same hold good to us in our Sabbath,
which is to be sanctified by all these at once in a spiritual sense. That it
was so to them is evident in the 23. Levit: 27. 28. 29. 30. Where God having
instituted the day of atonement, tells them how they were to sanctify it in
the 27 verse, to wit, it shall be an holy convocation to you, and ye shall
afflict your Souls, and offer an offering to the Lord: and then in the 28 and
29 verses he bids them, ye shall do no work in that same Day, and what is the
reasons why, it follows, for it is a Day of atonement to make an atonement for
you before the Lord. For whatsoever Soul it is that shall not be afflicted in
that same Day he shall be cut off from among the people. As who say, ye have
other matters in hand (then worldly business) on that Day, which ye must wholly
intend, and therefore surcease such things and such employments as may take you
of from such matters, or hinder the fitnes of your hearts in them (which is a
thing too well known to them that worship God in spirit, how that a small
carnal employment is found often times an hurtful distraction to their spirit)
and therefore it follows in the 30 verse whatsoever Soul it be that does any
work on that same Day etc. Which is a lively demonstration of the nature of
the Sabbath Rest in i^s first and chief respect. And observe by the way, how
here at large, as in the fourth Commandment in brief (though in other places
of Scripture it also is manifested at large) God first lays down the maine
sanctification of the Sabbath before he prescribe the means.

Secondly, in that this rest is so far approved of God as it conduces to
spiritual labor, and again spiritual labor is no where condemned though it
be a breach of rest. For rest (take it as it was primarily intended in its
first institution, without the intervening holiness which it contracted in the
time of the Jews) is no ordinance or part of Gods worship abstractively
considered, for so it neither a^swereth the Antitype nor fulfilleth the
commandment, but relatively, for it relates to Gods solemn worship on the
Sabbath, as fasting does to prayer, upon solemn occasions, And this you may
see to be Master Breerewoods opinion in his second tract. page 15. The
commandment of the Sabbath (says he) enjoy^eth. 1. outward worship of God.
2. Cessation from works as a necessary preparation for that worship, that as
thee end, this as the means.
which if it be used is no part of prayer, and yet omitted is an impeachement
to it, because jointly considered it is an ordinance, and of necessary) and
seasonable use at that time: And as in fasting we must not only fast from
things nourishing (real necessity ever excepted) but much more from things
pleasing; so in keeping the Sabbath, we ought not to rest only from
profitable labors, but more especially from distracting bodily recreations,
because the Sabbath should be both our full delights and full employment as
Heaven shall be hereafter: For the commandments being Synecdochicall, as
therefore in the commandments touching adultery and murder the thoughts and
words conducing thereunto are forbidden: So in this commandment touching the
Sabbath, as works are forbidden so worldly thoughts whence worldly works issue
(as adultery from lust) and the discourse of worldly things, so likewise
paritate rationis, pleasure must needs be included; For labor being forbidden
as an impediment, consequently therefore whatsoever proves an impediment is
forbidden. This commandment as the rest being Synechdochicall.

And thus Musculus least (says he) God should seem to speak of some
profane idleness, he says not remember that thou keep the Sabbath day, but
that thou hallow the Sabbath Day. Now to hallow (says he) that day is to make
the rest of it devout, holy, and employed to godly exercises, whereby the mind
may be instructed, exercised, and grounded in things concerning godliness. And
Cyrill (quoted by Doctor Heylyn page 141.) in Amos 8. and Gaudentius Brixianus
speak to the self same purpose.

The Jews (says Gaudentius) neglecting those spiritual duties which God
commanded on that day abused the Sabbath rest unto ease and luxury. For whereas
being free from temporal cares (says Cyrill) they ought to have employed that
day to spiritual uses, and to have spent the same in modesty and temperance,
and in the repetition and commenmoration of Gods holy Word, they on the other
side did the contrary wasting the day in Gluttony and Drunkenness and idle
delicacies.

And whereas you would bring the reason which God alleges from himself in
the commandment to make it good: That to rest on the Sabbath is the adequate
sanctification, with this I would have you compare that speech of Christ (who
by your own acknowledgement was Lord of the Sabbath) I will have mercy and not
sacrifice; where he blames the Jews, notwithstanding the typical holiness of
this rest in their times, for their not sanctifying the Sabbath with acts of
mercy, through their superstitious misprison of this rest. Also consider how
that God intended his spiritual service and worship in the very commandments
of the second Table, much more then in those of the first. Again I oppose
hereunto the reason which God gives from his own example, in the fourth of
Deuteronomy. to wit, his not appearing to them in any likeness, to cry down their
making of Images to worship them, which yet is no argument to prove that their
not making of Images (though he was to be obeyed and imitated therein) was
his proper worship or any part thereof, but only in a negative sense, which
does exclude some thing but conclude nothing.

And therefore that which Zanchy says of strangers rest is proper to the
business in hand. Isti jubebantur non simpliciter quiescere, sed quiescere ut
ipsi suo modo Sabbatum sanctificare possent. Whereby you may see how he
se^v^th your turn, though put in your margent.
This ( suo modo) is of different sense to different sorts and conditions of
people, for the strangers that knew not the true worship had their suo modo,
nay and the Cattle theirs, and so the Jews that knew it under types and
figures had also their suo modo, and so have we now ours.

And indeed if that rest was principally respected; why was not other cattle
and creatures commanded to be kept from laboring as well as the Ox and the
Ass: Why were they not as well to stop up the Bee-hives on the Sabbath Day
to keep them from working like as they do in Winter, to preserve them from
destroying; But we see that only the labors of those beasts are forbidden,
which might be a distraction to man's better employments and sanctified rest;
which appears in that for the better accommodating us to holy duties (as for
the hearing of a Sermon) we may interrupt the rest of our Cattle (though other
ways commanded) and use their labor on that day; as in the example of the
Shunamite, 2 Kings 4 22. 23.

Lastly I would ask you wherein we shall sanctify our everlasting Sabbath in
Heaven, whether by a bare resting from our works or by positive worship. Surely
you will say by positive worship; And yet I deny not, but our rest will be an
happy means thereunto; And so much is signified now by our Sabbaths rest: For
such as is the Antitype, such is the type.

Thirdly touching your proof cut of Ier. 17. 24. I answer.

1. That the reason of Gods taxing them with this was, because it was a fault
most obvious (as may appear in that amongst other works, he instanceth most
their bearing of burdens as the thing most frequent and abusive) so does he
complain of their profaning the Sabbath by working in it, because that being
a fault most obvious they would be the soonest convinced thereby; For man can
naturally better conceive of his outward gross and sensitive errors, then of
his spiritual ones, which notwithstanding was employed therein. Like as at the
day of judgment he will judge us by our works, and yet therein we shall
answer for our infidelity, for in the one he involues the other.

God took the same order with the Jews under the Law that Christ did under
the Gospel, that is, still to blame them for those faults which were either
most apparent or most proper to those times and persons; knowing that if they
failed in those they must needs fail in the more material; But when they were
diligent to do the outward duty, and neglected the inward then God blames
them in that respect also: As we may see by that which he tells them
touching their sacrifices, how that he that sacrificed a sheep, was as if he
cut of a dogs neck: whereas had they neglected to have sacrificed he would
first have called on them for his outward service; because without that the
inward could not be performed: So of the Sabbath-rest; he must first bring
them from profaning the Sabbath, before he could bring them to a due
sanctifying of it: For except they made good their bodily rest, according to
the commandment, they could never meditate rightly their rest in Heaven.

Again in the second place, I say, that though God in this 17. Ier: did thus
sharply reprove their profaning the Sabbath by working, yet he never meant
that in resting consisted its chiefest sanctification, as may appear by the
58. of Isa. 13. Which Master Calvin in his institutions upon the fourth
commandment brings to prove that we were to rest from our works that day,
that God might work his works in us, and that the Prophets did call back the
Jews from thinking themselves discharged by their carnal rest.

In the third place I answer, that this rest being a transcendent type, and of
special sanctity in those times, could not be neglected, no not in the
letter of it, without gross profanation of the Sabbath, besides the injury
done to the useful signification of it; because that then it was a part of the
Sabbaths sanctification, I mean, of its very positive sanctification: And
therefore had God just cause to complain his Sabbaths were not sanctified,
when they were so notoriously profaned.

Fourthly, now I come to speak to your third proof touching the profanation
of the Sabbath; which is say you by working, to which I answer.

First, that a man by working (if it be seasonable) sanctifies the Sabbath,
and again by resting, if it be carnal and unfruitful, he may profane it.

Secondly, to argue from the profaning to the sanctifying is no good argument,
as because works profane it, therefore rest only sanctifies it. It may as
well be argued from the second commandment, that he that does not make
Images to bow to them, is consequently a true worshipper of God. For though it
be most true, that every one, that rests not from worldly employments on the
seventh day, does profane the Sabbath and break the commandment. Yet on the
contrary, every one that does rest cannot be said to sanctify it, no more
then every one, that does not make Images to bow to them, may be said to
worship God aright, and yet every one that does make Images to bow to them,
does profane the true worship of God. So Master Hisdersham, to keep a bodily
rest on that day from all our own works is but the outside of the
commandment, and concerns only the outward man, and the outward and bodily
observation of the fourth commandment (which, as the whole Law, is spiritual)
and may be performed by a man which has no truth of Grace in him at all. Thus
also Musoulus on the fourth commandment after he has shown how those words
of the commandment ( Thou shall in it do no manner of work) do forbid all
manner of lets which may hinder the sanctifying of the Sabbath, because (says
he) that is to be done not with a patched mind, but with all our endeavor,
and with a whole mind. In his conclusion, speaking against such as profane the
Sabbath by licentiousnes, the very cattle (says he) do use the Sabbath Day
better then we, which though they do nothing toward the sanctifying of it,
yet their rest is so far forth to be preferred, that they do nothing
whereby the holy rest is profaned and defiled, and the eyes of Gods Majesty
offended.

As concerning the proof you bring to back this last argument withal, to
wit, the example of Gods severe punishing work though but a small one, when
yet sins and other things which might seem more to profane it were passed
over, I answer:

First, that God was curious in maintaining in violate their discipline in
their days, which was then both his own ordinance and the proper means of
their instruction (for shadows were then substances) so that if they were
remiss in observing to do the type, such as was this rest, they sinned both
against God and their own souls, and under went a double guilt of punishment
and loss, like as we, under the Gospel* do sin more in not believing in
Christ, then in breaking the whole Law.

Secondly, I say, that God was the severer in menacing and punishing this,
because else they would have beeue apter to thwart it, judging of it rather by
matter of fact, then by matter of duty or command, which I think was a notable
aggravation of his sin that gathered sticks, judging the offense by the thing;
As its like Adam did (and as you do afterward) when he ate the apple, which
happily God fore seeing imposed the greater judgment to overawe him.

And this Sabbath-rest (as that of eating the apple) not being a Law written in
the conscience, and therefore they not having their conscience so lively in
that as in other sins, had need of the stronger bar to keep them of from
breaking it.

Thirdly, this instance you give was whilst they were in the wilderness (as the
Scripture phraseth it Number. 15. 32.) when the type was more lively and
significative, and they better in abled to observe it, and therefore was the
sin so much the more offensive and presumptuous, and consequently worthy of
severer punishment. He himself typifying that the neglect of Gods rest brings
certain and unavoidable ruin.
Which you never read of, to be executed after they came out of the wilderness,
and yet were their prophanations in regard of their works far greater.

As for the man's carrying of his bed, I answer to it two things.

First, that it was no breach of the Sabbath, but a manifestation of the
miracle by a lawful action (I mean lawful though Christ had not commanded
it) being necessary, because happily he had never a one else (being a poor
man) to ly on at night: Or else in his absence his bed might have been wronged
or stolen. See pa^alell to this Matthew. 9. 6.
And put case he had left it and in his absence it had been stolen, and he
meeting the theife, the theife threw it down and run away, might not he in
your opinion have then taken it up and carried it home? And why then might not
he lawfully carry it home before to prevent stealing, as after it was stolen:
And we have reason to believe it to be commanded by Christ to one of these
ends: For it is like he was poor or had no body to watch it, nor yet to carry
it for him; for then he might have had some man to have put him into the Poole
when the water was troubled, but he had none. In like case I appeal to your
opinion whether you think it a breach of the Sabbath* for a Jew in his
Sabbath-dayes journey finding a cloake-bagge or a bag of money, to take it up
and carry it away least if he leave it there till the next day, to avoid
carriage on the Sabbath, another that has as little right to it as he, find
it and carry it for him.

Secondly I answer, that Christ neither could nor did command him to break the
Sabbath or profane it. First, I say he could not, for that tie which the Law
has upon us, by the condition of our nature, because we are borne under it;
it had upon Christ by the condition of his office and voluntary susception
because he was made under it: So that it behoved him to fulfill all
righteousness: And therefore he is said in that respect to have been obedient
to his parents, though he were not only the Son of Mary but the Lord of Mary:
Therefore when Scripture denies all sin to have been in him, it implies that
he was exactly conformable to the Law, in doing all that it requires, and in
leaving undone all that it forbids. Secondly, I say he did not, upon that
reason which you allege, to wit, as being Lord of the Sabbath: For 1. Though
indeed he was Lord of the Sabbath, yet in his humane nature, wherein he was
under the Law, he was not to show his foveraigne authority to the breach of
any part of it, either moral or ceremonial, for so it behoved him to fulfill
all righteousness. Secondly, that place of Scripture whence you borrow your
reason is mistaken by you; For those words, the Son of man is Lord even of the
Sabbath Day, do not intend that Christ is Lord of it as you mean, for him to
keep or break it at pleasure; But Son of man signifies mankind, as is
evident. 1. by comparing the 27. and 28. verses of the second of Mar. The 27.
verse says, The Sabbath was made for Man, and not Man for the Sabbath, and
then in the 28. verse it follows with this word of coherence, therefore the
Son of Man is Lord etc. where the one and the other do intend man in genere
and for Christ if you will secondly because that in that action it was not
Christ himself that Lorded it over the Sabbaths-rest, but his Disciples, for
though it was done in his service yet not by his commands as you reason, but of
themselves for the releife of their necessity.

But to conclude I see not then by these arguments how your first To wit in the
sense.
proposition can be made good. For if so be rest sanctifies the Sabbath then
does man and beast sanctify it alike, then is there no difference between the
stranger and the Israelite, nor between the Israelite and his ox.

If you had said that not resting in the profaning of the Sabbath, as bowing
to Images is the profaning of Gods worship we had easily agreed: But that by
the sense of the fourth commandment it is properly or principally Though
occasionally and by accident I acknowledge it to be a part of the Sabbaths
sanctification in the (...) of the Jews.
the sanctifying of the Sabbath, I can no more yield you, then that not bowing
to Images is properly or principally the worship of God by the sense of the
second commandment.

Ohi. But you will say, is not Gods commandment kept in both these, when they
do not bow to Images, and when they do not labor but rest.

Ans. I answer that the things, which the commandments properly and
principally strike at are not observed thereby; For these are rather
preventions of Gods dis-worship then any parts of his worship; And he that
knows these commandments aright, knows they intend doing as well as not
doing: And therefore he that out of a good conscience forbeareth to do the
one (wherein indeed he negatively keeps the commandment) will by virtue of
the same conscience set you the other. For otherwise he should give but a
poor account to his Master at the last day, who when he asks him what he
has done, answers him with what he has not done, and when he asks him
an account how he has employed his Sabbaths, and what glory and worship he
has done him in them, he answers him, I never profaned thy Sabbaths with
bodily labor but always rested on that day, neither did I ever bow to an
Image, surely his ways shall be as his that hid the talent in a napkin, for
he has reason to look for no better, thinking of God as he did, that he
was hard in his commandments and therefore he kept them as hardly in the
negative and not in the affirmative. Whereas Bishop Lake in his Sermons page
213. says, that negatives are but to attend affirmatives and God does not
reward the ferbearance of ^vill but the doing of good.
Master Dod page 74. says, one may forbear the sins of the second
commandment, and yet be a damnable breaker of that commandment: for God
commands not only to turn from dumb Idols, but also that we should serve
the true and living God 1 These. 1. 9. else such are as well guilty of the
breach of this Law as Idolaters, they for doing that they should not we for
not doing that we should. So of the fourth commandment.

And for authority sake take notice what Thomas Aquinas says to this purpose.
In the observance of the Sabbath says he two things are to be considered,
one whereof as the end, and this is, that man be vacant to divine things,
which is signifi^d in that which he says (remember that thou sanctify the
Sabbath.) for those are said to be sanctified in the Law which are applied to
divine worship; But the other is the cessation of works signified when it (...)
added, on the seventh day of the Lord thy God thou shall not do any work^.
And again says he Spiritual works are not forbidden on the Sabbath Day, for
therefore does a man abstain from other works on that day, that he might be
vacant to works pertaining to the service of God. And says he yet further,
servile works as they respect either the service of sin, or the service of man
do contrary the observan^e of the Sabbath, in so much as they hinder man's
application to divine things.

For a closure to persuade the spiritualizing of the Sabbath observe what one
speaking of the word remember as it is prefixed to the fourth commandment,
says.

To remember the keeping of the Sabbath (says he) is so to keep it in mind
as to prevent worldly business falling on that day, to desire after it, to
prepare for it; to delight and glory in it, as we do in those things we
keep much in remembrance: for when he speaks* of remembrance he calls on us
for such affections and actions as become remembrance, therefore when God bids
you remember the Sabbath he commands you to desire it; Thus David still
explain^ himself by the word remember in the Psalms as Psalm 44. 4. and in
other places. For it is a rule amongst the Hebrews in e^pounding of Scripture,
that verb^ se^su^ cum affect^^ (...) so that by remembering the Sabbath we
should desire it, delight in it, and account the business and employment thereof
honorable to us, glorifying God in the consecrating it to him, being joyful
in it and the duties of it, both as the souls market day to provide it
necessaries, like as the Husband man is glad of the market to buy and sell in,
and as the souls holy day for to procure it refreshing; as Schoole-boies joy
in a play-day, and not be weary of the day nor heavily do the dutie^ of it.

Broad.
CHAP. IV. Wherefore God ordained the Sabbath.
THe ends and purposes for which God ordained the Sabbath were many.

1. That the Israelites might celebrate the memorial of the Worlds creation,
as Exodus 31. (...). It is a sign between me and the children of Israel for
^ver: for in ^ixe days the Lord made Heaven and Earth, and on the seventh day
rested and was refreshed.

2. That they might remember their deliverance Consider whether God commanding
the Israelites to keep the Sabbath, because he had brought them out of Egypt,
this be an Argument that the Sabbath was then first enjoined.
out of Egypt where (...) doubt they might not rest any day from their burdens.
And remember that tho^ w^st a servant in the Land of Egypt and that the Lord
thy God brought the^ out thence through a mighty hand and outstretch^d arm
therefore the Lord thy God (...)

3. ^ That Servants and (...) might rest and be refreshed after their hard
labor in the week before as Exodus 23. 12. six days thou shall do thy
work* and (...) the seventh day thou shall rest, that thine O^e (...) Ass
may rest and the Son of thine hand (...) and the stranger may be refreshed.

4. That the Israelites might have more leisure to serve God, who on this day
as also on festival days, commanded them to have an holy convocation. Six
days shall work be done but the seventh day is a Sabbath of rest, and holy
convocation. Levit. 23.


5. That they might know, how that he was the Lord that did sanctify them, as
Exodus 31. 13. Verity my Sabbaths ye shall keep, for it is a sign between
me and you throughout your generations, that ye may know, that I am the Lord
that does sanctify you.

6. By some men's Doctrine the legal Sabbath served to put the Israelites in
mind of keeping a spiritual Sabbath; as the legal circumcision served to put
them in mind of the spiritual circumcision of the heart, hereof now in their
understanding the Prophet Isaiah speaks Chap. 58. 13. truly this spiritual
Sabbath is the only Sabbath in the judgment of Augustine, Tertullian,
Chrysotome etc. which Christians ought to keep.

7. The legal Sabbath was a type of the heavenly Sabbath, it was a shadow of
the blessed rest to come, of which matter in the next Chap.

Answer.
To the first of these I answer:

That the Israelites were a people contenting themselves with the outward part,
not savouring the inward and spiritual strength of things (which is naturally
the fault of all men till they be better taught of God) and for this reason
God ever and anon made the Sabbath to follow as a Counter-checke to their
carnal zeal.

And therefore when the making of the Tabernacle was commanded, the Sabbath was
even then exempted from its very work, to show them, that it was other worship
that he expected, and that they were not to repose their happiness and
confidence in outward things, but in God: And as therefore in the time of
Mannah he commanded his Sabbath, to show them, how that it was he, and not
that, which nourished them: So likewise when the Tabernacle was commanded the
Sabbath was urged upon them in this 31. Exodus to show them, how that it was God
and not it that sanctified them: And therefore did the one give place to the
other.

So that the end of the Sabbath as it is expressed in this portion of Scripture
between the 12. and 18. verses seems rather to consist in these words of the
13. verse, for it is a sign between me and the children of Israel, for ever
that ye may know, that I the Lord do sanctify you (Those words which in the
17 verse make mention of the Worlds creation and Gods rest, being rather added
as a reason in this place to enforce this end) For here it is not the meaning
of the holy Ghost to discourse of the Sabbath simply, but only occasionally,
as appears by the coherence of the 11. 12. and 13. verses, where the Sabbath
is urged with a verily or a notwithstanding as it is in the Geneva, that though
he had commanded the making of the Tabernacle; yet he would not have them
repose their Religion or content in this outward Tabernacle or Temple (for God
dwells not in things made with hands) but that they should look to the
spiritual part the Temple of their hearts, that they should be more careful
to build up and keep that in repair, which did more properly distinguish them
to be the sanctified Israel of God. Whosoever therefore is an Israelite indeed
let him look to make good this sign of his sanctification, the sanctifying of
the Sabbath by spiritual worship and service, which does excellently approve
it to his conscience that God has sanctified him, that is chosen him to be
his, and thus it is made holy to him (as it is phrased in the 14. verse) that
is, a day of blessing and sanctification, for therein God bestows the best of
his blessings, because on that day we are or ought to be wholly employed in
the best of his ordinances, such as belong to our souls and not to our bodies.
Therefore ought not this day to be defiled with bodily employments (by such as
are the Israel of God) but to be dedicated, from earthly labor to an heavenly
rest, after the example of God: For when the hands cease from one employment,
the heart is fittest for another. And as one well observes. The Sabbath Day
signified that they themselves were the Lords, and therefore they abstained
from their own works to do the Lords.

To the second end gathered out of the 5. of Deuteronomy. That they might remember
their deliverance out of Egypt.

I answer, that this is an Argument to incite them to the better observance of
this duty of sanctifying the Sabbath, and their more willing allowance of it in
their servants; For the 15. verse is thus much, That whereas when thou wast a
servant in the Land of Egypt, thou could not have sanctified a Sabbath unto
me, having no rest for thy self, because of thine intolerable pressures,
which I who am the Lord thy God have set thee free from, and therefore command
no more then I have enabled thee to fulfill, therefore do I now expect that
according to my commandment, and for my mercies sake shown to thee in working
thy deliverance, thou should observe the Sabbath to sanctify it.

For Gods mercy thus preached unto them must needs conduce much to the gaining
back from them both mercy and obedience. And for this cause it is that this
their deliverance is made the Preface to the whole Law, suitable to that in the
Gospel, that we being delivered from the hands of our enemies might serve him
without fear.

And both this (which was a signification of our redemption) and that other
example of Gods resting from the creation, are propounded as fit Theames for
them to improve and exercise their minds upon, to the glorifying of him, and
bettering themselves on that day; both which were much to one purpose to show
forth the wonderful loving kindness of God to his people and Church, in that
he made all things for them, even for them whom he had delivered out of
Egyptian thraldom: which admirable mercies of his, he would have them take
special notice of, and turn to praisefull Haleluiahs on that day, (which he
has sanctified to himself) without wearisomnes, cheerfully and with delight,
as the Angels and Saints in Heaven keep their Sabbath.

If this typical and corporal deliverance of the Jews be such a persuasive
reason of their sanctifying the Sabbath; shall not our deliverance much more
stir us up to do the like?

The substance of your marginall consideration has been handled before, only
I add this, that a commandment is not made special by every motive, but that
it may be in force to me, though every motive brought to enforce it, properly
concern not my particular. Else a man may oppress a stranger that has not
been himself stranger in the Land of Egypt: Though this motive be only
proper to them in the letter, yet common to us in the spiritual and better
sense, and therefore enforces the commandment upon us, as well as on them.

Touching your third end deduced from Exodus 23. 12. where God commanded the
Jews to rest from their six days work on the seventh day, that so their
Cattle, Servants, and Strangers might be refreshed.

To this I answer, that this commandment does neither imply that a bare rest
does sanctify the Sabbath, nor that they were to use the Sabbath as a
Parenthesis between two weeks the better to pass from labor to labor, but
the intent of it was.

1. The better to set forth the heavenly rest which the Sabbath signified, for
it being thus absolutely and universally commanded both to them and every thing
that was properly theirs, it shows the absolute and universal rest which
every one that belongs to God shall be possessed of in Heaven, as well as
God himself. For as God rested from his works so shall they from theirs, to
enjoy an absolute and perpetual refreshment with him in Heaven.

2. That to the practices of piety (which they were to perform toward God on
this day) they should adjoyne the practices of charity humanity to man and
beast, (not that mercy was the proper end of the Sabbatical-rest, for so you
confound the two Tables, the first whereof immediately respects God, the second
Man.) And in this respect was God curious of the due observance of his
Sabbaths, because the right keeping of them did involue the whole Law of God.

Your fourth end drawn from the 23. Levit. does refute your position of the
Sabbaths being sanctified by rest. For if so be this rest of the Sabbath
served properly as a means to further the holy duties of that day, how can the
holiness of that day be properly or principally said to be included in the
rest it self? which if it be not an holy rest, that is, used to an holy end
and purpose, it neither fulfilleth the duty of the commandment (which
commands us as well to sanctify the Sabbath as to forbear work) nor the
signification of the Sabbath it self; For in Heaven when there shall be the
convocation of the universal Church of God, the perpetual Sabbath shall
thenbee sanctified not in that we shall rest, but in that we shall holyly
rest.

Your fifth end fell out to be discoursed of in your first, which shall
suffice concerning it, only thus much further, that I suppose, it cannot be
proved, that all signs of covenants were abolished by Christ's coming. For the
Rainebow was given for a sign of Gods covenant with Noah. The Sabbath for a
sign of Gods covenant with Israel, from which I infer that this cannot
therefore be judged abolished because a sign, because the other sign as we
see is yet remaining. Catonus page 45. De iride autem si concedemus (quod
doctissimi nonnulli negant) illam, ante diluvium fuisse, induisse a postea
ra^ionem signi, sequetur tamen inde (quod nos contendimus) essentiam iridis non
a signo dependisse, imo si promissio Dei ad certum tempus restricta fuisset,
expleto tamen illo, iridis natura non minus integra remansisset. Similiter and
de Sabbatho dicendum est.

And to give further light to that same place of Scripture, Exodus 31. 3. I will
here insert the discourse of a divine of prime note upon the word ( remember)
showing the reasons wherefore it is prefixed to the fo^rth commandment, wherein
he handles the aforesaid text.

This word remember (says he) is prefixed to the fourth commandment rather
then to the rest for 2. reasons.

Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth, when many lusts are ready to
draw us of. And the reasons why we are so apt to forget this Commandment, and
why there is need of a Memento are four.

1. Because the rest of the Commandments are written in our Hearts by light of
Nature, but this only was given by outward ordinance of divine instruction, and
we are apter to forget instructions then inclinations.

2. Because this more restrains the natural liberty then all the rest, they
restraining only sinful things, this lawful things, yea our very words and
thoughts about them.

3. Because of the multitude of our six days businesses which had need be
remembered to be seasonably finished, else they will breed distractions.

4. Because the Devil prompts us to forget it, so to quench the Memory of the
Creation and the Creator, and so to bring in the Eternity of the World, as he
did amongst the Heathen and there with Athisme: to prevent which we are bid to
remember to keep this Commandment as a means to preserve the memory of God
and to keep a foot his worship.



1. Is taken from the dependancy of the observation of all the rest of the
Commandments on this, for in keeping of the Sabbath the Lord is wont to
sanctify his People to the keeping of all the rest of the Commandments, so
that keeping this we keep all, and neglecting this we neglect all, hence God
says Exodus: 31. 3. Verily my Sabbaths you shall keep for it is a sign
between me and you throughout all your Generations that you may know that I
am the Lord that does sanctify you; moreover says God Exodus: 20. 12. I gave
them my Sabbaths to be a sign between me and them that they might know that
I am the Lord that does sanctify them, Look all the conversion of sinners and
you shall see where one has been converted on the Week Days 7 have been on
the Sabbath, 7 to one nay 10 to one if not a 100 to one. God does delight most
to dispense his grace on that Day, so that keep that Day and you keep an
opportunity where God does bestow his graces on the Sons of men, but neglect
it and you neglect an opportunity of getting grace of God. Heathen Princes are
wont on their coronation Day to show themselves to their People in all their
rioalty and cast about Silver and Gold, so does God sometimes in these his
solemn Days show himself to be present with us in holy duties, he scatters
abroad his holy graces and delights so to do, we are not to appoint God the
time when to come down and speak to his People, but they must wait the time
he has appointed, now God does delight to sanctify Men on this Day of all the
rest, therefore the text says, He blessed it and hallowed it, that is, he did
bless it to be a means to sanctify it to his People; for else the Sun
shines no hotter on this Day then any other but that God has blessed it, as he
blessed the bread, to make us blessed, to observe it therefore is a means to
bring ablessing on our Family, Town, Kingdom where we live, take many Men
that are dejected for Sin and (...) tell you one of the first and chief in
their neglect of the Sabbath though it be not written in their Hearts by
nature. On this Day God draws nigh to his People, and they to him, by whom he
will be found sooner on this Day then any of the rest, and if we get grace any
Day its a thousand to one it is on this Day, or else something added to it.
Esa: 36. 4. The way to lay hold of the Covenant is to keep the Sabbath, there
is some hope of a Man's salvation when he makes con^cience of keeping the
Sabbath. If thou turn away thy feet etc. and consecrate it as glorious etc.
thou shall delight thy self in the Lord says Esaias, implying that a man that
has no delight in keeping of the Sabbath, has no delight nor pleasure in God,
but the way to get pleasure in God is to keep the Sabbath.

2. Reason why this commandment is of most weight to be remembered, is taken
from the efficacy of it, in it we are made most spiritual and heavenly
minded, it frames our spirits to be fit for every good business, by keeping the
Sabbath we are kept from idle thoughts, and by this means are molded up into
a Heavenly frame, we are not even of this World, there is nothing of it does
hang about us. There remains a Rest to the People, Heb: 4 9. implying that the
Saints in Heaven keep a Sabbath rest, meditating divine things, learning from
Christ, Singing praises and are in a spiritual manner wrapped up in all
spiritual business and minding Heavenly things. And we by keeping it are wrapped
up from all encumbrances otherways lawful, but now not fitting our spirits.

3. Reason is taken from the memory of those things are kept in memory by it,
for by keeping in mind the Sabbath we keep in mind Gods chiefest benefits to
us, as our Creation and our Redemption by its translation from the seventh to
the eight Day, and Ezech: 20. 12. that it is a sign that God does sanctify us
implying thus much, that whereas there are three Persons who show themselves in
three Works tending to our Salvation. This Sabbath is sanctified to us to put
us in remembrance of them, and their works, as of the Father that Created us,
of Christ that Redeemed us, of the Holy Ghost that Sanctifies us.

Thus are our chiefest blessings remembered by our keeping of this fourth
Commandment and therefore it is of most weight to be remembered.

The legal Sabbath as you call it, and which you speak of in your sixth end,
was more then to put them in mind of the spiritual Sabbath, for it was the
properst means of bringing it about to cause them actually to keep a
spiritual Sabbath, for when as they were not to do any of their own works nor
to think any of their own thoughts, what could they construe hence but that
they were to do Gods, and think Gods Like as the Apostle collects Heb: 11.
14. from our Fathers saying, they were strangers and Pilgrims on the Earth,
that they that say such things, declare plainly that they seek a Country.
? And therefore does not that 58. Isaiah 13. intend only the negative part (for
so God should allow of Idleness, and take away the nature of the mind, which is
ever to be in motion) but also the spiritual part, which also is expressed
there: but if it had not, it being delivered in the Negative, they both ought
and might thence have deduced the Affirmative and better part: (like as was
done to them in their Typical ordinances, wherein the shell was to be cracked
before they could find the kernel. It was Gods ord^nary way of delivery in
those times.
) like a skillful Logitian, that only mentions the Major and the Minor of a
Syllogism, and leaves the Conclusion to be gathered, as a thing so easy
because so necessary, as none but Fools and Dunces can be ignorant of, and
thus does Christ deal with us also under the Gospel, he gives general Rules
for us thence to deduce particular Conclusions.

To your last End I answer. That it is most true that the Sabbath was a Type of
the Heavenly Sabbath, and a shadow of that blessed Rest to come; and therefore
transcendent to those Types which were properly lewish and of a Temporary
nature; whereas this Sabbath had its beginning with time, and shall receive its
ending with time, when the works are finished from the foundation of the
World. When as the Church of God is possessed of the Antitype, then shall this
universal Type vanish by the second coming of Christ, as the Jewish Types
have already vanished by his first coming.

Broad.
CHAP. V. 1. The Sabbath was a shadow.
SAint Paul in his second Chapter of the Epistle to the Coloss. has these
words, Let no man judge you in Meat, Coloss: 2. 16. 17.
or Drink, or in respect of an holy Day, or of the new Moon, Hoc est, figurae
fuerunt quae portenderent ea quae post essent vere exbi^henda a Christo. Marlor.
or of the Sabbaths, which are a shadow of things to come, but the body is of
Christ. Here by Sabbath the Weekly Sabbaths are meant as I gather.

1. Because St. Paul uses another word which does most properly signify the
festival Days, (...).

2. Unless by Sabbaths in this place the weekly Sabbaths be meant, Vide Tract^
de Sab. cap. 2. erg: 1.
we have not the least warrant in Gods word for working on the Jews Sabbath.
The Sabbatarians heretofore might with more color have put of any Text then
this.

3. Taking it for granted that we (...) not keep the Jews Sabbath, how it is
credible that S. Paul being Christ's only Doctor about Days, Rom: 14. Gal: 4.
Coloss: 2.
and handling this matter purposely in three Epistles, should not give us to
understand as much in one of them, and if in any in this.

4. Thus it is taken by very many great Divines S. Aug: terms the Sabbath
Sacramentum ambratile spir: and lit: Instit: lib: 2. cap. 8. sect. 28.
cap: 14. Calvin speaking of the fourth Commandment says umbratile veteres
nuncupare solent, so that it seems the Fathers generally for Sabbaths here
understood the Weekly Sabbaths, and therefore termed the fourth Commandment
umbratile shadowish.

5. I know no more but two or three in Print who take it otherwise, and all
that they can say, is that it is Sabbaths in the plural number, See Math: 28.
15. Acts 13. 14 and 16. 13.
but Sabbaths imports the Weekly Sabbath in many places. Again that with
Sabbaths are adjoined Meats and Drinks, and therefore that S. Paul speaks
of such Sabbaths as are in rank with them, which manner of arguing is termed
Petitio principis: This is all that ever I knew alleged by any, which is so
little, that it only argues a will to say something, it is not so much as a
shadow of sound proof.

Besides this Text Coloss: 2. There are other pregnant enough to prove, that
the Sabbath was a shadow, Type or Ceremony, as that Exodus: 31. 13. and and the
like may be gathered by Heb: 4. See what I have written of this Text^^ my
questions.
but of these Texts more shall be said hereafter.

Answer.
1. However there may be another word used to signify Festival Days, yet you
cannot deny, but it is frequent to name their festivalls, Sabbaths: Because of
the Rest and analogy which they had common with the Weekly Sabbath. Like as
Magistrates are called Gods, though there be other words to signify them.
And such is the sense of this Text, as may probably appear by these following
reasons which you so slightly evade.

1. Because it is Sabbaths in the plural number, for the Greek word (...)
where it signifies the Weekly Sabbath, and not the Week it self, is for
most part either expressed in the singular number, or if in the plural, then
it is joined with a word singular, as (...), and after this manner it is also
every where translated both in English and Latin, but in this 2. Coloss: 16.
there are none of all these.

2. Because Sabbaths are adjoined with such things (in this place of the
Coloss:) which are indisputably abrogative and merely Jewish, Such as are
termed in the 14 verse the handwriting of ordinances, and in the 17 verse are
termed the shadows of such things to come, whose body is of Christ, that is,
which are fulfilled in Christ, and whose significations end when he comes.
But we know the signification (as you your self confess out of 4. Heb:) of
the Sabbaths Rest is Heaven, our Rest there which remains unfulfilled yet to
the People of God as the same 4. Heb: shows.
and therefore are these the likelier to be such. For as Dr. Andrews says of
the Sabbath, how that it had been folly to have put a ceremonial Law amongst
the Moral; so say I in this case, that it were strange if God, who is the God
of order and not of confusion, should by his Apostle in this place mix one of
the ten Moral Commandments with the hand writing of Ordinances, things
merely ceremonial and abrogated.

To which two Reasons I add these which follow.

1. The Apostle himself did condescend to keep the Weekly Sabbath with the
Jews (not only for a time, as he did some of the Jewish Holy Days as also
their other rites, but at all times and in all places as occasion offered) as
being a thing of a different nature from their Sabbaths which he taught.

2. These three Holy Days, New-moones and Sabbaths are but (as I may so say)
Synonimies in sense signifying as it were one and the same thing, in the
intention of the Apostle by diverse expressions: for were not New moons
Holy Days, and Holy Days Sabbaths, so that if you disp^^e from a seeming
Tautology you may as well argue against New-moones as Sabbaths. And I would
know why Holy Days and Sabbaths may not be as well one and the same in this
place of the Coloss: as in the 58. Isa: 13. both of them in the one place
signifying the Weekly Sabbath, and in the other place the Jewish Sabbaths.
Which Synominy does the rather appear from that 4. Gal: 16 (which is the same
in effect with this of the Coloss:) where the Apostle by Days, Months, Times
and Years, means things of the same nature and Ordination, to wit, the
Jewish abrogated Types and Ceremonies such as begun with Man's Fall (or rather
with Moses) and ended with Christ's Resurrection (unto which the converted
Gentiles did too much adhere) not such as began in Paradise, and shall end in
Heaven.

But whereas it may be objected: that doubtless had not the Apostle intended
all Sabbaths in the word plural, he would have made some particular exception
of the Weekly Sabbath, considering how considerable it was so to do, if he
would have had the Weekly Sabbath to be understood to be still of force.

To this I answer. That the first Day of the Week or Lords Day having taken
footing among the convert Gentiles to whom the Apostle wrote, he might with
less scruple use the word Sabbaths absolutely without exception; considering
that all Sabbaths (eo nomine) were outlawed. Though now as the case stands we
in these times are forced to reassume the name Sabbath (not thereby to
shoulder out the more worthy name of Lords Day, but) to vindicate the authority
of the fourth Commandment, and to testify our judgments touching the new
Sabbath; like as the primitive times are reported to take up the wearing of the
Cross to testify their profession and Confession of a Crucified Christ
against their opposers.

2. To your second Reason I answer. That our warrant to work on the Jews
seventh Day is the fourth Commandment, which proportioneth us out six Days
for our worldly affairs, and the seventh for an holy rest, which is the
total and moral sense and sum of that Commandment, and which we still
observe, the order being occasional and temporary, but the number moral and
perpetual, as I have proved before. And therefore the Apostles did imply a
nullity of the one by the bringing in of the other, according to the nature of
the Commandment and the Prophecy of Isaiah 65. 16.

So that if you think it meet to retain the Lords Day in our Church (as you
do in your premonition) then must you grant the order to be changed. For it was
never the Apostles meaning nor in their power, when God by a perpetual Law
from the beginning had given us six Days for labor and destined the seventh
to an holy Rest, to have turned it into five Days labor and two Days Rest.
For amongst the Jews, when Holy Days were so frequent, there was never any
weekly Holy day ordained, to go cheek by jole with the Sabbath, but either
Monthly or Yearly. So that as Moses his Serpent eat up the Sorcerers, so
has our seventh Day eaten up theirs. As the Apostle says in another case, 2
Cor: 3. 10. Even that which was made glorious had no glory in this respect, by
reason of the glory which excels.
Generatio unius est corruption alterius. Our new Heaven and new Earth have
given us a new Sabbath and new Rest. For old things are passed away, and all
things are become new.

3. To your third reason I answer. That Paul in like case speaks in diverse
places of Ministers maintenance, and yet says never a word to clear the
controversy of Tithes, whether they be or be not Iure divino, but he
preaches the substance, to wit, a meet maintenance to be necessary. So in
Paul's discourse of times and Days (as also of other things) although he
satisfy not our Fancies, who cannot see af^rre of, yet does he answer the will
of the Holy Ghost, who for reasons whereof we are incapable spares to do
what we expect. And indeed the reason of Paul's not Preaching the Sabbaths
alteration might be because it was neither safe nor convenient. For it must
needs have given great offense to the Jews, (seeing it had a place amongst
the moral Commandments) who were so precise in the punctisioes of times, as
that they would have been of your opinion, that either their seventh Day or
none was moral: and so would have taken advantage to vilify his doctrine, as
if he had gone about to overthrow as well the Moral as Ceremonial Law; the
sun shine of the Gospel being too bright for their weak Eyes to behold all at
once. And therefore the Aposile, condescending to their infirmities, chose
rather to insinuate the Lords Day t^citly by his practice, then by his
doctrine. For so i^ behoved him in those times, wherein he became all to all
that he might win some. And therefore did he take occ^^^on on the I^^ish
Sabbaths to Prea^h the Gospel in their Synagogues, when yet we see how that
privately he sanctified the Lords Day with Ch^istians.

Therefore I conclude that this Scripture is nothing concerning the Weekly
Sabbath (whereof he writes nothing at all directly for the reasons aforesaid)
but of the Jewish Ceremonial Sabbaths which he must needs cry down, if he
set up Christ. The shadow must vanish, when the substance comes in place. And
of this the converted Jews were mostly as well persuaded without offense as
the converted Gentiles. But of this sort was not the Weekly Sabbath, as I have
proved elsewhere, and as further is evident from the 92. Psalm: which is
dedicated to the Sabbath Day, but none of the rest of the Psalms to any of the
legal Ceremonies, from which I may thus reason.

That seeing the Book of the Psalms, was ordained for the consolation of the
militant Church unto the Worlds end, (as may appear by the Apostles
exhortation) it seems not consonant to reason, that a part of Gods perpetual
worship should be dedicated to a temporary Ceremony.

To your fourth and fifth I answer, that how the Sabbath is said to be
shadowish, we have shown before, and shall have more occasion hereafter to
enlarge it.

Amongst those two or three which justify the morality of the Sabbath. I would
have you take in Dr. Andrews in his exposition of the fourth Commandment, and
Mr. Hooker in his Eccles: Pol: and Bishop Hell whom I have already alleged.

Broad.
2. The Sabbath was a shadow from the beginning.
FOr Gods very Resting was Typical as appears Heb: 4. 4. observe that the
Apostle there speaks os the seventh Day as rested upon by God, and not as
sanctified by him or enjoined to be sanctified by Man, so that the seventh Day
then became a Type when God rested therein, the seventh Day in order if not in
time before it was sanctified was Gods rest, and Consequently a shadow of the
Rest remaining to the People of God. Consider further that it does not appear
by the Scripture when the Sabbath became a shadow; and which was the first
Sabbath that was such if the first of all were not.

Again that all other shadows and Types were such from their first
institution.

If any think there was no shadow or Ceremony of Christ before Sin.

Ans: Suppose that before there had been no shadow or Type at all, yet might
the Sabbath be a shadow or Type from the beginning thereof, for it is very
profitable that Adam fell the Day before. Again though there were no Ceremony
of Christ before Sin, yet might there be a shadow of things to come, that now
shall be exhibited by Christ, which had not Adam sinned God would have
exhibited by himself.

There were it seems three Types or shadows in the beginning, Paradise, the
Tree of Life, and the seventh Day Gods Rest, of the comfort of all which Adam
for his Sin was deprived. But afterward God being merciful to the posterity
of Abraham they had the same Sabbath, Mannah for the Tree of Life, and the Land
of Canaan for Paradise, which was as it were another Paradise, and a figure
also of the Kingdom of Heaven.

Answer.
In the 4. of Hebrews it is beyond the Apostles scope to treat upon the
sanctification of the Sabbath, for that there he only disputes upon the
typical use of it. So that thence I easily grant you the significary or
typicalnes of the Sabbaths rest even from the beginning: so you take it not in
a Jewish sense as abrogative by Christ his first coming: for though Christ
then came to destroy the ceremonial Law, yet came he to fulfill the Moral
Law, in which the Sabbath has his seat, and whose typicalnes does not so
properly relate to Christ, or to our present Rest in him, as to our Rest in
Heaven, As appears in the 4 Hev: where by Gods 6 Days work and re^ting on
the seventh i, signified the travel of Man's Life, and his Rest in Heaven, if
he be of the People of God, and thus has eveu Christ himself rested before us
(as is there also specified) is partaker, as well as procurer of the benefit of
this Type.
which in Innocence we were capable of without him, although that now our
capacity and interest in that Rest being lost, and only recovered in and
through Christ, it may by accident refer to Christ (as the Tree of Life is
made to do.) because he is become our Intermedium to that Rest which yet at
first it signified without him, and thus is Marriage made a Type of Christ, and
his Church, which in Innocence was properly a Type of the Union and Unity
between God and his Church immediately till sin made a divorce, and
therefore are they not as other Types occasionally taken up and occasionally
laid down, but begun (as I may say) before Christ, and shall end after him,
that is, when he shall give up his Kingdom into the hands of his Father, to
whom the Creation being appropriated, this Type of the Sabbath being grounded
thereupon, must needs begin and end in him. Yet so, as that by reason of
Christ's intervention, and the new Creation which he has made, it is (by
accident) of use also toward him; because that in and by him only, we now
enjoy this Rest, and are given in Marriage unto God. So that, if we can here
prove our Rest and Marriage unto him by Faith, then are we inchoatively
possessed of our everlasting Rest and Marriage, which shall be consummated with
God in Heaven, * whereof these two Institutions in Innocence were figures.

Touching the time of Adams Fall for my part I cannot think it was before Gods
seventh Day, and my reason is from Moses his method for he puts it after,
and yet I do believe he never kept Sabbath in Innocence, but fell before his
own seventh Day.

Touching Adams deprivation I answer. That although it be evident by Scripture
and the fiery Sword, that Adam was deprived of Paradise, and the Tree of Life,
as being properly annexed to the Commandment concerning the Tree of Good and
Evil: yet does not the same appear concerning the Sabbath, for that it did
partake as well of duty as of commodity, and was a coadjutor to the Law of
nature: besides we see it renewed in its proper kind, and upon its primitive
reason: which the other are not, but exempt by a fery Sword; also we see the
Scripture says, the Sabbath was made for Man, which indefinitely signifies
all Mankind, though properly the People of God. For God having still a People
he has for them a Rest in Heaven, toward which the Sabbath is as helpful as
the Sacrament of the Lords supper is to our Faith in Christ. For as one says.
Even now in this marveilous light of the Gospel, we have our divine
Ceremonies and Sacraments, God reserving the greatest for the Kingdom of glory.

Broad.
3. The Sabbath was a shadow of our blessed Rest in Heaven.
SAint Paul saying Coloss: 2. that Meat, Drink, Holy Days and Sabbaths are a
shadow of things to come, does not there tell us of what things to come they
are a shadow.

And the only place (in my knowledge) whereby we may gather of what the
Sabbath was a shadow, is Heb: 4. by which Chapter it appears that the Sabbath
was a shadow or Type of the Rest in Heaven. The Rests or Sabbaths mentioned in
that chapter are three, one, the first seventh Day verse 4. another the Land
of Canaan verse 8. a third the Kingdom of Heaven verse 9. of the latter Rest
the two former were shadows. Some tell us of a legal spiritual and Heavenly
Sabbath, and the legal with them was a Type of both the other, which I dislike
not.

Answer.
You may well imagine of what things to come Paul means in that 2. Coloss: if
you consider the context, for after he had handled Circumcision both in its
Type and Antitype, then he concludes of other things of that nature in these
words, let no man therefore condemn you in Meat or Drink etc. As if he had
said; like as Circumcision, so all things of that nature and institution, are
extinguished through Christ, the substance of these shadows, and the end of
these Ceremonies. Amongst whichby an Argument ex non concessis, you would draw
in the Weekly Sabbath to be one, (as if the Jews had not other Sabbaths which
more properly are to be reckoned in that number) and yet confess it to
signify our Rest in Heaven, and to have none other signification but that:
which signification is still in force also, as we see in the 4. of H^b. which
properly is true of none of the abrogated Shadows. Which signification I say
is still in force and consequently the Sabbath: for how should it be other,
seeing that they are Christ's own words, Math: 5. 18. That till Heaven and
Earth pass one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the Law till all
be fulfilled. Now how can the Sabbath be abrogated, seeing by your own
confession it signifies our Rest in Heaven, which is not yet fulfilled nor
will not be till the second coming of Christ. whereas the Jewish Types
therefore vanished at the first coming of Christ, because they received the
fulfilling in him properly and adequately.

But perchance it will be objected. Ob^.
That the abolishment of all the signs of the Old Testament was by this, that
Christ has actually acquired all the benefits figured by them, though the
Elect inherit them not yet totally and perfectly; and thus he has also
acquired the benefit of the Sabbaths signification for us, though not yet
accomplished it to us.

I answer. 1. It is true that the benefits of both are acquired by Christ, Answ.
but in a different kind. For the Jewish Types were since the Fall created de
novo for his sake, to shadow him forth, and so he properly accomplisheth and
so abolisheth them, Coloss: 2. 17. Whence D. Tailor observes (in his Christ
revealed page: 4)
But this of the Sabbath was created in the beginning, and was since then
(things so falling out by the Fall) only renewed for his sake: like as was the
Law also (for God makes them go hand in hand and so should we) to the end that
both of them may appear, 1 That as the body is the cause of the shadow so
Christ was the cause of those Ceremonies.
by the accident of our Fall, to be now only fulfilled and accomplished on our
behalfes through and by Christ. 2 That as the shadow represents the shape of
the body with the actions and motions: sod those rites and Ceremonies resemble
Christ in all his actions, passions, motions.


I say 2ly. It may as well be said that the whole Law is utterly abolished by
Christ, as the Sabbath^ for that he has fulfilled the righteousness thereof for
us; and yet we know that to us under the Gospel the Law is still binding in a
Gospel sense, requiring a willing and an upright, though not an absolute and
perfect obedience unto it: And so are we to celebrate a Gospel Sabbath, though
not the last of seven as expecting Rest by works, yet the first day of seven
as having and expecting Rest by Christ for still the Law and the Sabbath fate
alike. So that (as one says) Christ has both accomplished and abolished the
Ceremonial Law, the (...) Law he has accomplished but not abolished; for
Christ is the End of the Daw. But as Augustine well distinguishes, the
perfecting not the destroying End.

But by the way I must in this place the better to clear the truth take in two
objections that are made against our acceptance of this 4. Heb:

First, they object that Gods Rest (there spoken of) on the seventh Day is not
meant as typifying our Rest in Heaven, but only is mentioned in way of
similitude.

Ans: 1. If the Sabbath be at all a Type it must be so from the beginning: for
as M. Broad observes it appears not else, by Scripture, when the Sabbath
became a shadow, and which was the first Sabbath, that was such, if the first
of all was not. And again, that all other shadows and Types were such from
their first institution.

Sabbath be no Type, why is it disputed to be no Moral Commandment, but
abrogated?



1 From the olteration and change which it has undergone since Christ.

2 By the inference which is made, in way of consequence from Gods resting unto
his Peoples resting, in the connection of the 9 and 10 verses of this 4 chap.
Heb:

Sabbath its said was made for Man, that is, for his benefit and here to
signify his happiness hereafter: so Mayer in locum says, that in Gods being
said to rest, there must needs be an alluding to a most joyful Rest to be had
by Man, seeing he was never weary neither had he need of Rest: so Anselm. to
prove the rest of the seventh Day, and that it prefigured a further rest to
come, he aleadgeth the words (says he) of the history in Genesis* (The
seventh Day God rested from all his Works) for in that immediately after the
making of Man these words were added, it is plain, that the resting of man who
was last made was meant hereby. For as Augustine says, God was not weary so
that he had need to rest in regard of his great labor, but in those words he
has promised Rest to the laboring, or because he made all things very good
and then it is said, he rested, thou may understand also that after thy good
works thou shall rest, and rest without end.

Secondly, they object, that by Rest there is not meant our Rest in Heaven, but
our Rest from Sin here upon Earth, or our Gospel rest.

To this I answer, It cannot properly bear that sense; for,

1. It must be such a Rest as God rested, which was not from Sin, but an
everlasting Rest in Heaven from the Works of Creation.

2. It must be such a Rest as is spoken of in the fourth Commandment, which is
not properly a Rest from Sin, but a Rest from works.

3. As Mayer observes it is there called Sabbatismus which signifies a time
of everlasting joy and festivity which cannot be expressed, which is only
proper to Heaven.

4. To put all out of doubt in the 14 verse of this 4 chap. Heb: it is expressly
called Heaven, and Christ himself is employed to rest it when he ascended into
Heaven. Nor does the Apostles speaking in the present tense in the third verse
of this chap: saying, ( We which have believed do enter into Rest) afford any
Argument against it, for that is only a speech of faith, implying the certainty
thereof, as also intimating the inchoation or entrance which the People of God
make into this Heavenly Rest or everlasting Life even in this Life. For the
Apostles dispute there shows that God has a Rest of everlasting Happiness for
his People, as for himself, and which now we are become capable of only by
the promise of the Gospel through Faith, by reason of Christ our high Priest,
who is gone thither before us, but for farther satisfaction see mi^e Anal^^
page* 38.

Broad.
4. The Sabbath was a shadow in as much as it was a Sabbath, that is, a day of
rest and refreshing.
THe Sabbath (as has been said) was a shadow of the blessed rest to come, and
hereof now it was a shadow in respect it was a Sabbath or day of rest, even as
the Land of Canaan was a type of Heaven in as much as it was a place of rest.
Some will not have a Sabbath it self to be a shadow, but would Saint Paul
have said the holy days new Moons and Sabbaths are shadows, if not these but
circumstances only about them had been a shadow, where is the word Sabbath
taken in such a sense? The word Sabbath is to be taken in such a sense Col. 2.
as it is to be taken in other places, The Son of Man is Lord of the Sabbath.
Matthew. 12. Mar. 2.
The Sabbath was made for Man, was the strict rest, precise seventh day or the
like made for Man? was the Son of Man Lord of the Sabbath only in such
respects? but let us examine their Doctrine better.

The Sabbath they say was shadowish or ceremonial in some respects: The
Sabbath was not a shadow in as much as it was the seventh day, but the
seventh day was a shadow in as much as it was the Sabbath or day of rest:
consider that the thing shadowed is the rest spoken of Hebr. 4. 9.
as first, in respect it was the seventh day, and here they say, that the
number of seven is mystical, that it is the number of perfection, and tell of
seven days, and of seven times seven years etc. Ans.

1. Why may not I say also that the number of three is mystical, I am sure
that three Persons in one God is the greatest mystery of all others, and I can
tell them of three Persons in one God, of three Angels appearing to Abram.

2. Supposing that the number of seven be mystical, it follows that we
are freed from it, and not from the seventh day only, for what have we to
do with the Jewish dark mysteries, in this clear Sunshine of the Gospel.
The week by this Doctrine should rather be a mystery or shadow then the
Sabbath, for the Sabbath was but one day of the seven, as the first was or any
other. Indeed the Sabbath was the last of the seven but what of that? Saint
Paul tearming the Sabbath a shadow joyneth it with the Holy Days and new
Moons, if now they will have the Sabbath be a shadow in regard it was the last
of the week, the New-moone (maysome say) was a shadow in regard it was the
first of the Month, and the holy days in regard they fell at other times.

3. If the number of seven or last of seven be mystical, must it not be so
from the beginning. And thus must the Sabbath be a mystery or shadow from the
first institution, as all other shadows were. Secondly, in respect of their
strict rest, but I know nothing of any moment, God himself rested strictly,
for he rested from all his works Genesis 2. 2. unless Gods example teaches us
to rest strictly, it teaches us nothing.
which they bring for proof hereof, and why of the strict rest and not of the
whole? Certainly we shall rest wholly in Heaven. And if the Sabbath was
ceremonial in respect of the strict rest, then it seems he that labored
all day or a good part thereof brake the moral part and so sinned. Moreover
the holy days (joined with the Sabbath Col. 2.) may seem to want the
ceremony, seeing no such strict rest was in joined in them as was showed before
Chap. 2. 3. in respect of the sacrifices offered therein. Ans.

First, If sacrifices offered on such a day made the day a shadow, then every
day of the week was a shadow as well as the Sabbath, for sacrifices were by
the Law to be offered every day.

Secondly, Then shall we have three Sacraments for the administration of the
Lords supper is as well a part of sanctifying the Lords day, as the offering of
sacrifices was a part of sanctifying the Sabbath. If then the sacrifices made
the Sabbath a ceremony like to themselves, the Lords supper makes the Lords
day a Sacrament like to it self also.

Thirdly, If a ceremonial duty enjoined on the Sabbath made it partly
ceremonial, a moral duty enjoined on the holy days made them partly moral.
And thus should the feast of Passover be partly moral as well as the Sabbath.

Answer.
I grant you, that the Sabbath was a shadow or signification of the blessed
rest to come, and that not as it was a seventh day, In respect of any mystery
contained therein.
but as the seventh day was a Sabbath. But hence you would deduce a wrong
conclusion, that therefore it is as was the Jewish shadows, abrogative in the
coming of Christ, and that we are not bound to dark mysteries (say you) in
this clear sunshine. Ans.

We are not bound indeed to any mystery, but to the duty contained in the
number of seven. Yet to the signification of the Sabbath we are bound, which
is not dark but clear for so the Scripture has made it to be in the fourth
Hebr. And although this Sabbath was shadowish, yet was it neither of like
nature with their other Sabbaths, nor yet with other things whose signification
reached to Heaven as well as it.

First I say, it differed from other Sabbaths because it properly signified our
rest in Heaven (as we see in the fourth Hebr. where it alone is mentioned) and
they properly our rest on earth by Christ; and therefore were they so many (and
it but one and the same from the beginning) to signify that our rest here was
to be with manifold intermissions and in great variety.

Secondly I say, it also differed from other things whose signification reached
to Heaven as well as it: For mostly they had a double signification, the one
proper and proximate, as Jewish types, signifying the rest and flourishing
prosperity, that the Church should have in the time of the Gospel; the other
Analogicall and remote, intimating that in the end, Heaven should be the
accomplishment of our Gospel graces and benefits, like as in the mid way they
were the accomplishment of their types and shadows. For all the Jewish types
being ordained for Christ, must be fulfilled in and by Christ in the time of
grace, which is his time of regiment, by administering grace as now he does
being our high Priest entered into the holy of holies with blood to make
intercession for us, and by completing grace which he shall do hereafter,
when asking he shall come in glory to set us at liberty from all our enemies
in that great Iubilee, when the day of refreshing shall come from the presence
of the Lord: and then after that we have done our part and Christ his, we
shall (a complete Adam in soul and body and clothed with perfect innocence)
enter into our Masters everlasting rest and joy.
But the Sabbath had precedence of these having for its signification properly
and adequately one rest in Heaven, and the other abrogative Sabbaths
subservient to it for the abrogative part (as appears by the significant
difference of rest that was imposed upon them in the wilderness, as I have else
where observed more at large) it being Catholicall and (the) Churches
inheritance beginning with it and ending with it; and they being (that)
Churches inheritance in like manner receiving their beginning and ending with
it.

If it be objected, that the Sabbath is as much fulfilled on earth as many
other Jewish types, for many of them have not their perfect signification
accomplished here but in Heaven, (as the Jewish circumcision shall not be
perfected till we be in the Kingdom of Heaven) and our everlasting rest has
its inchoation here in the souls of Gods elect, what difference then?

Ans. The difference consists in the immediate object which the types
primarily and principally eyed. For the Jewish types primarily eyed the happy
estate of the Church on Earth under the time of the Gospel, thereby to invite
and bring their souls into a Gospel state by believing (so that though they
are perfectly fulfilled in Heaven, yet they are properly fulfilled on earth)
and secondarily or remotely its perfection in Heaven; For the time of the
Gospel was (as I may say) properly their Heaven as it may appear in that it
is said, the Prophets and righteous men have desired to see (to wit looking
through their types and shadows) the things that you see etc. Matthew. 13. 17
these being their primary and proper object, and as may appear in the second
place by the faultines of their covenant Hebr. 8. 7. and the faultlesnes of the
Gospel covenant. But this type of the Sabbath contrariwise primarily and
principally eyed the happy estate of the Church in Heaven Hebr. 4. whereby
their minds were to be elevated above the Mannah, that they should partake of
on earth, which they must enjoy with pains taking, even to the Mannah which
they should feed on in Heaven with rest from all labor, and so is not yet
fulfilled neither properly nor perfectly. For we must note that the Sabbath
signified properly Gods rest, or our rest with God, not first Christ's rest and
then Gods, though by reason of the admixtion of the Gospel in that time of the
Law, it signified Gods rest to be by Christ (as in its succession to Mannah
has been shown) I say that properly it signified not Christ's rest; neither
literally, in respect of the time of the new covenant under the Gospel,
wherein we are set free from the burden which neither we nor our Fathers were
able to bear, nor spiritually, in the souls of the regenerate freed from the
Law (for this their other Sabbaths did in regard this weekly Sabbath could not
properly do it, at that time) though now under the Gospel, the Sabbath Day
that attended the Law being done away, this weekly Sabbath now supplieth the
place of all their Sabbaths, and now it self alone signifies our already
entrance into our eternal rest inchoatively, by being possessed of our souls
spiritual rest in Christ, a thing which whilst the Law was afoote it could
not properly imply; Because the Law gave no present rest but all future, though
in the time of the Law (as aforesaid) it was signified to be made good to us
by Christ. Yet it never properly signified the rest of Christ in the soul, for
then it had signified a present rest which was contrary to the Law, and is now
our privilege under the Gospel; The Sabbath Day being changed for that end
from last to first. For 4. Heb. 3. We which have beleved do enter into rest,
where this rest of God is spoken of in a double respect, to wit, as denied to
carnal Israel that sought to possess themselves of it by works, but granted
to Gods spiritual Israel that seek it of Grace through faith, who shall not
only have it here after, but even for present are possessed of it in their
souls, which happiness the Law or first covenant never could afford.

So that although the Sabbath be shadowish, yet is it not the Jews proper
freehold but common with them and us, being theirs only, as they were the
elect Church and people of God to whom it universally belongs, and therefore
was instituted even to Adam in innocence. For the Church of God in the clearest
state of it never was nor never shall be upon earth, without shadowish
Sacraments and Sabbaths, being her proper inheritance, which were even in
innocence, where our eyes were clearer then they are now.

And seeing that the Sabbath is not properly Jewish it cannot be said to be
abrogated, because the substance is yet not come, which is Heaven it self; or
our absolute rest and inablement to serve God there; As was signified by that
strict rest commanded to the Jews on this Sabbath in the time of Mannah, above
other rests and other Sabbaths; but only changed, to prove to us that the
Gospel estates us in that rest (and that presently) which the Law should, but
could not.

And now in our days the stricter that we rest from worldly distractions, and
the more sanctifiedly that we keep the Sabbath, the nearer we imitate Gods
example, Who yet on the seventh day that he rested, ceased not to cherish and
maintain, all things that he had made, by his providence, and in necessary
and merciful providence we are to imitate God on that day as well as in
resting.
and fulfill his intention in the institution of the Sabbath, and the better
we perform our duty in glorifying God (as the Jews did in doubling their
sacrifices on that day) and the more comfort we reap to our selves, in lively
moralizing thence our heavenly rest which we shall have hereafter, free from
all corruptions, interruptions, temptations. Doing God double service in
Heaven, to that we do him here.
For in proportion all that belong unto the Jews concerning their resting and
sanctifying the Sabbath, belong likewise to us consideratis considerandis.

Broad.
CHAP. VI.
ARguments prooving that the precept of the Sabbath is not moral nor
perpetual Did some men teach only that the precept of the Sabbath was
greater, and of longer continuance then the precepts of the holy days, it were
not so strange, but that the precept of the Sabbath and the precepts of the
holy days should be of different natures the one moral, and the other not,
is incredible.


Answer.
A pitiful shift that these Antisabbatarians and the Papists are driven to for
the maintenance of their opinions, even to the down right adventuring to blot
out that which God himself has written with his own hand; (a greater boldness
then King Belshazzar durst attempt touching the writing on the wall) witness
Master Broad here, and Vasquez the Jesuit elsewhere, who being driven to
acknowledge (by comparing the words of the second commandment with the fourth
of Deuteronomy.) that the Scripture does forbid the adoration of the true God himself
in an Image, and confessing with all that he and his fellow Catholics do
other ways, what says he then to the commandment? why, because it will not
be obeyed it must be repealed, and not admitted to have any place amongst the
moral precepts of God, it was (says he) a positive and ceremonial Law, and
therefore ought to cease in the time of the Gospel, thus making the
commandemen of God of none effect to keep their own traditions Gab. Vasquez.
lib. 2. disput. 4. cap. 4. sect. 84. But the Jesuits come short of the
subtilties of our age, for they bluntly explode the second commandment,
whereas they might have let it stand still with a distinction: Like as some of
our Antisabbatarians (For they cannot all agree upon the point) do, let the
fourth commandment stand though not for its own sake, or as a Law (though we
must pray, Lord incline our hearts to keep this Law, as we do to the rest)
but only for some other causes and consideration dictated by our
Antisabbatarians, some one, some another; to keep the ten commandments from a
blancke. I wonder what one man of a thousand has wont to pray that prayer
after the reading of the fourth commandment in their sense; which if they will
have pass for Doctrine, they must either alter the frame of the commandment
or else explode it as Master Broad does.

But Doctor Heylyn part. 2. page 241. objects, that if this ejaculation be to
be understood in a literal sense, according as the words are laid down in
terminis, it then must be the meaning of it, that we should pray unto the
Lord to keep the Sabbath of the Jews, even the seventh day precisely from
the Worlds creation and keep it in the self same manner that the Jews once
did.

To which I answer, that our praying that prayer in a literal sense now in our
times does force no such conclusions. Not to keep the Sabbath of the Jews:
For though the commandment express a seventh day for number yet it does not
in terminis express the order saying, Thou shall keep the last day in the
week, or of seven, and not the first, etc. (though I acknowledge from other
reasons proper to these times the commandment had then that meaning only) so
that now the letter of the commandment is intended in our prayer only with a
circumstantiall variation according to the practice of the Church (derived from
the Apostles) which explaines it to the meanest: Again, not the seventh day
precisely from the Worlds creation, for that has suffered many variations, nor
did Adam keep it, but he means the seventh day from the first gathering of
Mannah.

Nor yet in the self same manner, that the Jews once did, If by (once) he
mean in the strict time of the wilderness for reasons aforesaid. So that by the
letter of the commandment we now may pray the Lord to incline our hearts to
keep holy a Sabbath, and not the Jews, a seventh day and not the last of
seven (For the Law in the letter respects properly and principally the
number implying only the order occasionally, for the season sake, because the
creation was then the greatest good; which number it still retains in the same
letter, and upon a new season implies a new order, the reason whereon the order
was built being circumstantiall, as I have proved before) nor the day that God
rested on after the creation, nor the extraordinary rest in the wilderness. I
say, we may ejaculate this prayer in a literal sense to the fourth
commandment as well as to the fifth, where weepray, Lord incline our hearts to
honor our parents, that according to thy promise, the days may be long in
the Land which thou give us: Now we all knew that by Land there and then is
implicitly meant the promised Land, or Land of Canaan. Yet the manner of
expression which God uses in the penning of that Law (as of that of the
Sabbath) admits a latitude ( Ephesians. 6. 2. 3.) not appropriating the promise to
the Land of Canaan only (by saying, that thy days may be long in that Land of
Canaan which the Lord thy God gives thee) so that the Tribe and the half
which planted on this side Jordan might have prayed this prayer at the reading
of the fifth commandment, as well as they with in the Land of Canaan, by
virtue of the letter of that Law; and so in like manner may we now: So
excellent is the wisdom of the Lawgiver. That though in some temporary
implicit circumstantiall sense, his Laws might more properly belong to those
people to whom they were immediately given then to us and our times; yet he
has so ordered it that the Law is still useful and binding for the substance
of it, even in the letter. And therefore they that pray this ejaculation with
understanding hearts, do not pray, Lord incline our hearts to keep a Sabbath
which (...) no Sabbath, but Lord incline our hearts to keep a Christian
Sabbath, a Christian seventh day, and a Christian rest.

But in the conclusion Doctor Heylyn says, we may thus expound this prayer.
viz. to pray unto the Lord to incline our hearts to keep that Law as far as
it contains the Law of Nature, etc. (which yet Master Broad his partizan will
not allow) a pitiful shift to keep all whole: And such is Bishop Whites page
159. 160. The generality of whose conclusion there upon this ejaculation
(saving his private exposition) may well serve to set forth the use of it now;
For (says he) our prayer to God, prescribed in the Liturgy, is not to beseeth
him to incline our hearts to keep the Law according to the special form and
circumstance of time commanded in the old Law, (which say I is the last day of
seven in memory of our creation) but in such a manner as is agreeable to the
state of the Gospel and time of Grace, which say I is the first day of seven
in memory of our redemption, and not as he interprets it, to wit, according to
the equity and mystery of the fourth commandment, and according to the rule of
Christian liberty, which has freed Gods people under the Gospel from the
observation of days, months, times and years (says he) upon legal and
ceremonial principles; true, if he mean judaicall ones, and then he cannot
mean the Sabbath; For to be freed from it is no part of Christian liberty,
because not yet fulfilled by Christ, Hebr. 4. 9. 10.

But to return to Master Broad, by your Marginall note it seems you could
allow the Sabbath (not in respect of the Jews weakness, but of its own worth
and greatness) to be of longer continuance then the holy days but not
perpetual; wherein you exceedingly wrong your cause: for if of longer
continuance why not perpetual? and if not perpetual, why of longer
continuance? the Holy Days and Jewish Sabbaths, say you, expired in Christ,
and if this common Sabbath be no other then a Jewish Holy Day, why does not it
expire with the rest? and if you can allow it beyond Christ, I pray you, what
should hinder it for being perpetual? neither is it incredible to think that
the common Sabbath, and Jewish Holy Days be of different natures; when as
they had different institutions, different significations, different locations
and different extensions.

Broad.
ARG. I. No moral Commandment may be broken in case of necessity: but the
fourth Commandment may; Ergo, it is not moral.
THe Major is evident, for a man may not Ly, Steal or the like to save his
Life; The Minor is no less evident, In case of necessity the whole Rest may be
broken and not the strict only.
for to save the Life of his Cattle a man may labor all the Sabbath, in
seeking them covered with Snow, in lifting them out of Pits etc.

Works of necessity are not forbidden in the intention of the Lawgiver, Obj.
and therefore such do not break the fourth Commandment.

Suppose the King by a general Law shall forbid the eating of Flesh in Lent,
Answ.
a sick Man eating Flesh breaks the Law, though no doubt it be in the Kings
intention, that in such case Flesh may be eaten: as it is in the Lawgivers
intention that Work in case of necessity may be done, David brake the Law of
shewbread: Math: 12.
so is it in the Lawgivers intention that the fourth Commandment in case of
necessity may be broken, as other Ceremonial precepts might in the time of the
Law.

The whole Rest (not the strict Rest only) is Ceremonial, Obj.
so that if a Man labor all the Sabbath in lifting his Cattle out of Pits, in
saving his goods from Burning, in Fighting against the Enemy etc. Yet he
breaks only the Ceremonial part of the fourth Commandment.

Unless such break the moral part, Answ.
none ever did, nor can do, and consequently there is no moral part: consider
that to break the fourth Commandment, and to profane the Sabbath are the
same, and now that the Sabbath is profaned only by work was showed before
Chap. 3.
those Laws only are to be termed Moral whereby the observation of Moral
duties, such as are Prayer, Alms etc. are prescribed as for Time and Place,
they are necessary circumstances about the performance of Moral duties, and
their Laws are to be termed Circumstantiall.

Mr. Jacob in his reply to some notes of mine above twenty years since
acknowledged that the fourth Commandment was circumstantiall and not moral.
And I suppose that many other when they have a little considered the matter
will easily acknowledge as much, but yet as he, so they, will have it
perpetual nevertheless: wherefore I come to prove that the fourth
Commandment is abrogated.

Answer.
In answer to your Argument, I say, that the fourth Commandment can be no more
broken then the first second or third. For as in the first other things may be
loved, but not unlawfully loved, and as in the second Images may be made, but
not unlawfully made, and in the third the Name of God may be used and taken,
but not abused and taken in vain: so in this fourth Commandment we may do
work, and ^et break this no more then the other, if so be not unlawful
work, but such as agrees with the sense of the Lawgiver, and may be gathered
by comparing places of Scripture, which we find to be such as may promote
Piety, Mercy and Charity. And therefore is that following Objection of moment.
For in all Laws the meaning of the Lawgiver, and sense of the Law it self is
principally to be respected, not the Letter: for that thing may be
contradictory to the Letter of the Law, which yet is no breach of the meaning
of the Law, if so be it be agreeable to the rules of Right, Reason and Piety.
For it is supposed that all Laws ought to be such, and if otherwise then
they cannot in a right sense be said to bind, and so consequently not to be
broken.
As where we are commanded not to Swear at all, you might well imagine what
would follow thence, if this doctrine of yours might take place, that therefore
to Swear at all is to break this Commandment, and so in this fourth
Commandment where we are bid to do no manner of Work, if you will cleave to
the Letter, you may soon find your error to your cost. But God gives his
Laws and Commandments to reasonable Creatures, who should therefore be able
to judge of them according to the Rules of Truth and Reason. A London Merchant
charge his Apprentice upon a Shrovetuesday that all that Day he stir not
out of his House, if so be the Apprentice upon occasion go into the back
Court, you will not say hereupon he breaks his Masters commandment. That
therefore which one affirms of men's writings is true touching Laws, to wit,
that we must seek for the meaning by the matter, as well as by the Letter;
and lend our Ears to listen and observe what they desire to speak, and not
make them speak only what w're desire to hea^e, unless we will be like (...)
Children, who having some fancy running in their Heads, imagine the Bells to
ring and sing as they think and speak.

See that where Christ says Math: 12. 5. That the Priests profaned the Sabbath
in the Temple, and ^ere blamlesse, it is spoken according to the Capacity and
misprision of the superstitious Pharisees, See ^ Ioh: 15. 16. 18.
the better to convince their error, (...) that if they counted the actions
which his D^^ples did in his service to be a breach of the Sabbath, they must
by the same Reason account the actions which the Priests did in the service of
the Temple to be a breach of the Sabbath (for he had more authority to use
their service, then the Temple had to use the service of the Priests) but that
they did not, therefore nor ought they to think this a breach of the Sabbath,
for indeed such works as tend to Mercy and Piety I conclude works of
necessity within these terms of Piety and Mercy, whereto I limit the works of
the Sabbath; because whatsoever works are done on that Day (though they be
works of necessity as ^^dering Beasts etc.) ought to bring forth some special
glory to God, by some Sabbaticall and holy use, under one of these two heads;
and therefore does Christ turn that Act of necessity (when his Apostles for
hunger sake rubbed the Ears of Corn) into an act of Mercy, saying I will have
mercy and not sacrifice.
are so far from breaking the Sabbath (which commands an holy Rest) as that
they are the proper fulfillings of it, even as to do the will of our Father in
Heaven will be no impeachment to our Rest there* And indeed the just
intermission of Rest on the Sabbath, is most improperly called a dispensation
of the keeping of the Sabbath, for in nothing ought Rest to be intermitted on
the Sabbath, but in such things as tend more to the sanctifying of the Sabbath
(such were Christ's Sabbath Day cures which he might else have suspended till
the next Day) for Rest being principally ordained to remove the impediments of
the Sabbaths sanctifying ought of right to give way to its furtherances:
whereas the dispensing with a duty is to prejudice that for the advantage of
some other.

But by the way take notice that, from the Pharisees reproving Christ's
Disciples, in the beginning of this (...). Math: for rubbing the Ears of Corn
on the Sabbath Day, Ob^.
it is objected by some, that that Law given in the W^^dernes in the time of
Mannah, touching their not preparing their Food on the Sabbath Day, was then of
force and a foot in the opinion and practice of the Pharisees, else they would
not have reproved the Disciples for so doing, to which I answer.

That they did not reprove this action of Christ's Disciples in reference to
that Law, Answ.
or with any such opinion that it was of force, or in respect of any such
practice of their own: but as a work and so a breach of Rest (as Mr. Broad
rightly observes in his third chapter) nay as a needless and cursory work or
action, as may appear.

1. In that they themselves were not so ill instructed in the lawfulnes of
works of mercy and necessity (seeing they led their Oxen to watering on the
Sabbath Day) that they would have found fault with it had they conceived it to
have been a work of necessity.

2. In Christ's excuse or justification of them, from the necessity of what they
did, implying, first that it was not needles and superfluous, as they by their
Pharisaicall carping and misprision conceived, but necessary, and secondly that
it was not unlawful, because not needless.

2ly. I answer, it was not their practice as you may see Luke 14. by comparing
^^verse with 12. 13 except of some superstitious ones, such as Ignatius ad Mag:
mentions.

3ly. I answer, it was not their opinion, for then the Pharisees would have
replied upon Christ's argument, that necessity made it not lawful to them, in
regard that that necessity was begot by their improvidence, in not preparing
and making ready their viands beforehand on the Day before, according as that
Law enjoined: for so it is likely through the improvidence of the man that
gathered Sticks on the Sabbath Day (probably for to sees or bake some Mannah
unprovided the Day before) his action became necessary and yet he was stoned
for it.

But here it will be said that if this action of Christ's Disciples was a breach
of Rest, Obj.
and so judged to be unlawful, then in like manner it is unlawful for us
going through a Corn Field on the Sabbath Day to do the like.

It is as well unlawful to us as to them needlessly and cursorily performed,
Answ.
but with a distinction of unlawfulnes for it was literally unlawful to them,
but it is spiritually unlawful to us: For it was of a positive holiness to them
in their times, but to us it is only of a relative holiness: so that such an
action is unlawful to us, not properly as a breach of Rest, but as it is a
distraction, or a fruit and effect of empty carnal and earthly minds on that
Heavenly Day: for else in case of necessity (for mercy sake) it is lawful, or
as an help and furtherance of the spiritualizing or sanctifying of that Day it
is also lawful: as if a man for the help of his mind in meditation, or to
deduce some point of instruction do pluck an Ear of Corn, and anatomize it by
rubbing it in his hand, the better to see the wisdom and power of the Creator
in it. For thus even in the time of Israel, the Temple sanctified works to it
own service, even on the Day of Rest: as Christ shows after in this 12.
Math: intimating that the principal end of the instituting the Sabbaths rest
from carnal works, was for the service and help of the Temple of our minds
and Hearts in the works and ways of God Isaiah 58. 13. Levit. 23. 27. 28 etc.
And therefore did the godly-wise among the Jews make no scruple of working on
the Sabbath Day to this end, as the Priests in the Temple, nor to travel
further then a Sabbath Days journey for this purpose, as we see by the godly
Shunamite her going to the Prophet a Kings 4. 22. 23. For spiritual and holy
ends make spiritual and holy actions, so that the action be not unlawful but
indifferent. To this purpose its worth our observation to consider how that the
building of the Tabernacle (and Temple) gave place to the rest of the Sabbath,
Exodus 31. intimating that distracting bodily labors, or the carnal part or
employment of or about even holy things, their opus operatum must give place to
the spiritual rest of heavenly mindednes, and spiritual worship or
worshipping of God in Spirit: And again on the contrary the Sabbath-rest gave
place to the serviceable works of the Temple (and Tabernacle) implying that our
carnal rest must give place to his spiritual worship and service. And
hereupon let me in an holy Iealousy annexe an exhortation to some of the
Ministers of this Land (for blessed be God it needs not to all) that they
would carefully provide, and look that they do not build the Tabernacle on
that day, I mean that they rest not in the opus operatum of their holy
employments, and busying themselves about the carnal part of holy things, in
putting off the studying of their Sermons, or getting them by heart (except it
be to work them upon the heart, and not barely to commit them to memory) till
that day, and so though they take care to build the Tabernacle of Gods Church,
yet they in the mean time neglect the Temple of their own hearts, in serving
God in the Spirit and not in the letter or outward performance only. But it
were well if they would gather and prepare their Mannah, sees it and bake it
the day before, that when the Sabbath came, they might have nothing to do, but
to chew and conc^ct it into their own Spirits, Doctor Tailor in his
expe-Christ revealed page 148. The Minister must not only set the Word and
Sacraments before others, but himself must feed on on them as the Priests did
on the Shewbread all the week and year long, least it befall him, as that
Prince which saw plenty of food with his eyes but tasted not of it, 2 Kings 7.
20.
and so spiritually in the experience of their own hearts (not heads) dish it
out to their hearers; which would be an happy means to make them see better
fruits of their labors: For commonly that which is notionally delivered is
notionally received, and that which is spiritually and powerfully delivered in
the evidence of the Spirit, is spiritually and savingly received (though I know
to the pure all things are pure; a good stomach can digest good meat, though
the cook perhaps never lick his own fingers, how ever it be cooked or
dished: it may be as the yolke of an egg to the hearer, when it is as the
white to the speaker without taste or life) for Spirit begets Spirit, as fire
begets fire; And as a worthy Writer of this Church says to this purpose, that
it can hardly sink into an hearers heart, that never went further then the
speakers head. This fault in part is to be suspected in some Ministers by
their absenting themselves In the vestry or elsewhere.
from the public prayers of the congregation, not coming in till the Psalm
be almost at an end (of ill president, the congregation losing the Doctrine of
their example and the assistance of their Spirit) not but that some men at some
times may be justly and really straightened and necessitated to study or get by
heart their Sermons on the Sabbath Day, others also may be of weak memories
and must bring it fresh: To such I speak not, but only to make them their
afflictions, and to watch and pray against them; but to them to whom God gives
Mannah for gathering and preparing, that they do not put up with the worse,
and neglect the better part of the duty, satisfying themselves with this that
they are in their Divine calling, conversant about holy things, and so gather
Mannah when they should eat it. It is an easy thing to take great pains in
the outward part or performance of holy things, which often proves a snare,
causing the neglect of the Spirit of the inner man: For many are great
laborers in the work of the Lord, that are starvelings in the Spirit of the
Lord, satisfying themselves with a Popish peace of conscience in the deed
doing, in stead of joy in the holy Ghost, bringing indeed meat to their nests,
but through have or lazines eating none themselves; or like Tailors make
clothes for other men to wear, so they never assaying their own points how
they fit or may fit their own Spirits, but think it is their duties to teach,
and other men's duties to do. And let me also admonish the People that they
take not scandal or offense by carping or misprision at the Ministers absence
in time of public prayer, as the Pharisees did here at Christ's Disciples, but
rather judge them necessitated to it.

But it will be said, Obj.
that it is beyond flesh and blood, thus to spend a whole day in heavenly
mindednes.

It is indeed hard to flesh and blood, Answ.
but where the Spirit is there is liberty: A Gentleman that handles a flale for
novelty sake thinks it an hard thing to thresh an hour together, but the
Country Husbandman, that is called to it, and by frequent use has made it
another nature, to him thinks it no hard thing to thresh a whole day together.
So flesh and blood wanting the skill to handle spiritual tools, and feeding
on spiritual things with a forced and not a natural palate, digesting divine
truths but as other truths of other arts, only into a notionall meditation to
improve his understanding or outward practice a little, to such a man it must
needs be hard: But he that is begotten of God, and has a new nature put into
him, he is skilled in the way of the Lord, and finds such sweetness in
digesting divine truths into his Spirit, and in renewing and maintaining his
spiritual acquaintance with God in giving and receiving, and in the variety of
Gods spiritual ordinances as that it is not hard to him; for when flesh and
blood knows it shall have no liberty it will look for none and then the
Spirit easily bears rule. I wish by the way that such men as talk of keeping
every day Sabbath, to cry down the weekly Sabbath ^thereby, do know their
own meaning whilst withal they say, to spend a whole day in heavenly
mindednes and spiritual employments is an heavy yoke; and implyingly make it
part of our Christian liberty to be redeemed unto earthly mindednes and not
unto heavenly, whereas it is both the best and chiefest part of our Christian
liberty, to be redeemed and enabled unto heavenly mindednes, and to a willing,
powerful, spiritual performance of holy things, in this time of the
ministration of the Spirit, being delivered from the ministration of the dead
letter, which embondaged them to the outward and carnal part, and unwilling
weak performance of them through the weakness of the flesh: For the Spirit is
therefore a free Spirit, not because he freeth us from the Law, but because
he sets us free to the performance of it: Thus David looked to be a free man
and set at liberty, not from obeying but to obeying and doing the commandments
Psalm 119. 32. I will run the ways of thy commandments when thou have
enlarged my heart* I wish we were less guilty of this Iudaisme in our days
viz. making our holiness consist rather in rest, then in resting to be holy.
Sure I am those that walk the most exactly and strictly in this way of
heavenly mindednes on that day, find the benefit and sweet thereof to their
souls, and good reason: For that promise Isaiah 58. 14. Then shall thou
delight thy self in the Lord is not only made to, but also to be fulfilled
by the performances of the duties enjoined us in the foregoing verse, of not
doing our own ways, not finding our own pleasure, not speaking our own
words, the Spirit of God working this unspeakable delight and comfort in the
souls of them that so walk.

Now I come to speak to your answer to the second objection, and therein to
show you when we are said to break the moral part of the Sabbath, which is,
when we either do our own works, or Gods work to our own ends. For had
rest been properly or only the moral part of the Sabbath, then had the
superstitious Jews kept it, none better. But a man may rest and not keep the
Sabbath, and a man may work and not break the Sabbath: And indeed that man
that both rests and works to wit, from his own works to do the works of
God, is the only true Sabbath keeper: And therefore as we are advised in
another case, that whether we eat or drink etc. So in this case, say I,
whether we rest or work let it be done to the glory of God, else our rest is
but the rest of brute beasts, and our works the works of profane Men and
Hypocrites. So that on the Sabbath our rest must give place to all Gods good
works, and on the contrary all our works must give place to Gods rest: For
whether we rest or work, it must be unto God, and not unto our selves, for so
only we fulfill the Sabbaths signification.

Lastly, for answer to that which you say in proof hereof, how that those
Laws are only to be termed moral etc. I ask you what prayer or Alms etc.
is there commanded in the third commandment, Thou shall not take the name of
the Lord thy God in vain, and yet this you cannot deny to be a moral Law. If
you say there are, then I answer, no more then in the fourth commandment where
we are to keep holy the Sabbath, or to sanctify it with an holy rest: by
which is not meant a bare rest, no more then by an holy convocation is meant a
bare meeting together, but it is meant in regard of the holy duties that were
to be done thereon of praying, praising God, reading Moses Law, sacrificing
etc. And why is not, remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath Day as well
moral also, as, thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, in the
sense in hand. And whereas you say, that time and place are circumstantiall
(implying them thereby to be indifferent things) I answer, that in themselves
they are so, but if God please to alter their natures, he may; Thus he
disposed of the Temple for a time, and the Sabbath for ever to be his proper
ordinances. Consider how inconsistent you make it, for resting to be the
sanctifying of the Sabbath, and yet the Law of the Sabbath to be but
circumstantiall to other duties.

Broad.
ARG. II.
BY Sabbaths Col. 2. 16. the weekly Sabbaths are to be under stood, by
ordinances then in the 14. verse the Law of these Sabbaths must needs be meant
as well as the Laws of new Moons and Holy Days, and now these ordinances,
that is, precepts of the Sabbath, new Moon and Holy Days are here said most
manifestly to be blotted out.

Though Saint Paul here says that the precept of the Sabbath is blotted out,
Obj.
yet his meaning is not that it is wholly blotted out, but only in part.

So any one may say of the precepts of the new Moon and Holy Days, Answ.
and would it not trouble them to show by the Scriptures how much is blotted
out, and what is left uncancelled?

The received division of Moses Law has been^ into moral, ceremonial, and
judicial.

That any commandment should be partly ceremonial, and partly moral, partly
an ordinance and partly not, partly nailed to the Cresse and partly remaining
in the Arc, partly blotted out and partly left to be read and observed; I
could never yet find in any part of Gods word. Master Dod and Master Cleaver on
the com.
And this no doubt some of late perceive well enough, and therefore teach that
the precept of the Sabbath is wholly moral, or (as their words are) no more
ceremonial then all the rest.

They see plainly that he which will have it partly blotted out and partly
not, had need be greater then an Angel, as teaching in part another Gospel
then Saint Paul did. Consider that Saint Paul here says as much of the Sabbath
and the precept thereof, as he does say of the New-moone and the precept of
the same, and again that he says as much here of the New-moone and its
precept, as is said of them in any other place.

Though the precept of the Sabbath be wholly blotted out, Obi.
as the precepts of the New-moone and Holy days joined with it, yet not the
fourth commandment in the Decalogue. We grant the fourth commandment is
ceremonial and blotted out so far forth as it Touching the supposed substance
and morality of this commandment, see chap. 8. sect. 4. 5.
enioyneth the Sabbath (not only the seventh day and strict rest) but this
commandment is of a larger extent then this comes to.

The fourth commandment and the commandment Answ.
of the Sabbath are the same after the Scriptures, so that Saint Paul here
saying the commandment of the Sabbath is blotted out, it is all one as if he
had said, the fourth commandment in the Decalogue is blotted out, you have no
color of proof to the contrary. As touching the fourth commandment, being
blotted out so far forth as it enioyneth the Saboath, consider that the
fourth commandment must needs enjoin the Sabbath, Such as ^each (and this is
the common Doctrine) that the fourth commandment is partly ceremonial, do
say in effect that it is partly blotted out.
so far forth as it is contained in these words, Remember the Sabbath Day to
sanctify it, etc. If God had made this Law bath for Jews and Christians, is
it credible but that he would have set it down in words fitting both sorts,
so that Christ at his coming should not have blotted out any part thereof?
Certainly Christ would not have written that again which he had once blotted
out, suppose that he also had left Tables.

In a word the Sabbath is the only thing spoken of in the fourth commandment,
and no Law of God or Man ever stood in force longer then it bound to do the
thing mentioned in it Many in England so do, yea the last Parliament may well
be thought to dislike it, for neither in their title of the act forkeeping the
Lord's Day, nor yet throughout. The body thereof is this name used, although the
heathenish name Sunday be in both, yea and although the commandment read in
the Church of speaks of sanctifying the Sabbath.
as many as dislike the name Sabbath for the Lord's Day, have cause to dislike
this commandment for the Law thereof, for the one is as well Jewish as the
other.

Answer.
By Sabbaths in that 2. Col. 16. is to be understood the Jewish ordinances,
which properly belonged to them and their time, such as were their solemn
fealts, Se^ Isa. 1. 13. compared with the 14. verse.
which although they were Jewish Holy Days, yet did they also carry the name
of Sabbaths, and holy convocations, because of the Analogy they had with the
weekly and moral Sabbath, as we may see Levit. 23. In the beginning of which
Chapter you shall find the weekly Sabbath most gloriously entitled (THE
SABBATH OF THE LORD) and remarkeably paled out from among those Jewish
Holy Days, Feasts, and Sabbaths. For God, in that Chapter instituting his
solemn Feasts, or Jewish Holy Days, in the first place notes out his
weekly Sabbath (in the third verse) to be none of them, by a glorious and
sublime title, and pregnant difference, which s^emeth to be distinctly penned
by the holy Ghost, to prevent confusion and unequal mixture. Which very thing
is your fault and labor.
And, having first done this, then he in the rest of the Chapter proceeds to
show what Feasts he means, which he also calls Sabbaths, but in a far
different sense. And think you, that the Apostle would so carelessly and
slightly have jumbled together (in this place of the Col.) what God, even in
the time of the Jews, was so careful to distinguish* as in this 23. Levit.
appears, as also in the exhibiting of his Laws, which were of several
natures, ceremonial and moral, amongst which this was one, and which with the
rest was put into the Arc.

And as in your answer to the first objection you say, that you cannot find in
any place of Gods word why any Indeed the Sabbath is both wholly ceremonial
and wholly moral, as was signified* by its double exhibition to the Jews,
once by the hand of Moses and another time together with the Law showing that
though it was of a typical, and ceremonious signification, yet notwithstanding
it was of equal condition with the moral Laws, by Gods special appointment.
For when I say the Sabbath is ceremonial, I mean not in an abrogative, but in
a significative sense.
commandment should be partly ceremonial, partly moral, partly nailed to
the Cross, and partly remaining in the Arc, partly blotted out, and partly
left to be read and observed; I affirm the same of the Decalogue or ten
commandments as Moses numbers them Deuteronomy. 4. 13. Not but that in the delivery
and exhibition of this Decalogue (this rejoyneth upon your following answer to
the second objection) there were things (as I have said before) which were more
proper in regard of circumstance to the Jews then to us, and yet God made the
Decalogue as a Law both for Jews and Christians, and has set it down, though
not altogether in words and letters, yet in sense and substance fitting both
sorts: So that the Law may still be truly said to remain, although Christ's
coming and the state of the Church differing, may vary some circumstances; as
by changing the Egyptian deliverance into the antitype thereof, to wit, our
spiritual; and the Land of Canaan meant in the fifth commandment, into England
where we dwell; and so likewise the memory of our creation into the memory of
our redemption; and their gates into our jurisdictions; and thus though there
is an alteration made, yet does the Law remain the same in sense.

Broad.
ARG. III.
IN the 31. of Exodus we read thus, Verily my Sabbaths ye shall keep, for it
is a sign between me and you, throughout your generations, that ye may
know, that I am the Lord that does sanctify you. The like was signified by
clean meats, Levit. (...). 24, 25, 26. Act. (...) 12, 13, 14, 15, 20.
Here by sanctifying is meant separating from other Nations to be a peculiar
people to himself. In this sense Aaron and his Sons are said to be
sanctified. Exodus 29. 44. Aaron and his Sons were sanctified and severed from
the other Levites to be the Lords Priests, and the Israelites were sanctified
and severed from other Nations to be the Lords people, of which sanctifying
the Sabbath was a sign, in as much as it was a day sanctified and separated
from other days of the week for the Lords service.

Now if God gave the Sabbath for a sign to the Israelites, the Sabbath could
not be common to other Nations, and consequently was a mere ceremony as was
circumcision. Abraham received the sign of circumcision, and the Israelites
received the sign of the Sabbath. Hence I thus argue, such as is the Sabbath
such is the precept thereof, The Sabbath is a sign, therefore the precept
thereof is significative or ceremonial and is abrogated. Here consider, that
if Noah had taught his household, and Lot his Sons, Abraham his Sons by Hagar
and Keturah, Isaac his son Esau, and Melchisedech his people to keep the
Sabbath, the Sabbath could have been no sign to the Israelites, for the World
would have been replenished with Sabbath-keepers at that time, and a long time
after, so that no doubt we should often read of this matter in Heathen writers.

Answer.
You say the Sabbath was given to the Israelites as a sign of their peculiar
sanctifying or seperating to be the people of God from all others, and hence
you fallaciously conclude, that therefore it cannot be common to others. See
this confuted in: Master Richard Bifield page 87 88. where he shows how
every sign of separation or consecration is not ceremonial. Nor does every
seperating or sanctifying mark oblige only those that have that mark, page
1* ^0.


For though it be true, that as a sign it was proper to them only in their
times, and so also was the whole Law, as it was renewed and given of God for a
covenant between him and them The giving them to the Israelites was a sign
the Lord was nigh to them, and therefore in vain does Master Dow allege page
15. That in that the Sabbath is called a sign between God and the Israelites,
that he was their Sanctifier and Deliverer out of Egypt, which it could not
be, if it were given to all Nations in Adam, seeing the Law was the like.
(and therefore does he say Psalm 147. 19, 20. He has shown his word to
Jacob, and to Israel his judgments, and statutes, and that he has not dealt
so with every Nation, (that is with any Nation) neither have they known* his
judgments) so that the Sabbath and the whole Law are alike significative, and
indeed have somewhat of signification in them in this second exhibition: For as
the Church it self was then typical, signifying the Church of Gods elect; So
was the Law, as given to them, as may appear in that it was twice written; to
show the double writing of it, by nature and grace in the hearts of the elect.

So that both the Sabbath, and the rest of the Decalogue, as they are moral
Laws, are forever common to the universal Church of God; being not only bare
signs, but of a double nature. For the same thing may be both proper and
common in diverse respects: As the Land of Canaan was proper to the Jews, as
it was the Land of promise, and yet it was common to many Nations in the use
thereof, to wit, as it was a place of commerce and habitation, and so is to
this day. And so the whole Decalogue we know was common, as it was the Law of
nature, to all Nations and People, even in those times of the Jews, but yet is
it in the fourth Chap. of Deuteronomy. 13. verse, appropriated to the Jews; because
it was given, in a special manner, as a Covenant between God and them, and in
that respect it is opposed to things that are common to all People, in the 19.
verse of that Chapter, as the thing, wherefore and whereby God will be
especially worshipped, even for that very cause, because (as he himself
lays down the reason there) they are distributed unto all People under the
whole Heaven: And yet is this Law no man will deny in the moral sense of it
common to us now (...) (whereof the Sabbath is a part) nay, For though we
refuse the Law as a Covenant, yet we entertain and honor it as a rule of
obedience. Nor surely are we to say, that the Law because it was given to the
Jews must be in the same respect to us as to the Jaws, else it binds not
at all, if so be it be qualified according to our times, and turned from a
covenant to a rule. Then granting this change and yet retention of the whole,
why not also of that part thereof which concerns the Sabbath.
and was also common to them that were not Jews even in the time of the Jews,
though not in nature of a special Covenant, yet so as it was a Law of nature
(which the precise Sabbath, I confess is none, but only made equivalent by
revelation) and therefore did they then observe (though set times of
worshipping God, yet happily) not the whole day, or at least not every
seventh, for that most properly is the Churches right and rite. Moreover the
very Sabbath it self was of force, by virtue of the fourth commandment, to
all that came with in the cognizance of it as well stranger as Jew: And
therefore could it not be meant a sign of separation in your sense, so as to
appropriate it solely to them, and thereupon to create it a mere ceremony.
Many things there were indeed, among the Jews, that bare this sense
expressly, as the Paschall-Lambe, whereof by express words no stranger was to
eat, until he was made as one that was borne in the Land by circumcision,
Exodus 12. 48. But it was other ways in the commandment of the Sabbath, for
the stranger ( quatenus stranger) was ^o observe it, if they were within their
gates Nehem. 13. 16, 19, 20, 21.
( Iubebantur feriari eo die, q^emadmodum and Iudaei, indigenae, says Zanchy)
And not as the Antisabbatarians of our age would persuade, that it belonged to
the proselite stranger only.

Again I argue against you out of your own place. 31. Exodus That if God menat
it as a bare sign peculiar to the Jews, why then does he fly back to the
primitive institution of it; in the seaventeenth verse, re enforcing the
commandment there, upon that reason which is common to all mankind. The words
are these: It is a sign between me and the children of Israel for ever; For
in six days the Lord made Heaven and Earth, and in the seventh day he
rested.

Now we know, it was never the property of the Jewish types to look backward
to the state of innocence, but forward.

But you will say, that the first institution of the Sabbath was but a prophecy
or forerunner of the second.

To this I answer, That it is very ill likely, that any thing that was proper
to the Jews as a ceremony, and not common to the whole Church of God (for
whose sake the World was made) was prophesied or foreordained in innocence;
For all the things that are made use of in Scripture from the state of
innocence, are spoken of as appertaining to the whole Church of God, and not
proper to any one People or time: And so is the Sabbath made use of in the
fourth Hebr. to signify an everlasting rest, to whom? but to the People of God.

But you will ask me, how I know that this Law of the Sabbath was given in
innocence, and not after the fall?

I answer, that this one reason may serve for all; Because that whatsoever
Moses makes mention of before the fall, we have good reason to think it to
be done in innocence, and to allow as well his Method as his matter in that
particular. But he places the Law of the Sabbath before the fall: Ergo etc.
Besides your own Hypothesis stops this objection.

For if Adam should have kept the Sabbath had he continued in innocence (as you
suppose he should) its like it was revealed to him in that state.

And the rather was the Sabbath given in innocence, that it might be
understood to be equal with the Law of nature, and to appertain to the whole
Church of God, which afterward was to be of a double condition, and so the
Sabbath serves for a double end answerable to these conditions, to wit, in
memorial of the creation as it is in the 20. Exodus 11. and also in memorial
of our redemption as in the 5. Deuteronomy. 15. and as is the Sabbath such is the Law,
of a double obligation to us in respect both of our creation and redemption.
Note.


It is very observable in those two places how an order is kept (which gives
authority to our second Sabbath and to the reason thereof) for in the first
giving the Law Exodus 20. the Sabbath is enforced by the creation, and in the
repetition or second giving of it in the 5. Deuteronomy. it is altogether enforced
upon the redemption, the creation not being once named or mentioned there in
the Law of the Sabbath or fourth commandment, lively intimating the
subsistence of the fourth commandment under the Gospel, and the binding
authority of it in our days, by the incorporation and addition of the reason
of our new creation or spiritual deliverance by Christ, into the commandment,
in stead of the old reason which is utterly omitted as if it were forgotten, or
at least overtopped and triumphed over by us that are the second generation of
Israel. Answerable to that 65. of Isaiah 17. I will create new Heavens and a
new Earth, the ^ormer shall not be remembered nor come into mind.


I wish our Antisabbat^rians to consider well, that such a repetition of the
fourth commandment (not seorsim or by it self, but together with the whole
Decalogue in its proper place) with such a material omission and addition or
alteration, cannot but be significantly and doctrinally meant by the holy
Ghost there.

But some argue, from this connection of the Sabbath to their deliverance out of
Egypt, that the Sabbath was therefore given to them for a memorial of a
particular benefit to them, and so belonged to the Ecclesiastical Government
of the Jews, and therefore though it were not typical, yet for that cause it
ought to be done away.

To whom I answer, that upon the same reason they may as well abolish the whole
Law (and turn Antinomians) if they ponder it connexed with its preface.

I will borrow Master Richard Bifield to conclude this point page 88. who
says, that the Sabbath in those places of Exodus 31. 13. and Exodus 20. 12. 20
is called a sign in two respects.

First, in that it is an Argument and Document between God and Israel, and so
between God and his People for ever, whereby they may know, that God has
sanctified them.

Secondly, it is a sign not of any future thing* but of a thing present, as
every adjunct that is a visible concomitancy is a sign of the subject present.

For in the observation of the Sabbath there is a public profession of that
communion which intercedeth between God and us. As then every solemn
profession is a sign of that thing of which profession is made, so also is the
Sabbath called in this respect a sign.

Broad.
ARG. IV.
GOd resting on the seventh day, it became his Sabbath or Day of rest, as we
term that a man's birthday wherein he was borne, and as the other days of
the Week were Gods working days* This his resting (as I have showed before
Chap. 5.) was typical, and it was the reason, why God did sanctify the day,
and commanded men to sanctify it as appears by Genesis 2. 3. and Exodus ^0. 11.

Hence I thus reason, such as the foundation is, such is the building; The
foundation (Gods resting on the seventh day) was typical, The Sabbath doctrine
is builded on the sands.
and therefore his sanctifying it presently, and man's sanctifying it afterward
was no less.

Finally consiner whether more then this may be not spoken of Sion, and the
Temple, then is spoken of the Sabbath. This is my rest for ever. Psalm 132.
14. My house shall be called an house of prayer for all People, Isa. 56. 7.

I do not know where the Sabbath is termed Gods rest for ever, and for all
People.

Answer.
My former Arguments have been sufficient to give this its answer, for I have
always granted the Sabbath to be typical from the fourth Hebr.

Your comparison of the Sabbath, with those phrases belonging to the Temple and
Sion in holy writ, is a mere flourish, and readily answered out of the fourth
of Hebr. where the typical rest of the Sabbath is extended far beyond the
typical rest of Canaan wherein Sion was, for the holy Ghost says there, that
the Sabbaths-rest still remains to the People of God, implying the contrary
of the other rest.

Broad.
CHAP. VII.
THE chiefest Arguments of the adverse part answered. I come now to answer the
chiefest Arguments of the adverse part, I say the chiefest, for with a cloud
(not of witnesses seeing they prove nothing, but of Arguments) such as they
are, whereby some go about to obscure the light, I will not at this time have
any thing to do, hoping that as a mist it shall of it self vanish away, from
before the eyes of all those that read this Treatise with understanding.

ARGUMENT I.
ADam was commanded to sanctify the seventh day in the state of Innocence;
therefore it is moral to sanctify one day in a week, I think it best to
make answer to this Argument particularly.

1. Adam was commanded to sanctify the seventh day.

Answ. It does not appear that Adam received such a Command as is said before,
As I commanded your fathers, Ier. 17. 22. rather we would think as I conmanded
Adam in the beginning, if it had been true. Consider also this saying, and made
known to them thy holy Sabbath, N^hem. 9 14.
Chap. 1. And had God given such a Command, why should it not be recorded? He
that will have us believe more then is set down, must allege some Scripture
or some reason why it was not set down.

It will be said unless Adam was commanded to sanctify the seventh day,
wherefore did God sanctify it in the beginning.

Answ. Because thou a man know not a reason of Gods doings, this is not a
sufficient reason or warrant for thee to affirm that he did more then thou
find that he did in the Scriptures. And consider that others may know some
reason hereof, though thou and I do not.

This that follows, whether they be reasons or not I leave it to thy
consideration, I dare not say so, I was not with God when he laid the
foundations of the earth.

1. It appears by Heb. 4. (as is said before) that Gods Resting the seventh
day wherein God rested and which he sanctified, was a Type of the Rest that
remains to the people of God.

2. God might sanctify the seventh day in the beginning for a purpose not
present but to come, namely that the Israelites should sanctify the same when
they came into the land of Canaan, another Paradise as it were, and a Type also
of the kingdom of heaven; A blessed time and a blessed place, an holy day and
an holy land sort well together.

When a man shall stand before Christ's judgment seat and being demanded,
wherefore did thou say, that God commanded Adam to sanctify the seventh day
when the Scripture says not so in any place? Consider whether this answer, I
could see no other reason of Gods sanctifying the seventh day will not prove
like Adams breeches of fig leaves. I am well assured it will.

Answer.
To your answer I rejoyne, That this example of God, thus declared by himself,
was in the nature of a Command, as appears plainly by the parallel case. We
see Gods creating Man male and female was a law justly inferred thence,
obligatory enough to bind one man to marry but one woman at once, and to love
her and live with her as appears, Genesis 2. 23, 24. compared with Mark 10. 6,
7. where there is concluded, from this exemplary action of God, a perpetual
binding duty to all mankind, without any express Commandment to that
purpose.

But Gods blessing and hallowing the seventh day must needs enforce a Command,
if we consider, that (as Christ says) the Sabbath was made for man, that is
says Mr. Hilder sham for the great benefit and behoof of man; so that man
could not (no not in Innocence) have been without it.

And if this of the Sabbath were of no obligatory ^orce, I pray you then, why
do you (as before) say that Adam, if he had continued in Innocence, should
have kept it? Me thinks he should rather then have kept every day Sabbath then
we now; and yet you say, It is likely he should have wrought six days and
sanctified the seventh. Therefore as Christ says in the case of separation, it
was not so from the beginning; So say I in this case of the Sabbath, that it
was so from the beginning, on Gods part actually, and on man's part it both
should and would have been so, had he continued upright.

And therefore as well in this of the Sabbath, as in that of Marriage, ought it
to be so now. Nor did man's fall abrogate the Sabbath (any more then it did the
rest of the moral Law Know that all the Commandments given in Innocence were
moral, either by a natural or positive morality.
as you would seem to persuade in your first Chapter. For God used the self
same authority to reinforce it when he gave the Law the second time, to wit,
his own example and the Creation, both which he used in his first institution.

And therefore however we may think of the Sabbath in our corrupt reasonings,
or by other men's examples, as the jews might do of Marriage from the example
of the Patriarchs polygamy, or the toleration of Moses, yet it was other ways
from the beginning, and let God be true though men be liars.

As touching your marginall note, God (as I may so speak) had no reason to go
so far of for an inforcement, as to Adam, (especially it having been so long
intermitted) when he might have it fresh and nearer hand; which he the rather
chose to use, for that this iteration of the Law was more peculiar, and a
greater Demonstration of his special love to them in way of Covenant, and so
more pressing and remarkable.

And yet does he not utterly omit to make use of the first institution, for he
uses the same Arguments to them, as to Adam, for the observing it, to wit, his
own example, and the memory of the Creation: which shows that it was to be
understood as a Commandment laid then upon Adam, as well as now upon the
Israelites. And by this rule you may say, The promise and Covenant of Grace was
not given to Adam, because Gal. 3. 17. The Apostle draws his Argument of
refutation from that Covenant which God confirmed with Abraham 430 years
before the Law was given, and not from the Covenant made with Adam at the
first. Touching the latter part of your marginall note I have answered it a
little before, from Psalm. 147. 19, 20.

It may well be said, (as a Rejoinder to your second answer) that unless the
sanctifying of the Sabbath was instituted as an Ordinance for Adam to observe,
wherefore did God sanctify it? for Christ says, The Sabbath was made (that is
appointed or created in the beginning) for man; And if God had a reserved and
secret intent in this, why was it revealed (especially when the thing was done
and past) seeing things revealed belong to us and to our children? And from
your own reason, That the Sabbath was a Type of the Rest that remains to the
people of God, a man may justly argue the use of it to the Church, and
consequently the necessity and universalitie of it. For by the people of God
is not meant any visible particular, but the whole Catholic Church.

And why God, who (instrict sense) rested no more on that day then on others,
did yet so declare himself to have done, ad captum vulgi, and did also spin out
the creation into six days, which else he could have done in a trice, if it
were not for example sake, I leave to any indifferent judgment.

And as touching your second reason, why God should thus antedate the Sabbath,
and have such a special eye to Israel, in the time of Innocence, when there
was no partition wall built up, I see no reason, nor could the ancient Jews
ever dream of such an interpretation, neither can you produce the like example
in any thing else, from all the Scripture, to give some color of probability
to your conceit.

But some there are, who screw their wits further then you to foil this
Doctrine of the Sabbath, Ob.
and for want of other objections stick not to say that those words, Genesis 2.
ver. 3. were not at all delivered by God in Innocence, but are only by Moses,
speaking there of Gods rest, aptly introduced in way of Anticipation, declaring
what God did then the better to give authority to the Sabbath, that was
instituted in his time.

To which I answer three things as follows: Ans.


1. That they may as well (and better) affirm the the four and twentieth
verse of that Chapter to be a deduction drawn and inserted ( orbiter) by Moses.
Had these objectors lived in the time of the Jews, before this Gospel of
Math. 19. 5. was written, they would doubtless readily have sided for the
maintenance of Moses his bill of divorce, and have invented tricks against the
law of marriage mentioned, Genesis 2. verse. 24. as now they do against the law of
the Sabbath, mentioned verse. 3. In both which Moses does alike couple the
example and duty, whereas had it not been then preceptive, why should Moses
pussle our faith, and transgress the rules of method, not contenting himself
with the relation of the history alone as it is penned, verse. 2. especially
seeing he needed not have begged any credit to the duty of the Sabbath, by
inserting it into that place: For God had sufficiently warranted it under his
own hand in the Tables of stone from mount Sinai. I say they have far less
reason to make this a Prolepsis of Moses his inserting, then that of 24. verse.
of this second of Genesis, which rather seems to be an inference of Moses his
own collecting from Adams former words in the verse foregoing, then this a
Prol^psis of his inserting from Gods resting on the seventh day; And the reason
likewise is the same, for whereas it was done (says D. Heylyn, page 10.) by
Moses, because of the Jews adversenesse to observe that day, and therefore
they are minded of it by an intimation of the equity and reason of it, even in
the entrance of Gods book, derived from Gods first resting on that day after
all his works: So in like manner, they may allege this to be a minding of
them of their duty in this, from the equity and reason of Gods making them male
and female at first, because of the averseness of the Jews to this conjugall
law; seeing that Moses was feign to grant them a bill of divorce for the
hardness of their hearts, besides the Polygamy that even the Patriarchs gave
example of. But I know no man affirm this later, and if any do let them
compare this 24. verse with Math. 19. 4, 5. and their mouths will soon be
stopped; and as little reason have they to affirm the former, but to grant
this its being from the beginning, as well as that.

2. I answer, That if these words, Genesis 2. 3. were only inserted of Moses, and
were not institutive, but that Gods giving the law of the Sabbath to the Jews,
was the first institution of it, then these words of the fourth Commandment
mentioned, Exodus 20. 11. would have run in the present tense, thus; therefore
the Lord blesses, or does now bless the seventh day, and halloweth it, and
not in the preter tense, thus; therefore the Lord blessed the seventh day and
hallowed it, for this has a reference with it, implying it to have been done
aforetime of God, as indeed it was (like of those last words of the third verse
of the second of Genesis (which God had created and made) imply a precedent
Creation, in Innocence, not referring to its institution upon the fall of
Mannah, as some object, for then there was no mention made of blessing and
hallowing.

3. I answer, That this appears plainly to be the meaning of the Church of
England (though opposed by our late Doctors) which in the Bible allowed by
Canon (Canon 80.) in the contents prefixed to the second chapter of Genesis
calls it peremptorily, the first Sabbath.

But Bish. White brings in this objection, p. 42. That the Law of the fourth
Commandment was not agreeable to the state of Innocence. 1. For that in that
happy estate, there was no toylesome labor, etc. Sweat of face entered into the
world after the fall, and before the fall man's labor was matter of delight and
pleasure. To which I answer:

1. That this is a good argument with those that grant him, rest to be either
the only or principal sanctification of the Sabbath.

2. That there was labor enjoined Adam, which though it was not toylesome, yet
(as we have elsewhere observed) it must necessarily take him off from immediate
contemplation and more solemn service and worship, and that he was so far
capable of wearisomnesse, even in Innocence, as to have found other manner
refreshment in divine and spiritual things, then in worldly affairs.

3. No more was Gods labor in the work of creation toilesome, but
delightful, and yet he says of himself that he rested the seventh day.

Secondly he objects, That Adam being a free man, might have intermitted labor
at any time, when himself pleased. To which I answer:

1. So no doubt might God in his work of Creation.

2. And so Adam by voluntary worship in keeping every day Sabbath and not this,
should have lost an excellent and significant ordinance (as I have proved the
Sabbath to be.) Just as they would now have an every day Sabbath under the
Gospel, to blow up the weekly. Sabbath; As if because that under the Gospel
God has promised that he will teach us, Or as if because it is promised that
now under the time of the Gospel, we shall have the Law written in our hearts
in opposition to it, as it was graven in stone, and so given to the Isra^lites.
We should turn Antinomians, and not allow the Law in a suitable sense to our
times ( viz. as a rule of obedience, and a repair to decayed nature) to belong
to us.
Ier. 31. 31, 34. therefore we might cast away the use of means, whereby we
are to get knowledge. But as the best way to be taught of God is to use the
means whereby he works knowledge: So the best way to keep this every day
Sabbath, is to sanctify the Sabbath of the Lord, that so the Lord of the
Sabbath may sanctify us as he has promised: And those that most truly and
conscionably desire to keep an every day Sabbath to the Lord, find most need
of a Sabbath, being built up sensibly thereby the better to perform that duty.

Thirdly, he objecteth, There was no necessity of having one set day in every
week for performing religious offices, for man lived in Paradise in a fruition
of God. To which I answer:

1. By the same rule seconded by their position. The Church need appoint no
Holy Days now under the Gospel Which they will hardly yield to.
for say they, we are to keep every day Sabbath or Holy Day to the Lord, which
surely we cannot do without spiritual fruition of God.

2. That though Gods children enjoy now a constant fruition of God as a friend,
yet is this fruition much maintained, increased, and enlarged by their
sanctifying the Sabbath: And so doubtless should Adams, it representing to him
and us the perfection of our happiness and his.

Fourthly, he objecteth, All Gods creatures were as living books to preach to
man the majesty and bounty of the Creator.

To which I answer. We account it not a needless action in God when he had
made his creatures which we knew and saw well enough, so solemnly
notwithstanding to overlook them, as is recorded, Genesis 1. 31. Neither is there
any cause why Adam should not have a solemn day of contemplation and service
appointed him, because of the time and means he had of serving God on other
days: seeing the Sabbath intimated most doctrinally, what we ought to God, to
wit, our whole selves, and what service we should do him in heaven, to wit,
absolute without any interruption, the better to enamourus of our change.

To conclude, it is evident that the Sabbath was a Law in Commandment in time
of Innocence, else it could not have suffered loss and detriment by Adams
fall, which it did, as is evident in that. First, It was one of the Laws
written in Moses his first Tables, which were broken and spoiled to signify as
much. Secondly, Because there were renewed in the second Tables the very self
same laws which were at first, whereof the Sabbath was one. For the Sabbath
waits as an handmaid on the moral Law, in which respect chiefly it was made
for man (that is, given to mankind) to be helpful to his obedience: So that
seeing, as a Law, the Sabbath is concomitant with the Law in the second
exhibition of it, consequently it was so at first, especially seeing it is
reported, that God writ the same things in the second Tables as he did in the
first; which signifies Gods twice giving the Law once in Adam which was
defaced, and so the Sabbath as well as the rest, which he repaired as before.

And again work was commanded in Innocence and consequently the Sabbath.

It is true, that an Holy land and an Holy day suite well together, but an Holy
Church and an Holy Sabbath suite better, and you shall find this Holy Church
keeping the Sabbath in the wilderness, before they came into the Holy land,
and more strictly too.

When God (lastly) asks me that reason why I thought the Sabbath to be a
Commandment. I think it good to answer him, (...) his own example, especially
seeing he grounded an express Commandment thereupon afterward. And if God
like not this answer, he will then do by it as he did by Adams breeches, give
me a better. In the mean time I will choose rather to err by obeying then ^y
disobeying, and I am sure I shall give a better account of the one, then you
shall of the other.

Broad.
2. In the state of Innocence.

Answ. It has been I suppose the general opinion until of late years, that
Adam fell the day before, and otherwise his first child had not been conceived
in sin, again the Devil doubtless would be ^empting as soon as might be, his
malice was so great that every hour seemed a twelve month before he could
become a murderer, and the sooner he set upon our first parents after they were
created, the likelier he was to prevail the more easily, should he have
ta^^yed a day or two, the woman might have learned by experience that the
Creatures could not speak of themselves, which had Eve known, she would rather
have been affrighted then deceived. Further who (and without curiosity) would
not be desirous to hear, how Adam and Ev^ carried themselves in that first
Sabbath. Had not this bin a notable pattern to all his posterity? In man's
reason Adam should be ill dealt withal, to have his evil deeds and not his
good deeds committed to History.

Answer.
Let us herein be wise with Sobriety, and be content to receive it as God by
Moses delivers it, to wit, what was done before the fall, as done in
Innocence, whereof the Sabbath was a part, which silenceth your conjecturall
reasons. And therefore I will forbear to refute conjectures with conjectures,
and satisfy my self with divine authority.

Though I could tell you that it is very unlikely, that, seeing in Gods days
works in the first Chap. of Genesis, (who did yet but command and it was done)
so few things are recorded to be done on every day, That Adam besides the
business of his temptation, fall and punishment (together with the
circumstances belonging to them which you may read in the third of Genesis:
took up no small time) could receive his blessing, Genesis 1. 28. and his regiment
and liberty, 29, 30. and his putting into Paradise, Chap. 2. 8. and his law of
Commandment, 16, 17. and could give names to all Cattle, fowls of the heaven
and beasts of the field 19, and all on the day of his own Creation, especially
if we consider how much time God spent of it (proportionably to the work that
Moses allotteth to other days) in creating the living things of the earth
according to their kind, as Cattle, creeping things, and beasts, and Adam
himself, and casting him into a sleep and creating Eve out of him, and the view
he took after of all that he had made.

Nor is it so considerable concerning. Adam and (...) keeping the first
Sabbath, seeing they kept none, for God (as your self observed) made known his
example at the evening of his seventh day, and Adam fell before the the seventh
day cam^ about.

If you ask (...) he fell, Object.
if (...) (...)

(...) Answ.
but the third, which was the first day of the week follow^ng, and (...) which
leads me thus to think (...) Adam in opposition to the first And is opposed to
his ^all even in his resurrection it self in the 1 C^r. 15. 21. Since by man
came death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead.
I rose on that day (...) I think Adam fell, And that he fell not on the first
of his Creation, which was Gods sixth and last day, appears not only by the
Sabbaths institution in time of innocence as aforesaid, but also by the last
verse of the first Chapter of (...) Where after God had finished the works of
that Day, he viewed every thing that he had made, and seeing all was Good;
presently there follows upon that, as upon the other days of Creation (when
they were finished) this Conclusion, And the Evening and the Morning were the
sixth day. Besides that it is likely God could not be said to be refreshed on
the seventh day, and Adam new fallen, for whom all things were made and by whom
all things were accursed, which would have been a displeasure to God, and would
have taken of his refreshment.

Broad.
3. And therefore it is Moral.
Answ. Suppose that it had been commanded, Consider that there need not any
Moral Commandment be given to Adam in the state of Innocence.
and in the state of Innocence, yet would it not follow that this Commandment
was Moral, for Adam received a Commandment concerning the Tree of Knowledge
of good and evil, and yet was not that a Moral Commandment.

Answer.
To this I answer; That all the Commandments which were given in Inno^encie
were Moral, they were both common to all mankind and perpetual to all ages,
The Jewish ^awes were neither common nor perpetual but expressly contrary.
and so was that of the forbidden Tree (Though Mr. D^w, page 15. says he,
supposes no man will affirm it, And therefore did Eve sin a particular
sin in eating of it, The woman was first in the transgression.
and so should conceive whosoever of Adams poste^itie had eaten thereof, though
none but Adam could sin the public and Epidemicall sin, because the
Covenant was made with him, in the day that he should eat thereof, etc.) but
with this difference, that some of them in Gods intention were proper to that
state, and were not to be renewed by Christ after the fall, of which sort this
of the forbidden Tree was one, and therefore was Adam thrust out upon his fall
by God, from having to do with any thing that is peculiar to that state.

But other Commandments there were, which were intended to remain as common
to man falling or standing, by means of Christ, and of this sort was the
created Law of nature in the mind of man, the ordinance of marriage, and then
why not this of the Sabbath? For this is most true, that whatsoever God gives
as a law afterward, we have no reason to think that to be utterly abolished
by the fall, for from all such things we are kept by the fiery sword, never to
have commerce with them again: For thus we are utterly deprived of something,
which in Innocence signified Heaven, to show us our desert and Gods justice;
And something again is renewed unto us, which likewise did and does signify
Heaven, to manifest our hope and his mercy through Christ. So that then if the
Sabbath be not abolished by the fall, neither is it abrogated as a Type,
because not yet fulfilled: For the Rest which it did signify does yet remain
to the people of God.

To your marginall note, I answer, That there was no need of a Moral
Commandment to be given, so far as nature was capable; but if Gods will
extended further as it did in this particular of the Sabbath, as I have
formerly shown, then it was necessary it should be revealed as positively
Moral, and part of natures discipline.

Broad.
4. To sanctify one day in a week.
Answ. Nay rather to sanctify the seventh day. Note.
God commanded Adam to sanctify the seventh day, Arguments drawn from Genesis 2.
and Exodus 20. prove it moral and perpetual to sanctify the seventh day,
wherein God created, and which the Jews sanctified, or nothing.
ergo it is moral to sanctify the seventh day, is a nearer inference then
thus, ergo it is Moral, to sanctify one day of the seven or week. And now if
any deny the nearer inference, the further of may better be denied. Why (I
marvel) shall the sanctifying of one day of the week be rather Moral then of
the seventh day? What reason can they allege of the least moment? As for Text
of Scripture they can produce none.

Answer.
For your full answer to this, I refer you back to your first chapter, Were
the Sabbath moral, natural, then the Jews Sabbath were to be kept of us
Christians, but being moral positive, it is alterable to the will of the
lawgiver. For nature being one without change to all of necessity prescribes
no binding rule to any in particular, but to all in general, No man being able
to say, This natures L^w commands me to do, and yet b^nds not another ^o do the
like.
only with this summary addition.

That the Sabbath being the Churches perpetual Type, it is to vary according
to the constitution of the Church, even as the shadow of a man does according
to the disposition of his body, or the Suns shining, The substance of the
Commandment, and the signification of the Sabbath being still kept inviolate,
though circumstances alter in this as in other Commandments, as has already
been observed in the first Chapter. And so it is with us Christians, in whose
time, since the consummation of our redemption by Christ's resurrection, the
last day has been changed into the first of the week, only to take in better
loading, and to fignifie how that by Christ we are ass^redly possessed of that
heavenly Rest, even now in this life before our works be ended: For whereas
formerly by the Covenant of the Law we were to do this and live, now we must
first live, and then do.

Broad.
ARGUMENT. 2.
THe Commandment of the Sabbath is placed among the Moral precepts in the
Deoalogue, therefore it is Moral like unto them. Ans. Then must it be wholly
Moral, and then must the Jews Sabbath be kept of us Christians. Again, the
Commandment of the Sabbath is placed among the Ceremonial pr^cepts, Levit.
23. therefore (be like) it is ceremonial like unto them also.

Answer.
You do wrongfully conclude us necessarily to keep the Jews individual
seventh day, from the morality of the Sabbath* For though they were bound to
observe that order, because they were under the Covenant of works, like as Adam
was when it was given him in Innocence, (in which time the work of Creation was
the thing most worthy commemoration) yet notwithstanding we being freed from
the one, are likewise freed from the other* for as the ^ast day of seven was
significative to them, so is the first to us. So that our new Creation being
finished the first day of the week, it has privileged us to sanctify a new
seventh day, though an old Sabbath: For in this case alteration is no
dissolution, no more then to adjourne the Parliament to another time is to
dissolve it, especially considering the Sabbath is not naturally but positively
moral. And whereas you say, That the Sabbath is found in Scripture among the
ceremonial precepts, and specially in that Levit. 23. (where yet it is spoken
of, Paramount, although because of Analogy it is reckoned amongst them.) I
answer, That I deny not but there may be found in Scripture a mixture of moral
and ceremonial Laws, without danger of confounding their natures after they
had been once formally instituted. But that the ten Commandments which God
himself both spoke and gave, after such an extraordinary manner, with such
majesty and terror, and in regard of the place for all the world to take
notice of it, and which he calls his Covenant, and himself in a special
manner records them to be ten in number, Deuteronomy. 4. and with his own finger
wrote them twice in Tables of stone (signifying as well their lasting nature as
any other thing) and commanded them to be put into the Holy of Holies in the
Arc under the Mercyseate, and which were all of them institute in Innocence,
either by created Nature or immediate Revelation, whereas all other Ordinances
were delivered by the mediation of Moses a mortal man, but that immediately by
the immortal God, as witnesses Josephus in his Jewish antiquities: Moses
(says he) received the ten Commandments from the high and unexcessible
mountain Sinai, with thundrings, but other Laws he received in the Jewish
Tabernacle, ascending no more the mountain. Now that one of these should be
temporary, and the other nine perpetual, is doubtless in any reasonable man's
opinion very ill likely. I am sure Bishop Andrews in his Chatechisticall
doctrine says, That it were not wise to set a Ceremony (he means a Jewish
abrogative Ceremony) in the midst of moral precepts. And one says, Certainly
God did intend something extraordinary by this great odds of conveyance, and
what more proper then that these were mortal and dependant upon those, those
immortal and independent, especially if we weigh the manner how Moses
concludes his repetition of the ten Commandments with these words. God added
no more but wrote them in Tables of stone, to show that these words be valued
of a greater rate, then those which should be added by the hands of Moses,
which were either to be explanations of these, or shadows of Christ: And as
God did not add, so man may not diminish from these words, and so consequently
there is no reason without sacrilege to suspect the morality of the fourth
Commandment.

Broad.
One heretofore required me to show a satisfactory reason, why if the fourth
Commandment be of no higher rank then the other temporary constitutions of
Moses, Touching Gods gracing the fourth commandment, as much as the nine
moral.
God should grace it as much as the nine moral. Ans. I dare not take upon me
to yield a reason of Gods doings: And I would gladly know what reason
themselves can yield, wherefore God should use so many words touching
abstinence from work on the Sabbath, and not one word of coming together to
pray, and to hear the word preached. Yet this I say, In man's judgment it is
great reason, that one Ceremonial Commandment at the least should be placed
amongst many moral precepts, in the Tables of the Covenant; seeing God made a
Covenant with the Israelites, after the tenor of both sorts indifferently, as
is to be seen, Exodus 24. There we read how that Moses having written in a book
sundry Laws, as well Ceremonial as other, the book is called the book of
the Covenant, verse. 7, 8. Behold the blood of the Covenant, which the Lord has
made with you concerning all these words. See also Chapter 34. from the 10.
verse to the end of the 27.

Answer.
You say you da^e not give a reason of all Gods doings, I could with you were
as modest in not reasoning against God, as you are in reasoning for him.

As concerning your question, why God speaks so much of rest, and so little
of holy duties. Answ. You are sufficiently answered out of the Commandment it
self. For those words (Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day) are a most
plenary expression of the sanctifying of that day, with the duties of
holiness, which being thus premised, then follows after in the Commandment
the urging of Rest or abstinence from work, both as a means to further the
Sabbaths sanctification (like as in the Sabbath of Atonement, Levit. 23. 27,
28.) and as a significant part thereof, conjunctively considered and
spiritually Th^ugh by reason of the mino^tyof the Jewish pedagogy (as
aforesaid) there was then (interpretat^vely by God, (...) ab^tract holiness of
this Rest, being s^^cowish and significative, as of other Types.
improved. For as fasting joined with prayer is a necessary medium of Gods
extraordinary worship by removing impediments, and also a significant medium
concerning our extraordinary humiliation: So is the Sabbaths Rest both a medium
and a significant medium to Gods extraordinary worship and our extraordinary
happiness: And it is not rare to find fasting urged in Scripture without
express mention of Prayer, as in Ester 4. 16. Where when Ester gave Mordecai
in charge to assemble the Jews, and to fast for her three days and nights,
there is no mention of prayer; And yet no man can deny but it is most
necessarily understood and employed, though it be not expressed. So it is.

As for your Arguments drawn from the Covenant, which because it consisted both
of Moral and Ceremonial Laws, therefore (say you) it is reason that one
Ceremonial Commandment at least should be placed among many Moral precepts
in the Tables of the Covenant. Answ. Nay rather it is good reason that both the
Laws should be written together in the Book of the Covenant, as indeed they
were, in regard that the two Tables were to be laid up in the Holy of Holies,
and so not to be come by, but the copies of that Book were of continual use.
And again seeing the Covenant of the Jews consisted of both, it is the more
reason that they should be carefully distinguished (as likewise they were) then
confounded, seeing you cannot deny but that which was Moral was to appertain
to after ages, and if they had then been undistinctly mixed, how could after
ages tell which was which; But this was prevented through Gods good providence,
by their disjunction and distinct exhibition at the first.

Broad.
If this will not satisfy him or any other (then as Christ answered some
Questioners, Matt. 21.) let them first tell me wherefore God should appoint a
greater punishment for the breach of a Ceremonial Law, then he did of some
Moral* And I will afterward tell them wherefore he should grace a Ceremonial
Commandment as much as a Moral.

Answer.
There may be very good reason for it, for though sometimes God does inflict
the most grievous temporal punishment upon the greater sins, to aggravate the
danger of committing them; So other some times he ordains a great punishment
for a lesser sin, least according to our corrupt judgments we should think
it small, and if it were not for the punishment threatened, be the carelesser to
observe it. And secondly to show that it is not so much the Nature of the thing
commanded, as the Will of the Commander that gives weight to the Commandment.
And thirdly, A man may commit some moral offense with less guilt, then the
Jews might a Ceremonial: As if a man should steal a loaf of bread for pure
need, he was not so great a sinner, as he that through contempt or wilful
neglect omitted, or carelessly performed the Sacrifices of the Law or other
Ceremonies.

Broad.
Again, Touching Gods gracing of the fourth ^ommandement above the other
temporary Constitutions.
He would needs know a reason why God should grace the Commandment of the
Sabbath above the other temporary Constitutions. Answ. The reason happily was
because the Sabbath served more then any of the other (I think I may say then
all the other) Ceremonies, to the furtherance of the Moral Law. True, that on
the first and last days of the Passover the Israelites were to have holy
Convocations as well as on the Sabbath, but this Feast as other came but once
in the year, whereas the Sabbath was once in the week.

Answer.
If the Commandment of the Sabbath had had its beginning with the rest of the
Ceremonies, you might have had some color for what you say; But seeing it was
first set on foot in Innocence, and afterward revived as an equal among, and
contemporary with the Moral Laws, why now it should only be preferred to be
the Master of the Jewish abrogative Ceremonies, and so Moses his tale of ten
Commandments, brought by us into the number of nine. I can see small reason to
persuade. And I know no use the Sabbath was of then for advantage to the Moral
Law In conf^ssing the Sabbath to be of such furtherance to the Moral law, he
must needs imply (against himself) that the Sabbaths Rest was a significant
medium to the sanctification of the Sabbath, and not the sanctification it self
properly and only.
, but it is of the same use to us now, (especially if it should have been
useful (as it should) in Innocence.) So that if the Sabbath fail, which is
the sinews of Religion, then farewell the power of Godliness. For doubtless
it was the very reason why it was given of God as a perpetual and absolute
necessary Concomitant and Appendix to the Moral Law, superadded by him in the
time of ^nnocency to the Law of Nature, as I have said before, that it might be
a perpetual help thereto; and therefore as it begun with it, so it shall end
with it.

Broad.
Not to stand longer hereupon. Consider that the Sabbath was instituted for
diverse weighty purposes as no other Ceremony the like, whereof before Chapter
4. Secondly, that it concerned all the Israelites generally, both Priests and
People, and also very often as few Ceremonies the like. Thirdly, that as soon
as it was instituted, it was profaned, the like whereof I do not find did
befall any other Ceremony. And if this last consideration did minister
sufficient occasion unto God to grace the Sabbath above other Ceremonies
(seeing the people had already disgraced it more then the other, and thereby
bewraied what they were likely to do in time to come) how much more the two
former considerations concurring herewithall? This much to give him and others
satisfaction if it may be.

Answer.
You say very true of the Sabbaths super-excellency above all other Ceremonies,
and let me add one which is, That as it was before them in dignity and time,
so shall it be after them to the end of the world. But for your third reason of
the profanation of the Sabbath, as soon as it was instituted, which you say
you find not to befall any other. I answer, that you need not go far to
seek one, for their gathering Mannah was profaned with covetous gathering and
disobedient keeping of it, before the Sabbath: And you may as well say, that
therefore it was commanded to be put into a golden pot, and laid up before the
Testimony, as that because the Sabbath was profaned, therefore it was put
among the ten Commandments: Besides, offering of incense was profaned in the
very first exercise of Aarons Priesthood by strange fire, Levit. 10. 1.

Broad.
Now out of that has been here said, an answer may be taken also unto these
words of the Prophet Isaiah, 58. 13. 14. No more can be gathered from that Text
then from the placing of the fourth Commandment among the moral Commandments
in the Decalogue, which is that God much respected the keeping of the Sabbath.
And this I acknowledge, but this he did likewise, the paying of tithes and
offerings, Mal. 3. and does the partaking of the Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 11.

Broad.
ARGUMENT 3.
SOme of late would fetch an argument from Christ's words, Matthew. 5. 18. where
by the Law they understand the Decalogue only.

Answ. Then shall the word Law be taken in one sense, verse. 17. and in another,
verse. 18. for by the Law in the 17. verse. is meant The five books of Moses,
Genesis Exodus Levit, etc.
the whole Law of Moses, as likewise, Matthew. 11. 13.

It is altogether improbable, that where there is a distribution of Scripture
into parts, by the Law should be signified the Decalogue only. Again, when
Christ comes to instance afterward in many particulars of the law, some of the
instances are taken out of other places as verse. 33. 38. 43. If it be said,
these particulars may be referred to some Commandments in the Decalogue. Answ.
So it would be said if Christ had instanced in any Ceremonial precept
throughout the whole Law. The instances (as also that which is said verse. 16.
and 20.) do show that Christ spoke of the Law Moral, or that which is to be
kept of Christians, but seeing the instances are taken out of diverse places, it
cannot be gathered by them (nor by ought else here) what is moral in Moses
law, Five books.
and to be kept of Christians, and what not, were it that by the law the
Decalogue is only meant, yet seeing no more is said of the law, verse. 18. then
is said of the Law and Prophets, If every tittle of the Decalogue (in their
meaning) be perpetual, then are we to blame that we keep not the Jews
Sabbath, and forbear all work therein. This text might better have been urged
by the Sabbatarianis heretofore.
verse. 17. the meaning cannot be that every thing that is enjoined in the
Decalogue is perpetual, for then it should follow that every thing enjoined
likewise in the Prophets is perpetual and to be observed of Christians, Now
that no more is said of the law, verse. 18. then is said of the Prophets, verse.
17. is manifest, for there Christ says that he came to fulfill the Prophets,
which is as much as one tittle of the Prophets shall not pass till all be
fulfilled. That Christ spoke thus as it were, verse. 17. The Law and the
Prophets shall be fulfilled in part, and thus verse. 18. The Law shall be
fulfilled wholly is not to be imagined. It would ask a long discourse to show
Christ's meaning. Let it then suffice to have shown that this Text makes
nothing for the perpetuity of the fourth Commandment.

Answer.
It is true that these 17. and 18. verses of the 5th. Matt. do intend as well
the Ceremonial as the Moral Laws, for Christ going about to bring himself
into liking with the Jews by removing the impediment of their Law, showing
that he made for and not against it. First concerning the Ceremonial, whereas
they thought Christ had meant to have made those Laws to be no laws, but to
have brought in a new way of Righteousness and Salvation into the world, he
tells them, his coming was not to disparage or annihilate those laws, but
rather to ratify them by fulfilling them, not so much to take away their being
as to give them a better being.

Secondly, concerning the moral Law, whereas they trusted to it to their own
destruction, and misinterpreted it in favor to their carnal and corrupt
minds, he came to show them the true sense and meaning of God in it, to wit,
that they were not to be saved by their own but by his fulfilling it, and that
God will as well be served in spirit as in letter: So that he was so far from
abolishing this Moral law, as that he did more enforce it, and gave life to
that which they had made to be but a dead letter. And thus this text makes for
the perpetuity of the fourth Commandment, for that Christ fulfilled both the
Laws, the one by adding the substance to the shadow, the other by delivering
men from the curse of it through grace, and confirming it (by a new exposition
New I mean to them
and a manifestation of the spiritual part of it) as a rule of manners for all
ages; which is evinced out of the 19. verse, where notwithstanding he had
formerly said how that he had fulfilled the Law, yet does he there press them
to obedience, which must needs be of the Moral Law.

Moreover as Christ meant not to destroy the law, so neither did he mean to
confound the natures of laws perpetual and temporary (which was a way to
destroy them) and consequently not to annihilate the use and being of any
thing, save only such as did help to build the partition wall, and were
ordained for the state and time of the Jewish Church before Christ's coming:
Much less the Sabbath, which sprung out of Paradise, before any promise of
Christ was made, and which now in our State or Church is every whit as useful
and proper as ever, serving to cherish the Moral law, and to help us to
heavenly mindedness by its signification.

Nor do we say as you would force upon us in your Margin, that every tittle
in the Decalogue is perpetual, to wit stri^tly (for that the Law like other
Scripture being occasionally written, in the strictness of the Letter, did
partake of those times, and of the state of the Church to which it was then
given) but Evangelically, and in a suitable sense to our times it is perpetual.

Broad.
ARGUMENT 4.
A Fourth Argument is taken from Christ's words, Mat. 24. 20. but this Text
being rightly understood, makes nothing for them neither.

An exposition of Christ's words, Math. 24. 20.
Pray that

Your, not of the Apostles only, who were all well nigh dead, or departed out
of Jury before that time, not of the Disciples alone, who before the siege
departed to Pella, but of the Citizens of Jerusalem, and generally of all the
Jews.

Flight, that is calamity from which I council you to fly, there being no hope
by any means to avoid the same. He terms it flight, to note the certainty
of their overthrow.

Be not in the Winter, neither

On a Sabbath, (...) not (...)*
that is, a feast, or festival Sabbath, and I am induced thus to expound this
Text.

1. Did Christ mean the weekly Sabbath, yet this Text would stand them in no
stead. See M. (...). Tract page 73.
Because Christ seems not to mean any one particular day, for he speaks of
days, as before verse. 19. and again after ve. 22. except those days should be
shortened.

2. Because he counsels them to fly as soon as they see Jerusalem besieged,
Luke 21. 20.

And indeed it had been a great folly (knowing that the City should be
destroyed) not to shift for themselves whilst they might, but to tarry until
the last brunt.

3. Because the calamity befalling at the Passover, became came far more
grievous then other ways it would have been, for a great number repairing to
Jerusalem at that feast were shut in by the Romans, and thus Tot^ gente velut
in carcerem conclusa (as Josephus speaks) it came to pass. 1. B^ll. lud.
lib. 1. cap. 1.
That the air was infected and many died of the pestilence. 2. That they
sooner wanted food, and many miscarryed through famine. 3. That there was
greater dissension among them (for quot homines tot sententi^e) and many
perished by this means.

(...)

Some of late restraining Christ's words to the Disciples, only hold the reason
of his counsel to be, that so they might not be hindered from the sanctifying
of one Sabbath, which say they would be grievous to the soul, as to (...) in
winter would be grievous to the body.

Answ. As though they might not be as well hindered from sanctifying the
Sabbath, in defending themselves against the Romans* as in flying from them,
and again in hiding themselves after their flight, being scattered here and
there as the manner is of such.

If the Disciples following Christ's counsel, Luke 21. would depart out of
Jerusalem as soon as it began to be besieged, it is likely that they might
then depart in what day almost best pleased themselves, or rather indeed in
what night they would, which is the time wherein men usually seek to depart
out of Cities besieged. If they would tar^y until the city were ready to be
taken (which in them had been extreme folly) there is no likelihood that they
could fly and escape at all. But not to stand longer hereupon, the verses both
before and after do sufficiently convince, that Christ gave this counsel for
the better avoiding of bodily calamities, and the event has manifested the
same.

Answer.
I will not much dispute what Sabbath was meant by Christ in these words of
his, Math. 24. 20. For admitting the conclusion, how that Christ gave this
counsel for the better avoiding of bodily harms and calamities, and the
increase of those troubles, which (at the least) was such as was not from the
beginning of the world to this time, nor ever should be. For that they were to
typifie the calamities that should befall the wicked and unbeleevers at the
last day; I confess this exposition of yours to be in my conceit very genuine,
and yet it may for that very reason intend the weekly Sabbaths as well as any
of their festivals: For as by the one the Jews should be multiplied at
Jerusalem at that time, and so should their misery be increased: So again by
the other might their consciences be so straightened in regard of their
superstitious resting, which they used upon the Sabbath, as that they would
rather endure to dye then fly, especially considering the Religion they put in
that tradition of a Sabbath days journey, which was but two miles as they
accounted it; So that had they fled ^ut two miles further then their stint,
they would have thought themselves more to have violated the Sabbath, then if
they had spent the whole day in contentions and seditions within the City: For
of such force is zeal, when it is not according to knowledge of Scripture, as
that, through our corrupt nature, it binds the conscience more straight then
any command of God rightly understood; As we may see by those soldiers, who
when they were besieged, rather then they would drink of the well into which a
dog was thrown, they would starve or render the City Turkish History.
. And so doubtless would many of the Jews choose to dye before they would fly
further then their superstitious tradition gave them leave.

But as I have given truth its due in commending your exposition, so give me
leave to discover the fallacy of your marginall sophisme, by comparing (...)
with (...) already spoken of in the 2 Col. 16. There because it makes for your
advantage, you will have it to be meant the weekly Sabbath, and yet the Article
is not prefixed, and in this place you will have it to be meant the lewish
Sabbath, because the Article (...) is not prefixed. This is scarce good
dealing. But I pray you let one and the same defect beget one and the same
sense in both places, and so let them both pass alike, for the Jewish
extraordinary festivals, and so your Argument shall not only prevail with us,
but evince the truth.

Broad.
CHAP. VIII.
What would follow were the fourth Commandment moral or perpetual. Such as
give a different sense of the same Law at sundry times make it like a nose of
wax.


Were the fourth Commandment moral or perpetual, it would follow that we
Christians ought to keep the Jews Sabbath, for the meaning of this
Commandment must needs be the same as heretofore it was: A Law cannot say one
thing to day and another to morrow, though a Lawgiver may: And now the meaning
of the fourth Commandment heretofore was God sanctified the seventh day, Genesis
2. not one day of seven, or the like, the fourth commandment enjoined the same.
that the seventh day wherein God rested should be sanctified, other meaning
this Commandment could have none, as the words thereof do manifestly declare,
they import this and nothing else.

Such I know among us, as urge the perpetuity of the fourth Commandment, will
have it bind now to sanctify the Lord's Day, but they cannot agree among
themselves show this strange matter should come to pass, I say this strange
matter, for there being an old statute for fasting on the Friday, if it should
be said that hence forward we should be bound thereby to fast upon Saturday,
would it not seem wonderful strange? A strange matter it is that the fourth
Commandment should bind to sanctify the Lord's Day, and how it may come to
pass many strange opinions there are, which I think needful here briefly to
examine

1. Opinion.
There are who teaching that the fourth Commandment binds to sanctify the
Lord's Day, will have it thus to come about. They say that those words in the
beginning, Remember to sanctify the Sabbath, are for substance the whole
fourth Commandment, that which follows being only an explication and a
reason, and here they take the word Sabbath in a general sense, so that this
(with them) is a more general Commandment, then if God had said, Remember to
sanctify the seventh day.

Ans. I acknowledge that these words are for substance the whole fourth
Commandment as you teach, but whereas you put a difference between Sabbath
and seventh day, Consider further. 1. That once only before, mention is made
of the Sabbath, and that Sabbath was the seventh day. 2. Remember says God to
sanctify the Sabbath, and what Sabbath should they remember to sanctify but
that before mentioned. 3. That the word Sabbath is not to be taken again in
such a general sense throughout the Scripture.
this I cannot approve of for these reasons.

1. Because then the word Sabbath should be taken in one sense in the beginning
of the Commandment, and in another toward the end; for toward the end by
Sabbath must needs be meant the seventh day only. And rested the seventh day,
wherefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath and sanctified it. Here Gods resting on
the seventh day is the reason why he sanctified the Sabbath, and can it be a
reason of sanctifying another day besides the seventh day, especially seeing he
labored on all the other. Suppose that we had the like speech in the new
Testament, as thus. He rose again on the first day, wherefore he blessed the
day of resurrection, and sanctified it; Who would not take the day of
resurrection here for the first day only?

Reas. 2. By this your Doctrine the fourth Commandment should be of larger
extent, then that Commandment in the beginning (suppose it were a Commandment
as you would have it) for there it is said, God blessed the seventh day not the
Sabbath.

Answer.
In stead of answer to this in this place, I refer you to a review of your
first Chapter and mine, where the self same point is largely discoursed, Only
a word or two more.

1. Touching your consequence of the unchangeablenesse of the Jews day into
ours, if the fourth Commandment be admitted moral. See for this Eat^nus de
Sabbato, page 40. de Moralitate Sabbathi. Neque enim (says he) mut^bile cum
ceremoni^li been est coniunctum, aut cum eo convertendum, Quamvis enim omne
ceremoniale sit mutabile, non e contra tamen, Multa enim sunt positiva
^^^tabilia quae non sunt Ceremoni^, huius generis sunt leges Iudiciales, Exodus
21. etc. Sic etiam totu^ Decalogu^, aliquo modo mutabilis fuit, ut diserte
Apostolus expri^it, in 3 ad Gal. 13. Christus redemit nos ab execratione legis,
and cap. 4. 30. Ejice ancillam and filium eius, qu^ ancilla (ut verse. 25.
apparet) mo^^ Sicai erat, qui est in Arabia. Hoc est lex; quae ibi pronunciata
fuit. Hisce liquet, quod lex and male^^ctio eius, in Christo sunt abrogata,
quatenus aliquo modo erant murabilia, totam autem legem ceremonialem esse, nemo
est qui dixerit.

2. And touching your instance or similitude of fasting Friday by Statute. I
answer, That indeed it were strange to turn Friday into Saturday by virtue of
the letter of the same law, Rebus sic stantibus, but put case we had some
extraordinary Deliverance fell out on Friday (as the Gunpowder Treason) and
were to keep it weekly as we are the Sabbath, then if either the Parliament
sedente curia, should alter the law, or the King by a non obstante should for
this cause publish an alteration, or by his and the Courts example should
change the day from Friday to Saturday, in memory of that Deliverance, Friday
being made thereby rather a Day of Feasting then Fasting, I think no wise man
will say that the law was repealed or suffered any detriment by this: So etc.

Christ came not to give new laws but to renew the old upon a new condition,
and in this sense was it a new Commandment, to love one another. And thus is
the Lords Day a renewed Sabbath, not given as a new law, but altered by
example. For ours is a new Sabbath, as the Covenant is said to be a new
Covenant, which is only in exhibition, not in substance: For there was nothing
but by the coming of Christ it was ground under one of these two wheels,
either it suffered abrogation or qualification: But the Sabbath suffered not
abrogation: Therefore Qualification: And which was proper to Christ, who though
he came not to give new laws, yet he was to qualify and renew the old upon
Evangelicall terms.

Broad. 2. Opinion.
By this first opinion, though the fourth Commandment binds to keep the
Sabbath yet not the seventh Day, but others teach that it binds to keep the
seventh day as heretofore it did. Those have then to prove that the Lord's Day
is the seventh or last of the week. Now how can they prove this? They deal
wisely herein, for they have not the least show of proof.
Nay I know not any that has so much as gone about it hitherto, and to save
their pains hereafter, I would have them know that the Scriptures, Fathers, and
Reason are against them in this matter.

1. The Scriptures are against them, for they term the Lord's Day the first of
the week in two places: Act. 20. 2 Cor. 16. It is imagined that Christ before
his Ascension or the Apostles, presently after commanded to keep the Lord's Day
for Sabbath, which if Christ or his Apostles had done, and it had been needful
that the Lord's Day should be the seventh day, Either the Sabbath was not so
soon changed into the Lord's Day, or it was not then needful that the Lords
day should be the seventh day.
doubtless order should have been taken for this also, and then Saint Paul
would not have termed it the first of the week well-neere twenty years
after this time writing especially unto the Gentiles.

2. The Fathers are against them, for they termed Wednesday the fourth of the
week. Si dies observare non licet, Origin. Nicephorus have the like saying.
and menses, and tempora, and annos, nos quoque simile crim^n incurrimus,
quartum Sabbati observantes and parascenem, and diem Dominicum, etc. Hieron. in
Gal. 4.

3. Reason is against them, for if the Jews Sabbath until the change were the
seventh day, how should the next day be the seventh also? Consider that the
name seventh has reference to other days going before.
Either there must be once; two seventh days together, or there must be one
monstrous week consisting of eight days, or else one day must be in no week.

Answer.
It is not needful to prove the Lord's Day to be the last day of the week; It
is enough to hold correspondencie with the Commandment, if we prove it to be
the seventh day, not in order, but in number: For though the Commandment
binds perpetually to the number, it was and is the present condition of the
Church, in regard of our benefit from God and Gods Covenant to us, which
binds us to the order first or last. In which adjournment we, as is
requisite, retain and observe the scope and equity of the Commandment, since
God has afforded us six days for the dispatch of our own businesses, that we
should willingly dedicate the seventh to his worship: For the altering of the
circumstance of time does not abolish the substance of the Commandment. This
difference is evident and usual in other matters, as for instance: It was one
thing to have the Tridentine Council translated to Bolonia, and the ending of
it was another thing: So there is a difference between the adjourning of the
last to the first, and the dissolution of the Sabbath day. And although the
Sabbath be now the first day of the week in one respect, to wit, according to
order, yet it remains still the last in another respect, to wit, as they are
seven in number: And that it was thus, even in the Christians account, the last
as well as the first, appears in the 1 Cor. 16. where Paul bids them, that
every first day of the week every one should contribute as God had prospered
him, to wit, in the six foregoing work-dayes.

And as touching your reason I answer, that every thing must have a time of
institution and beginning. Had God made Adam the first day, then had he kept
Gods seventh day Sabbath, but God making him the sixth day, and he being first
to spend six days in one kind of employment, and the seventh in another,
thereupon it is more then likely he was to keep the thirteenth day from the
first day of the Creation as his first Sabbath, and not the fourteenth day as
his second Had Adam kept Gods seventh day Sabbath, then had he kept a Sabbath
in Innocence, for it was instituted before his fall
.

Again, if to be God did rain Mannah, on the first day according to the
computation of the Creation, then they kept that seventh day Sabbath; But if he
did not begin to rain Mannah on that day, but on some other in the week, then
was that computation broken, and yet the Sabbath rightly kept.

So, had Christ risen on the last day of the week, (but then had not Isaiah
his prophecy been fulfilled 65. 17.) then had we observed that day; but the
Son of man (as you say) being Lord of the Sabbath, its fit the Sabbath should
wait on him, and not he on the Sabbath, and therefore as he chose the first
day to rise on, as likewise the morning and not the evening to rise in; so have
we done well, after Saint Paul's rule, in imitating him as he imitated Christ,
in keeping the Lord's Day Sabbath ever since: which, as I have noted before, was
not darkly prefigured in the keeping the first and seventh day in the time of
the Passover: As like wise to being the Sabbath in the morning and not in the
evening (which yet cannot be done without some loss of time, being that the
Jews Sabbath ended at the evening) for if we change the day because of Christ's
resurrection, and by Paul's example; why not then the terminations of the day,
according to the time of Christ's resurrection, and example of Paul in his
practice at Tro^s. I speak this as an argument against some, that are of
opinion the Sabbath still begins at evening, as in the time of the Jews,
and first Creation, when indeed evening and morning made the day, and darkness
was to go before light.

As for the disorder which you say this innovation must needs produce, let it
lie upon the Apostles who can answer it well enough; and so may we building on
the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles: In the mean time Paul's example,
which is not in vain set down in the 20. Acts 6, 7. (where no day of the
seven, but only the last, which was the first day of the week, is thus
disposed of) is a sufficient warrant for us hence forwards to observe it, from
the 4th. Phil. 9. The things which you have seen in me, do, and the God of
peace shall be with you.

And as for that in your margin, where you say that the number seven has
reference to other going before; I answer you in this figure 7000007: where you
see, the first as well as the last in some respect may be the seventh, to wit
in number, though not in place and order.

Broad.
But let it be imagined (although I can scarce see how it can be imagined only)
that our day is become the seventh and last of the week, what would follow
hereupon? That God might well be said to have rested on our day, and to have
enjoined one day on Mount Sinai; But then it might not be said, that Christ
rose upon one day. He that says both God rested and Christ rose upon one day,
may as well say* that God both rested and began to make the world upon one day,
which I will not believe any man will say, until I know it.

Answer.
I know none that goes about to make Gods Rest and Christ's Resurrection to be
upon one and the selfsame day: Nor need it, for it is enough that the one was,
and the other is observed holy, as the seventh day in opposition to the six
work-daies: The change not only being granted by us, but argued as necessary
and significantly material.

Broad. 3. Opinion.
Others there are which by the seventh day in the beginning of the
Commandment, Am^s Theol. li^. 2. cap. 15. sect. 8. v^l unus e s^ptem, but does
the Scripture so speak, or does he so much as go about to prove (...). He and
others do wisely to take that for granted which they cannot prove.
understand one of the seven days; but the seventh day is the Sabbath, that is
(say they) but one of the seven days is the Sabbath, and the first day is one
of the seven days as well as the seventh.

Answ. 1. Then shall the words seventh day have one sense in the 2. Genesis and
another here. Will any man say that God ended his work upon one of the seven
days, and not upon the seventh day only?

2. Then shall the words seventh day have one sense in the beginning of the
Commandment, and another after, for after it is said that God rested on the
seventh day.

3. Then had the Israelites sanctified our day or any other, and not the
seventh, they had not broke the fourth Commandment.

Answer.
This opinion, of the seventh day to intend one of seven, is doubtless most
true, and is therefore spoken in the Commandment exclusively, implying thus
much, That thou art not to keep the sixth day, or one of six, or the eight day
or one of eight, but the seventh day or one of seven.

For the substance of the Commandment has respect unto the number, for it
opposes seven to six; as if it had said, six days shall be for labor, and
the seventh for Rest: although I deny not, but the example of God in respect of
order, was then significa^tly binding during the inforceme^t of the reasonof
the creation: I would not be mistaken; and be thought (when I say one of seven)
to mean any one, but as Ames. in that place being rightly understood, and set
down, dies septimus vel unus e septem, that is, the seventh day, or one of
seven, not of six or eight. For I know the Jews were to celebrate the seventh
day, the last in order both for example and signification sake, during the
Covenant of works: For the order both was and is exceeding useful in respect
of its signification, and helps much to the fulfilling the duty of
sanctifying the Sabbath. And therefore has God been ever careful, not only to
give the general Commandment to his Church, for the observation of the
seventh day; But he has likewise prescribed them a terminus a quo, a day or an
occasion whence and whereby they were to number their seven days (which yet
was not always one and the same seventh day) As unto Adam he gave the first day
of his being created to number from, and therefore was he careful to give him
this Commandment in due time, to wit, the second day of his Creation, so soon
as he had given an example, that so he might remember it against the seventh
day came: So likewise to the Jews he appointed by Moses the first day of
Mannah for them to reckon upon: And so to us by his own and the Apostles
examples he has given the day of the Resurrection to be the ground of our
Computation.

Broad. 4. Opinion.
Some of late tell us of the substance and circumstances of the fourth
Commandment, Give way to this new doctrine of the substance and circumstance
of a divine law, and open a wide gap to manifold errors, we shall now have
seeking after the substance, as there was after the Allegory heretofore.
by the substance they mean the sanctifying of one day in the week, by
circumstances the keeping of the seventh day, and strict resting. Answ. 1. That
the sanctifying of one day in the week is the substance of the fourth
Commandment you have not learned from the words thereof, for they speak only
of sanctifying the seventh day. 2. No Prophet nor Apostle (nor Father I
believe) has thus interpreted the Commandment either in clear or dark
terms. 3. No other Commandment of God is to be interpreted after such a
manner. 4. Then had not a Jew broken the Commandment though he had labored
on the seventh day, so that before he had sanctified one of the six days.

If God had said, Remember to sanctify one day of the week six days thou
shall labor, and the seventh thou shall sanctify, ye had some color for your
doctrine, although this had bin nothing in very deed. For God said, thou shall
keep a Feast to me, Neither was the resting of the land one year in seven the
substance of that Law, Exodus 23. 10. 11.
thrice in the year thou shall keep the Feast, etc. Exodus 23. 14, 15, 16. and
yet the keeping of the Feast thrice in the year was not the substance of that
Law who ever so imagined? But only God there first tells the Israelites in
general what he would have done, and afterward acquainteth them with his
mind particularly and fully. You your selves I am sure will acknowledge that
the keeping of a feast thrice a year is as well the substance of the foresaid
Law, as the keeping of the Sabbath once in a week is the substance of the
fourth Commandment; and the worshipping of God was one end of the feast, as
well as of the Sabbath. Yet Christ has blotted out that whole Law. The like
may be said of that Law, Exodus 23. 10, 11.

By this opinion not the substance, but only the circumstances of the fourth
Commandment are mentioned in the Decalogue, which circumstances also are not
to be observed.

Answer.
That in the fourth Commandment is both substance and circumstance is evident:
By substance, I understand the sanctifying the seventh day, not as it is last
in order, but as it is opposed to all other numbers, by circumstance I
understand the order and the reason For the reason did as well bind to observe
the order, as to establish the Commandment it self, til I there was a new
reason of a new order, but never of a new commandment
: Which two (that I may use your phrase in the conclusion of your seventh
Chapter) have been manifested to have been circumstantiall by the event.

I say the very reason of the Commandment as it did bind the order was
circumstantiall and changable. We see how it received an addition, in that
their remembrance of their deliverance out of Egypt (which was a Type of our
spiritual deliverance) was made a reason of this fourth Commandment as well
as the Creation; And so is now our redemption it self by Christ, and yet
nothing of the substance abolished or altered, but the maine duty of
sanctifying the seventh day is still observed. And the reason (as I conceive)
why this Commandment was more circumstantiall then others, was because it was
preter-ordained to the Law of Nature for the continual use of the Church in
all states and conditions: And therefore was it to be brought to the state, and
made suitable to the condition of the Church In regard of the circumstantiall
parts of it, the moral part fitting all states as an help of their obedience.
; and not the condition of the Church to be brought to it, as were also the
Sacraments, and yet so as that God has himself ever ordered these changable
circumstances in it, either by the doctrine or example of his Prophets or
Apostles, notvery darkly.

Indeed as touching the seventh day to be any other then the last in the time
of the Prophets, is not to be imagined, because then that order was in force,
but now in the Apostles time, the event does clearly manifest the contrary in
the practice of the Apostles, which gives sufficient authority for ours It is
altogether an unlikely thing, that the Church without a pregnant Commandment
(which there is none in scripture) would take upon them to abolish the fourth
commandment (enjoining a duty upon an universal and perpetual benefit) and
yet of their own authority bring up a custom equivalent
. And whereas you say that no other Commandment is to be interpreted with
circumstances and substance. I answer, That be^ides that circumstance of the
Israelites deliverance prefixed to the whole Law, me thinks you should
acknowledge this to be true in the fifth Commandment, where there is a promise
made of a reward in Canaan to them that keep it, which yet is a changable
circumstance And in answer to your marginall note, if it were not a changable
circumstance, you may imagine what absurdity would follow.
in respect of the precise meaning: For though in that respect it be void, yet
it is still of force and use according to the present state and residence of
the Church, as appears in the 6. Ephesians. 2. And notwithstanding the cessation of
the Egyptian Deliverance, and the precise meaning of this promise in the fifth
Commandment, and their alterations into a more spiritual and proper meaning
for the present Church, yet do the Commandments themselves for their substance
remain to this day the same: For the change of significant circumstances may
be upon good grounds without impeachment to the being of the law: as the
Israelites supposed changing the gesture from standing to sitting, when they
were a Sedentary Church did no whit abolish the Passover. And thus did David
change the order that God had appointed among the Levites (how that till
thirty years old they were not to officiate) when the reason of it failed,
and the Arc had rest, then without prejudice to the Ordinance, he ordained
that they should officate at twenty, as is 1 Chronicles. 23. As a man may alter his
temperament and yet continue a man still, so long as for substance he remains
the same in soul and body. So if so be the Sabbath had been changed, from being
kept every seventh day, to every sixth, then the whole frame of the fourth
Commandment had suffered shipwreck: But in the change of one seventh day to
another upon such a ground and reason the substance suffers not.

For as Bishop White observes, page 136. (against T. B. who affirms that in
all Divine laws whenever any part is taken away the whole is abolished) That
if by part he understand such a part as is substantial and constituent his
position is granted, but if he understand a circumstantiall or accidental part
the position is false; For (says he) the Law of Prayer or Divine worship is
still in force, as it was in David's and in Daniels time, in respect of
substantial actions, but many circumstances of time, place and gesture, are
abolished in the time of the Gospel: as Daniels praying with windows open
toward Jerusalem, etc. And therefore, a little to vary the words and sense of
his conclusion against T. B. the substance of the fourth Commandment may be
continued and yet the Circumstance altered.

As touching your following instance of the three feasts a year, I see not
that it holds good Analogy with the Sabbath: But your marginal instance of the
^arths seventh year Sabbath is proper. In which Commandment (I say) there is
both circumstance and substance. The substance is the Law it self of resting
the seventh year in opposition to the other six: But the precise order is
added by the God of order, for the better execution of this Law without
confusion, which must needs follow if it were left arbitrary. Like as in the
Law of Tithes, God chose to himself one in ten, which for orders sake, and
that they might have a rule to walk by, he appointed to be every tenth as it
passed under the rod. And so of the Sabbath, wherein for order sake God did not
only appoint the seventh day to be the last, but also gave a computation from
Mannah, that so they might also know which should be that last, and so avoid
confusion: Which yet does nothing hinder, but that the same God may upon
occasion, appoint another order by his Apostles, as he did that by Moses, and
not harm the Law it self, or the substance of the Commandment in so doing.
Nay I think, if the case were put to you of a man in a far country, who by
some or other accident losing that computation of Mannah) should
notwithstanding have dedicated every seventh day (which yet happily might be
the first, second, or third of the week as well as the last) to an holy rest,
in obedience to tho Commandment: (I think I say) you would grant this man to
observe the fourth Commandment in substance.

Broad. 5. Opinion.
Others speak of the Morality and Ceremonies of the fourth Commandment, By
this opinion only the Ceremonies are mentioned in the Decalogue, the fourth
Commandment has as it were a piece of Moses veil on the face thereof, when
it is read in the Church.
by the Ceremonies they mean the seventh day and strict rest, by the morality
the sanctifying of some times, or the having of set and appointed days.

Ans. There is no Morality of the fourth Commandment as is said before: Indeed
I acknowledge the Law of Nature; here Nature taught the Gentiles, and does
teach Christians to set apart some times (as places) for the public worship of
God: But there is a Suppose that God had said to Sem thou shall sanctify some
time, to Ham thou shall sanctify one day in a week, and to Iaphet thou shall
sanctify the seventh day, had he not given diverse Laws to them there? Should
Sem have kept the morality, Ham the substance, and Iaphet the ceremony or
circumstance of one and the same Law, this were presently doctrine I trow.
difference between the general Law of Nature written in man's heart at the
Creation, and the peculiar precept of the Sabbath written since in Tables of
stone.

Should God now say to the Jews, you shall sanctify the seventh day, wherein
I rested, and to us Christians you shall sanctify the first day wherein my
Son rose. The Jews sanctifying their Sabbath, and we the Lord's Day, should
do that is enjoined by the Law of Nature in a general manner, but as they
should not do that were enjoined by our particular Law, so then neither should
we do that were enjoined by their particular Law.

Answer.
That there were some intervening Ceremonies befell the Sabbath in the Jewish
Church, you (I think) will not (I am sure cannot justly) deny, which now like
an old suit of clothes are dropped off Nay even in the very time of the Jews,
the extreme strict Rest ceased when Mannah ceased
(for Christ has pruned the Law of her Mosaicall branches) and the Sabbath
remains naked and pure. For as the Sabbath it self was a super-addition or
handmaid to the Law of Nature, that is of necessary use and service to preserve
our obedience to the will of God revealed in it (and especially to the first
Table (as I have observed in the beginning of this Tract: So had it self also
many additions, which were proper to the state of the Jewish Church (in which
time it was reinforced) as likewise had every thing else: Which additions were
some of them Ceremonies, some mere occasional circumstances (and thus was the
strict rest in the wilderness, and the stranger within thy gates mentioned in
the fourth commandment) some whereof were abrogative, some changable,
according to the several natures, as appears by their several events in this
new created Church of ours. In the Commandment it self, as it is laid down
in the Decalogue, I know nothing properly Ceremonial in a Jewish sense, and to
be abrogated properly by Christ; For whatsoever was abrogated by Christ, was
ordained by reason of Christ since the fall, which the Sabbath was not. Heb. 4.
Yet is it no other then a Ceremony (and for this cause it is so changable in
diverse particulars upon occasion) but of that nature and so annexed to the
Church, as the shadow to the body, inseparable, though alterable, according to
the condition of the party and degree of the Sun.

Touching your first marginall note, with which I will couple your conclusion
of the fourth Opinion, You say, That by these two opinions, Not substance, but
either circumstance or ceremony, are only mentioned in the fourth Commandment,
and has as it were a piece of Moses his veil when it is read in the Church.

Answ. In the order there is included the substance In the first Table it is
ordinary to include the greater in the less, the affirmative in the negative;
like as in the second Table the less is mostly included in the greater.
; For the seventh day cannot be commanded, but one of seven must necessarily
and principally be intended, as when God commanded the Tenth, surely any man
will think he has more respect to the number then to the order.

Neither can the fourth Commandment be said any more, nay not so much (for the
one was common and the other proper, to have a piece of Moses his veil over
it, for the seventh day being a Ceremony, then all the Law has by its preface
of the Egyptian deliverance. I wish you had considered what a veil you cast
upon the fourth Commandment, when it is read with the Prayer.

As concerning your second marginal note, I have formerly shown in what
relation the Sabbath and the Law of Nature stand. And as touching the
difference of the commanding of one day in a week, and the seventh day I
answer, That in substance they are the same, and the difference is only in
manner of exhibition. For Ham has only the substance it self mentioned and
commanded him, and the order left arbitrary, which if he of his own accord
should design to be every seventh or last day, then I pray you what difference
for substance: But Iaphet has both the substance and order assigned him of
God, so that the difference lies only in manner of exhibition. Like as the
Covenant of Grace was both one to the Jews and us in substance, only as it
was given to them, it was clothed with many circumstances and ceremonies
(though they were Laws they were no better) but to us naked: All which
circumstances (I grant) did bind during their significancy, and though now the
Ceremonies be annulled, and the Sacraments changed, which were Appendices to
the Covenant, yet is the substance of the Covenant the same, and distinct from
its circumstances: So though the Sabbath admit an annulling of some
additaments, and a change of some circumstances or ceremonies, yet may and does
the fourth Commandment in substance remain the same distinct and unconfounded.
Nay this very change does discover to us the substance from the circumstances
and ceremonies, as well of the Sabbath, as of the Covenant if we had not
understood them before.

And though the Morality and Ceremonies of the fourth Commandment relish not
with you, yet your Partisans of later Edition pass it in Verbo Magistri. That
it is abrogated in the speciality of it, because it was ceremonious, and so
serve their turns to pull down the Sabbath, and yet affirm it stands good in
the morality or equity of it, to keep unraced the ejaculation annexed to it in
our Liturgy. And Mr. Dow, page 9. says in absolute terms. They more fully
express the nature of this Commandment who say, It is partly Moral, and
partly Ceremonial.

Broad. 6. Opinion.
Mr. Cleaver will have this strange matter come to pass by a Trope, whereby
one part is put for the rest. He says, That in the precepts and prohibitions
more is meant then in words is expressed. Moral. of the Law. Chap. 4.

Answ. I acknowledge that in the other nine Commandments more is meant then is
expressed in words, but here in the fourth Commandment that which is expressed
in words is not meant. It is a kind of Trope to put one part for the rest, but
when no part is put for the rest, what manner of Trope may that be? For this
thou shall sanctify the seventh day wherein I rested, is no part of Gods Law
in these days, and yet this in effect is all that God spoke from Sinai.

Answer.
Although the fourth Commandment be a Law still in force, yet (as I said) it
binds us not to keep Sabbath the last day of the week, though the seventh.
For the order was foretold to be altered in the 65. Isaiah 17. where it is
prophesied, that Gods creating new heavens and a new earth shall make the old
to be forgotten, that is, there shall be a wonderful alteration, and that
which now men make most account of, to wit, the Creation, then they shall
account it the least, sanctifying the memory of my resting from their
Redemption in stead of my resting from their Creation. And thus you wilfully
slander us when you say, that, Thou shall sanctify the seventh day wherein I
rested, is no part of Gods Law in these days, for we grant it but with an
Orthodox distinction of Rest. For the Commandment it self looks with a
double face both ways, both to the Jewish Church and ours, both to the old and
new Creation; And bears his Title in the very front in that word Remember.
And as one well observes, There is no Commandment ushered with such a Memento
as that of the Sabbath, wherein (says he) I think we may discern Gods
providence, forearming weak Christians against the strong assaults of their
own affections, struggling against the restraint of a whole days libe^tie, and
of man's inventions oppugning Gods institutions, for it is a Commandment of
Remembrance; so that as once we were to remember our Creation by it, as
appears b^ the first promulgation of it in Exodus, for there the Creation is
only mentioned: so like wise are we now to remember our Redemption by it, as
appears by the second pro^nulgation of it in Deu^eronomie, where the old
Creation is quite forgotten not a word mentioned of it, and the new set forth
in its Type of their ^gyptian deliverance. Which observation (taken from the
various reasons annexed at several times, and in such an order, for the
enforcing of this Commandment) compared with this Text of Isa^ah 65. 17. and
the present event suitable, does both very much illustrate the perpetuity of
the Sabbath, and yet prophecy the change both in one, which also (if we
consider the nature of those times) does well prove the thing: For though
Christ speaks plainly to us now, yet to them he spoke and prophesied (as I
may so say) in parables, which rightly understood are no less proofs then
ours, And thus is the substance of the fourth Commandment preserved, that is,
the dedicating of the seventh day to duties of Piety and Mercy, and six days
to our other affairs, as also prophecy fulfilled, and the Apostles imitated.

But may some say, Object.
Our Redemption was not finished on that day, for that it still remains in
acting by Christ's intercession, which is Bishop Whites objection, page 299.

Christ's intercession after his dying and rising, is as Gods providence was,
Answ.
and is, after his six days Creation; And as (notwithstanding his continual
providence) his Creation was finished on the last day of the week: So Now
(notwithstanding Christ's intercession at Gods right hand) our Redemption was
finished on the first day of the week by his Resurrection. And whereas Bishop
White further objecteth, page 299. That the day of Christ's resurrection cannot
properly be called a Sabbath or day of Rest, because our Savior was in action
on that day about the necessary works of perfecting man's Redemption, by
applying, teaching, inspiring, authorizing his Disciples. I answer. They were
all Sabbath Day works, and so was the seventh day a working day to God in many
such like respects suitable to the first Creation, and yet it was his Sabbath
for this reason, because he rested and ceased from that which he did before,
(as Mr. Hildersham notes upon the Hebrew word Sabbat in his 135. Lect. on the
51. Psalm) which holds in respect of Christ. Furthermore page 300. Bishop
White says, That the Primitive Church devoted the first day of the week to
the honor and service of Christ, not because of Christ's cessation from
redemptive actions, but because it was primus dies laetitiae, The first day of
joy and gladness for the resurrection of the Lord: True; But the cause of this
joy was the perfection of our Redemption and Deliverance, which we celebrate
with a congratulatory commemoration on the first day, like as we were to do
the perfection of our Creation on the last day of the week. And page 303. h^
says, That Christ rested upon his resurrection day, no more then he did upon
every day after until his ascension, and since his ascension until the worlds
end. Answ. So he may say that God rested no more from his work of Creation on
the seventh day, then he has done ever since, where by the way take notice,
That it is the consummation of the Creation and Redemption, which is meant by
their Resting, and which we celebrate, for else if Rest should respect barely
their cessation, then all the after time should be of equal estimation with
the last day in respect of the Creation, and with the first day in respect of
the Redemption.

And now indeed I wonder why the Egyptian deliverance being in Deuteronomy. annexed by
the dictate of the spirit, as a reason to enforce the duty of the fourth
Commandment or Sabbath in its second promulgation, should not be thought a
sufficient reason to enforce the same duty and law upon us, as well as the
obedience of the whole Law is urged upon us by the same reason contained in the
Preface Deny the one and ^eny both, but reason and sobriety will deny neither.
seeing that in both places it signifies alike our spiritual Redemption and
deliverance. Especially seeing the holy Ghost, in the fifteenth verse of the
fifth of Deuteronomy. after he has there affixed to the fourth Commandment, our
deliverance out of spiritual Egypt in its Type, as the reason of it,
concludes upon it mandatorily a duty (not a liberty) imposed upon us
therefore, in these words, Therefore the Lord thy God commanded thee to keep
the Sabbath day. A place of Scripture if soberly consulted (especially
considering withal the preterition of the Creation in that place, whereby this
becomes not only a motive but the sole reason) not easily answered by our
Antisabbatarians. For as one says well, In the 5. Deuteronomy. The reason of the
Redemption from Egypt is put as a cause of sanctifying the Sabbath, so that
there begins a translation, though not of the day it self, yet of the use
and sanctification of the day, as to be kept in an holy and thankful memory of
the Redemption from Egypt, which was but a Type and figure of our spiritual
Redemption by Christ: which their Redemption from Egypt, if taken only
literally, was not to be compared to the work of Creation, that it should
challenge to it self a right in the Sabbath before the Creation, but only as
it typified and prefigured that glorious work of Redemption. Now if the
Redemption from Egypt, which was but a Type, were so glorious a work, as that
the Sabbath day should be kept rather in memory of that, then of the Creation,
then what shall we say of the work of Redemption it self, which does so far
exceed in glory that from Egypt, as the Sun does the shadow? If therefore
Gods ancient people were to keep the Sabbath day in memory of their Rest from
Egypt, how much more (when a greater Rest from a greater work of Redemption
even the true and eternal Rest is come in, and we in Christ do enter into it
as Heb. 4. 3.) ought that day of the week be kept holy, wherein the Lord
rested from his most glorious and gracious work. And this may serve to answer
your unanswerable conclusion following, if you will weigh it without prejudice.

Broad.
To conclude, By no ways or means yet found out can it be, That the precept
of the Sabbath should bind to sanctify the Lord's Day, And I could wish my
brethren not to busy their brains to find out more ways, as having busied
them too much hereabouts already. Were the fourth Commandment a law in force
still, it should bind to sanctify the Jews Sabbath and none other.

Broad.
But suppose that the fourth Commandment did bind to sanctify the Lord's Day,
What would follow were the fourth Commandment a law still in force, and did
bind to sanctify the Lord's Day, See my Latin Tract. Chap. 5.
what would follow thereupon? That we might do no more work on our days then
the Jews might do on theirs; for there is not the least color of
dispensation in Gods word for doing of more, and indeed after some men's
doctrine we may do no more, not pick up a few sticks, nor buy a little
ointment, nor step over the door sill to gather up Mannah, etc. See Mr. Dod,
and Mr. Cleaver on the fourth Commandment.

Answer.
It matters not what would follow now, no more then what did follow when the
Commandment was confessedly of force. For certainly if we be to keep a
Sabbath to the Lord, if we could herein do the will of God on earth as it is
done in heaven, by keeping it here in the Type, as they keep it in heaven in
the Antitype, it were so much the better, wholly heavenly, free from all
carnal and earthly distractions, so far as necessity will give leave, and
to do even these necessary things with such heavenly mindedness, as that the
rules both of Piety to God and charity to our selves are fulfilled therein.
If at any time, much more on that day, ^it ought to be our meat and drink to
do the will of our heavenly father in earth, as it is done in heaven. And it
is apparent, in Christian experience, that he which that day keeps himself
and his heart diligently from terrene thoughts, words, and actions, employing
them contrarily, grows most in grace, has the sweetest Communion with God,
the greatest measure of Divine comfort, (for a Christian never feels such
sound comfort as when he spiritually observes it) and is the ablest to long
after his dissolution For God blessed the Sabbath day, that is, appointed it to
be a day of blessings to them that sanctify it, which they do that observe to
d^e these three things. 1. That they keep it delightfully, not with
tediousness and grudging. 2. That they busy themselves in all holy things
acting them in the spirit. 3. That they spend the whole day wholly and not
partly thus. These (as M. D^d rightly observes) only inh^rit the blessings
entailed upon the Sabbath by promise.
, which show it to be Gods ordinance, for he is wont to give a blessing to his
own ordinance: Whereas those that fight so much against it, it is like never
felt the sweetness of it (as for your self, I will pass no censure of you,
for I know you not) but some I am able to produce, that are of this licentious
opinion concerning the Sabbath, and are as little strict in other things which
are uncontroversably naught, to the scandal of the Ministry, and to the
palpable arguing, that because they entertain not the truth in the love of it,
God has either given them over to believe a lie, or else that they take up
this opinion more to countenance their corruptions, then to maintain Truth.
For non-residency, a formal and lazy ministry, and such like follow as
naturally upon this, as falling away does upon free will. Your manner of
instancing is naught thus to go about to lessen the Commandment it self, and
our obedience to it, by a sleightie expression of the things commanded. Had
Adam thus excused himself to God, when he accused him of rebellion, and told
him, why, it was but a mouth-full of an apple, etc. the aggravation had been
worse then the fault, a few sticks, a little oil, etc. is it the fewness of
the sticks, the littleness of the oil; that give ens and non-ens to the Sin?
He that has his eyes anointed, though but with a little of Gods eyesalve,
knows that the thing commanded is to be judged by the commandment, and not
the commandment by the thing commanded.

Me thinks that Memento or watchword set at the beginning of the Commandment
(and so usefully expounded by M. Dod and M. Cleaver) to quicken our
circumspection in providing for the sanctifying of the Sabbath, by prevention
and foresight, should have answered this Argument in the hatching, especially
in these petty things you speak of, considering that the less the temptation
the greater the sin.

But to your instances themselves I answer. That in all things whatsoever a
lawful necessity grants a lawful liberty on the Sabbath, as for gathering
of Mannah I have formerly showed you, why it did bind and for what time. And
therefore, instead of further answer, I will insert for a conclusion, the
positive truth of such works as may be done on the Sabbath day, as you shall
find it in Mr. Richard Byfeild, page 95, 96. There are (says he) four sorts
of works lawful on the Sabbath. 1. Works of holiness. 2. Works of mercy. 3.
Works that are in their nature servile, yet do directly respect the present
worship of God, as our travel to the places of Gods worship, for these works
become now holy works, and are not ours but Gods works. 4. Works of common
honesty, that is, works that make to the comely decent and orderly performance
of Gods worship, and our carriage and behavior therein. Such are the tolling
of a bell for the calling of the assembly, the comely and modest dress of the
body provided that it be not vain, curious, nor ask much time, but be thrust
into the narrowest room that may be: The spreading of our table, so that state
be not taken up, and all things be prepared before, as much as may, with the
like. By works of mercy, I mean not only necessary labors in the help of the
sick, and of women in travel, and of beasts out of a pit with the like: But
also all those which are called works of necessity, which I rather call works
of mercy, because they are therefore necessary, as they tend to the
preservation of things, not from feared or suspected, but from eminent and
imminent and present danger, and the work it self must be done in mercy, not
in covetousness or other respects. Now of this sort are these works, labor
in provision of convenient food, tendance of cattle, fight for defense of our
country being assailed, riding of posts on the affairs of the state in causes
of present and imminent danger. In all these the Master has power to command,
and so has the superior ove^ him that is under his charge, and the servant is
bound to obey. The Master may command him the works of mercy, and the works
servile, which directly look to the worship of God, or to go with him to the
Sermon, though many miles off (if it cannot be had nearer hand) and as his
Master may take his horse and ride thither, his servant going on foot, so may
he command his servant for this purpose to saddle his horse, as in 2 King. 4.
22, 23. the question of the Shunamites husband shows, who to his wife
desiring one of the Asses to be made ready, and a servant to be sent her that
she might go to the man of God, says on this wise, wherefore will thou go to
him to day? It is neither new Moon nor Sabbath. It was then their custom so
to do on the Sabbath and new Moon.

In like manner the Master may enjoyne the servant such works as tend to
necessary provision of food, and tending of children in the family, etc.

Yet here again some things seem to fight with the sanctification of the day.
First, if the Master shall strictly stand upon his state and distance, for if
the family-necessities in respect of young children should necessarily require
the presence of some constantly at home, the Master may not hereby keep his
servant constantly from public worship, but rather sometimes change turns
with him. Much less may he desire such unnecessary superfluities, as may cause
absence from the Assemblies, for this is to feed the carcass on the lifeblood
of the souls of thy servants. Deal in all plainness of heart, and know that
thou have to deal with God. The servant must be sure the work is unlawful
before he offer to withdraw his obedience, but thou may sin in that in which
thy servant sins not, because thou art bound to search more into the nature
of thy necessities. Secondly, if the Master set not his business in so wise
and discreet an order, that without all unnecessary hindrances, he and all his
household may sanctify the day and keep it holy. Thirdly, if the Master
remember not that he is a God, and that both by communication of name and
power, to provide for, and see to the servants and his households rest, and
therein respect the mercy which God would have shown to his servants, yea to
cattle on that day.

Broad.
CHAP. IX. The Doctrine of the Primitive Church.
AFter the Doctrine of the Primitive Church the fourth Commandment is
ceremonial and abrogated, and for proof hereof ^ say,

(1.)
That I have seen many sayings of Fathers and others, showing this to have
been the Doctrine of the Primitive Church, whereof I will set down some in
this place, more may be found in my other books.

Tertull. lib. adversus Iud.
Denique doceant Iudaei, Though the Jews cannot prove this, yet some
Christians can in their imagination.
Adam sabbatizasse, etc. Lastly, let the Jews prove if they can, that Adam,
Abel, or Noah kept the Sabbath, or that Melchisedech received the Law of the
Sabbath in his Priesthood. But the Jews will reply and say, since this precept
was given by Moses, it was to be observed. It is manifest then that the Law of
the Sabbath was not an eternal nor spiritual, but a temporary precept, which
at length should cease and have an end. By this and other like sayings in his
book against the Jews, it may not only appear what was Tertullians own
judgment in this matter: But also what was the judgment of the Christian
world in his time. If Christians then had bin Sabbath-keepers, Tertullian would
not have written as he has in that book.

Eusebius. hist. lib. 1. cap. 5.
Eusebius there speaking of Adam, Abel, Noah and other godly ancients, has
these words, Nec corporalis itaque circumcisionis rationem hab^erunt, sicut:
neque nos* nec sabbatorum observantiae quemad^odum ^eque ^os.

Aug. de spir. and lit. cap. 14
In illis igitur december praeceptis, excepta Sabbati observatione dicatur, etc.
Among the ten Commandments, except the observation of the Sabbath, let any man
tell me, what is there that is not to be observed of a Christian, whether of
not making or not worshipping Idols, or any other God, besides the only true
God, whether of not taking the name of God in vain, whether of honoring
parents, whether of abstaining from fornication, murder, theft, false
witnes-bearing, adultery, and coveting that which is our neighbors. Which of
these Commandments Will any man say that a Christian ought not to observe the
fourth Commandment, it seems so, and that August. will not gainsay it.
will any man say that a Christian ought not to observe. In the 15. Chapter
following he terms the fourth Commandment, Praeceptum figuratum, a
figurative precept.

Chrysostom. in expos. secund. super Matt. Homil. 49.
Legis iustitia prima, and salutaris, december habet mandata: Primum cognoscere
unum Deum, secundum abstinere ab Idolis, tertium non peierare, quartum colere
sabbatum spirituale, quintum, etc.

Note that our fourth Commandment after Chrysostom. is to keep a spiritual
Sabbath. There are two sorts of Sabbaths, the one literal or carnal, and the
other figurative or spiritual, the former belonged to the Jews, the later to
Christians. This I doubt not was the doctrine of the Primitive Church.

(2.)
That I never saw to my remembrance any saying of Father, Council,
Ecclesiastical writer, cited by any in their Sabbath discourses, whereby it
might certainly be gathered, that so much as one learned man in the Primitive
Church was ever of other judgment, and took himself bound by this
Commandment to sanctify the Lord's Day, one day in a week, or any day or time
whatsoever, note it and search their books.

Answer.
Mr. Cleaver in his book called the Morality of the Law, has there given you
your answer to this particular objection of the Fathers opinions in this point,
where the Reader may see the true meaning of the ancients in this particular,
and how Saint Augustine is wronged and perverted by you. I say for plenary
satisfaction to the Reader, I refer him in this particular of the Fathers
opinion in this point, to peruse these pages of Mr. Cleavers book aforesaid,
129, 130, 131, 132, 133, 134, 135, 136.

Broad. (3.)
That Mr. Calvin speaking of the fourth Commandment, has these words (
^nstit. lib. 2. cap. 8. Sect. 28.) Vmbratile veteres nuncupare solent. The
ancients (not only some of the Ancients) accounted it shadowish, not only
partly shadowish. Of what judgment Mr. Calvin was, may partly appear by that
he writes afterward sect. 34. It a evanescunt nugae Pseudo prophetarum, etc.
Dr. Field excepteth the fourth Commandment out of the number of the Moral
Commandments. Book 5. of the Church. Chap. 22. page 101.

Answer.
In the beginning of this work, you gave occasion to manifest Mr. Calvin's
opinion, and so I did.

As for Dr. Field he does not except the fourth Commandment from the number of
the Moral, but from the number of those that are connaturall with man, and
therefore is more subject to change then the rest: His words are these; These
Laws (says he) are imposed upon men by the very condition of their nature and
creation, as the very condition and nature of a man created by God requires,
that he should honor, love, fear, and reverence him that made him, and
therefore touching the precepts of the first Table (that concerning the Sabbath
excepted) it is clear and evident that they cannot be altered.

Broad.
Mr. Rogers in his Cathe. A^l 7. propos. 3.
Doctrine of the Church of England blames D. B. for teaching (as contrary to
the seventh Article) that the Sabbath was none of the Ceremonies which were
justly abrogated at the coming of Christ; Note well what h^ writes, I write no
more.
again that the Commandment of sanctifying every seventh day (as in the
Mosaicall Decalogue, is natural, moral, and perpetual.

Answer.
It is true that Mr. Rog^rs blames D. B. for teaching that the Sabbath was
none of the Ceremonies which were justly abrogated at the coming of Christ, for
which he is much to blame himself, till he can evince it to be one of them
which he does not.

Broad.
Who so reads what Mr. Rogers has written in the Preface to his book, See
the Preface beginning at the ^0. Section.
shall understand, that I am not the first or only man that have stirred much
in this matter, God grant I be the last that has need to stir much herein, and
that the day of Rest to the Jews be not the cause of contention among
Christians any longer.

The end of the first Treatise.
Answer.
Here you fulfill the Proverb, you wish all were well so you were not the
cause of it, if you may be suffered to speak the last word, you care not,
though all keep silent. I did wish (though it be now unseasonable) when I first
framed this answer, that it might come to the notice and knowledge of
authority, the disturbance of the peace which Mr. Rogers and you have brought
into the Church by endeavoring to discover a shameful nakedness of
contradiction in your Mother, by laboring to set the Articles and the Liturgy
at odds one with another: For how comes it to pass that we are commanded by
the church to pray, Lord incline our hearts to keep an abrogated Ceremony of
the Jews, even in her opinion as he and you would have it.

But the contrary is apparent not only by the Liturgy, but also by the Homily
Of the place and time of prayer, part. 1.
(established and received for the Doctrine of our Church) as you may see it
quoted to this very purpose by Mr. Richard (...) in answer to Mr. Breerowood.
He (...) thus, You come in with the Edicts of Princes as one that would have
the Lord's Day depend upon the constitutions of the Church, and Edicts of
Princes only, and so not to differ from another Holyday: Most wicked popis^^
and worse then popish, and against all famous lights ancient and modern. Or
do you mention Princes Edicts and Churches-Constitutions to gloss with ours?
Ours de^est your Tenet, and you seek herein to wound Church and Prince. For
how they hold of the Lords day that it is directly grounded on the fourth
Commandment, appears in the (...), in the book of Homilies, and in the
Statutes and godly provisions for redress of prophanations. This is the
doctrine of the Church Homily of the place and time of prayer, part. 1. page
125.
By this Commandment (speaking of the fourth) we ought to have a time, as one
day in the week wherein we ought to rest, yea from all lawful and needful
works: For like as it appears by this Commandment, that no man in the six
days ought to be slothful or idle, but diligently to labor in that estate
wherein God has set him, even so God has given express charge to all men
that upon the Sabbath Day, which is now our Sunday, they should cease from all
weekly and work-day labor, to the intent that like as God himself wrought six
days and rested the seventh, and blessed and sanctified it, and consecrated it
to quietness and rest from labor: Even so Gods obedient children should use
the Sunday holily* and rest from their common and daily businesses, and also
give themselves wholly to heavenly exercises of Gods true Religion and service.
So that God does not only command the observation of this Holy Day, but also by
his own example does stir and provoke us to the diligent keeping of the same
Good natural children will not only become obedient to the Commandments of
their parents, but also have a diligent eye to their doings, and gladly follow
the same. So if we will be the children of our heavenily Father, we must be
careful to keep the Christian Sabbath Day, which is the Sunday, not only for
that it is Gods express Commandment, but also to declare our selves to be
loving children in following the example of our gracious Lord and Father. Thus
far the words of the Homily, which (says, Mr. ^yfeild to Mr. (...)) Crosses
all that you hold in this your Treatise, and fully speaks what we hold
Consider it.

1. Our Christian Sabbath is Gods express Commandment in the fourth precept
of the Law enjoined.

2. That it is given of God in express charge to all men.

3. That all men are charged to cease from all weekly and worke-day labor, and
rest from common and daily businesses* and give themselves wholly to heavenly
exercises of Gods true Religion and service.

4. That all this stands in force upon all men for the Lord's Day, from the
example of God himself, who wrought six days, and rested the seventh, and
blessed and sanctified it, and consecrated it to quietness and rest from
labor, which example binds us to imitation when the Lord (...) said the
seventh day is the Sabba^h of the Lord, he enjoined our Sabbath, which is also
the seventh day.


And that this was the proper meaning of our Church, besides the former words,
take these that follow in the Homily also, they are these.

This Example and Commandment of God, the godly Christian people began so
follow, immediately after the ascension of our Lord Christ, and began to choose
From these words (Christain people chose the first day) M. Broad elsewhere ^ath
argued that the doctrine of our Church grants the observation of the Lords
day to be an Eccl^siasticall ordinance, and not an Apostolical precept, which
objection or argument you have fully answered in M. Cleaver his Morality of the
Law, page 137, etc. whither I refer you.
them a standing day of the week to come together in, yet not the seventh day,
which the Jews kept, but the Lord's Day, the day of the Lords Resurrection, the
day after the seventh day, which is the first day of the week. Ten times is
the sanctifying of the Lord's Day in that part of the Homily called the
Commandment of God in all meaning no other then the fourth Commandment. Now
why should some be bold to say, and be suffered to put forth this wicked
doctrine to the casting an aspersion on our famous Church, That to establish
the Lord's Day upon the fourth Commandment is to incline too much to Iudaisme.
This also lays the like aspersion on the Scottish Church, Preface of the
assembly at (...).
which teaches that the sanctification of the Lord's Day is of divine
institution, as well by reason of the divine precept commanding the seventh day
in general to be observed, as of the practice of Christ, which has the force
of a divine precept.

Broad.
A Treatife of the Lord's Day. CHAP. I.
THe Church of Christ hitherto consisted of Jews and Gentiles. And as touching
the believing Jews at Jerusalem, The Church of the Jews, Acts (...). 10.
it is out of question that for many years they observed the same day as
before, for they were zealous of the Law; one part whereof was the observation
of the seventh day. If Baptism would not serve them in stead of Circumcision,
who can believe that the Lord's Day would serve them in stead of the Sabbath.
Yea James and the Elders did not so much as teach them, Acts ^1. ^4.
that the law of Commandments contained in ordinances was abolished, as it is
manifest in that they desire Saint Paul to make it appear by his practice,
that the report of him was nothing, and that he himself also walked orderly
and kept the Law. John 5.
But were they zealous of the Sabbath or not, when the unbeleeving Jews were so
much offended with Christ before time for the carriage of a bed on the Sabbath,
Acts ^1. 28.
and at this time with Saint Paul for profaning the Temple as they supposed,
it cannot be that they would suffer their Sabbath, and other Holy Days to be
profaned by Christians, as long as their Commonwealth stood. It is then out
of question that the Church at Jerusalem a long time observed the Sabbath: and
now, Mention is thrice made of the Lord's Day but always among the Gentiles.
that besides the Sabbath and other Holy Days* enjoined in the Law, they
sanctified the Lord's Day, and so rested from work two days in every week I
cannot believe without some proof, and (...) I have seen none at all.

Answer.
Here in you fight with your own shadow, for it is easily yielded all you say;
but what you would conclude hence, I see not, or what you can well conclude,
from the weakness of the believing Jews, to disprove the Lord's Day to be the
Sabbath; no more then you can prove Baptism to be no Sacrament, because many
of them held themselves still to Circumcision, in all which Paul was ^aine to
comply with them, that by becoming all to all he might win some. Yet still
keeping the Doctrine of Christian liberty whole among the Gentiles Verse 21.
of that 21. Chapter.
where there was no stumbling block, though in his practice he warped toward
the weak Jews amongst them at Jerusalem. And therefore did those, that advised
him to comply with the Jews, declare their faith in the point, and show him
that it was merely done to win upon their weakness, as appears in the 25.
verse (which I would have you take notice of, as well as of the 20. and 24.
verses Of that ^1. Acts.
) where they tell him* as touching the Gentiles that believe we have written
and determined that they observe no such thing.

So that from the practice of the Apostles among the believing Gentiles we are
to gather conclusions for our directions, and not from the practice either of
the Jews, or of the Apostles among the Jews: For you your self will say, that
the Jews (...) observing the Sabbath, because (you say) it was then abrogated.

And (I say) they erred in observing that day Sabbath* for as James and the
elders said to (...) in the 25: verse of that 21. Chap. of the Acts, (...) say
I concerning the Sabbath. That they had taug^t the Gentiles to observe no such
thing as to keep the (...) seventh day, nor yet did they ^each to keep no day
Sabbath, but instituted the Lord's Day there, where they know they might do it
usefully.

Broad.
As touching the Church of the Gentiles, The Church of the Gentiles.
I see no likelihood, that for some years the believing Gentiles came together
rather on one day then on another, but esteeming every day alike, and assembled
as often as they could with convenience. And thus it continued (as may be
thought) until near twenty years after Christ's resurrection, for the text
of Scripture, were first we find mention of any such matter is ^. Car. 16.
which Epistle was written above twenty years after Christ arose. as is said
by some learned; The Epistle was written before the meeting at Troas.
again for a time after the Gospel was preached to the Gentiles, there was no
need of an appointed day, some few only in a City embracing the faith of
Christ.

Answer.
Happily this is true which you say, concerning the Church of the Gentiles
also, That for a long time they used no such Sabbath, but assembled as they
could conveniently; But what does this argue, against the Lord's Day being the
Sabbath? no more then that of the Jews aforesaid. For we are not to judge of
the Church of the Gentiles in their worst, but in their better estate. This new
Creation had at first its Chaos, as well as the old, without form, till things
were perfected by degrees, now a little and then a little: It was no little
while before they were persuaded that fornication was a deadly sin.

The Lord's Day received its Institution at the consummation of this new
Creation, as the Sabbath did at the consummation of the old; though perhaps
this, by reason of the Churches non age had its intermission, like as that had,
being also set a foot in its season, as that was.

But let us not pitch either upon the rudeness of the Jews, or the rawnesse of
the Gentiles to take example by, but see the disposing providence, and
directing hand of God in the Apostles them selves in those times, who were
ordered by the special instinct of the spirit, and we shall see that in the
20th. of John, where in the 19th. verse it is said, that the same day at night
which was the first day of the week, and when the doors was shut, where the
Disciples were assembled for fear of the Jews, came Jesus etc. and so again in
the 26th. verse: it is said, That eight days after, again the Disciples were
within and Thomas with them, Then came Jesus etc. Which shows Gods special
hand in assembling them on the day of Christ resurrection, and the Spirits care
to record it for our learning, together with Christ's approbation and blessing
thereof by his presence.

Neither is there the least mention made of the Jewish Sabbath, but it is
reckoned in the Text as the rest, ( eight days after) and so Paul he passes
over the Jewish Sabbath as an ordinary day in the 20. Acts 6. and honors
only the first day of the week when he says, That he abode at Troas seven
days, and the first day of the week the Disciples being come together, etc.

Dr. Heylyn, Part. 2. page 22. to make the matter good, bids us take notice
that Paul had tarryed at (...) seven days before this meeting; But we may do
better to take notice that he wrongs the Text, which implies no such thing, but
that his stay was but seven days in all: for the 6. verse having briefly told
us Paul's journall from Philippi to Tro^s, it also shows us the number of
days that he spent there, which were but seven in all (where we abode seven
days says he) and then the 7. verse historizeth to us, the remarkable
example of Paul and the Disciples touching the first day of the week only,
being silent of the rest. And upon the first day of the week, when the
Disciples, etc. And as touching that 1 Cor. 16. which you mention. The words of
Paul there seem to take for granted the foreknowledge and acquaintance that
the Christian Cori^ths already had of that day to be the Lords. And if so be
the Lord's Day be not the Sabbath, why was it kept of them, and is it now kept
of us, in parallel to the Sabbath, weekly, and not anniversarily or yearly, as
Easter Day and other remembrances of Christ are? and as all the times of
Commemorations which the Church of her own accord dedicated have ever and only
been; as we see by the feasts of Puri^, and of dedication, among the Jews, and
so now amongst us Christ^^^ and Easter, etc.

Broad.
We read that the Disciples were called first Christians at Antioch, though by
whose me^^^ it be not said in the Acts, but as touching the meeting on the
first day of the week, Acts 11. 26.
we neither find where it began nor by whom. This (in my judgment) is very
probable if not certain, that this manner of assembling on the first day of the
week, was approved by the Apostles, as was the name of Christians: Yea and
Christ himself may seem to approve it likewise, in as much as on this day, he
revealed those mysteries to the beloved Disciple. So long it was between the
writing of the first Epistle to the Corinths, and the Revelation.
About forty years after this order began, the name Lord's Day was given to
the first of the week, which name had it been given when Saint Paul wrote his
first Epistle to the Corinths, and Saint Luke the Acts, it is probable that one
of them would have used it, and yet it is not improbable that this name
Lord's Day was given as soon as the day began to be in any great account.

Answer.
It is true that in Antioch the Disciples were first called Christians, and be
the means what it will, it was not without the special hand of God, nor
without a special prophecy and promise as appears in the 65 of Isaiah 15.
Where the name of the Jews is cried down, and the name of the Christians set up
Dr. Hall upon the place.
. Ye shall leave your name as a curse unto my chosen, for the Lord God shall
slay you, and call his Mark, God himself was the Father, and gave the name,
who ^ver was the Godfather.
serva^^^ by another name. And as thus God prophesied the alteration of the old
name into a new, in the 15th. verse, so in the 17. verse, he prophesied the
alteration of the Creation from old to new, together with the forgetfulness of
the old by reason of the joyful remembrance of the new: which was yet further
prophesied by the Psalmist in the 118. Psalm. 22. 24. The stone which the
builders refused, that is, crucified and cast off, is the head of the corner,
that is, is raised again of God and made our salvation, for this is the sense
thereof, as you may see in the 4th. Acts 10, 11, 12. And what follows in the
Prophet of David? That this work of raising up Christ again by his mighty
power is a thing mavelous in our ey^s. And that therefore this is the Day
which the Lord Is not this divine institution, and a sufficient reas^n for the
denomination of the Lord's Day? Dr. Andrews is expr^sse for it, in his 13 Sermon
upon the Resurection, page 529. Says he, How came it to be the Lords day? but
that as it is in the Psalm, the Lord made it? And why made he it? but because
on it, the stone cast aside (that is Christ) was made the head-stone of the
corner, that is, because then the Lord rose.
has made, for us to rejoice and be glad in it, as it follow^th in the 23 and
24 verses of that 118 Ps^lme.

Object. But it will be objected, that hereby is no particular day denoted, but
indefinitely the time of the publication of the Gospel.

Answ. To which I answer, That the promise of the accomplishment of our (...)
3. 15. on the very particular day of Christ's (...) is eminently meant hereby,
as is evident by comp^ring this place with 13 Acts 32. 33. These words. 32. And
we declare unto you glad tidings, how that the promise which was made unto the
fathers. 33. God has fulfilled the same unto us their children, in that he
has raised us. Jesus again, as it is also written in the second Psalm: Thou
art my ^onne this day have I begotten thee. As touching the meeting on the
first day of the week, which you say we neither find where, nor by whom it
began. I have even now showed you the original of it, both for time and
persons; to wit, on the day of Christ's resurrection by the Apostles, and the
day fennight after. Had they only met the day of his re^urrection, we might
have thought it had been only accidental, and not of special providence; or
if it had been recorded, that they had met any other day besides, it might
somewhat have weakened the force of this argument: But meeting twice, and it
being recorded to be on the same day (together with the effects thereof) it
does wonderfully prove the thing to be of purposed providence, both on Gods
part in assembling them then, and on Christ's part in appearing to them, thereby
to give original to this Ordinance, which accordingly has been so observed
ever since. And therefore it is not likely that the Apostles took it up by
approbation from inferior Christians (nor yet that Christ honored it only by
way of approbation but also of institution, for we see what honor he gave to
it a principio, by his often appearings thereon, and the gift of the Holy
Ghost, John 20. 22. on this day, which you so Sophister like pass over, and
only instance in that which seems to serve your turn) but that it was taken
up from them.

Though this confessed approbation of Christ's, grants it to be of the same
authority with Baptism, which was brought in by John Baptist and ratified by
Christ. And if the people of the Jews held the Baptism of John to be from
heaven and not of men, though they had no express command for it but only his
practice (and though the chief Priests and Elders believed him not) only for
this reason, because they held John as a Prophet, Matthew. 21. 25, 26. and this
their belief of John and his Baptism, producing suitable fruits of grace and
holiness in them, was approved of Christ, verse. 32. I wonder how any dare deny
the Lord's Day to be of divine institution, and affirm it humane, that know and
acknowledge Paul to be an Apostle (the least whereof was greater then John
Baptist) and the thing of such great consequence and benefit to the Church, and
otherwise so backed: But let us labor to imitate these contemned Publicanes
and harlots in believing this point of the Lord's Day to be from heaven by
divine institution, and not of men by humane ordination, suffering Paul's
practice as an Apostle to overrule (...) as John Baptist as a Prophet did them,
and framing our practice to ou^ faith like them: And so, obeying him and his
Ministers, let us not doubt in like case the approcation of Christ in our
behalfes, above the over-wi^e unbeleevers be they (...).

And you shall (...) second Treatise, page 22. (...) that, o^ taken (...) the
Lord's Day is in some sort de iure divino, in some sort, namely not by personal
but by delegate authority, that is, not prescribed personally and immediately by
God himself, but only by virtue of that authority which by God was committed
to the Apostles, for the ordering and governing of his Church, but being taken
for divine Ordinance or Commandment it is not de iure divine. And further he
says, To entitle a Commandment divine is required. 1. That the authority be
divine whereby it is ordained. 2. That the Author himself that ordains be so
also, that is, that both the power whereby, and the person that does immediately
establish it, be divine. Which divine authority is confessed to be in the
Apostolical constitutions, but the immediate Authors are denied to be divine.

Now as all other events and actions receive their denomination from their
immediate not remote causes: so the constitutions of the Apostles, although
they proceed originally from the instinct and aspiration of the Holy Ghost,
Gods spirit yet proceeding immediately from the institutions of the Apostles
themselves, which delivered them unto the Church in form of Commandments,
they are to be termed humane constitutions, and not properly divine. Thus you
have Mr. Breerewoods opinion of the divine authority of the Lord's Day, much
more Orthodox then yours, only in answer to this later part, where he says
that Apostolical actions are to be termed humane, from that principle, That
all actions are to receive their denominations from their immediate not remote
causes. He might have considered how that all the new Testament is called the
word of God from the remote Cause the Spirit of God, which inspired it, though
the Apostles and Evangelists writ it (which were men) and that by no express
Commandment that we find.

Bishop White averreth against T. B. page 91. That our weekly observation of
the Lord's Day in the time of the Gospel is an holy and godly practice, for it
is warranted by the example of the Apostles, and those Primitive Churches which
were planted by the Apostles, and which received their Ecclesiastical precepts
and constitutions by tradition from the Apostles, so that the Apostles first
founded it, as he further affirms, page 97. says he, It is an ignorant speech
to term it a popish tradition, for popish traditions had not their beginnings
from the Apostles. So also page 189. We believe says he, that the holy
Apostles ordained the Sunday to be a weekly Holy Day, because the Primitive
Fathers, who lived some of them in the Apostles days, and others of them
immediately after, and who succeeds them in Apostolical Churches did
universally maintain the religious observation of this day. So again, page
192. It is probable that in the Churches at Corinth and Galatia, the Lord's Day
was made a weekly Holy Day by the Apostles (for they principally governed those
Churches at this time) 1 Cor. 16. 1, 2. (And yet Doctor Heylyn labors to
prove this ordination of Paul to the Galathians to be upon a Sabbathday, and
not upon the Lord's Day.) And again, page 192. It could not possibly have come
to pass that all and every Apostolical Church throughout the universal world
should so early, and in the beginning of their plantation, have consented
together to make the Sunday a weekly Service-day, unless they had been thus
directed by their first founders the holy Apostles themselves, etc.

Lastly, it is a true that a long time after Christ's Resurrection was the name
of Lord's Day given to the first day of the week I have showed before the
significant use of the Sabbath, paffing under the name of the first day of the
week in scripture before it come to be styled the Lord's Day.
, to wit, when the first day of the week began to be most currantly received
for the Christian Sabbath: As the name of Christians was then given, when
Christianity was generally professed and received, and yet was there a Sabbath
before professed by many, as well as there were Christians and Christianity
before they were so called: So that what you say of the one, you may as well
say of the other.

Broad.
Now I have before acquainted thee with the agreement between divines touching
this day, namely that ordinarily (some necessary businesses excepted) it is to
be spent wholly in religious exercises. The difference be^ween them stands in
this point. Some will have the Lord's Day to be the Commandment of Christ, or
his Apostles, as the Sabbath was of God heretofore. Others will have it to be
only an Ecclesiastical tradition or constitution, yet such an one as is of
greater authority then many other Zanehius has this saying, Traditionum enim
Ecclesiasticarum, quaedam sunt Apostolicae, qu^dam mere Ecclesiasticae. He
instanceth in the Lord's Day.
Certe quas constat ab Apostolis fuisse profectas hae plus habeant authoritatis
quam relic. Red. de trad. Eccles.

Answer.
It were to be wished that how-ever Divines differ in opinion concerning the
Morality, that yet they agreed in the divinity or holy practice of the Sabbath.
But there are of your opinion that stick not to say, how that the Sabbath is
but an ordinary Holy Day; and that the vacant hours which are besides the
public employments ordained by the Church For number and season.
are of the same nature with working days, and their practice is accordingly:
So that if we may judge the tree by the fruit, then may we judge their opinions
by their practice which savoureth of the flesh, and not of the spirit, whose
furthest progress in the practicke part is (like some of the choicest
heathens) to regulate their actions by the light of Nature. And happily they
have the lantern of notionall divinity shining in their heads And so take up
a form of godliness, but deny the power thereof, for seeing they see not, and
hearing they hear not, but are wholly ignorant of the understanding with the
heart, which Christ speaks of, Matt. 13. 15. They see the Law, but Gods end
in it, to bring the soul sensibly sentenced under sin and wrath, to need and
seek a Savior, and to keep the soul restless till it enjoy him, and accept
him on any terms God does offer him, by the sense of the depth of their filth
and misery they experiment not in them, as appears by their pride and I
shmaelitish persecuting the sons of the free woman. They being flesh which
lusts against the Spirit, and of carnal minds, which is enmity against God, do
persecute him that is borne after the Spirit as was prophesied, Gal. 4. 29. For
the flesh despises and opposes spiritual worship and spiritual worshippers,
and being spiritually blind, sticks not to speak evil of things they know
not. And professing themselves to be wise, they become fools. It was ever the
lot of truth to be rejected of the builders. Many great Rabbis (professing the
key of knowledge) were greatest enemies to the truth, as the truth is in
Christ, that is, to the sincere pro^ession and practice of Christianity. Christ
must be set as a sign and butt of contradiction. Offenses must come, but woe
be to them by whom they come. For carnal Protestants are held off from the true
embracing of Christ, because they see the truth and sincerity of Christ every
where so resisted and hated, by those that are great and wise in their
Generation. For Holiness in the forehead was a chief grace, but now with us
it was become a chief disgrace, in so much that the despised members of Christ
received extreme discouragement (except they have such a measure of grace as
raises them above contempt) to profess holiness to the Lord openly, the
Devil spewing out after the Church a flood of poison to drown her But be it
as it will. I pray both the scorner and the scorned, to peruse considerately,
the one for terror, the other for encouragement, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20,
21. verses of the Epistle of Jude.
(a cold clymate for Religion to dwell in) which they (embracing this present
world) use (as workmen do their tools) to get money and preferment under the
color of an outward calling, for the inward they look not after; But for the
knowledge of that wherein the life and soul of Religion consists, to wit,
Christ and him crucified, in a saving sense, they are as ignorant in it as
Nicodemus was in the doctrine of Regeneration, which though he had read it
before in the new Covenant ( Ezekiel. 11. 19.) yet seeing he saw not, no more do
these, and therefore no wonder if they cry down the authority of the
Lord's Day, that have no acquaintance with the Lord of the day, but instead of
serving him as their Lord and Master, they serve themselves of him, making his
Gospel (wherein they should labor in season and out of season) to be their
stalking horse, to convey them the more plausibly to their prey of preferment
here on earth, and leave that of Heaven for such fools as they call Puritanes.
I mean not non-conformists, except they be such as they mean, that is, Men
that make not Religion to consist in knowledge, but in living according to
their knowledge in inward and outward holiness, not being vainly puffed up by
a fleshly mind with a voluntary obedience of willworship, or mere formal
holiness, or moral excellencies, or civil and natural righteousness; but
holding the Head, laboring to increase with the increase of God, and to grow
in the excellent and humbling knowledge of the simplicity of Christ, to the
praise of the glory of his grace; in a word, such as the Scripture calls
Saints, and profane men, Precisians.

No men greater enemies to preaching. A conscionable Minister, that is painful
in the discharge of his calling, laboring to save the souls of his flock,
preaching twice a day, and the name of a Lecturer (so called for distinction
sake) stinks in there nostrils, as they do in Gods. I wonder how such men come
to be called Divines or Preachers, that thus defile their own nest, accounting
soule-saving preaching, foolishness, and in a spiteful pride calumniating
those that with conscience and diligence labor in the work of the Lord.

How necessary is it, think we, then to maintain the Prerogative of the
Sabbath, when men of this Coat (like swine) tread holy things under their feet.

But let such ponder that place of the Evangelist, and apply it, Matt. 5. 19.
Whosoever shall break one of these least Commandments, and teach men so, he
shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven.

But to come to the difference it self, I answer, That I know no Divines that
do affirm Christ to have left it in express mandatory terms that that day
should be kept Sabbath nor yet Holy Day; for indeed there is no such
Commandment extant in the new Testament: But they say, That it is likely
Christ did teach it to his Apostles before his death As he did the place of
meeting after his Resurrection, Matt. 28. 16.
, which though it be more then I know, yet sure I am their meeting thus
emphatically recorded in Scripture to be on that very day, and the day
sennight, of Christ's Resurrection, and answerably practiced after by Paul, is
doubtless of binding authority, and to an exemplary use and end: And how-ever
it be, that Christ did or did not, teach them by word of mouth before his
death, questionless in that thing, at that time, they were especially taught
of God, the instinct and secret guidance of the Spirit being in stead of a
Commandment to them (though perhaps for present they were ignorant of their
own practice, as Mary was, when she powered the box of ointment upon Christ's
head, that she did it for his burying) and doing the same thing that day
sennight; We have just cause to think that Christ had an hand in it, though it
be not expressed in the word, he having appeared to them the day before, and
the same effect ensuing upon the same occasion, to wit, his appearing to them
being met again.

And therefore what though the Puritanes (as Bishop White styles them, from T.
B. page 185.) cannot show the Lord's Day to be made a Sabbath by any written Law
(he means no doubt in the new Testament) may not the unerring spirit of the
Apostles suffice us, seeing that himself says, page 119. The inspiration of
^od is of as great efficacy and authority as his writing, wherewith the
Apostles doubtless were directed in the instituting of an exemplary perpetual
observation to the Church.

And whereas (I say) the instinct of the Spirit was as a Law or Commandment to
the Apostles, in this particular of instituting the Lord's Day upon Christ's
Resurrection. I would to this purpose commend the consideration of Moses his
instituting the Sabbath, upon the fall and gathering of a double portion of
Mannah in 16. Exodus which yet we do not find in terms to be taught him of
God then, when that Law of Mannah was commanded, ver. 5. Fulke upon the 1*
Revel. is peremptory and says, That for the prescription of the Lord's Day
before any other of the seven, they had without doubt either the express
Commandment of Christ before his ascension when he gave them precepts
concerning the kingdom of God, and the ordering and government of his Church,
Acts 1. 2. or else the certain direction of his Spirit, that it was his will
and pleasure it should be so, and that also according to the Scriptures, seeing
that there is the same reason of sanctifying that day in which our Savior
Christ accomplished out Redemption, and the restitution of the world by his
Resurrection from death, that was of ^anctifying the day, in which the Lord
rested from the Creation of the world. Nor can it be denied (I think) but that
the Apostles had many things taught them privately by Christ, which afterward
upon occasion they published, some by precept, and some by example Matt 10. 27.
. And we may be the rather induced that Paul had received it from Christ, if
so be we consider how ingenuous he is to acknowledge what he had not received
in the 1 Cor. 7. 25. As concerning virgins (says he) I have no Commandment of
the Lord, but I give you mine advice. And Zanchy observes that he taught them
not so much by words, as by the efficacy of the Spirit, which being their
unerrable guide in all things concerning the Church, we may well allow to be
ours in this matter of the Lord's Day by virtue of their exemplary Ordinance.
Their practice and example, I doubt not you will say, had been enough without
precept (and I remember none they have in any express terms from Christ) for
the ordaining Pastors and Ministers, nor do I think you will deny them to be
iure divino. But granting this is not commanded by Christ, yet are you no
gainer by it. For I do the rather think that because no express mention is
made of it in the new Testament by way of Commandment, it should seem the
rather to be the Sabbath. Thus Eatonus de Sabbato, page 69. de institutione and
iure diei dominicae ait. Non opus erat mandato novo, cum vetus illud mandatum
de observando Sabbato in vigore esset, and adhuc est, iam autem novum praceptum
far de re illa, quae veteri pracepto stabilita fuerat, esset vetus praceptum
abolore. Christus autem non venit abolere legem sed implere. And indeed God is
most precise as we see, both in Innocence and under the Jews, to prescribe the
days of his solemn worship by special Commandment, and so certainly would
he have done this if it had been a new thing; but being not commanded in the
new Testament, it ought the rather to be taken for granted in the matter of it,
from the fourth Commandment And indeed to any sober mind that knows the Law
of the Sabbath, these things are sufficient to let us know that this is the
Sabbath.
, and in the manner to be regulated by the Apostles example (which should be of
force to us, as well as David's eat^ng the Shewbread was to the Jews) else God
would never have let such a day, which has ever in the Church been received as
a weekly Sabbath, to have been without an express Commandment; especially
considering how precise he was in that point, even son the days that were
appointed for the solemning of the Type in the Time of the Jews. And yet as
(...) says, page 70. Nulla est conseque^ti^, Non (...) dixit and fecit Dominus
noster de quibus (...) ^pud Ev^ngelistas facta est mentio, satis au^^ (...)

It is no new thing, both to belee^e a thing to be (...) divi^, for which yet
there is none other commandment (expressed then practice, as also to believe
that it was commanded of God, though there be no specification of any such
Commandment in holy writ, as for instance in the sacrificing that was before
the Law, where find you any Commandment to sacrifice, before you find Abel
sacrificing? And yet (I believe) you doubt not but there was a command or
something equivalent. Neither can you other-wayes think, but when Noah at his
going into the Arc, took with him beasts both clean and unclean, he was
instructed from heaven, which was which, though no such instruction appear.

Again did not Christ, in the instituting of the new Sabbath, imitate his
father in his manner of instituting the old in the old Creation: For what
Commandment did God give at first? Was it any other then a declaration of his
own practice to Adam, whom he had then extraordinarily made, that he by his
practice should teach it to his posterity? So does not Christ the like? For
because he rested by rising on the first day of the week from the work of our
Redemption and re-creation, therefore did he bless and hallow it, by his
example to his Apostles, whom he had extraordinarily called (that they by their
example should do the like to others) with those many manifestations of
himself, and admirable blessings, which he then bestowed on them. Which
practice of Christ does wonderfully make good both the Morality of the Sabbath,
and justifies the alteration of it also to the first day of the week. For
whereas God at the first blessed it, that is, appointed it to be a day wherein
he would especially confer spiritual blessings. We see Christ accordingly does
still on this day bless and enlighten his Apostles, by appearing to them being
together glorifying God.

Now if you will say that Adams posterity (whom in your first Chapter you say,
it is probable, had they continued in Innocence, should always have followed
Gods example in working six days and resting the seventh) should have
sanctified the last of seven by Tradition from God and Ad^ms examples, I will
easily yield you that by the like tradition from Christ and his Apostles
example, we do now keep the first day of the week.

Broad.
CHAP. II. The latter Opinion maintained.
THe Primitive Christians for the most part held the latter opinion, as I
gather by this that follows. Justin Martyr in his second Apology writes
after this manner. Apol. ad calcem,
We hold these assemblies on the Sunday because on that day God began to make
the world, and also our Savior Jesus Christ arose from the dead. Hereby it is
manifest that Justin knew not of a Commandment from Christ or his Apostles,
for should a Rabbin yield a reason of their meeting on the Sabbath, would it
not be because God had so commanded it, who on that day rested after the
Creation and sanctified it? And so would Justin no doubt had he took their
meeting to be enjoined by Christ or his Apostles, we hold these Assemblies on
the Sunday because Christ has so commanded, who on that day rose again from
the dead. Thus I am sure some would be ready to write in these days.

Answer.
The opinion of the Ancients (how-ever you may force them to speak) was that
one day in a week, or the seventh day, was still of force by virtue of the
fourth Commandment, (and that the individual first day of the week was from
Christ or his Apostles or both) as appears in that they call the sanctifying
of the Lordsday a keeping of the Sabbath. So Ignatius (who ad Magnes. charge
those Christians to work on the Jews seventh day) does yet say. Let every of
us keep Sabbath spiritually (...) ad Magn^s. (...)
: (speaking in opposition to the Jews manner of superstitious Sabbatizing) so
that he cries down both their day and manner of hallowing it (...) of this
page 50. in margin. (...) temp. ^51. if his.
, and yet maintains the Sabbath to be yet still on foot, and exhorts them
to the right keeping it. St. Augustine also says. So we also sanctify the
Sabbath the Lord saying, Ye shall not do any work therein. And as Mt. Richard
Byfeild says, The Apostle to the Heb. 4. 9. Doubted not to apply the name of
Sabbath to the Christian people and our Re^^, saying, That the people of God
have their Sabbatisme left unto them. For humane authorities in this point, I
further refer you to the 21 and 26. Chap. of Mr. Richard Byfeild.

But to show your leger-de-maine I proceed to that of Justin Martyr. In which
(I say) he does as Paul sometimes does concerning his Apostleship,
Demonstrating it by such arguments as do properly constitute an Apostle. So
Justin in his Apology for Christians does first show the reason of the
Christian Sabbath, i. e. Our new Creation by Christ, who by his resurrection
brought light out of darkness in the first day of the Creation.

But had you looked further (as no doubt you did) you might have seen his
opinion to be more then you make it, even witnessing Christ to have taught it
to his Apostles, as you shall find it quoted by Mr. Richard Byfeild Chap. 21.
page 124.
. So that you deal with Justin Martyr as men deal with Mag-pyes, cut their
tongues shorter to teach them to speak what they would have them. And yet a
R^bbin might have laid down the Reason and concealed the Commandment without
solloecisme or error, unless you will say it was a fault in Rabbi Moses, for
so he proscribeth the Israelites to answer their children, when they should
ask them concerning the Passover, as you may see in the 12. Chap. of Exodus
26. 27. so also in the 13 Exodus 13, 14, 15, 16. You shall see the reason of a
duty delivered from the parent to the children, by precept from Moses, without
any specification of the Commandment it self.

Broad.
Si dies observare non licet, and menses, (...) lib. Com. (...) E^^st. ad G^^.
and tempora and annos, nos quoque simile crimen incurrimus, quartum Sabbati
observantes and parascenem and diem dominicum and ieiunium Quadragesima. See
the place and note that he does not yield a peculiar reason for the observation
of the Lord's Day.

Constantinus imperator concessit rusticis, Eusebius. de vita Co^st. lib. 4. Cap.
19.
ut diebus dominicis agrorum culturae, pro ut ipsi viderint fore necessarium
inservirent. Idoneum vero precationi tempus salutarem diem dominicum
constituebat, quippe qui tum vere praecipu^s est, tum hand dubie primus.

Note the reason Eusebius rendereth of this constitution of Constantine, and
consider withal that Constan^ine would not have so constituted, if in his
judgment our Savior Christ had before appointed the Lord's Day to this end;
Did ever a Christian Prince simply decree that the Lords Supper should be
administered? As many Christian Princes and Councels as have simply decreed the
observation of the Sunday, were doubtless of this opinion.

Answer.
For answer to this, I refer you to Mr. Richard Byfoild, Chap. 29. where the
Reader may herein receive satisfaction.

Broad.
As touching modern writers Calvin says, (...) lib. 2 cap. 8. sect. 34.
Veteres subrogarunt diem dominicum in locum Sabbati.

Zanchius says, In 4 Prece^t.
that the Lord's Day, Nullum habet Domini mandatum.

Dr. Field says, Book 4. Church, Chap. 20.
that the Lord's Day is an Apostolical tradition not precept.

The Book of Homilies (not to stand upon other) says, Homily of the place and
time of pray^r.
That Christian people chose the first day which is as much in effect as that
it is not Christ's Commandment. Will any man say that the people of Israel
chose the seventh day? Now of this opinion I am, and these are my reasons.

(1.)
Had Christ or his Apostles commanded to sanctify the Lord's Day, mention
should have been made thereof in Gods word, for the Scripture contains in it
all things needful for our instruction. Seeing then we find not mention of
any such matter, I cannot believe that Christ or his Apostles gave Commandment
to sanctify the Lord's Day.

Object. Every thing to be done by us is not mentioned in Scripture.

Answ. No marvel though some particulars be not mentioned, but consider that
were it ^ods express Commandment we should sanctify a day, this were a
matter of great moment concerning all men, and very often, and therefore it may
well seem a wonder, that Christ and his Apostles should be so silent herein,
as never to exhort any man to sanctify the Sabbath or Lord's Day, nor to
reprove any for the profaning of either of them. We see how often Moses and
the Prophets called upon the Israelites to sanctify the Sabbath, and how often
and earnestly many now cry out for the sanctifying of the Lord's Day no man can
be ignorant.

Object. The Precept of the Sabbath was in force during Christ's time, yet
Christ never moved the people to sanctify the Sabbath, nor reproved any for
profaning thereof.

Answ. Though it were then in force, yet its strength began to wear a pace
from the days of John Baptist, and therefore no marvel, seeing the Sabbath
and other Ceremonies were shortly to give up the ghost, though Christ passes
them over as he does, contenting himself to preach the Kingdom of God, which
is not meat nor drink, (nor times nor places) but righteousness and peace,
and joy in the Holy Ghost, Romans 14.

(2.)
Saint Luke takes upon him to write the Acts of the Apostles, and it were very
strange that if any thing had been done by the Apostles concerning the changing
of the Sabbath into the Lord's Day, he should wittingly omit such a weighty
matter. In the 15 Acts, he gives us to understand that after the Gospel was
preached to the Gentiles, some would have them to be circumcised, and and keep
the Law of Moses, one part of which Law was the sanctifying of the Sabbath or
seventh day: Hereupon the Apostles and Elders came together to consult, at
which meeting there was not one word (that we find) of changing or observing
any day whatsoever, although no doubt they which urged Circumoi^ion urged the
Sabbath in like manner, For Baptism might serve In stead of Circumcision as
well as the Lord's Day in stead of the (...). Had they before made a Dec^ee,
concerning the changing of the Sabbath into the Lord's Day, (...) just occasion
was (...) same, To handle the point and not to in^^mate so much as any
difference between days, if any there were, had not been wisdom in Paul,
especially writing to strangers, the Romans must needs have thought him
contrary to their former teachers.
or if they had (...) something concerning this matter. After this time it is
not likely that the Apostles (...) met together in Councell^gain.

(3.)
Had the (...) would have charged all men to observe the same Decr^ee, (...)
one man to esteem of days one way, and to another another way as he does,
Romans 14. 5. One man esteems one day above another, another esteem th everyday
alike. Let every man be fully persuaded in his mind. The Apostles I know used
to bear for a time with the weak, but they would not have born with those who
held new and ungodly opinions, as he did that esteemed every day alike, if
every day had not been alike. He that esteemed every day alike, no doubt used
every day alike, and had this been tolerable in any sort, were it Gods
Commandment to sanctify any day? This Chapter does much trouble some in these
days, and they fear not to term him weak there after Saint Paul that
esteems every day alike, howsoever he be strong that esteems every meat
alike. But is he to be termed weak that esteems a day sanctified by God
like unto all other days? rather ignorant and ungodly, would not Saint Paul
presently have such an one instructed in this matter? The weak brother
esteemed one meat above another, and one day above another, the strong brother
believed that he might eat all things and so esteemed every day alike,
according to Paul, and it is good holding of Paul herein.

(4.)
Saint Paul alone by way of Doctrine teaches of days, Romans 14. Col. 2. Gal. 4.
he teaches of them purposely in three several Epistles, in these he
delivers as much as is needful to be taught about this matter. And now all
that can be gathered by his Doctrine is, that there is no more account to be
made of one day then of another. Saint Paul's Doctrine (says Mr. F^x) puts
no difference nor observation in times and days, In the sum of Saint Paul's
doctrine before Acts and Monuments.
It is a true saying and worthy of all men to be received.

In a word Christ and his Apostles never commanded to observe a day, they never
reproved for not observing. Saint Paul reproved the Galathians for observing
days, and writing to the Romans and Colossians he shows the indifferency of
days as of meats, speaking of one as of the other, among these he had never
been. The Galathians turned from the Gospel he had preached to them, so that he
had diverse times just occasion to show his mind fully in this point. Yet does
he never so much as intimate the least difference between days, or between
days and meats. Now what Christ or his Apostles could do more, to make us
know that Religion is not placed in the observation of days I cannot imagine.

Answer.
I have in the introduction of this Treatise shown you Mr. Calvin's opinion of
the fourth Commandment, Com. on Genesis 2.
to be universal and perpetual, and how? but by the succession of the first
day of the week to the last.

Zanchy says, In 4. Pracept.
Morale est mandatum quatenus praecepit ut e septem diebus unum consecremus,
etc. quatenus tale nunquam fuit abrogatum nec abrogari potest. And yet if the
fourth Commandment be not observed in the Lord's Day it is abrogated.

The Book of Homilies makes this good likewise of the divinum ius of the
Lord's Day, as it is the seventh day, from the fourth Commandment as has been
showed before; and so has your objection been answered in respect of the
peoples choosing the Lord's Day, by a reference to Mr. Cleaver his Morality of
the Law, page 137.

And now of this opinion am I.

I have ever granted you that the Christian Sabbath is not by any express
precept from Christ or his Apostles enjoined, nor is it needful, Nay it had
been prejudicial as Eatonus observ^th, page 69. Novum praeceptum far dear
illa, quae v^teri praecep^o stabilit^ fu^rat esset v^tus praec^^tum abolere,
quod ^^ristus venit impl^re, to be due jure divino, but forsooth the Sabbath
must be jure humano.
for if upon this ground you will conclude it to be an arbitrary practice and
not de iure divino They can allow Tithes
, you may as well cry down the writings of the Apostles, and turn Anabaptist
in point of baptizing of Infants. For as for the Scriptures, what express
precept of Christ's, have we to his Apostles for writing of them? and (...) the
Epistles were most of them occasionally written by the Apostles, and yet who of
us for these reasons denies them to be the work of God, universal and (...)
divi^o? F^urth Po^ke Church, ch^p. (...).
For as Field says in answer to the Papists, (...) the imperfection of the
Scriptures because they were written by the Apostles and Apostolical men of
their own motions, and not by Commandment from Christ (which is a parallel
argument to this of the Christian Sabbath and the answer equal to both) who
knows not (says he) that the Scriptures are not of any private motion, but
that the holy (...) of God were moved, impelled and carried by the Spirit of
truth the the performance of this work, doing nothing without the instinct of
the Spirit which was (...) the^ a Commandment. And why may not all these
reasons and grounds warrant, and give equal force to their practice in the
point of our Christian Sabbath or Lord's Day as well as to their writing of
Scripture. So speaks Dr. Ames. med. page 359. Si dies bac dominica conced^^ur
fuisse Aposto^^^ (...) author it as (...) est divina, quia divino Spirit^
agebantur Apostoli, non minus in Sacris institutionibus, quam in ipsa doctrina
Ev^ngelii, vel verbo vel script is proponenda. Especially seeing that the same
things that accompanied the Gospel, did accompany the Sabbath, the better to
approve it to be of God, to wit, The gift of the holy Ghost.

And now we know there is nothing more ordinary in Scripture, then for God to
grace the first institutions of his Ordinances, with extraordinary tokens of
his savor, which are of an argumentative nature, and of an establishing and
instituting force. As at the first setting up of the San^drin among the Jews,
Numb. 11. 25. Every one of the seventy Elders prophesied for a while, to
testify that their calling was from heaven. And though diverse others besides
these have had the Spirit of Prophecy bestowed on them, that yet nothing
detracts from Gods sealing the ordination of this Council or Sanedrin by the
Seventies prophesying. So though Christ appeared to his Disciples on other
days, besides the first day of the week, yet it detracteth not from his
instituting and authorizing that day by his remarkable apparitions and
operations thereon, as Dr. Heylyn would insinuate, part. 2. page 13.

Again at the instituting of the Leviticall priesthood and sacrifices, there
came a fire from the Lord, and consumed the burnt offering: also at Christ's
baptizing we see how extraordinarily the Spirit came down in likeness of a
Dove; and so at Peter's first preaching to the Gentiles, what an extraordinary
work was there wrought, Acts 10. 44. And may not we well conclude the divinity
of the Lord's Day from these manifold rare occurrences which fell out in the
practice or usage of it We have David's example in a like case, for in the 1 Chronicles. 22. he there concludes Ieruselem to be the place that God had chosen
for his more solemn worship, by that special token of Gods favor to it, in
delivering it from the destroying Angel.
, and such as are most remarkably and eminently recorded in Scripture,
mentioning the Time as well as the things themselves, As, That Christ appeared
to them on the first day of the week, and the first day of the week they had
the gifts of the Holy Ghost given them, and on the Lords day Saint John was
ravished in the Spirit (not any other day in the week having the honor to be
denominated the day of his appearance in all the New Testament, though no doubt
he did appear to them on other days of the week, besides the first, in those
other times of his appearances) And why is all this? But to give the better
authority and estimate to that day: Which we may the rather judge, because that
since then God has shown extraordinary judgments upon the breakers and
prophaners of it, which being frequently and remarkably instanced, I will
refer you for them to the Martyr-booke, Practice of Piety, and Mr. Richard
Byfeild, page 99. 100. 101. As also if we consider the benefits, which
nationally we have enjoyed thereby, above all other Protestant Churches, of
Peace, Plenty, and also powerful Preaching and Professing Which now begin to
leave us, and to decline together with the Sabbaths declension. For as one
piously observes, The Ark shakes through the old Sins and new Doctrines of
our land.
for a long season, and which do experimentally and personally redound to the
due observers of it, how extraordinarily and feelingly they delight themselves
in the Lord, according to that promise Isai. 58. ult. So that then believe it
for the works sake, as Christ says in another case. And indeed Argumentum ab
effectis, is an argument of no small evidence and power with those that
profess Christianity in the power of it: The want of which medium in the
experiences of men (either not at all wrought in them, or else not taken notice
of by them) is the cause of so many false conclusions in these days, as well
as it was amongst the Galathians, till Paul (a man of spirit) put them in
mind, Gal. 3. 2. And observe it as a maine argument in this way of experience,
That at the first beginning of men's conversions, when God enlighteneth and
convinces the Conscience, commonly the first thing the Conscience fastens on,
is the mispending the Sabbath, and the first duty that he conscionably puts
in practice upon his conversion, is commonly the better sanctifying and keeping
the Sabbath.

Now as touching the baptizing of Infants, there is neither an express precept
for it, nor yet an example of express practice delivered in Scripture; and yet
the grounds, causes and reasons of the necessity of that practice, and the
benefit or good that follows on it, are evidently contained in the Scripture,
and for this respect it is named a tradition: But yet the grounds of it being
in Scripture (as Field in the fore-quoted place observes) it is not therefore a
bare tradition, but is therefore of Divine authority, and unalterable in the
Church of God. The same in all respects holds good concerning the Sabbath,
and with some advantage, for that there is the express practice of the Apostle
Paul in this point mentioned in the Scripture, which is not so in the baptizing
of Children. And this is apparent, that those things which had their grounds
and reasons in Scripture, the Apostles were not curious or exact in commanding
them expressly, nor entreating of them largely, except they were then
controverted and scrupled at, which (it seems) the Lord's Day was not, but was
currantly received and practiced among the Gentile converts (the Infant Jews
being born withal) for on that day they ordinarily were wont to celebrate both
the death and resurrection of Christ, the one by the Sacrament, and the other
by the Sabbath, as appears, Acts 20. 7. And therefore Saint Paul when he
speaks of it, still mentions it as a thing granted and not doubted of,
although the Ceremonial or Jewish temporary Sabbaths, as like wise the
Ceremonial meats were, which makes the Apostle so often and so largely handle
that point.

Thus Eatonus, page 69. Nullum praeceptum de ritu aliquo. Iudaico abrogando a
Domino nostro Apostolis and Discipulis suis relictum legitur. Nusquam dicitur
Pascham, non comedetis, non circumcidemini, and similia, Solum enim
controversia in Ecclesiiis de illis orta est ex occasion ista. Apostoliritus
illos prohibuerunt, iam autem cum in confess^ est diem nostrum dominicum a
nullo Christiano impugnatum fuisse, non mirandum est, si nullum de illo
observando vel abrogando Sabbato Iudaico mandatum expressum reperimus. Est
tamen generale mand^tum de illo observando comprehensum in illo Apostoli,
Estote imitatores mei, sieut and ego sum Christi.

And thus much may serve for answer both to your opinion and reasons, as also
for the remainder of your Treatise (excepting some short observations) for what
follows has been mostly spoken of before both by you and me.

Broad.
CHAP. III. The former Opinion confuted.
1. CHrist did not command us to sanctify the Lord's Day. Such as would have us
believe that our Savior Christ himself enjoined the Lord's Day, go about to
prove it by his practice.

1. Because he appeared to his Disciples on the first day as they were
assembled together, John 20.

Answ. This assembling was for fear of the Jews, and it was a very strange
kind of teaching them by his practice to observe the day, not to come unto
them till late in the Evening, about half an hour before the end thereof, for
the night following belonged unto the second day, other wise either that first
day had two nights belonging to it, or else I cannot see how Christ lay three
days in his grave.

Answer.
Had this record of the Apostles being assembled and Christ appearing at this
time been alone recorded, there might have been some probable conjecture that
it might be but accidentan (although the Text is very exact and expressive
concerning the time: for having in the first verse of the 20. John, spoken of
the first day of the week, the 19. verse reduplicateth that with a significant
explanation (as if the Evangelist would be loath to be mistaken in that point of
Time) saying, The same day then at night which was the first day of the week,
etc.) But being seconded with the like afterward, it argues it to be ordered
by God of a purposed providence, especially if we take along the event and
succeeding practice of the Apostles and Church ever after, which to all sober
minds puts it past doubt. And as touching that you say their meeting was for
fear of the Jews, happily the privacy of it was so, but why they should fear
the Jews more on that day, then on any other I see no reason, and therefore
can it be no reason of their then assembling.

And now concerning Christ's appearing to them at the Evening of the same day,
it is so far from lessening the authority of this institution, as that, being
compared with Gods institution of the first Sabbath, which according to your
own confession was about the end thereof, it gives much force thereto.

And although I mean to be brief in what follows, yet I must needs by the
way show you M. Breerewoods refutation in this point by Mr. Richard Byfeild,
page 211. Says he there. Concerning the authority that translated the Sabbath,
you say it is certain that the translation thereof was actually and
immediately prescribed by the Church, deal ingenuously and show me where, if
in Scripture then I answer, that it was not immediately prescribed by the
Church, for the Apostles were not Authors of the institution, but ministers of
Christ and penmen of the holy-^host: If in Ecclesiastical writers, I answer,
they all refer us to the Apostles and the Scriptures. This opinion therefore
is so far from certain, that it is certainly false. You say again, That
certainly Christ never gave his Apostles particular charge of instituting a new
Sabbath, either while he conversed with them on earth; or afterward by
Revelation. How know you this? The Apostles delivered many things that the
Evangelists did not set down, not themselves expressly say, that they
received them from the Lords mouth, That they concealed Christ's command from
the Church, that is, this particular expression in so many words, that Christ,
commanded it, this makes to prove that it was given them in charge by Christ,
for else when the Apostles enjoined it, they would have said of that their
injunction as of other things, 1 Cor. 7. 6, 12, 25. We speak this by
permission, and not by Commandment: We have no Commandment of the Lord, but
we speak our judgment, Herein speak we, not the Lord. This institution then
(to use your own language; of a new day of solemnity instead of an old
Sabbath) was of the (...) and necessity of the Apostles Commission not of the
libe^ty. The Apestles did nothing in ordering the Church but from and by
Christ, either by precept or example or divine inspiration: And it is more then
probable they had special warrant from Christ in express change, when we
compare together their precept and practice, with these two Texts, Matt. 28.
20, Acts 1. The first enjoining the Apostles to teach what he commanded, and to
teach and baptize, in which Ordinances teaching such things he would be with
them to the worlds end. ^ The later declaring that Christ spoke the things
pertaining to the kingdom of God to his Disciples in these forty days before
his ascension Besides this in the 2. verse of 1 Acts, it is said, until the
day that he was taken up, after that he, through the holy Ghost, had given
Commandments to the Apostles whom he had chosen.
For all that you say therefore, it is certain the Sabbath was translated by
the same authority that first commanded it.

Broad.
2. Because after eight days he came to them again, John 20. 26. Ans. This
were more strange, for how can they prove that a week is meant thereby? A
week after is but seven days, and should thy friend departing from thine
house on Sunday at night, promise to come again after eight days, would thou
expect his coming upon that day seven-night? either it was not a week, or
Saint John dreamt not of such a collection, for otherwise he would have said so
plainly. Matthew and Mark have the like phrase, Matt. 17. 1. Mark 92 compared
with Luke 9. 28.
and seeing by after six days they mean on the seventh, it is some likelihood
that John by after eight days, may mean on the ninth, this is more probable.

Answer.
These words of John after eight days, Parallel places to this are, Mark. 8.
31. after. 3. days, id^est, the third day, and Ie^. 25 12. when 70. years are
accomplished, i. e. in the seventieth year.
or as it is in the Geneva eight days after, what do they intend more then if
I should say, Eight days hence I will do such a thing. Surely according to
this propriety of speech, the eighth day is the fittest to be understood. So
here after eight days is as much as if he had said, after eight days were
come, or after the eighth day was come (signifying thereby that it was the
first day of the week and not the last, And M Sprint, page 138. observes that
it is as if he should say, The eighth day after by an Hebraisme, and quoteth
further the like speech in Luke 2. 21, and 1. 59.
which as I observed before, from comparing the 1. and 19 verses of this
Chapter, he is c^^ious (and sure not without cause) to notify unto us) again
his Disciples were within, etc.

Thus E^t^nus^ page 71. says: Parum obstat obi^ctioilla (...) The two Evang.
speak of 6. days, and Luke 8. days after. Six inclusive, and eight exclusive.
non ipso^^ctav^ esset sed non s^^bsequente; Obiectio (inqu^^) haeo par^^
^alet, quia vel Synechdochice exponenda (...) verba illa, ^t alibi saepiu^ in
scriptura, There are 6. days in the week; and Sabbath and Sabbath make eight,
on the former Sabbath he appeared, and the next succeeding.
sic ^t Luke 2. 21. (...)

Broad.
3. (...).

(...) Supper in memory of his Passion, and 3. of the Evangelists together with
Saint Paul make mention thereof, what the least show of Scripture or reason can
be alleged, where fore if Christ would have a day kept in memory of his
resurrection, he should not command so by word of mouth, or commanding so the
Evangelists should not commit it so to writing but leave us to pick out his
meaning in such a sort?

Answer.
So in the instance that you gave even now, from the expression of the Evang.
Matt. 17. 1. (After six days) had it not been as easy for him and the rest
to have said the seventh day (if they had meant the seventh day) as after six
days? But it seems had you been in those days a follower of Christ, you
would now and then have stopped before him, and have given him occasion to have
plucked you back, with a Come behind me; Or his councellor, Then always when
the Jews had asked a Miracle, he should have showed them one, and not have
suffered them to have gone so far about, as to find their desire in the
miracle of Ion^^, nor have bid the man carry his bed on the Sabbath, but he
should also have given satisfaction to the Jews in the point, nor have turned
the water into wine after they had well drunken, but withal he should have
preached sobriety to them. Do you preach it to your self.

Indeed if there had been no footsteps nor grounds for this in the old
Testament, or that the Apostles had not had the assistance of the holy Ghost,
then it had been somewhat which you allege. But as there is nothing so
clearly expressed, but wrangling and perverse spirits will find some matter
of controversy thence, so some things are left purposely to try men's spirits,
whether they delight more in sobriety or disturbance.

It seems you cannot satisfy your self with crying down the fourth
Commandment or old Sabbath, but you would also persuade that the sanctifying
of the Lord's Day (the day which, as the Psalmist says, the Lord has made for
us to rejoice and be glad in) is against Christ's will, or at least not with his
will, when you say, If Christ would have a day kept in memory of his
resurrection. etc.

Broad.
2. The Apostles did not command us to sanctify the Lord's Day.

That the Apostles commanded us to sanctify the Lord's Day, some go about to
prove.

1. 1 Cor. 16. 2.
Because Saint Paul ordained that upon the first day of the week collections
should be made in the Churches of the Corinthians and the Galathians.

Answ. If they met usually upon the Lord's Day, it may seem strange, that Saint
Paul had not rather ordained that a collection should have been made in the
Congregation, then that every one should lay by him in store (at home) as God
had prospered him, thus we would think that their benevolences would have been
in greater readiness. But be it that they met every first day, yet by whom
this manner began is uncertain. They themselves will have it begun long before
Saint Paul took this order about the Collection.

Further, See D. Field of the Church, book 4. Chap. 20. Zanch. de red chap.
10. de trad. Eccles.
let Saint Paul be the author thereof, yet every ordinance of an Apostle does
not bind us in these times, yea this very ordinance does not. Were there the
like collection to be made, who would take himself to be bound every first day
to lay up by him in store, as God had prospered him?

Answer.
Certainly this Ordinance of Saint Paul, does wonderfully commend this day, and
argue the point in hand. For first they were hereby prompted, to give to the
poor members of Christ, as they had received from him a work becoming an holy
day, and conducing to the pious hallowing thereof, like as did those charitable
cures which Christ wrought on the Sabbath Day.

If they met usually upon the Lord's Day (say you) it may seem strange, etc.
Bishop White tells you, page 211, 212. That although this Text of Sa^nt Paul
makes no express mention of Church assemblies on this day, yet because it was
the custom of Christians, and likewise it is a thing convenient to give alms
upon the Church days. It cannot well be gainsaid but that in (...) and Galat^
the first day of every week was appointed to be the day for alms and
charitable contributions, The same was also the Christians weekly Holy Day for
their religious assemblies. Secondly, it argues their rest on (...) day, from
the labors of the (...) days, with a reco^^ection, and tha^kefull calling to
mind the blessing of God upon their foregoing weekday labors, and what can
there be more Sabbath-like.

Dr. Heylyn, parr. 2. page 26. (...) prove this laying up to be appointed by
(...) on some Sabbath day or other (and to a little before does he labor to
make then meeting at Tro^^ to be on the Sabbath-(...) too, and not on the first
day of the week) and yet page 27. he (...).

Acts. That as concerning the Gentiles which believe we have written and
determined that they observe no such thing as the Law of Moses, whereof the
Sabbath was a part says he. Now these things are very inconsistent. That Paul
should countenance the Sabbath even among the believing Gentiles at Troas, and
command this laying up thereon also to the Corinthians, and Galatians, and yet
be an opposer of the Sabbath, and therefore it must needs be upon the first day
of the week or Lord's Day.

Again, in the same place he quarrels (...) in the 1 Cor. 16. 1. to intend the
first day of the week, under some authorities quoted to countenance his
acceptance. But Bishop White being in print before him might have given him
better satisfaction (saving that it seems he loves to vary) who page 196.
says, In the holy Gospel, this day is styled (...) the first day of the week
following, Matthew. 28. 1. Mark. 16. 2. John 20. 1. likewise, Acts 20. 7. 1 Cor.
16. 2. Besides his quotation of sundry authors to confirm this translation,
which phrase is an Hebraisme thus to express the first day by one day, and so
used in the 1. Genesis and the word Sabbath for week, Levit. 25. 8. Luke 18. 12.
as Mr. Sprint affirms, page 101. And sure I am, the same phrase is used by
the Evangelists, to signify the day of Christ's resurrection to be on the first
day of the week.

Moreover, page 211. Bishop White, in positive terms upon the argument in
hand, says, That the Apostles themselves at some times observed the Lord's Day,
and brings (with a for it is written) these very places to prove it, Acts 20.
7. The first day of the week, etc. and 1 Cor. 16. 1, 2. Concerning the
gathering for this Saints; even as I have ordained in the Churches of Galatia,
so do ye: Every first day of the week, etc. In that you say. Every
Apostolical Ordinance does not bind; I grant it, if the Ordinance be
circumstantiall, proper either to times or persons, it cannot be properly said
to be cominon, but if it have for substance a Moral Law, for order a Prophecy,
for confirmation an Apostolic ordinance and example, me thinks, this might be
very well allowed to be binding. And all this is (as has been proved) true of
the Christian Sabbath,

Some ordinances (I confess) there are of the Apostles that are not of
perpetual obligation, for that they were done only occasionally, and to an
exemplary end, for to authorize their successors (the Governors of the
Church) to order things of an indifferent nature to the benefit of the Church,
all which things the Church had and has authority, as well occasionally to
abolish, as occasionally to institute; but this Ordinance of the Sabbath is
beyond the authority of the Church to abolish or alter, as much as it is to
add or detract from the new Testament.

And therefore is it not of those sorts of Apostolic Ordinances which bind
not in perpetuum. For the foundation of it is so laid in Scripture (as
aforesaid) as neither time nor authority can expire nor alter it.

Broad.
2. Because the Disciples at Troas being come together to break bread on the
first day of the week, Saint Paul preached to them.

Answ. Granting that the Disciples assembled every first day, and also by Paul's
own ordinance (neither of which can be proved) yet does it not follow that they
kept it Holy Day, and abstained altogether from works of their Callings.

Saint Augustine says, Tom. 2. Epist. 118.
that in some places they communicated every day, and in others on the Sabbath
and Lord's Day.

Socrates says, Hist lib. 1. cap. 21.
that in all Churches of Christians (two excepted) they communicated every
Sabbath Day.

Sozomenus says, Lib. 7. cap. 19.
that at Constantinople and almost in all other places, they came together on
the Sabbath and the day following, that is, the Lord's Day: yet no man (I trust)
will hence infer, Certainly such as communicated every day, did not keep
every day Holy Day.
that these who met and received the Communion, both on the Sabbath Day and the
Lord's Day, kept them both Holy Days and forbear work altogether. Ad^e that in
likelihood they came together at Troas, late in the Evening, about that time of
the day, Consider that many Christian servants had heathens to their Masters,
who would not suffer them to keep the Lord-day Holy Day. Again, this had been
2 means to bewray Christian Masters.
wherein Christ did institute the Sacrament, otherwise Saint Paul's preaching
till midnight should have been very long, and this they might well do though
they kept it not Holy Day. The Disciples at Troas assembled on the first day to
break bread, ergo, Saint Paul ordained that all Christians should assemble on
that day to break bread is a likelier inference then this, ergo, Saint Paul
ordained that all Christians should keep that day Holy Day. If any thing may be
enforced from their meeting at Troas, this may as well (or rather better) that
the Lords Supper must be celebrated every first day.

Answer.
That on that day the Disciples abstained from the works of their callings
exercised on the other six, I have even now more then probably proved by a
just and proper deduction, or collection, from 1 Cor. 2. 16. I have also quoted
the authority of Ignat ad Mag. and Aug. sermon. de temp. 251. And is it probable
that the jews were to abstain from works on their remissest Holy Days, and
that we must make a worke-day or a mixed day of our Ca^itallest?

And as for the time of the day when they met^ (though it might be in the
Morning for ought the Scripture says to the contrary) it is not so material
to us to know, considering the Natures of those Times.

It suffices that that was the only day (being also parallel with consonant
places of Scripture of the same nature) that they employed solemnly in their
sacred affairs.

And if there were diverse observed, as you say, it was because for a time
Christians were diverse, consisting of Jews and Gentiles.

As touching your conclusions whereby you argue hence rather the practice of
the Sacrament then the Sabbath, I answer, That if it was an ordinance, yet it
was but temporary; for from those words of Christ ( So often as ye shall ^at
it) the times of celebrating the Sacrament are at the disposition of the Church
(and it was in the Churches then, occasionally celebrated, for the Christian
Sabbaths sake, as a means of its sanctifying, and not the Sabbath for its sake)
whereas the time of the Sabbath and Lord's Day is by Precept and practice
determined.

Broad.
3. Because Saint John tells us that he was in the spirit on the Lord's Day.

Answ. I acknowledge that whereas Christians in many places used to assemble on
the first day of the week. Christ hereby may seem to approve of their
meetings on this day, and this is the most that can be gathered from Saint
John's being in the spirit: Now whereas from the name Lord's Day, some would
infer that therefore the Lord himself enjoined it. Let them consider that
this name might well be given, because that upon occasion of Christ's
Resurrection the Churches held their meetings therein. Psalm. 74. 8.
The Synagogues in Canaan are called the Synagogues of God, and yet we find
not that God commanded to build them: Some call the Church Gods house, whose
meaning is not, that it is Gods express Commandment to build Churches now, as
it was to build the Temple heretofore.

The most that can be gathered from these Texts is, that after a time
Christians used to assemble on the first day of the week, and that Christ and
his Apostles approved this manner, which I acknowledge, but that Christ or his
Apostles would have the observation of the Lord's Day be a matter of Religion in
the time of the Gospel, Excepting the two s^cra^ets, there is no outward thing
required to make a good Christian. M. Fox in the page before the Acts and
Monuments.
as the keeping of the Sabbath was in the time of the Law, is not to be
believed. God is a spirit, and the time is come wherein he will be worshipped
in spirit and truth. The kingdom of God consists of a matter of another
nature, Romans 14. 17.

Answer.
From these Texts may wellbe gathered the laudable and Evangelicall practice of
the Apostles, and the excellent confirmation, countenance and authority that
God gave thereto, in this point of sanctifying the Lord's Day, so that God bare
witness thereto by signs and wonders, and gifts of the holy Ghost, according to
his own will; besides the benefits and fruits of it at this day to every man's
experience that observes it conscionably, of peace of Conscience, Joy in the
holy Ghost, and sensible increase of knowledge and grace do also make it good,
according to that where it is said, That it is a sign that the Lord does
sanctify you, as also according to that promise, Isai. 58. 13, 14.

It was by these two Arguments of Christ's special appearing to him, and the
fruits thereof, that Paul proved his Apostleship, and so may we prove the
Sabbath.

For the name Lords day, and force of that argument to prove Christ the
instituter thereof, see Eatonus, page 73. says he, Arguinus ex appellatione
eius, Apocal. 1. (...) etc. sic autem dici non potuit, nisi eam Dominus
instituisse^ ut in C^na (...) and oratione ^actum est. Hic respondetur,
do^inic^^ diem dici potuisse, quia in commemoratione domini, licet non ^ domino
fuerit instituta. Sed assertionis (...) racion^^ non vide^^s; Cum e^im Ecclesia
(...) and ascensionis eius memoriam retinuerit, dies tamen illos (...) non
vo^^it.

Lastly the Jewish superstition we disclaim, but the true spiritual worship
of God we retain, as it is requisite in the present state of the Church, and
why a solemn day should be prejudicial to solemn service, and why we stand
less need of rest and opportunity to serve God, then the Jews, or Adam in
Innocence, I see not.

Broad.
CHAP. IIII.
ENough has been said to make it appear that we are not bound to sanctify
the Lord's Day, by virtue of that Commandment in the Decalogue, neither by any
express Commandment from Christ or his Apostles, and now if any think,
though this doctrine be true, yet happily it were better that it were not
taught publicly.

Answ. Be the truth alone preached, the greatest good doubtless will follow
thereupon: Do not we know, that though Paul plant, and Apollos water, yet it
is God alone which gives the increase? Indeed if any man were able to give
increase, it were another matter, but shall I fetch water from the devils well,
and look that God should give increase after such watering? neither is the
Church now in the infancy, that we should fear to make known the abrogating
of Moses Law.

Broad.
The truth being taught, this good will follow. 1. Thou shall not Iudaize, The
good will come of this doctrine.
as they will be found to do who observe the Lord's Day in obedience to the
precept of the Sabbath. 2. That thou shall not do any thing doubtingly on the
Sunday, which doubtless many in England do; and if he which eats doubtingly
be damned, shall not he which works doubtingly be damned likewise? Romans 14.
3. That we shall not have such building on the foundation, hay and stubble
hence forwards, as has been heretofore especially of late years.

Answer.
You will not say he Iudaizeth, that upon his obedience to father and mother
shall now in the time of the Gospel, expect the fulfilling of that promise in
the first Commandment of the second Table, because that now we live not in the
land of Canaan. And why, pray you, may not this Commandment concerning the
Sabbath stand good now, as well as that promise, and challenge obedience, as
well as that does faith. If we observe the one, or believe the other as the
Jews did, As in offering double sacr^^ces, etc. which yet in the Analogy is
now also proper.
then I confess we Iudaize, but if according to the present state of the
Church, we obey the one and put trust in the other, this must needs be free
from Iudaisme, and yet be good Christianity.

For the second Good: Call you that Good to work on the Sabbath Day (which yet
anon you make to be the property of such, as belong not to God, but are the
children of the devil) so a man's conscience accuse him not, or so he do it
not doubtingly? ^ndeed you salve the soar well, but take heed of dawbing with
untempered mortar. Mr. Byfeild gives a good rule, If we must needs doubt, it
is better to doubt and obey, then to doubt and disobey. And for your third
Good, That we shall not have such building on the fo^ndation hay and stubble.
Be you aware betime, lest you bring an old house over your head. For you know
what is threatened to him that breaks one of these least ^ommandements, and
shall teach men so, he shall be called the least in the kingdom of Heaven.

Broad.
As touching the hurt which in some men's imaginations may come of the
publishing of this truth, No ^urt can come of this (...)
It is not to be doubted, but that when Luther preached Justification by faith,
such as were not good trees brought forth less good fruit in show, and be the
truth taught concerning the Lord's Day, it is (I confess) likely enough, that
such as belong not to the Lord, will serve the Lord the less in outward show
too: But shall I conceal any good thing from the children of God, because the
children of the devil will show themselves more in their colors? He that is
unjust, let him be (more) unjust still. (...)
If a man had not the fear of God before his eyes, and any should preach as
formerly they have done, he would not forbear as formerly he has not, to
follow his worldly business, to haunt the Alehouse and the like on the
Lord's Day. If a man truly fears God (as I hope gentle Reader thou do)
enough may soon be said to make him spend the Lord's Day in the holy exercises
of Religion, as, 1. Though in this time of the Gospel God would not have any
part of his worship consist in the observation of times or places, neither did
Christ or his Apostles command us Christians to any day whatsoever, yet this
general Commandment we have. 1 Cor. 14.
Let all things be done to edifying decently and in order, yea and Nature
teaches that there should be Times and Places set apart for public meetings,
as we see the Gentiles had by the very light of nature. 2. This order to
assemble on the Lord's Day, had his beginning in the time of the Apostles, and
was approved by them, neither is there the least doubt to be made, but that
were Saint Paul now alive, he would approve of it in like manner, only he
would be much more earnest then I have been, a^, or can be to have all
superstition clear weeded out of men's minds. After the Apostles time the
succeeding churches observed the same order as partly appears by these
sayings of Justin Martyr, and others before alleged, and thus it has
continued ever since, and no doubt shall so continue to the second coming of
Christ. Some of late have made it a question whether the Church may change the
Lord's Day into any other day of the week, but in my judgment they might well
have spared their pains therein, for what can be imagined wherefore any Church
should attempt such a matter, unless it be to withdraw some from a
superstitious conceit they have of the day? Let this error be reformed, and
there is no fear of a change.

Answer.
To this changing of the Lord's Day into another, I answer, That as the order of
the last day in the week was significant in the time of the Jews: So is the
first day now (as I have observed before) and as therefore that was commanded,
so was this prophesied by Isaiah I have formerly shown how both by Isaiah and
David, this was clearly foreto^dand promised.
in the old Testament, and accordingly practiced in the new, and therefore can
no more be altered now without contradiction of divine authority, then the
other could in the time of the Jews; Except you can imagine God hereafter to
bestow a benefit on us as much greater then our Redemption, as our Redemption
was then our Creation. Besides the Church has no liberty to alter any day, the
which has a clear ground and warrant in the word, which the Christian Sabbath
or Lord's Day has. And moreover you say Christ is Lord of the Sabbath, if so,
then sure the privilege and authority of altering belongs only to him.

Broad.
The Apostle, Hebrews 13. gives this charge, Obey them that have the rule over
you, and submit your selves, and again, Romans 13. Wherefore ye must needs be
subject not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake. Some peradventure
hearing that God has not immediately commanded us Christians to sanctify the
Lord's Day, as he did the Israelites to sanctify the Sabbath, will be ready to
demand, what need we then forbear any worldly business on the Sunday? for
answer unto whom though unworthy of any, let me also demand, what need you
repair to the Church, the place of prayer? That you may so do must we teach
that God in express terms has commanded to build Churches, and in such
places in every Parish? Had these men lived in the time of the Law, though they
had forborne work on the Sabbath, yet certainly they would not have repaired
to the Synagogues when they had been called they would have answered with
Dathan and Abiram, we will not come, for God has not bidden us come to such a
place, nor at such a time of the day. Even in the time of the Law, some things
were lest to be ordered by the Magistrate.
Should thy so^^e being sent of thee into the field, think with himself, I
need not go, for it is not written in the Scriptures that I should go plow to
day, As God in general terms has charged thy son to obey his father, so
God in general terms has charged thee an inferior to obey thy Governors,
both spiritual and temporal, by whose joint Commandment thou art bound to
sanctify the Lord's Day, and if thou wilfully breakest this double bond, know
that it is by the coming of another spirit upon thee then came upon Sampson
heretofore, even such a spirit as the man had that brake the iron chains and
setters in pieces, Mark. 5.

Answer.
Pray you turn the point of this Argument into your own breast, and consider
if the same authority, which commands you to sanctify the Lord's Day, do not
likewise in the Liturgy command you to pray for inablement to keep the fourth
Commandment, Have a better nion of your (...) then to think she will command
you to pray for that which you o^ght not to believe and practice.
but it s^emeth whosoever is in authority you will be supreme, binding that
authority that should rather bind you. But if the authority be thus (as you
would make it) in the hand of the Magistrate only, to appoint the time of Gods
solemn worship, and that the fourth Commandment is now of no force, nor yet
the prophecy or Apostolic practice to bind us; then you may say with Ames. in
his Medulla, page 355. ut si ipsis videatur diem (...) ex viginti, aut triginta
huic usui assignare, non posint hoc nomine argui alicuius (...) (aut
scripturae.) Nay rather we may hence argue it as a fault in the Apostles and
primitive times, that they would take upon them of their authority to create so
near a semblance to the Sabbath, and not rather an annual remembrance of the
Resu^^ection* and by an humane institution to shoulder out a divine one, an^
yet the substance thereof (to wit the benefit of the Creation) still remains
to be remembered. But it is strange that the Church should either assume this
liberty, or that we should give it to the Church. 1. Seeing the fourth
Commandment does dictate to us, both the proportion of time which we are to
celebrate to God* and the reason of that celebration, the Time is the seventh
day, the reason is Gods resting from or consummating his greatest and
beneficiallest work, which Christ, the author and actor of the new Creation,
God and Man, has now fulfilled by his Resurrection, and so pointed and
appointed us the (...) or the particular seventh day, nothing dissenting from
the Commandment nor destroying it, but fulfilling and establishing it upon
better terms. 2. Seeing God commands to labor six days and to rest a
seventh; And Christ has not exempted us from laboring in our calling to the
end of our lives, therefore a seventh day is to be kept for Sabbath weekly to
the end of the world. And it is not left in the power either of the Church or
any humane authority, doctrinally to shorten or enlarge this proportion of
days for our labor and holy Rest, or any way to abrogate or alter this
Commandment.

Broad.


Gal. 5. 13. For brethren ye have been called to liberty, only use (...)
liberty for an occasion to the flesh.
The end of the second Treatise.
Answer.
Weigh well the truth of that which the same man Am^s* Medul. page 364.
speaks concerning this unlawful liberty, which you strive so much to
maintain by good Scripture misused, Says he there, Experientia docet
licentiam and rerum sacrarum non curantiam, magis magisq^^ invalesc^re ubi die^
dominicae i^st^ratio non habetur.

Take heed of walking in the Broad way.

Broad.
A question whereabout I will not contend, only I think good to show mine
opinion therein.

The Sabbath as it is said before chapter the third, A Jew sleeping in the
night, and were it p^rt of the day sanctifi^d the Sabbath for that time.
was sanctified by abstaining from all works, which in the time of the Law was
an holy duty, as was the abstaining from leavened bread, the offering of
sacrifices, etc. and some that only rested from work sanctified the Sabbath,
as did little children their cradles. A child of twenty days old did profane
the Sabbath (no man will say so) and of necessity every one profaned it or
sanctified it, there is no mean.

Quest. Was the Sabbath sanctified by offering sacrifices, praying, hearing the
Word, and the like holy Duties, or not?

Answ. It was not, for proof hereof I propose this briefly to be considered.
God first sanctified the seventh day, that is, consecrated it to an holy rest,
after he comm^nded man to sanctify it, that is, to spend it in holy rest, as
for moral duties they were enjoined in other Commandments on very day. See
bef^^


1. God commanding to sanctify the Sabbath, and coming afterward to show his
meaning, requires only to rest from work: Remember to sanctify the Sabbath,
that is, God himself being expositor, Remember to do no work on the seventh
day, Exodus 20. 8, 10. See before, Chap. 3.

2. God sanctified the seventh day, because therein he had rested and was
refreshed, Genesis 2. Exodus 31. not because he had instructed Adam and Eve
therein, or that they had called on his holy name.

3. As God commanded to sanctify the seventh day, so the year, Neither was
the Temple.
which year was not yet sanctified by the sacrifices, prayers, etc. in the
same see Levit. 25.

4. God requires in the first place to worship him, then for the better
performance of this duty in the second place he requires Israel to sanctify
the seventh day, that is, to do no work therein, whereby the day became fit
for this purpose. The sanctifying of the Sabbath then, The order of the
Commandments shows this, and Nature teaches the same. Nature ^e^cheth in
the first place to worship God, and after to have se^ times for the per^^^mance
of this duty.
as the sanctifying of the Tabernacle in order went before the worshipping of
God therein, I mean before praying, hearing the word and such like duties, for
the sanctifying of the Sabbath was it self a part of the Ceremonial Law.

5. Were the Sabbath sanctified by praying, hearing the word, etc. it would
follow that God more respected the sanctifying the Sabbath, then he did
praying, preaching, etc.

6. The Sabbath was profaned only by working, as is showed before, Chap. 3.
Wherefore it was sanctified only by abstaining from work.

7. Suppose that Adam had continued in the state of Innocence, Nature then
would have taught him to set a part some times and places for holy
Convocations, I demand now, how Adam sanctified his appointed times, by
preaching, hearing of the word, etc. or not.

If not, why then did the Israelites? If yea, then why had he not as well
sanctified his appointed places, by the same holy Duties? I dare affirm that
when any goes on the Sunday to the Church, to pray and hear a Sermon, if
thereby he sanctify the Sunday, that thereby he sanctifies the Church also.
This I will maintain, though (as I said) I will not contend about the
question, for we have nothing to do with the Jews Sabbath nor with their
sanctifying it.

Answer.
How and in what sense Rest is said to sanctify the Sabbath we have at large
spoken of it before. Yet here I will briefly answer one question with another.
I ask how the vessels What I s^y of these may be in^^a^^ed in other thi^g^.
of the Temple were properly said to be sanctified, whether by being not
employed about profane uses, or rather in a relative sense, by being employed
about holy? Sure you will say, by being employed in Gods service about holy
uses. So the Sabbath was not properly sanctified by resting from profane, but
by being employed in holy businesses. For God has appointed it to be a day of
blessing, now sure it is not our Resting, but our employment in holy services,
and use of the means that makes it so. And so had God appointed it to be to
Adam in Innocence, for no doubt but Adam being enjoined labor, which
necessarily took him off from immediate contemplation, his spiritual life
should have been upheld by due use of means And therefore had he a Sacram^nt
instituted, to wit, the tree of life, and also a Sabbath.
as well as his temporal, but what those had been besides prayer, and
meditation, and praise, and such like means, whereby he might enjoy spiritual
commu^ion with God, I will not take upon me to determine.

Now as for that, which you urge so strongly, of sanctifying the Places as well
as the Time, I answer, That what Places God has ever specially and solemnly
appointed for his special and solemn worship, they have been as well
sanctified by that worship as the Time so appointed, and so was the Temple in
Jerusalem. For as it is the use, unto which Christ has appointed the bread and
wine, in the Lords Supper, that sanctifies the bread and wine, so was it the
use unto which God appointed the Temple that sanctified it. God appoints one
time universally for all people, not so of Place: Because an appointed Time may
be Catholic (as is the Church) which an appointed place cannot. For first it
would be of infinite inconvenience for the Catholic Church to repair to one
particular Place, as all Israel did to Jerusalem; and secondly it would
contradict the nature of the Church, and make that particular which is
Catholic. But I will conclude with Dr. Ames. opinion in this matter of Rest,
Medul. page 367. Quies ista quamvis in se absolute considerata non sit, neque
unquam fuer it pars aliqua cultus, prout tamen a Deo imperatur, tanquam
necessarium quid ad ipsius cultum, and ad illum etiam refertur, eatenus est
pars observantiae illius quae pertinet ad religionem and cultum Dei,
Sanctificatio huius quietis ac diei est applicatio nostrum ipsorum singularis
ad Deum eo die colendum, quod innuitur illis ipsis phrasibus. Sanctificavit
illum diem and Sabbatum est Iehove Deo tuo.

Pray for the Author:
Praise God the Giver.
FINIS.

