ADVICE TO A PAINTER. In a POEM to a FRIEND.

Si quis atro dente me petiverit,
Inultus ut Flebo Puer?
Horace. Printed for J. Davies, 1681.

To the Marshall Royalists, the Right Honorable, the Right Worshipful and
truly Noble Members of the LOYAL SOCIETY, united in a Glorious Artillery in the
City of Bristol.
Worthy Gentlemen,
YOur voluntary entrance into this Loyal Band, is as great a Specimen
(methinks) of your particular Valors, as that of lapping the Waters amongst (
a) Gideons Soldiers, when he was to fight the Midianites, and to show you how
ignorant your Adversaries are in the design of the holy Writ, like their
Forefathers of Rebellion that mistook the Text of ( b) Curse ye Meroz, when
they went out like Fools and Knaves to help the Lord against the Mighty,) they
upbraid to you, forsooth, the ( a) paucity of your Numbers, (in an empty Libel)
which alone shows you to be under the Banners of the Lord of Hosts, who reduced
the Armies of Two and thirty thousand to Three hundred, because they were too
many for him to overcome by: You are those few (my hearts) picked out on purpose
to do his Wonders, at whose first sight the late ( d) Sharer of the Government
marched off with his ragged Regiment, like a nasty Fog, before the Sun
ascending to his Meridian, or Oreb and Zeeb, before the Sword of the Lord, and
of Gideon, for they (and none other) can be truly said to wield either of those
Weapons, but men in your Circumstances, commissioned by your Liege-Lord (who
alone has power to grant them) for your so doing.

You Have broke your Pitchers, shown your Lights,
And by your Stratagems, the Midianites,
(Those giddy Mists) are vanished from your Plain;
You! like Apollo, have the Python slain,
In honor of whose Name the Pythean Plays
Were typically Acted, for your Rays,
Like the Repentance of King Pharaoh's mind,
Dismiss those Frogs and Lice from Egypts kind.
( e) Hinc illae Lachrimae --
Ab hoc font derivata simultas
In Regem regimenque fluxit.
I am informed that ( f) Six or Seven empty Bottles at first, one of which is
since cracked, and another quite broken, clubb'd to the making up of One
Billingsgate Logerhead, and he advised a Painter very scurrilously, and dully,
to traduce you all in general, and particularly those of the first rate amongst
you: I confess, ever since that senseless Ribaldry came to my view, I have been
disputing which of Solomon's Advices to follow, whether to answer a Fool in his
Folly, or not, were the best way to appear in your vindication. But upon better
thoughts, I have advised a Painter (in the ensuing Poem) to exhibit such
Calumniators in their Colors; that the World may see what sort of People those
Opposers of Government are called out on; the ignorance and scurrility of whom,
I am so great a hater of, that I have avoided treading in their steps, by
particularizing either Place, or Person: so that none but the guilty (who ought
to suffer) can be offended at it; yet they also may escape the punishment if
they have the Wit to hold their Tongues, for when one Rogue is described
amongst a thousand Persons, who but a Fool will declare himself to be the Man,
by quarrelling with the Painter for his draught: it follows then, that a Man
may be a Knave unknown to his Neighbors, if he cunningly carries it off by
Silence; but if he uncovers himself by Passion, then we must conclude him a
Fool, and a Knave too, and so I Will leave him, for Nemo me impune lacessit.

Gentlemen, I shall use no other Argument to persuade your Acceptance of this
Dedication, but to tell you, it was designed to expose the King's and your
Enemies; and Written by one that honors your Design, loves your Persons, and
(as you are all Sons of the Church of England) is

Your affectionate Brother, and humble Servant, (...).

TO THE READER.
THIS Advice to a Painter was Writ about July, 1680. when insolence to Majesty,
and Magistracy, was more fashionable than (I thank God) now it is. And has
hitherto expected the good hour to walk abroad in, when Loyalty may take the
Air without fear of Thieves and Robbers. It came to me from an unknown hand,
and was designed it seems to Sham some foolish scurrilous Poetasters, that had
then Libelled all the King's true Subjects in this City.

If I knew the Author, I Would tell you my Name also, for then you might ask the
Question, I declare I cannot answer. Ergo, etc.

From Bristol May 3d. 1681. Anonymus.

ADVICE TO A PAINTER.
CANTO I.
Painter is advised to draw,
Corporation kept in awe,
The ( a) Hieroglyphick of a Borough fooled,
Being by Member of her own, over ruled.
Dear Painter,
DRaw a great blind she Bear, with a brass Ring
Fixed in her Nose; and through that draw a String.
Held by a snarling, dogged, ill-look'd Pleader,
At ( b) Paris-garden Bar; and let him lead her.
In 's the other hand, (skilled Pencil) let him feel,
An Oaken plant, ( c) tipped at both ends with Steel,
(As well to stave off Curs, as ( d) Bruin Sway,)
Whom left it should be thought she don't obey,
Let him ( e) lean hers, when she don't tend his way.
So rarely done, that Passers-by may Swear,
This Surely is her Bear-ward, That his Bear.
CANTO II.
Corporation's brought a Bed
Of ( a) Anarchy; her Babes are led
By Bear-ward, to the River Jordan,
Where ( b) Crop gives name to every ( c) Lordain.
NExt draw this ( d) Vrsa Major in her throws,
Convuls't by her hard labor, Whelping those
Ensuing Cubs, lickt into various Shapes,
As ( e) Monkeys, Martins, Baboons, Jackanapes;
Taught in their Youth, as ( f) Novices by Friar,
By ( g) barking Bear-ward, Midwife, Son, and Sire,
Whom pray'e don't forget to Paint with 's Staff,
Just at this ( h) green Bear's tail, to make you laugh,
Watching (as careful ( i) Neat-herds do their Kine)
Lest she should eat her nauseous Secundine.
Then draw a Haw-thorn Bush, and let him place
The ( k) Heam upon it, with Faith, that the next race,
May Females prove, for one Dissenting She
More mischief does in rule, than all we see
Of the more worthy Gender: Painter then,
First prithee trigg me out with careful Pen,
(Let it contend with Brains, show artfull Strife,
For I would fain have this done to the life)
A crop eared factious ( l) Nomenclator; that
(As the Hen at ( m) Bedminster did lay a Cat)
May by his power to name say, this great Bear
Did Whelp a Bear-ward, Sword Bearer, and Mare,
With many Cubs besides, which you must frame
At this Gamaliel's Feet to get a Name,
And lest Specific Waters he should want,
Most natural to each respective Plant,
Draw full all Vessels but the sacred Font,
From various Rivers, fit for Spiritual Warfare,
Those of Damascus, Abana and Pharpar,
Euphrates, Gion, Pyson, Jordan, Tweed,
To dip, or sprinkle, sowse, or dowse this breed;
Then for the maungy Brats amongst 'em; draw,
The ( n) Leaper-cleanser, Ulcer-curing spaw,
Tan-fats, and Lime-pits, least the Waters taint,
Vessels of honor and dishonor paint,
This for Cub-reprobate, that for Cub saint.
Then in the Devil's name, though in Christian guise,
Let him begin these Rebels to baptize.
Of ( o) Rhosne's Stream that runs through Lemane Lake,
(With Cub in Arms) a handful let him take,
And sprinkling say; this is the damn'dest Cur
Of all the Litter: him, Jack Presbyter,
I therefore name: then for the ( p) Gossips draw,
Knox, Buchanan, Wat Tyler, and Jack Straw,
With Sir John Oldcastle, and Major Weir,
Hexham, and all the Whigs in the ( q) Northern Bear,
Which Constellation may the Devil tear.
In ( r) Jordan's Laver choosing then the aptest,
Next Jack for mischief, dip him Anabaptist.
And for his bold ( s) Sectators pray 'e decipher,
Tom. Muncer, Jack of Leyden, Nick Stock, Phipher,
Tuscoverer, and Becold, Knipperdolling,
A Goldsmith Prophet, and a Tailor King:
That to sad Ruin did poor Munster bring;
Pox on ( t) Sheath tail, that keeps such Cursed Sting.
The unruliest of the rest, let crop Ears call
Rude ( u) Antinomian; which may serve for all
Rebellious Cubs, from Buroughs loins that fall,
From Center ( w) Pinn to Circumferent Wall.
In The Tanfat dowse another, and him Name
A ( x) Brownist; then the lustful Cub to tame,
Sowse him in the Lime-pit, scowr the Blackmoor white,
Take off his Hair-cloth, call him ( y) Adamite.
In The Medicinal Bath, the ( z) Chiliast claimed,
For Preservation, that he might be named,
The Nestlin Cub, half starved, Crop called a Quaker,
A won way'd-Whelp, that does disgrace his Maker.
A senseless Cub, he Muckhiltonian styled,
Which masty Brat the Waters so defiled,
Last Cub of Baptism it had beguiled.
Had not sagacious Crop, to make an end on it,
Spit in his Face, and called him Independent.
CANTO III.
( a) Demas Bear-ward's now turned ( b) Pedant
Of Body, how to set a Head on it;
Teaches Brats of Corporation,
They become the pest of the Nation.
PAinter, you need not change his Face, nor hew,
For the same ugly Visage here will do,
As did in Paris-garden, only see
You make a decent change on's ( c) drapery;
Instead of Staff put into's hand a Rod,
Haughty behavior, grace, or scornful nod,
Such as to Mortals may become a God.
On Cub that pleases him, pray make him snear
On whom he is jealous, let ( d) Orbilius lear,
And pray let both the Aspects be severe.
The great Bear's Litter first about him draw,
Then placed above them, with extended Paw,
Old threadbare Cloak, tuckt close under his arm,
And rusty Beaver cockt: let him alarm
His mixed Disciples; to them let him say,
This (my beloved) is the glorious day,
When the Sun-shines the wise man makes his Hay.
Keep close, my Lads, unto each holy Name
You were baptized in, and increase your fame.
Contend in naught but getting Proselytes
To your select Professions, against the Rites
Of Church pretensions, for in doing so
You multiply to Friend, subtract from Foe;
And as they lesser, so you bigger grow.
Let lovely Toleration with you dwell,
What mischief e're you do pretend it well;
Let actions seen, be Heaven; though unseen, Hell.
Thus you will delude the Silliest, who are most,
And he that has the Numbers rules the roast;
Now, though you each with other seem to be
Disjoined in Worship; against ( e) Monarchy
Be sure you all unite: the good old Cause
Will give you brave Preferments 'bove the Laws.
Does ( f) Pride, or Noll, the Brewers, sound so well
As the Protector, or as Colonel?
Does clownish Desborough, the Plowman, call
For such respect, as Major General?
Had Barkestead, Thimble-maker, half the power
As Barkestead, when Lieutenant of the Tower?
Has Hewson, Cobbler, the Euphonie of Lord?
And don't Sir Reverence sweeter smell than --
( g) E'n't four in decimals a Babe to eight?
And is a man the lower for his height?
You Are all in the same Station these were then,
And what has once bin may be done again.
Cheer up my Lads, and choose for your Bravado
Some sage Apostate, armed with a ( h) Croisada,
He Is in at all that is once turned ( i) Renegado.
I make no doubt, the adverse part will say,
Such various minds cannot all be in the right way.
They Will fondly tell you, Brethren must agree,
That may be done without a Unity
In Church, or State, as plainly will appear
By Dint of Argument; for look you here,
(My trusty Boys) you are all Sons of one Bear,
So, Brethren, yet each one has his share
Of Spiritual Portion (set apart as Land
To several Heirs) on which foundation stand:
Did ever any but a Fool contend
For that which Custom had put to an end?
Turn over Nature's Volumes, and Converse
With all the Animals in the Universe.
Ask the Philosophers, see if you find
Two of their Wisest ever of one Mind;
And yet they love each other, live, and die,
And rise again in their Posterity,
To do the same; nay, all the Plants that are
Put forth at first two Leaves dissimular
From the same Root, yet this and that agrees,
And stand all Weathers, till they are Shrubs or Trees;
These Reasons well digested, Boys, why then
Should man think to unite the Minds of men?
Or quarrel at unlikeness in us? nay,
Had nature e're decreed, as these men say,
We should be all alike, she would have shown's the way.
All they pretend the Law runs on their side,
Alas! wont ( k) Wealth, and power stem that tide,
What Conqueror for villainy e're smarted?
Or whoring Duchess (as poor Jade) is carted?
Who steals a horse, or kills a man, must die
By the Law, whilst he is exalted to the sky,
That robbs and kills whole Nations; thus you see,
Not rape, but want, gives name to villainy.
Courage my hearts! resolve then to be brave,
Thus stands the Victor, and thus stands the Slave.
The Fate of either as you choose, you will have.
Thus Pedant spoke: now, Painter, let the Boys
(If you know how) make an exulting noise,
Cast up their Caps, and clap their hands, as though
They were already flusht in blood of Foe;
And were possessed of what they had expected,
For making God, their King, and Church neglected.
Then to some angry Herald, pray 'e repair,
To be advised what Arms those Cubs shall bear.
And let him search the Magazine of Hell
For proper Coats, to those that dare rebel
Before he trigs them out: but for Supporters,
Vultures and Harpies pressing on to tortures.
Paint them in bloody Colors, armed, and langu'd,
And when yo've drawn 'em all, let 'em be hanged.
FINIS.
TO MY FRIEND Mr. ANTITHEOPHOPTOS.
SIR,
I Have perused your advice to the Painter, and the design pleases me so well
that I wish it was Printed, and as intelligible as your Scholia's upon it could
make it, for if those few enclosed parts of it, (which I here purposely send
you) were explained, I am of opinion it would live for ever, to be the mirror
of Schismatics, and consequently a stop to the Career of Disobedience,
especially to the sincere Bigots; for when they shall see by this Glass, how
ugly they appear in such Communities, and enquire into the villainy of their
respective Teachers; they will for shame acquit their Conventicles, and come
(as the King commands them by his Laws) to serve God in their own Parish
Churches, at the proper times appointed. I have given you my Opinion, with
liberty to pursue your own, and remain

Yours, T. G.

To my Worthy FRIEND Mr. T. G.
SIR,
I Thank you for your Advice, which was not given in vain, as will appear by my
Annotations upon those places, which you think to be obscure, which at your
request appear now in public, as follows,

SIR, Your Affectionate, (...)*

NOTES upon the Epistle Dedicatory.
(a) Gideons Soldiers.] The Story of Gideon routing Oreb and Zeeb, and the
Midianites, see in the Seventh Chapter of Judges.

(b) Curse ye Meroz] Was denounced against those that assisted not their
lawful King, which our Rebels made use on in our late Civil War, to curse
those that did not assist the Usurpers against him.

(c) The paucity of your number.] The scurrilous ignorant advice to a Painter,
which abused the Artillery, reproached them for that their number did not
amount to the years of the Age of man: which Story (had it been true, alluding
to the Lappers that beat the Midianites) the Dedicator accounts to their Praise.

(d) Sharer, etc.] An Officer set up by himself, without any Authority
undertook to teach the use of Arms in Bristol, routed by the Artillery who are
commissionated for what they do; this vanquished Officer, for saying he was a
Sharer in the Government, was indicted at Wells Assizes.

(e) Hinc illae lachrimae.] The Artillery that came in their places exasperated
them to make their railing Libels, which abused the Loyal Nobility, and Gentry
amongst them.

(f) Six or Seven] We have an Account of so many that club'd to the making
those senseless Verses, and it is said one of the Poetasters is mad, and another
dead since.

NOTES upon the First Canto.
(a) Hieroglyphicks] Or Images of things, by which (as we by Letters) the
Egyptians were wont to express themselves, as a Dove for Innocence, a Serpent
for Wisdom, so a blind She-bear for a Corporation that is led by the Nose by one
of her Members, as the Bears are by their Bear-wards.

(b) Paris-garden Bar] Or the Bear garden at London, where the Dog and Bear is
Plaintiff and Defendant, and the Bear-ward and Butcher plead their causes.

(c) Tipped at both ends] The description of a Bear-ward's Staff.

(d) Bruin] A Romantic name for a Bear.

(e) Lean hers, etc.] Haughty Pride, and insolent Ambition, will choose rather
to quit their Principles than be thought to lose their Authority.

NOTES upon the Second Canto.
(a) Anarchy] Or Confusion, a multitude of hare-brain'd People of several
persuasions.

(b) Crop] Stands here for a Nonconformist, or a Tub-Preacher.

(c) Lordain] An idle Dunce, or Block-head.

(d) Ursa Major] Or this great She-blind Bear, the Hieroglyphick of a
Corporation.

(e) Monkies, Baboons, etc.] These Imitators only of Mankind I take to be fit
Representatives for such spawn as will never come to perfection.

(f) Novices] As the cunning Friars instruct the Novices their Disciples, so
you will find in the next Canto (when the Cubs grow more docible) the Bear-ward
turned Schoolmaster, and Lecturing them into Rebellion.

(g) Barking Bear-ward, etc.] Or snarling ill conditioned Fellow, who for the
care of the Young may properly enough be styled their Sire; and the Sire of
Cubs, as properly the Son of a Bear, and at this juncture of time, when his
Bear's whelping may as well be termed her Midwife.

(h) Green Bear] Green is a common Epithete for Females in the Straw.

(i) Neat-heards, etc.] This alludes to a little piece of superstition which
the Country people use, carefully attending their calving Cows, lest they
should eat their after Burden, which they commonly throw upon a Hawthorn Bush,
with steadfast belief that they shall have a Cow-calf the next year after.

(k) Heame] The same in Beasts, as the Secundine, or Skin that the young is
Wrapped in.

(l) Nomenclator] Or a Name-giver, the Nonconformist Tub-preacher, which is
introduced to baptize the Cubs.

(m) Bedminster] i.e. A place near Bristol, where there was a Hen brought forth
a Cat; else they lie who made Affidavit of its truth before the Magistrate
there.

(n) Leaper-cleanser] A Medicinal Bath.

(o) Rhosnes-stream] The River that runs through the Lake of Lemane to Geneva,
from whence flows that poisonous Spring of Presbyterianism.

(p) Gossips] Fit Witnesses to Sedition are Knox and Buchannan, Scotch Rebels
in Queen Elizabeth's days; Wat Tyler and Jack Straw, Rebels to King Richard the
Second; Sir John Oldcastle, Rebel to King Henry the Fifth; Major Wier and Hexam
late Rebels in Scotland, hanged at Edinburrough (for the murder of the
Archbishop of S. Andrews) with many other such hypocritical Religionaries, or
pretended Protestants of integrity, which they call Whigs amongst them.

(q) Northern Bear] A celestial Constellation, in form of a Bear about the
North Pole.

(r) Jordan's Laver] The River Jordan is the common Appellative for any Stream,
or Pond, where the Anabaptists dip their Proselytes.

(s) Sectators] Apt Gossips, or Witnesses, at such a Baptism were Tom Muncer
and his Partner Phipher, with Nicholas Stock the first broachers of Anabaptism
in Germany, about the Year 1525. Banished thence by Frederick Elector of Saxony,
for their Rebellious Doctrines; afterward they and their numerous party were
routed by the Duke of Saxony, and the Lantgrave, 5000 of them slain, and 300
taken Prisoners, and themselves Beheaded at Mulhuse; then Jack Becold, alias
Jack of Leyden, a Tailor; Tuscoverer, a Goldsmith; and Knipperdolling, an
inconsiderable Fellow, follows the steps of the abovesaid Rebels, and
propagates their erroneous Principles in the City of Munster, about the Year
1533. where they increased to that Insolency, that Jack of Leyden, the Tailor,
consecrates Tuscoverer, the Goldsmith, a Prophet; and in requital he crowns
Jack of Leyden, the Tailor, King; by whose damnable and (for some time)
successful practices the City of Munster was ruined.

(t) Sheath-tayl] As a Scabbard to a Blade, or a Sheath to a Knife; so is the
Tail of a Wasp to its Sting.

(u) Antinomian] Or one that is against all Law.

(w) Pinn, Wall] For Center and Circumference, for as in a Cylinder, or long
Figure, if a man was to express its Contents, he would naturally enough say,
from the one end to the other; so in a walled City, which is supposed to be
round, the Contents are expressible from the Center to the Circumference, which
Center I call Pinn, and Circumference, Wall; for that I wanted two
Monasyllables to make up my Verse. This I think is obvious enough, and had past
without a Comment, had not some ill minded men made another Interpretation, by
way of Derision, to a Godly Presbyterian of that Name, one Thomas Wall (a
Bookseller by Usurpation, though as much a Goldsmith as Tuscoverer the aforesaid
Prophet, etc.) who was taken in a carnal manner upon one Pinn's Wife, a
Carpenter in the Marsh belonging to that City, if you will believe the Affidavit
made before the Magistrates there; but the Poet clears himself you see of the
allusion, and concludes this Scholion with the Motto borrowed from the Garter,
viz. Honi soit qui male panse.

(x) Brownist] A Sect taking its name from a silly Fellow whose Name was Brown,
as some hold a Rigider sort of Independent, for whose Baptism the Tanfat is
well enough a color.

(y) Adamite] A lacivious sort of Enthusiasts, that ran up and down Naked,
pretending Antiquity for their Religion, which was before all Clothes were
invented, nay, prior to the Aprons made of Fig Leaves, which were the first
Garments.

(z) Chiliast] A Millenary or Fifth Monarchy man, that expects Christ shall
come upon earth a thousand Years before the Resurrection.

(and) Muckhiltonian] A sordid Sect, or Schism, lately reported in Ireland, by
one Muckhilton, now in Newgate for his horrid Blasphemies.

NOTES on the Third Canto.
(a) Demas Bear-ward] Demas was an Apostate, which I here call the Bear-ward,
because the Poet now makes him a Schoolmaster.

(b) Pedant] Or Schoolmaster instructing the Rebellious body to get a head.

(c) Drapery] A term amongst Lymners for the Garments or Clothes they represent
in painting.

(d) Orbilius] Was so cursed and severe a Schoolmaster that Horace calls him
Plagosus Orbilius.

(e) Monarchy] Or Kingly Government.

(f) Pride and Noll] They were but Brewers, before Rebellion raised one to be a
Protector, and the other a Colonel: Desburrough also was then a Plowman,
Barkestead a Thimble-maker, and Hewson a Cobbler; afterward made Lords by the
same Rebellion.

(g) Four in Decimals] That is, 40. and eight, 80. Here the Rebellious Orator
exhorts his Cubs, a fortiori, showing them, that as inconsiderable Rascals as
they are now in 1680. their Forefathers in Rebellion were in 1640. and hints it
to them by way of shame, having Forty more Years experience, if they arrive not
at the same Dignities.

(h) Croisada] The Popes Bull for the Sign of the Cross to Christians warring
against Infidels.

(i) Renegadoe] One that deserts his Colors, his Principles, and Religion for
interest.

(k) Wealth and Power] We have seen Magna Charta once run down, and Rhimed at
in derision, by a potent Usurper, who arrived at that height of greatness, only
by well managing such cursed Cubs as are described in this Poem.

FINIS.

