A Fannaticks Alarm, Given to the MAYOR IN HIS QUARTERS, By one of the Sons of
Zion, become BOANERGES:

To Thunder out the Judgments of God against Oppression and Oppressors;
Together with some Flashings of Pure Gospel-Lightnings, really intended for the
enlightening the Eyes of the Understanding, even to the beholding of Him who is
Invisible.

By HENRY ADIS, a Baptized Believer, undergoing the Name of a Free-willer; and
also most ignomineously by the tongue of Infamy, called a Fannatick or a mad
man.

Woe to the Bloody City, Nahum 3. 1.

For they profess that they know God, but in works they deny him, being
abominable and disobedient, and to every good work reprobate, Tit. 1. 16.

For I have seen Violence and Strife in the City, Psalm. 55. 9.

For they eat the Bread of Wickedness, and drink the Wine of Violence, Prove.
4. 17.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, an Uphol^ster, living in Princes Street, near
Covent Garden, 1661.

A Fannaticks Alarm, Given to the MAYOR IN HIS QUARTERS, By one of the Sons of
Sion, become BOANERGES.
O Earth, Earth, Earth, Hear the Word of the Lord, Ier. 22. 29. To Thee O
Richard Brown I speak, in the Words of the great Jehovah, given in into his
Servants and Prophets by his Eternal Spirit; by virtue whereof, thus says the
wisest of men, The Merciful man does good to his own Soul, but he that is
cruel, troubles his own flesh. O man, consider thy ways, what has been thy
Work, for these many years last past? What good did thou do to thine own
Soul, in thy mercy thou shewedst to the Kings Friends at Abington? Were not thy
tender mercies there, the mercies of the wicked, even mere cruelty? Prove. 11.
17. And now the Tide is turned, art thou ready to say of thine own Violent
Actings, as once old Jacob did, of Simeon and Levies cruel dealings against the
Shechamites, Genesis 49. 7. Cursed be mine anger, for it was fierce, and my wrath,
for it was cruel? Or rather, art thou not going about to plaster up that old
inveterate, malignant, and festred Sore, with a far worse Plaster, than was
the Sword that made that Wound; So that it may be said to Thee, in the words of
the Prophet, Ier. 13. 23. Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the Leopard his
spots? no more can thou do good, that have been accustomed to do evil; Art
not thou now with double and triple diligence, breathing out Threatenings and
Slaughter (Saul-like) against the Church of God, as if they had been, or at
present were the Kings greatest Enemies; but had thou ever been a Scholar in
Christ's School, and had been tutored by his Usher, that Holy Spirit of Truth,
whose Fruit is, Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness and Goodness,
Meekness and Temperance; Thou would then have taken out a far easier
Lesson, than Cruelty, Violence, Malice and Oppression; and would also have
experimentally known, that Christ's Laws, teach the best Loyalty to Earthly
Princes, and the purest Love to our very Enemies.

And now I speak of Love, give me leave (O Richard Brown) to speak some few
words in love to Thee, who appearest by thy violent Actings, to be a bitter
Enemy to King Jesus, in persecuting him in his Members; and therein pretendest
thy self to be a great Friend to King Charles; the contrary whereof, I hope
will be manifested hereafter in this discourse, in its due place.

In the mean time, in love I shall let thee know, my End of this my Alarm, that
so I might prove my Thundering to be natural, consisting as well of Lightning
(if possible) to the enlightening the eyes of thy understanding; as well as to
show Thee the Judgments of God against thy Violent and Inhumane Dealings; to
which purpose, I am at this time, come to beat up thy Quarters, and in
Christian Love to deal with Thee; and (to speak after the manner of men) like a
Conscientious Lawyer, to lay before Thee, the worst of thy Case; like an Honest
Physician, to show the True state of thy Body; like a careful Chyrurgian, to
search thy noisome and festred Ulcers to the quick; and with that charitable
Samaritan, Luke 10. 34. pour in Wine and Oil, that thy Wound may be both
searched and supled, that so, if possible, thy Soul may be saved in the day of
the Lord. And herein I shall follow the example of the Lord himself, Isa 1. who
that he might the better persuade Israel to a through Reformation, and a perfect
Return to him, his God; he first lays before him, the evil of his ways,
telling him, as I by his assistance in his words shall tell Thee, That from the
Crown of thy Head, to the Sole of thy Foot, there is no whole part in Thee; thy
Head is Sick, and thy Heart is Faint, thy Hands are full of Blood; Therefore
Wash thee, make thee Clean, put away the evil of thy Doings, cease to do Evil,
learn to do Well, seek Judgment, relieve the Oppressed, Judge the Fatherless,
and plead for the Widows; keep men no longer in thy cruel Custody, to make so
many Fatherless and Widows, as it is at this day, in keeping those many poor,
Innocent harmless Baptists, and others under restraint, in doing which, thy
danger therein I shall lay down before Thee, by Thundering out the Judgments of
God, against such Violent and Oppressing Actors; that so, as in a Glass, thou
may clearly read thy self, both what thou art, and what thou shall be, or
what will hecome of Thee.

And then give thee in some Clear, Bright and Glorious Flashes, of Pure Gospel
Lightning, to enlighten thy Inward Man, in order to thy Recovery out of this
thy Miserable, Poor, Blind, Naked and Despicable Condition, even to the
Translating thee out of the Kingdom of Darkness, into the Kingdom of Gods Dear
Son; unless thou be wanting to thy self.

In order whereunto, I shall once more cry out and say, O Earth, Earth, Earth,
Hear the Word of the Lord; for thus says the Lord by his Prophet, Isa. 33. 1.
Woe unto Thee that spoilest, and thou wast not spoiled; that dealest
Treacherously, and they dealt not Treacherously with Thee; when thou shall
cease to spoil, thou shall be spoiled, and when thou shall make an end to deal
Treacherously, they shall deal Treacherously with Thee: For God is a just God,
and many times deals with the Sons of men, by the Law of Retaliation; for
Adoni-bezek said, Threescore and ten Kings, having their Thumbs and their great
Toes cut off, gathered their meat under my Table; as I have done, so God has
done to me, Judges 1. 7. And Nathan said unto Divid, Seeing thou have killed
Uriah the Hittite, with the Sword of the Children of Ammon; Therefore the Sword
shall never depart from thy House, 2 Samuel 12. 9.

So also says Samuel to Agag, King of the Amalakites, 1 Samuel 15. 33. As thy
Sword has made women Childless, so shall thy Mother be Childless among women;
and Samuel liewed Agag in pieces before the Lord in Gilgal: Therefore Woe unto
them that decree unrig hieous Decrees, and that write grievousnesse, which they
have prescribed, to turn away the Right from the poor of my people, that
Widows may be their Pray, and that they may Rob the Fatherless, Isa. 10. 1,
2. Therefore hear what the Lord says by his Prophets, to Thee and all
Oppressors; What mean ye, that ye beat my people to pieces, and grind the face
of the Poor, says the Lord of Hosts? Isa. 3. 15. Hear ye this all ye that
forget God: and the fool has said in his Heart, There is no God. And what have
thou said, O Richard Brown? have not thou said, as he has said? And are not
his Actings, as thine? For they are corrupt, they have done abominable works,
there is none that does good. The Lord looked down from Heaven upon the
Children of Men, Ps. 14. 1, 2. to see if there were any that did understand,
and seek God; but ver. 3. They are all gone out of the way, they are altogether
become filthy; there is none that does good, no not one. Verse. 4. Have all the
workers of iniquity, no knowledge? who eat up my People, as they eat Bread, and
call not upon the Lord. For they have corrupted themselves, their Spot, is not
the Spot of his Children, they are a perverse and a crooked Generation, Deuteronomy.
32. 5. A sinful Nation, a People laden with Iniquities, a seed of Evildoers,
Children that are Corrupters; they have forsaken the Lord, they have provoked
the Holy One of Israel, they are gone away backwards, Isa. 14. Yea, they have
deeply Corrupted themselves, as in the days of Giliah; Therefore he will
remember their Iniquities, he will visit their Sins, Hos. 9. 9. For they have
shamed the Counsel of the Poor, because the Lord is his Refuge.

Behold thy self, O Richard Brown, see what thou art now doing; For the wicked
watches the Righteous, and seeks to Slay him, Psalm. 37. 32. Yea, he Plotteth
against the Just, and Gnasheth upon him with his Teeth, Verse. 12. Yea, they
have Drawn out their Sword, and bent their Bow, to cast down the Poor and
Needy, and to slay such as are of an upright Conversation. But hear, O ye Seed
of God, what the Spirit says; And see, O Richard Brown, what thy Reward shall
be; and so it shall be with all Persecutors and Persecuting Spirits; Their
Sword shall enter into their own Heart, and their Bows shall be broken, Verse.
15. For the Armies of the Wicked shall be Broken; but the Lord shall uphold the
Righteous, Verse. 17. Therefore depart from Evil, and do Good, and dwell for
ever; for the Lord loves Judgment, and forsakes not his Saints: But the Seed
of the Wicked shall be cut off, Verse. 27, 28.

Therefore, O Earth, Earth, Earth, Hear the Word of the Lord; For says the
Prophet, Verse. 35. I have seen the Wicked in great Power, and spreading himself
like a Green Bay Tree; Yet (notwithstanding, or for all that) he passed away;
and lo, he was not: Yea, I sought him, but he could not be found; for the
Wicked shall perish, and the Enemies of the Lord, shall be as the Fat of Lambs;
they shall consume (yea) into smoke shall they consume away, Verse. 20. For the
Transgressors shall be destroyed together, and the Hand of the Wicked shall be
cut off, Verse. 38. For says that upright Man, Job 21. 17. How often is the
Candle of the wicked put out? And how often comes their Destruction upon them?
God distributeth Sorrows in his anger, they are as stubble before the Wind, and
as Chaff that the storm carries away: God lays up his Iniquity for his
Children, he rewards him and he shall know it; his eyes shall see his
destruction, and he shall drink of the wrath of the Almighty. One dies in his
full strength, being wholly at ease and quiet; his Breasts are full of Milk,
and his Bones are moystened with Marrow; and another dies in the bitterness of
his Soul, and never eats with pleasure.

And thus, O Richard Brown, the wicked is reserved to the day of destruction,
they shall be brought forth to the day of wrath; yea, so says the Prophet,
Isai. 5. 24. For as the fire devoureth the stubble, and the flame consumes the
Chaff; so there Root shall be Rottenness, and there Blossom shall go up as
dust: for now will I arise, says the Lord, now will I be Exalted, now will I
lift up my self; ye shall conceive Chaff, yea shall bring forth stubble, your
breath as fire shall devour you, and the People shall be as burning of Lime, as
Thorns cut up, shall they be burned up.

And thus, O Earth, the Curse of the Lord is in the house of the wicked; But he
Blesses the Habitation of the Just, Prove. 3. 33. For behold, or take notice of
it, O Richard Brown, that God will not cast away a Perfect man, neither will he
help the evil doers; for they that hate thee, shall be clothed with shame, and
the dwelling place of the Wicked shall come to naught, Job 8. 20, 22. And thus,
O Mayor, the Eyes of the Wicked shall fail, and they shall not escape, and
their hope shall be as the giving up of the Ghost, Job 11. 20. For says that
Holy Man, Job 8. 11. Can the Rush grow without mire? Can the Flagg grow without
water, whilst it is yet in its greenness and not cut down, it withers before
any other Herb; So are the paths of all that forget God, and the Hypocrites
Hope shall perish; whose Hope shall be cut off, and whose trust shall be as a
Spiders Web; he shall lean upon his house but it shall not stand, he shall hold
it fast, but it shall not endure: For, says the Prophet Isaiah, they hatch
Cockatrice Eggs, and weave the Spiders Web, he that eats of their Eggs dies,
and that which is Crushed breaks into a Viper: Their Web shall not become
Garments, neither shall they cover themselves with their works; their works are
works of iniquity, and the Acts of violence are in their hands, as they are in
thine: their feet run to evil, as do thine, and they make have to shed Innocent
Blood, as thou do; their thoughts are thoughts of Iniquity, wasting and
destruction are in their Paths: The way of Peace they know not, and there is
no Judgment in their goings; they have made them Crooked Paths, whosoever
goes therein shall not see Peace, no more shall thou; Isai. 59. 5. etc. For
the wicked are like the troubled Sea, when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up
mire and dirt. There is no Peace, says my God, to the wicked, Isai. 57. 20.
for says the Prophet David, Psalm. 7. 11. etc. God judges the Righteous, and
God is angry With the wicked every day; therefore if he turn not, he will whet
his Sword; he has bent his Bow, and made it ready; he has also prepared for
him the Instruments of death; he ordains his Arrows against the Persecutors:
Then beware, O Mayor of London, for see what the great Man has done, For
behold, thou travellest with Iniquity, and have conceived Mischief, and
bring forth Falsehood; he made a pit and dug it, and is fallen into the
ditch which he made; His mischief shall return upon his own head, and his
violent dealing shall fall upon his own pate. Then O mighty man behold thy
Reward, for the Lord is in his Holy Temple, the Lords Throne is in Heaven, his
Eyes behold, his Eyelids try the Children of Men: The Lord (as at this day)
tries the Righteous, but the Wicked and him that loves violence, his Soul
hates: Therefore upon the wicked he shall rain Snares, Fire, and Brimstone,
and an horrible Tempest, this shall be the Portion of their Cup, Ps. 11. 4.
etc. Although they now drink Wine in Bowls, and Chant or Sing to the noise of
the Vial; For says the same Prophet, Psalm. 55. 2, etc. Attend unto me, and
hear me, I mourn in my complaint and make a noise; Because of the voice of the
Enemy, because of the Oppression of the wicked; for they cast Iniquity upon me,
and in wrath they hate me; wherefore; says he, verse. 9. Destroy O Lord and
divide their tongues; for I have seen violence and strife in the City; yea in
London City, we have seen store of it, since thou come to be Mayor, day and
night they go about it; upon the Walls thereof Mischief also, and sorrow are in
the midst of it; Wickedness is in the midst thereof, deceit and guile, depart
not from her Streets: for it was not an Enemy, O Richard Brown, that reproached
me, then I could have Born it, neither was it he that hated me that did
magnify himself against me, then I would have hid my self from him; But it was
thou (may several Freemen and Citizens and others say, in the words of the
Prophets) it was thou, A man mine Equal, my Guide and mine Acquaintance; as if
they should say, it was thou, O Richard Brown, a man, yea, a man like my self,
a Tradesman, mine Equal, a Freeman, my Guide, even the Father, Captain, Head,
and Guide of the City; that wast chosen to Regulate by Law, and not by thy Will
contrary to Law; Who have committed some for refusing to take the Oaths, when
thou wast not in a fit Capacity to Administer those Oaths; who art set up to
be a Terror to Evil works; and not thus to be such an actual and continued
worker of Violence; Breathing out Threatenings and slaughters, against the
quiet, harmless, poor, Innocent Sheep, Lambs, and Disciples of Christ having,
as is Judged, Saul-like, received Authority from the High Priest, Acts 9. 1.
Acts 26. 9. And out of thy blind zeal, art now thinking with thy self, that
thou ought to do many things, contrary to them who are in the Faith and
Order of the Gospel, even in the way of that Jesus of Nazareth; who, after the
way which thou and thy High Priests calls Heresy, are Worshipping the God of
their Fathers; who Believe all things that are written in the Law and in the
Prophets and are such as have hope toward God, which I think thou do not
allow of, nor believe that there shall be a Resurrection of the dead, both of
the Just and of the unjust, according to Act 24. 14, 15. The which, if thou
did Really Believe, and that according to 2 Cor. 5. 14. with several
Scriptures more, how that we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of
Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his Body, according to
what they have done, whether it be good or bad; the which if thou did, then
Confident I am, thou would not dare thus, Iehu-like, to put thy Saul-like.
Commission into such fiery Execution, which thou do in the City, where many
of the Saints thou do shut up in Prison, having, as aforesaid, Received
Authority from the Chief Priest; and by thy Deportment toward them, we may in
Reason judge that if they were to be put to death, thou, Saul-like, would
willingly give thy Consent, yea, and thy voice also against them; for we see
that thou in the City, do by cruel inhumane words, Iearings, Scoffings,
Deridings and Threatenings, even Frightening many Poor Souls, as thou did
Jeremiah Ives, out of their Resolutions; Even many of them to Swear, to the
Violating of their Tender Consciences, even to the causing them to walk
mournfully the remainder of their days; whilst thou forcest several that were
made Free, and others that were forced, (as thou do some now) to Swear under
the Late Power, even most abominably to forswear themselves: for, to Swear for
and against, or against and for I do affirm is nothing less; the which possibly
may bring some of their gray hairs with sorrow to the grave: the which if they
will not yield to, thou will be sure to make their poor Wives and little ones
know sorrow, even by shutting up their Husbands, or Fathers into Prison-holes
and Dungeons, as we several of us were at the Gate House at Westminster; who
having been Committed and Printed as Traitors, and never so much as tried or
brought before any Authority, yet were the 25th. day of the first Month,
vulgarly called March, found Innocent, and are now freely set at Liberty byhe
King and his Council, without either Swearing or Engaging, or paying so much as
one Groat, the common and ancient Fees; For, as we are informed, the King sent
fifty pound to Sir Edward Broughton the Prison-keeper, for our Discharges, and
good Reason too; and that because we were most unjustly imprisoned in his Name,
as Traitors against Him; by which means, we had lost above ten weeks time, from
our lawful Employments, to our great Damage, to the spending of much time, of
some others of our Families also to look after us, and making Provision for us,
even to the undoing of some, who lived two or three Miles from the Prison; by
which means, if our nearest Relations came often after us, other things might,
and without question, did go but badly with us at our Habitations.

And this I do affirm, That if King Charles should but forbid such Acts of
Violence (the which of necessity must cause the Land to Mourn) And, as he has
done for us, so also if he would but Rescue those many Poor Oppressed Ones,
those Men and Women, those Tender Lambs of Jesus, out of thy Lion-like Claws,
and thy Bear-like Paws; who art as eager in thy pursuit after them, as a
She-Bear bereaved of her Whelps.

I say again, if King Charles should but do thus to them and others, in other
parts of the Nation; confident I am, he would do a far more acceptable Service
to God, and produce more good to his own Soul, then thou O R. Brown, and thy
vain Glorious Citizens can possibly do, either to him, your selves, or to Gods
Glory, by your High Towering, Babel-like Pagions, that with such Zeal and
Eagerness you are Building, for the Solemnizing of that Feastival, of fiting
his Temples with a Glittering Thorny Crown of Gold; when in Truth it should be
Solemnized, rather with Sober and Serious Considerations, and with Mature
Deliberation, (not whether it should be done or no?) but that it be done with
Holy and Earnest Desires to God, that God would Fit, Furnish and Enable him,
with such Gifts, Endowments, and Quallifications from Above, and with such
Wisdom, Courage and Boldness, that thereby he might be able to go in and out
before this People; so as that he might be Exemplary, in his being a Pattern to
his Subjects, both in Pity and Patience, Mercy and Moderation, Justice and
Indulgence, Piety and Purity, Courtesy, Chastity, Charity and Faithfulness;
that so there might be, like King and like People, even to the pulling down of
all Vice, with Stage Plays, May-Games, and Pastimes; and Establishing of
Truth, Virtue and True Piety, and all things that may render a Nation Amiable
in the Eyes both of God and Man; that so God who is the God of Mercy, Truth and
Peace, may in much Mercy, Heal our Distempers, and Build up our Nation; and so
Unite the Hearts of all the people of England, one to another; that though they
differ in Judgment, so as that they cannot have close Communion one with
another; yet they may have so much Love one for another, as that they may have
Union one with another; that so there be not such difference in Affections, as
to become Enemies one to another, even to the leading into Captivity, and
casting into strong Holds, Prison-holes and Dungeons, as it is at this day;
although for the Producing and Propagating of Truth, they may Write and
Discourse one with another; that so Erroneous Persons may read themselves and
their Actings, as in a Glass, and so may reform and amend.

But instead of showing persons wherein their failing lies, thou have violently
haled poor Innocent Persons to Prison, who did not injure nor wrong Thee in the
least; in which Actings of thine toward them, Thou have used so much rigor, as
that thou have done it, even with much Indignation, even to the grinding of thy
Teeth; So that thou have done that which caused God once to complain against
Israel of old, Amos 5. 7. who turned Judgment into Wormwood, and caused
Righteousness to cease in the Earth; Thou have not at all shown Mercy:
Threfore, O R. Brown, Hear what the Lord says by his Servant, Iam. 2. 13. For
he shall have Judgment without Mercy, that has showed no Mercy; and Mercy
rejoices against Judgment; For thou have by thy Violent Actings, contracted
that Misery upon thine own Head, that the Prophets of old did on them by their
profaneness, Ier. 23. 15. For thus says the Lord concerning these Prophets,
Behold, I will feed them with Wormwood, and make them Drink of the Water of
Gall; for from the Prophets of Jerusalem, is profaneness gone forth into all
the Land, as thy Violence has done from London: Therefore may it not justly be
said to London, as once the Lord said to Jerusalem, because of the Violence
that was sound in Her, by reason of Her Bloody and Cruel Actings, which sounded
forth over the Land, as thine has done from the City; For thus says the Lord
God, Ezekiel. 24. 6. Woe to the Bloody City, to the Pot whose Scum is therein, and
whose Scum is not gone out of it; bring it out piece by piece, let no lot fall
upon it. And again Verse. 9. to 15. Thus says the Lord God, Woe to the Bloody
City, I will even make the Pile for Fire great. Heap on Wood, kindle the Fire,
consume the Flesh, and spice it well, and let the Bones be burnt. Then set it
empty upon the coals thereof, that the Brass of it may be Hot, and may Burn,
and that the filthiness of it, may be molten in it, that the Scum of it, may be
consumed. She has wearied her self with Lies, and her great Scum went not
forth out of Her; Her Scum shall be in the Fire. In thy Filthiness is
Lewdness. because I have Purged Thee, and thou wast not Purged, thou shall not
be Purged from thy Filthiness any more, till I have caused my Fury to rest upon
thee. I the Lord have spoken it, it shall come to pass, and I will do it, I
will not go back, neither will I spare, neither will I repent according to thy
ways, and according to thy doings shall they judge thee, says the Lord God,
or the Great Jehovah. Therefore says the same Prophet, Ezekiel. 30. 1. The Word
of the Lord came unto me, saying, Son of Man, Prophecy and say, Thus says the
Lord God, How! ye, woe worth the Day; For the Day is near, even the Day of the
Lord is near, a cloudy Day, it shall be the time of the Heathen: For says the
Prophet, Nahum 1. 2. God is jealous, and the Lord revengeth, and is furious,
the Lord will take Vengeance on his Adversaries, and he reserveth (or lays
up) Wrath for his Enemies; The Lord is slow to Anger, and great in Power, and
will not at all acquit the Wicked; the Lord has his way in the Whirlwind, and
in the Storm, and the Clouds are the Dust of his Feet; (he is a terrible God,
behold his Great Power) For he rebukes the Sea, and makes it dry, and dries
up all the Rivers: Bashan languisheth, and Carmel, and the Flower of Lebanon
languisheth; The Mountains quake at him, and the Hills melt, and the Earth is
burnt at his Presence; yea, the World, and all that dwell therein. Who can
stand before his Indignation? And who can abide in the fierceness of his Anger?
His fury is poured out like Fire, and the Rocks are thrown down by him. The
Lord is good, a strong hold in the day of trouble, and he knows them that
trust in him: But with an overflowing Flood, he will make an utter end thereof,
and darkness shall pursue his Enemies: Therefore says the same Prophet, Nahum
3. 1. Woe to the Bloody City, it is full of Lies and Robbery, the Prey departs
not; The noise of a Whip, and the noise of the rattling of the Wheels, and of
the pransing Horses, and of the jumping Chariots; The Horseman lifts up the
brigh: Sword, and the glittering Spear, and there is a Multitude of slain, and
a great number of Carcasses; Because of the Multitude of the Whoredoms of the
well-favoured Harlot, the Mistress of Witchcrafts, that sells Nations through
her Whoredoms, and Families through her Witch-crafts; Behold, I am against
Thee, says the Lord of Hosts, and I will discover thy skirts upon thy Face,
and I will show the Nations thy nakedness, and the Kingdoms thy shame; And I
will cast abominable filth upon Thee, and make Thee Vile, and will set Thee as
a Gazing Stock; For says the Prophet, Ier. 6. 7. As a Fountain casts out her
Waters, so she casts out her Wickedness, Violence and spoil is heard in her,
before me continually is Grief and Wounds; Wherefore says the Lord, Ier. 6. 8.
Be thou instructed, O Jerusalem; And may not the Lord say to London at this
day? Be thou instructed, O London, least my Soul depart from Thee, least I make
Thee Desolate, a Land not Inhabited. And may not his Servants say, especially
now they pull them so violently from their Meetings, even Men, Women, and
Children (as a man may say) and force them into Prison-holes, and Dungeous; I
say may not they justly cry out and say with that Prophet. Ier. 6. 10. To whom
shall I give warning that they may here? Behold their Ear is uncircumcised, and
they cannot hearken; Behold, the Word of the Lord is to them a Reproach, they
have no delight in it. And verse. 13. For from the least of them, even to the
greatest of them, every one is given to Covetousness, and from the Prophet even
to the Priest, every one deals falsely. And may we not safely say to England
at this day, with the same Prophet, Jer. 5. 30. That a wonderful and Horible
thing is committed in the Land, The Prophets prophecy falsely, and the Priests
bear Rule by their means; and the People love to have it so: But what will ye
do in the End thereof? For, O Richard Brown, when the Lord shall make
Inquisition for Blood, he Remembers them, he forgets not the Cry of the
Humble, Psalm. 9. 11. For Precious in the sight of the Lord are the death of his
Saints, Psalm. 116. 15. I mean the peaceable tender Lambs of Jesus, that little
Flock, who are quietly Keeping the Word of Christ's Patience, waiting upon him
in all his Ordinances, Appointments, and Administrations, that are so much
slighted, villified, and under valued by Men in this our Day.

Therefore know, O Mayor, that whilst thou art Haling the Lords People to
Prison, and Endeavoring with all that little Petty Mite of Power thou have
allotted thee, to bring them at an under, that then thou art but doing the
Devils drudgery; for so says the Spirit, Revel. 2. 10. Pear none of those
things which thou shall Suffer; Behold the Devil shall cast some of you into
Prison, that ye may be tried, And you shall have Tribulation ten days: From
whence, O Richard Brown, I would have thee, and all Persecuting spirits to Note
what the Spirit says in the Text, Behold (or take notice of it) the Devil
shall cast some of you into Prison: I say again, let all persecuting spirits
know; yea, and behold, I say again, lest they should seem to have some
Colorable Excuse at that great day of Account, when God shall judge the
secrets of men by Jesus Christ, according to the Gospel, Romans 2. 16, I say, I
would fain have all persons in Places of Authority, know, that as they are set
as Magistrates, they are by the Appointment of God to be a terror to evil
works, and a praise to them that do well, Romans 13. 3. But to Imprison, Punish,
or Banish from the Land of their Nativity, any that own the Gospel of Christ,
upon a Scripture Account, is to prove themselves Persecutors; for I shall
challenge the ablest and Learnedest Persons in this Nation, that can wash their
hands of Rooms Traditions, to show any such Warrant from Gods Word in the
least; for, as I showed to the King in my Fanatics Mite cast into His Treasury
(in the first Impression, in Pages 12. and 13. and in the last, in Page 9. and
10.) that a Minister of the Gospel is not to be as a General in a Army, to
Frighten, Beat, and Fight men into Faith; but as an Ambassador, to persuade,
to Invite, gently to treat with, and to entreat into the way of God; the one
being Evangelical, or Gospel, but the way of force being Diabolical and of the
Devil; and whilst they are made believe they are doing Gods Work (for says
Christ, John 16. 2. the time will come that when they shall kill you they shall
think they do God good service) They are then manifesting themselves to be
Drudges to that Evil One; for so says the Text, Romans 12. 10. The Devil shall
cast some of you into Prison etc.

But here some may object and say, That this is a Text out of the Revelations,
and the Revelations is very Mysterious, and the Text may mean something else.

To which I Answer, That I judge it is meant literally, and that it shall be
Actually performed, as we see in a Measure it is at this day; the which is a
great Confirmation of my Faith in the Truth of it; So that what I have seen,
and felt, and heard, that Declare I, as in other, so in this case; and
therefore I shall farther Answer, that though the Devil, has not as I know
off, nor ever had any Power, Actually as a Commission Officer, as a Mayor, or
Justice of Peace, so to do; yet Instrumentally he may so do, in and by Men that
are so Commissionated; and although I cannot truly say, that ever any Mayor,
either of this or any other City, or any Justice of Peace, of this, or any
other City, Town, or Borrough, was ever a Devil simply so considered; yet I
must take leave to think who is in Men, when they Act so contrary to the very
Heathen, and have not learned, or rather by reason of much Bloodshed, are
hardened and blinded, that they cannot see how to act as mere natural men or
Heathens, that walk only by the Light of Nature; Even to do by another, as
freely, as they would have another do by them: So that though I cannot say,
that any Mayor, or Justice, is a Devil; yet I can safely, and upon a good
account, say with our Apostle, Ephesians. 2. 2. That there are some who walk
according to the course of this World, according to the Prince of the Power of
the Air, the spirit that now works (I pray mind it) the spirit that now
Works in the hearts of the Children of Disobedience. And there are some that
are led Captive by the Devil at his Will, 2 Timothy 2. 26. And such shall fall
upon the People of God when the Devil, their Master, has a Commission Signed,
and not before; for the Devil knew Job long before he could do him any harm;
for the Lord said unto Satan, Have thou considered my Servant Job, that there
is none like him in the Earth, a perfect and an npright man, one that fears
God and Escheweth Evil, Job 1. 8, 9, 10. Then Satan answered the Lord and said,
Does Job fear God for naught? have thou not set an Hedge about him, and about
his house, and about all that he has on every side, thou have blessed the Work
of his hands? and his Substance is increased in the Land: therefore we find
that the Devil said, Put forth thine hand now, and touch All that he has and
he will curse thee to thy Face: And the Lord said unto Satan, Behold, All that
he has is in thy Power, only upon him put not forth thine hand.

So, or when he had his Commission Signed Satan went out from the presence of
the Lord, and the next news we hear of Job, the Sabeans are Commissionated by
this General, the Devil, to take away, to kill and to slay; for so says the
Text, verse. 14. And there came a Messenger to Job and said, Thy Oxen were
Plowing, and the Asses feeding beside them, and the Sabeans fell upon them, and
took them away; yea they have slain the Servants with the Edge of the Sword,
and I only am escaped to tell thee: and the Devil being in a rage against this
good man, verse. 16. The fire of God (says the Servant) came down from Heaven,
and has burned up the Sheep, and the Servants; And in verse. 19. The Winds
smote the four Corners of the house, wherein his Sons and Daughters were, and
killed them.

Whence I would note, That Winds and Fire, though the Creatures of God, yet
when the Devil has a Commission, they are in his Power, and in his hands to
bring his Design about; as that Man of Sin, his Instrument, shall be by him
also Commissionated, Revel. 13. 13. to call for fire from Heaven, in the sight
of Men. I hint this the rather, because the time I judge is very near, when
that shall be Acted forth, that so those that see it may be confirmed and
strengthened in the present Truth; for the Image shall be made of the Beast,
that had his wound by a sword, and did live; and that when it does come, yea
may know it to be of the Devil that grand Impostor, and not of God; though that
fire, as this in Jobs case, shall and did come down from Heaven. But to proceed;

And the next news also that Job hears, is, That the Devil Impowers the
Armies of the Caldeans, who come forth in three Bands, who also killes, slayes
and takes away; And if the Devil will do any thing to the Person of Job, he
must Cogg for a new Commission, and when he has it, he must not touch Jobs
Life. Job 2. 4, 5, 6. By virtue of which Commission, he presently brings him
full of Boyles, from the Crown of the Head to the soal of the Feet; yea he
brings him as low as possible he can, even to the very next door to death; he
brings him as near to it, as we use to say, almost as four pence to a Groat
even to the Dunghill, yet his Life he must not touch; And whilst Job yet
holds his integrity, the Devil comes into his Wife, to persuade him to
Relinguish his Confidence, and to let go his Integrity, that so he might have
his End; as I sear he has in this time of trial, into many a Proud, Covetous,
Carnal, Faithless Woman, to persuade their Husbands to Swear or Engage
themselves out of Prison; contrary to the Requirement of the Lord Christ,
Matthew. 5. 34. Swear not at all; Rather then lose outward Pomp, Pleasure, Pride,
Profit, Preferment, and what upon an outward account, is to preserve an outward
being; little considering what will be the Bitterness of it hereafter.

From which case of Job, before I go farther, I would have all men in Christian
Love to take notice; especially Londons Tradesmen, that Buy and Sell, and get
great Gain; I say, I would have them and all to take notice,

1. That the Devil knows how Men have their Incommings, how they are
preserved, and how they are blessed; who could give so Ready an account to God
of what Job had, both at home and abroad, and how all was preserved; and that
they a void his Baits in their Traiding, both in Buying and Selling.

2. Observe, That whilst Men act in the fear of God doing good, having and
Eschewing Evil, that then God takes special notice of them, and Hedgeth them
about.

3. Observe, That the Devil has no Power on such Persons, neither He nor his
Instruments, till God give them a Commission.

4. That if such Persons, keeping close to their God, by fearing him, and
Eschewing evil, should be by the Commission of God under the Devil, or his
Instruments hands, that then they should not be cast down; but take notice,
that it is but for the Trial of their Faith, and the Increase of their Graces.

And therefore; first, I would beg all Gods People, in all cases to keep close
to God, in his own way, fearing him, and avoiding all appearance of evil; that
so God may keep close to them, and bless them with all Blessings, both
Spiritual and Temporal, and might Hedge them about on every side.

Secondly, That if God should Suffer the Devil, or his Instruments, to cast any
of them into Prison, That then Iob-like they hold their Integrity, to the
advancing of Gods Glory, and the Eternal Benefit of their own Souls; for
Blessed is he that Indureth Temptation, for when he is tried, he shall receive
a Crown of Life, which the Lord has promised to them that Love him, James 1.
12. For they that shall be with the Lamb, are Called, and Chosen and Faithful,
Revel. 17. 14.

Again, We see that King David himself, though a Man after Gods own heart,
became an Instrument in the hand of the Devil, Satan, or that evil one, to
bring down Gods wrath upon Israel, even to the Destruction of threescore and
ten Thousand, in three days time; as I showed fully in my Fannaticks Mite cast
into the Kings Treasury, in Page 51, 52. of the the first Impression, and in
the Last Edition, in Page 38, 39. from 2 Samuel 24. compared with 1 Chronicles. 21. 1.
Yea, and also the Lord Christ says to his People, that they shall be haled
before Kings, Rulers and Magistrates, for his Name sake, Mark 13. 9.

And as that Evil one makes use of Kings, Rulers, and Magistrates, good Men and
wicked Men, some by one means, and some by another, to punish Gods People: So,
secondly, he makes use of Learned Men, gifted Men, and Teachers, as his
Instruments, to seduce and draw off, if possible, from the Simplicity of the
Gospel, and from the Truth as it is in Jesus; And such are called, Bewitchers,
Seducers, Deceivers, False Teachers, and false Apostles: And all this he does
by these Instruments, that he may bring poor Souls to Himself; for says that
Servant of the Lord, such are false Apostles, Deceitful Workers, Transforming
themselves into the Apostles of Christ; and no marvel, for Satan himself is
Transformed into an Angel of Light; therefore it is no great thing if his
Ministers, be Transformed into the Ministers of Righteousness; Yea, such of
which there are many, whom the Lord Christ tells us off, Mat. 7. 22. who in
that day will say unto him, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy Name, and in
thy Name cast out Devils, and in thy Name done many Wonderful Works? who shall
say unto them, I Profess I never knew you, Depart from me you Workers of
Iniquity; So also says the Apostle, 2 Pet. 2. 1. But there were false Prophets
among the People as also there shall be false Teachers among you, who shall
privily bring in Damnable Heresies; yea, so says our Apostle, Acts 20. 29.
Know this also that after my departure, shall greedy Wolves enter in, not
sparing the Flock; also of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse
things, to draw away Disciples after them, etc. Such whom he tells us, do lie
in wait to deceive, Ephesians. 4. 14.

And thus we evidently see, the Devil has his Civil, and his Ecclesiastical
Instruments; his Spiritual, and his Temporal Engines, that if he cannot get men
to relinquish the Ways of God, by a Persecuting Hand, then he striveth what he
can to poison them with False Doctrine, Errors and Heresies; and the one he
endeavors to do generally at all times, the other, but when he has a
Commission: So that it may be said to Persecutors, yea, and to the Devil
himself, as once the Lord Christ said, That he, nor they, can do nothing,
except it be given them from above, John 19. 11. For as the Devil must have his
Commission Signed, before he or his Instruments can Act any thing against Gods
People; So,

Secondly, he is Limited; for, ye shall have Tribulation ten Days, ten Days
is his time Limited; And as I said before, I Judge, and that upon an
Experimental Account, that this Text is meant Really and Actually, that it
shall be performed; So I fear, that some that have Experienced it so to be,
have and do own it strictly in the Sense of Ten Natural, or Artificial Days,
following one successively after the other, consisting of twenty four hours a
piece; or else they would not have made so much haste out of Prison as they
did, some by Swearing, and others by Engaging, to the Dishonor of that God
they serve, the Blemishing of his Truth, and the Disencouraging and stumbling,
of weak, single-hearted Souls, and the great burden of their Brethren under
the same Sufferings; For we are not to Limit the Holy One of Israel, how long
his ten Days shall last, or in what Sense it is meant: Some through Mercy, lay
above ten Weeks, and had ten Months been added to those ten Weeks, and ten
Years to those ten Months; they durst not in the least have entertained a
Thought, to have gained their Enlargement, to the Dishonor of their Master, by
Swearing to King Charles, contrary to the Law of King Jesus, who says (Mat. 5.
34.) Swear not at all. As to the ten Days Imprisonment, we know it possibly
may be some Years, as the Apostle Paul was, who had worn out two Years at Rome,
after he had appealed to Caesar, where the story of the Scripture leaves him
under Bonds, Acts 28. 30. But Gods time of Deliverance, is the best time for
deliverance; through Mercy some have had it; and therefore I am Desirous that
others should wait for it.

But this was, and is the great Confidence and Comfort of some of Gods People,
that the Devil is Limited, as to his Power, as well as to his Time; He can go
no farther than his Bounds; For all that he has, is in thy Hand, said God to
the Devil; Only upon himself put not forth thy Hand, Job 1. 12. And Satan
appeared before the Lord a second Time, Job 2. 3. And the Lord said unto Satan,
Have thou considered my Servant Job, -- who still holds his integrity,
although thou movedst me against him without a cause. From whence, I for my own
part, have great cause to Rejoice, yea and I do Rejoice, in that Causelessly I
and others of our Judgment were haled to Prison, and injuriously Printed as
Traitors, and that by the Good Hand of our God upon us, our Innocence is
cleared, and we cleared without Fees; I say again, it was the Good Hand of our
God upon us, and we must to his Praise, acknowledge it.

But to our Matter: The Devil has done what he can to Job, and yet Job holds
his Integrity; But the Devil will not so leave him; for says the Devil, Skin
for skin, and all that a man has will he give for his Life; put forth now
thine hand, and touch his bones and his flesh, and he will Curse thee to thy
Face. And the Lord said unto Satan, Behold he is in thy Hands, but save his
Life. Here is a new Commission, and a new Limitation; whence we may still take
notice of the Providential Care, that the Great God has of his poor Faithful
Ones; for says our Savior, Are not two Sparrows sold in the Market for one
Farthing, and not one of them shall fall to the Ground, without your Heavenly
Father? But the very Hairs of your Head are all numbered, (pray mind it) are all
Numbered; Fear ye not therefore, ye are of more Ualue than many Sparrows; Does
God take care for Oxen? 1 Cor. 9. 9. Does God take care for Sparrows? And will
he not take care for you, if you in his strength, stand firm to his
Requirements, O ye of Little Faith?

God gives his Servants Gifts and Graces, and God requires an Improvement of
those Gifts and Graces, that so he may have the Glory of them: And therefore
the next thing considerable in the Text is, That the Devil shall cast some of
you into Prison ten Days, that you may be Tried; mind it Souls, it is that you
may be Tried. And now Friends, look to your selves, you that were not willing
in times of Prosperity to keep close to the Words of Christ's Patience, will
hardly with Patience lie in a Prison, or a dark Dungeon, in this hour of
Temptation, that shall come upon all the World, to try them that dwell upon
Earth, to try those that live upon the Earthly Vanities of the Earth, upon
Creatures, and Creature Comforts; I say look to it, for I am verily persuaded,
and that by the Word of the Lord, that God has yet a finer seive to bring his
people through; And as I said in my Fannaticks Letter, in page 19. God is now
going to gather Congregations out of Congregations, and Churches out of
Churches. Oh! how many are there that have already fallen through this Course
Seive, and these no mean Ones neither! This little Ridling time, methinks it
seems to me like the Dragons Tail, spoken of, Rev. 12. 4. That drew the third
part of the Stars after it, and cast them to the Earth; cast them into the
World again, for their earthly Mindedness: I could wish that such souls would
seriously consider the danger they are in, from Heb. 6. 6. Oh consider this,
all ye that forget God, lest he take you away, and there be none to help, Psalm.
50. 22.

Christ is now sitting as a Resiner and Purifier of Silver, Mal. 3. 3. And he
will purify the Sons of Levi, and purge them as Gold and Silver, that they may
offer an Offering in Righteousness; He is now at work with his Fullers Soap;
and how can they be cleansed, that will not endure the scouring Water of
Persecution?

Therefore know, that if ye will not endure the Heat of the Furnace, if ye will
not hold out the Trial, if ye will not trust to the Refiners skill, and wait
his Leisure; if yea will Leap out of the Fire, if you will shrink thus in the
wetting, if ye will neither endure the Fullers scouring, nor the Refiners
Purifying, you cannot expect to offer a Pure Sacrifice in Righteousness.

Consider Friends, that God is now provoking you to jealousy, by a People,
which upon a Scripture account, are not a People; as he did Israel of old, Romans
11. 11. And will you be as stupid as they? Have they not lain by you? Have you
not seen their Courage, their Constancy, and their Boldness, both in their
Sufferings, and their Meetings? And can you give out so easily? Have we not a
far better ground to Suffer then they? Have we not Larger Promises than they?
For Eye has not Seen, Ear has not Heard, neither has it ever entered into
the Heart of Man to conceive, what God has laid up for them that Love Him.

Oh I beseech you Consider, if such things be laid up for them that Love Him;
Let us examine our Ways, and see whether we have Loved Him, his Laws, his
Statutes, his Ordinances, and his People, as we ought to have done? Have we had
that Love to the Lord, his People, and the whole Creation, as we ought to have
had? Has the Conversion of Souls been esteemed in our Eyes? Has the
Establishing and Confirming of Souls, been delightful to us? Have we laid forth
our selves, to make the Ways of King Jesus Amiable, Lovely and Desirable to
all men? Have we by our Constancy in our Assemblings together, according to the
Requirement of the Lord, gone on with Christian Courage and Boldness, not
Fearing the Wrath of the King?

O Friends Consider, whether the Love of King Jesus, who laid down his Life for
you, that you might Live to Eternity, or the Wrath of King Charles, has been
most taking upon your Affections? The Breach of whose Proclamation, take it at
the worst that can be imagined, could but bring you to the Grave, that cannot
contain nor hold you long; For the Sea shall give up the Dead that are in it;
And Death, and Hell, or the Grave, shall Deliver up the Dead that are in them;
And all shall be judged, every Man, yea, every Man, according to his Works: And
at which time, if our Wovks are not found Perfect before God, the second Death
must be our Portion. Oh! That they were wise, that they understood this, that
they would Consider their Latter End, Deuteronomy. 32. 29.

O Consider what your Actings have been! may not the Lord Christ say to you, as
once he said to his Disciples, Mat. 26. 40. What, could you not watch with me
one hour? What, could ye not hold it out with the Foot men? how think ye you
will be able to run with the Horse men? And may not I say to you, in the words
of our Apostle, Gal. 5. 7, 8. You did Run well, who did hinder you, that ye
should not obey the Truth? This persuasion comes not of him that called you,
who said, Mat. 5. 34. Swear not at all. Oh Consider, Friends, the saying of our
Apostle, in verse. 9. How that a little Leaven Leaveneth the whole Lump; How
many eyes are, and have been upon you, and such as you are, that do thus
undervalue the words of your Master King Jesus? What can be expected from poor
Souls, such as are but Tender Lambs of Jesus? O, I beseech you have a care, for
you that have known much, from you God will require the more; O then have a
Care and Consider, that so ye may give up your Account with Joy, and not with
Trembling. Oh that they were wise, but to set Eternity before their eyes, that
so they might please God, not at all fearing the faces of Men.

Yet herein I would not be mistaken; yea I say again, I would not herein be
mistaken; for I do not in the least persuade to Rebellion against King Charles,
to Gratify King Jesus, for that is not agreeable to his Law; But I would have
them, in obeying King Jesus, to obey King Charles; and in obeying King Charles,
to obey King Jesus: As thus, I would have them obey King Jesus, in all his
Laws, Statutes, Ordinances and Appointments; not Fearing King Charles, nor his
Proclamations; And yet I would have them, according to the Requirement of that
Servant of King Jesus, Romans 13. 7. To Render to King Charles, Custom, Tribute,
Fear, and Honor. I would have them Obey King Jesus, and to be so careful to
avoid Forswearing, as not to Swear for that Yesterday, and this to Day, and the
other to Morrow; for to Day, and against to Morrow, as it is at this day with
Thousands; But I would have them so to avoid the danger of Forswearing in every
Case, as that I would have them in no Case to Swear at all; according to Mat.
5. 34. Iams 5. 12. The which in my Fannaticks Testimony against Swearing, is
cleared; And yet I would have them, according to the Requirement of King Jesus
to be as faithful in their Yeas and Nays, to King Charles, yea and Faithfuller
too, than those his Subjects, that Ram, Dam, Rend, Tear, Swear and Forswear.

I would also have them so fear King Jesus, as that I would not have them fear
King Charles; for Rulers are not set up for a Terror to good Works, but to the
Evil, Romans 13. 3. Will thou then not be afraid of the Power? do that which is
good, and thou shall have praise of the same: for he is a Minister of God to
thee for good; but if thou do that which is Evil, be afraid, for he bears not
the Sword in vain; for he is the Minister of God, a Revenger to execute wrath
upon them that do Evil, Romans 13. 3, 4.

But here methinks, I hear multitudes will be ready to object and say; If King
Charles was set up for this end, and had the Sword of Justice for this Cause
put into his hands, why is it as it is with us at this day? Why are we in
several Goales, and Dungeons in most Counties in England, when we are found no
evil Doers? when they have nothing against us in any thing save in the matters
of our God; who says by his Son, Swear not at all; Nay, why are, and have been
several Imprisoned that have sworn? And why have some Persons been forced to
pay Fees as Traitors, though they have Sworn before they were put into Prison,
and not taken from Meetings neither, but from their own habitations, if the
Magistrate, as the Scripture says, be set up to be a praise to them that do
well? why were we thus rudely Hurryed? Why, cries out several in Newgate, are
we thus cruelly Imprisoned by Richard Brown, and kept in without Trial? Why
were we, cry out some thirty of them committed to Newgate the 10th. Day of Abib
Exodus 13. 4. or the first Month, from our peaceable Meeting out of Beech-Lane,
by the City Marshal and the rude Rabble, and saw not the face if a Magistrate
till the Eighteenth day after, that we were carried before him; the tenderest
of whose Mercies are mere Cruelty: I say, if serving of God peaceably and
quietly, with Reverence and Godly Fear, be good in the Sight of God: How can
those answer the turning the Edge of the Sword of Justice upon them, before the
great Jehovah, who put that Sword into their hands? and if so, Why are the poor
peaceable People of God, that are no Turkish slaves, but the free born
Commoners of England, thus enslaved? Why must the Sword of Oppression thus be
suffered in the hands of Richard Brown, instead of the sword of Justice? Why
are the several Justices of Peace, in the several Counties of England, thus
suffered to disturb the Peace of the Innocent Lambs of Jesus, in their
peaceable Meetings?

And if any man shall ask me the reason, why I question these things? I must
Answer them in the words of Little David, in that 1 Samuel 17. 29. What have I
now done, is there not a cause? Is not that great Goliath of our times, defying
the Host of the Israel of God, that Rome-bred Monster, Persecution? Is it not
now vaunting it self against both the Cause and People of God? Is it not now
pulling down those that cannot drink drunk, go like Anticks, Spot and Paint,
Whore, and Rant, Rend and Tear, Swear and Forswear? Is not this a Cause why the
People of God, who will evidence themselves so to be, now to stand up for
Purity, Piety, Peace, Mercy, Truth and Justice, and in such a time as this,
boldly, Courageously, and Manfully, to fight the Lords Battle, and to lay about
them with the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God, Joh. 6. 17. and
chiefly and more frequently to meet together, and with a peaceable, gentle and
holy violence, come with great Zeal into their several and respective Meetings,
to pray to the Lord, and set their shoulder to the Work, as one Man, to offer
an Holy Violence to the Throne of Grace, that God would let King Charles see
what he has done for him; and also what he does expect from him; that so the
End of his faithful Subject, in casting that into his Treasury, may be
effected; To which purpose it shall be my request to all my Brethren, that they
would both privately and Publicly Meet at their Public Meetings, to cry
Mightily to the Father, by the help of the Spirit, in the Name of his Son, King
Jesus, that he would Assist King Charles, in that needful work of
Self-Examination, and due Consideration; Not forgetting the Great, the Mighty,
and the Noble of the Land, nor thee Richard Brown, although thou art so cruel;
But to remember also all Justices of Peace, yea, and all the Nation in general,
that are thus bent against Gods People, with such a spirit of bitterness, that
God would let them see how they requite the Lord for his Benefits bestowed upon
him and them; and to them, in doing so much for him their King: To which
purpose, that it may be the more Effectually done, I say to them all, as I do
to Henry Den about Swearing, in my Fannaticks Testimony against Swearing, in
Page 45 that they would call for, and crave the assistance of all in that Page
mentioned, that so they may, if possible, have one Word of God from the ablest
of their Learned Men, for their thus imprisoning and abusing the Fock of God;
or any man else, for their worshipping their God, because they cannot worship
with them: I say again, I would have every soul be fully satisfied herein,
before they proceed farther, that so they may have the Word of God for their
Warrant, as a Foundation of their Faith herein; for says the Apostle, Romans 14.
23. Whatsoever is not of Faith, is Sin. For Faith is the full persuasion of the
heart of Man, grounded upon the Promises of God, and wrought in us by the
Spirit of God.

So that if thou have not a Word of God for thy Warrant, as a Foundation of thy
Faith herein, thy Faith is no more Faith but Fancy; and therefore have a care
Soul, who ever thou art, though never so great; I say again in the fear of the
Lord, have a care, that the Lord say not one day to you, that are thus found
persecuting his People for worshipping him (not at all harming you) as once he
said by his Prophet to Israel of old, Isai. 1. 12. Who has required this at
your hands; Why have you Ensnared, Inslaved, Imprisoned, and evilly Entreated
my People; when I have done so much for you, when I have given you so much
Liberty, so much Freedom, so many Privileges and Enjoyments? and can ye not
suffer the Members of that Body, of which my Son Jesus is the Head, no Liberty
at all? When King Charles wanted his Kingdoms, Wealth, Liberty, Subjects,
Armies, Arms, Ammunition, Magazines, and Storehouses, Sumptuous and Fair
Buildings, Parkes and Chases, Meadows, Fields and Pastures, Ships and Shipping,
with all that He has, and all that He does enjoy; and all this He has by His
own showing, again and again, from the hands of our Father, that Loved us and
gave his Son to Die for us; yea, He has what He has from the hands of our
Father, who is so to us by Promise; not only by Creation, but also by
Regeneration and Adoption; yea, we have his Word for it, 2 Cor. 6. 17, 18. And
by his assistance have performed the conditions, and I have his Seal for my
Sonship, Ephesians. 1. 13. and through Mercy I speak not Parrot-like, but what I
have through Grace seen and known, felt and looked upon, and handled, that I
declare; it is that which gives me boldness now, Acts 4. 13. and will give it
me at the day of Judgment, 1 Job. 4. 17. And although we are his peaceable and
quiet Subjects, by the appointment of our Father, yet he cares not for us, but
is desirous to be rid of us, and no Room fit for us in all his Territories,
but a Prison; and in these Prisons the Dungeon, and that by many thought to
good for us too; although we never deserved such things at his hands. I am sure
he promised us better things, and that upon conditions too, the which on our
parts were never yet broken, nor never shall be, let him deal with us however
he pleases; yet our peaceable Meetings are broken, and our Forms and
Accommodations in those Meetings, broken to pieces, Demollished and burned; and
that by the Rude Rabble: and should we (were it our Principle) be but half so
Tumultuous as these are, that at every turn have to do with us, we should then
be looked upon as very dangerous Persons and such as there might be some color
of Imprisoning; but, blessed be the Lord, we are not such, and yet are and have
been Imprisoned: and in Kent several have been Haled away to Maidestone, who
now lie there; and our Brother Cross, who a short time before with his own
hands, presented a moderate and an honest Petition into the Kings Hand, in
order to the procuring a Liberty according to the Kings Promise again, again,
and again; but we see the Conclusion is a Prison, a Dungeon; but this I am
confident of, that he that fitteth in the Heavens does laugh such violent
Actions to scorn, and the Actors of such Oppressions, he will have them in
Derision; yea I say again, the Lord will have them in Derision, for so says
the Lord by the Mouth of a King, Psalm. 2. 1. etc. Why do the Heathen rage, and
the People Imagine a vain thing? the Kings of the Earth set themselves, and the
Rulers take Counsel together against the Lord, and against his Anointed;
saying, Let us break their Bonds asunder, and cast away their Cords from us.
But in the midst of all these Contrivances, as in Belshazzars case, Dan, 5. 5.
there is a Handwriting in the way, that will cause some Trouble, the which I
cannot but declare, and it is no more but the words of the Text; for says the
Spirit of the Lord in verse. 4. He that sits in the Heavens shall Laugh (and
who can hinder him?) yea the Lord shall have them in Derision, and who shall
gainsay it?

But give me leave in Christian Love to go on to give this Caution, in the
words of the same Man of God, in v. 10. Be wise therefore, O ye Kings, be
Instructed yea Judges of the Earth; ye Judges before whom the peaceable People
of God often in your Circuits are Haled; And you Judges of the Earth that are
to Seal Decrees against them; I say again, take good heed in Gods fear, what ye
do to them; for says the Prophet to the People of God, and that to their great
comfort, Zach. 2 8. He that touches you, touches the Apple of his Eye; a
tender place, a choice thing, yea, they are his Sons and Daughters, 2 Cor. 6.
17, 18. His Jewels, Mal. 2. 17. His choice ones, that shall be his; such as he
himself will spare, as a man spares his own son that serves him.

And if you will not spare them, look to it, the Lord will have you in
Derision, the Lord will Laugh you to scorn; O then be instructed ye Judges of
the Earth, for ye judge not for man, but for the Lord; And will you not spare
the peaceable Sons and Daughters of God, that he would have spared? If King
Charles should say to you, Spare such or such a man that comes before you,
would you dare to Condemn and Execute him? How dare you then Arraign, Judge,
and Condemn to Prisons, and strong holds an Dungeons, the Sons and Daughters of
the great God, who are so near and dear to him; and such of whom the Lord
Christ says, He that receives you, receives me? Mat. 10. 40. And in as much
as ye did it not to one of these littles ones, ye did it not unto me, Mat. 25.
45. And, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Acts 9. 4. Therefore upon the
Seat of Judgment Remember Mercy; for he shall have Judgment without Mercy,
that hrth showed no Mercy -- Jam. 2. 13.

I would not here be mistaken, I do not plead with you Judges, that you should
pervert Judgment, far be it from me so to do; but if ye find a Baptist, such
as I am now pleading for, a Malefactor, let my Tongue cleave to the Roof of my
Mouth, or my Pen fall out of my hand, if ever I either speak or write in
Vindication of any, or of my Self, if found in the way of evil-doing: But if
after the way, which you call Heresy, I or any are found worshipping the God
of our Fathers, I say again and again, I hope I shall by Divine assistance
plead and write if possible; And herein, I would have you all to take that safe
Counsel and good Advice of one of your Brethren a Doctor of the Law, Acts 5.
34. who said verse. 38. Refrain from these men, and let them alone, for if this
Counsel or this Work be of man, it will come to nothing; but if it be of God,
ye cannot overthrow it, lest ye be found fighting against God; And it is a
fearful thing to fall into the hands of the Living God, Heb. 10. 31. For our
God, or the God of the Baptized People, is a consuming fire. Use Moderation
therefore I forewarn you, lest the fire of this God fall suddenly upon you, as
once it did upon Sodom and Gomorrah, and the Neighboring Cities, for their
abominations: Be wise therefore, O ye Kings, be Instructed ye Judges of the
Earth; serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice before him with trembling; Kiss
the Son lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way, when his wrath is
kindled, ye a but a little; Blessed, yea I say again, Blessed are all they that
trust in him, Psalm. 2. 10, etc.

O then I beseech you in Gods fear have a care, both Prince and People, what ye
do, in shutting up the peaceable Meetings of the quiet People of God, such as
would, according to the requirement of the Lord, do Gods Work in Gods way; they
would not neglect the assembling of themselves together, as the manner of some
is, but would Exhort one another daily, whilst it is called to day; who
according to the Requirement of the Lord by his Apostle, 1 Timothy 2. 1. would
first of all make Prayers, Supplications, Intercessions, and giving of Thanks
for all men; for Kings and all that are in Authority; for King Charles, and all
his Courtiers; for Mayor Brown, and all his Citizens; And for Justices of Peace
in all Cities, Corporations, Towns and Borroughs, with all their Gentry,
Citizens, Manufactures, Yeoman, and Rusticks; that God would open the eyes of
their understandings, so as that they might see what they are a doing, and how
they on all hands, are rendering to God for all his Benefits bestowed upon them;
in making and in so Eagerly prosecuting that Proclamation, to shut up those
peaceable, quiet, harmless, and In-offensive Meetings of Gods People, to the
hindering, as much as in them lies, their Prayers from Ascending up to God, and
his Blessing from Descending upon them; in which however, they have, and shall
manifest themselves to be our Enemies, yet I shall let them know, that
notwithstanding their thus using us, we dare not neglect our Duties, in praying
for them; for that is the Requirement of our Lord and Master King Jesus, who as
he says, Swear not at all, Mat. 5 34. so also he says, verse. 44. Love your
Enemies, Bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and Pray
for them that despitefully use you: And for my own part, I dare no more omit
the doing of the One, than I dare yield to the acting of the other: And
therefore, O Richard Brown, I shall let thee know, that get me into thy
Clutches when thou will, and get a Commission to offer me up as soon as thou
can; yet know, that in the words of my Brother Stephen, he who first taught
Gods People how and in what manner to Suffer, Acts 7. 60. I shall in his words
say, both of him that shall give out such a Commission, and thee that shall
gain it, and of him that shall Execute it, and of all that shall rejoice at it,
and consent to it; yea, for all, be they High, be they Low; be they Rich, be
they Poor; be they Young, be they Old; be they Free, be they Bound, King or
Subjects; I say in the words, and I hope in the Spirit of Truth, with my
Brother Stephen I shall Pray, The Lord lay not this sin to their charge: and in
the words of him that was not ashamed to call his Congregation, (Heb. 2. 10.)
nor his Disciples, Brethren, Sisters and Mothers, Mat. 12. 49, 50. I say in his
words, I hope by the help of his Spirit, I shall cry out and say, Father,
forgive them they know not what they do, Luke 23. 34. For this is a day in
which we must expect nothing less, but Mockings, Iearings, Scoffings, and
Deridings, Buffettings, Banishments and Imprisonments, with Torturings, and
cruel Deaths; for I perceive by the Hatred, Malice, and Malignity of the
generality of the Sons and Daughters of Men, that it must fare with us in our
Crooked and Adulterous Generation, as with the Flock of God gone before, yea,
and with our Master himself, who was said to have a Devil, John 10. 20. And at
length, Away with him, Crucify him, Crucify him, Mat. 27. 22. The Apostles
Peter and Paul were both put to death, in the last year of the Emperor Nero;
Paul was Beheaded, and Peter was Crucified with his head downwards, says
Eusebius Pamphilius, in his third Book, the first Chapter.

O Friends, Consider, what are your Fears? what are your Doubts? Did ye not run
well in a Sun-shiny day, who did binder you? you lay all your Confidence in an
Arm of Flesh, and is it vanished with it? Shall so many of us come out of
Egypt with Israel of old? And shall our Carkastes fall thus as did theirs in
the Way? Shall but some few Calebs and Ioshuahs enter into Canaans Glory of the
old Stock? Numb. 14. 22, 23, 24. What need we Fear, are not all our Hairs
numbered? Can the Two Witnesses be Slain, till the Forty and Two Months be
expired, and their Prophesies fulfilled? Does not the Nation ring of your
Apostasy in this Cloudy Day? Do not that People called Quakers, upbraid us with
your backslidings in one County, and another, a third, and more?

O Friends, It is the burden of my Soul, to hear such Actings as I hear; and
that my rejoicing toward you, and on your behalfs, in my Fannaticks Letter, in
page 5. etc. is to so little purpose; I well hoped it might have proved an
Instrument in Gods Hand of much good unto you; but I fear it was much slighted
and undervalued, because it dropped not from a tall Cedar, but sprung up from
so mean and low a shrub: But to such Souls, I must say in the Words of the
Prophet, Isa. 40. 28, etc. Have thou not known? Have thou not considered? Have
thou not heard, that the everlasting God, the Lord, the Creator of the ends of
the Earth faints not, neither is weary? There is no searching of his
Understanding; He gives power to the faint, and to him that has no might, he
increases strength: Even the Youths shall faint, and the Young men shall
utterly fail; But they that wait upon the Lord, shall renew their strength;
they shall mount up with Wings of Eagles, they shall run and not be weary; they
shall walk, and not be faint, for of a Truth, God is no respecter of Persons,
but in every Nation, he that fears Him, and works Righteousness, is
accepted of him, Acts 10. 35.

And now, why should I much wonder to see such Apostatizing times, when the
Lord by his Servant tells us, That day shall not come, except there come a
falling away first; at whose coming he himself puts it to the Question,
Whether he shall find Faith on the Earth? Luke 18. 8. And this is the use, that
through mercy, I make of these times; I see hereby, my Savior was a True
Prophet; And this is a Confirmation to me, that I am in the Truth, in which
time I also see and feel such Halings before Magistrates to Prison, in this
time when Iniquity does so much abound. And

Secondly, This leads me out of my self, to stand by the strength of Him that
is Mighty, by whose strength only I have yet stood, and still hope to stand;
It was by his strength, that I lived and survived the dampnesse of the Dungeon,
void of Light or Air, those ten Weeks together; It was by his help, that our
Consciences were kept undefiled; and by his help it was, that way was made for
us, in the Hearts of the greatest of the Nation, to Release us without Fees; It
is by the help of Joseph's God, that was with him in the Prison, Genesis 39. that
it was so well with us as it was; It was by the help of Daniels God, that sent
his Angel to shut the Mouths of the Lions, that we were preserved from harm,
amongst a company of rude people, Felons and others; it was by the help of the
God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, that we came out of our Dungeon without
harm; And by the help of him that walked with them in the fiery Furnace, it
was, that we were constantly refreshed, comforted and supported; it was by the
help of him that turned again the Captivity of Job, that we were brought again
from our Captivity; it was by the help of him, who enabled David to break
through a Troop, and to leap over a Wall, that we are at present Escaped from
the Guards of Soldiers, that watched our Gates night and day; it was by the
help of him who sent his Angel to strike off Peter's Chains, and to open the
Prison-doors, that we were enlarged; it was by help of him whose grace is
sufficient for poor Souls, that we were supported in our Spirits; Yea, it was
by the good will of him that burned in the Bush, that our Zeal for the Cause of
Christ, was and still is continued. Oh then, let me beg you in Gods Fear, not
to droop in this Cloudy day, for there is no Crown but for the over-commer, no
Reaping but for him that does not faint; Oh then let the hands hanging down,
and the feeble knees be strengthened, and held up, and look up and lift your
heads, for your Redemption draws nigh, the day of Jesus is at hand, the
Kingdom of God is even at the door; for yet a little while and he that shall
come, will come and will not tarry, and the Just must live by Faith.

And now Rich. Brown, I would have thee know, that though I speak to my
Brethren in this City and Nation, in some part of my Discourse, yet it is not
besides my business; for thou well know, that it is the nature of an Alarm
so to do, to Rouse Friends as well as Enemies; I shall Appeal to thine own
Practice herein, that when thou gave an Alarm, to Oxford, Wallingford,
Banbury, or any other of the Kings Quarters; whether thou did not as well
therein mind thy Friends of their Duties, as well as thou did desire to put
the Kings Friends to hardship, and upon Difficulties; And finding so much cause
for it as I do, occasioned partly by the Rigor of others in places of
Authority in other parts; as well as by thy cruelty to those our Friends, who
are as good Friends to Kings Charles, as those with such Eagerness thou did
formerly put to such hardship, Imprison, and hang up; I have, I say good reason
upon this account, to say what I have said.

And if thou seem to take Exceptions at my saying, we are as good Friends to
King Charles, as those thou so dealt withal.

To this I shall answer, and let thee know, that thou art a far greater Enemy
to King Charles the Second herein, then thou wast to his Father King Charles
the First, King Charles the Second, and the Duke of York, in thy so hastily
hanging up, and making such Havoc of his Friends at Abington, or else where;
But to speak in the Language of David, though in another case, 1 Chronicles. 21. 17.
As for these poor Sheep, what have they done? Pick and choose, take the
Offenders, if thou find them such, and hang them up if thou judge^^ meet,
but (...) the (...) Suffer for, nor with the Guilty, nor the peaceable with the
violent: I say again, that thou did never do the King, nor (...) greater
Myschief, in the height of all thy fury against them and their Friends, then
thou do King Charles the Second (...) Gods People their Liberty; when they
should (...) their several and respective Meetings, praying to the Lord, yea,
and crying mightily to the great Jehovah, for his assistance and help, to be
showred down upon him; that as he has given him such a Benefit, as to enjoy
himself again in this Land of his Nativity; that so God would enable him to
make suitable Returns for such Benefits bestowed; considering the great Danger
of the neglect of it, that will redound, both to him and his people, as I
showed him in my Fannaticks Mite, cast into the Kings Treasury, as in the whole
discourse of it, is evident: and not only so, but also to pray for the great
Council, that are now going to Sit, that God would bless it, both to the King
and his People, and that what they do, they might be directed by the Lord, so
as that they might be a Blessing both to the King and his People; to the
setting a period to these Oppressions that are upon the Freeborn People of
England, who several of them have been and are Imprisoned without any Just and
Legal Cause, and that the Oppressor might cease out of the Land, and that there
might be no more leading into Captivity, and that complaining in our Streets,
might have an End; that the Alarm of War, and the sound of the Trumpet, might
be banished our borders; that so the People of the Land might beat their Swords
into Plow-shares, and their Spears into Pruninghooks; that all may act out of
a Principle of peace, with them who some of them only are Fighting the good
fight of Faith; that so they may lay hold of Eternal Life, the Weapons of whose
warfare are not Carnal, 2 Cor. 10. 4. That they in their Meetings might also
Pray for their Enemies, and them that hate them, and despitefully use them; and
for thy Self, O Richard Brown, that God would show thee what thou art now
doing, that the Lord Christ would cause thee to hear a Word from Heaven,
saying, Richard, Richard, why persecutest thou me? I am Jesus whom thou
Persecutest: O what Benefit would this be. O Richard Brown, to thy poor Soul; I
say again, what a Benefit would it be, to thy poor, lean, languishing sick
Soul, to find thy Self to become a Preaching Paul, of a Persecuting Saul? Did
thou but know the Efficacy of the servent Prayer of a Righteous Man, though
poor, though mean, though despica ble in the Eye of the world, though unlearned
as to Humane Learning; yet a Prayer of such a man, accompanied with Faith, and
made to the Lord in the Name of Jesus Christ, by the help of his own Spirit,
that helps our Infirmities, that Spirit that is from the Lord, and knows the
Mind of the Lord, that makes Intercessions to the Lord, with Sighs and groans
that cannot be uttered; and he that searches the heart, knows what is the
mind of the Spirit, because he makes Intercession for the Saints, according
to the will of God, Romans 8. 26, 27.

And now, O Richard Brown, consider with thy self seriously, what harm such a
Prayer would do thee, the King or his People; nay, consider with thy self, and
that seriously too, whether thou do not do evilly in what thou do do, in
that thou blockest up the Meetings of Gods People, such as thou have nothing at
all against in the least, but as to the matter of their God: I say again and
again; yea, and I could wish with all my Soul, that I had but such a voice, as
that I could but speak it so, as that thy Soul might be truly sensible of it,
that we, are some of us, an Innocent, harmless People, such whom thou nor any
man, as to actions of violence, or any manner of ill will, either to the King,
or his People in the least, unless it be for wishing and desiring the same
thing to King Charles the second, thy Self, and all his Subjects, as once our
aged Brother Paul, did to King Agrippa, Acts 26. 29. I would to God that not
only King Charles, and thou O Richard Brown; but all that are Englands
Subjects this day, were altogether, as to my Principles, both to God and man,
as I am.

And now, O Mayor, I would have thee seriously to consider, what, my End
intended in this my Giving thee this Alarm, is; and if thou do not know, as
I fear thou do not, in the singleness of my soul, I shall let thee know, it
is not for any Revenge I bear thee, for God is my witness I lie not, I do it
not for any such End, but that if possible, thou might, make a right
Improvement of it; and that thou might for the time to come, even quit thy
Self like a Man; yea, that thou quit thy Self as thou pretendest thy Self, as a
Christian; that so thou would in the Spirit of Love, Meekness, and
Moderation, if thou have it, instruct persons that are out of the way; and not
to cause them to say of thee, as the Indians said of the Spaniards, that were
once so cruel to them, That if a Spaniard went to Heaven, they did not desire
to come there; Yea, I say, I shall let thee know, that as the Lord Christ,
intends not a destruction to that Soul, that he requires his Church, should
be delivered up unto Satan; but that it should be for the destruction of the
flesh, or of that fleshly part, that caused him so to offend; that so the
Spirit might be saved in the day of the Lord, 1 Cor. 5. 5. Even so it is with
me, it is in Love I bear to thy soul that I do it, and for the ease of Gods
People; and therefore I shall let thee know, that a desperate Wound must have a
desperate Cure; for Extremes must have Extremes to Cope withal, and Ulsers
must have flesh to feed upon, not skin: It is neither Smoothing nor Soothing
thee up in thy condition, that will do thee any good, but harm; therefore in
the faithfulness of my Soul, I must tell thee, that thy condition is not to be
dallyed withal; And as the honest Lawyer, as aforesaid, deals with his
Clyent, so shall I with thee, and let thee know, That if that grim Sergeant,
Death, shall but once Arrest thee, upon an Action of Battery, in the Name of
the great Jehovah, at the Suit of King Jesus, for Persecuting him in his Poor
Members, and shall charge thee in his Declaring, with a Brown, Brown, Why
Persecutest thou me? He will recover such damages of thee, at that Great
Tribunal, that he will deliver thee to the Iaylor, and he will commit thee to
Prison, and so thou shall not come thence, till thou have Paid the uttermost
Farthing: Therefore be persuaded to agree with thy Adversaries quickly, whilst
thou art in the way, Mat. 5. 25. And take that advice of the Prophet, Isai. 55.
6. Seek the Lord whilst he may be found, and call upon him whilst he is near.
Let the wicked forsake his Ways, and the unrighteous man his Thoughts, and let
him return unto the Lord, for he will have Mercy; and to our God, for he will
have Compassion.

And secondly, I must also with the honest Physician, let thee know, that thou
have a very soul Body, and overflowing with gross Humors, that are very
apparent; the which may easily be distinguished, without either feeling thy
Pulses, or casting thy Water; for thou have several confused Distempers, as thy
Belly swelling with a Timpany of Pride, and thy Body full of the dropsical
Humors of Uiolence and Oppression; And thou art deeply infected with that
unsatiable disease against the People of God, called Apetitus Caninus; And yet
in a deep Consumption of common humanity, pity, and true piety, patience,
penetency, and purity, love, lenity, and true loyalty, meekness, moderation,
and true manhood; yea, and like Ephraim of old, Hos. 7. 9. thou have gray hairs
here and there upon thee, and thou do not know it; and like that Angel of the
Church of Sardis, Rev. 3. 1. thou have a Name to live, and art dead; and with
that Leader of that Laodicean Church, Rev. 3. 17. supposest thy Condition to be
very good, and that thou art Rich, and that thou have need of nothing; and
know not, that thou art poor, and wretched, and miserable, and blind, and
naked: For thy Actings plainly discover thee to be what thy Profession is not;
But, says our Savior, By their Fruits ye shall know them; Do men gather
grapes of thorns, or figgs of thistles? Matt. 7. 16. Do men pretend to be
Christians, and yet act so unlike Christ, and the Primitive and Present
Christians? What! a Child of God, and of a Persecuting Spirit? I must confess a
Wolves Nature wrapped up in a Sheeps Skin, is that which our Savior has
foretold we must expect in these latter days; and they (...) so far from being
his, as that he forewarneth his People of them, and requires his to beware of
them: What! a Son to the God of Peace, Romans 16. 20. and yet a Persecutor? A
Brother to Christ, the Prince of Peace, Isa. 9. 6. and yet a hater of his
Church, which is his Body? Col. 1. 24. A man pretending to be led by the Spirit
of God, (for if a man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his, Romans 8.
9.) whose fruit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness,
meekness and temperance, Gal. 5. 22. against which there is no Law: Yet thou
show thy self to be so far from being led by that Spirit, as that thou
would fain find out a Law, to be put in rigid execution, against those
peaceable quiet Baptists, that are led by that Spirit.

And because thou, nor thy cruel Brethren Magistrates, in several Counties, as
you pretend your selves to be, godly and christian, yet finding no Law of King
Jesus for any such cruel abominable actings, as you execute upon persons, to
fulfill your own lust and malice, therefore ye are forced to lay claim to the
Proclamations of King Charles, and before there came forth one for your turns,
some in Lincolnshire made use of that against Swearing and Debauched persons,
who imprisoned John Watts and others in that County, and William Iefferyes,
Matthew Caffin, and our Brother Millar, with others, were questioned upon that
Proclamation also, as evil doers, in the West Country, near Dorchester: So
that common Proverb in them is fitly to be applied, which says, It is an easy
matter to find a stick to beat a Dog withal; yet if King Charles had not made
that Proclamation against our quiet and harmless Meetings, ye had missed of
your cruel and malicious Ends: And I must plainly say, that if he had not made
it, he had showed some respect to us, for then he had continued us as he found
us, till a Parliament had restrained us; but the making of this, and refusing
to take it off, till a Parliament, looks with such a dreadful face, as that it
has frightened many a poor weak soul into a persuasion to Swear, contrary to
the Requirement of Christ, who says, Matthew. 5. 34. Swear not at all, but let
your Yea be Yea, and your Nay Nay, for what is more than this comes of evil,
or of that evil One; For says he, Except your righteousness shall exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no wise enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven. So that our Yeaes, and Nayes, should. be more than other
men's Swearings; and therein we should be as faithful to King Charles in what we
undertake, as our Brethren of Holland are to their States.

But see, O Richard Brown, whether thy violence herein, does not evidence thee
to be one that is acting in the fruits of the flesh, the consequences whereof
are very dangerous; for says our Apostle, Gal. 5. 20. The works of the flesh
are manifest, some of which are these, which are so predominant in thee, even
hatred, variance, emulation, wrath, strife, and envyings, of which I have told
you in times past, that they that do such things shall not inherit the Kingdom
of God. Thou that art so eager to force persons to Swear against the Pope, do
thou fight with Roms Engines, Imprisonment, Banishment, the Gallows, Fire and
Faggot?

And now let me ask thee, O R. Brown, Where are thy senses? Do thou pretend
to own the Gospel of Peace, Ephesians. 6. 15. the God of Peace, the Prince of Peace,
and the Spirit of Peace, and yet actest so contrary to them all? Do thou
think rational men have not their eyes in their heads, because thou art blind?
Will thou with the Idiot, think every one a Fool, when he is the greatest or
most apparent one himself? Will thou with the Drunkard, think that every man
else is Drunk, when drink has jostled out his Reason? Do thou well know
thine own Opinion, as to God and his Truth, so as that thou can say, this or
that is Error? or rather does not thy actings discover, that thy Religion is as
those Bishops of England was in K. Henry the Eight's, Q. Mary's, and Q.
Elizabeth's times? now for this, and then for that, and then again for the other.

Again, Consider I beseech thee, whereabout thou art; as for thy Religion, I
query whether thou art not yet to choose it? I fear thou art as uncertain to
that, as thou art in thy acts of Violence, and War: Once for the late King,
when upon his Birth-days, and other such Festivals, thou had thy
vainglorious Bonfires in Loyters, that must Sail up to White Hall with Wind
and Tide currently, to let King Charles the First and his Courtiers know, that
there was one Richard Brown of White Friars, a Woodmonger, that did Honor him,
his Birth, Breeding and Progeny: But so soon as the Tide is Turned, and when
both Wind and Tide is against King Charles, his Heirs and Successors, House of
Lords and Bishops; then, Who but Major General R. Brown engaging eagerly
against the House of the Stuarts, House of Lords and Bishops? And now that the
Wind and Tide are come about again, who but R. Brown? who more busy than he?
who more double diligent? who more officious to frighten great eminent men of
parts and abilities, into a persuasion (as he did Ieremieh Ives) to Swear, if
not to Forswear? as in my Fanatics Testimony against Swearing is evident; with
what is also judged a Reason of it in thee, as in Page, 45. So that here is up
and down, and down and up again; One time for a King, Bishops, and House of
Lords, then against them, and now for them again; and none of all this without
Swearing: So that here is Swearing for, and Swearing against, and Swearing for
again; And because thy Throat is so open a Sepulcher, thou art mad, and wilt
Imprison all, both young and old, rich and poor, that cannot swallow Oaths as
greedily as thy Self; So that here is one thing and another, and what you will,
and for what you please, if you please but to confer Honors, Profits, and
Preferments upon him, provided you be but of the strongest side, for that has
been the course all along: So that generally men, to save their own stake (as
we use to say) will Swear for that Power one Week, Month or Year, which the
next, or so soon as it stands with their own Interest, they will be ready both
to Pull down, and Swear against: So that who but Richard Brown, when King
Charles the First was in Power at White Hall? but when the same King Charles,
was at Holmby House a Prisoner, who but Major General Richard Brown, in full
Commission against him? and who else must be sent as one of the Commissioners
to treat with him?

But, Consider of thy cruelty, in all thy undertakings, Do thou not think O
Richard Brown, that men have their eyes in their heads? do not all men
generally know, that Persecution is one of Romes horrid, impious, and most
abominable Bratts? For in her shall be found the Blood of the Prophets and of
Saints, and all that were slain upon the earth, Revel. 18. 24. For I saw the
Woman drunk with the Blood of the Saints, and with the Blood of the Martyrs of
Jesus -- Revel. 17. 6. And therefore, may I not say to thee, as once the Lord
Christ said to James and John, Luke 9. 55. who when the Samaritans would not
receive them, they queried with him, whether they should not call for fire from
Heaven, as Elias did, and consume them? To whom the Lord Christ made this
reply, saying, Ye know not what spirit ye are of; for the Son of Man came not
to destroy men's lives but to save them. Therefore, O Richard Brown, examine thy
spirit, and see whether it be from Christ or not; For a Kingdom divided against
it self cannot stand.

And how can men profess themselves to be Christ's Disciples, and yet when they
kill, banish, or hale to prison for the name of Christ, they think they do God
good service? Can these things stand together? are these things agreeable to
the mind of God upon a Scripture account? Examine thine own heart, and try
thine own ways, and as thou professest thy self to be a Christian, lay thy
Actings to the Rule of Gods Word, try and examine them according to that saying
of our Apostle, 1 John 4. 1. -- Try the spirits whether they be of God? But if,
upon a Scripture account, thou art not willing to enter into judgment with thy
self, then be persuaded to try thy self by that Light within, as that People
called Quakers, require their Hearers; Even by the Light of Nature, that which
men have given them to witness for or against them, that which will either
accuse or excuse, even that Witness-bearer, spoken of by our Apostle, Romans 2.
14. which Light is to be followed by those that have not the written Law of God
to Regulate them; and therefore we shall read the Text thus, For when the
Gentiles which have not the Law (written) do by Nature the things contained in
the Law (written) these having not the Law (written) are a Law unto themselves,
which shows the work of the Law (written) to be written in their hearts, their
Conscience also bearing them witness, and their thoughts in the mean while
accusing or excusing one another: So that that which does accuse or excuse, is
Conscience, or that Light within; so that by their rule, Conscience, or the
Light of Nature, is Christ; because it does make manifest, and so they run it
up; That which does make manifest is Light, and Christ is Light, and this Light
is Christ, or the Spirit of Christ; Christ and his Spirit is one, and cannot be
divided; and so that Christ, or their Light within them, is in them their hope
of glory. I say again to thee, Richard Brown, Did thou but act and walk as
the Heathens and Gentiles, did thou but walk just according to the Light of
Nature, thou would not dare to act as thou have and do.

And seeing Conscience is that which does either accuse or excuse, and that
thou have and do that which in Conscience ought not to be done; let me in
plainness tell thee, I fear thy Conscience is asleep; I say, it is to be feared
Conscience is and has been a long time in a deep Lethargy; therefore jogg it,
rouse it, awake it, tell it, it has slept long enough, and that thou have need
of it, for thou have an Alarm from one of the Sons of Zion, that tells thee
thy Condition is sad, and that he is such an one unto thee, as once the Lord
Christ was to the Woman at the Well of Samaria, John 4. 17, 29. that he is
downright with thee, and tells thee in plainness of speech what thou have
done, and what is thy danger, and what thy acts of violence will bring thee to.

And when Conscience is thoroughly awaked, ask it seriously, and desire it to
satisfy thee plainly, whether it does judge, that thou thy self could be
willing to be served, as thou have served many a poor man, yea many a miserable
poor man, that thou have cast into Prison? And were thy Children tender and
young, as possible some of theirs are, at thy poor, empty, and naked house,
crying out for bread; and thou kept in Prison not in a capacity to gain thine
own nor theirs, even to the wounding of thy Soul, and to the great burden of
thy Spirit; Ask thy Conscience also, whether it ought not to make scruple of an
Oath, especially in Swearing for and against? and whether thou could be
willing to be forced to Swear one day for this thing, and another day against
that same thing? Ask it also, whether it could be willing to be forced to go to
such a Worship as is merely Formal, Carnal, and in a great measure Papal, when
it is really convinced of the contrary? and whether it could be willing to be
forced to maintain an Antichristian Ministry, in opposition to the true
Ministers of Jesus?

I say again, O Richard Brown, if thou art not willing to act as a Christian
upon a Scripture account, then rouse up, and awaken thy Conscience, and act but
like a mere Heathen; and confident I am, thou will find more comfort in it in
the conclusion, than thou will in thy present actings by many degrees.

For now thou art Persecuting the People of God, not knowing in what Relation
they stand to the great God, and his Son Jesus Christ; for as the whole bulk of
mankind was in a lost condition, and as our first Parents sold us all, by
reason of their first transgression; so God found a way out of his mere Love,
to buy us again to himself; for so says our Apostle, 1 Cor. 6. 19, 20. Ye are
not your own, for ye are bought with a price; therefore glorify God both in
your bodies and in your spirits, which are Gods. And 1 Cor. 7. 23. Ye are
bought with a price, be not the servants of men; And he that bought us, says
by his Son, Mat. 5. 34. Swear not at all; and yet thou do imprison men and
women, because they will not serve men in Swearing for them, and when they
would have them.

Secondly, We cost God dear, even his own Son, Tit. 2. 14. yea, the precious
blood of that Son; For so says the Text, 1 Pet. 1. 18. For ye are not redeemed
with corruptible things, as silver and gold, from your vain conversation,
received by tradition from your fathers; but with the precious Blood of the Son
of God, as of a Lamb without blemish, and without spot: Yea, by the Blood of
him that loved us and washed us from our sins in his own Blood, Rev. 1. 5. and
Rev. 5. 9. and Heb. 9. 12, 13, 26.

And so, First, We are his Portion; for the Lords People are his Portion, Deuteronomy.
32. 9. Zech. 2. 12. And now Richard Brown, consider what thou art doing, thou
art squandring away the Lords Portion; thou were better by many degrees be
doing something else, for the very hairs of their heads are all numbered, Matt.
10. 30. and he that touches them, touches the apple of Gods eye, Zech. 2. 8.
Yea, so says the Prophet Moses, Deuteronomy. 32. 10. speaking of Gods People; he
found them in a Desert Land, in a waste howling Wilderness, he led them about
and instructed them, he kept them as the apple of his eye. And this was the
Prayer of David when he was in distress, Psalm. 17. 8. Keep me, (O Lord) as the
apple of thine eye, hide me under the shadow of thy wings. Men's Portions, we
know, are to be employed for the benefit of the Owners, and the People and
Portion that cost God so dear, should be improved for God, by setting forth his
glory in their several and respective Meetings, and increasing their number;
But thou have shut up their Meetings, and shut them up into Prison-holes, and
Dungeons: O Richard Brown, how will thou answer the Lord Jehovah, for these thy
cruel dealings? O in the fear of the Lord, consider thy ways, and the Lords
Patience yet toward thee! should the Lord be but as cruel to thee as thou art
to his Portion, his poor, peaceable, innocent, harmless People; What do thou
think would become of thee to Eternity? Turn back again to the Law-case in Page
32. and read thy doom, what it will be except thou agree with him, whom thou
have thus made thine Adversary, even quickly whilst thou art in the way.

Secondly, As they are his dear Portion by Purchase, so they are his Heritage,
Joel 2. 17. and God by his Spirit in his servant, 1 Pet. 5. 3. requires those
that are the Elders over his People, that they Lord it not overGods Heritage,
as the Parish Priests use to Lord it over their Flocks, and the Bishops were
wont to Lord it in their Dioces: But consider O R. Brown, since thou were L.
Mayor, how thou have lorded, nay tyrannized over Gods Heritage, whom thou by
the Lord never had an appointment to overlook, nor watch over; therefore see
the danger thou art in for thy so doing, as well as others in all other
Heathenish Nations; for says the Lord, Joel 2. 2. I will gather all nations,
and bring them down into the Valley of Iehoshaphat, and will plead with them
there; for my People and for mine Heritage, whom they have scattered among the
Nations. Yea I say, O Richard Brown, that God will reckon with thee for those
that thou have Imprisoned, by which means thou have scattered the Flock, and
dispersed, derided, and despised Gods Heritage; For thus says the Lord, Verse.
11. Come ye Heathen, (and I say) O Lord Major of London, that have not acted so
well as most of the Heathens, unless thou Repent, thou also shall there be
Reckoned withal; and that Reckoning will be terrible, for Verse. 16. The Lord
shall roar out of Zion, and utter his voice from Jerusalem, and the heavens and
the earth shall be shaken. -- And Verse. 19. Egypt shall be a desolation, and
Edom a desolate wilderness, for their Uiolence against the Children of Judah,
because they have shed innocent blood in their land: then beware, O BLOODY
MAYOR.

Thirdly, And as Gods People are the Portion and Heritage of God, so they are
the Vinyard of God; for so says that Kingly Prophet, Ps. 80. 15. They are Gods
Vine, and the Vinyard which his own right hand has planted; Yea, so also as
says that Evangelical Prophet, Isa. 5. 1. I will sing a song to my welbeloved,
a song of my welbeloved, touching his vineyard my welbeloved has a vineyard in
a very fruitful hill, and he fenced it, and gathered out the loose stones
thereof, and planted it with the choicest Vine. And Verse. 7. The Vineyard of
the Lord of hosts is the house of Israel, and the men of Judah are his pleasant
plant. And, says the Lord by his Prophet, Zech. 12. 2. Behold, I will make
Jerusalem a burdensome stone, and a cup of trembling unto all the people round
about; and verse. 3. I will make Jerusalem a burdensome stone for all people,
all that burden themselves with it shall be cut in pieces, though all the
people of the earth be gathered together against it. Then let all Persecuting
spirits have a care, how they tread down Gods Vineyard, for says the Prophet,
Ier. 50. 10, 11. For Chaldea shall be a Spoil, all that spoil her shall be
satisfied, says the Lord; Because ye were glad, because ye rejoiced, O ye
Destroyers of my People: Then have a care of thy self, O Richard Brown, for God
will have a Controversy with thee, for thy treading down his Vineyard, for he
is the Husbandman; yea so says our Savior, John 15. 1, 2. I am the true
Vine, and my Father is the Husbandman; every branch in me that bears not
fruit he takes it away. So that thou art but a drudge, a servant to lop off
the fruitless branches; and therefore know, that thou art not set on work
either to cut off fruit-bearing-branches, nor the Vine, but thou behavest thy
self hitherto, as if thou were set on work to root up the Vine, even King
Jesus; and therefore know, that in the midst of thy fury thou may make more
haste then good speed; and therefore in the Name of the Lord, I am come to let
thee know, that this Stone cut out off the mountain without hands, Dan. 2. 34.
this Stone which the builders rejected, the same is made the Head of the
Corner, and this is the Lords doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes;
Therefore have a care of being too sie with him; for whosoever shall fall upon
this stone, he shall be broken: but on whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind
him to powder; Yea, so says our Vine, Matthew. 21. 42, 44. Then have a care of
thy self, O Richard Brown, for if he fall upon thee, he will break thy Lordship
to pieces; for he shall fall on the feet of the Image, and break it to pieces,
Dan. 2. 34, 35.

Fourthly, As Gods People are his Portion, his Heritage, and his Vineyard, so
they are his Sheep and his Flock; for he is our God, and we are the People of
his Pasture, and the Sheep of his hands, Psalm. 95. 7. For know ye, (yea I say
again and again, know ye, ye Persecutors) Know ye, that the Lord he is God, it
is he that has made us, and not we our selves, we are his People and the Sheep
of his Pasture. And thus he led his Flock of old by the hand of Moses and
Aaron, Psalm. 77. 7. Thus did he by, and to his Flock of old under that Legal
dispensation, and he showed himself valiant for his Flock and his Sheep, and
that by the hands of Moses and Aaron; Witness those ten Plagues he brought upon
that Oppressing Tyrant, Pharaoh King of Egypt; for says the Lord, Exodus 3. 7,
8. I have surely seen the Affliction of my People which are in Egypt, (yea and
so he does in England, for it is not fair pretenses that can blind his eyes, or
stop his ears) for (says he) I have heard their cries, by reason of their
Taskmasters, (that would violate their Consciences) for I know their sorrows,
and am come down to deliver them out of the hands of the Egyptians; and he is
the same God still, for he can both see, hear, and will in his due time
deliver: For they are his Sheep, and if they can but behave themselves like
Sheep, if they can but suffer their Wool to be torn off their Backs, by such
Bryary Brambles and Thorns as thou art, O Richard Brown, if they can but
according to the Requirement of that Shepherd and Bishop of their souls, 1 Pet.
2. 25. that great Shepherd of the Sheep, (who became so) through the Blood of
the everlasting Covenant, Heb. 13. 20. I say, if they can but follow his
example, who left himself an example for them, 1 Pet. 2. 21. who although he
was the great Shepherd, yet he was oppressed and afflicted, and he opened not
his mouth; Yea, he was led as a Lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before
the is dumb, so opened he not his mouth, Isai. 53. who requires that his Sheep
should learn of him; for says he, I am Meek and Lowly in heart, and they shall
find rest for their Souls, Mat. 11. 29. who also requires, Luke 21. 19. that
in their patience they should possess their Souls. And if they can but follow
the word of Command given out of the Mouth of this great Shepherd, the Captain
of their Salvation, who himself was made perfect through Sufferings, Heb. 2.
10. I say, if they would but observe his word of Command, Mat. 24. 6. that when
they shall hear of Wars and Rumors of Wars, Nation against Nation, and Kingdom
against Kingdom, that then they be not troubled: But, with the Flock of God
gone before them, that they stand still, and see the Salvation of the Lord,
Exodus 14. 13. for he will come down in flaming fire, to take vengeance on them
that know not God, and obey not the Gospel of Christ, 2 These. 17. 8. But upon
Mount Zion (or to the Flock of God) shall be Deliverance, and there shall be
Holiness, and the House of Jacob (or the Seed of Faith) shall possess their
possessions, Obadiah 17. For says the Prophet, Isai. 34. 1, 2, 8. Come near ye
Nations, and hear, and hearken ye People, Let the Earth hear, and all that is
therein, the world and all things that come forth of it; for the Indignation of
the Lord is upon all Nations, and his fury upon all their Armies; for it is the
day of the Lords vengeance, and the year of recompenses, for the controversies
of Zion: For says the Prophet, Zech. 9. 16. And the Lord their God shall save
them in that day, as the Flock of his People, for they shall be as the Stones
of a Crown lifted up, as an Ensign upon his Land. O then have a care
Opppressors, both how and whom ye oppress, for it will be your own safety.

5. For as they are his Portion, his Heritage, his Vineyard, and his Sheep and
Flock; So they are Gods Garden; for so says the Lord, Cant. 4. 12. A Garden
enclosed is my Sister, my Spouse. The people of God are his Plants, yea, so
says the Lord Christ, Mat. 15. 13. Every Plant that my Heavenly Father has
not Planted, shall be rooted up: for if we have been planted into the likeness
of his Death, we shall also be in the likeness of his Resurrection, Romans 6. 5.
And says our Apostle, 1 Cor. 3. 6. I have planted, and Apollo watered, in a
Gospel Church; and says Hosea of the Church of old, Ephraim is Planted in a
pleasant Place, Hos. 9. 13. though Ephraim did not bring forth good fruits to
God; and therefore Ephraim must be weeded, for Ephraim shall bring forth his
Children to the Murderer. Therefore thou, and such as thou art, O Richard
Brown, are but Weeders of Gods Garden; those Plants that are of our Heavenly
Fathers Planting, thou may root up; For my Father, says Christ, John 10.
29. is greater than all, and no man is able to pluck them out of his hand. Then
look about you, O you Seed of God, for ye are made partakers of Christ, if ye
hold fast your Confidence steadfast unto the End, Heb. 3. 14. I must confess it
is high time the Weeders were at work, for the Weeds are grown high in the
Church of Christ; but if thou shall pluck up and offer violence, to the choice
Flowers and fruit-bearing Branches to God, our Gardener will be very angry with
thee; nay I question, whether he will not turn thee out of his service;
therefore it is requisite thou be good in thine Office; and for the
Information of thy Judgment, in order to the Reforming of thy violent Actings,
Read, I beseech thee, what God has done with such violent Weeders, Isaiah 10.
from 5. to 20. Amos 1. and Isai. 13. all the whole Chapters.

And as Gods People are his Garden; So Christ takes a delight in them; For he
walks in the midst of the seven golden Candlesticks, Rev. 1. 12, 13. Revel.
2. 1. Yea, says the Spouse, Cant. 6. 2. My beloved is gone down into his
Garden, to the Beds of Spices to feed in the Gardens, and to gather Lillies, to
smell those Fragant Gifts and Graces of the Spirit, which are so delightful to
me, as that I even feed upon them; I pluck them even with as much delight, as
men pluck Lillies, and their Choice, Ripe, and full blown Fragant Flowers; and
verse. 11. I went down into the Garden of Nuts, to see the fruits of the
valleys, and to see whether the Vines Flourished, and the Pomegranates Budded;
to see how the young Ones, those Babes, those Lambs, those young Men in the
Faith, have profited in the Profession of the Gospel; and those Vines, how they
flourish; those strong Men and Fathers, whether they bring forth Fruit as well
as Leaves, whether they have the possession, as well as Profession of the
Gospel; how they flourish, yea, how they abound in every good Work.

And in Cant. 4. 16. The Spouse being sensible of the want of the constant
breathings of the holy Spirit, which says our Savior, is as the Wind Blowing
where it lists, she cries out, Awake O North Wind, and come thou South;
blow upon thy Garden, that the Spices thereof may flow out; Let my beloved come
into his Garden, and eat his Pleasant Fruits; as if she should say, without
thee, by the incomings of thy Spirit we can do nothing, we cannot show forth
Love, Joy, Peace, Patience, Long-suffering, Gentleness, nor Goodness, Meekness,
nor Temperance, without the Breathings of that Holy Spirit of thine; therefore
give us what thou requirest from us, and then come into thy Garden, and feed of
thine own.

And now O Weeder consider what thou have done, thou shuttest up the Garden
Doors that are within thy Jurisdiction, thou rootest up the Flowers, Vines and
Plants, throwest them on heaps, and lockest them up in noysom Prisons, Holes
and Dungeons, amongst noisome and very infectious Weeds: Indeed more I might
say, but I shall forbear, yet not forbear to tell thee, that the Mr. Gardener,
sees and beholds it; And I shall mind thee of the words of that Kingly
Prophet, Psalm 10. 13, 14, 15. Wherefore do the wicked contemn God, he has said
in his heart thou will not require it; But thou have seen it (O Lord) thou
beholdest mischief and spite, to requite it with thy hand; the Poor (yea, every
one of thy poor Flock) commits himself unto thee, thou art the help of the
Fatherless: Break thou the Arm of the Wicked (says that Holy Man, verse. 15.
and of the Evil man, seek out his wickedness, till thou find none.

But I shall say, and that in the singleness of my Soul, O Lord give Richard
Brown a sense of the Evil of his ways, let him see O Lord, the ugliness of a
Persecuting Spirit, and whence it is, show him wherein he has failed in all
his Acts of Violence, and Oppression, and cause him to hear a Word from Heaven,
and that from thy Son, for the Eternal good, Benefit, and welfare of his poor
Soul, saying, Brown, Brown, why Persecutest thou me? and let him know that thou
O Lord God of recompenses, wilt surely requite; cause him O Lord to be so
sensible of the Evil of his ways, as that he may search out his own
Iniquities, Transgressions and Sins, and that he may set them before him, and
may be sensible of them in their several aggravations, as that he may see
himself a nothing Creature without a Savior; And that he may so close with thy
Son Jesus upon his own terms, as that of a Persecuting Saul, he may become a
Preaching Paul, that so he may Build again that which (as to thy People) he
has destroyed; and may destroy (as to himself) that which he has builded,
that so he may purge out that old Leaven as he may become a new lump unto thy
self, when he shall be translated out of the Kingdom of darkness, into the
Kingdom of thy Dear Son; that so as he has Squandered away thy Portion, ruined
thy Heritage, trodden down thy Vineyard, and as much as in him lies, slain thy
tender Lambs, Sheep and Flock, shut up thy Garden, rooted up thy choice Vines,
Fragant Flowers, and Budds of Spices; So O Lord for the time to come he may, as
much as in him lies, repair thy Portion, rebuild thy Heritage, repair thy
Vineyard, Re-inliven thy Flock, and replant and replenish thy Garden; that so
thy People O Lord may see that Prophecy of the Prophet Isaiah, in a good
measure fulfilled to them in their days that Kings Rulers, and Governors, may
be their nursings Fathers, and their Queens shall become their nursing Mothers;
Yet Holy God, if it shall be thy will to suffer thy People yet to undergo the
hand of Persecution, Teach every one of thy faithful Ones, readily and
willingly to say, Not as I will, but thy Will be done; And as thou have brought
them forth in Suffering times; So for the sake of thy Son Jesus, give Suffering
Spirits, and Suffering Resolutions, that so they may in the midst of their
distress, Glorify thee, by their Patient, willing, courageous and undaunted
behavior; And O Lord, Enable them by the Incomings of thy own Spirit, so as
that they may suffer purely and alone for their bearing their Testimoey for
Jesus, against Jesuits, and Romes Abominations, against Tyrannical Oppression
of Oppressors, and against all things that are contrary to sound Doctrine,
Truth, and true Piety, to the pulling down of Vice, and the establishing of
Virtue; to the undeceiving the Deceived, the Confirming them that do stand, to
the healing the Backslider, even to the showring down of Gods blessings upon
the Nation; that so in our Sufferings, our God may support us, Enable us, in
and under our Sufferings; so as that when we come to die, we may so die, as
that we may live in Glory Eternally.

And now, Richard Brown, that thou may the better consider of thy ways, I
shall lay before thee what God has done to the Persecutors of his People
formerly; that so, if possible, thou may be Reclaimed.

Then first consider, Pharaoh King of Egypt, in those ten Plagues he suffered
in his own Country and Habitation, after he had contrived the ruin of Gods
People, when he himself sought to bring Gods People at an under, he himself was
suddenly brought Low, Exodus 1. and Exodus 7. and 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, Chapters, and
whilst he still retained his Malice against them, Gods Judgments are renewed;
when he pursues Israel to destroy them all, God utterly ruins him and all his
that prusued them, and that most Miraculously; for the Red Sea was before them,
and Pharaoh and his Host behind them, and now in all probability the People of
God must perish; but Israel waits upon God, and God most Miraculously devides
the Sea, and causes Israel to go over dry-shod; But when pharaoh, his Host and
his. Chariots pursued them, the Waters returned and overwhelmed them all,
Exodus 14. from 22. to 30.

Again, we see in Hamans case, that when he had so far prevailed with King
Ahasuerus as that all the Jews must be put to death, proud Haman himself was
hanged on the Gallows he had prepared for Poor Mordecai. Behold O Richard
Brown, do thou not remember an old English Proverb, that says, Harm watch,
harm catch; in plain English, I must tell thee, that Isreal's God is a Just God,
and I would have all those also know so much, that do tell King Charles, as
Haman told Ahasuerus, that there are a certain People scattered abroad, and
dispersed among the People, in all the Provinces of his Kingdom, and their Laws
are diverse from all People, neither keep they the Kings Laws (for when he
says, by his Proclamation, Meet not, yet they will Meet, as through Mercy it
is at this day) Therefore it is not for the Kings profit to suffer them;
therefore say they, If it please the King, let it be written, that they* may be
destroyed: but I would have all such Persecuting spirits know, that Isreal's God
does neither slumber nor sleep, but is a Covenant-keeping God, and will never
leave nor forsake those that depend upon him.

For when an upright-hearted Daniel, shall faithfully serve his God and his
King, in so much that he is hated of the rest of the Princes and Presidents,
Dan. 6. 4, 5. And that they can find no fault in him, save in the matter of his
God; then a Decree must be Cogged for, a Royal Statute as they call it, that
must be made after the Law of the Medes and Persians, which alters not, which
is, That whosoever shall ask a Petition of any God, or man, for thirty days,
save of the King, shall be cast into the Den of Lions: But when Daniel knew
that the Writing was Signed; (what then) did he do as the Professors of our
days general have done? I answer to their shame, No; he turned not his Back
upon his God, nor upon the waiting upon his God in his constant course, times,
place, and manner; For as soon as Daniel knew that the Writing was Signed, he
went into his House, and his Windows being opened in his Chamber toward
Jerusalem, he kneeled upon his knees three times a day, and prayed and gave
thanks before his God, as he did aforetime; It is worthy our serious
consideration, as he did Before time, so he does now, the Kings Royal Decree
alters not his serving his God, nor the fear of the Den of Lions, but he
prays and gives thanks three times a day, as he did afore-time; whereupon
faithful Daniel must be cast into the Den of Lions; but that God sent his Angel
to shut the mouths of the Lions, that Daniel so constantly and faithfully
served, and Daniel must be released: But shall his Accusers escape? No, for
they dig a pit for another; but are fallen into the ditch that they have
dug; for no sooner Daniel out, but his Accusers in; for says the Text, The
King Commanded, and they brought those that had Accused Daniel, and cast them
into the Don of Lions; them, their children, and their wives; and the Lions had
the mastery of them, and brak all their bones in pieces, ere ever they came at
the bottom of the Den, Dan. 6. 24. Will the mighty men, in Nebuchadnezzars
Army, by the appointment of the King, cast Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego,
into the seven times hot fiery Furnace? The Flame shall fasten on them, and
shall destroy them, Dan. 3. 22. Thus evil shall slay the Wicked, and they that
hate the Righteous shall be desolate, Psalm. 34. 21.

And that I may the better set home the certainty of this truth upon thy heart,
O Richard Brown; I shall lay before thee something out of the History of the
Church, that so thou may see how the Judgments of God have all along
followed Tyrannical Oppressors, even to the advancement of his own Glory and
his Peoples good.

Eusebius Pamphilius, in his first Book, of the Life of Constantine, and the
50. Chap. tells us, that the Emperor Maximinius was a great Persecutor of
the People of God, insomuch that he expressed his rage against them with great
fury; but before he could satisfy his thirst with the Blood of Just and
Religious men, God began to lay Judgments on him, and began to invade his
body, that so he might recover his mind; for an ulcerous Fistula did breed in
his secret parts, which in time did eat into his bowels, having a number of
worms, which did breed in it, and yield a deadly stinck -- insomuch that he
became a Lamentable spectacle to all men: thus being full of pain and misery,
and troubled in Conscience for Oppressing the Church, presently in all haste,
he confessed his fault to God, and commanded them to make their accustomed
Supplications and Prayers for him to God.

And thus we see God many times meets with men for their misactings against his
People, as he did of old, Psalm. 105. 14, 15. when he suffered no man to do them
wrong, yea (when he) reproved Kings for their sakes, saying, Touch not mine
Anointed, and do my Prophets no harm. And let me tell thee O Mayor, I am
persuaded it would be a benefit to thy soul, if God should so gently lay his
hand on thee, that so thou might know thy self, and know his peaceable
people; but the Lord is now giving thee a Warning by me his unworthy servant,
then slight it not; I say as thou tenderest thine own preservation, and as thou
prisest thine own peace, be at peace with the peaceable People and Flock of God.

But this ulcerous Fistula in Maximinius becomes not a full cure to his Soul,
nor a through means of the curing of his inveterate and malignant mind; But
Pharaoh-like, he begins again, suddenly after a little ease, to disturb the
People of God afresh, who, says the said Author, in the 51. Chapter, of his
said book, striving to exceed others in wickedness, began to invent new wicked
projects against them; putting the Christians to death by fire and sword, by
barrels full of nails, by exposing them to wild beasts, or casting them into
the sea; and besides all this, he invented a new kind of torture, which was to
put out their eyes; so that multitudes of men, women and children, had their
eyes put out; first with hot Irons, and afterward were tortured in diverse
strange manners; for which Gods Revenge afterward overtook him, etc. For
bringing an Army into the Field, to fight against an Enemy, who wanting the
assistance of God, he was overthrown; and so putting off his Royal apparel,
which, says the story, he was unworthy to wear; he thrust himself among the
common Soldiers, and afterward be took himself to flight; and having
disguised himself in the habit of a Servingman, he hid himself in Towns and
Villages; but he could not hide himself from the watchful eye of Divine
Providence; for after he thought himself in safety; he was stricken with a
thunderbolt to the ground, his body being so withered and shrunk up with it,
that it could hardly be known to be the same, for it looked like a dried
Carcass.

And, says the said Author in his 52. Chapter, when Maximinius intended to
plague the Church of God more vehemently; his Eyes dropped out of his head, and
he was left stark blind; and that punishment which he had invented against the
Christian Martyrs, the same by Divine Justice, was inflicted on himself; who at
last living in this miserable manner, he began to confess and acknowledge the
Christians God; affirming, that he had found by experience, that the Christians
God was the true God.

And seeing God is so Just, and so Severe a God, let me in his Name, and in his
Fear desire thee, O Richard Brown, to consider of thy violent actings; and
know, that he is the same God still; and is as Powerful as ever, and as Just as
ever, and as Severe as ever, and as Loving to his own People as ever; then be
more moderate to his People, lest he be as Just, and as Severe to thee as he
has been to others; For says the Prophet David, -- Evil shall hunt the
Uiolent man, to overthrow him, Psalm. 140. 11. For the Wicked through the pride
of his countenance will not seek after God, Psalm. 10. 4. God is not in all his
thoughts. For his ways are always grievous: thy judgments and far above out of
his sight, verse. 5. He says in his heart, I shall not be moved: for I shall
never be in adversity, verse. 6. His mouth is full of cunsing, and deceit, and
fraud: under his tongue is mischief and violence, Verse. 7. He lies in wait
secretly, as a Lion in his Den; he lies in wait to catch the Poor, he does
catch the poor when he draws him into his net, he croucheth and humbles
himself, that the poor may fall by his strong ones, verse. 9. 10. He has put
forth his hands against such as be at peace with him, he has broken his
Covenant; the words of his mouth were smoother then butter, but war was in his
heart; his words were softer then oil, yet were they drawn swords, Psalm. 55.
20, 21. He has said in his heart, God has forgotten, he hides his face, he
will never see it, Psalm. 10. 11. Arise O Lord God, lift up thine hand, forget
not the humble, verse. 12. Wherefore does the wicked contemn God? he has said
in his heart, Thou will not require it, verse. 13. Thou have seen it, for thou
beholdest Mischief and Spite to requite it with thy hand: the poor commits
himself unto thee, thou art the helper of the fatherless. And notwithstanding
thy Fury, O Richard Brown, The Lord will not suffer the soul of the righteous
to famish: but he casts away the substance of the wicked, Prove. 10. 3. The
way of the wicked is darkness: they know not at what they stumble, Prove. 4. 19.
For they sleep not except they have done Mischief: and their sleep is taken
away unless they cause some to fall. For they eat the bread of wickedness, and
drink the water of violence, Verse. 16, 17. Thus whilst Blessings are upon the
head of the Just, Uiolence covers the mouth of the wicked: For the memory of
the Just is blessed, but the name of the wicked shall rot. For, says the holy
man Job, Chap. 27. 13, etc. This is the portion of a wicked man with God, and
the heritage of oppressors, which they shall receive of the Almighty. If his
children be multiplied, it is for the sword: and his offspring shall not be
satisfied with bread. Those that remain of him shall be buried in death: and
his widows shall not weep. Though he heap up silver as the dust, and prepare
raiment as the clay, Verse. 20. Terrors shall take hold on him as waters, a
tempest steals him away in the night. The eastwind carries him away, and he
departs: and as a storm hurleth him out of his place. For God shall cast upon
him, and not spare: he would fain flee out of his hand.

And as Maximinius, as aforesaid, would be willing to go into any disguise, so
that he might make an escape out of the hands of his Enemies; yet he cannot by
these his evasions, escape from the Judgments of the great God, the which he
assayed to do, but all in vain; for the wicked shall not escape: for if persons
sin out the day of Grace, and become Reprobated, as to every good work, and so
have their eyes closed, their ears heavy, and their hearts hardened, as was the
eyes, ears, and hearts of Israel of old, even Gods own peculiar People, Isa. 6.
9. and Act. 7. 42. possibly they may go on for a time, and have no bonds in
their death, but their strength is firm, they may have no trouble as other men,
neither may they be plagued as other men; Therefore Pride compasses them as a
chain, yea, Uiolence covers them as a garment; their eyes may stand out with
fatness, they may have more then their heart can wish, yet they may be corrupt
and speak wickedly and loftily concerning Oppression, Psalm. 73. 4. etc. yet he
that sits in the heavens shall laugh them to scorn; yea, the Lord shall have
them in derision, Psalm. 2. 4.

And now, O Richard Brown, I would beg thee, in the fear of the great Jehovah,
to consider thy Condition, what it is, and how the Case stands with thee, the
which that thou may the better do, the Premises being duly weighed; Consider,
1. What thou wast. 2. What thou art. 3. What thou shall be to all Eternity.


Secondly, Consider seriously, 1. What thou have done. 2. What thou art now a
doing. 3. What thou shall do to Eternity.


And Thirdly, Consider, 1. Where thou have been. 2. Where thou art. 3. Whither
thou shall go to Eternity.


O I beseech thee in Gods fear Consider thy standing, thy breath is in thy
nostrils as well as others, and God may as soon send his Messenger Death to
thee, as to another; for the Lord will abhor the Bloody and Deceitful man,
Psalm. 5. 6. For says the same Prophet, Psalm. 55. 23. But thou O Lord, shall
bring them down into the pit of Destruction; for bloody and deceitful men shall
not live out half their days: But what man is he that desires life and loves
many days, that he may see good? Depart from evil and do good, seek peace and
pursue it; For the eyes of the Lord are over the Righteous, and his Ears are
open to their Cry; But the face of the Lord is against them that do evil, to
cut out their Memorial from off the Earth. And should the Lord take thee away
in this cruel, inhumane, merciless, violent, bloody-minded Condition; what
would become of thee to Eternity? for as Death leaves a man, so Judgment,
shall find him; If Death put a man into the hole of the Earth, a cruel, an
inhumane, a merciless, a violent, a bloody-minded man; so shall Judgment find
him. Consider I beseech thee, that the Fruits of the Spirit are love, joy,
peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, meekness and tempearnce, Gal. 5.
22. whilst the Works of the Flesh, some of which are manifestly these, hatred,
malice, wrath, strife, envyings, murders; the living in any one of which, will
exclude a man from Heavens Glory, Gal. 5. 20, 21.

And that thou may see, what I really intend in this my Alarm; I shall,
after the thundering out of Gods Judgments against Oppression, and tyrannical
Oppressors, I shall, I say, in Christian Love, lay before thee, some flashings
of pure and glorious Gospel Light, to the refreshing thy soul, and to the
enlightening the eyes of thy understanding; that so thou may, if thou art
willing to it, even be recovered out of thy sad condition: For, as I said in
the beginning of my Discourse, from Isaiah the first; so shall I begin my
Conclusion, and say to thee, and to all Tyrannical Persecuting Spirits, Your
hands are full of Blood, therefore wash ye, make ye clean, put away the evil of
your doings from before the Lord; cease to do evil, learn to do well, seek
Judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, and plead for the
widows; And then come and plead with the Lord, and if ye so do, though your
sins were as scarlet, they shall be as wool; though they be as crimson, they
shall be as snow; For God is a merciful, a loving, and a tenderhearted God to
poor sinful souls; who, if ye will believe himself, says, As I live, I have no
pleasure in the death of him that dies, but that the wicked turn from his
ways, and live; Turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways; for why will ye die, O
house of Israel? Ezekiel. 33. 11. For if the wicked will turn from his all sins
that he has committed, and keep all my statutes, and do that which is lawful
and right; he shall surely live, he shall not die: All his transgressions that
he has committed, they shall not be mentioned unto him; in his righteousness
that he has done, he shall live, Ezekiel. 18. 21, 22. For, The Lord is
long-suffering to us-wards, not willing that any should perish, but that all
should come to repentance, 2 Pet. 3. 9. O then, Richard Brown, and all
persecuting and violent spirits, in the fear of the Lord, be persuaded by the
Lord, to cast away from you all your transgressions, whereby ye have
transgressed; and make you a new heart, and a new spirit; for why will ye die?
(O Mayors of London, and Justices of England) For I tell you again and again,
that I have no pleasure in the death of him that dies; wherefore turn ye your
selves and live, Ezekiel. 18. 31, 32. See the willingness of an offended God, to
be friends and at peace with an offending soul; nay, he thinks much of every
minutes time that ye spend, before ye come to him; For hear how he cries out,
by that Wise man, saying, How long, (I pray mind the terms) How long ye simple
ones, will ye love simplicity, and ye scorners delight in scorning, and fools
hate knowledge? Turn ye at my reproof: And what then, may some Poor, Ignorant,
Malicious, Envious, Cursing, Swearing, Rending, Tearing, Persecuting soul say;
What shall we have upon our Returning? Behold, this thou shall have, I will
pour out my Spirit upon you, I will make known my words unto you, Prove. 1. 22,
23. I will give you my Spirit, that shall lead you into all truth, John 16. 13.
whose operation in you, will produce other effects, then Envying, Slandring,
and casting into Prison, Strongholds, and Dungeons; for the fruits thereof,
are, Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Meekness and Temperance; So
that if your sins were never so Red, though they be of never so deep a dye, yet
forsake them; and the Blood of a Crucified Jesus shall cleanse you from all
sins, 1 John 1. 7. For he is the Propitiation for our sins, and not for ours
only, but also for the sins of the whole World, 1 John. 2. 1, 2. Therefore
take that good advice from the Lord, given by his servant Peter, to those Jews
that were the Actual Betrayers and Murderers of the Lord Christ, Act. 2. 38,
39. Repent ye therefore, and be Baptized every one of you, in the Name of Jesus
Christ, for the Remission of Sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy
Ghost; Which Holy Ghost, or Spirit of Truth, will lead you into all truth; and
will make a clear discovery of Truth from Error, of Light from Darkness: I can,
through mercy, say it will do so; I have found it, and it is the desire of my
soul, that you, and all the men of the world, should find and know it; And this
is one, and the great and main cause, why I write this Alarm; that so thou
might be made sensible of what thou have done, and what thou have to do.
For, for my own part, I my self have been as Zealous as thou can be; and had
I had but as much Power as thou now have, I do really believe, (unless
Conscience had flown in my face) I should have done as much as thou have done;
And I knowing thy conditon by mine own, and by comparing my past, with my
present Condition; I could do no less in Christian love than what I have done;
For I through mercy have taken out this Lesson, in what the Lord requires me,
in what he said to Peter, that when I am Converted, I should strengthen my
brethren: And herein I desire to do by another, as I would have another do by
me; And I would, if another saw me running headlong to destruction, that he
should let me know the danger; that so I might, if possible, escape and avoid
it. And thus, O Richard Brown, I have done to thee, I profess in the presence
of the Lord, no otherwise than I would have thee, or another, do to, and for
me; and as I have spoken boldly to thee, to let thee know wherein thou have
failed, and run thy self into an eminent Danger; so I shall be as ready to show
thee a Remedy; and shall let thee know, what Relief I have found, and by whom;
that so, thou with me, may have cause to magnify the free Grace, Love, and
Mercy of that God, who has done such great things for poor, worthless, sinful,
rebellious, malicious, and persecuting Spirits, as now thou art, and I my self
have been: And therefore I shall let thee know, that there is one Jesus of
Nazareth, a man approved of God; who, amongst the Jews, by Miracles, Signs and
Wonders was owned of God, Act. 2. 22. who was sent forth of God, to be a
Propitiation through his Blood, to declare his Righteousness, for the Remission
of sins that are past, through the forbearance of God, Romans 3. 25. For there is
no other Name given under Heaven, by which men can be saved, Act. 4. 12. For
him has God the Father sealed, John 6. 27. And herein was the Love of God
manifested toward us, because that God sent his only begotten Son into the
World, that we through him might live, 1 John 4. 9. For, says our Apostle,
Jesus Christ came into the World, to Save sinners, of whom I am Chief, 1 Timothy
1. 15. For there is one God, and one Mediator between God and man, the Man
Christ Jesus; who gave himself a Ransom for all, to be testified in due time, 1 Timothy 2. 5, 6. Who came to Seek, and to Save that which was lost, Luke 19. 10.
Who was that Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the World, John 3. 29.
For God so loved World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that Whosoever
believed in him, should not Perish, but have everlasting Life: For God sent not
his Son into the World, to Condemn the World, but that the World through him
might be Saved, John 3. 16, 17. For, verse. 14. As Moses Lifted up the Serpent
in the Wilderness, so also must the Son of Man be Lifted up; that Whosoever
believes in him should not perish, but have Eternal Life: And this is Life
Eternal, that they might Know thee the only True God, and Jesus Christ, whom
thou have sent, John 17. 3. But he that says he Knows him, and Keeps not
his Commandments, is a Liar, and the Truth is not in him, 1 John 2. 4. So that,
to Know God, upon a Scripture account, is to Obey God. For Samuel said unto
Saul, 1 Samuel 14. 22, 23. Has the Lord as great delight in burnt-offerings and
sacrifices, as in Obeying the voice of the Lord? Behold to Obey is better than
Sacrifice, and to Hearken than the fat of Rams; but Rebellion is as the Sin of
Witchcraft, and Stubbornness, is as Iniquity and Idolatry. So we see evidently,
that what God Requires from a Soul, if that Soul do not Obey God in that
Requirement, God looks upon that Soul to be a Rebel against him. And this is
that which makes many a poor man lie in Prison at this very day, that dares
not transgress the Requirement of the Lord Christ; lest they be found Rebels
against Christ, who says Mat. 5. 34. Swear not at all.

O Richard Brown, it is said, Romans 5. 6, 8. That When we were without strength,
in due time Christ died for the Ungodly: For God commended his Love toward Us,
(or to the Bulk of Mankind) in that whilst we were yet Sinners, Christ Died for
Us; And there is more Joy in Heaven over One Sinner that Repents, than over
Ninety and nine Just men, that need no Repentance, Luke 15. 7. For this was one
End why Jesus Christ came into the World; Not to Call the Righteous, but
Sinners to Repentance, Matt. 9. 13. For Christ himself said, Luke 24. 46. Thus
it is written, and thus it behoved Christ (or the anointed One) to Suffer, and
to Rise from the dead; the third day; and that Repentance, and Remission of
Sins should be preached in his Name among all Nations, beginning at Jerusalem.

And now I am come to preach it to thee, O Richard Brown, and to all in this
Nation, to whom this my Alarm shall come, that are of a Persecuting Spirit; and
to all that are in a Carnal, Dead, Sleepy, and a Drousie Condition, as to their
souls eternal good, and shall say to thee and them, as once the Lord Christ
said to thy Brother Saul, Act. 9. 4. O Violent, Turbulent, Envious, Malicious,
and Inveterate Spirits; why Persecute ye Christ, in his Poor, Peaceable,
Harmless, Innocent Members? And therefore, I shall say to every such soul, that
is of this Bitter Spirit, as once Peter said, Act. 8. 22, etc. Repent therefore
of this thy wickedness, and pray God, if perhaps the thoughts of thy heart may
be forgiven thee; for I perceive thou art in the Gall of Bitterness, and in the
Bond of Iniquity: And let me assure thee, O Richard Brown, and all others who
are so spirited, that ye need not desire, as Simon desired Peter, verse. 24. to
Pray for him, for that God that hears Prayers, unto whom all flesh come,
Psalm. 65. 2. I say, that God that hears Prayers, knows right well, that it
is, and constantly was, my Request at the Throne of Grace, yea, and when I was
in the Dungeon too; That God would open the eyes of your Understandings, that
so ye might have a perfect fight of your Conditions; that so, both You, and
your King, might be truly sensible of what God has done for Him, and what God
has done for you; And that God would show you all, what he does expect, both
from Him and You; And that he would show you sensibly, how you are but evilly
requiting him, in Persecuting his peaceable People, when he has given you
peace on every side; and thus whilst you were, and are seeking our Ruin, I
both am and was praying for the good, welfare and benefit of your souls; And
whilst you were striving to Ruin Us, and our Little ones, in Our Temporal
Estates here; I was Praying for You, and the Eternal welfare of Yours in Glory.
And thus I shall tell thee, O Richard Brown, and all men, and that in the very
faithfulness of my soul, that, be as Malicious, and as Hateful against me as
you will, and do with me for this My Alarm, My Mite cast into the Kings
Treasury, My Fannaticks Letter, or My Fannaticks Testimony against Swearing; I
say, show your selves as great Enemies to me as you will; my Resolution is, and
(God assisting me) ever shall be, according to the Requirement of King Jesus,
to Love You, though you be mine Enemies; and as much as in me lies, to do Good
to You, though ye Hate Me; Yea, and the Best Good too, yea, and as much as in
me lies, to bring you to that Chiefest Good, to that One Thing Necessary; and
also earnestly to Pray for You, though you Despitefully use Me: And this is the
way, by which I shall evidence my self to be a Child of that Father who sent
his Son to Die for Thee, for Me, and for All the Sons and Daughters of Adam.

A Parley.
AND now, O Richard Brown, before I Retreat from thy Quarters, I shall sound
thee a PARLEY; although I may say to my self, and the Peaceable People of God,
as once Hezekiah said to Israel of old, 2 Chronicles. 32. 28. We need not be
dismayed, notwithstanding all the Rude Multitude that is with thee; For with
Thee, is an Arm of Flesh, but with Us, is the Lord our God, to Fight our
Battles for us; Though we are on the Strongest side, and have the Best places
of Defense, For the Name of the Lord is a Strong Tower, the Righteous flee to
it, and are safe, Prove. 18. 10. And they that trust in the Lord, are as Mount
Zion, that cannot be Moved, but Abides for Ever, Psalm. 1. 25. Yea, when
Sinners in Zion are Afraid, and when Fearfulness shall Surprise the Hypocrite,
then He that walks Righteously, and speaks Uprightly, Isa. 33. 14, etc.
then He that despises the Gain of Oppression, He that shakes his hands from
taking of Bribes, He that stops his Ears from hearing of Blood, that
shuts his Eyes from seeing of Evil, (as do many of the Peaceable Ones
amongst the Baptists) He shall dwell on High, his Place of Defense shall be the
Munition of Rocks; Bread shall be given him, (yea that Bread of Life that once
came down from Heaven) his Waters shall not fail; for he shall drink freely of
the Waters of Life, Revel. 22. 17. I say again, though we are of the Strongest
side, yet seeing thou have some of the Soldiers belonging to the Captain of
our Salvation, in thy Custody; I shall desire (if thou shall think fit) to come
to a PERSONAL TREATY with thee; Provided that thou will allow me but the Law of
Arms, to go and come Freely, and without Interruption, during that Treaty; And
I then question not, but in a very short time, by the Help of the Spirit of
Peace, we shall conclude of such a Sound, Lasting, Firm League and Covenant,
that will prove like the Law of the Medes and Persians, which alters not; For
I am verily persuaded, and that from mine own former Condition, that God has
yet some other thing to do by thee, or upon thee; So that, if thou do, what
thou do against Gods People, singly and alone for Gods glory, (thy
Judgment, not yet being rightly Informed) I do really believe, that thou shall
yet be an Instrument in the hand of God of much Glory to him, as once was thy
Brother Saul, and my Brother Paul; Who what he did, he did it out of Zeal to
God, and in his Ignorance and Unbelief; and therefore he obtained Mercy, as he
says himself, Phil. 3. 6. 1 Timothy 1. 13, 16. But if thou have any other end in
what thou do, Thou may go on and please thy Fancy, if thou will, and
fulfill thy Lust if thou please, but thou shall miss of thy End, to attain
Glory, if that be thy End; For if Gods Glory, the Good of thine own Soul, and
the Benefit of Others, be not thine End, then thy End to Eternity will be but
Miserable; For God made Thee, and I and All Men, for his own Glory; in
producing of which, he has promised us Glory; But if God be not Glorified by
us, he will be Glorified upon us; For, God will not want his great End.

Therefore, O Richard Brown, be persuaded in Gods Fear, and as thou tenderest
the Eternal good, benefit, and welfare of thine own Soul, to consider thy End,
and thy End; thy End what it is, in doing what thou do do, and thy End what
it will be, if thou yet continuest doing what thou hitherto have done.

And if thou shall be willing to such a Treaty, possibly it may be, that which
(experimentally I have known with others) may tend to thy Information, in order
to thy Reformation; that so thou may be wrought up to a Conformity to the
Will and Mind of God, when thou shall be Transformed into the Likeness of Gods
dear Son; that so thou may be translated into his Kingdom of Grace here, in
order to thy Reigning with him in Glory hereafter. And this, O Richard Brown,
the Searcher of all hearts knows, is my chief and ultimate End, in this my
Alarm; even thy souls good to Eternity.

But if thou shall refuse to answer my Desire in this my Parley, but wilt still
go on in thy Acts of Violence and Oppression, I shall without Violence, or the
least force of Carnal Weapon, make a Peaceable Retreat, and Retire into my
Closet, where my Soul shall weep in secret for thee, and al Tyrannical
Oppressors; and shall cry out in the Words of Him, who went up and down doing
Good, who left Himself as a Pattern for us to walk by; Who said of them that
Crucified Him, Father forgive them, they know not what they do.

THE END.

