CLAUDIUS AELIANUS His Various History.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Dring at the George in Fleetstreet near St
Dunstan's Church. 1666.

TO The Lady NEWTON.
Madam,
HAving in obedience to a Father's command made his first attempt upon
Learning, ^y duty next directs me to lay it ^t your Ladiship's feet. The
Original I received from a Person those loss can never be too much ^mented by
any but your self, ^y dearest Cousin and your in^omparable Son Mr Newton.
Par^on me, Madam, that I have awa^ed a Grief which is always too busy in
disturbing your rest: I will therefore forbear those praises due to his memory,
which upon any other account it were a kind of Sacrilege to suppress; and shall
only beg your Ladiship's pardon for this Address, which affords me the honor
of being known to be,

Madam, Your Ladiship's Most obedient Nephew and most humble Servant, THOMAS
STANLEY.

Preface.
TO pass by that Aelian (if his name were such, for some Copies read Helian,
others Hadrian) whom Martial, lib. 12. Epigr. 24. mentions as his contemporary
and friend: The first eminent person of this name was the Author of the
Tacticks, who appears to have been (not a Roman but) a Grecian, in regard he
acknowledges in his Preface that he had no knowledge of the Roman Tacticks.
The time wherein he lived is manifestly collected from the same Preface, which
he addresseth to the Emperor Adrian, and in it says that he met Nerva at
Formiae.

Later in time (as being contemporary with Philostratus the Lemnian who lived
under Severus) was Aelian the Sophist, of whom Philostratus gives this account;

Aelian was a Roman, but spoke Greek as purely as those who lived in the midst
of Attica: This man seems to me worthy of praise; First, because though he
lived in a City which used another Language, yet he arrived at the purity of
the Greek: Next, because being honored by the Title of Sophist by those who
used to confere such attributes, he was nothing the more confident of himself,
nor conceited of his own opinion, nor exalted with so great a title, but making
scrutiny into himself, and finding himself not proper for public declamations,
he gave himself to writing, in which he was admirable* His style is unaffected,
with a gracefulness beyond Nicostratus. Sometime he imitates Dion and his way*
On a time Philostratus the Lemnian found him intent upon a Book, and reading it
with anger and eagerness, he asked him what he was about; He answered, I am
making a declamation against Gynnis, for so I name that Tyrant who so lately by
his infamous life dishonored Rome. Philostratus replied, I should have admired
you, if you had declaimed against him whilst he was living; for to oppose a
living Tyrant is manly, but every one can revile him when dead. This man said
that he never went out of Italy, that he never went on Shipboard, or saw the
Sea; for which he was much respected by the Romans, as one that loved their
manners. He was a hearer of Pausanius: but he admired Herod as the most florid
of all Orators. He lived above threescore years, and died without issue; for
he approved not the having of Children or marriage.

Suidas more briefly of the same Aelian of Preneste in Italy, chief Priest and
Sophist, surnamed Claudius called Meliglossus and Melipthongus taught Rhetoric
in Rome in the times after Adrian. Suidas implies that he lived under
Antoninus who succeeded Adrian, but that he was not the same with the other
Aelian, Author of the Tacticks.

This last Aelian in all probability, was the Author of this Treatise, as also
of that concerning living Creatures; both which are one style, and that much
different from his who wrote the Tacticks. In his Treatise concerning living
Creatures he cites Dion (Cassius) who lived under Severus: In this, he takes
many passages out of Athenaeus, not Athenaeus out of him; for Athenaeus is very
punctual in citing his Authors omitted by the other.

ON Aelian his Various History, Translated into English by Mr Thomas Stanley,
the hopeful and only Son of my dearest Friend Thomas Stanley of Cumberlow,
Esquire.
AELIAN, as if affecting to be known
To others in a Language not his own,
This Curious Piece thought fit at first to express,
Though native Roman, in a Grecian dress.
You, kind to him and us, what lay concealed
In a learned Tongue, have in our own revealed;
And taught our generous Youth by this Essay,
TO improve those hours they vainly cast away.
Your blooming years forth early Virtues shoot,
And ere we Leaves expected, show us Fruit;
Such, and so various, as must needs invite
The dull, and please the curious appetite.
Not to know what was done ere we were born,
Is to live Children still; the too-just scorn
Of many an aged head: This slothful crime
Your industry refells; looks back on Time,
And shows as present in old Aelian's Glass
What-ere of rarest note long since did pass;
And that transmitted in a style and phrase
As pleasing as the Lib. 3. Chap. 1.
Tempe it displaies.
Go on (dear Sir,) Go on, and nobly trace
( Iulus-like) though with unequal pace,
Your learned Father's steps, who does engage
By so much Worth this too ungrateful age:
And think it still your best concern, you should
Be like him in Variety of Good.
Edw. Sherburne.

To Mr THOMAS STANLEY, ON His Translation of AELIAN's Various History.
IF from a Glorious Morn we justly may
Take a Prognostic of the ensuing Day;
What do these early glories promise, when
You shall arrive at your Meridian?
When at an Age others scarce read their own,
The Roman and Greek Tongues to you are known;
Which, like some subtle Merchant, coasting over,
(Not in the search of Spices or of Ore)
You at a Noble way of Traffic aim,
Bring Learning home, to barter here for Fame.
Y' have made a fair Return, let your success
Tempt you to Sea again: Nor could we less
Expect from you, whose happy Birthright lays
Hereditary claim unto the Baies:
For to be much and early learn'd's your fate;
Not to be so, were to degenerate.
Go on in your Paternal tracks of Fame,
TO entail the style of Learned on your Name:
And let the Trophies of your Labors be
As Various as your Aelian's History.
But I these vain Encouragements might spare,
What we would have you be, is what you are.
Richard Stokes, M. D.

(...).
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)

AELIAN's Various History.
The First BOOK.
CHAP. I. Of the Polypus.
THE A Fish so named from having many feet.
Polypusses are so ravenous that they devour all they light on; so that many
times they abstain not even from one another. The lesser taken by the greater,
and falling into his stronger nets, (which are usually called the hairs or
grasps of the Fish) becomes his prey. They also betray Fishes in this manner;
lurking under the Rocks they change themselves to their color, and seem to be
all one with the Rock it self. When therefore the Fishes swim to the Rocks, and
so to the Polypus, they entangle them in their nets, or grasps.

CHAP. II. Of Spiders.
The art of weaving and the gifts of the Goddess Minerva.
Ergane, Spiders neither know nor require: for what should such a Creature do
with woven garments? The web is only spread as a net for such things as fall
into it, whilst she standing still, immovable, keeps watch: whatsoever falls
in she eats; it being as much as the web can hold, is enough to satisfy her
hunger.

CHAP. III. Of the Egyptian Frogs.
The Egyptian kind of Frogs has a peculiar wisdom, and far excels all
other: For if a Frog meets a Serpent bred in Nilus, she biteth off a piece of
reed and holds it as fast as she can cross-wise, and will not let it go. The
Serpent is not able to swallow the reed, because his mouth is not so wide as
the reed. Thus the Frog by wisdom overcomes and masters the strength of the
Serpents.

CHAP. IV. Of the Egyptian Dog.
This also is wise in the Egyptian Dogs: they drink of the River not greedily
or freely, stooping and lapping till they have at the same time satisfied their
thirst, for they are afraid of the Creatures in it; but run along the bank, and
catch up drink by stealth at times, till at last they have allayed their thirst
by snatches without receiving harm.

CHAP. V. Of the Sea*Fox.
The Fox, not only the Land-beast is wily, but the Sea-Fox very cunning: for
she scruples not the bait, neither, being greedy, refrains from it, but
contemns the hook; for before the Fisher can pluck up the reed, she leaps up,
and gnawing the line asunder, swims away. So that many times she swallows two
or three hooks, yet the Fisherman cannot get her for his Supper.

CHAP. VI. Of Sea*Tortoises.
The Sea-Tortoises lay upon land, and having laid, they immediately bury their
eggs in the ground, and returning to their usual abode, swim there: They are so
good accomptants, that having reckoned forty days, (in which time the eggs are
hardened and become living creatures) they returning to the place where they hid
what they laid, and digging up the earth which they had cast upon them, lead
their young away, now able to follow them.

CHAP. VII. Of wild Swine.
Wild Swine are not wholly ignorant of Physic and Medicine; for if unwittingly
they have eaten Henbane, whereby their hinder parts are contracted with a kind
of Palsy, though thus shrunk up, they make to the waters, where they get Crabs
and eat them with all haste. These afford remedy of their ill, and make them
sound again.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Phalangium.
The A kind Spider.
Phalangium is as hurtful to Deer as to Men: If they bite the Deer, they are in
danger of dying quickly after it; yet if they taste Ivy, the bite will not harm
them. But it must be wild Ivy.

CHAP. IX. Of the Lion, sick.
When a Lion is sick, nothing will cure him but to eat an Ape.

CHAP. X. How the Cretan Goats cure themselves when shot.
The Cretans are excellent Archers; they shoot the Goats which feed on the tops
of mountains, which being hurt, immediately eat of the herb D^ttany, which as
soon as they have tasted, the Arrow drops out.

CHAP. XI. That Mice have Praescience.
Mice also are to be reckoned among creatures of greatest Praescience; for when
a House decaieth and is ready to fall, they first perceive it, and leaving
their holes and former dwellings, run away as fast as they can, and remove to
new.

CHAP. XII. Of Pismires.
Pismires also, as I am informed, have some kind of Praescience; for when
there shall be a Famine, they take pains extraordinarily to carry in provision,
and lay up corn and other grain on which they feed.

CHAP. XIII. Of Gelo.
Gelo the Syracusian dreaming that he was thunder-st^uck, cried out, not with a
soft or low voice, as is usual in dreams, but aloud, being exceedingly
affrighted. The dog which lay asleep by him, wakened with the cry, went round
about him, and fell a barking fiercely and eagerly: By which means Gelo was at
once delivered from sleep and fear.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Swan.
Aristotle says that the Swan begets a fair and numerous offspring; but that
they are prone to anger, fighting and killing one another. He also affirms the
Swans war with the Eagles, but so as that they resist only, not begin the
assault. It is commonly reported they sing sweetly; but I never heard a Swan
sing, nor perhaps any man else: yet it is believed she sings, and then
especially (as is said) she sings most sweetly and pleasantly when she draws
near her end. They cross the Sea and fly too over it, yet their wings never are
tired.

CHAP. XV. Of Pigeons.
They report that Pigeons (the male and the female) sit upon their eggs by
turns; which being hatched, the male bedews them with a kind of spittle to
avert envy, and (as it is said) that they may not be liable to fascination. The
female lays two eggs, of which the first always proves a male, the second a
female. They lay all the year long, so that they bring forth young ten times in
the year. Of Egypt it is reported, that Pigeons lay twelve times [ a year] in
that Country. Aristotle asserts that wood-pigeons are d^fferent from
housepigeons, these being bigger, those lesser: besides, house-pigeons are
tame, woodpigeons wild. He also affirms that the male couples not with the
female till he has kissed her, for she will not admit his society without a
kiss. * * * But if we credit Callimachus, the Phassa, the Pyrallis, the
House-pigeon and the Turtle are nothing alike.

The Indian Relations tell us that in India there are yellowish Pigeons: Charon
of Lampsacus affirms that about Athos there were seen white Pigeons when the
Persian Galleys coasting about Athos were defeated there. At Eryx in Sicily is
the renowned and sacred Temple of Venus; where when the Erycinians celebrate
the [ Feast] Anagogia, (at which time they say Venus removes from Sicily to
Libya) all the Pigeons disappear, as if they went along with the Goddess. At
all times else it is certain that a great number of these Birds are about the
Temple. Moreover the Achaeans report that Jupiter falling in love with a Virgin
named Phthia, turned himself to a Pigeon: Phthia lived at Aegium.

CHAP. XVI. Of Socrates drinking Hemlock.
When the Ship returned from Delus, and Socrates was now to die, Apollodorus (a
friend of Socrates) coming to him in Prison brought him a Vest of fine cloth
and rich, with a Gown of the same, desiring him that he would put on that Vest
and Gown when he was to drink the poison; since he should not fail of handsome
Funeral-Robes if he died in them. For it is not Reading (...).
unfit that a dead body should be covered vered with decent ornaments. Thus
Apollodorus to Socrates. But he would not permit it, saying to Crito, Simmias
and Phaedo, How high an opinion has Apollodorus of us, if he believe that
after I have pledged the Athenians, and taken the potion, he shall see Socrates
any more? For if he thinks that he which shall shortly lie at your feet
extended on the ground is Socrates, it is certain he knows me not.

CHAP. XVII. Of a very little Chariot, and an Elegiack Distich.
The admired little works of Myrmecides a Milesian, and Callicrates a
Lacedemonian. They made Chariots with four horses which a fly might cover;
They writ an Elegiack Distich in golden letters in a Sesamum: Neither of which
a wise man (I think) will praise; for what are these but a vain waste of time?

CHAP. XVIII. Of Women vain in apparel.
Were not many Women [ among the Ancients] luxurious in apparel? They wore on
their heads a high Coronet, on their feet Chiappines: They had also long
Earrings hanging at their ears. That part of their Gowns which reaches from
the shoulder to the hand was not sowed together, but fastened all along with
buttons of gold and silver. Thus did the women among the Ancients: The vanity
of the Athenian women let Aristophanes relate.

CHAP. XIX. The Luxury of the Sybarites, Colophonians, and Corinthians.
It is a common saying and known to all, that to the Sybarites and the City
Sybaris the cause of destruction was their great luxury. But I will relate what
is not commonly known: They say that the Colophonians also were ruined by
excessive luxury; for they also went proudly attired, were lavish at their
Tables far beyond need, and apt to affront others. Likewise the reign of the
Bacchiadae at Corinth (when they had arrived to great power) was destroyed by
immoderate luxury.

CHAP. XX. Of Dionysius his Sacrilege.
Dionysius plundered all the Temples of Syracuse of their Treasure. From the
Statue of Jupiter he took the Robe and Ornaments, valued at fourscore and five
Talents of gold. The public Artificers not being forward to touch the Statue,
he first laid hands upon it. He likewise robbed Apollo's Image of a golden
Periwig, which he commanded to be cut off. Sailing thence to TroeZene, he
impiously took away all the Treasure of Apollo and Leucothea. He also having
drank a (...), a cup which they used to drink after meals, after which the
Tables were taken away.
grace-cup, commanded a silver Table which stood by Apollo to be taken away.

CHAP. XXI. How Ismenias without dishonor adored the King of Persia.
I cannot omit the wise and t^uly Grecian action of Ismenias a Theban: Being
by his Country sent Ambassador to the King of Persia, he went thither, and
would have spoken himself to the Persian about his business; but the Captain
whose office it was to report business to the King, and to conduct such as were
admitted to his presence, told him, Theban, (he spoke this merrily by an
Interpreter, the Captain's name Tithraustes) the Law of the Persians is, that
he who comes into the King's presence, shall not speak with him till he has
first Falling prostrate.
adored him. If therefore you will go in person to him, you must do what the
Law requires; otherwise your business may be done by us, though you adore not.

'Conduct me, said Ismenias. When he came into the King's presence, he plucked
off a Ring which he had upon his finger, and letting it secretly drop, stooped
down as if he had adored, and took it up again, making the King believe that he
adored; yet he did nothing that might dishonor the Greeks. By this means he
obtained all that he requested, and was not denied any thing by the Persian [
Emperor.]

CHAP. XXII. The gifts which the Kings of Persia used to bestow upon
Ambassadors.
The gifts which the King gave to Ambassadors who came to him either from
Greece or elsewhere were these: To every one a Babylonian Talent of finest
silver; two silver Cups, Read (...).
each weighing a Talent. The Babylonian Talent makes twenty two Attick pounds.
He gave them also a Scimitar and Bracelets, and a Chain, all which were valued
at a thousand Daricks. Likewise a Median Vest which they called a Dorophorick.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Gorgias and Protagoras.
Among the ancient Greeks, Gorgias the Leontine son of Philolaus, and
Protagoras son of Democritus, were famous as to Rhetorical opinion; yet were
they as far short of others in wisdom as boys are of men* For opinion
neither hears nor sees clearly: whence it oftentimes erres, overprizing some
things, undervaluing others.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the Contest betwixt Hercules and Lepreas.
Glaucon [or Caucon] son of Neptune had by Astydamia, daughter of Phorbas, a
son named Lepreas, who counseled Augeas to cast Hercules in bonds when he came
to demand the reward of his labors* Hereupon, as it seems, Lepreas was hated
by Hercules for this advice. Afterward the son of Jupiter [ Hercules] went to
To demand revenge on h^s son: so Schess^r.
Caucon; but at the intercession of Astydamia laid aside all enmity toward
Lepreas. Then there happened a youthful emulation between them, and they
challenged one another at the Discus, and to draw Wate^, and which of them
could first eat an Ox. In all which Lepreas was overcome.

Hereupon another contention arose, which of them could drink most; in which
also Lepreas was worsted. At last, moved with anger and indignation, he
challenged Hercules to single combat. Thus he received punishment for his
counsel to Augeas, for he was slain in the fight.

CHAP. XXV. Of Alexander's magnificence to Phocion, and his to Alexander.
Alexander the son of Philip, (or, if any one likes it better, of Jupiter, for
to me it is all one) to Phocion the Athenian Captain only began his letters
with the usual form of salutation, Hail; so much has Phocion won upon the
Macedonian. He also sent him a hundred Talents of silver, and named four
Cities, of which he might choose any one to receive the revenues and profits
thereof for his own use. These Cities were Cius, Elaea, Mylasa, Patara: thus
did Alexander liberally and ^gnificently. But Phocion far more, wh^ accepted
neither the City nor the Silver; yet that he might not seem to dis-esteem and
contemn the offers of Alexander, he expressed his respect to him thus: He
requested that they who were kept Prisoners in the Tower of Sardis might be set
at liberty; Echecratides the Sophist, Athenodorus of Himera, Demaratus and
Sparto: these two were brethren and Rhodians.

CHAP. XXVI. Of Aglais a great eater.
I have heard of a woman that could sound a Trumpet, which art was her way of
living, by name Aglais, daughter of Megacles; she wore a Periwig and a plume on
her head, as Posidippus relates. At one meal she did devour twelve pounds of
flesh, and four Peck loaves.
Choenixes of bread, and drank a Nine pints.
Congius of wine.

CHAP. XXVII. Other great eaters.
These are reported to have been extraordinary great eaters; Pityreus a
Phrygian, Cambletes a Lydia^, Thus a Paphlagonian, Charidas, Cleony^us,
Pisander, Charippus, Mithridates of Pontus, Calamodorus of Cyzicus, Timocreon a
Rhodian, both a Wrastler and Poet, Cantibaris a Persian, Erysichthon son of
Myrmidon, who for that reason was nicknamed So read* (...), as Scheffer.
Aethon. It is said also that there is a Temple in Sicily dedicated to
Gluttony, and an Image of Ceres the Corn-giver. Likewise Alcman the Poet
attests of himself that he was a great eater. And Anaxilas the Comic Poet
says that there was one Ctesias an extraordinary Glutton.

CHAP. XXVIII. Diet of Fish much esteemed by the Rhodians.
I will tell you a Rhodian opinion. In Rhodes, they say that if a man looks
upon Fish with a great liking, and loves (...).
Fish above all other meat, they esteem him an extraordinary person: But such
as like the diet of Flesh better are reproched by the Rhodians as clownish and
gluttonous; whether justly or wrongfully, I not examine.

CHAP. XXIX. Of an Ewe which eaned a Lion.
The Coans report that an Ewe in the pastures of Nicippus the Tyrant did ean,
not a Lamb, but a Lion. By which sign it was portended to Nicippus (as yet but
a private person) that he should be King.

CHAP. XXX. That Galetes was beloved of Ptolemee not more for his beauty then
his prudence.
King Ptolemee loved a youth named Galetes: he was very beautiful, but of a
mind transcending h^s form; which Ptolemee frequently testified of him, saying,
Oh thou sweet of d^sposition! thou never were author of harm to any, but on the
contrary have done several good offices to many. On a time this youth rode
forth with the King, and beholding afar off some Malefactors led to
execution, he readily said, (speaking to Ptolemee) O King, since it is our
chance to be on horseback according to some good Genius of those wretches,
come, if you please, let us spur on and overtake them, that we may appear to
the unhappy men as the Castor and Poll^*
Dioscuri, preservers and succourers: (so those Gods are called.) Ptolemee much
pleased with his sweet disposition and proneness to mercy, embraced him, and
not only saved the Malefactors, but confirmed and increased the affection he
bare him.

CHAP. XXXI. The Persian custom of presenting Gifts to the King.
The Persians have a custom which they observe most strictly; When the King
rides abroad in Persia, all the Persians make him Presents according to their
several abilities. They who live by the labor of their hands in husbandry and
tillage, give one neither too mean, nor too rich or too magnificent, but either
Oxen or Sheep; some also Corn or Wine. These are presented to him by every one
as he rides along, and are called Presents, by which name he also accepts them.
The poorer sort bring Milk, Palms, Cheese, ripe Fruits, and other delicacies
which grow in that Country.

CHAP. XXXII. Of Water presented as a gift to the King of Persia.
This also is a Persian story. They report that a Persian called Sinetes, being
far from home, met Artaxerxes surnamed Mnemon; being thus surprised, he was
much perplexed with fear of the Law and respect of the King. Having nothing at
that time to give him, and being much troubled to be exceeded in duty by the
rest of the Persians, unwilling that he alone should be infamous for not making
a Present, they say that with all speed he ran to the River hard by, which was
named Cyrus, and hastily lying down took up water in both his hands. O King
Artaxerxes, (said he) reign for ever. I make you at this time such a Present as
I can get, and in such a manner as I can, that as far as lies in me you may
not pass by unpresented. I pay you homage in the water of Cyrus. But when you
shall come at night to your station, I will bring from my house, and present
you, the best and richest things that I have, according to my ability: I shall
not come behind any of those who now offer you gifts. Artaxerxes was much
pleased herewith. Man, (says he) I accept thy Present kindly, and reckon it
amongst the most precious, declaring that it is of equal value with them;
First, because Water is the best of all things; next, because it bears the name
of Cyrus: And I will that you come to me where I shall lodge to night. This
said, he commanded the Eunuchs to take the Gift from him; who instantly running
to him, received the Water out of his hand into a golden Cup. The King, as soon
as he came to his lodging, sent him a Persian Vest, a golden Cup, and a
thousand Daricks; withal, gave the Bearer order to say thus; The King commands
you to delight your mind with this, because you have delighted his, in not
suffering him to pass by unpresented and without homage, but paid him such
respect as necessity would then allow. He wills also that you drink water from
that River in this Cup.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of an extraordinary great Pomegranate presented to the same King.
Misus presented an extraordinary great Pomegranate in a Basket to Artaxerxes
as he was riding in Persia. The King admiring the largeness of it, From what
Paradise (said he) did you take this gift which you bring me? He answered, out
of his own grounds, and that it was of his own grafting. The King was
exceedingly pleased, and sent him royal gifts, saying, By ^e Sun, (...) Deity
of the (...).
Mithra, this man by like care and diligence might also in my opinion make a
little City great. This speech implies, that by continual industry and labor
all things may be made better then Nature has produced them.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of a Father, who accused his Son of a Capital crime.
A certain man, by Country Mardian, by name Rhacoces, had seven sons, the
youngest of which, named Cartomes, did many harms to the Scheffer, to the
Mardi^ns.
Magi. His Father first tried to reform his manners by admonition and
instruction: but he not obeying, and the Judges coming to the place where this
young man's Father lived, he taking his Son, and binding his hands behind him,
brought him before the Judges, where he accused his Son of all the several
outrages which he had committed, and desired the Judges to put the young man to
death. They amazed hereat, would not condemn him, but brought them both before
Artaxerxes; where the Mardian persisting in his plea, the King interrupting him
said, Then you can endure that your Son should be put to death before your
eyes. He answered, Most willingly: For when in my Garden I prune and cut off
the lower branches which grow about the Lettice, the mother and root of them is
so far from being grieved thereat, that she flourishes the better, and
becomes both fairer and sweeter. In like manner, O King, when I shall see him
who wrongeth my Family, and consumes the means of his brothers, lose his life,
and be prevented from doing them farther injury, I shall thrive the better, and
behold the rest of my Family thrive with my self. Which Artaxerxes hearing,
praised Rhacoces, and made him one of the Royal Judges, saying to those who
were present, that he who had determined so justly concerning his own Children,
would toward all others be an upright Judge. He dismissed the young man
without punishment, threatening to put him to a most cruel death if he should
offend again for the time to come.

The End.
AELIAN's Various History.
The Second BOOK.
CHAP. I. How Socrates taught Alcibiades confidence not to be daunted at the
people.
SOcrates discoursed thus to Alcibiades. The young man was much perplexed and
abashed, being to appear before a public Assembly. But Socrates encouraging
and exciting him, Do you not despise (says he) that Shoemaker? (naming him.)
Alcibiades assenting: and so likewise (continues Socrates) that public Crier?
and that Tent-maker? [ Alcibiades] the son of Clinias granting this; And does
not, said Socrates, the Athenian Commonwealth consist of these? If you contemn
them single, fear them not in an Assembly. Thus [ Socrates] son of Sophroniscus
and Phenareta prudently instructed [ Alcibiades] son of Clinias and Dinomache.

CHAP. II. Of Pictures praised amiss.
Megabyzus highly commending some Pictures that were meanly and ignorantly
painted, and finding fault with others that were made with great art, the boys
of Zeuxis that were grinding Colors laughed at him; whereupon Zeuxis said,
When you hold your peace, Megabyzus, these boys admire you, for they look on
your rich garments and attendants; but as soon as you say any thing concerning
this Art, they laugh at you: therefore preserve your self in esteem by holding
your peace, and censure not the work or skill of any which is not in your way.

CHAP. III. Of Alexander not giving due commendations of a Picture.
Alexander beholding his own Picture at Ephesus drawn by Apelles, did not give
it such praise as it deserved; but a Horse which was brought in neighed to the
painted horse, as if it had been a true one. King, said Apelles, this Horse
seems to understand painting much better then you.

CHAP. IV. Of the Friendship betwixt Chariton and Melanippus, and the Tyrant's
mercy toward them.
I will relate to you an action of Phalaris not agreeing with his disposition:
for it expresses a great humanity, and therefore seems not to suit with him.
Chariton an Agrigentine loved Melanippus passionately, who was also an
Agrigentine, of a sweet disposition and excellent form. Phalaris had injured
this Melanippus in a certain business; for he having brought an Action against
a Favorite of Phalaris, the Tyrant commanded him to surcease the Suit: He not
obeying, the Tyrant threatened him with death unless he submitted. So being
compelled he gave over the cause, and the Judges under Phalaris nulled the
proceedings; which the young man taking ill, said that he was wronged, and
discovered his resentment thereof to his friend, praying him to join with him
in a Plot against the Tyrant, intending also to engage some other young men,
whom he knew proper and ready for such an attempt. Chariton seeing him enraged
and inflamed with fury, and knowing that none of the Citizens would join in the
design through fear of the Tyrant, said that he also had formerly the same
intention, and should ever be ready above all things to free his Country from
Slavery; but it was dangerous to communicate such things to many persons:
wherefore he entreated Melanippus to consider it more deliberately, and to
permit him to find out an opportunity proper for the attempt. The young man
yielded. Chariton thereupon undertook the whole business himself, not willing
to engage his friend in it; that if he were taken and discovered, he alone
might bear the punishment, and his friend not share in the danger. He provided
himself of a Falchion to assault the Tyrant when he should see a fit occasion.
This could not be carried so privately, but that he was apprehended by the
Guard, watchful of such things. Being carried to Prison, and tortured to make
discovery of his Accomplices, he courageously endured the torment. But this
continuing a long time, Melanippus went to Phalaris, and confessed that he was
not only a Conspirator, but Author of the Treason. The King demanding the
cause that moved him to it, he declared the whole business from the beginning;
how he was obstructed in his Suit, and that this was it which provoked him. The
Tyrant wondering hereat set them both at liberty; but commanded them
immediately to depart, not only out of all Cities belonging to the
Agrigentines, but quite out of Sicily. Yet he allowed them to receive the full
benefit of their estates. These and their friendships Pythia afterward
commended in these Verses:

To men, true patterns of celestial love
Blessed Chariton and Melanippus prove.
The God calling this love of theirs a divine friendship.

CHAP. V. Of well husbanding Time, and that among the Lacedaemonians Walking was
not permitted.
The Lacedaemonians conceived that Time above all things ought to be husbanded,
employing it diligently in serious business, not allowing any of the Citizens
to wast i^ in idleness or play; that it might not be thrown away upon things of
no virtue. A testimony hereof amongst the rest is this: The Lacedemonian Ephori
hearing that they who had taken Decelia used to walk in the afternoon, sent
this command to them, Walk not: (As if they did it for recreation rather then
exercise of the body) It behooves the Lacedaemonians to get and preserve health
not by walking, but by exercise.

CHAP. VI. An instance that we ought not to please the Vulgar.
Hippomachus, (they say,) one that taught to wrestle, when the people that
stood about as one of his Scholars was wrestling gave a great shout, struck him
with a wand, saying, You did amiss and not as you ought, it should have been
done better. For if you had done according to Art, these men would not have
applauded you. Implying, that they who perform every thing well and handsomely,
must not please the multitude, but those who are understanding in the Art.
Socrates also seems to contemn the Common people in his discourse with Crito,
who came to him in the Prison, and counseled him to make an escape, and avoid
the sentence of the Athenians against him.

CHAP. VII. That the Thebans expose not Children.
This is a Theban Law most just and humane; That no Theban might expose his
Child or leave it in a Wilderness, upon pain of death. But if the Father were
extremely poor, whether it were male or female, the Law requires that as soon
as it is born it be brought in the swadling-clouts to the Magistrate, who
receiving it, delivers it to some other for some small reward, conditioning
with him that he shall bring up the Child, and when it is grown up take it into
his service, man or maid, and have the benefit of its labor in requital for
its education.

CHAP. VIII. Of Xenocles and Euripides contending at the Olympic Games.
In the ninety first Olympiad, wherein Exenetus won the race, Xenocles and
Euripides contended. Xenocles (whosoever he was) got the first Victory by these
Tragedies, Oedipus, Lycaon, Bacchae, and Athamas a Satyr. It is ridiculous
that Xenocl^s should not be worsted, and Euripides get the better, especially*
in those Tragedies* One of these two must have been the reason, either that
they who gave the votes were ignorant and void of clear judgment, or corrupt.
But both are dishonorable, and unworthy the Athenians.

CHAP. IX. Decrees of the Athenians against some Revolters.
What Decrees did the Athenians make, and those in a Democracy? That every one
of the Aeginetae should have his thumb cut off from his right hand, so that he
might for ever after be disabled from holding a Spear, yet might handle an Oar*
That all the young men of Mitylene should be put to death: Which Decree was
made at the instigation of Cleon son of Cleaenetus. That such as had been taken
Prisoners by the Samians should be branded in the face with the mark of an Owl.
This also was an Athenian Decree. I wish, O Minerva, Guardian of the City, and
Jupiter Eleutherius, and all the Gods of the Grecians, that the Athenians had
never done these things, and that it might never have been said of them.

CHAP. X. Timotheus having heard Plato discourse, judged himself to be less
happy.
I have heard that Timotheus (son of Conon) General of the Athenians, when he
was in height of felicity, and took Cities with great ease, so as the Athenians
knew not how they should honor him sufficiently, met accidentally with Plato
son of Aristo* as he was walking with some Scholars without the City wall, and
seeing his reverend presence, his proper person and graceful aspect, hearing
him also discourse, not of Contributions, Galleys, Naval affairs, Supplies,
Reliefs, Confederates, Islanders, and the like matters, but of those things
which he professed, and in which he employed his studies, said, ''O this life
and true felicity! Whence it appears, that Timotheus did not conceive himself
absolutely happy, as not enjoying this, though otherwise in highest honor and
esteem with the Athenians.

CHAP. XI. What Socrates said of those that were put to death by the Thirty
Tyrants.
Socrates seeing that the Thirty Tyrants put many eminent persons to death, and
betrayed the rich to excessive punishments, said to Antisthenes, Does it repent
thee that we have done nothing in our whole lives great and remarkable, as
those Monarchs who are described in Tragedies, Atreus's, Thyestes's,
Agamemnons, and Aegisthus's? They are in those Plays beheaded, feasted with
their own flesh, and generally destroyed: But no Poet was ever so bold or
impudent as to represent a poor man killed upon the Stage.

CHAP. XII. Of Themistocles giving over Prodigality.
I know not whether this speech of Themistocles son of Neocles be commendable
or not. After that his Father had cast him off, giving over Prodigality, he
began to live temperately, and to refrain from Curtezans, being taken with
another affection, that of governing the Athenian State; and contested eagerly
with the Magistrates, endeavoring to make himself the chief. He said (as is
reported) to his friends, What will you give me, who never yet was envied? He
that loves to be envied, hastens, according to Euripides, to harm himself: But
that this is folly, Euripides himself declares.

CHAP. XIII. Of Socrates abused in a Comedy by Aristophanes.
Anytus and his Companions studied to do Socrates a mischief, for those
reasons which are related by many; but feared the Athenians, doubting, if they
should accuse Socrates, how they would take it, his name being in high esteem
for many respects, but chiefly for opposing the Sophists, who neither taught
nor knew any solid learning. Wherefore they began, by making trial in less
things, to sound how the Athenians would entertain a Charge against his life:
for to have accused him upon the very first, he conceived unsafe, as well for
the reason already mentioned, as lest the friends and followers of Socrates
should divert the anger of the Judges upon them, for falsely accusing a person
so far from being guilty of any wrong to the State, that he was the only
Ornament of Athens. What then do they contrive? They suborn Aristophanes a
Comic Poet, whose only business was to raise mirth, to bring Socrates upon
the Stage, taxing him with crimes which most men knew him free from;
Impertinent discourse, making an ill cause by argument seem good, introducing
new and strange Deities, whilst himself believed and reverenced none: hereby to
insinuate an ill opinion of him even into those who most frequented him.
Aristophanes taking this Theme, interweaves it with much abusive mirth and
pleasant Verses; taking for his subject the best man of the Grecians. The
argument of his Play was not against Cleon; he did not abuse the Lacedaemonians,
the Thebans, or Pericles himself; but a person dear to all the Gods, especially
to Apollo. At first (by reason of the novelty of the thing, the unusual
personating of Socrates upon the Stage) the Athenians, who expected nothing
less, were struck with wonder: Then (being naturally envious, apt to detract
from the best persons, not only such as bore office in the Commonwealth, but
any that were eminent for learning or virtue) they begun to be taken with the
CLOUDS, [so was the Play named] and cried up the Poet with more applause then
ever any before, giving him with many shouts the victory, and sending word to
the Judges to set the name of Aristophanes in the highest place. Socrates came
seldom to the Theater, unless when Euripides the Tragic Poet contested with
any new Tragedian, then he used to go: And when Euripides contended in the
Piraeum, he went thither also, for he loved the man as well for his wisdom,
as the sweetness of his Verse. Sometimes Alcibiades son of Clinias and Critias
son of Callaeschrus would invite him to a Comedy, and in a manner compel him:
for he was so far from esteeming, that he did greatly contemn those persons
that were abusive and scurrilous in their language, (being himself a temperate,
just, good and discreet person) which hugely troubled the Comedians. And this
was the ground (as well as other things suggested by Anytus and Melitus) of
Aristophanes his Comedy; who, it is likely too, got a great sum of money by
it, they being eager in prosecution of their design, and he prepared by want
and malice to receive their impression: But this he best knows. In fine, the
Play got extraordinary credit, that of Cratinus being verified,

The Theater was then
Filled with malicious men.
It being at that time the Feast of Bacchus, a multitude of Grecians went to
see the Play. Socrates being personated on the Stage, and often named, (nor was
it much the Players should represent him, for the Potters frequently did it
upon their stone Juggs) the strangers that were present (not knowing whom the
Comedy abused) raised a humme and whisper, every one asking who that Socrates
was. Which he observing, (for he came not thither by chance, but because he
knew himself should be abused in the Play, had chosen the most conspicuous Seat
in the Theater) to pu^ the strangers out of doubt, he rose up, an^ all the
while the Play lasted continued i^ that posture. So much did Socrates despis^
the Comedy and the Athenians themselves

CHAP. XIV. Of a Plane-tree beloved of Xerxes.
Xerxes deserves justly to be laughed at, who after he had contemned the works
of Jupiter, and made himself new ways to travel by land and water, fell in
love with a Plane, and doted upon the Tree: for seeing (as it is reported) in
Lydia a tall Planetree, there he stayed a whole day, no necessity requiring,
and pitched his Tents in the Wilderness about the Plane-tree: he also hung upon
it many rich ornaments, honoring the boughs with chains and bracelets, and
left it a Keeper, as the Guardian and Protector of a Mistress. But what did
this profit the Tree? the apposititious ornament nothing suiting with it, hung
there in vain, not adding any thing to the beauty of the Tree. For to the
beauty of a Tree are requisite fair branches, leaves thick, a body strong,
roots deep and plaint, yielding to the winds, wideness of shadow, the
successive seasons of the year, the nourishment of the water by channels and
rains. But the Robes of Xerxes, the gold of the Barbarian, and his other gifts,
contribute nothing to the Plane, or any other Tree.

CHAP. XV. Of those who besmeared the Seats of the Lacedemonian Ephori with
Soot.
Certain Clazomenians coming to Sparta, through abuse and insolence besmeared
with Soot the Seats of the Ephori, in which they used to give judgment, and
determine public affairs. This being known, the Ephori were not incensed, but
calling the public Crier, commanded him to make this strange Proclamation
openly through the City, Let it be lawful for the Clazomenians to do
unhandsome things.

CHAP. XVI. Of Phocion.
I esteem this action of Phocion (the son of Phocus) commendable also. Coming
before a public Assembly of Athenians, after he had reproved them for some
ingratitude, he said, both wisely and sharply, I had rather receive ill from
you, then do ill to you.

CHAP. XVII. Of the wisdom of the Persian Magi, and of Ochus.
The wisdom of the Persian Magi was (besides other things proper to them)
conversant in Prediction: They foretold the cruelty of Ochus toward his
Subjects, and his bloody disposition, which they collected from some secret
signs. For when Ochus, upon the death of his Father Artaxerxes, came to the
Crown, the Magi charged one of the Eunuchs that were next him to observe upon
what things, when the Table was set before him, he first laid hands; who
watching intentively, Ochus reached forth both his hands, and with his right
laid hold of a Knife that lay by, with the other took a great Loaf, which he
laid upon the Meat, and did cut and eat greedily. The Magi, hearing this,
foretold that there would be plenty during his reign, and much blood shed. In
which they erred not.

CHAP. XVIII. Of magnificent Suppers.
Timotheus (son of Conon) General of the Athenians, on a time retiring from
magnificent Suppers and Military entertainments, was invited by Plato to a
Treat in the Academy; where being entertained with a frugal Supper and with
Music, when he returned to his friends, he said, They who sup with Plato are
better for the next day also. From thence forward Timotheus dispraised
sumptuous and chargeable Suppers, of which there is no benefit the next day.
There is a speech much to the same purpose reported of him, that Timotheus
meeting Plato on the morrow said to him, You, O Plato, sup better the next
morning then over night.

CHAP. XIX. Of Alexander, who would be called a God.
Alexander, when he had vanquished Darius, and was possessed of the Persian
Empire, being high-conceited of himself, and puffed up with his success, writ
to the Grecians, that they should decree him to be a God: Ridiculously; what he
had not by nature, he thought to obtain by requiring it of men. Hereupon
several people made several Decrees; the Lacedaemonians this, Forasmuch as
Alexander would be a God, let him be a God. Thus with Laconick brevity,
according to the manner of their Country, the Lacedaemonians reprehended the
Pride of Alexander.

CHAP. XX. Of the meekness of King Antigonus.
It is reported that King Antigonus was popular and meek. He that has leisure
to make enquiry after him and his actions, may satisfy himself elsewhere. I
shall relate only one act of his full of Clemency and void of Pride. This
Antigonus, perceiving that his Son behaved himself rigidly and severely toward
his Subjects, Do* you not know, Son, said he, that our Reign is but a glorious
Servitude? This speech of Antigonus to his Son expressed much Mildness and
humanity. He who conceives otherwise of it, seems in my opinion not to
understand either what belongs to a King or a Subject, but rather to have
lived under some Tyrant.

CHAP. XXI. Of Pausanias his friendship with Agatho the Poet.
There was great friendship betwixt Pausanias a Ceramean and Agatho the Poet:
This is generally known; but I will relate what is less common. On a time the
two friends came before Archelaus: He observing the frequent differences
betwixt Pausanias and Agatho, and thinking that one friend despited the other,
asked Agatho what was the reason that he had such frequent quarrels with him
who loved him so well. He answered, O King, I will tell you: It is not that I
am froward toward him, neither do I this through rusticity; but if I
understand any thing of behavior, as well by Poetry as other things, I find
that the greatest pleasure of friends is, after some falling out to be
reconciled; and I am of opinion that nothing can happen to them more
delightful: Therefore I make him partake often of this pleasure, by falling out
with him frequently. For he is over-joyed when I end the difference and am
reconciled; whereas if I should use him always alike, he would not understand
the difference. Archelaus (as they say) commended this answer. It is reported
that Euripides also the Poet exceedingly loved this Agatho, and in favor of
him composed his Tragedy entitled Chrysippus. But this I cannot certainly
affirm, yet know it to be attested by many.

CHAP. XXII. That the Mantineans were just Lawmakers.
I am told that the Mantineans were just Lawgivers, no less then the Locrians
and Cretans, and the Lacedaemonians themselves, and the Athenians. For though
the Laws of Solon were most excellent, yet the Athenians soon after his death
abrogated the Laws which they received from him.

CHAP. XXIII. That Nicodorus the Wrastler became a Lawgiver.
Nicodorus, an excellent and famous Wrastler among the Mantineans, in his later
years giving over wrestling, became a Lawgiver to them, benefitting his
Country far more in Civil affairs, then when he was publicly proclaimed
Victor in the Lists. Some say that Diagoras the Melian, who loved him much,
composed those Laws for him. I have more to say of Nicodorus, but lest I should
seem to intermix any commendations of Diagoras, let this suffice: For Diagoras
was a hater of the Gods; neither do I take any pleasure in making farther
mention of him.

CHAP. XXIV. That Milo was strong in Body, but not in Mind.
Some have undervalued the famed Strength of Milo the Crotonian, relating thus
of him; None of Milo's Antagonists were able to force away a Pomegranate which
he held in his hand; but his Mistress, with whom he had frequent differences,
was much too hard for him. Whence it is manifest, that Milo was of a strong
Body, but an effeminate Mind.

CHAP. XXV. That the sixth of the Month Thargelion was fortunate to the Greeks.
It is observed, that on the sixth day of the month Thargelion many good
fortunes have befallen not only the Athenians, but diverse others. Socrates was
born on this day, the Persians vanquished on this day; and the Athenians
sacrifice three hundred Goats to Agrotera upon this day in pursuit of Miltiades
his vow: On the same day of this month was the fight of Plataeae, in which the
Grecians had the better: (for the former fight which I mentioned was at
Artemisium) neither was the Victory which the Greeks obtained at Mycale on any
other day; seeing that the Victory at Plataeae and Mycale happened on the
self-same day. Likewise Alexander the Macedonian, son of Philip, vanqu^shed
many Myriads of the Barbarians on the sixth day, when he took Darius Prisoner.
All which is observed to have happened on this month. It is likewise reported
that Alexander was born and died on the same day.

CHAP. XXVI. Of Hyperborean Apollo, and certain wonders concerning Pythagoras.
Aristotle says that Pythagoras was called by the Crotonians Hyperborean
Apollo. The son of Nicomachus [ Aristotle] farther says, that he was at the
same hour of the same day seen by many at Metapontium and at Croton, where he
stood up at the Games. There also he showed one of his Thighs, which was of
Gold. The same Author says, that as he was passing over the River Nessus it
called him, and that many heard the call.

CHAP. XXVII. That Anniceris was a good Charioteer; and that he who bestows
much pains upon little things, neglects the greater.
Anniceris the Cyrenian was proud of his Horseman-ship and Chariot-driving. He
on a time desired to let Plato see his skill: wherefore having made ready his
Chariot, he drove many courses round the Academy, keeping his track so exactly,
that the wheels never went out of it. All who were present admired it much. But
Plato reprehended his too much industry, saying, That it was impossible that he
who employed so much pains about things of no value, could bend his study to
things of greater concernment. For being wholly taken up with those things, he
must necessarily neglect such as are truly worth admiration.

CHAP. XXVIII. Upon what occasion Cock fighting was first instituted.
After their Victory over the Persians, the Athenians made a Law that Cocks
should one day in the year be brought to fight in the Theater. The occasion of
which Law was this: When Themistocles went forth with an Army of the Citizens
against the Barbarians, he saw some Cocks fighting; neither did he behold it
slightly, but turning to the whole Army, These (says he) undertake this
danger, neither for their Country, nor for their Country Gods, nor for the
Monuments of their Ancestors, nor for Fame, Liberty, or Children; but that
they may not be worsted, or yield one to the other. With which words he
encouraged the Athenians. This therefore which was at that time an occasion of
inciting them to Valor, he would have to be ever after had in remembrance.

CHAP. XXIX. How Pittacus made an Emblem of Fortune.
Pittacus at Mitylene made stairs to the Temples, which served for no use, but
as a dedicated gift; hereby signifying the ascent and descent of Fortune: those
whom Fortune favors ascending, the unfortunate descending.

CHAP. XXX. Of Plato.
Plato son of Aristo was at first extremely addicted to Poetry, and wrote
Heroical Verses; which afterward he burnt, perceiving them to be far
inferior to Homer's. Then he betook himself to writing Tragedies, composing a
Tetralogy; which Poems he gave to the Players, intending to contest at the
Games. But before the Bacchanalian Feast he heard Socrates discourse, and was
so much taken with that Siren, that he not only forbore his design of
conten^ing, but from thence forward wholly gave off writing Tragedies, and
addicted himself to Philosophy.

CHAP. XXXI. That no Barbarian is impiou^
And who extolls not the wisdom of the Barbarians, since none of them have
fallen into any Atheism, or question whether there are Gods or not, and whether
they take care of us or not? None of them ever held such Opinions as Euemerus
the Messenian, or Diogenes the Phrygian, or Hippo, or Diagoras, or Sosias, or
Epicurus; not any Indian, Celt, or Egyptian. For these Barbarians which I have
named attest that there are Gods, and that they have a providential care of us,
and that they presignifie events by birds, Omens, entrals, and by other
observations and rules, which do teach men the providence of the Gods toward
them. They say also that many things are signified beforehand by Dreams and by
the Stars. Being firmly settled in this belief, they sacrifice purely, live
holily, perfo^m divine rites, observe the rules of the Orgia and all the rest:
whence it must be acknowledged that they worship and reverence the Gods firmly.

CHAP. XXXII. How Hercules his name was changed, and of the Oracle of Apollo
concerning it.
Some Pythian relations affirm that Hercules, son of Jupiter and Alcmena, was
at his birth named Heraclides; but that afterward coming to Delphi to consult
the Oracle about some business, he obtained that for which he came, and
received farther privately from the God this Oracle concerning himself,

Thee Hercules does Phoebus name,
For thou shall gain immortal fame.
CHAP. XXXIII. Of the Images of Rivers.
We behold the nature of Rivers, an^ their Channels; but they who worship them
and make Images of them give them some the shape of Men, others of Oxen In the
shape of Oxen the Stymphalians represented Erasinus and Metopus; the
Lacedaemonians, Eurotas; the Sicyonian and Phliasians, Asopus; the Argives,
Cephissus: but in the shape of Men the Psophilians represented Erymanthus; the
Heraeans, Alpheus; so likewise the Cherronesians that came from Cnidus,
represent the River Cnidus. The Athenians worship Cephissus as a horned man. In
Sicily the Syracusians represent Anapus in the shape of a Man, and Cyane a
fountain as a Woman. The Aegestaeans worship Porpax, Crimissus and Telmissus
under the Figures of Men. The Agrigentines represent the River which bears
the same name with their City by the image of a ^eautiful Boy, to which they
sacrifice. They ^ikewise dedicated an Ivory Statue at Del^hi, and inscribed the
name of the River upon it, which Statue was of a Boy.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of Old age.
They say that Epicharmus being very ^ld, sitting and discoursing with some of
^ike age, and every one of them saying, ^ne, I could be content to live but
sive ^ears longer; another, three years; a third, ^our; he interposing said, O
good men, why do you contest and wrangle about a a few days? All we that are
here met tend by some fate or other to our end. Therefore it is time for us all
to die with the soonest, before we feel any of the miseries which attend Old
age.

CHAP. XXXV. That Sleep is the Brother of Death; and of the decease of Gorgias.
Gorgias the Leontine being at his latter end, and being of a great age and
surprised by sickness, fell by degrees asleep: and when one of his friends
coming to visit him asked him how he did; Just now, says he, Sleep is going to
deliver me up to his Brother.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of Socrates falling sick in his old age.
Socrates being very old fell sick; and one asking him how he did, Well, says
he, both ways: sor if I live longer, I shall have more Emulators; if I die,
more Praisers.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of a Law which prohibited the sick to drink Wine.
Zaleucus the Locrian made many excellent and convenient Laws, of which this
was not the worst. If any of the Epizephyrian Locrians, being sick, drank pure
Wine, unless by prescription of the Physician, though he returned to his former
health, yet he was to be put to death for drinking it without leave.

CHAP. XXXVIII. A Law of the Romans and other people not allowing Wine to all
persons, nor of all ages.
This was also a Law of the Massilians, That no Women should taste Wine, but of
what age soever they were they should drink water. Theophrastus affirms that
this Law was of force also among the Milesians, which not only the Ionian
Reading (...).
but Milesian Wives observed. But why should we not speak of the Law of the
Romans? Or how can I avoid being reproched of neglect, if having mentioned the
Locrians, Massilians and Milesians, I omit to speak of my own Country? Amongst
the Romans this Law was strictly observed, that no free Woman or she slave
should drink Wine; nor any of Noble birth, from their childhood till five and
thirty years of age.

CHAP. XXXIX. The Law of the C^etans concerning Learning.
The Cretans commanded all freeborn children to learn the Laws with a kind of
melody, that their minds might be enticed by their Music, and they get them by
heart the more easily: so that if they committed any thing contrary to Law,
they could not plead ignorance. The second thing which they were appointed was,
to learn the Hymns of the Gods: The third, Encomiums of good men.

CHAP. XL. That Beasts love not Wine, and of some Beasts that will be drunk.
Every irrational creature naturally abhors Wine, especially those who being
over-fed with Grapes become drunk. Crows if they eat the herb Oenutta, as also
Dogs, run mad. If the Ape and the Elephant drink Wine, the one forgets his
strength, the other his subtilty, and both are easily to be taken.

CHAP. XLI. Of some who were lovers of Drink, and great Drinkers.
Lovers of Drink were Dionysius in Sicily, and Nisaeus a Tyrant also,
Apollocrates son of Dionysius the Tyrant, Hipparinus kinsman of Dionysius,
Timolaus a Theban, Charidemus an Orithean, Arcadion, Erasixenus, Alcetas a
Macedonian, and Diotimus an Athenian. This last was called a Tunnel, because
putting a Tunnel into his mouth, he could drink wine poured into it without
taking breath. They relate of Cleomenes the Lacedemonian, that he was not only
a great Drinker, but that he also used the ill custom of the Scythians to
drink Wine unallai'd. They say also that Io of Chios, the Poet, was an
immoderate drinker of Wine. Likewise Alexander the Macedonian, in honor of
Calanus the Brahman, an Indian Sophist, that burned himself, instituting Games
of Music, Horse-racing and Wrestling; to gratify the Indians, he added
another part proper to that Country, which was Drinking. To him that should be
Victor he appointed a Talent for his reward, to the next thirty Minae, to the
third ten. Promachus got the Victory. Moreover Dionysius, at the Feast which
they call Choae, proposed a golden Crown as a reward to him that drank most.
Xenocrates the Chalcedonian was Victor, and taking the Crown when he went away
after Supper, put it upon a Statue of Mercury which stood at the door,
according to his custom: for he used to lay there Garlands of Flowers, Myrrh,
Ivy, and Laurel, and leave them. Also Anacharsis, as it is said, drank much at
Periander's house. He brought this custom from his own Country, for it is
proper for the Scythians to drink pure Wine. Lacydes and Timon, Philosophers,
are said to have drank much. Likewise Mycerinus an Egyptian, a Prophecy being
brought him from Buta, foretelling that he should live but a little while, to
delude the Oracle by doubling the time, turning nights into days, watched and
drank continually. To these add Amasis the Egyptian, of whom Herodotus
attests enough. And Nicoteles a Corinthian must not be severed from these. And
they say also that Scopas the son of Creon and Antiochus the King were much
addicted to Wine: for which reason he put the whole Government of his Kingdom
into the hands of Aristaeus and Themisto, Cyprians, whilst he, given over to
Drunkenness, bare only the Title of King. Likewise Antiochus Epiphanes,
delivered as pledge to the Romans, used to drink Wine immoderately. As also his
namesake Antiochus, who waging War with the Medians against Arsaces, was a
slave to Drunkenness. Amongst these may be reckoned Antiochus the great.
Immoderate drinking cast Agro King of the Illyrians into a Pleurisy, and
killed him. Likewise Gentius another King of the Illyrians was a great Drinker.
What shall we say of Orophernes King of Cappadocia, who was also a great
Drinker? And if we must mention Women, (in whom to love drink is a great vice,
to drink much a greater) Clio, as they say, contended in drinking, not with
Women only, but with Men; for she was a great Drinker, and had the better of
every one, carrying in my opinion a shameful victory.

CHAP. XLII. Of Plato's renown, and of his Laws for equal Distribution.
The fame of Plato and renown of his Virtue came to the Arcadians and Thebans,
who thereupon sent Ambassadors earnestly to request him to come over to them,
not only to instruct their young men in Philosophy, but, which was a higher
concernment, to ordain Laws. They were ready to have obtained what they desired
of him; for the son of Aristo was pleased with the invitation, and intended to
yield to them. He asked the Ambassadors how they stood affected to Equality of
estates: when understanding by them that they were so averse from it, as not to
be by any means induced thereto, he refused to go.

CHAP. XLIII. Certain eminent persons among the Grecians very poor.
There were most excellent persons among the Grecians who lived in extreme
Poverty. Aristides son of Nicomachus, and Phocion son of Phocus, Epaminondas
son of Polymatis, Pelopidas a Theban, Lamachus an Athenian, Socrates son of
Sophroniscus, and Ephialtes son of Sophonides.

CHAP. XLIV. A description of a Picture made by Theon a Painter.
Amongst other things which witness the excellent art of Theon the Painter was
this Picture: An armed man ready to charge the Enemy, who had made an Incursion
and wasted the Country. The young man seemed ready to fall on with
sprightliness and courage: you would have said he were transported with rage
and the fury of Mars. His eyes seemed to sparkle fiercely. Having taken up his
Arms he appeared snatching, as if eager to assault the Enemy with all speed. He
held forth his Shield, and waved as it were his Sword, as ready to fight, with
a killing look, his posture expressing that he meant not to spare any. Theon
painted not any thing more, no common Soldier, no Centurion, no Company, no
Horseman, no Archer; this armed man only being sufficient to complete the
excellence of the piece. But before he would discover this Picture to public
view, he got a Trumpeter, and bade him to sound a Charge as loudly and fiercely
as he could, and to give it all possible spirit of encouragement to fight.
As Soon as this shrill and dreadful noise was heard, the Trumpet sounding as if
there were a sudden incursion of the Enemy, he discovered his Picture, and the
armed man appeared, after that the sound of the Trumpet had excited the fancy
of the beholders.

The End.
AELIAN's Various History.
The Third BOOK.
CHAP. I. Thessalian Tempe described.
LET us now describe and paint out in discourse the Thessalian Tempe: for it is
acknowledged that speech, where the faculty is free, can represent whatsoever
it pleases as fully to the life, as men that are excellent in handiwork. It
is a place situated betwixt Olympus and Ossa. These are Mountains of
extraordinary height, and disjoined as it were by providence. They include a
Plain whose length extends to forty* Furlo^gs.
Stadia; its breadth in some places is a Plethrum, in others somewhat more.
Through the middle runs the River Peneus, into which other Rive^s flow, and by
communicating their waters make Peneus great. It affords various places of
delight of all kinds, not wrought by the hand of man, but spontaneous works of
Nature, which contributed much to the beauty and glory of the place from its
first beginning. For Ivy full of down abounds and flourishes there, which like
generous Vines creeps up the high trees, and grows with them. There is also
plenty of Smallage, which climbing up the Hill shadoweth the Rock, so that it
lies hid under it, nothing being seen but the green Herb, which yields a
pleasant entertainment to the eye. In this Plain there are diverse Groves and
large Cupbords, which in the Summer afford grateful shelter to Travelers and
refreshment. It is full of little Brooks and Springs of water, cool and
pleasant to the taste. These waters, they say, benefit such as wash in them, and
conduce much to health. Birds are dispersed about everywhere, especially the
Musical, which yield extraordinary pleasure to the ear, and by continual
warbling invite and delight the very passenger. On each side of the River are
those pleasantnesses which I mentioned before, and places fit for repose and
diversion. Through the middle of the Tempe runs the River Peneus gently and
smoothly like oil. This is much shaded by the thick branches of the adjoining
Trees, which for the greatest part of the day keep off the Sun's beams, and
afford to those that sail a cool passage. All the neighboring people meet with
one another there, and offer sacrifice, converse* and feast. Whence there being
many that sacrifice and perform Divine rites continually, it happens that
such as travel thither either on foot or by water perceive very sweet odours.
This unintermitted worship of the Gods makes the place sacred. Here the
Thessalians say that Apollo Pythius, having slain Pytho with his arrows at that
time possessed of Delphi when the Goddess Earth held the Oracles, was by
Jupiter's command purified; and that then the son of Jupiter and Latona crowned
with this Tempian Laurel, and bearing a branch thereof in his hand, came to
Delphi and took possession of the Oracle. There is also an Altar in that place
where he was crowned, and took away the branch. Whereupon even to this time the
Delphians every ninth year send youths of Noble birth with an Architheorus, who
is one of their own. These coming to Tempe sacrifice magnificently, and having
made Garlands of that Laurel which the God then so loved as to Crown himself
with it, depart. They pass that way which is called Pythias, and goes through
Thessaly, Pelagonia, Oeta, and the Countries of the Aenians, Melians, Dorians,
and Hesperian Locrians. They carry these youths thither with no less respect
and reverence, then those who with sacred presents from the Hyperboreans pay
homag^ to the same God. Likewise at the Pythia^ Games the Victors are presented
with ^ Crown of the same Laurel. Thus much concerning the Thessalian Tempe.

CHAP. II. Of Anaxagoras bearing the death of hi^ Children with courage.
When one coming to Anaxagoras the Clazomenian (as he was discoursing wit^ his
friends) told him that his two only Sons were dead; He nothing troubled o^
disordered at the news, answered, I knew that they were born mortal.

CHAP. III. Of Xenophon bearing the death of his Son unmovedly.
A Messenger from Mantinea told Xenophon (as he was sacrificing) that his son
Grillus was slain. He taking only his Garland off, continued to sacrifice. But
when the Messenger added that he died victoriously, he took again the Garland
to put it on his head. This is generally known.

CHAP. IV. That Dio was not troubled at the loss of his Son.
As Dio, son of Hipparinus, a Disciple of Plato, was treating about public
affairs, his Son was killed with a fall from the house top into the Court. Dio
was nothing troubled at it, but proceeded in what he was about before.

CHAP. V. Antigonus seeing his Son dead, was nothing troubled.
They say that Antigonus the second, when his Son was brought home slain in
battle, did behold him without changing color, or shedding a tear: but having
commended him for dying as a stout Soldier, gave order that he should be
buried.

CHAP. VI. Of the Magnanimity of Crates.
Crates the Theban is known to have been a magnanimous person, as well by other
things, as by his despising what the Vulgar admire, as also his Wealth and
Country* That he gave the Thebans his estate is generally known. But this other
action perhaps is less notorious. He quitted Thebes newly restored, saying, I
have no need of a City which Alexander or some other may subvert.

CHAP. VII. Of the Calumny of the Vulgar.
Demochares Nephew to Demosthenes, to show that he nothing valued the
dispraises of the Vulgar, seeing certain Detractors together sitting in a
Physician's Shop, and wholly bent upon calumniating others, What do you say
(said he) you Dysmenidae? discovering their disposition by that compellation.

CHAP. VIII. that Phrynichus was chosen General for a certain Poem.
The Athenians made Phrynichus Gene^l, not out of favor, nor for Nobleness of
^irth, or for being rich; for which men ^e commonly esteemed at Athens, and
pre^rred above others: But he having in a cer^in Tragedy composed Verses
suitable to ^med Dancers, did win so much upon the ^heatre, and please the
Spectators, that ^ey immediately chose him General; be^ving that he would
behave himself ex^llently and advantageously in Martial af^irs, who had in a
Play composed Verses ^d Songs so proper for armed men.

CHAP. IX. Of Love.
Who is able to fight with a Lover, that not a Lover himself, and when the
busi^ss is to be decided by the Sword? For ^ who loves not, always shunneth
and de^neth a Lover, as being himself profane ^d uninitiated with the God: he
dares as ^uch as the courage of his soul and strength of his body will bear;
yet fears the other as one transported with divine fury; animated not by Mars
only, which is common to both, but likewise by Love, For they who are excited
with other of the Gods, whereof one (as Homer says) rages equal with Mars;
they, I say, which are possessed only with one, fight with as much courage as
one God inspireth: But the servants of Love being inflamed with Mars and Love,
serving both Deities, have according to the opinion of the Cretans a double
share of Courage. But none therefore fin^ fault if a Soldier who fights only
by instigation of one God, refuse to encounte^ with him who is assisted both by
Man and Love.

CHAP. X. Of Lacedemonian Friendship.
Of the Lacedemonian Ephori I could relate many excellent things said and done
at present I shall only tell you this: If amongst them any man preferred in
Friendship a rich man before another that (...) poor and virtuous, they fined
him, punishing his avarice with loss of money. If an^ other that were a
virtuous person profe^ particular friendship to none, they fined him also,
because being virtuous he would not make choice of a friend: whereas he might
render him he loved like himself, and perhaps diverse; for affection of friends
conduces much to the advancement of virtue in those whom they love, if they be
temperate and virtuous. There was also this Law among the Lacedaemonians; If any
young man transgressed, they pardoned him, imputing it to want of years and
experience; yet punished his friend, as conscious and overseer of his actions.

CHAP. XI. Of the Soul.
The Peripateticks assert that the Soul in the daytime is inslaved and
involved in the body, so that she cannot behold Truth; but in the night, being
freed from this servitude, and gathered together, as it were, in a round about
the parts that are in the breast, she is more Prophetic, whence proceed Dreams.

CHAP. XII. Of Friendship amongst the Lacedaemonians.
Friendship among the Spartans was truly innocent: if any thing unlawful
happened, both persons must either forsake their Country or their lives.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Drunkenness of the Tapyrians.
The Nation of the Tapyrians is so addicted to Wine, that they live in Wine,
and bestow the greatest part of their life and conversation upon it. Neither do
they abuse it by drinking only, but by anointing themselves therewith, as
others do with Oil.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Drunkenness of the Byzantines.
The Byzantines (as is reported) live in Taverns, quitting their own houses,
and letting them to strangers. Nor leave they their houses only to them, but
their wives also. Thus they by one act are guilty of two Crimes, Drunkenness
and Prostitution. Moreover, flowing in Wine and Drunkenness, they delight to
hear the Pipe, and make Piping their chiefest business. But they cannot endure
to hear the least sound of a Trumpet; whence it is manifest that the Byzantines
are wholly averse from Arms and War. Wherefore Leonides their General, in a
strict siege, seeing that when the Enemy was assaulting the Walls they left the
Works, and went to their usual entertainments, commanded that Taverns should be
set up for them upon the Walls. This Damon relates of them, which Menander
seems to confirm, saying, Byzantium makes the Merchants Drunkards; they drank
all night long.

CHAP. XV. Of the Drunkenness of the Argives, Corinthians, Thracians and
Illyrians.
The Argives also and Corinthians have been reproched in Comedies for being
intemperately addicted to Wine. Of the Thracians it is at this time reported
for certain, that they are great Drinkers. Neither are the Illyrians at present
free from this vice. To which they add another dishonesty, inasmuch as at a
Feast they permit the Guests to drink to their Wives, every one as he pleases,
though nothing related to them.

CHAP. XVI. A comparison betwixt the two Generals, Demetrius and Timotheus.
Which of these two was the better General, Demetrius Poliorcetes, or Timotheus
the Athenian? I will tell you the nature of both, and then you may judge which
deserves to be preferred. Demetrius by force and avarice, and oppressing many,
and committing injustice, took Cities, battering their Walls with Engines, and
undermining them: But Timotheus by discourse, persuading them it was most to
their advantage to obey the Athenians.

CHAP. XVII. That Philosophy is not inconsistent with Political Government, and
that some Philosophers have governed Commonwealths.
Some Philosophers have governed States, though studying only the good of
their own minds they lived privately. Of those who managed public affairs were
Zaleucus, who reformed the State of the Locrians, Charondas that of Catana, and
of Rhegium when he was banished Catana. Archytas much benefited the Tarentines,
Solon the Athenians; Bias and Thales greatly profited Ionia, Chilon the
Lacedaemonians, Pittacus the Mitylenaeans, Cleobulus the Rhodians, and
Anaximander brought a Colony from Miletus to Apollonia. Xenophon also was an
excellent Soldier, and proved the best General when he went up along with
Cyrus, at what time Cyrus and many others with him was slain. Necessity then
requiring a person that might bring the Greeks off and conduct them safe home,
he was the man. Plato son of Aristo brought Dio back to Sicily, whom he
counseled and taught how to subvert the Tyranny o^ Dionysius. But Socrates
would not meddle with the Athenian State, because the Democracy of the
Athenians did at that time more resemble a Tyrannical and Monarchick
Government. Neither would he join in sentencing the ten Commanders to death,
nor partake of the injustices committed by the thirty Tyrants. But when
occasion called him forth, he was a Soldier. He fought at Delium, and at
Amphipolis and Potidea. Aristotle, when his Country was not declining, but
quite dejected, raised her up again. Demetrius Phalereus governed the Athenian
Commonwealth with much honor, until envy, customary with the Athenians, threw
him out. In Egypt also, living with Ptolemee, he was chief in making Laws. And
who will deny that Pericles son of Xanthippus was a Philosopher? or Epaminondas
son of Polymnis, and Phocion son of Phocus, and Aristides son of Lysimachus,
and Ephialtes son of Sophonidas; and long after these Carneades and Critolaus?
For they were sent by the Athenians Ambassadors to Rome, and procured a Peace;
so much did they prevail with the Senate, that they said, The Athenians have
sent Ambassadors, that not persuade, but compel us to do what they please. I
must instance also the skill of Perseus in Politics, for he taught Antigonus:
and of Aristotle, who instructed Alexander Son of Philip from his youth in
Philosophy: And Lysis Disciple of Pythagoras taught Epaminondas. Therefore if
any shall say Philosophers are unpractical, he speaks inconsiderately and
ignorantly, though, for my own part, I should much more willingly embrace the
contemplative quiet life.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Discourse betwixt Midas the Phrygian, and Silenus; and the
incredible relations of Midas.
Theopompus relates a discourse between Midas the Phrygian and Silenus. This
Silenus was son of a Nymph, inferior by nature to the Gods only, superior to
Men and Death. Amongst many other things, Silenus told Midas that Europe, Asia
and Africa were Islands surrounded by the Ocean: That there was but one
Continent only, which was beyond this world, and that as to magnitude it was
infinite: That in it were bred, besides other very great Creatures, Men twice
as big as those here, and they lived double our age: That many great Cities are
there, and peculiar manners of life; and that they have Laws wholly different
from those amongst us: That there are two Cities far greater then the rest,
nothing like to each other; one named Machimus, Warlike, the other Eusebes,
Pious: That the Pious people live in peace, abounding in wealth, and reap the
fruits of the Earth without Ploughs or Oxen, having no need of tillage or
sowing. They live, as he said, free from sickness, and die laughing, and with
great pleasure: They are so exactly Just, that the Gods many times vouchsafe to
converse with them* The Inhabitants of the City Machimus are very Warlike,
continually armed and fighting: They subdue their Neighbors, and this one City
predominates over many. The Inhabitants are not fewer then two hundred Myriads:
they die sometimes of sickness, but this happens very rarely, for most commonly
they are killed in the Wars by Stones or Wood, for they are invulnerable by
Steel. They have vast plenty of Gold and Silver, insomuch that Gold is of less
value with them then Iron with us. He said that they once designed a Voyage to
these our Islands, and sailed upon the Ocean, being in number a thousand
Myriads of men, till they came to the Hyperboreans; but understanding that they
were the happiest men amongst us, they contemned us as persons that led a mean
inglorious life, and therefore thought it not worth their going farther. He
added what is yet more wonderful, that there are men living amongst them called
Meropes, who inhabit many great Cities; and that at the farthest end of their
Country there is a place named Anostus, (from whence there is no return) which
resembles a Gulf; it is neither very light nor very dark, the air being dusky
intermingled with a kind of Red: That there are two Rivers in this place, one
of Pleasure, the other of Grief; and that along each River grow Trees of the
bigness of a Plane-tree. Those which grow up by the River of Grief bear fruit
(...) this nature; If any one eat of them, he shall spend all the rest of his
life in tears and grief, and so die. The other Trees which grow by the River of
Pleasure produce fruit of a contrary nature; for who tastes thereof shall be
eased from all his former desires: If he loved any thing, he shall quite forget
it; and in a short time shall become younger, and live over again his former
years: he shall cast off old age, and return to the prime of his strength,
becoming first a young man, then a child, lastly, an infant, and so die. This,
if any man think the Chian worthy credit, he may believe. To me he appears an
egregious Romancer as well in this as other things.

CHAP. XIX. Of the dissension betwixt Aristotle and Plato.
The first dissension betwixt Aristotle and Plato is said to be thus
occasioned; Plato did not approve of his life and habit, for Aristotle wore
rich garments and shoes, and cut his hair after a manner not used by Plato* He
also wore many Rings for ornament; he had a deriding kind of look, and was
peremptory in discourse: all which mis-became a Philosopher. Plato seeing this
rejected him, and preferred before him Xenocrates, Speusippus, Amyclas, and
others; to whom he showed respect, and admitted them to his conversation. On a
time, Xenocrates being gone into his Country, Aristotle came to Plato,
accompanied with a great many of his Disciples, of whom was Mnason the Phocian,
and the like: Speusippus was then sick and unable to be with Plato: Plato was
fourscore years old, and through age his memory much impaired. Aristotle
assaulting and circumventing him by propounding arrogantly some questions, and
arguing with him, discovered himself injurious and ungrateful. Hereupon Plato
retiring from his outward Walk, walked privately with his friends. After three
months Xenocrates returned from his Journey, and found Aristotle walking where
he had left Plato, and seeing that he and his Disciples went not from the walk
to Plato, but directly to the City, he asked one of the Walk where Plato was,
doubting that he was sick. He answered, He is not sick, but Aristotle troubling
him has made him quit the Walk, and now he teaches Philosophy privately in
his own Garden. Xenocrates hearing this went presently to Plato, whom he found
discoursing with such as were present, who were young men of eminent quality,
and some of the Noblest. When he had ended his discourse, he saluted Xenocrates
kindly, according to his usual manner, and Xenocrates did the like to him. When
the company was dismissed, Xenocrates, without speaking a word to Plato, or
acquainting him with it, got his friends together, and sharply reproved
Speusippus for having yielded the Walk to Aristotle. Then to his utmost he
opposed the Stagirite, and so far proceeded the contention, that at last
Aristotle was thrown out, and Plato restored to his former place.

CHAP. XX. Of Lysander, and some Gifts presented to him.
To Lysander the Spartan going to Ionia, some of his acquaintance there sent,
amongst many other presents, an Ox and a Cake* He looking upon the Cake, asked
what Dainty it was. To which he that brought it answered, It was made of Honey,
Cheese, and some other things. Give this then, said Lysander, to the Slav^s.
Hilots; for it is not meat for a free person. Bu^ the Ox he commanded to be
sacrificed, killed, and dressed according to the fashion of his Country, and did
eat of it with delight.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Magnanimity of Themistocles.
On a time Themistocles, yet a boy, returning from School, his Master bade him,
meeting Pisistratus the Tyrant, to go a little out of the way. Whereto he
generously answered, Is not here way enough for him* So much did something
ingenious and generous appear in Themistocles at those years.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Piety of Aeneas, and compassion of the Greeks to the
Trojans.
When Troy was taken, the Grecians (as it becomes Greeks) commiserating the
condition of the Captives, made Proclamation by a Herald, that every free
Citizen might carry away with him any one thing he pleased. Hereupon Aeneas,
neglecting all other things, carried out his household Gods. The Grecians
pleased with the piety of the man, gave him leave to take something else. He
then took up his Father of a very great age upon his shoulders, and bore him
away. They not a little astonished hereat, gave him back all that was his;
confessing that to such men as were pious toward the Gods, and honored their
Parents, even those who were by nature their Enemies become merciful.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Alexander.
Great were the actions of Alexander at Granicus and Issus, and the fight at
Arbela, and Darius subdued, and the Persians subjected to the Macedonians; all
Asia conquered, and the Indies reduced under his power. Great were those things
which he did at Tyr^, and among the Oxydracae, and many others. Why should we
endeavor to comprehend within the narrow expression of words the unlimited
courage of this person in War? Or if any detractor will rather impute these
things to the Fortune which attended on him, so let it be. But he was doubtless
excellent in that he was never worsted by Fortune, nor at any time deserted by
her. Other things there are not commendable in him. That on the fifth day of
the Month he drank excessively at Eumaeus his house, on the sixth day he slept
after his debauch, and recovered so well as to rise and give order to his
Captains for the Expedition of the next day, saying that they should set forth
very early. On the seventh he feasted with Perdiccas, and again drank freely.
On the eighth he slept. On the fifteenth day of the same Month he made another
debauch, and the next day slept. On the four and twentieth he supped with
Bagoas. (The house of Bagoas was from the Palace ten Stadia) The day following
he slept. One of these two therefore must needs have been; Either that
Alexander did prejudice himself exceedingly by employing so many days of the
Month in drinking, or that they who write these things have belied him. We may
likewise imagine that they who relate other things of the same kind concerning
him, wrong him also, of whom is Eumenes the Cardian.

CHAP. XXIV. How much Xenophon was delighted with Bravery.
Xenophon amongst other things took great delight to have rich A^ms. For he
said that if he should overcome the Enemy, the best ornaments would suit with
him: If he died in fight, he should be laid out decently in a rich suit of
Arms: this being the proper winding sheet for a man of courage, and which best
adorns him. They say therefore of this son of Gryllus, that his Shield was
Argolick, his Breast Plate Attick, his Helmet wrought in Boeotia, his Horse
Epidaurian. I must needs say he was a Person delighted in Bravery, and merited
it.

CHAP. XXV. Of ^eonides, and three hundred more, who gave themselves up to
death voluntarily for the preservation of Greece.
Leonides the Lacedemonian, and three hundred more with him, voluntarily
underwent the death at Pylae which was prophesied of them: and fighting stoutly
and gallantly for Greece, obtained a glorious end, leaving a deathless renown
and eternal fame behind them.

CHAP. XXVI. Of Pindarus the Tyrant.
Pindarus, Son of Melas, Grandson o^ Alyattes the Lydian by his daughter, being
Tyrant of the Ephesians, was severe in punishments and inexorable, but
othe^wise courteous and wise. He took great care that his Country might not be
brought into servitude by the Barbarians, of which this is a testimony. When
Croesus his Uncle by the Mother's side invaded Ionia, he sent an Ambassador to
Pindarus, requiring the Ephesians to be subjected to him: to which Pindarus not
yielding, Croesus besieged the City. But one of the Towers being undermined,
(which was afterward called the Traitor) and destruction appearing before
their eyes, Pindarus advised the Ephesians to fasten Ropes from the Gates and
Walls to the Pil^ars of the Temple of Diana, by that means making the whole
City an Anatheme to her, thereby to preserve it secure. Farther he advised them
to go forth and make suit to the Lydian. Upon the Ephesians declaring the case
and their suit, it is said that Croesus laughed, and was pleased with the
Stratagem, granting the Ephesians liberty, on condition that Pindarus should be
banished the City: which he opposed not, but taking along such friends as would
go with him, left his Son and the greatest part of his estate in the City,
committing them both to the care of Pasicles one of his friends. He departed to
Peloponnesus, preferring Banishment before Regal power, that his Country might
not be subjected to the Lydians.

CHAP. XXVII. Of Plato's Poverty, and how he betook himself to Philosophy.
This also I have heard, but whether it be true or not I know not: They say
that Plato son of Aristo was driven by Poverty to betake himself to the Wars;
but intercepted by Socrates, while he was buying his Arms, and instructed in
that which concerns mankind, he through his persuasion addicted himself to
Philosophy.

CHAP. XXVIII. How Socrates reformed the Pride of Alcibiades.
Socrates perceiving Alcibiades to be exceeding proud of his riches and lands,
he showed him a Map of the World, and bid him find Attica therein; which done,
he desired that he would show him his own lands. He answered, They were not
there* Do you boast, replies Socrates, of that which you see is no
(considerable) part of the Earth?

CHAP. XXIX. Of the Poverty and Pride of Diogenes.
Diogenes the Sinopean used to say of himself, that he fulfilled and suffered
the imprecations mentioned in the Tragedy, being a Vagabond, destitute of a
house, deprived of his Country, a Beggar, ill clothed, having his livelihood
only from day to day: And yet he was more pleased with this condition, then
Alexander with the command of the whole World, when having conquered the
Indians he returned to Babylon.

CHAP. XXX. Of certain persons extremely Modest.
Amoebeas the Lutenist was extremely continent, insomuch that having a very
beautiful Wife, he never lay with her. So likewise Diogenes the Tragedian
Player. Clitomachus, one that had been Victour in all exercises, was
extraordinary modest. At Feasts, if there were any loose discourse, immediately
he arose and departed.

CHAP. XXXI. Of the diligence of Nicias in his Art.
Nicias the Picture-drawer was so intent upon Painting, that he many times
forgot to eat, his thoughts being wholly taken up with his employment.

CHAP. XXXII. Of Alexander and Hercules, learning to play on the Lute.
Alexander son of Philip, whilst yet a boy, not of Man's estate, learnt to play
on the Lute. His Master bidding him strike such a string as suited with the
Tune, and the Air required; And what imports it, said he, if I strike this?
pointing to another. He answered, It imports nothing to him that shall be a
King, but to him that would be a Lutenist it does. Doubtless he feared, that if
he behaved himself not discreetly he might suffer as Linus; for Linus taught
Hercules (yet a Boy) to play on the Lute, who touching the Instrument
unmusically, Linus rebuked him; whereat Hercules incensed struck Linus with the
Lute and killed him.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of Satyrus a Player on the Flute.
Satyrus a Player on the Flute heard many times Aristo the Philosopher, and
being much taken with his discourse, said,

Into the fire my glittering Bow
Why do I not as useless throw?andlt;
So mean did he esteem his own Art in comparison of Philosophy.

CHAP. XXXIV. A Law common to the Romans and Lacedaemonians.
The Lacedaemonians and Romans had a Law, That no man might eat of whatsoever
things, or as much as he pleased. They reduced the Citizens to Temperance,
besides other ways, principally by diet.

CHAP. XXXV. That it was not permitted to laugh in the Academy.
There is a general report amongst the Athenians, which says, That it was not
permitted to laugh in the Academy: for they endeavored to preserve that place
free from contumely and levity.

CHAP. XXXVI. Why Aristotle left Athens.
When Aristotle left Athens, fearing to be attainted, to one that asked him
What kind of City is Athens? he answered, Very beautiful; but in it Pears upon
Pears and Figs on Figs do grow: meaning Sycophants. And to one who asked him
why he left Athens, he answered, Because he would not the Athenians should sin
twice against Philosophy; reflecting on the death of Socrates, and his own
danger.

CHAP. XXXVII. A Law of the Ceans concerning Old men.
It is a custom of the Ceans, That all such amongst them as are very Old, as
if they invited one another to a Feast or some solemn sacrifice, should meet
together, and being crowned drink Hemlock; because they are no longer fit to
do their Country service, their Minds now doting by reason of Age.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Some things first found out at Athens.
They say that at Athens were first found out the Olive and Fig Trees; which
the Earth also first brought forth. Also that the Athenians invented Judiciary
Pleas, and first instituted coporal Exercises, and uncloathed and anointed
themselves. And Erichthonius first harnessed Horses together.

CHAP. XXXIX. What things some of old did eat.
The Arcadians fed on Acorns, the Argives on Pears, the Athenians on Figs, the
Tyrinthians on wild Figs, the Indians on Canes, the Carmans on Dates, the
Maeotians and Sauromatians on Millet, the Persians on Turpentine and Cardamum.

CHAP. XL. Of Satyrs, Tityri, and Silenes.
The Satyrs companions of Bacchus in dancing are by some named Tityri; which
name they had from Teretisms (wanton Dances) in which Satyrs delight: Satyrs,
from the wideness of their mouths; Silenes, from Sillos, which is a scoff with
an unpleasing jest. The Silenes were clothed in coats with sleeves, hairy on
both sides; which Robe signified the planting of Vines by Bacchus, and the
downy thickness of the leaves.

CHAP. XLI. Many Surnames of Bacchus.
The Ancients called to bring forth fruit plentifully (...)
Phluin, whence they named Bacchus Phleon, as also Protryges, and Staphylites,
and Omphacites, with diverse other names.

CHAP. XLII. Of ^ertain Women that fell Mad.
Elege and Celaene were Daughters of Proetus. The Queen of Cyprus worked them
to prostitute themselves; insomuch as in some parts of Peloponnesus they ran up
and down, as it is said, naked and raging. They roved also mad into other parts
of Greece, transported with this distemper. It is likewise reported that the
Wives of the Lacedaemonians were transported with Bacchanalian fury; as also
those of the Chians: And that those of the Boeotians were transported with
divine frenzies, the very Tragedy manifests. They say that only the Minyades,
Leucippe, Aristippe and Alcithoe declined the Dance of Bacchus: the cause
whereof was, that they desired to have Husbands, and therefore would not be
Maenades to the God; whereat he was incensed. And when they were working at
their Looms, and very busy in weaving, on a sudden branches of Ivy and of
Vines twined about their Looms, and Dragons made nests in their Baskets, and
from the roof distilled drops of Milk and Wine. But when by all this they could
not be persuaded to serve the Deity, then fury possessed them, and they
committed a foul crime out of Cithaeron, no less then that in Cithaeron: for
the Minyades, seized with frenzy, tore in pieces a young Infant of Leucippe's,
thinking it a Kid; then went to the rest of the Minyades, who persecuted them
for this mischief, when they were turned into Birds. One was changed into a
Crow, the other into a Bat, and the third into an Owl.

CHAP. XLIII. Of a Lutenist murdered by the Sybarites.
At Sybaris a Lutenist singing at a Festival which they celebrated in honor of
Juno, and the Sybarites falling together by the ears about him, and taking up
weapons to assault one another, the Lutenist afraid fled with his long Robe to
the Altar of Juno: But they spared him not even there. A little while after
blood was see^ to spout up in the Temple of Juno, as if it had been from a
Spring. The Sybarites sent to Delphi: Pythia said,

Go from my Tripods, for thy hands profane
Distilling blood my sacred pavements stain:
From me expect no answer, who did slay
The Muses Son; Thou for his death must pay.
None that transgresses, vengeance can decline,
Not though descended from Jove's mighty Line.
He and his children, and their children must
Expect due vengeance for that act unjust.
CHAP. XLIV. Of one who might have assisted his Companion, but would not: And
of another that did assist, but unfortunately.
Three young men of the same City being sent to Delphi to consult the Oracle,
^ell among Thieves: One of them ran away and escaped; the second having killed
all the Thieves but one, missed the last, and ^an his sword through his
companion. To him that ran away Pythia gave this Oracle;

Thou sufferedst thy companion to be slain:
I will not answer thee, go from my Fane.
To the other demanding an answer Pythia gave this;

Thou slew'st thy friend by chance in his defense:
Clearer then ever is thy Innocence.
CHAP. XLV. An Oracle given to Philip.
They say that Philip received an Oracle ^n Boeotia at the Trophonian Cave,
That he should take heed of a Chariot. Fearing therefore because of the Oracle,
it is reported he would never go in a Chariot. The success is related two
ways. Some sa^ that the Sword of Pausanias wherewith (...) killed Philip had a
Chariot carved in Ivor^ upon the Hilt: Others, that he was slain (...) he went
round the Thebaean Lake name^ Harma, a Chariot. The first report is more
generally received, the other is less frequen^

CHAP. XLVI. A Law of the Stagirites.
This was a Law of the Stagirites, trul^ becoming the Greeks; What you laid no^
down, take not away.

CHAP. XLVII. Of Timotheus and some others, who^ their Virtues availed nothing.
The Athenians first magnified Tim^theus; but afterward when he was thoug^ to
have offended, neither did his own merits avail him in the least, nor those of
h^ Ancestors. Themistocles was nothing benefited either by the Sea Fight at
Salam^ or his Embassy to Sparta: I mean that Em^ bassy by which he gave the
Athenian means to build up their Walls again. For ^e was banished, not only
from Athens, ^ut quite out of Greece. Pausanias the La^edemonian was nothing
helped by his Vi^tory at Plataeae; for when affairs were new^odelled at
Byzantium, and they were ^ck of the Persian Disease, he lost that fa^our which
he formerly had. Phocion was ^ot saved by the general title of Phocion ^e Good,
nor by his age of seventy five ^ears, in which time he never injured any
^thenian in the least; for the Athenians ^agining that he would have betrayed
the ^yroeum to Antipater, condemned him to ^eath.

The End.
AELIAN's Various History.
The Fourth BOOK.
CHAP. I. Several Customs of Nations and People
ACertain Law of the Lucani^ says, That if after Sunset Stranger come and
request (...) lodge under the roof of any on^ if he entertain not the man, let
him be p^ nished, and pay the penalties of Inhospi^ lity. As I conceive both to
the person the came to him, and to hospitable Jupiter.

I am informed that the Dardanians in (...) lyria wash but thrice in their
whole li^ at Birth, at Marriage, and at Death.

The Indians do not let out money use, neither do they receive any: Neith^ is
it lawful for an Indian to give or ta^ ^rong. Hence they neither make Bonds, ^r
give Pawns.

It is a Sardinian Law, That when Pa^nts grow very old, their sons should by
eating them with Clubs kill them, and ^en bury them; they conceiving it unfit
^at a man at extraordinary old age should ^ve any longer, he frequently failing
by rea^n of his body's being oppressed with old ^ge. There was also this Law
amongst ^em, They punished Idleness; and he who ^ved slothfully was to be
arraigned, and to ^ive an account of his manner of life, and to ^ew where were
his means of subsistence*

The Assyrians gathered together in a cer^in City such Virgins as were fit for
Marri^e, proclaiming a Fair of them; and who^ever buys one carries her away as
his ^ride.

The Biblians, if they light upon any ^ing by chance in the way, take not up
that they laid not down; for such a thing (...) not esteemed the right of the
finder, but theft.

The Berbiccans put all persons to death ^at are above threescore and ten years
^ld; the Men by Sword, the Women by ^alter.

The Colchians intomb their dead in Skins, in which they sow them, and hang
them up on trees.

It was a custom of the Lydians to prostitute their Women before Marriage: bu^
being once married they must live continently; and she who transgressed was no^
capable of pardon.

CHAP. II. Of the difference betwixt Nicostratus who played upon the Lute
only, and Laodocus, who both played and sung to th Lute.
It is reported that Nicostratus a Fidle^ arguing with Laodocus a Lutenist
about Music, said, That he in a great Art wa^ little, but that himself in a
little Art w^ great. It is therefore a commendable thin^ not only to improve a
Family and Estate but an Art also, if we believe Nicostratu^ who in this said
excellently.

CHAP. III. Of Polygnotus and Dionysius, Pai^ters.
Polygnotus a Thasian and Dionysius Colophonian were two Painters, Polygnot^
^rought to the full bigness, and most com^only descriptions of Games: Dionysius
opied the same things in little, alike exacty in every thing but their bigness;
as the pirit, air, posture, habit, and the like.

CHAP. IV. A Theban Law concerning Artificers and Painters.
I am told there is a Law at Thebes, which ^ommands Artificers, both Painters
and ^otters, to make the Figures as good as may be. This Law menaceth to those
who ^ould or paint them not well a pecuniary ^ulct.

CHAP. V. Persons that were mindful of Benefits.
Persons that were mindful of Benefits ^eceived, and gratefully requited them.
Theseus to Hercules: for Aidoneus King of the Molossians having cast Theseus
into bonds because he came along with Pirithous, to steal away his Wife, (not
intending to marry her himself, but doing this only for the sake of Pirithous)
Hercules coming to the Molossians set Theseus at liberty, for which Theseus
erected an Altar to him. And those seven Captains that besieged Thebes were
grateful to Pronax, for Pronax being killed in their Cause, they instituted
Games in memory of him; which most think were celebrated for the Captain
Archemorus.

And Hercules was grateful to Nestor: for when Neleus would not entertain him,
and the rest of his sons were of Neleus his mind, Nestor only dissented; for
which reason Hercules, having taken the City, put Neleus and the rest of his
sons to death, but not only spared Nestor, but bestowed on him the Kingdom of
his Ancestors. And the Athenians expressed a public gratitude to the children
of Hercules; for because their progenitour had deserved well of Theseus, the
Athenians did therefore conduct them to Peloponnesus. And Hercules was grateful
to the three hundred and threescore Cleonians: For they having aided ^im
against the Molionidae, and dying generously and honorably, he transferred to
them the Honors which the Nemeans bestowed on him for subduing the Lion which
overran and wasted their Country.

And Menestheus son of Peteus was not ungrateful to the Tyndaridae: for they
having cast out the sons of Theseus, and taken Aethra the Mother of Theseus.
Prisoner, they bestowed the Kingdom upon Menestheus; for which reason
Menestheus named them Kings and Preservers.

And Darius son of Hystaspes having (whilst he was yet a private person)
received in gift a Garment from Syloson, when he was possessed of the Empire,
bestowed on him the Government of his own Country Samos, Gold, as we may say,
for Dross.

CHAP. VI. An Oracle concerning the Athenians.
When the Lacedaemonians would have utterly destroyed the City of the Athenians,
consulting the Oracle, they brought answer in this manner; Do not remove the
common Altar of Greece.

CHAP. VII. That sometimes the Dead rest not even after Death; and of Pausanias.
Not Death it self benefits wicked persons, since even then they cannot rest:
But either they are wholly destitute of Sepulchers; or, if buried, yet fail of
the latest honor, and common port of all Bodies. So when Pausanias took part
with the Medes, the Lacedaemonians not only famished him, but threw his carcass
out beyond their Borders, as Epitimedes reports.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Vicissitudes of Fortune.
Who knows not the sudden and swift changes of Fortune? The Lacedaemonians, when
they were Masters of the Thebans, were again so subdued by them, that the
Thebans came not only into Peloponnesus, but passed Eurotas, and wasted the
Country of the Lacedaemonians, and had taken their City, if Epimonandas had not
feared that all the Peloponnesians should conspire and fight for Sparta.

Dionysius the Tyrant being besieged by the Carthaginians, having no hope of
relief, did quite despair, and intended to run away; but one of his friends,
named Ellopides, coming to him, said, O Dionysius, the Title of King is an
excellent Funeral ornament. Hereat ashamed, he took heart, and with a few
overcame many Myriads, and enlarged his Empire.

Amyntas the Macedonian being worsted by the neighboring Barbarians, and
losing his Kingdom, took his resolution to quit the Country wholly, thinking
he did enough if he saved himself. Whilst he was in these thoughts, one told
him the saying of Ellopides: whereupon seizing a little place, and gathering
many Soldiers together, he recovered the Kingdom.

The Egyptians in their own language called Ochus an Ass, reproching his sloth
by the dullness of that Beast. For which he seizing Apis sacrificed him to an
Ass.

Dio son of Hipparinus being banished by Dionysius, with three thousand
Soldiers conquered him, and reduced him to his own estate, a banished person.

The Syracu^ians with nine Galleys assaulting an hundred and twenty of the
Carthaginians, overcame them.

CHAP. IX. Of the Humility of Plato, and Ingratitude of Aristotle.
Plato, son of Aristo, at the Olympic Games fell into company with some
strangers who knew him not, upon whose affections he gained much by his affable
conversation; dining and spending the whole day with them, not mentioning
either the Academy or Socrates, only saying his name was Plato. When they came
to Athens, he entertained them courteously. Come, Plato, said the strangers,
show us your namesake, Socrates his disciple, bring us to the Academy,
recommend us to him, that we may know him. He smiling a little, as he used,
said, ''I am the man: whereat they were much amazed, having conversed so
familiarly with a person of that note, and not knowing him, who used no
boasting or ostentation. Whence it appears, that besides his Philosophical
discourse, his ordinary conversation was extremely winning.

Plato called Aristotle a Colt: What is meant by that name is manifest: a Colt
as soon as it is satisfied with the milk of the Dam kicks at her. Plato
therefore hereby signified some Ingratitude of Aristotle; for he having
received the greatest seeds of Philosophy from him, and introduction thereto,
as soon as he was replenished and satisfied with the best things thereof,
revolted from him, and, getting his friends together, set up against him
Peripateticism, professing himself Plato's adversary.

CHAP. X. What respect Pericles had for the Athenian people.
Did not Pericles, son of Xanthippus, bear a great respect to the Athenian
people? To me it appears so; for as often as he was to speak in public, he
wished that no word might fall from him which might exasperate the people, as
being contrary to them or their opinion.

CHAP. XI. Of the Luxury of Socrates.
Diogenes said that Socrates himself was luxurious: for he was too curious in
his little House, and in his little Bed, and in the Sandals which he used to
wear.

CHAP. XII. Of the Picture of Helena drawn by Zeuxis.
Zeuxis the Heracleote having drawn Helena, got much money by the Picture; for
he admitted not every one that came accidentally, or out of a desire to see it,
but made them first pay money before they saw it. Hereupon the Heracleote
gaining much money by the Picture, the Grecians of that time called this Helena
a Curtezan.

CHAP. XIII. The saying and happiness of Epicurus.
Epicurus the Gargettian said, that to whom a little is not sufficient, nothing
is sufficient. The same said, that he was ready to contend with Jupiter in
felicity when he had bread and water. This being the opinion of Epicurus, what
he meant when he praised Pleasure we shall know elsewhere.

CHAP. XIV. Of sparing and keeping Riches.
Many times Riches gathered together penny by penny, with much labor, as
Archilochus says, are poured into the lap of a Curtezan. For money is as the
Sea Hedgehog, easier to be taken then kept. Anaxagoras also in his Book of
Kingly Government says, It is hard to get Money, but much harder to keep it.

CHAP. XV. Of some who in sickness learned Music and other Sciences, in which
recovering they became eminent.
Hiero Tyrant of Sicily is said to have been first a private person, and of all
men the most averse from learning Music, and nothing inferior to his brother
Gelo in Rusticity. But falling sick he became extraordinary learned, employing
the leisure of his infirmity in hearing learned Discourses. Hiero therefore
recovering heard Simonides the Cean, Pindarus the Theban, and Bacchylides the
Juliet; but Gelo was illiterate to the last.

They say also that Ptolemee the second falling sick became very learned. And
Plato affirms that Theages studied Philosophy upon no other occasion then the
leisure of sickness, which hindering him from Civil affairs forced him to the
love of Learning. What man of understanding wishes not that sickness had
befallen Alcibiades, Critias, Pausanias the Lacedemonian, and others? To
Alcibiades and Critias, that they might not have revolted from Socrates. One
becoming insolent, and sometimes taking part with the Boeotians, sometimes with
the Thessalians, the Medes and Persians, adhering to Pharnabazus. But Critias
became most Tyrannical and bloody, and much oppressed his Country, and led a
hated life.

And Straton son of Corrhagus seems to have fallen sick advantageously. For
being of an old family and rich, he used no exercise; but falling ill of the
Spleen, and exercise being requisite for his cure, he addicted himself to it,
and making progress therein, he in one day at the Olympic Games was Victor in
wrestling and the Pancratium, as also in the following Olympic and Nemean and
Isthmian and Pythian Games.

Likewise Democrates the Wrastler, having a pain in his feet, went to the
Games, and standing in the Stadium made a Circle about himself, and challenged
his Antagonists to force him beyond the line; which they not able to do, were
worsted: And he, for continuing firmly in his station, went away crowned.

CHAP. XVI. Qualities of some of the Ancients.
If any man imitate Callias, he will make him a great Drinker; if Ismenias, a
Player on the Flute; a Boaster, if Alcibiades; a maker of Broths, if Crobylus;
an excellent Orator, if Demosthenes; Warlike, if Epaminondas; Magnanimous, if
Agesilaus; Good, if Phocion; Just, if Aristides; and Wise, if Socrates.

CHAP. XVII. Wonders and Opinions of Pythagoras.
Pythagoras taught men that he was begotten of a better kind then mortal
nature. For on the same day, and at the same hour, he was seen at Metapontium
and in Crotona. Likewise at Olympia he showed one of his Thighs which was of
Gold; and did make Myllias the Crotonian call to mind that he had been Midas
son of Gordius a Phrygian. He also stroked a white Eagle which ^ame to him of
her own accord; and as he pa^sed over the River Cosa, the River saluted him,
saying, Hail Pythagoras.

He afsi^med the leaf of Mallows to be most sacred. He said that Arithmetic is
the wisest of all things: Next, he who imposed names on things. And that
Earthquakes were nothing else but Conventions of the dead: And that the Rainbow
is the beams of the Sun: And that the sound which frequently strikes the ear is
the voice of Demons. It was not lawful to doubt of any thing he said, or
question him about it, but to acquiesce in what he said as in a Divine Oracle.
And when he came to Cities, a report was spread that he came not to teach, but
to heal.

The same Pythagoras commanded to abstain from the Heart, and from a white
Cock, and from all things that died of themselves, and not to use Baths, nor to
go in the common Road; it being doubtful whether these things were pure.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the respect and honor which Dionysius gave to Plato.
When Plato, invited by the frequent Letters of Dionysius, came to Sicily, the
young Dionysius placed him in a Chariot, whilst he himself played the
Coachman: whereupon a facetious Syracusian well versed in Homer, pleased with
the sight, spoke these Verses out of the I^iads, with a little alteration:

The Chariot groaned beneath the weight,
Proud that the best of men there sat.
Whereas Dionysius was jealous of all others, he had so great respect for
Plato, that he suffered him only to come to him unsearched (although he knew
him to be Dio's intimate friend.)

CHAP. XIX. That Philip honored Learning; and of Aristotle.
Philip the Macedonian is not only said ^o have been a good Soldier, and an
excel^ent Orator; but he likewise honored Learning exceedingly. Wherefore
supply^ng Aristotle with much money, he was ^he cause of his great and various
Experi^nce, and of his knowledge in living Crea^ures. Whose History the son of
Nicoma^hus acquired through the wealth of Philip. He honored Plato also and
Theophrastus.

CHAP. XX. Of Democritus, and of the Renown of him, Theophrastus, Hippocrates,
and others.
It is reported that Democritus the Abderite was wise, besides other things, in
desiring to live unknown, and that he wholly endeavored it. In pursuit whereof
he traveled to many Countries; he went to the Chaldaeans, and to Babylon, and
to the Magi, and to the Indian Sophists. When the estate of his Father
Damasippus was to be divided into three parts amongst the three Brothers, he
took only so much as might serve for his travel, and left the rest to his
Brethren. For this Theophrastus commends him, that by traveling he had gained
better things then Menelaus and Ulysses. For they wandered up and down no
otherwise then Phoenician Merchants, for they gathered money, which was the
occasion of their travel by Se^ and ^and. The Abderites called Democr^us,
Philosophy; but Protagoras, Discourse.

Democritus laughed at all people, an^ said they were mad; whence his
Countrymen called him Gelasinus. They likewis^ ^ay, that Hippocrates at his
first meeting with Democritus thought him mad: But after they had conversed
together, admired ^he man. They say that Hippocrates, though ^e were Dorick,
yet for the sake of Demo^ritus he composed his Writings in the Io^ick Dialect.

CHAP. XXI. Of those who were beloved of Socrates and Plato.
Alcibiades was beloved of Socrates, Dio of Plato. But Dio received advantage
by ^he love of his friend.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Luxury of the Athenians.
The ancient Athenians wore purple garments, and various colored Vests. They
^ikewise tied their Hair in Knots, to which ^hey put golden Grass-hoppers, and
other ^rnaments of Gold. When they went ^broad, their servants carried
Folding-stools, that when they pleased they might sit down. It is cert^in also,
that their Tables and Diet were very Luxurious; and yet Whiest they did this,
they were Victors at Ma^athon.

CHAP. XXIII. Of certain Prodigal persons.
Prodigality and volup^uous life reduced Pericles, and Callia^ son of
Hipponicus, and Nicias of Pergaseus to indigence. When money failed them, these
three drank Hemlock, their last draught, to one another, and died as at a Feast.

CHAP. XXIV. How Friendship may be best preserved.
Leoprepes the Cean, Father of Simonides, chanced on a time to sit in the
Wrastling-place: Two young men, entire Friends, came to him, and asked him how
their F^iendship might best be preserved. He said, If you yield to one another
anger, and not by opposition provoke each other.

CHAP. XXV. Of the strange Madness of Thrasyllus.
Thrasyllus the Aexonian fell into a strange and new kind of Madness; he left
the City and went to Pyraeum (the Heaven,) and dwelling there, he fansied that
all the Ships which came in were his, and registered them, and so dismissed
them. When any came safe into the Haven, he rejoiced exceedingly. This
Infirmity held him many years. At length his brother, coming from Sicily, put
him to a Physician to be cured, and so his Madness ceased. He many times
mentioned his actions during his Madness, and said that he never had so much
Joy, as when he was pleased with ^eing Ships come in safe which nothing
belonged to him.

CHAP. XXVI. Of Electra.
Xanthus a Lyrick Poet (he was ancienter then Stesichorus the Himeraean) says
that Electra daughter of Agamemnon was not named so at first, but Laodice.
Afterward when Agamemnon was slain, and Aegisthus marrying Clytemnestra
reigned, she lived unacquainted with the Marriage Bed, and grew old a Virgin:
for which reason the Grecians called her Electra, as having never had a
Husband, and living unacquainted with the Marriag^-bed.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the Gift of Pamphaes and Diotimus.
Pamphaes a Prienian gave to Croesus, whilst his Father was yet living, thirty
Minae, who coming to the Crown sent him a great Chariot filled with Silver.

Diogenes ^eiving a little money of Diotimus the Carystian said,

The Gods immortal grant
To thee what thou do want,
A Man and House.
It seems that this Diotimus was effeminate.

CHAP. XXVIII. That Pherecydes fell into a Phthiriasis because of his Atheism.
Pherecydes the Syrian ended his life the most miserable of men: his whole body
being consumed by Vermin, and his countenance becoming loathsome, he declined
the conversation of his acquaintance. And wh^nsoever any one coming to visit
him demanded how he did, putting out his finger through the hole in the door,
the flesh whereof was quite eaten off, he said, that his whole body was such.
The Delians affirm, that the God in Delus displeased with him wrought this: for
as he sat in Delus with his Disciples, he spoke many things concerning
himself, amongst the rest this, That he had sacrificed to none of the Gods, and
yet led a life no less pleasant and void of grief then they who offered
Hecatombs. For this vain speech he suffered severe punishment.

CHAP. XXIX. That Alexande^ ridiculously believed there are infinite Worlds.
I cannot forbear to laugh at Alexander the son of Philip, who seeing that
Democrit^s in his Writings asserted that there are infinite Worlds, was
troubled that he had not quite subdued one. How much Democritus himself would
have laughed at him, what need I say? whose custom that was.

The End.
AELIAN's Various History.
The Fifth BOOK.
CHAP. I. That Tachos died upon using more delicate Diet.
TAchos the Egyptian, whilst he used the Diet of his Country, and lived
sparingly, was the most healthful of men; but when he went to the Persians, and
fell into their Luxury, not able to bear their unaccustomed Diet, he ended his
life by a Dysentery, and changed Luxury for Death.

CHAP. II. Pherecydes how he died.
Pherecydes, Master of Pythagoras, falling sick, first had a very hot Sweat,
viscous-like Phlegm, afterward like that of Beasts; then little Vermin grew in
him: and his flesh corrupting into them, he wasted away, and so ended his life.

CHAP. III. Of Hercules his Pillars.
Aristotle affirms that those Pillars which are now called of Hercules, were
first called the Pillars of Briareus; but after that Hercules had cleared the
Sea and Land, and beyond all question showed much kindness to men, they in
honor of him, not esteeming the memory of Briareus, called them Heraclean.

CHAP. IV. Of some Trees growing in Delus.
It is reported that in Delus there grows an Olive and a Palm, which Latona
touching was immediately brought to bed; whereas until then she could not.

CHAP. V. Of Epaminondas his Indigence and Magnanimity.
Epaminondas had but one Vest, and that sordid, so that whenever he sent it
to the Fuller, he was forced to stay at home for want of another. Whilst he
was thus indigent, the Persian King sending him a great sum of money, he
would not accept it. And, if I mistake not, he that refused the Gift was more
Magnanimous then he that offered it.

CHAP. VI. Of the voluntary death of Calanus.
Likewise the end of Calanus the Indian is worthy to be praised, another would
say to be admired. It was on this manner; Calanus the Indian Sophist, having
bid a long farewell to Alexander and the Macedonians, and to life, when he
would free himself from the Fetters of the Body, caused a Pyre to be made in
the fairest Suburb of Babylon; the wood thereof was dry, and chosen for
fragrancy, Cedar, Thyum, Cypress, Myrtle and Laurel. He having performed his
accustomed exercise (which was to run a course) came and stood in the middle of
the Pyre, crowned with reeds. The Sun shone upon him, and he worshipped him,
which was the sign he had given the Macedonians, that they should kindle the
Pyre, which they did; and continued standing upright in the flame, and fell not
till he was quite consumed. Hereat Alexander (as is reported) much astonished,
said, that Calanus had vanquished greater Enemies then he. For he warred with
Porus, and Taxiles, and Darius; but Calanus with Pains and Death.

CHAP. VII. Of Anacharsis.
The Scythians wander up and down their own Country; but Anacharsis, being a
wise man, extended his travells farther: for he came into Greece, and Solon
admired him.

CHAP. VIII. How some have born Scoffs.
Scoffs and Reproaches to me seem of no force: for if they meet with a solid
mind, they are shattered in pieces; but if with a mean and low, they have
power, and many times occasion not only grief, but death: whereof take this
instance; Socrates being derided in a Comedy, laughed; but Poliagrus hanged
himself.

CHAP. IX. Of Aristotle.
Aristotle having prodigally consumed his Patrimony, went to the Wars; which
succeeding ill with him also, he then traded as an Apothecary. But coming by
chance into the Peripatus, and hearing the discourses there, being of better
natural parts then most of them, he acquired that habit which afterward he put
in execution.

CHAP. X. The number of some Ships and Arms which the Athenians lost.
The Athenians were diligent in taking care for their Navy. Sometimes having
the better, and sometimes being worsted, they lost in Egypt two hundred
Galleys, with all that belonged to them; at Cyprus a hundred and fifty; in
Sicily two hundred and forty; in the Hellespont two hundred. Of
compleatly-armed Soldiers there were slain in Sicily forty thousand, and at
Chaeronaea a thousand.

CHAP. XI. The Cruelty of a King of Thrace toward his Children.
A King of Thrace, (his name let some other tell) when Xerxes warred against
Greece, fled to the Mountain Rhodope, and advised his six Sons not to fight
against Greece. But they not obeying him, when he returned, he put out the eyes
of them all; an act unlike a Grecian.

CHAP. XII. That D^mades wa^ fined for making a (...)* ^at Alexander should be
accounted a God.
I cannot but love this act of the Athenians; In a publi^k Assembly of the
Athenians, Demades rising up decreed that Alexander should be the thirteenth
Deity. But the people not enduring his excessive impiery, fined him a hundred
Talents, for enrolling Al^xander, who was a mortal, amongst the Celestial Gods.

CHAP. XIII. That the Athenians were inclined to Novelties.
The Athenians were very changeable as to Government, and exceedingly inclined
to alteration. They patiently suffered Kingly Government under Cecrops,
Erechtheus and Theseus, and afterward under the Codridae; they experimented
Tyranny under the Pisistratidae; they used Aristocracy four hundred years;
after which they chose yearly ten Citizens which governed the City. At last
there happened an Anarchy by the Sedition of the Thirty Tyrants. This ready
change of customs, whether it should be commended or not, I know not.

CHAP. XIV. An Attick Law concerning the Interrment of Bodies, and killing of
Oxen.
This was an Attick Law; Whosoever happens to light upon the Car^ase of any
man, he must throw earth all over it, and bury it as looking toward the West.

This also was observed by them; A ploughing Ox, that labors under the
yoke, either with Plough or Cart, sacrifice not. For he also is a Tiller of the
earth, and partakes with men of their labor.

CHAP. XV. Places of Judicature in Athens for Murders.
Attick Courts of Judicature, for wilful Murders in the Areopagus, for
involuntary in the Palladium; for those who confessed the Murder, but pleaded
the lawfulness of it, in the Delphinium.

CHAP. XVI. That a little Boy was condemned for Sacrilege.
A little Boy carried away a Plate of Gold which fell from the Crown of Diana.
It was discovered. The Judges caused playthings and Dice to be set before him,
as also the Plate. He again laid hold of the Plate: whereupon they put him to
death for S^crilege, not sparing his age, but punishing the act.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Superstition of the Athenians.
The Athenians were so Superstitious, that if any one felled a little Oak out
of the Heroes Grove, they put him to death* And Atarbes, for that he killed the
Sparrow sacred to Aesculapius, they spared not, but executed him: Not pardoning
either his ignorance or madness, but preferring the concernment of the God
before both these. For some said he did it by chance, others, through fury.

CHAP. XVIII. Of a Woman with child condemned to death.
The Court of Areopagus having tried a Woman poisoner, and it being judged she
should die, they would not put her to death until she were delivered of the
Infant wherewith she was great. Then saving the innocent Child, they executed
the guilty person.

CHAP. XIX. How Aeschylus condemned for Impiety was preserved.
Aeschylus the Tragic Poet was by reason of some Play condemned ^or Impiety.
Whereupon the Athenians being ready to stone him, Amynias his younger Brother,
throwing back h^s Vest, showed his Arm without a Hand* Amynias had the reward
for fighting best at Salamis, where he lost his Hand, and was the first of the
Athenians that was rewarded. The Judges seeing the trouble of the man, called
to mind his actions, and dismissed Aeschylus.

CHAP. XX. Of the Fasting of the Tarentines and Rhegians.
The Tarentines being besieged by the Romans, and ready to surrender through
Famine, the Rhegians ordered a Fast to be kept every ten days; and with the
allowance of that food supplied the Tarentines. Hereupon the Romans raised
their si^ge; and the Tarentines, ^n (...) of their d^stress, kept a Feast,
which they called The F^st.

CHAP. XXI. That Medea did not kill her own Children.
Some say that the relation concerning Medea is false, and that she did not
kill her Children, bu^ the Corinthians. This Fable concerning Colchis, and the
Tragedy (Medea) they say Euripides made at the request of the Corinthians. The
falsity prevailed above the truth, by reason of the excellency of the Poet. But
for the Murder of the Children, they say that even to this day the Corinthians
offer exp^atory Sacrifices to them; which they render as a kind of Tribute.

The End.
AELIAN's Various History.
The Sixth BOOK.
CHAP. I. Of the Wrath, Inhumanity, Contempt, Injustice, and Violence of some
toward others.
THE Athenians having overcome the Chalcidenses, distributed that part of their
Country which is called Hippobotus into forty Lots; but meddled not with the
ground consecrated to Minerva in the place named Lilantus. The rest of the
Country they let out, and brought away the Pillars which now stand at the Royal
Piazza, on which they set up the Bills of Sale. The Prisoners that they took
they cast into Fetters: neither did this s^tisfie their rage against the
Chalcidenses.

The Lacedaemonians having overcome the Messenians, took to themselves the half
of every thing in Messenia, and compelled the Free-women to go to Funerals,
and to bewa^l the de^d, such as were Strangers, and not^ing related to them. Of
the men, they imp^oyed some ^n Husband^y, some they sold, some they slew.

(...) the Athenians were insolent in this (...). Having good success, they
used not their good ^ortune moderately: For they compelled the foreign Virgins
that inhabited the^r Country, to carry Umbrella's in public Solemn^ties before
their own Virgins, and the Women before their Women; and the Men to carry
Spades.

The S^cyonians having taken Pellene, prostituted publicly the W^ves and
Daughters of the Pellenians. This was most savage, O you Gr^ian Gods, and
unseemly, I think, even in Barbarians.

Philip having gained the Victory at Chaeronaea, was exalted with the success,
as were also all the Macedonians. The Grecians, searing him exceedingly,
surrendered themselves according to their several Cities, as ^ast as possible to
him. The same did the Thebans, and the Megarenses, the Corinthians, Achaeans,
Elei, and the Euboeans, that dwelt upon the Seaside. Philip kept not the
agreement he had made with them, but subjected them all to Servitude, contrary
to right and equity.

CHAP. II. Of the Valor of the Son of Harmatidias.
The Son of Harmatidias the Thespian, going with others of his Country to aid
the Athenians, fought at first stoutly and gallantly; then having lost his
Arms, fought with his bare hands against the armed men, and so died honorably.
I have named the Father of the young man, and celebrated him after the manner
of Homer. His own name, if any is inquisitive to know, let some other tell.

CHAP. III. Of ^sadas a Boy.
The Lacedaemonians crowned Isadas, yet but a Boy, and not obliged by the Law to
take Arms, for leaving the Gymnasium, and behaving himself gallantly in a
Fight. Yet because he engaged with the Enemy before his age required it, and
before he had received Arms from his Country, they fined him.

CHAP. IV. Of him that was betrothed to the Daughter of Lysander.
Lysander dying, one that was betrothed to his Daughter in his lifetime,
because she was fatherless, and that Lysander at his decease proved poor, cast
her off, and said he would not have her to Wife; hereupon the Ephori fined him:
not like a Lacedemonian or Grecian, to forget his Friend dead, and to prefer
Wealth before a Contract.

CHAP. V. Of the Athenian Ambassadors.
The Athenians, because the Ambassadors which they sent to Arcadia took
another way, and not that which they appointed, though they performed their
charge well, put them to death.

CHAP. VI. Laconick Laws.
Are not these Laconick? There is a Law amongst the Spartans, That he who has
had three Sons should be exempt from Watch and Ward; he who five, should be
discharged from all public Offices and Taxes. That Marriages should be
contracted without Portions. No Lacedemonian might learn a Trade. They must go
to War clothed in Scarlet: For besides that the color had something of
awfulness in it self; the blood which was spilt upon it from wounds did much
more daunt the Enemy, appearing more sharp to the sight and more dreadful.

It was not lawful for a Lacedemonian to strip a slain Enemy. They who died
fighting stoutly, were carried crowned with Olive and other Branches. But they
who had fought best, had a Scarlet-Robe thrown over them, and so were buried
honorably.

CHAP. VII. Of the Earthquake which happened at Sparta.
When the Lacedaemonians had treacherously expelled the Taenarian Servants,
(these Servants were of the race of the Hilotes) through the anger of Neptune
there happened an Earthquake at Sparta, which threw down the City, so that
there were but five Houses left standing of the whole City.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Murder of Artaxerxes.
They say that Artaxerxes surnamed Ochus, being by Bagoas the Eunuch, who was
an Egyptian, slain and cut to pieces, was thrown to Cats, and some other
buried in his stead was laid in the Regal Monuments. The Sacrileges which are
reported of Ochus are many; especially those committed in Egypt. Neither was
Bagoas satisfied with killing Ochus, but he also made Hilts for Swords of the
Bones of his Thighs: thereby signifying his bloody disposition. He hated him,
because when he came into Egypt he slew Apis, as Cambyses had done before.

CHAP. IX. Of a Treasure sought by the Delphians in the Pythian Temple.
There coming a report to Delphi, that the Temple of Apollo was anciently very
rich (grounded upon these Verses of Homer,

Not so much wealth as Phoebus marble Fane
Founded in rocky Pytho does contain,)
They say that hereupon the Delphians began to digg about the Altar, and the
Tripod; but there happening violent Earthquakes about the Seat of the Oracles,
they gave over the attempt.

CHAP. X. A Law concerning Citizens made by Pericles.
Pericles General of the Athenians made a Law, That he whose Parents on both
sides were not Citizens, might not enjoy the privileges of a Citizen. From this
Law there happened a revenge upon himself; for his two legitimate Sons, Paralus
and Xanthippus, died of the common Pestilence. There remained only to him his
natural issue, who by their Fathers Law were deprived of interest in the State.

CHAP. XI. Of Gelo offering to resign the Government.
Gelo having overcome the Carthaginians at Himera, reduced all Sicily to his
obedience. Then coming into the Marketplace unarmed, he declared that he would
resign the Government to the Citizens. But they refused, knowing him to be more
loving to the people, then desirous of Monarchick power. Hence in the Temple of
Sicilian Juno there is an Image representing him unarmed; which pictures this
action.

CHAP. XII. Of the Happiness of Dionysius, and what end it had.
Dionysius the second had an Empire excellently fortified after this manner. He
possessed Ships no less then four hundred, of five rows and six rows of Oars.
His power of foot-souldiers was a hundred thousand, Horsemen nine thousand.
The City of Syracusa was adorned with exceeding great Havens, and encompassed
with a very high Wall. He had store for five hundred Ships more. His provision
of Corn which was laid up was a hundred Myriads of Medimnae. His Magazine was
furnished with Shields, Swords, and Spears, many LeggArms, Breast-plates, and
Slings. The Sling was Dionysius his own invention.

He had also many Auxiliaries; and confiding in these Dionysius thought he
possessed an Empire bound with Adamant. But he first put his Brothers to death;
then saw his Sons cruelly murdered, and Daughters first ravished, then killed.
Not one of those that descended from him had the rite of Sepulture: for some
were burned alive, others cut in pieces and cast into the Sea. This happened to
him, when Dio Son of Hipparinus invaded his Kingdom. He himself died old in
extreme poverty.

Theopompus says, that through excessive Drinking he had so great an infirmity
in his Eyes, that he grew blind; and that he sat in Barbers Shops, and talked
jestingly to move laughter; and that in the midst of Greece he led a
dishonorable and wretched life.

No light argument to persuade men to moderation and temper, is the change of
Dionysius his fortune, from so high, to so low a condition.

CHAP. XIII. Of Tyrannical Governments in Greece, which have continued in
Posterities.
It is excellently ordered by Providence, that Tyrannical Governments last not
to the third Generation; but either the Tyrants are rooted out like
Pitch-trees, or their Children divested of Power. But amongst the Greeks these
Tyrannical Governments are known to have lasted so long; that of Gelo in
Sicily, of the Leucanians in Bosphorus, and of the Cypselidae at Corinth.

CHAP. XIV. Of a Conspiracy against Darius.
I am told an extraordinary meek act of Darius Son of Hystaspes. Aribazus the
Hyrcanian, with many other persons, not inconsiderable, in Persia, conspired
against him. The Plot was laid at a Hunting: which Darius understanding, was
not daunted, but commanded them to betake themselves to their Weapons and
Horses, and to fix their Arms. And looking sternly upon them, Why then do you
not that, said he, which you designed? But they seeing the undaunted look of
the man, gave over the attempt. And so great fear seized them, that they threw
away their Spears, leaped from their Horses, adored Darius, and delivered
themselves up to do with them as he pleased.

He separated them from one another, and sent some to the confines of India,
others to the borders of Scythia; and they continued ever afterward faithful
to him, being mindful of this favor.

The End.
AELIAN's Various History.
The Seventh Book.
CHAP. I. Of Semiramis, and how she obtained the Assyrian Empire.
OF Semiramis the Assyrian several things are related. She was the fairest of
Women, yet neglected her Beauty. When she came to the King of Assyria, whether
she was summoned through the renown of her Beauty, as soon as he saw her, he
fell in love with her. She requested of the King that he would grant her a
Royal Robe; and that she might have the command of Asia five days, and the
ordering of all things during that time. She failed not of her request. But as
soon as the King had seated her upon the Throne, and that she knew all things
were at her power and disposal, she commanded the Guard to kill the King, and
so possessed herself of the Assyrian Empire. Dinon relates this.

CHAP. II. Of the Luxury of Strato and Nicocles.
Strato the Sidonian is said to have studied to exceed all men in Luxury and
Magnificence. Theopompus the Chian compares his life to the Feasting of the
Phaeacians, which Homer according to his great wit, as he uses to do, highly
magnified. This man had not a single Musician at his Feast to delight him, but
there waited many Women-Musicians, and players on the Flute, and beautiful
Curtezans, and Women-dancers. He emulated exceedingly Nicocles the Cyprian, and
Nicocles him. This emulation was about nothing serious, but concerning the
things we spoke of. For each of them hearing from those who came from the other
what was done there, emulated and endeavored to exceed the other. But this
lasted not always, for both died violent deaths.

CHAP. III. A Consolatory Saying of Aristippus.
Aristippus, to some of his friends being exceedingly afflicted, besides many
other Consolatory speeches, said thus at first t^ them; I come to you not as to
condol^ with you, but to suppress your grief.

CHAP. IV. Of the praise of a Mill.
Pittacus exceedingly commended a Mill making an Encomium upon it, for that
many persons may exercise themselves in little compass. There was a common So^
hence called the Mill-Song.

CHAP. V. Of the hand-labour of Ulysses and A chilles in many things.
Even Laertes was by his Son surprise laboring with his hands, and pruning
Tree when he was very old. Ulysses like wise confesses that he knew many
things and how to do them with his own hands.

There is not any man alive so good
At making fires, and cleaving out the woo^
He also quickly made a little Ship by his own labor, without any Ship-wright.
And Achilles himself, who was the third from Jupiter, did cut the meat and
dress the Supper for the Ambassadors that came from the Achaeans.

CHAP. VI. The answer of a Scythian concerning Cold.
On a time there falling a great Snow, the King of the Scythians asked one whom
he saw walk naked, whether he were not frozen. He again asked the King whether
his Forehead were not frozen. To which he answering, No; the other replied,
Neither am I, for I am Forehead all over.

CHAP. VII. Of Demosthenes his Watchfulness.
Pytheas scoffed at Demosthenes Son of Demosthenes, saying that his Arguments
smelt of the Lamp, because he sat up all the night, meditating and considering
what he should say when he was to come before the Athenians.

CHAP. VIII. Of Alexander's grief at Hephaestion's Death.
When Hephaestion died, Alexander cast into the Pyre his Arms, and Gold and
Silver, to be burnt with the dead body; as also a Vest of great esteem amongst
the Persians. He likewise caused all the chie^ Soldiers to be shaved, himself
acting a^ Homerical passion, and imitating his Achilles. But he did more
eagerly and fiercely, laying waste the Castle of the City Ecbatana, and
throwing down the Wall. A^ to the shaving of his Hair, he did in my o^ pinion
like a Greek^: but in throwing dow^ the Walls, he expressed his mourning like ^
Barbarian. He also changed his Vest, giving all over to grief, love and tears.

Hephaestion died at Ecbatana. It is reported that these things were intended
for the Burial of Hephaestion, but that Alexande^ used them dying, before the
mourning wa^ over for the young man.

CHAP. IX. Of a Modest Woman.
Was not this a singular token of Modesty? To me it seems such. The Wife ^f
Phocion wore Phocion's Vest, and requi^ed not a A thin Sasfroncoloured Gown.
Crocotum, or A thin fringed or laced Gown. Hesych.
Tarentine, or Cloak, or Mantle, or Veil, or Hood, or co^oured Robes. But she
first put on Mode^ty, and then such things as were at hand.

CHAP. X. Of the Wife of Socrates.
Xanthippe, Wife of Socrates, refusing to ^ut on his Vest, so to go to a
public Spectacle, he said, Do you not perceive that you go not to see, but
rather to be seen?

CHAP. XI. Of the Shoes of the Roman Women.
Of the Roman Women many have used ^o wear the same Shoes as Men.

CHAP. XII. An Apophthegm of Lysander or Philip concerning Perjury.
Children must be cheated by Dice, Men by O^ths. Some ascribe this Saying to
Lysander, others to Philip the Macedonian. But which soever it was, it is not
well said, in my opinion. Neither is it perhaps strange that Lysander and I
differ in our opinions, for he was a Tyrant: but my mind may be guessed by
this, that I have declared that this Saying pleases me not.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Tolerance of Agesilaus.
Agesilaus a Lacedemonian, now an old man, very often went forth without Shoes
and Coat, in his Mantle, and that in the Winter mornings. And when a certain
person reprehended him, that he did more youthfully then became his age, he
answered, But the young Citizens cast their eyes on me, as Colts on their Sires.

CHAP. XIV. Of Philosophers that went to War, and administered Civil Government.
Were not the Philosophers skilful in Warlike affairs? To me they seem such.
For the Tarentines chose Archytas their General six times. Melissus was their
Admiral. Socrates fought thrice, and Plato himself at Tanagra, and at Corinth.
The Warlike actions and Generalship of Xenophon many celebrate; and he himself
acknowledges, in his Discourses concerning Cyrus. Dio son of Hipparinus
subverted the Tyranny of Dionysius: and Epaminond^s, being made chief Commander
of the Boeotians, at Leuctra overcame the Lacedaemonians, and was chief among
the Romans and Grecians. Zeno much advantaged the Athenian State, whilst he
was with Antigonus. For there is no difference if a man benefits others,
whether it be by his Wisdom or Arms.

CHAP. XV. How the Mitylenaeans revenged themselves upon their revolted
Confederates.
The Mitylenaeans being absolute Masters of the Sea, imposed as a punishment
upon their Confederates which had revolted from them, That they should not
teach their children to read, nor suffer them to be instructed in any Learning;
conceiving that to be bred Ignorantly and Illiterately was of all punishments
the greatest.

CHAP. XVI. Of Rome, Remus, Romulus, and Servia.
Rome was built by Remus and Romulus, sons of Mars and Servia. She was of the
Race of Aeneas.

CHAP. XVII. Of Eudoxus coming to Sicily.
When Eudoxus came to Sicily, Dionysius largely congratulated his arrival. But
he neither flattering nor concealing any thing said, I come as to a good Host
with whom Plato lives. Declaring that he came not for his sake, but for the
others.

CHAP. XVIII. That the Egyptians are courageous in Torments; and of the Indian
Women.
They say that the Egyptians behave themselves stoutly in Torments. And that
an Egyptian being put to torture, will sooner die then confess the truth.
Amongst the Indians, the Wives resolutely go into the same fire with their
dead Husbands. The Wives of the man contest ambitiously about it; and she to
whom the Lot falls is burned with him.

CHAP. XIX. Of Solon's Stratagem against the Megareans, and how afterward he
overcame them by Argument.
Solon was made General in the War concerning Salamis. Having taken two
Megarean Ships, he manned them with Athenian Soldiers, and caused them to put
on the Enemies Armor, and passing undiscovered slew many of the Megareans
unarmed.

He also overcame them by Reason; not by specious words, but weight of
Argument. For causing some Monuments of the dead to be opened, he showed that
they were all Athenians, being laid toward the West, according to the manner
of their Country; for the Megareans used to be buried disorderly, and as it
happened. The Lacedaemonians judged the Controversy.

CHAP. XX. Of an old man, a Cean, that Died his Hair.
There came to Lacedemon a Cean, an old man, conceited of himself and ashamed
of his age: For which reason he endeavored to conceal the grayness of his hair
by Dying it. Coming in this manner before the Lacedaemonians in public, he
declared his business. But Archidamus King of the Lacedaemonians rising up, What
truth, said he, can this man speak, who does not only lie in his Heart, but in
his Hair? So he rejected what he had alleged, from his outward appearance
arguing the unsoundness of his Mind.

CHAP. XXI. Of the sedulity and care of Caesar and Pompey, to learn such things
which are requisite to govern rightly.
Caesar disdained not to frequent the School of Aristo, and Pompey that of
Cratippus. For their great power did not make them despise those persons that
might most advantage them; and of these they had need notwithstanding their
great Dignities. For, as it seems, they desired not so much to command, as to
command well.

The End.
AELIAN's Various History.
The Eighth BOOK.
CHAP. I. Of Socrates his Demon.
SOcrates said of his Demon to Theages, Demodocus, and many others, that he
many times perceived a voice warning him by Divine instinct, which, says he,
when it comes, signifies a dissuasion from that which I am going to do, but
never persuades to do any thing. And when any of my friends (says he) impart
their business to me, if this voice happens, it dissuades also, giving me the
like counsel: Wher^upon I dehort him who advises with me, and suffer him not
to proceed in what he was about, following the Divine admonition. He alleged
as witness hereof Charmides son of Glauco, who asking his advice, whether he
should exercise at the Nemean Games; as soon as he began to speak, the voice
gave the accustomed sigh. Whereupon Socrates endeavored to divert Charmides
from his purpose, telling him the reason: But he not following the advice, it
succeeded ill with him.

CHAP. II. Of Hipparchus his Wisdom, his care of Learned men; and of Homer's
Poems.
Hipparchus, eldest son of Pisistratus, was the wisest person among the
Athenians. He first brought Homer's Poems to Athens, and caused the Rhapsodists
to sing them at the Panathenaick Feast. He sent also a Gally of fifty Oars to
Anacreon the Teian [Poet] that he might come to him. To Simonides the Cean
[Poet] he was very kind, and kept him always with him, obliging him (as is
probable) by great gifts and rewards: for that Simonides was a great lover of
money, none will deny. This Hipparchus made it his business to favor Learned
men, and endeavored by his authority to reduce the Athenians to Learning, and
to better his Subjects; conceiving that no man ought to envy Wisdom, who
himself is just and honest. This Plato relates, if A Dialogue so named in the
Works of Plato.
Hipparchus be truly his.

CHAP. III. The Athenian Custom of killing an Ox, and of the Diipolian and
Buphonian Festival.
This is an Athenian Custom when an Ox is killed: By Proclamation they acquit
all severally of Murder, only they condemn the Knife, and say that killed
him. The day on which they do this they call the Diipolian and Buphonian
Festival.

CHAP. IV. Of the Luxury of Poliarchus.
They say that Poliarchus the Athenian arrived at so great a height of Luxury,
that he caused those Dogs and Cocks which he had loved, being dead, to be
carried out solemnly, and invited friends to their Funerals, and buried them
splendidly, erecting Columns over them, on which were engraved Epitaphs.

CHAP. V. Of Neleus and Medon, and the Twelve Ionian Cities.
Neleus Son of Codrus, being deposed from the Regal^ Government, left Athens,
(for the Pythian Oracle assigned the Kingdom to Medon) and intending to settle
a Colony came to Naxus, not by design, but driven thither by Tempest: willing
to depart thence, he was hindered by contrary winds. Whereupon being in suspense
what to do, the Soothsayers told him that his Company must be expiated, there
being amongst those who came along with him many persons whose hands were
defiled with blood. Hereupon he pretended that he had killed some servant, and
needed Expiation; whereby he induced such as were conscious of ill to the same.
Which done, having now discovered who were the profane persons, he left them.
They continued at Naxus; but Neleus came to Ionia, and first settled at Miletus,
having turned out the Carians, the Mygdonians, the Leleges, and the rest of the
Barbarians, For (...) perhaps should be read (...).
who built the Twelve Cities in Ionia. The Cities are these; Miletus, Ephesus,
Erythrae, Clazomenae, Priena, Lesbus, Teos, Colophon, Myus, Phocaea, Samos, and
Chios. He also built many other Cities in Epirus.

CHAP. VI. Of the ignorance of Learning and Institution amongst the Barbarians.
They say that none of the ancient Thracians knew any thing of Learning. Even
all the Barbarians that inhabited Europe thought it dishonorable to understand
Literature. But those in Asia (as is said) used it more. Whence some forbear
not to affirm, That not Orpheus himself, being a Thracian, was wise; but that
his Writings are false and fabulous. This Androtion asserts, if he be credible,
concerning the ignorance of Learning and Institution amongst the Thracians.

CHAP. VII. Of the Marriages solemnized by Alexander, after his Victory over
Darius.
Alexander having taken Darius, solemnized Marriages of himself and friends.
The men that were married were ninety, and the Marriage-beds as many. The Hall
in which they were entertained had a hundred Couches, such as they used to lie
on at Meals: The feet of every Couch were of Silver; but of that on which he
lay, they were of Gold. They were all covered with various-coloured Carpets of
rich Barbarian work. He admitted to the Feast some particular Friends, whom he
caused to sit over against him. In the Court were feasted the Foot-souldiers,
Mariners, Horsemen, Ambassadors, and Foreign Greeks. Before Supper the (...).
Trumpets sounded, to give notice that it was time to come to the Table; and
again when Supper was ended, that they should rise to depart. He solemnized
these Nuptials five days together. Very many Musicians, and Players,
Tragedians and Comedians, came thither. There came also many Jugglers out of
India, of which kind those of that Country exceed all others.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Art of Painting.
Conon the Cleonaean (as is said) perfected the Art of Painting, which until
then was but rude, and very indifferent, and as it were in its infancy. For
which reason he also received a greater reward then the Painters that were
before.

CHAP. IX. Of a Tyrant killed by his Friend.
Archelaus, Tyrant of Macedonia, (for so Plato calls him, not King) loved
Crateuas exceedingly, who no less loved the supreme Command, and therefore
killed his Friend Archelaus, hoping thereby to obtain the Tyranny, and make
himself happy. But having possessed the Tyranny three or four days, he was also
betrayed by others and slain. To this Macedonick Tragedy aptly suit these
Verses,

Who snares for others lays,
Himself at last betraies.
They say that Archelaus had betrothed one of his Daughters to him: but
marrying her to another, he out of indignation slew Archelaus.

CHAP. X. Of Solon, and the Laws written by him and Draco.
The Athenians chose Solon their Archon; for that Office was not conferred by
lot. After he was chosen, he beautified the City, besides other things, with
Laws which he writ for them, and are observed to this day. Then the Athenians
gave over using the Laws of Draco, which were called Thesmi, retaining only
those which concerned Homicides.

CHAP. XI. Of the decay and dissolution of things, and of the World it self.
It is not to be wondered at, that Humane Nature being mortal and transitory,
necessitates them to perish, if we look upon Rivers that fail, and consider
that even the highest Mountains diminish. Travelers say that Aetna appears to
be much less then it was formerly. They relate the same of Parnassus, and
Olympus the Pierican Mountain. And they who seem to understand the nature of
the Universe, assert that the World it self shall be dissolved.

CHAP. XII. Of Demosthenes, Aeschines, Theophrastus, and Demochares.
It is a strange thing, if true, that Demosthenes failing of Rhetoric in
Macedonia, Aeschines the Cothocidean, son of Atromitus, flourished amongst the
Macedonians, and far transcended the rest of the Ambassadors in wit. The
cause whereby this happened to Aeschines, was the friendship of Philip and his
gifts; and because Philip heard him patiently and pleasingly, and looked upon
him with a mild and benevolent aspect, thereby discovering the good will he had
for him; all which were great incitements to Aeschines of confidence and fluent
Language. This happened not only to Demosthenes in Macedonia, though a most
excellent Orator, but also to Theophrastus the Eresian; for he likewise was at
a loss before the Council of the Areopagus, for which he alleged this excuse,
That he was daunted with the grave presence of the Senate. To which speech
Demochares answered bitterly and readily thus, Theophrastus, the Judges were
Athenians, not the twelve Gods.

CHAP. XIII. Of some who never laughed.
They say that Anaxagoras the Clazomenian never laughed, nor so much as smiled.
They say also that Aristoxenus was a great enemy to Laughter. And that
Heraclitus bewailed all things in life.

CHAP. XIV. Of the death of Diogenes.
Diogenes the Sinopean, being sick to death, and scarce able to go, cast
himself from a Bridge which was near the place of exercise, and charged the
Keeper of the place that as soon as he was quite dead, he should throw him into
the [River] Ilissus; so little did Diogenes value Death or Burial.

CHAP. XV. Of the Moderation of Philip upon a Victory; and of what he would be
minded continually.
Philip, when he had vanquished the Athenians at Chaeronaea, though exalted
with his success, yet subdu^d his passion, and behaved himself not insolently.
Therefore he thought it requisite to be put in mind by one of his Servants that
he was a Man: wherefore he appointed this office to a Servant; neither did he
go forth before that, as is said; nor was any that came to speak with him
admitted before the Servant had cried aloud thrice to him, which he did daily.
He said to him, Philip, thou art a Man.

CHAP. XVI. Of Solon and Pisistratus.
Solon son of Execestides now grown old, began to suspect Pisistratus as aiming
at Tyranny, when he came before a public Convention of the Athenians, and
required a Guard of the people. But seeing the Athenians, not regarding his
speeches, went to Pisistratus, he said that he was wiser then some, and more
valiant then others: wiser then those who perceived not that as soon as he had
gotten a Guard, he would become Tyrant; more valiant then those who perceived
it, but held their peace. Pisistratus having gotten this power made himself
Tyrant. Then Solon hanging out his Shield and Spear before his Gate, said, That
he had taken Arms and defended his Country whilst he was able; and now, though
no longer fit by reason of his age to be a Soldier, he still was in mind a
well-willer. Notwithstanding Pisistratus, whether respecting the man and his
wisdom, or mindful of their acquaintance in his youth, did no harm to Solon

Not long after Solon being very old died, leaving behind him a great renown of
Wisdom and Fortitude. They set up his Image of Brass in the Marketplace, and
buried him publicly near the Gates of the Wall on the right hand as you come
in His Monument was encompassed with a Wall.

CHAP. XVII. Of Oenycinus Monarch of the Zanclaeans.
Oenycinus a Scythian, Monarch of the Zanclaeans, came up into Asia to King
Darius, and was esteemed by him more just then all the persons that had come up
out of Greece to him: For having obtained leave of the King, he went into
Sicily, and came back again from thence to the King. This Democedes the
Crotonian did not; and therefore Darius much reproached him, calling him a
Deceiver, and a most wicked man. But the Scythian lived very happily in Persia
till he was old, and died there.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Euthymus and the Hero in Temese, and a Proverb.
Euthymus a Locrian, of those in Italy, was an eminent Wrastler, and reported
to have been of admirable Strength. For the Locrians show an extraordinary
great Stone which he carried and set before his Gates. He quelled the Hero in
Temese, who exacted Tribute of all that lived thereabout; for coming into his
Temple, which to most persons was inaccessible, he fought with him, and
compelled him to give up much more then he had plundered: whence arose a
Proverb of those who get any thing whereby they receive no benefit, that the
Hero in Temese is come to them. They say that Euthymus going down to the River
Caecis, which runs by the City of the Locrians, was never after seen.

CHAP. XIX. The Epitaph of Anaxagoras, and his Altar.
Here lies, who through the truest ways did pass
Of The world Celestial, Anaxagoras.
There was a double Altar erected to him; one inscribed of the Mind, the other
of Truth.

The End.
AELIAN's Various History.
The Ninth Book.
CHAP. I. That Hiero loved Learning, and was liberal, and lived friendly with
his Brothers.
THEY say that Hiero the Syracusian was a lover of the Grecians, and esteemed
Learning exceedingly. They affirm also that he was most ready to confer
benefits; for he was more forward to bestow them, then the suitors to receive
them. His soul likewise was of great courage, and he lived together with his
Brothers, who were three, without any jealousy, loving them, and beloved in
like manner of them exceedingly. With him lived Simonides and Pindar; neither
did Simonides, though of extraordinary age, decline coming to him. For the Cean
was naturally very covetous, and that which chiefly allured him was (as they
say) the Liberality of Hiero.

CHAP. II. Of the Victory of Taurosthenes.
To Aegina from Olympia on the same day news of the Victory of Taurosthenes was
brought to his Father, some say by an Apparition; others report that he carried
along with him a Pigeon taken from her young (not yet fledged,) and as soon as
he gained the Victory, let her loose, having tied a little purple about her,
and then she came back to her young the same day from Pisa to Aegina.

CHAP. III. Of the Luxury and Pride of Alexander and some others.
Alexander made his Companions effeminate by allowing them to be Luxurious. For
Agno wore golden nails in his Shoes. Clitus, when any came to ask counsel of
him, came out to his Clients clothed in Purple. Perdiccas and Craterus, who
loved exercise, had always brought after them Lists made of Skins of the
length of a Stadium, which upon occasion they pitched on the ground, and
exercised within them. They were attended with a continual cloud of dust raised
by the Beasts that brought these Carriages. Leonnatus and Menelaus, who were
addicted to Hunting, had Hangings brought after them which reached the length
of a hundred Stadia. Alexander himself had a Tent that held a hundred Couches;
the partitions made by fifty Pillars of Gold* which upheld the Roof: the Roof
it self was of Gold curiously wrought. Within it round about were placed first
five hundred Persians, called Melophori, clothed in purple and yellow Coats.
Next those a thousand Archers in flame-colour and light red. Withal a hundred
Macedonian Squires with silver Shields. In the middle of the Tent was placed a
Golden Throne, upon which Alexander sat and heard suits, encompassed round
about with this Guard. The Tent it self was surrounded with a thousand
Macedonians, and ten thousand Persians. Neither might any man without much
difficulty get access to him, for he was much dreaded, being raised by Fortune
and exalted with Pride to so large a Tyranny.

CHAP. IV. Of the diligence of Polycrates in hearing Anacreon, and of his
Jealousy.
Polycrates the Samian was addicted to the Muses, and much respected Anacreon
the Teian, and took delight as well in his Verses as Company: but I cannot
commend his intemperate life. Anacreon made an Encomium of Smerdias.

CHAP. V. Of Hiero and Themistocles.
Themistocles, when Hiero brought Horses to the Olympic Games, forbad him the
Solemnity, saying, It was not fit that he that would not share in their
greatest Danger, should partake of their Festivals. For which Themistocles was
commended.

CHAP. VI. Of Pericles and his Sons dying of the Pestilence.
Pericles, when his Sons were taken away by the Pestilence, bore their death
with great fortitude: By whose example the rest of the Athenians were
encouraged to suffer patiently the loss of their nearest friends.

CHAP. VII. Of Socrates his Equanimity in all things.
Xanthippe used to say, that when the State was oppressed with a thousand
miseries, yet Socrates always went abroad and came home with the same look.
For he bore a mind smooth and cheerful upon all occasions, far remote from
Grief, and above all Fear.

CHAP. VIII. Of Dionysius his Incontinence.
Dionysius the younger coming to the City of the Locrians, (for Doris his
Mother was a Locrian) took possession of the fairest houses of the City, and
caused the floors to be strewed with Roses, Marjoram, and other Flowers. He
also sent for the Daughters of the Locrians, with whom he conversed
lasciviously. But he was punished for this; for when his Tyranny was subverted
by Dio, the Locrians seized on his Daughters, and prostituted them publicly to
all persons, especially to such as were of kin to the Virgins whom Dionysius
had abused: This done, they pricked their fingers under their nails, and so
killed them; then they pounded their bones in a Mortar, and whosoever tasted
not of the flesh that was taken from them, they cursed. What remained they cast
into the Sea. As for Dionysius, he suffered the vicissitude of Fortune at
Corinth, in extreme poverty, becoming a Metragyrta, and begging Alms, beating a
Tabour and playing on a Pipe till he died.

CHAP. IX. That Demetrius also was Incontinent.
Demetrius Poliorcetes, having taken Cities, abused them to maintain his
Luxury, exacting of them yearly one thousand and two hundred Talents. Of which
sum, the least part was employed for the Army, the rest expended upon his own
Disorders: for not only himself, but the floors of his House were anointed
with sweet Unguents; and according to the season of the year, Flowers strewed
for him to tread on. He was lascivious also; he studied to appear handsome, and
Died his hair yellow, and used Paint.

CHAP. X. Of Plato's little valuing Life.
Plato, when it was told him that the Academy was an unhealthful place, and the
Physicians advised him to remove to the Lyceum, refused, saying, I would not,
to prolong my life, go live on the top of Athos.

CHAP. XI. Of Parrhasius the Painter.
That Parrhasius the Painter wore a Purple Vest and Crown of Gold, besides
others, the Epigrams on many of his Images attest. On a time he contested at
Samos, and met with an Adversary not much inferior to himself; he was worsted:
the subject was Ajax contending with Ulysses for the Arms of Achilles.
Parrhasius being thus overcome, said to a friend who bewailed the misfortune,
that for his own being worsted he valued it not, but he was sorry for the son
of Telamon, that in the same contest had been twice overcome by his Adversary.
He carried a Staff full of golden Nails: His Shoes were fastened on the top
with golden Buckles. They say he wrought freely and without trouble, and
cheerfully, singing softly all the while to divert himself. This is related by
Theophrastus.

CHAP. XII. Of the Epicureans banished by the Romans and Messenians.
The Romans expelled Alcaeus and Philiscus out of the City, because they taught
the young men many dishonest pleasures* Likewise the Messenians expelled the
Epicureans.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Gluttony and excessive Fatness of Dionysius.
I am informed that Dionysius the Heracleote, son of Clearchus the Tyrant,
through daily Gluttony and intemperance, increased to an extraordinary degree
of Corpulency and Fatness, by reason whereof he had much ado to take breath.
The Physicians ordered for remedy of this inconvenience, that Needles should be
made very long and small, which when he fell into sound sleep should be thrust
through his sides into his belly. Which office his Attendants performed, and
till the Needle had passed quite through the fat, and came to the flesh it
self, he lay like a stone; but when it came to the firm flesh, he felt it and
awaked. When he had business, when any came to speak with him for advice or
orders, he set a Chest before him, (some say it was not a Chest, but a little
kind of Turret) which hid all of him but his face, which was seen out of the
top, and so talked with them: an excellent Garment, far fitter for a Beast
then a Man.

CHAP. XIV. Of the extraordinary Leanness of Philetas.
They say that Philetas the Coan was extremely lean; insomuch that being apt to
be thrown down upon the least occasion, he was fain, as they report, to put
Lead within the soles of his Shoes, lest the wind, if it blew hard, should
overturn him. But if he were so feeble that he could not resist the wind, how
was he able to draw such a weight after him? To me it seems improbable. I only
relate what I have heard.

CHAP. XV. Of Homer.
The Argives give the first Palm of all Poetry to Homer, making all others
second to him. When they sacrificed, they invoked Apollo and Homer to be
present with them. Moreover they say, that not being able to give a portion
with his Daughter, he bestowed on her his Cyprian Poems, as Pindar attests.

CHAP. XVI. Of Italy, and of Mares both Man and Horse.
The Ausonians first inhabited Italy, being Natives of the place. They say that
in old time a man lived there named Mares, before like a Man, behind like a
Horse, his name signifying as much as Hippomiges in Greek, Half-horse. My
opinion is, that he first backed and managed a Horse; whence he was believed to
have both Natures. They fable that he lived a hundred twenty three years; and
that he died thrice, and was restored thrice to life* which I conceive
incredible. They say that more several Nations inhabited Italy then any other
Land, by reason of the temperateness of the Country and goodness of the Soil,
it being well watered, fruitful, and full of Rivers, and having all along
convenient Havens to harbor Ships. Moreover, the humanity and civility of the
Inhabitants allured many to remove thither. And that there were in Italy one
thousand one hundred and ninety seven Cities.

CHAP. XVII. Of Demosthenes his Pride.
Demosthenes seems to be argued of Pride by this relation, which says, that
the Water-bearers raised a Pride in him, when they said something of him softly
to one another as he passed by. For he who was puffed up by them, and proud of
such commendations, what must he be when the whole public Assembly applauded
him?

CHAP. XVIII. Of Themistocles.
Themistocles son of Neocles likened himself to Oaks, saying that men come to
them for shelter, when they have need of them in rain, and desire to be
protected by their boughs; but when it is fair, they come to them to strip and
peel them. He also said, If any one should show me two ways, one leading to
the Grave, the other to the Tribunal, I should think it more pleasant to take
that which leads to the Grave.

CHAP. XIX. That Demosthenes refused, being called by Diogenes to go into a
Cook's Shop.
As on a time Diogenes was at Dinner in a Cook's Shop, he called to Demosthenes
who passed by. But he taking no notice, Do you think it a disparagement,
Demosthenes, (said he) to come into a Cook's Shop? your Master comes hither
every day; meaning the Common people, and implying that Orators and Lawyers
are Servants of the Vulgar.

CHAP. XX. Of Aristippus.
Aristippus being in a great storm at Sea, one of those who were aboard with
him said, Are you afraid too, Aristippus, as well as we of the ordinary ^ort?
Yes, answered he, and with reason; for you shall only lose a wicked life, but
I, Felicity.

CHAP. XXI. Of Theramenes.
It happened that as soon as Theramenes came out of an House, the House fell
down immediately: The Athenians flocked to him from every side to congratulate
his escape; but he, contrary to all their expectations, said, O Jupiter, to
what opportunity do you reserve me? And not long after he was put to death by
the Thirty Tyrants, drinking Hemlock.

CHAP. XXII. Of some that studied Medicine.
They say that Pythagoras was much addicted to the Art of Medicine. Plato also
studied it much. So did Aristotle son of Nicomachus, and many others.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Aristotle being sick.
Aristotle on a time falling sick, the Physician prescribed him something. Cure
me not as if I were an Oxe-driver, (says he) but show me first a reason, and
then I will obey: Implying, that nothing is to be done but upon good grounds.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the Luxury of Smindyrides.
Smindyrides the Sybarite advanced to so high degree of Luxury, that though the
Sybarites themselves were very luxurious, yet he far out-went them. On a time
being laid to sleep on a bed of Roses, as soon as he awaked he said, That the
hardness of the Bed had raised Blisters on him. How would he have done to lie
on the Ground, or on a Carpet, or on the Grass, or on a Bull's skin, as
Diomedes? a Bed befitting a Soldier.

And underneath him a Bull's skin they spread.

CHAP. XXV. How Pisistratus behaved himself toward his Citizens.
Pisistratus having obtained the Government, sent for such as passed their time
idly in the Marketplace, and asked them the reason why they walked up and
down unemployed, adding, If your yoke of Oxen be dead, take of mine, and go
your ways and work; if you want Corn for seed, you shall have some of me. He
feared lest being idle, they might contrive some Treason against him.

CHAP. XXVI. Of Zeno and Antigonus.
Antigonus the King loved and respected Zeno the Cittiean exceedingly. It
happened, that on a time being full of Wine, he met Zeno, and like a drunken
man embraced and kissed him, and bade him ask something of him, binding himself
by an Oath to grant it. Zeno said to him, Go then and sleep; gravely and
discreetly reproving his Drunkenness, and consulting his Health.

CHAP. XXVII. Ingenuity of Manners.
One reprehended a Lacedemonian Rustic for grieving immoderately. He answered
with great simplicity, What should I do? It is not I that am the cause, but
Nature.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of Diogenes.
A Spartan commending this Verse of Hesiod,

Not so much as an Ox can die,
Unless a Neighbor ill be by;
and Diogenes hearing him, But, says he, the Messenians and their Oxen were
destroyed, and you are their Neighbors.

CHAP. XXIX. That Socrates was fearless, and despised Gifts.
Socrates coming home late one night from a Feast, some wild young men knowing
of his return, lay in wait for him, attired like Furies, with Vizards and
Torches, whereby they used to fright such as they met. Socrates as soon as he
saw them, nothing troubled, made a stand, and fell to question them, as he used
to do to others in the Lyceum, or Academy.

Alcibiades, ambitiously munificent, sent many Presents to Socrates. Xanthippe
admiring their value, desired him to accept them. We (answered Socrates) will
contest in Liberality with Alcibiades, not accepting by a kind of munificence
what he has sent us.

Also when one said to him, It is a great thing to enjoy what we desire; He
answered, But a greater not to desire at all.

CHAP. XXX. Of the Providence of Anaxarchus.
Anaxarchus when he accompanied Alexander in the Wars, the Winter coming on,
foreseeing that Alexander would encamp in a place destitute of wood, buried all
his Vessels and other Utensils in his Tent, and laded his Carriages with wood.
When they came to the Rendezvous, there being want of wood, Alexander was
forced to make use of his Bedsteds for Fuel. But being told that Anaxarchus
had gotten fire, he went to him and anointed himself in his Tent. And having
understood his Providence, commended it; bestowing on him Utensils and Garments
double in value to those he had thrown away, for the use of his fire.

CHAP. XXXI. Of a Wrastler who, having gained the Victory, died before he was
Crowned.
A Wrastler of Crotona having gained the Victory at the Olympic Games, going
to the Judges to receive the Crown, was suddenly seized with an Epileptick fit,
and died with the fall.

CHAP. XXXII. Of the Statues of Phryne a Curtizan, and the Mares of Cimon.
The Grecians erected a Statue of Phryne the Curtizan at Delphi upon a high
Pillar: I say not simply the Grecians, lest I seem to involve them all in that
crime whom I chiefly love, but those of the Grecians who were most addicted to
Intemperance. The Statue was of Gold. There were also at Athens Statues of the
Mares of Cimon in Brass proportioned to the life.

CHAP. XXXIII. The Answer of a young man to his Father, demanding what he had
learned.
A young man of Eretria, having heard Zeno a long time, returning home, his
Father asked him what Wisdom he had learnt. He answered that he would show
him. His Father being angry, and beating him, he bore it humbly. This (says
he) I have learnt, To bear with the anger of a Father.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of persons richly clad.
Diogenes coming to Olympia, and seeing at the Solemnity some young men,
Rhodians, richly attired, laughing said, This is Pride. Then meeting with some
Lacedaemonians clad in Coats course and sordid, This (said he) is another Pride.

CHAP. XXXV. Of Antisthenes taking pride in a torn Cloak.
Socrates seeing that Antisthenes always exposed to view the torn part of his
Cloak, Will you not (says he) lay aside Ostentation amongst us?

CHAP. XXXVI. Of Antigonus and a Lutenist.
A Lutenist showed his skill before Antigonus, who often saying to him, Scrue
the Treble; and again, Scrue up the Tenor: The Lutenist angry said, The Gods
divert such a mischief from you, O King, as for you to be more skilful herein
then I am.

CHAP. XXXVII. How Anaxarchus derided Alexander, who would be esteemed a God.
Anaxarchus, surnamed Eudaemonicus, laughed at Alexander for making himself a
God. Alexander on a time falling sick, the Physician prescribed a Broth for
him. Anaxarchus laughing, said, The hopes of our God are in a Porrenger of
Broth.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of Alexander, and the Harp of Paris.
Alexander went to Troy, and making there a curious Scrutiny, one of the
Trojans came to him, and showed him the Harp of Paris. He said, I had much
rather see that of Achilles then this of Paris. For he desired to see that
which belonged to the excellent Soldier, and to which he sung the praises of
great persons. But to that of Paris, what were sung but adulterous Airs to take
and entice Women?

CHAP. XXXIX. Of ridiculous and extravagant affections.
Who can say that these affections were not ridiculous and extravagant? That of
Xerxes, when he fell in love with a Planetree. Likewise a young man at Athens,
of a good Family, fell desperately in love with the Statue of good Fortune,
which stood before the Prytaneum. He often would embrace it and kiss it; at
last transported with mad desire, he came to the Senate, and desired that he
might purchase it at any rate. But not obtaining his suit, he Crowned it with
many Garlands and Ribbons, offered Sacrifice, put upon it a very rich Garment,
and, after he had shed innumerable tears, killed himself. * * * *

CHAP. XL. Of the Pilots of the Carthaginian Ships.
The Carthaginians appointed two Pilots for every Ship, saying, that it was not
fit a Ship should have two Rudders; and he who did chiefly benefit the
Passengers, and had command of the Ship, should be desolate and alone without
an assistant.

CHAP. XLI. Of Pausanias and Simonides.
Simonides the Cean and Pausanias the Lacedemonian (they say) were at a Feast
together. Pausanias bade Simonides speak some wise thing. But the Cean
laughing, said, ''Remember you are a Man. At that present Pausanias slighted
this, and valued it not; siding then with the Medes, and proud of the
Hospitality which the King showed him; perhaps also transported with Wine: But
when he was in the Temple of Minerva Chalcioecus, and struggled with famine,
and was ready to die the most miserable of men, he then remembered Simonides,
and cried out thrice, O Cean Guest, thy speech imported much, though I
ignorantly undervalued it.

CHAP. XLII. Of Artaxerxes and Darius.
Artaxerxes having put his eldest Son Darius to death for conspiring against
him; the second, his Father commanding, drew his Scimitar and slew himself
before the Palace.

The End.
AELIAN's Various History.
The Tenth BOOK.
CHAP. I. Of Pherenice admitted to behold the Olympic Games.
PHerenice brought her Son to contend at the Olympic Games: the Judges
forbidding her to behold the Spectacle, she went and argued with them,
alleging she had a Father who had been Victor at the Olympick^, as also three
Brothers, and she had now brought a Son to be one of the Contendours. Thus she
prevailed with the people, contrary to the Law, which forbids Women the
Spectacle, and beheld the Olympic Games.

CHAP. II. Of the Continency of Eubatas.
Lais seeing Eubatas the Cyrenaean, fell deeply in love with him, and made a
proposal of Marriage to him: which he (fearing some treachery from her)
promised to do; but forbear her company, and lived continently. It was agreed
they should be married as soon as the Games were over. As Soon as he had won,
that he might not seem to break his contract with her, he caused her Picture to
be drawn, and carried it along with him to Cyrene, saying he had taken Lais,
and not broken the Agreement. For which she that should have married him caused
a great Statue to be erected for him in Cyrene, to requite this Continence.

CHAP. III. Properties of some Creatures.
Young Partridges, as soon as their feet are at liberty, can run nimbly. Young
Ducks, as soon as fledged, swim. And the Whelps of Lions, before they are
brought forth, scratch their Dam with their Claws, eager to come into the light.

CHAP. IV. Of Alexander's quickness in action.
Alexander Son of Philip marched in his Arms thrice four hundred furlongs, and
before he rested fought the Enemy, and overcame them.

CHAP. V. Of Tyrants, out of Aesop's Writing.
This is a Phrygian saying, for it is Aesop's the Phrygian. The Sow when any
one takes her, makes a great cry, and not without cause, for she has no Wool
or the like, and therefore presently dreams of death, knowing that so she may
benefit those who make use of her. Tyrants are like Aesop's Sow, mistrusting
and fearing every thing, for they know, as Swine, that their life is owing to
every one.

CHAP. VI. Of Little men.
For Leanness were derided Sannyrio the Comic Poet, and Melitus the Tragic
Poet, and Cinesias who made Songs for round Dances, and Philetas the Poet that
wrote Hexameters. Archestratus the Prophet, being taken by the Enemy, and put
in a pair of Scales, was found to weigh but one obolus. Panaretus also was very
lean, yet lived free from sickness. They report likewise that Hipponax the Poet
was not only low of person and deformed, but very slender. Moreover
Philippides, against whom is extant an Oration of Hyperides, was very lean. So
that to be of a very spare constitution, they commonly called to be
Philippified. Witness Alexis.

CHAP. VII. Of some Astronomers, and of the Great Year.
Oenopides the Chian, an Astronomer, set up a brass Table at the Olympicks,
having written thereon the Astronomy of fifty nine years, affirming this to be
the Great Year.

Meton the Laconian, an Astronomer, erected Pillars on which he inscribed the
Tropicks of the Sun, and found out as he said the Great Year, which he affirmed
to consist of nineteen years.

CHAP. VIII. Of Benefits.
Aristotle the Cyrenaean said, that we ought not to receive a Benefit from any;
for either you must take pains to requite it, or seem ungrateful if you requite
it not.

CHAP. IX. That Philoxenus was a Glutton.
Philoxenus was Gluttonous, and a slave to his Belly. Seeing a Pot boiling in a
Cook's Shop, he pleased himself all the while with the smell; at last his
appetite increased, and nature prevailed (O Gods, a beastly nature) so that not
able to forbear any longer, he commanded his Boy to buy the Pot. Who answering
that the Cook valued it at a great rate; he replies, It will be so much the
sweeter, the more I pay for it. Such things ought to be remembered, not that we
may imitate, but avoid them.

CHAP. X. Of the ancient Painters.
When Painting first began, and was as it were in its Infancy, they drew
Creatures so rudely, that the Painters were fain to write upon them, This is an
Ox, That a Horse, This a Tree.

CHAP. XI. Of Diogenes having a pain in his Shoulder.
Diogenes had a pain in his Shoulder by some hurt, as I conceive, or from some
other cause: and seeming to be much troubled, one that was present being vexed
at him, derided him, saying, Why then do you not die, Diogenes, and free your
self from ills? He answered, It was fit those persons who knew what was to be
done and said in life, (of which sort he professed himself one) should live.
Wherefore for you (says he) who know neither what is fit to be said or done,
it is convenient to die; but me, who know these things, it behooves to live.

CHAP. XII. An Apophthegm of Archytas concerning Men.
Archytas said, that as it is hard to find a Fish without sharp bones, so is it
to find a Man who has not something of deceit and sharpness.

CHAP. XIII. That Archilochus defamed himself.
Critias accused Archilochus for defaming himself: For (says he) if he himself
had not brought this report of himself into Greece, we could never have known
either that he was son of Enipo a Woman-servant; or that he left Parus through
want and penury, and came to Thasus; how that after he came thither he bore
them enmity; nor that he spoke ill of friends and foes alike: nor (said he) had
we known that he was an Adulterer, if we had not been told it by himself; nor
that he was luxurious and insolent; nor (which was the basest of all) that he
threw away his Shield. Wherefore he was no good Witness of himself, leaving so
bad a Record behind him. This is laid to his charge, not by me, but by Critias.

CHAP. XIV. Of Idleness.
Socrates said that Idleness is the Sister of Liberty, alleging in testimony
hereof the Indians and Persians, people most valiant and most free, but as to
work most slothful: The Phrygians and Lydians very laborious, and servile.

CHAP. XV. Of those who were betrothed to the Daughters of Aristides and
Lysander.
Some of the most eminent of the Grecians betrothed themselves to the Daughters
of Aristides, whilst he was yet living; but they looked not upon the life of
Aristides, nor admired his Justice. For if they had been emulators of these,
they would not afterward have broken their contract. But as soon as he was
dead, they disengaged themselves from the Virgins; because at his death it was
known that the Son of Lysimachus was poor, which deterred those miserable men
from so worthy (in my opinion) and honorable a Match. The like happened to
Lysander, for when they knew that he was poor, they shunned his Alliance.

CHAP. XVI. Of Antisthenes and Diogenes.
Antisthenes invited many to learn Philosophy of him, but none came. At last,
growing angry, he would admit none at all, and therefore bad Diogenes be gone
also. Diogenes continuing to come frequently, he chid and threatened him, and at
last struck him with his Staff. Diogenes would not go back, but persisting
still in desire of hearing him, said, Strike if you will, here is my head, you
cannot find a Staff hard enough to drive me from you, until you have instructed
me. Antisthenes overcome with his perseverance, admitted him, and made him his
intimate Friend.

CHAP. XVII. Of those who grew rich by public Employments.
Critias says that Themistocles Son of Neocles, before he had a public
Command, was Heir to no more then three Talents: But having had a charge in the
Commonwealth, and happening afterward to be banished, his estate being exposed
to public sale, was valued at more then a hundred Talents. Likewise Cleon,
before he came to be engaged in public affairs, had not means enough for a
free person; but afterward left an estate of fifty Talents.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Syracusian Daphnis, and of Bucolick Verses.
Some say that Daphnis the Neatherd was Mercurie's Friend, others, his Son; and
that he had this name from an accident: For he was born of a Nymph, and as soon
as born exposed under a Laurel-tree. The Cows which he kept (they say) were
Sisters to those of the Sun, mentioned by Homer in the Odyssees. Whilst
Daphnis kept Cows in Sicily, being very beautiful, a Nymph fell in love with
him, whom he enjoyed, being in his blooming years, at which time (as Homer
says) the gracefulness of Youth appears most attractive. They agreed that he
should not enjoy any other; but if he transgressed, she threatened him, that it
was decreed by fate he should lose his Sight. Hereupon they plighted troth
mutually. Afterward the King's Daughter falling in love with him, he being
drunk violated the agreement, and lay with her. This was the first occasion of
Bucolick Verses, the subject whereof was to bewail the misfortune of Daphnis,
and the loss of his eyes. Stesichorus the Himeraean first used this kind of
Verse.

CHAP. XIX. Of Eurydamus.
Eurydamus the Cyrenaean gained the Victory at the Caestus: His teeth being
beaten out by his Antagonist, he swallowed them down, that his adversary might
not perceive it.

CHAP. XX. Of Agesilaus.
The Persian Emperor sent word to Agesilaus, that he would be his friend.
Agesilaus returned answer, That he could not be a friend particularly to
Agesilaus: but if he were friend to all the Lacedaemonians, he must consequently
be his also, for he had a share in each of them.

CHAP. XXI. Of Plato.
Perictione carried Plato in her arms. Aristo sacrificing in Hymettus to the
Muses or the Nymphs, whilst they were performing the divine Rites, she laid
Plato down among certain thick and shady Myrtle-trees that grew near to the
place. A swarm of Hymettian Bees lighted about his mouth as he slept, thereby
signifying the future sweetness of Plato's Tongue.

CHAP. XXII. Of Dioxippus.
Dioxippus in the presence of Alexander and the Macedonians, laying hold of a
Club, challenged Corrhagus a Macedonian armed to single combat; and having
broken his Spear closed with the man in armor, and casting him down, set his
foot upon his neck, and drawing forth the sword that was girt to him, slew the
armed man. Alexander hated him for this. He perceiving that Alexander hated
him, died of grief.

The End.
AELIAN's Various History.
The Eleventh BOOK.
CHAP. I. Of Oricadmus, and the Art of Wrestling.
ORicadmus gave rules for Wrestling, and invented that manner of Wrestling
which is called Sicilian.

CHAP. II. Of the Verses of Oroebantius, Dares and Melisander.
The Poems of Oroebantius the Troezenian were before Homer, as the Troezenian
relations affirm. They ^ay also that Dares the Phrygian, whose Phrygian Iliad I
know to be yet extant, was before Homer. Melisander the Milesian writ the
Battle betwixt the Lapithae and the Centaurs.

CHAP. III. Of Icchus, and Wrestling.
Icchus the Tarentine used Wrestling, and in the time of his exercise continued
most temperate, using spare diet, and living continently all his time.

CHAP. IV. Of the Baldness of Agathocles.
They say that Agathocles Tyrant of Sicily was Bald-headed even to derision;
his hair by degrees falling off, he ashamed made a Myrtle Garland to cover his
head and hide the Baldness. The Syracusians were not ignorant of his want of
Hair, but they took no notice of it, by reason of his fierce spirit and
Tyrannical demeanor.

CHAP. V. Of some persons unjustly condemned for Sacrilege.
Some persons sacrificed at Delphi; the Delphians conspiring against them,
privately put consecrated Moneys into the Baskets wherein was their
Frankincense and Cakes for Sacrifice. Hereupon apprehending them as
Sacrilegious persons, they led them to the top of the Rock, and, according to
the Delphian Law, threw them down.

CHAP. VI. Of an Adulterer.
It happened that an Adulterer was taken in Thespiae, and as he was led
fettered through the Marketplace, his friends rescued him. This occasioned an
Insurrection, wherein many men were slain.

CHAP. VII. Of Lysander and Alcibiades.
Eteocles the Lacedemonian said that Sparta could not suffer two Lysanders: And
Archestratus the Athenian said that Athens could not suffer two Alcibiades. So
intolerable were they both in their Countries.

CHAP. VIII. Of the death of Hipparchus.
Hipparchus was murdered by Harmodius and Aristogiton, because he would not
suffer the Sister of Harmodius to carry the Basket to the Goddess, according to
the custom of the Country, in the Panathenian Solemnity, she perhaps deserving
it.

CHAP. IX. Of certain excellent persons, Indigent, yet would not accept Gifts.
The most excellent persons among the Greeks lived in extreme Penury all their
lives. Let some then still praise Riches above the best Grecians, to whom
Penury was allotted as long as they lived. Of those was Aristides Son of
Lysimachus, a man of excellent conduct in War, who also imposed tribute on the
Grecians: Yet this so great a person did not leave enough to buy him Funeral
ornaments.

Phocion also was very poor, who when Alexander sent him a hundred Talents,
asked, For what reason does he give me this? They answering, Because he
conceives you to be the only Just and Good person amongst the Athenians; he
replied, Then let him suffer me to be such.

Epaminondas also Son of Polymnis was poor. When Jason sent him sive hundred
Crowns, You begin (says he) to do me wrong. He borrowed of a Citizen five
hundred Drachms for the Charges of his Journey to Peloponnesus; but hearing
that his Squire had got money of a Prisoner, Give me, says he, the Shield
back, and purchase for your self a Cook's Shop to live in: For now you are
grown rich, you will no longer fight.

Pelopidas being reproved by his friends for neglecting Riches, a thing
necessary to life; Yes, by Jove, says he, necessary for that Nicomedes indeed;
pointing to one lame and maimed.

Scipio lived fifty four years, and neither bought nor sold any thing, with so
little was he contented. One showing him a Shield richly adorned, he said, But
it behooves a Roman to place his hope on his right hand, not on his left.

Ephialtes Son of Sophonides was exceeding poor: his friends offering to give
him ten Talents, he would not accept them, saying, These will either make me,
through respect of you, to do something unjustly in favor; or if I show no
particular favor or respect to you, I shall seem ungrateful.

CHAP. X. Of Zoilus.
Zoilus the Amphipolitan, who wrote against Homer, Plato and others, was
Disciple of Polycrates. This Polycrates wrote an Accusation against Socrates.
Zoilus was called the Rhetorical Dog; his Character this, He wore a long Beard,
he shaved his Head close, his Gown reached not to his knees, his whole
employment was to speak ill and sow dissension; this unhappy man was wholly
given to Detraction. A (...) person asked him why he spoke ill of all: he
answered, Because I would do them hurt, but cannot.

CHAP. XI. Of Dionysius the Sicilian.
Dionysius the Sicilian practiced Physic* and did Cures himself, Lancing;
Cauterizing, and the like.

CHAP. XII. Of a Marchpane sent by Alcibiades to Socrates.
Alcibiades sent to Socrates a large Marchpane fairly wrought. Xanthippe angry
hereat; after her manner, threw it out of the Basket, and trod upon it: whereat
Socrates laughing said, And you then will have no share in it your self.

If any one think that in relating these things I speak Trifles, he knows not
that even in such a wise man is proved, despising those things which the Vulgar
esteem as the ornament of a Table, and crown of a Feast.

CHAP. XIII. Of one in Sicily very sharp-sighted.
They say there was a Sicilian of so sharp Sight, that extending his view from
Lilybaeus to Carthage he erred not: They say he could tell the number of the
Ships riding at Carthage without missing.

The End.
AELIAN's Various History.
The Twelfth BOOK.
CHAP. I. Of Aspasia.
ASpasia a Phocian, Daughter o^ Hermotimus, was brought up a^ Orphan, her
Mother dying i^ the pains of Childbirth. She was bred up in poverty, but
modestly an^ virtuously. She had many times a Drea^ which foretold her that she
should be mar^ ried to an excellent person. Whilst she was yet young, she
chanced to have a swe^ ling under her chin, loathsome to sigh^ whereat both the
Father and the Maid we^ much afflicted. Her Father brought her (...) a
Physician: he offered to undertake t^ Cure for three Staters; the other said he
ha^ not the Money. The Physician replied, he had then no Physic for him.
Hereupon Aspasia departed weeping; and holding a Looking-glass on her knee,
beheld her face in it, which much increased her grief. Going to rest without
Supping, by the reason of the trouble she was in, she had an opportune Dream; a
Dove seemed to appear to her as she slept, which being changed to ^ Woman,
said, Be of good courage, and bid a long farewell to Physicians and their
Medicines: Take of the dried Rose of Venus Garlands, which being pounded apply
to the swelling. After the Maid had ^nderstood and made trial of this, the
tumor was wholly assuaged; and Aspasia recovering her beauty by means of the
most beautiful Goddess, did once again appear the ^airest amongst her
Virgin-companions, enriched with Graces far above any of the rest. Of hair
yellow, locks a little curling, she had great eyes, somewhat hawk-nosed, ears
short, skin delicate, complexion like Roses; whence the Phocians, whilst she
was yet a child, called her Milto. Her lips were red, teeth whiter then snow,
small insteps, such as of those Women whom Homer calls (...). Her voice sweet
and smooth, that whosoever heard her might justly say he heard the voice of a
Siren. She was averse from Womanish curiosity in dressing: Such things are to
be supplied by wealth. She being poor, and bred up under a poor Father, used
nothing superfluous or extravagant to advantage her Beauty. On a time Aspasia
came to Cyrus, Son of Darius and Parysatis, Brother of Artaxerxes, not
willingly nor with the consent of her Father, but by compulsion, as it often
happens upon the taking of Cities, or the violence of Tyrants and their
Officers. One of the Officers of Cyrus brought her with other Virgins to Cyrus,
who immediately preferred her before all his Concubines, for simplicity of
behavior, and modesty; whereto also contributed her beauty without artifice,
and he^ extraordinary discretion, which was such, that Cyrus many times asked
her advice in affairs, which he never repented to have followed. When Aspasia
came first to Cyrus, it happened that he was newly rise^ from Supper, and was
going to drink afte^ the Persian manner: for after they have done eating, they
betake themselves to Wine, and fall to their cups freely, encountering Drink as
an Adversary. Whilst they were in the midst of their drinking, fou^ Grecian
Virgins were brought to Cyrus amongst whom was Aspasia the Phocian. They were
finely attired; three of them had their heads neatly dressed by their own Women
which came along with them, and had painted their faces. They had been also
instructed by their Governesses how to behave themselves toward Cyrus, to gain
^is favor; not to turn away when he came to them, not to be coy when he
touched them, to permit him to kiss them, and many other amatory instructions
practiced by Women who exposed their beauty to sale. Each contended to outvie
the other in handsomeness. Only Aspasia would not endure to be clothed with a
rich Robe, nor to put on a various-coloured Vest, nor to be washed; but calling
upon the Grecian and Eleutherian Gods, she cried out upon her Father's name,
execrating herself to her Father. She thought the Robe which she should put on
was a manifest sign of bondage. At last being compelled with blows she put it
on, and was necessitated to behave herself with greater liberty then beseemed a
Virgin. When they came to Cyrus, the rest smiled, and expressed cheerfulness in
their looks. But Aspasia looking on the ground, her eyes full of tears, did
every way express an extraordinary bashfulness. When he commanded them to sit
down by him, the rest instantly obeyed; but the Phocian refused, until the
Officer caused her to sit down by force. When Cyrus looked upon or touched
their eyes, cheeks and fingers, the rest freely permitted him; but she would
not suffer it: For if Cyrus did but offer to touch her, she cried out, saying,
he should not go unpunished for such actions. Cyrus was herewith extremely
pleased; and when upon his offering to touch her breast, she rose up, and would
have run away, Cyrus much taken with her native ingenuity, which was not like
the Persians, turning to him that bought them, This Maid only, says he, of
those which you have brought me is free and pure; the rest are adulterate in
face, but much more in behavior. Hereupon Cyrus loved her above all the Women
he ever had. Afterward there grew a mutual love between them, and their
friendship proceeded to such a height that it almost arrived at parity, not
differing from the concord and modesty of Grecian Marriage. Hereupon the fame
of his affection to Aspasia was spread to Ionia and throughout Greece;
Peloponnesus also was filled with discourses of the love betwixt Cyrus and her.
The report went even to the great King [of Persia,] for it was conceived that
Cyrus, after his acquaintance with her, kept company with no other Woman. From
these things Aspasia recollected the remembrance of her old Apparition, and of
the Dove, and her words, and what the Goddess foretold her. Hence she conceived
that she was from the very beginning particularly regarded by her. She
therefore offered Sacrifice of thanks to Venus. And first caused a great Image
of Gold to be erected to her, which she called the Image of Venus, and by it
placed the picture of a Dove beset with Jewels, and every day implored the
favor of the Goddess with Sacrifice and Prayer. She sent to Hermotimus her
Father many rich Presents, and made him wealthy. She lived continently all her
life, as both the Grecian and Persian Women affirm. On a time a Neck-lace was
sent as a Present to Cyrus from Scopas the younger, which had been sent to
Scopas out of Sicily. The Neck-lace was of extraordinary workmanship, and
variety. All therefore to whom Cyrus showed it admiring it, he was much taken
with the Jewel, and went immediately to Aspasia, it being about noon. Finding
her asleep, he lay down gently by her, watching quietly whilst she slept. As
soon as she awaked, and saw Cyrus, she embraced him after her usual manner. He
taking the Neck-lace out of a Box, said, This is worthy either the Daughter or
the Mother of a King. To which she assenting; I will give it you, said he, for
your own use, let me see your neck adorned with it. But she received not the
Gift, prudently and discreetly answering, How will Parysatis your Mother take
it, this being a Gift fit for her that bare you? Send it to her, Cyrus, I will
show you a Neck handsome enough without it. Aspasia from the greatness of her
mind acted contrary to other Royal Queens, who are excessively desirous of
rich Ornaments. Cyrus being pleased with this answer, kissed Aspasia. All these
actions and speeches Cyrus writ in a Letter which he sent together with the
Chain to his Mother; and Parysatis receiving the Present was no less delighted
with the News then with the Gold, for which she requited Aspasia with great and
Royal Gifts; for this pleased her above all things, that though Aspasia were
chiefly affected by her Son, yet in the love of Cyrus she desired to be placed
beneath his Mother. Aspasia praised the Gifts, but said she had no need of
them; (for there was much money sent with the Presents) but sent them to Cyrus,
saying, To you who maintain many men this may be useful: For me it is enough
that you love me and are my ornament. With these things, as it seems, she
much astonished Cyrus. And indeed the Woman was without dispute admirable for
her personal beauty, but much more for the nobleness of her mind. When Cyrus
was slain in the fight against his Brother, and his Army taken Prisoners, with
the rest of the prey she was taken; not falling accidentally into the Enemies
hands, but sought for with much diligence by King Artaxerxes, for he had heard
her ^ame and virtue. When they brought her bound, he was angry, and cast those
that did it into Prison. He commanded that a rich Robe should be given her:
which she hearing, entreated with tea^s and lamentation that she might not put
on the Garment the King appointed, for she mourned exceedingly for Cyrus. But
when she had put it on, she appeared the fairest of all Women, and Artaxerxes
was immediately surprised and inflamed with love of her. He valued her beyond
all the rest of his Women, respecting her infinitely. He endeavored to
ingratiate himself into her favor, hoping to make her forget Cyrus, and to
love him no less then she had done his Brother; but it was long before he could
compass it. For the affection of Aspasia to Cyrus had taken so deep impression,
that it could not easily be rooted out. Long after this, Teridates the Eunuch
died, who was the most beautiful youth in Asia. He had full surpassed his
childhood, and was reckoned among the youths. The King was said to have loved
him exceedingly: he was infinitely grieved and troubled at his death, and there
was an universal mourning throughout Asia, every one endeavoring to gratify
the King herein; and none durst venture to come to him and comfort him, for
they thought his passion would not admit any consolation. Three days being
past, Aspasia taking a mourning Robe as the King was going to the Bath, stood
weeping, her eyes cast on the ground. He seeing her, wondered, and demanded the
reason of her coming. She said, I come, O King, to comfort your grief and
affliction, if you so please; otherwise I shall go back. The Persian pleased
with this care, commanded that she should retire to her Chamber, and wait his
coming. As soon as he returned, he put the Vest of the Eunuch upon Aspasia,
which did in a manner fit her: And by this means her beauty appeared with
greater splendo^r to the King's eye, who much affected the youth. And being
once pleased herewith, he desired her to come always to him in that dress,
until the height of his grief were allayed: which to please him she did. Thus
more then all his other Women, or his own Son and Kindred, she comforted
Artaxerxes, and relieved his sorrow; the King being pleased with her care, and
prudently admitting her consolation.

CHAP. II. Of the Muses.
No Statuary or Painter did ever represent the Daughters of Jupiter armed. This
signifies that the life which is devoted to the Muses ought to be peaceable and
meek.

CHAP. III. Of Epaminondas, and Daiphantus, and Iolaidas.
Epaminondas having received a mortal wound at Mantinea, and being brought (yet
alive) to the Tents, called for Daiphantus, that he might declare him General*
When they told him that he was slain, he called to Iolaidas. When they said
that he also was dead, he counseled them to make peace and friendship with
their Enemies, because the Thebans had no longer any General.

CHAP. IV. Of Sesostris.
The Egyptians say that Sesostris received learning and counsel from Mercury.

CHAP. V. Of Lais.
Lais the Curtezan was called (as Aristophanes the Byzantine reports) Axine, []
which surname impleads the Cruelty of her disposition.

CHAP. VI. Of the Parents of Marius and Cato.
They deserve to be laughed at who are proud of their Ancestors, since among
the Romans we know not the Father of Marius, yet admire him for his parts. To
know the Father of Cato the elder would require much scrutiny*

CHAP. VII. Of Alexander and Hephaestion.
Alexander Crowned the Tomb of Achilles, and Hephaestion that of Patroclus;
signifying that he was as dear to Alexander as Patroclus to Achilles.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Treachery of Cleomenes to Archonides.
Cleomenes the Lacedemonian taking to him Archonides one of his friends, made
him partaker of his design; whereupon he swore to him that if he accomplished
it he would do all things by his head. Being possessed of the Government, he
killed his Friend, and cutting off his Head put it into a Vessel of Honey. And
whenever he went to do any thing, he ^tooped down to the Vessel, and said
what he ^ntended to do; affirming that he had not broken his promise, nor was
forsworn, for he advised with the Head of Archonides.

CHAP. IX. How Timesias forsook his Country voluntarily.
Timesias the Clazomenian governed the Clazomenians uprightly; for he was a
good man: but Envy, which uses to oppugn such persons, assaulted him also. At
first he little valued the Envy of the common people, but at last forsook his
Country upon this occasion. On a time he passed by the School just as the
Boys were dismissed of their Master to play. Two boys fell out about a Line.
One of them swore, So may I break the head of Timesias. Hearing this, and
imagining that he was much envied and hated of the Citizens, and that if the
boys hated him, the men did much more, he voluntarily forsook his Country.

CHAP. X. That the Aeginetae first coined Money.
The Aeginetae were once most powerful amongst the Greeks, having a great
advantage and opportunity; for they had a great command at Sea, and were very
powerful. They also behaved themselves valiantly in the Persian War, whereby
they gained the chief prize of valor. Moreover, they first stamped Money, and
from them it was called Aeginean Money.

CHAP. XI. Of the Pallantian Hill, and of the Temple and Altar dedicated to
Fever.
The Romans erected a Temple and Altar to Fever under the Pallantian Hill.

CHAP. XII. Of an Adulterer apprehended in Crete.
An Adulterer being apprehended at Gortyne in Crete, was brought to Trial, and
being convicted, was crowned with Wool. This kind of crowning argued that he
was unmanly, effeminate, studious to please Women. He was by the general vote
fined fifty Staters, degraded from honor, and made incapable of public Office.

CHAP. XIII. How Gnathaena the Curtizan silenced a great Talker.
A Lover came from Hellespont to Gnathaena the Athenian Curtizan, invited by
her fame. He talked much in his drink, and was impertinent. Gnathaena hereupon
interposing, said, Did not you affirm you came from Hellespont? He assenting;
And how then, says she, happens it that you know not the chief City there? He
asking which that was, she answered, Sigeum. By which name she ingeniously
silenced him.

CHAP. XIV. Of persons excellent in Beauty.
They say that the most amiable and beautiful amongst the Greeks was
Alcibiades, amongst the Romans, Scipio. It is reported also that Demetrius
Poliorcetes contended in Beauty. They affirm likewise that Alexander Son of
Philip was of a neglectful handsomness: For his Hair curled naturally, and was
yellow; yet they say there was something stern in his countenance. Homer
speaking of handsome persons, compares them to Trees, -- he shoots up like a
Plant.

CHAP. XV. Of certain excellent persons who delighted to play with Children.
They say that Hercules alleviated the trouble of his Labors by play. The Son
of Jupiter and Alcmena sported much with Children; which Euripides hints to us,
making the God say,

I play to intermit my Toils: this he speaks holding a Child. And Socrates was
on a time surprised by Alcibi^des, playing with Lamprocles, as yet a Child.

Agesilaus bestriding a Reed, rid with his Son a Child, and to one that laughed
at him, said, ''At this time hold your peace; when ''you shall be a Father your
self, then you ''may give counsel to Fathers. Moreover Archytas the Tarentine,
a great Statesman and Philosopher, having many servants, took great delight in
their Children, and played with them, chiefly delighting to sport with them at
Feasts.

CHAP. XVI. Persons whom Alexander hated for their Virtue.
Alexander hated Perdiccas because he was Martial; Lysimachus, because he was
excellent in commanding an Army; Sele^cus, because he was Valiant. The
Liberality of Antigonus displeased him, the Conduct of Attalus, the Fortune of
Ptolemee.

CHAP. XVII. Of Demetrius going to the House of a Curtizan.
Demetrius, Lord over so many Nations, went to the House of Lamia a Curtizan in
his Armor, and wearing his Diadem. To have sent for her home had been very
dishonorable, [much more was it that] he went amorously to her. I prefer
Theodorus the Player on the Flute before Demetrius; for Lamia invited
Theodorus, but he contemned her invitation.

CHAP. XVIII. That Phaon was beautiful.
Phaon, being the most beautiful of all men, was by Venus hid among Lettices.
Another says he was a Ferry-man, and exercised that employment. On a time
Venus ^ame to him, desiring to pass over: he received her courteously, not
knowing who ^he was, and with much care conveyed her whither she desired; for
which the Goddess gave him an Alabaster Box of Ointment, which Phaon using,
became the most beautiful of men, and the Wives of the Mi^ylenaeans fell in
love with him. At last being taken in Adultery he was killed.

CHAP. XIX. Of Sappho.
Sappho the Poetress, Daughter of Scamandronymus, is (by Plato Son of Aristo)
^eckoned among the Sages. I am informed that there was another Sappho in
Lesbus, ^ Curtizan, not a Poetress.

CHAP. XX. Of the Nightingale and Swallow.
Hesiod says that the Nightingale above all Birds cares not for sleep, but
wakes continually; and that the Swallow wakes no^ always, but half the night
only. This punishment they suffer for the horrid actio^ committed in Thrace at
the abominable Supper.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Lacedemonian Women.
The Lacedemonian Matrons, as many as heard that their Sons were slain in
fight* went themselves to look upon the wounds they had received before and
behind: and if of the wounds they had received the greater number were before,
triumphing and looking proudly, they attended their Sons to the Sepulchers of
their Parents; but if they received wounds otherwise, they were ashamed and
lamented, and hastene^ away as privately as they could, leaving the dead to be
buried in the common Sepulcher, or caused them to be brought away secretly and
buried at home.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Strength of Titormus and Milo, and of a certain Proverb.
They say that Milo the Crotonian, proud of his Strength, happened to meet
Titormus a Neatherd; and seeing that Titormus was of an extraordinary bigness,
would make a trial of strength with him. Titormus pleaded that he was not very
strong; but going down to Euenus, and putting off his Garment, he laid hold of
an extraordinary great stone, and first drew it to him, then thrust it from
him; this he did two or three times: After which he lifted it up to his knees;
and lastly, lifting it up upon his shoulders, carried it eight paces, and then
threw it down. But Milo the Crotonian could hardly stir the stone. The second
trial of Titormus was this; He went to his Herd, and standing in the midst of
them, took hold of the greatest Bull amongst them by the leg, who endeavored to
get away, but could not. Another passing by, he caught him by the leg with the
other hand, and held him also. Milo beholding this, and stretching forth his
hands to heaven, said, O Jupiter, have thou not begotten another Hercules?
Whence they say came this Proverb, He is another Hercules.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Boldness of the Celtae.
I am informed that the Celtae are of all men most addicted to engage
themselves in dangers. Such persons as die gallantly in fight, they make the
subjects of Songs. They fight crowned, and erect Trophies, triumphing in their
actions, and leaving Monuments of their valor, after the Greek manner. They
esteem it so dishonorable to fly, that many times they will not go out of
their Houses when they are falling or burning, though they see themselves
surrounded with fire. Many also oppose themselves to Inundations of the Sea.
There are also who taking their Arms fall upon the waves, and resist their
force with naked Swords, and brandishing their Lances, as if able to terrify
or wound them.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the luxurious Diet and Gluttony of Smindyrides.
They say that Smindyrides the Sybarite was so Luxurious in Diet, that when he
went to Sicyon, as a suitor to Agarista Daughter of Clisthenes, he carried with
him a thousand Cooks, and as many Fowlers, and a thousand Fishermen.

CHAP. XXV. Many who improved and benefitted the most excellent persons.
Ulysses was improved by Alcinous, Achilles by Chiron, Patroclus by Achilles,
Agamemnon by Nestor, Telemachus by Menelaus, and Hector by Polydamas; the
Trojans, as far as they followed him, by Antenor; the Pythagorean Disciples by
Pythagoras, the Democriteans by Democritus. If the Athenians had followed
Socrates, they had been every way happy and skilful in Philosophy. Hiero Son of
Dinomenes was delighted in Simonides the Cean, Polycrates in Anacreon, Proxenus
in Xenophon, Antig^nus in Zeno. And to mention those also who concern me no
less then the Greeks, inasmuch as I am a Roman; Lucullus profited by Antiochus
the Asc^lonite, Mecoenas by Arius, Cicero by Apollodorus, Augustus by
Athenodorus. But Plato, who far exceeded me in wisdom, says that Jupiter
himself had a Counselor; but whom and how, we learn from him.

CHAP. XXVI. Of some persons addicted to Wine.
Persons, as it is said, most addicted to Drink were Xenagoras the Rhodian, whom
they called * Amphoreus, and Heraclides A great (...).
the Wrastler, and Proteas the Son of Lanica, who was brought up with Alexander
the King; even Alexander himself is said to have drunk more then any man.

CHAP. XXVII. That Hercules was mild toward his Adversaries.
They say that Hercules was extraordinary mild toward his Adversaries, for he
is the first we know of who without any mediation freely gave back the bodies
of the dead to be buried, the slain being at those times neglected, and left to
be a feast for Dogs, for, as Homer says, He made them unto Dogs a prey; and, A
feast to Dogs they were. --

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the Leocorium at Athens.
The Leocorium so called at Athens was a Temple of the Daughters of Leos,
Praxithea, Theope, and Eubule. These, as is reported, were put to death for the
City of Athens, Leos delivering them up according to the Delphian Oracle, which
said, that the City could be no other way preserved then by putting them to
death.

CHAP. XXIX. What Plato said of the Excess of the Agrigentines.
Plato Son of Aristo, seeing that the Agrigentines built magnificently and
feasted highly, said, that the Agrigentines build as if they were to live for
ever, and feast as if they were to live no longer. Timaeus affirms that the
Vessels in which they put their Oil and their Rubbers were of Silver, and that
they had Beds all of Ivory.

CHAP. XXX. Of the Drunkenness of the Tarentines, and the Luxury of the
Cyrenaeans.
The Tarentines used to fall a-drinking as soon as they rose, and to be drunk
by that time the people met in the Forum. The Cyrenaeans arrived at so great a
height of Luxury, that when they invited Plato to be their Lawgiver, he would
not vouchsafe it, as they say, by reason of their habitual dissoluteness.
Eupolis also mentions in his Comedy entitled Maricas, that the meanest of
them had Seals of the value of ten Minae. Their Rings also were graven to
admiration.

CHAP. XXXI. Of several kinds of Greek Wines.
I will reckon to you the names of Greek Wines much esteemed by the Ancients.
One sort they called Pramnian, which was sacred to Ceres; another Chian, from
the Island; another Thasian and Lesbian: besides these, there was one sort
called Glycys, Sweet, the Name agreeing with the Taste; another Cretan, and at
Syracuse a sort named Polian, from a King of the Country. They drunk also Coan
Wine, and so called it, as also Rhodian, from the place.

Are not these Demonstrations of the Greek Luxury? They mixed Perfumes with
their Wine; and so drank it by a forced Composition, which Wine was called
Myrrhinites. Philippides the Comic Poet mentions it.

CHAP. XXXII. Of the Vests and Shoes of Pythagoras, Empedocles, Hippias, and
Gorgias.
Pythagoras the Samian wore a white Vest, and a golden Crown and Drawers.
Empedocles the Agrigentine used a Seagreen Vest, and Shoes of Brass. Hippias
and Gorgias, as is reported, went abroad in Purple Vests.

CHAP. XXXIII. That the Romans would not allow the Treachery of Pyrrhus his
Physician.
They say that Nicias, Physician to Pyrrhus, writ privately to the Roman
Senate, and demanded a sum of Money for which he would undertake to poison
Pyrrhus; but they accepted not his offer (for the Romans know how to overcome
by Valor, not by Art and Treachery to circumvent their Enemies,) but
discovered the Design of Nicias to Pyrrhus.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of the Loves of Pausanias, and of Apelles.
Many Affections among the Ancients are remembered, these not the least.
Pausanias loved his Wife extraordinarily; Apelles the Concubine of Alexander,
by name Pancaste, by Country a Larissaean. She is said to be the first whom
Alexander ever enjoyed.

CHAP. XXXV. Of the Perianders, Miltiades, Sibylls, and the Bacides.
There were two Perianders, the one a Philosopher, the other a Tyrant: Three
Miltiades; one who built Chersonesus, another the Son of Cypsellus, the third a
Son of Cimon: Four Sibylls; the Erythraean, the Samian, the Egyptian, and the
Sardian* Others add six more, making them in all ten; among which they reckon
the Cumaean and the Jewish. There were three Bacides; one of Hellas, another of
Athens, the third of Arcadia.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of the number of the Children of Niobe.
The Ancients seem not to agree with one another concerning the number of the
Children of Niobe. Homer says there were six Sons and as many Daughters; Lasus
twice seven; Hesiod nineteen, if those Verses are Hesiod's, and not rather, as
many others, falsely ascribed to him. Aleman reckons them ten, Mimnermus twenty,
and Pindar as many.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of the want of Victual to which Alexander was reduced; and that
some Towns were taken by Smoke.
Alexander in pursuit of Bessus was reduced to extreme want of Victual,
insomuch that they were forced to feed on their Camels, and other Beasts of
Carriage; and, being destitute of Wood, did eat the flesh raw. But much
Silphium growing there, it did much avail them toward the digesting their Diet.

In Bactriana the Soldiers took several Towns, conjecturing by the Smoke that
they were inhabited, taking away the Snow from their doors.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of the Horses, and some Customs of the Sacae.
The Horses of the Sacae have this quality, that if one of them casts his
Rider, he stands still till he gets up again. If any of them intends to marry a
Virgin, he fights with her; and if she gets the better, she carries him away
Captive, and commands and has dominion over him. They fight for victory, not to
death. The Sacae, when they mourn, hide themselves in caves and shady places.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of the Boldness of Perdiccas, and of the Lioness.
Perdiccas the Macedonian, who fought under Alexander, was so bold, that on a
time he went alone into a Cave where a Lioness had whelped, and seized not on
the Lioness, but brought away her Whelps: for which action he deserved to be
much admired. The Lioness is believed to be the most strong and most courageous
of all Creatures, not only by Grecians, but by the Barbarians also. They say
that Semiramis the Assyrian [Queen] was very proud, not if she took a Lion, or
killed a Leopard, or the like Beasts, but if she overcame a Lioness.

CHAP. XL. Of the Provisions which followed Xerxes.
Amongst the Provisions full of magnificence and ostentation which were carried
after Xerxes, was some water of the River Choaspes. When they wanted drink in a
desert place, and had nothing to allay their thirst, Proclamation was made in
the Army, that if any one had some Water of Choaspes, he should give it to the
King to drink. There was found one who had a little, and that putrid. Xerxes
drank it, and esteemed the giver as his Benefactor; for he should have died of
thirst if this had not been found.

CHAP. XLI. Of Protogenes the Painter.
Protogenes the Painter, as is said, bestowed seven years in drawing Ialysus,
at last perfected the Piece: which Apelles seeing, at first stood mute, struck
with admiration of the wonderful sight; then looking off from it, said, Great
is the work and the workman; but the grace is not equal to the pains bestowed
upon it; which if this man could have given it, the work would have reached to
Heaven.

CHAP. XLII. Of certain Men who were suckled by Beasts.
It is said that a Bitch gave suck to Cyrus, Son of Mandale; a Hind to
Telephus, Son to Agave and Hercules; a Mare to Pelias, Son of Neptune and Tyro;
a Bear to Paris, Son of Alope and Priam; a Goat to Aegisthus, Son of Thyestes
and Pelopia.

CHAP. XLIII. Certain persons who of obscure became very eminent.
I am informed that Darius Son of Hystaspes was Quiver-bearer to Cyrus: The
last Darius, who was vanquished by Alexander, was the Son of a Woman-slave:
Archelaus King of the Macedonians was Son of Simicha, a Woman-slave: Menelaus
Grandfather of Philip was registered among the Bastards; his Son Amyntas was
servant to Aerope, and believed to be a Slave: Perseus, whom Paulus the Roman
conquered, was by Country Argive, the Son of some obscure person: Eumenes is
believed to have been Son of a poor man, a Piper at Funerals: Antigonus, Son of
Philip, who had but one eye, whence surnamed Cyclops, was Servant to
Polysperchus and a Robber: Themistocles, who overcame the Barbarians at Sea,
and who alone understood the meaning of the Oracle of the Gods, was Son of a
Thracian Woman, his Mother was called Abrotonos: Phocion, surnamed the Good,
had for Father a poor Mechanic. They say that Demetrius Pha^ereus was a
Houshold-servant belonging to the Families of Timotheus and Conon. Though
Hyperbolus, Cleophon and Demades were chief men in the Commonwealth of the
Athenians, yet no man can easily say who were their Fathers. In Lacedemonia,
Callicratidas, Gylippus and Lysander were called Mothaces, a name proper to the
Servants of rich men, whom they sent along with their Sons to the places of
exercise to be educated with them. Lycurgus, who instituted this, granted, that
such of them as continued in the discipline of the Young men should be free of
the Lacedemonian Commonwealth. The Father of Epaminondas was an obscure person.
Cleon Tyrant of the Sicyonians was a Pirate.

CHAP. XLIV. Of those who lived a long time in the Quarries of Sicily.
The Quarries of Sicily were near the surface of the ground, in length a
Furlong, i^ breadth two Acres; there were in them some men who lived so long
there, as to b^ Married and have children, and some of their children never saw
the City, so that when they went to Syracuse, and beheld Horse^ in Chariots,
they ran away crying out, being much affrighted. The fairest of those Caves did
bear the name of Philoxenus the Poet, in which they say he dwelt when he
composed his Cyclops, the best of his Poems, not valuing the punishment imposed
upon him by Dionysius, but in that calamity he exercised Poetry.

CHAP. XLV. Of Midas, Plato, and Pindar, their infancy.
The Phrygian Stories say thus; Whilst Midas the Phrygian, yet an infant, lay
asleep, Ants crept into his mouth, and with much industry and pain brought
thither some Corn. These wrought a Honeycomb in the mouth of Plato. Likewise
Pindar being exposed from his Father's house, Bees became his Nurses, and gave
him Honey instead of Milk.

CHAP. XLVI. Of a Sign which portended that Dionysius should be King.
They say that Dionysius, Son of Hermocrates, crossing a River on Horseback,
his Horse stuck in the Mire; he leaped off, and gained the Bank, going away,
and giving his Horse for lost. But the Horse following, and Neighing after him,
he went back, and as he was laying hold of his Main to get up, a swarm of Bees
settled on his hand. To Dionysius consulting what this portended, the Sicilian
^oothsayers.
Galeotae answered, that this signified Monarchy.

CHAP. XLVII. Of Aristomache Wife of Dio.
Dionysius banished Dio out of Sicily, but his Wife Aristomache and his Son by
her he kept in custody: Afterward h^ gave the Woman in Marriage against he^
will to Polycrates one of his Guard, i^ whom he most confided. He was by birt^
a Syracusian. When Dio took Syracuse* and Dionysius fled to the Locrians, Aret^
Sister of Dio saluted him; but Aristomach^ followed aloof off through shame
being veiled, and not daring to salute him as her Husband, because by
constraint she had not kep^ the Matrimonial contract: but after Aret^ had
pleaded for her, and declared the violence used to her by Dionysius, Dio
receive^ his Wife and his Son, and sent them to hi^ own House.

CHAP. XLVIII. Of Homer's Poems.
The Indians sing the Verses of Homer translated into their own Language; and
not only they, but the Persian Kings also, if we may believe those who relate
it.

CHAP. XLIX. That Phocion forgave Injuries.
Phocion, Son of Phocus, who had been often General, was condemned to die; and
being in Prison ready to drink Hemlock, when the Executioner gave him the Cup,
his Kinsmen asked him if he would say any thing to his Son. He answered, I
charge him that he bear no ill will to the Athenians for this Cup which I now
drink. He who does not extol and admire the man, is, in my judgment, of little
understanding.

CHAP. L. Of the Lacedaemonians not addicting themselves to Learning.
The Lacedaemonians were ignorant of Learning, they studied only Exercise and
Arms; if at any time they needed the help of Learning, either in Sickness or
Madness, or some other public Calamity, they sent for Foreiners, as
Physicians; according to the Oracle of Apollo, they sent for Terpander, and
Thales, and Tyrtaeus, Nymphaeus the Sidoniate, and Alcman, for he was a Player
on the Flute. Thucydides implies that they were nothing addicted to Learning,
in that which he delivers concerning Brasidas, for he says that he was no good
Orator, as being a Lacedemonian; as if he had said, he was wholly illiterate.

CHAP. LI. Of the Pride of Menecrates, and how Philip derided him.
Menecrates the Physician grew so extremely proud, that he called himself
Jupiter. On a time he sent a Letter to Philip King of the Macedonians on this
manner; To Philip, Menecrates Jupiter well to do: Philip writ back, Philip to
Menecrates, Health; I advise you to betake your self to the places about
Anticyra: hereby implying that the man was mad.

On a time Philip made a magnificent F^ast, and invited him to it, and
commanded a Bed to be prepared apart for him alone; and when he was laid down,
a Censer was brought before him, and they burnt Incense to him. The rest
feasted highly, and the Entertainment was magnificent. Menecrates held out a
while, and rejoiced in the honor: but soon after hunger came upon him, and
convinced him that he was a man, and foolish. He arose and went away, saying he
was affronted; Philip having most ingeniously discovered his folly.

CHAP. LII. To what kind of persons Isocrates compared Athens.
Isocrates the Orator said of Athens, that it resembled Curtezans: All that
were taken with their beauty desired to enjoy them, but none would so much
undervalue himself as to marry them. So Athens was pleasant to travel to, and
excelled all the rest of Greece, but not secure to live in. He reflected on the
many Sycophants there, and the danger from those who affected popularity.

CHAP. LIII. Of several occasions of great Wars.
I am not ignorant that the greatest Wars have sprung from very slight
occasions. They say that the Persian [War] began upon the falling out of
Maeander the Samian with the Athenians; The Peloponnesian War from a Tablet [or
Picture] of the Megareans; The War which was called Sacred, for the exacting
the Mulcts adjudged by the Amphictyones; The War at Chaeronea from the dispute
between Philip and the Athenians, they not willing to accept of the place by
way of Gift [but of Restitution.]

CHAP. LIVE. How Aristotle endeavored to appease Alexander's Anger.
Aristotle willing to appease Alexander's Anger, and to quiet him being much
incensed, wrote thus to him; Rage and Anger is not toward Equals, but toward
Superiors; but to you no man is Equal.

Aristotle advising Alexander in such things as were fit to be done, did
benefit many persons; by this means he re-edified his own City, which had been
razed by Philip.

CHAP. LV. Of those who among the Libyans were slain by Elephants, either in
Hunting or in War.
Those who were slain by Elephants either in Hunting or in War, the Libyans
bury honorably, and sing certain Hymns. The subject of the Hymns is this; That
they were brave persons that durst oppose such a Beast: adding, That an
honorable death was a Monument to the buried.

CHAP. LVI. What Diogenes said of the Megareans.
Diogenes the Sinopean said many things in the reproof of the ignorance and
want of discipline of the Megareans, and would rather choose to be a Ram
belonging to a Megarean, then his Son. He implied that the Megareans had great
care of their Flocks, but none of their Children.

CHAP. LVII. Of the Prodigies which appeared to the Thebans, when Alexander
brought his Forces against their City.
When Alexander Son of Philip brought his Forces against Thebes, the Gods sent
them many Signs and Prodigies, fore-shewing misfortunes greater then ever had
happened; (but they, thinking that Alexander died in Illyria, gave out many
reproachful speeches against him.) For the Lake in Onchestus made a dreadful
and continual noise, like the bellowing of a Bull. The Fountain which flows
by Ismenus and the Walls thereof, named Dirce, which ever until that time had
run with clear and sweet Water, was then unexpectedly full of blood. The
Thebans believed that the Gods threatened the Macedonians. In the Temple of
Ceres, within the City, a Spider made her Web over the face of the Image,
working there as she uses to do. The Image of Minerva, surnamed Alalcomeneis,
was burnt of it self, no fire being put to it: and diverse other things.

CHAP. LVIII. Of Dioxippus.
Dioxippus the Athenian, an Olympic Victor in Wrestling, was brought [
Plutarch* de curio^*
in a Chariot] into Athens, according to the custom of Wrastlers. The
multitude flocked together, and crowded to behold him. Amongst these a Woman of
extraordinary beauty came to see the Show. Dioxippus beholding her, was
immediately overcome with her beauty, and looked fixedly upon her, and turned
his head back, often changing color, whereby he was plainly detected by the
People to be taken extraordinarily with the Woman. But Diogenes the Sinopean
did chiefly reprehend his passion thus; A Gold Representing the Triumph.
Tablet of Corinthian Work being set to sale, Behold, said he, your great
Wrastler his neck writhed about by a Girl.

CHAP. LIX. Of Truth and Beneficence.
Pythagor as said that these two most excellent things are given by the Gods to
Men; To speak Truth, and to do Good [to others:] He added, that each of these
resembled the actions of the Gods.

CHAP. LX. Of Dionysius and Philip.
On a time Dionysius the Second and Philip Son of Amyntas conversed together.
Besides many other discourses which (as is probable) happened between them, was
this; Philip asked Dionysius how it came to pass, that having so great a
Kingdom left him by his Father, he did not keep it. He answered not
improperly, My Father indeed left me all the rest; but the Fortune by which he
obtained and kept them, he did not leave me.

CHAP. LXI. Of honor given to the Wind Boreas.
Dionysius set out a Fleet against the Thurians, consisting of three hundred
Ships full of armed Men: But Boreas blowing contrary, broke the Vessels, and
destroyed all his Sea-Forces. Hereupon the Thurians sacrificed to Boreas, and
by a public Decree made the Wind free of their City, and allotted him an House
and Estate, and every year performed sacred Rites to him. Therefore not the
Athenians only declared him their Patron, but the Thurians also registered him
their Benefactour. Pausanias says that the Megalopolites did so likewise.

CHAP. LXII. A Persian Law concerning those who give the King Advice.
This was also a Persian Law; If any one would give advice to the King in
difficult and ambiguous Affairs, he stood upon a golden Brick; and if it was
conceived that his advice was good, he took the Brick in reward of his counsel,
but was scourged for contradicting the King. To a free person, in my judgment,
the reward did not countervalue the dishonor.

CHAP. LXIII. O^ Archedice a Curtezan.
One fell in love with Archedice a Curtezan at Naucratis; but she was proud and
covetous, and demanded a great price; which having received, she complied a
little with the giver, and then cast him off. The young man who loved her, yet
could not obtain her, because he was not very rich, dreamed that he embraced
her, and was immediately quit of his affection.

CHAP. LXIV. Of Alexander dead.
Alexander, Son of Philip and Olympia, ending his days at Babylon, lay there
dead, who had said that he was the Son of Jupiter. And whilst they who were
about him contested for the Kingdom, he remained without Burial, which the
poorest persons enjoy, common Nature requiring that the dead should be
interred; but he was left thirty days unburied, until Aristander the
Telmissian, either through Divine instinct, or some other motive, came into the
midst of the Macedonians, and said to them* That Alexander was the most
fortunat^ King of all Ages, both living and dead* and that the Gods had told
him, that the Land which should receive the Body i^ which his Soul first dwelt,
should be ab* solutely happy and unvanquishable for ever. Hearing this, there
arose a great emulation amongst them, every one desirin^ to send this Carriage
to his own Country that he might have this Rarity the Pledg^ of a firm
undeclinable Kingdom. Bu^ Ptolemee, if we may credit Report, So Freinsh.
stole away the Body, and with all speed conveyed it to the City of Alexander
in Egypt. The rest of the Macedonians were quiet, only Perdiccas pursued him;
not so much moved by love of Alexander, or pious care of the dead Body, as
enflamed by the predictions of Aristander. As soon as he overtook Ptolemee
there was a very sharp Fight about the dead Body, in a manner akin to that
which happened concerning the Image [of Hellen] in Troy, celebrated by Homer,
who says that Apollo in defense of Aeneas engaged amidst the Heroes; for
Ptolemee having made an Image like to Alexander clothed it with the Royal Robe,
and with noble Funeral Ornaments; then placing it in one of the Persian
Chariots, adorned the Bier magnificently with Silver, Gold, and Ivory; but the
true Body of Alexander he sent meanly ordered by obscure and private ways.
Perdiccas seizing the Image of the dead man, and the richly-adorned Chariot,
gave over the pursuit, thinking he had gained the prize. But too late he found
that he was couzened, for he had not got that at which he aimed.

The End.
AELIAN's Various History.
The Thirteenth BOOK.
CHAP. I. Of Atalanta.
THE Arcadian relation concerning Atalanta Daughter of Jasion is this; Her
Father exposed her as soon as born, for he said he had not need of Daughters
but Sons. But he to whom she was given to be exposed did not kill her, but
going into the Mountain Parthenius laid her down by a Spring, where there was a
Rock with a Cave, over which there was a place full of Oaks; thus the Infant
was destined to death, but not deserted by Fortune: For soon after a sheBear
robbed by Huntsmen of her Whelps, her Udder swollen and oppressed with fullness o^
Milk, came by a certain divine providence, taking delight in the Child gave it
suck; whereby at once the Beast eased her own pain, and nourished the Infant:
and came again, being oppressed with Milk; and being no longer Mother of her own,
became Nurse to one that nothing belonged to her. The same Huntsmen who before
had taken her Whelps watched her, and searching every part of the Thicket, when
the Bear according to her custom was gone to the Pastures to get food, stole
away Atalanta, not yet so called (for they gave her that name afterward) and
she was bred up amongst them with wild food: And by degrees her stature
increased with her years, and she affected Virginity, and shunned the
conversation of men, and delighted in the desert, making choice of the highest
of the Arcadian Mountains, where was a Valley well furnished with water and
tall Oaks, as also fresh gales and a thick wood. Why should it seem tedious to
hear the description of Atalanta's Cave, more then that of Calypso in Homer? In
the hollow of the cliff there was a Cave very deep fortified at the entrance
with a great precipice; along it crept Ivy, and twined about the young Trees,
upon which it climbed. Saffron also grew about the place in a young thick
Grove, with which also sprung up the Hyacinths, and many other flowers of
various colors, which not only feasted the eye, but the odours which they
exhaled round about into the air, did afford a banquet also to the smell.
Likewise there were many Laurels, which being ever verdant were very delightful
to the sight; Vines also growing thick and full of Bunches before the Cave,
attested the industry of Atalanta, springs ever running clear and cool to the
touch and taste flowed there abundantly. These contributed much benefit to the
Trees we speak of, watering them and enlivening them continually. In fine, the
place was full of beauty and majesty, such as argued the prudence of the Virgin.

The skins of Beasts were Atalanta's bed, their flesh her food, her drink
water. She wore a careless Vest, such as Diana not disdained. For she said that
she imitated her as well in this as in determining to live always a Virgin.
She was exceeding swift of foot, so that not any Beast could run away from her,
nor any man that laid wait for her, was able (if she would run away) to
overtake her. She was beloved, not only of all those who saw her, but also of
those who heard the report of her. If therefore it be not tedious we will
describe her person. But tedious it cannot be, since hereby we may arrive at
some degree of skill in Rhetoric. Whilst she was yet a child, she exceeded in
stature those who were Women grown; for Beauty she went beyond all other of the
Peloponnesian Virgins of that time. Her look was masculine and fierce,
occasioned partly by eating the flesh of wild Beasts, (for she was very
courageous) partly by her exercise on the Mountains. She had nothing of an
effeminate loose disposition, neither did she come out of the Thalamus, [where
Virgins are educated.] nor was one of those who are brought up by Mothers or
Nurses. She was not corpulent; for by Hunting and other Exercise she preserved
herself in a good Constitution. Her Hair was Yellow, not by any Womanish Art or
Die, but by Nature. Her Face was of a ruddy Complexion, somewhat tanned by the
Sun. What Flower is so beautiful as the countenance of a modest Virgin? She had
two admirable properties, an irresistible Beauty, and an awfulness. No timid
person could fall in love with her, for such durst not look upon her, so much
did her splendor dazzle the beholders. That which caused her to be admired,
besides other things, was her reservedness. For she exposed not her self to
view, unless accidentally in following the chase, or defending herself from
some man; in which action she broke forth like lightning, then immediately hid
herself in the thickest of the wood. On a time it happened that two bold
young men of the neighboring Country, Centaurs, Hyleus and Rhecus, in love
with her, came in a frolic to her. They had no players on the Flute in this
frolic, nor such things as the young men use in Cities upon the like occasion,
but took with them lighted Torches, the sight whereof might have frighted a
multitude, much more a lone Maiden. Then breaking boughs from the Pine trees,
they twined them about them, and made themselves Garlands of them, and with
continual clashing of Weapons as they went along the Mountains, set fire on the
Trees in their way to her, presenting her with injuries instead of Nuptial
Gifts. She was aware of their Plot, for she beheld the fire from her Cave, and
knowing who those revellers were, was nothing terrified with the sight: but
drawing her Bow, and letting fly an Arrow, chanced to kill the first, who
falling down, the other assaulted her, not in mirth, but as an Enemy to revenge
his friend and satisfy his passion. But he met with another vindictive Arrow
from her hand. Thus much of Atalanta Daughter of Jasion.

CHAP. II. How Macareus was punished for Cruelty.
A Mitylenaean, by name Macareus, Priest of Bacchus, was of a mild and good
look, but the most impious of all men. A stranger coming to him, and giving him
a great sum of money to lay up, in the inner part of the Temple; Macareus
digging a hole, hid the Gold in the ground. Afterward the stranger returning,
demanded his Money; he le^ding him in as if he meant to restore it murdered
him, digging up the Gold buried the man in the place, thinking that what he did
was hid as well from God as from men; but it proved otherwise, for not long
after; within a few days came the triennial solemnity. Whilst he was busied
in celebrating the Rites of Bacchus in much state, his two Sons that were left
at home, imitating their Father's sacrificing, went to his Altar, where the
brands were yet burning. The younger held out his neck, the elder finding a
knife left there by accident, slew his brother as a Victim. They of the family
seeing this cried out. The Mother hearing the cry, rushed forth, and seeing on^
of her Sons slain, the other standing by with a bloody Sword, snatched a brand
from the Altar, and killed her surviving Son. The news was brought to Macareus,
who giving over sacrifice, with all speed and eagerness ran to his own house,
and with the Thyrsus which he had in his hand, killed his Wife. This wickedness
was publicly known: Macareus was taken, and being tortured, confessed what he
had perpetrated in the Temple. In the midst of thief tortures he gave up the
Ghost. But the other who was murdered unjustly, had public honor, and was
interred by the appointment of God. Thus Macareus suffered due revenge, as the
Poet says, with his own head, and his Wives, and his Childrens.

CHAP. III. Of the Monument of Bel^s, and the unfortunate sign which happened
to Xerxes there.
Xerxes Son of Darius, breaking up the Monument of ancient Belus, found an Urn
of glass in which his dead body lay in Oil; but the Urn was not full, it wanted
a handbreadth of the top: Next the Urn there was a little Pillar, on which it
was written, That whosoever should open the Sepulcher, and not fill up the Urn,
should have ill fortune. Which Xerxes reading, grew afraid, and commanded that
they should pour Oil into it with all speed; notwithstanding, it was not
filled: Then he commanded to pour into it the second time, but neither did it
increase at all thereby; so that at last failing of success, he gave over; and
shutting up the Monument departed very sad. Nor did the event foretold by the
Pillar deceive him; for he had an Army of fifty Myriads against Greece, where
he received a great defeat, and returning home, died miserably, being murdered
in his bed by his own Son, in the night time.

CHAP. IV. Of Euripides drunk at a Feast.
King Archelaus made a great entertainment for his friends. And when they fell
to drink, Euripides took off unmixt Wine so freely, that by degrees he became
drunk. Then embracing Agathon the Tragic Poet, who lay on the couch next him,
he kissed him, who was at that time forty years of age. Archelaus asking him
whether he seemed amiable at those years, Yes, said he, of the beautiful not
the Spring only, but even the Autumn also is fair.

CHAP. V. Of Laius.
They say that Laius fell in love with Chrysippus Son of Pelops. * *

CHAP. VI. The properties of Arcadian, Thatian, and Achaean Wines.
At Heraea in Arcadia, I am informed there are Vines from which is made Wine,
which bereaveth men of the use of reason, and makes the Arcadians mad, but
causes fruitfulness in the Women.

It is said that in Thasus there are two sorts of Wines; one being drunk
procures sleep, profound, and consequently sweet; the other is an enemy to
life, and causet^ wakefulness and disturbance.

In Achaea about Ceraunia there is a kind of Wine, which causes Women to
miscarry.

CHAP. VII. Of the taking of Thebes by Alexander, and of Pindar.
When Alexander took Thebes, he sold ^ll the Freemen except Priests. And those
who had formerly entertained his Father as their Guest, he set at liberty (for
Philip, when a child lived there in Hostage) and such as were akin to them. He
also respected those who were descended from Pindar, and permitted his house
only to stand. He slew of the Thebans ninety thousand, the Captives were
thirty thousand.

CHAP. VIII. Of Lysander.
They say that Lysander the Lacedemonian living in Ionia, and rejecting the
Laws of Lycurgus as burdensome, led a luxufious life.

CHAP. IX. Of Lamia.
Lamia the Attick Curtezan said, The Lions of Greece coming to Ephesus be come
Foxes.

CHAP. X. Of Dionysius marrying two Wives i^ one day.
In one day Dionysius married two Wives, Doris the Locrian, and Aristaeneta
Daughter^ of Hipparinus, Sister of Dio, and bedde^ them by turns: One
accompanied him i^ the Army, the other entertained him when he came home.

CHAP. XI. Of the conquest over the Persians, and of Isocrates.
It was related to me that Isocrates the Orator was occasion of the conquest
of the ^ersians, whom the Macedonians subdued. For the fame of the Panegyric
Oration which Isocrates made to the Grecians, coming to Macedonia, first
excited Philip against Asia. and he dying, it also instigated Alexander his Son
and heir to prosecute the design of his Father.

CHAP. XII. How Meton freed himself from an expedition; and of the madness of
Ulysses.
Meton the Astronomer, when the Athe^ian Soldiers were upon an expedition
against Sicily, was registered amongst them (...) the Catalogue. But clearly
foreseeing ^he future disasters, he through fear shun^ed the Voyage,
endeavoring to be quit of the expedition. But when that nothing ^vailed, he
counterfeited madness, and a^ongst other things, to procure a belief of ^is
infirmity, fired his own house which was next the Poecile. Hereupon the Ar^hons
dismissed him, and in my opinion, Meton much better counterfeited madness then
Ulysses the Ithacian; for Palamedes discovered him, but none of the Atheni^ns
Meton.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Munificence of Ptolemee.
They say that Ptolemee Son of Lagus ^ook greatest delight in making his
friends rich; for he said, It Is better to enrich others, then be rich our
selves.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Verses and Poetry of Homer.
The Ancients sung the Verses of Homer, divided into several parts, to which
they gave particular names; as the Fight at the Ships, and the Dolonia, and the
Victory of Agamemnon, and the Catalogue of the Ships. Moreover the Patroclea,
and the Lytra, [ or redemption of Hector's Body] and the Games instituted for
Patroclus, and the breach of Vows. Thus much of the Iliads. As concerning the
other, [the Odysseis] the actions at Pytus, and the actions at Lacedemon, and
the Cave of Calypso, and the Boat, the Discourses of Alcinous, the Cyclopias,
the Necuia and the washings of Circe, the death of the Woers, the actions in
the Field, and concerning Laertes.

But long after Lycurgus the Lacedemonian brought all Homer's Poetry first into
Greece from Ionia whether he traveled. Last of all Pisistratus compiling them,
formed the Iliads and Odysseis.

CHAP. XV. Of some persons extraordinary foolish.
The Comic Poets say that one Polydorus, had a very gross understanding, and a
skin scarce penetrable: also that there was another by name Caecylian, who,
through excessive folly endeavored to number the Waves. There is a report that
there was one Sannyrion like these, who sought Ladder-rounds in a glass. They
say also that Coroebus and Melitides were very blockish.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Apolloniats and of their Country, and of Epidamnum.
The Apolloniats inhabit a City next Epidamnum in the Ionian Gulf: In the
places next them, there is a vein of Brimstone, which springs out of the
ground as fountains cast up water. Not far off there is showed a continual
fire. The Hill which burns is but little, reaches not far, and has but a
small circumference, but smells of Sulphur and Alum. About it there are many
Trees green and flourishing, nothing injured by the neighboring fire, either
as to the shooting out young ones, or to their own growth. The fire burns night
and day, and never intermitted, as the Apolloniats affirm, until the War which
they waged with the Illyrians

The Apolloniats according to the Lacedemonian Law prohibited foreiners. But
the Epidamnians allowed any one that would to come and live amongst them.

CHAP. XVII. A Proverb, and of Phrynichus.
Phrynichus fears a swarm of Wasps like a Cock. It is proverbially said of
persons that are worsted; for Phrynichus the Tragic Poet acting the taking of
Miletus, the Athenians with weeping made him quit the Stage, afraid and daunted.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Dionysius.
Dionysius Tyrant of Sicily, affected and commended Tragedy, and made
Tragedies: but he was averse from Comedy, for he loved not laughter.

CHAP. XIX. What Cleomenes said of Homer and Hesiod.
Cleomenes said Laconically according to the manner of his Count^y, that Homer
was the Poet of the Lacedaemonians, declaring how men should fight; but Hesiod
of the Slaves, declaring how men should till ground.

CHAP. XX. Of one who died cheerfully through willingness to ^ee some of the
dead.
A Megalipolite of Arcadia, named Cer^idas, dying, said to his friends that he
parted with his life willingly; for that he hoped to converse with Pythagoras
of the Wise; with Hecataeus of the Historians; with Olympus of the Musicians;
and with Homer of the Poets, and as soon as he had said this, died.

CHAP. XXI. Of Phrygian Harmony.
If at Celene any one play on the Flute before the skin of the Phrygian [
Marsga,] the skin moves, but if any tune or Hymn of Apollo, it stirs not.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Temple and Statue of Homer.
Ptolemaeus Philopator having built a Temple to Homer, erected a fair. Image of
him, and placed about the Image those Cities which contended for Homer. Galaton
the Painter drew Homer vomiting, and the rest of the Poets gathering it up.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Lycurgus the Lacedemonian.
Lycurgus the La^edomonian, Son of Eunomus, willing to teach the Lacedaemonians
Justice, was not duly requited. For one o^ his eyes were put out by Alcander,
as foam think by a stone cast from an ambushment, or as others, by a blow with
a stick. This is said to those who aim at one thing and receive another.
Ephorus says that he died of hunger in banishment.

CHAP. XXIV. Of some who have been harmed by Laws, which they themselves made.
Lycurgus the Orator made a Law, that Women should not go in Chariots at the
festival solemnities called the Mysteries, and that she who did so should be
fined at his pleasure. The first that transgressed this Law was his own Wife,
who being convicted, paid the fine.

Pericles also made a Law, that none should be a free Athenian, but he whose
Parents were both Athenians. Afterward Pericles, losing his legitimate
Children, had only one natural Son left him. It is manifest that he designed
one thing, and that the ^ontrary befell him.

Clisthenes the Athenian first brought in way of banishment by Ostracism, and
first felt the punishment of it.

Zaleucus, the Lawgiver of the Locrians ordained, that whosoever was taken in
Adultery should lose both his eyes. It fell out contrary to his expectation,
for his Son being surprised in Adultery, was to suffer the punishment decreed
by his Father. Hereupon, lest what was confirmed by general Votes should be
violated, he suffered one of his own eyes to be put out, and one of his Sons,
that the young man might not be quite blind.

CHAP. XXV. Of Pindar in a contest worsted by Corinna.
Pindar the Poet contending at Thebs, lighting upon ignorant Auditors, was
worsted by Corinna five times. * * *

CHAP. XXVI. How Diogenes in extreme indigence comforted himself.
Diogenes the Sinopean was left alone deserted by all men, not being able by
reason of his indigence to entertain any man, nor would any one entertain him,
all avoiding him because of his sower way of reprehension, and because he was
morose in all his actions and sayings. Hereupon he became troubled, and did
feed on the tops of leaves; for this food was ready for him. But a Mouse coming
thither, fed upon some crumbs of Bread which she found scattered there; which
Diogenes diligently observing, smiled, and becoming more cheerful and pleasant
to himself said; This Mouse requires not the plentiful diet of the Athenians,
and art thou Diogenes troubled that thou do not feast with them? By this
means he acquired tranquillity to himself.

CHAP. XXVII. Of Socrates.
It is reported that Socrates was very temperate and continent, insomuch that
when the Athenians part died, the rest were sick almost to death, Socrates
alone escaped the disease. Now he whose body was so well tempered, what an
excellent soul must he have!

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the Servant of Drogenes torn in pieces by Dogs.
When Diogenes left his Country, one of his Servants followed him; who not
brooking his conversation run away. Some persuading Diogenes to make enquiry
after him, he said, Is it not a shame that Manes should not need Diogenes, and
that Diogenes should need Manes? But this Servant wandering to Delphos, was torn
in pieces by Dogs, paying to his Masters name [Cynick] the punishment of his
running away.

CHAP. XXIX. Of Hope.
Plato said, That Hope is the Dream of men that are awake.

CHAP. XXX. Of Olympias grieving for Alexander's death, and want of burial.
Olympias, Mother of Alexander, understanding that her Son lay long unburied,
grieving and lamenting exceedingly, said, O Son, thou would have had a share
in Heaven, and d^dst endeavor it eagerly; now thou can not enjoy that which
is equally common to all men, earth and burial. Thus she, bewailing her own
misfortune, and reproving the pride of her Son.

CHAP. XXXI. That Xenocrates was Compassionate.
Xenocrates the Chalcedonian was not only kind to men, but often to irrational
creatures also. O^ a time a Sparrow, pursued b^ a Hawk, flew to his bosom, he
took it, much pleased, and hid it till the Enemy was out of sight; and ^when he
thought it was out of fear and danger, opening his bosom, he let it go,
saying, that he had not betrayed a suppliant.

CHAP. XXXII. How Socrates refelled the boasting of a Curtizan.
Xenophon relates that Socrates disputed with Theodota a Curtizau, a Woman of
extraordinary beauty. He also argued with Calisto, who said, I (o Son of
Sophroniseus) exccel you, for you cannot draw away any of my followers, but I
can whenever I please draw away all yours. He answered, Very likely, for you
draw them down a precipice, but I drive them to virtue, which is a steep and
difficult ascent.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of the fortune of Rhodopis a Curtizan.
The Egyptians relations affirm that Rhodopis was a most beautiful Curtizan;
and that on a time as she was bathing her self, Fortune, who loves to do
extravagant and unexp^cted things, gave her a reward suitable, not to her mind,
but her beauty. For whilst she was washing, and her Maids looked to her
clothes, an Eagle stooping down, snatched up one of her Shoes, and carried it
away to Memphis, where Psammetichus was sitting in Judgment, and let the Shoe
fall into his lap. Psammetichus wondering at the shape of the Shoe, and neatness
of the work, and the action of the Bird, sent throughout Egypt to find out the
Woman to whom the Shoe belonged; and having found her out, married her.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of Dionysius.
Dionysius having given order that Leon should be put to death, did three times
bid the Officers carry him away, and three times changed his mind. Every time
that he sent for him back he kissed him, weeping, and execrating himself for
that when he took the Sword to put him to death, he was overcome with fear. At
last he commanded him to be slain, saying, '' Leon, you must not live.

CHAP. XXXV. What natural remedies the Heart, being not well, uses.
Naturalists affirm that the Heart, when he would purge himself, eats the Herb
Seselis:. and being bitten by Phalangies he eats Crabs.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of the death of Eurydice, Daughter of Philip.
Olympias to Eurydice, Daughter of Philip by an Illyrian Wife, sent Hemlock, a
Rope and a Sword; but she made choice of the Rope.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of Gelo, and those who conspired against him.
Gelo Tyrant of the Syracusians, behaved himself in the Government very mildly,
yet some seditious persons conspired against him; which Gelo understanding,
convocated all the Syracusians, and coming amongst them armed, declared what
good things he had done for them, and revealed the Conspiracy. Then putting off
his Armor, he said to them all, Behold me now in my Coat, I stand unarmed
before you, and give my self up to be disposed as you will. The Syracusians
admiring his Courage, delivered the Conspirators into his hands, and gave the
Regal power again to him. But Gelo remitted them to the people to be punished.
Hereupon the Syracusians erected his Statue in a Coat ungirt, [unarmed] in
memory of his Oration to the people, and for the instruction of those should
reign after him.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of Alcibiades.
Alcibiades admired Homer exceedingly. On a time coming to a School of Boys,
he asked for the Rhapsody of the Iliads. The Schoolmaster answering, that he
had nothing of Homer, he gave him a sound box on the ear, and went away,
showing that he was ignorant himself, and made his Scholars such.

The same person being sent for by the Athenians out of Sicily to answer a
capital indictment, refused to appear, saying, It is a foolish thing for a man
that is accused, if he can escape, to go to a place whence he cannot escape.
One saying to him, Will you not t^ust your cause to your own Country? No, says
he, not to my own Master; for I should fear lest through ignorance or mistake
of the truth, he should cast in a black stone instead of a white. Hearing then
that he was sentenced to death by the Citizens But we will show, said he, that
we are alive: and going speedily to the Lacedim^nians, he set on foot the
Docilian War against the Athenians.

He said, that it was nothing strange the Lacedaemonians died fearless in War;
for so they escaped the severity of their Laws, and cheerfully exchanged
labors for death.

He used to say of his own actions, that he led the life of the Dioscuri, dying
one day and reviving the next: ^or whilst he was favored of the people, he
was thought equal to the Gods, but losing their favor, he differed nothing
from the dead.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of Ephialtes.
Ephialtes, a certain (...) reproching him for Poverty, said, Why do you not
add thae other thing, That I am Just.

CHAP. XL. Of Themistocles.
A golden Persian Chain lying by chance on the ground, Themistocles standing
by, said to a servant, Boy, why do thou not take up this Foundling, pointing
to the Chain; for thou art not Themistocles.

The Athenians having on a time dishonored him* afterward invited him to the
Generalship. But he said, I commend not those men who make use of the same
Vessel for the meanest, and for the best Offices.

To Eurybiades he had said something unpleasing, who thereupon held up his
staff. But he, strike so you hear; for he knew what he was about to say was
advantageous for the Commonwealth.

CHAP. XLI. Of Phocion.
They who are to die with Phocion making lamentation; Phocion said, ''Then you
are not proud, o Thudippus, of dying ''with Phocion

CHAP. XLII. Of Epaminondas.
Epaminondas returning from Lacedemonia, was arraigned for a capital offense,
for having continued the office of Boeotarch four Months longer then the Law
allowed. He bad his partners lay the blame on him, as if they had been
compelled thereto against their wills. Then coming into the Court, he said that
he had not any arguments better then his actions, which if they approved not,
he required that they would put him to death. But withal, that they should
write upon a Pillar, that Epaminondas had forced the Thebans against their
wills to lay Laconia wast, what had continued five hundred years unviolated by
Enemies. And to restore Messenia, which had been three hundred and thirty years
possessed by the Spartans. And that he had made the Arcadians their Allies, and
restored to the Greeks their liberty. The Judges reverencing him for these
things, acquitted him. At his going out of the Court, a little Melitean Dog
fawned upon him; whereupon he said to the standers-by, This thanks me
gratefully for the good I have done it, but the Thebans, to whom I have often
done good, arraigned me for my life.

CHAP. XLIII. Of Timotheus.
(...) General of the Athenians, is reported to have been very successful; he
said that Fortune was the cause of all these, but Timotheus of none. Hereupon
the Painters, abusing him, drew him sleeping in a Tent, and over his head stood
Fortune drawing Cities into a Net.

Themistocles being asked, with what in his whole life he was most pleased,
answered, ''To see the whole Theater at the Olympic Games turn their eyes upon
me as I passed into the Stadium.

CHAP. XLIV. Of the emulation betwixt Themistocles and Aristides.
Themist^cles, and Aristides Son of Ly^achus, had the same Governors, they
were thus brought up together, and taugh^ by one Master, but whilst yet Boys,
they we^e always at variance; and this emulation continued from their
childhood, ^o ex^reme old age.

CHAP. XLV. Of the Cruelty of Dionysius.
Dionysius [the younger] put his Mother to death by Poison. His Brother
Leptines, whom in a Sea Fight he might have saved, he suffered to be slain.

CHAP. XLVI. Of the Gratitude of a Dragon.
Patrae is a City in Achaia. A Boy there had bought a young Dragon, and brought
it up with care, and when it was grown bigger, used to talk to it as to one
that unde^stood him, and played, and slept with it. At last the Dragon growing
to an extraordinary bigness, the Citizens turned it loose into the Wilderness.
Afterward the Boy being grown a youth, returning from some Show with other
youths his Companions, fell amongst Thieves, and crying out, behold, the Dragon
came and slew them; which stung some, slew others, bu^ pre^erved him.

The End.
AELIAN's Various History.
The Fourteenth BOOK.
CHAP. I. How Aristotle stood affected as to love of Glory.
ARistotle Son of Nicomachus, a person that really was, as well as esteemed
wise. When one took away from him the honors decreed to him at Delphi; writing
hereupon to Antipater, said, As to those things that were decreed for me at
Delphi, and of which I am now deprived, I am so affected, as that I neither
much care for them, nor care nothing for them. This he said, not through love
of glory; neither can I accuse Aristotle (who was so great a person) thereof.
But he wisely considered that there was a great deal of difference betwixt not
receiving an honor, and after having received it, to be deprived of it. For it
is no great trouble no^ to obtain it, but a great vexation having obtained it,
afterward to be bereaved of it.

CHAP. II. Of Agesilaus, and the Barbarians breaking their Oaths.
Agesilaus used to commend the Barbarians who broke their Oaths, because, by
perjury they made the Gods their Enemies, but Friends and Assistants to him.

CHAP. III. Of Prodigality.
Timotheus inveighing bitterly against Aristophontes for being prodigal, said,
''To whom nothing is sufficient, nothing is dishonest.

CHAP. IV. Of Aristides dying of the biting of a Weezel.
Aristides the Locrian being bit b^ a Tartesian Weezel, and dying, said, That
it would have pleased him much better to have died by the biting of a Lion or
Leopard, (since he must have died by something) then by such a Beast. He
brooked in my opinion the ignomy of the biting much worse then the death it
self.

CHAP. V. What persons the Athenians chose for Government:
The Athenians conferred Offices Civil and Military, not only on native
Citizens, but also often preferred strangers before Citizens, and put them in
authority over the Commonwealth, if they knew them to be truly good and honest
men, and proper for such things. They often created Apollodorus the Cyzicene
their General, though a stranger, so likewise Heraclides the Clazomenian; for
having behaved themselves worthily, they were esteemed not unworthy to govern
the Athenians. And for this thing the City is to be commended, which betrayed
not truth to gratify the Citizens; but not seldom bestowed the chief dignity
even on those who were nothing allied to them, yet in regard of their virtue
most worthy of honor.

CHAP. VI. Aristippus his opinon concerning cheerfulness.
Aristippus by strong Arguments advised that we should not be sollicitous about
things past or future; arguing, that not to be troubled at such things, is a
sign of a constant clear spirit. He also advised to take care only for the
present day, and in that day, only of the present part thereof, wherein
something was done or thought; for he said, the present only is in our power,
not the past or future; the one being gone, the other uncertain whether ever it
will come.

CHAP. VII. A Lacedemonian Law concerning the Complexion and Constitution of
the Body, and such as are too Fat.
There is a Lacedemonian Law which says thus; That no Lacedemonian shall be of
an unmanly Complexion, or of greater weight then is fit* for the Exercises; for
this seems to argue Laziness, that, Effeminacy. It was likewise ordered by
Law, that every tenth day the young men should show themselves naked before the
Ephori; If they were of a solid strong Constitution, and molded as it were for
Exercise, they were commended; but if any Limb were found to be soft and tender
by reason of fatness accrued by idleness, they were beaten and punished.
Moreover the Ephori took particular care every day that their Garments should
be looked into, that they should be no otherwise then exact and fit to the
Body. The Cooks at Lacedemon might not dress any thing but flesh. He who was
skilled in any other kind of Cookery was cast out of Sparta. Nauclidas Son of
Polybiades, for being grown too fat and heavy through luxury and idleness, they
took out of the public Assembly, and threatened to punish him by banishment,
unless he alter that blameable and rather Ionick then Laconick course of life:
For his shape and habit of body was a shame to Lacedemon and our Laws.

CHAP. VIII. How Polycletus and Hippomachus argued the common people of
Ignorance.
Polycletus made two Images at the same time; one at the pleasure of the
people, the other according to the rule of Art. He gratified the common people
in this manner; As often as any one came in, he altered the Picture as he would
have it, following his direction. He exposed them both together to public
view, one was admired by all, the other laughed at. Hereupon Polycletus said,
Yet this which you find fault with, you your selves made, this which you
admire, I.

Hippomachus a Player on the Flute, when one of his Scholars missed in playing,
yet was nevertheless commended by the standers by, struck him with a stick,
saying, You played false, otherwise these would not have commended you.

CHAP. IX. Of the Patience of Xenocrates.
Xenocrates the Chalcedonian, being reproved by Plato for his want of
gratefulness, was nothing angry thereat, as is reported, but prudently silenced
one who pressed him to answer Plato, saying, This benefits me.

CHAP. X. How Phocion retorted upon Demades.
The Athenians preferred Demades to be their General before Phocion; who being
thus advanced grew high in his own esteem, and coming to Phocion, Lend me, said
he, that sordid Cloak which you used to wear in your Generalship. He answered,
You will never want any thing that is sordid, whilst you continue what you are.

CHAP. XI. How a King ought to behave himself toward his Subjects.
Philiscus on a time said to Alexander, Study glory, yet be not a Pestilence or
great Sickness, but Peace and Health: Affirming that to govern tyrannically and
severely, and to take Cities and depopulate Countries is a Pestilence; but to
consult the preservation of Subjects, is Health; these are the benefits of
Peace.

CHAP. XII. How the Persian King employed himself whilst he traveled.
The Persian King whilst he traveled had (to divert the tediousness of his
Journey) a little stick, which they call Philyrium, and a knife to cut it. Thus
were the Kings hands employed. They never had any Books, wherein they might
read of something great, memorable, and worthy of Discourse.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Tragedies of Agatho.
Agatho used many Antitheses. Whereupon a person that would have corrected his
Writings, told him, that all those should be put out of his Play. He answered,
But you observed not, excellent Sir, that by this means you blot Agatho quite
out of Agatho. So much was he pleased with these, and thought these Tragedies
upheld by them.

CHAP. XIV. Of Stratonicus a Lutenist.
A certain person received Stratonicus the Lutenist very civilly. He was much
pleased with the invitation; for he had not any friend to entertain him, being
come into a strange Country. Hereupon he returned great thanks to the man, who
so readily had received him under his Roof. But when he saw another come in,
and after him another, and perceived that he had made his House free for all
that would come; Let us get away, Boy, says he to his Servant, for we have got
a Wood-pigeon instead of a Dove, we have not lighted upon a friends House, but
upon an Inn.

CHAP. XV. Of the Discourses of Socrates.
It is a saying that the Discourses of Socrates are like the Pictures of
Pauson. For Pauson the Painter being desired to make the Picture of a Horse
tumbling on his back, drew him running. And when he who had bespoke the
Picture, was angry that he had not drawn it according to his directions, the
Painter said, Turn it the other way, and the Horse which now runs, will then
roll upon his back. So Socrates did not discourse downright, but if his
discourses were turned, they appeared very right. For he was unwilling to gain
the hatred of those to whom he discoursed, and for that reason delivered things
enigmatically and obliquely.

CHAP. XVI. Of the ambition of Hipponicus.
Hipponicus Son of Callias would erect a Statue as a Gift to his Country. One
advised him that the Statue should be made by Polycletus. He answered, I will
not have such a Statue, the glory whereof will redound not to the Giver, but to
the Carver. For it is certain that all who see the Art, will admire Polycletus
and not me.

CHAP. XVII. Of Archelaus, and of the Pictures of Zeuxis.
Socrates said that Archelaus had bestowed forty Minae upon his House, having
hired Zeuxis the Heracleote to adorn it with Pictures, but upon himself
nothing. For what cause many came from far out of curiosity to see the House,
but none came to Macedonia for the sake of Archelaus himself, unless he allured
and invited any by money, with which a virtuous person is not taken.

CHAP. XVIII. How one that was angry threatened to punish his Servant.
A Chian being angry with his Servant, I, says he, will not put you into the
Mill, but will carry you to Olympia. He thought, it seems, that it was a far
greater punishment to be spectator of the Olympic Game, in the excessive heat
of the Sun, then to be put to work in a Mill.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Modesty of Archytas in speaking.
Archytas was very Modest, as in all other things, so in speech, avoiding all
obscenity of Language. There happened a necessity of speaking something
unseemly, he held his peace, and wrote it on a Wall; showing that what he was
forced to speak, though forced, he would not speak.

CHAP. XX. Of a ridiculous Story.
A Sybarite a Pedagogue (which kind of people were addicted to luxury as well
as the rest of the Sybarites,) when a Boy that went along with him found a Fig
by the way, and took it up, chid him for so doing; but most ridiculously took
it away from the Boy, and eat it himself. When I read this in the Sybaritick
Histories, I laughed, and committed it to memory, not envying others the
pleasure of laughing at it too.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Poet Syagrus.
There was a Poet named Syagrus, after Orpheus and Musaeus, who is said first
to have sung the Trojan War, daring to undertake this which was the greatest
subject.

CHAP. XXII. Of a Tyrant forbidding his Subjects to talk together.
Tryzus a Tyrant, that he might prevent Conspiracies and Treasons against him,
commanded the inhabitants that they should not speak together, either in
public o^ private; which thing was most grievou^ and intolerable. Hereupon
they eluded the Tyrant's command, and signified their minds to one another by
actions of the eyes of the hand, and of the head. Sometime^ they beheld one
another with a melancholy brow, sometimes with a serene and cheerful* But from
the looks of every one it was evident, that they brooked ill their oppresse^
intolerable condition. And this also troubled the Tyrant who conceived that
even their silence, by various gestures and looks, contrived some ill against
him. Wherefore he prohibited even this likewise by Law. Hereupon one of them,
much troubled at this disconsolate manner of life, and instigated with a desire
of dissolving the Tranny, went into the Marketplace, where standing he wept
bitterly; the people came and stood all round about him, bursting also into
tears. The news hereof was brought to the Tyrant, that they used not any signs,
but wept grievously; who making have to prohibit this also, and not only to
enslave their Tongues and Gestures, but even to debar their Eyes of natural
freedom, he went on foot with his Guard to prohibit their weeping. But as soon
as ever they saw him, they snatched weapons out of the hands of his Guard, and
killed the Tyrant.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Clinias and of Achilles, who used to repress anger by Music.
Clinias was a virtuous person; as to his opinion, a Pythagorean. He whenever
he grew angry, and perceived his mind ready to be transported with passion,
immediately before anger took absolute possession of him, tuned his Lute and
played upon it. To those who asked him the reason, he answered, It allayeth my
anger.

Achilles also in the Ilias, singing to the Lute, and commemorating in Song the
glories of former persons, seems to me to have thereby assuaged his
indignation; and being Musically given, the first thing of the spoils which he
seized, was a Lute.

CHAP. XXIV. Of some persons who have nothing valued Money in regard of their
Countrymen. And of some who slew their Creditors.
Of those who despised Money, and declared their own greatness of mind, seeing
that whilst they themselves abounded with wealth, their Countrymen were
oppressed with extreme poverty were, at Corinth Theocles and Thrasonides; at
Mitylene, Praxis. These also advised others to relieve such as lay under great
want. But the rest refusing, they released such Debts as were due to
themselves, and thereby received great advantage, not as to Wealth but the
Mind. For they whose Debts were not forgiven rose up in Arms against their
Creditours. and excited by rage, invincible poverty, and necessity, slew them.

CHAP. XXV. How one persuaded a State to concord.
On a time the Chians were exceedingly at variance among themselves, and
generally infected with that disease. Hereupon, one amongst them, who was
naturally a lover of his Country, said to those of his friends, who would that
all of the adverse party should be cast out of the City, By no means, said he,
but when we have obtained the Victory, let us leave some of them, lest
hereafter wanting Adversaries, we should War with one another. By which words
he appeased them, it seeming to all that he spoke discreetly.

CHAP. XXVI. Of Antagoras railing at Arcesilaus.
Antagoras the Poet meeting Arcesilaus the Philosopher in the Forum, railed at
him. But he with an unmoved courage went to that place where he saw there were
most men, and discoursed with them, that the Railer might make a public
discovery of his folly. They hearing Antagoras, turned away from him, blaming
him as mad.

CHAP. XXVII. Of Agesilaus.
I commend those above all who suppre^s rising ills, and cut them off before
they grow to a head. Agesilaus advised that they should be arraigned and put to
death, who had made a Conspiracy privately by night to assault the Thebans.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of Pytheas an Orator.
One reproched Pytheas an Orator that he was wicked; he denied it not, being
convinced by his conscience; but answered, he had been wicked the shortest time
of any that ever had an interest in the Athenian Government. It seems he
pleased himself, in that he had not always been bad, and thought it no
disparagement to him, so that he were not reckoned amongst the worst. But this
of Pytheas was foolish; for not only he who does wrong is wicked, but he also
in my opinion that has an intention to do wrong.

CHAP. XXIX. That Lysander brought wealth into Sparta.
Lysander brought wealth into Lacedemon, and taught the Lacedaemonians to
transgress the Law of God, who charged that Sparta should have no way
accessible for Gold or Silver. Hereupon some wise persons, who still retained
the Laconick integrity: worthy Lycurgus and Pythius opposed him, others who
gave way were branded with infamy. And their virtue, which had flourished from
the beginning until then, perished.

CHAP. XXX. How Hanno would have Deified himself.
Hanno the Carthaginian through pride would not be contained within the bounds
of Mankind, but designed to spread a fame of himself transcending that Nature
which was allotted to him. For having bought many singing Birds, he brought
them up in the dark, teaching them one Song, Hanno is a God. They hearing no
other sound, learned this perfectly, and then he let them loose several ways,
conceiving that they would disperse this Song concerning him. But flying
abroad, and enjoying their liber^y, and returning to their accustomed diet,
they sung the notes proper to their kinds, bidding a long farewell to Hanno, and
to the Song which he had taught them when they were kept up prisoners.

CHAP. XXXI. Of Prolemee surnamed Trypho^.
Ptolemee Tryphon, (for so he was called from his manner of living) when a
beautisul Woman came to speak with him, said, My Sister advised me not to admit
discourse with a fair Woman. She confidently and readily replied, You may
receive it then from a fair Man; which he hearing commended her.

CHAP. XXXII. Of Pimandridas, who praised not his Son for gathering together
Riches.
A Lacedemonian named Pimandridas, being to take a Journey, committed the
management of his estate to his Son. At his return finding his means increased
much beyond what he had left, he told his Son that he had wronged the Gods, and
those of his Family and Guests: For whatsoever abounds in our estates, should
by such as are free persons be bestowed upon them. But to seem whilst we live,
indigent, and being dead, to be found to have been rich, is the most
dishonorable thing amongst men.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of Plato and Diogenes.
Diogenes being present at a discourse of Plato's, would not mind it, whereat
Plato angry said, Thou Dog, why mindest thou not? Diogenes unmoved, answered,
Yet I never return to the place where I was sold, as Dogs do; alluding to
Plato's Voyage to Sicily.

It is reported that Plato used to say of Diogenes, This man is Socrates mad.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of whom the Egyptians learned Laws, and of their Judges.
The Egyptians affirm that they learnt their Law of Hermes. Thus all people
magnify what belongs to themselves. The Judges amongst the Egyptians were of
old the same with their Priests. Of these the eldest was the Chief, and Judged
all; he must be the most Just, and upright of men. He had a Sculpture about his
neck of Sapphire, which Sculpture was named Truth: but, as I conceive, a Judge
should wear Truth not engraved in a Stone, but in his Mind.

CHAP. XXXV. Of Lais.
Lais was called also Axine [an Axe;] which name implies the cruelty of her
disposition, and that she extorted much, especially of Strangers, who were to
depart suddenly.

CHAP. XXXVI. That they are ridiculous who think highly of themselves because
of their Parents.
They are to be laughed at who think highly of themselves because of their
Parents and Ancestors; for we know not the Father of Marius, but admire him for
his own actions. As likewise Cato, Servilius, Hostilius, and Romulus.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of Statues and Images.
Statues which the art of Carving affords us, and Images I use to look upon not
carelessly; for there is much wisdom observable in this Art: which may be
argued, be^ides many other things, from this, that no Carver or Painter did
ever represent to us the Muses, in shape feigned, or misbecoming the Daughters
of Jupiter: neither was there ever any Artist so mad as to represent them in
Armor. Which demonstrateth, that the life of those who are addicted to the
Muses, ought to be peaceful, quiet, and worthy of them.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of Epaminondas and Pelopidas.
I have been told many excellent sayings of Epaminondas the Theban, amongst the
rest this; He said to Pelopidas that he never went out of the form every day,
until he had gained a new friend to add to the number of his old.

CHAP. XXXIX. How Antalcidas found fault with a Present perfumed with Unguent.
A King of Persia, (for I will relate to you something pleasant) dipping a
Garland which was woven of Roses, in sweet Unguents, sent it to Antalcidas who
came to him on an Embassy for Peace. But he, I receive says he, the gift, and
commend the civility; but you have spoiled the native odor of the Roses with
the adulteration of Art.

CHAP. XL. Of the Cruelty of Alexander Tyrant of the Pheraeans.
Alexander Tyrant of the Pheraeans was thought to be extremely cruel. But when
Theodorus the Tragic Poet did with much passion act the Tragedy Aerope, he
burst forth into tears, and rising up went out of the Theater: He made an
Apology to Theodorus, that he went not away through any slighting or disrespect
of him, but that he was ashamed to discover compassion at a Play, not showing
any to his Subjects.

CHAP. XLI. Of Apollodorus his Madness in Wine.
Apollodorus drinking Wine more then any man, did not conceal his Vice, or
endeavor to hide his drunkenness, and the ill consequence thereof, but being
enflamed and enraged with Wine, showed himself more bloody, increasing the
cruelty of his nature by this corporeal vice.

CHAP. XLII. A Sentence of Xenocrates.
Xenocrates friend of Plato used to say, That it is all one whether we put our
feet or our eyes in the house of another man: for he sins as much who looks
upon those places which he ought not, as he who enters upon them.

CHAP. XLIII. Of Ptolemee and Berenice.
They say that Ptolemee used to pass his time at Dice. In the mean time one
standing by, read the names of condemned persons, and the Crimes for which they
were condemned, that he might decree who of them should be put to death.
Berenice his Wife taking the Book from the Servant, would not suffer him to
read any fa^ther, saying, That when the lives of men were in question, it
should not be so slightly considered, but seriously and not at Play: for there
is no comparison betwixt Dice and Men. Ptolemee* was pleased herewith, and
would never after hear Judicial affairs whilst he was pl^ying at Dice.

CHAP. XLIV. A Lacedemonian Law concerning Covetousness.
A young man a Lacedemonian having bought Land at an u^der-rate, was cited
before the Magistrates and fined. The reason why he was thought worthy
punishment, was this; That being a young man, he was eagerly bent upon gain.
Amongst other things of the Lacedaemonians this was very manly, to oppose not
only Enemies but Covetousness.

CHAP. XLV. Of certain Women worthy praise.
We extol of the Grecian Women; Penelope, Alcestis, and the Wife of
Protesilaus: Of Roman, Cornelia, Porcia, and Cestilia. I could reckon many
more, but I will not, having alleged so few of the Grecians, overwhelm them
with Roman names, lest any one should think I gratify my own Country.

CHAP. XLVI. Of the Battle of the Magnetes against the Ephesians.
The Magnetes who border upon Maeander warring against the Ephesians, every
Horseman took along with him a Hound, and a Servant that served as an Archer.
As soon as they came near, the Dogs falling fiercely upon the Enemy, disordered
them, and the Servants advancing before their Masters, shot. The Dogs first
routed them, then the Servants did them much harm; and lastly, they themselves
fell upon them.

CHAP. XLVII. Of Zeuxis his Picture of Helen, and of Nicostratus a Painter.
When Zeuxis the Heracleote had drawn Helen, Nicostratus a Painter was
astonished at the sight of the Picture. One coming to him, asked what was the
reason he so much admired the Workmanship; He answered, If you had my eyes you
would not ask me. I may say the same of an Oration, if a man has not learned
ears, as an Artist skilful eyes.

CHAP. XLVIII. Persons of whom Alexander was jealous.
Alexander was jealous of Ptolemee's good fortune, of Arrhius his turbulency,
and of Pytho's study of innovation.

CHAP. XLIX. Why Philip made the Sons of the noblest Persons wait on him.
Philip taking the Sons of the noblest in Macedonia, made them wait upon his
person, not in contempt of them, or to affront them, but that he might make
them ready and expedite for action. To such of them as were addicted to Luxury,
or performed his Commands remissly, he is said to have been very severe. Thus
he did beat Aphthonetus, because upon a march, being thirsty, he left his rank,
and went out of the way to an Inn. Archedamus he put to death for putting off
his Arms, when he had commanded him to keep them on.

The End.
The Arguments of the CHAPTERS.
The First BOOK.
CHap. 1 Of the Polypus. 2 Of Spiders. 3 Of the Egyptian Frogs. 4 Of the
Egyptian Dog. 5 Of the Sea-Fox. 6 Of Sea-Tortoises. 7 Of Wild Swine. 8 Of the
Phalangium. 9 Of the Lion, sick. 10 How the Cretan Goats cure themselves when
shot. 11 That Mice have Praescience. 12 Of Pismires. 13 Of Gelo. 14 Of the
Swan. 15 Of Pigeons 16 Of Socrates drinking Hemlock. 17 Of a very little
Chariot, and an Elegiack Distich. 18 Of Women vain in Apparel. 19 The Luxury of
the Sybarites, Colophonians and Corinthians. 20 Of Dionysius his Sacrilege. 21
How Ismenias without dishonor adored the King of Persia. 22 The Gifts which
the Kings of Persia used to bestow upon Ambassadors. 23 Of Gorgias and
Protagoras. 24 Of the contest betwixt Hercules and Lepreas. 25 Of Alexanders
magnificence to Phocion, and his to Alexander. 26 Of Aglais a great eater. 27
Other great eaters. 28 Diet of Fish much esteemed by the Rhodians. 29 Of an Ewe
which eaned a Lion. 30 That Galetes was beloved of Ptolemee not more for his
beauty then his prudence. 31 The Persian custom of presenting Gifts to the
King. 32 Of Water presented as a Gift to the King of Persia. 33 Of an
extraordinary great Pomegranate presented to the same King. 34 Of a Father who
accused his Son of a Capital crime.
The Second BOOK.
1 How Socrates taught Alcibiades confidence not to be daunted at the People. 2
Of Pictures praised amiss. 3 Of Alexander not giving due commendations of a
Picture. 4 Of the Friendship betwixt Chariton and Menippus, and the Tyrants
mercy toward them. 5 Of well husbanding time; and that among the Lacedaemonians
walking was not permitted. 6 An instance that we ought not to please the
Vulgar. 7 That the Thebans expose not children. 8 Of Xenocles and Euripides
contending at the Olympic Games. 9 Decrees of the Athenians against some
revolters. 10 Timotheus having heard Plato discourse, judged himself to be less
happy. 11 What Socrates said of those that were put to death by the Thirty
Tyrants. 12 Of Themistocles giving over prodigality. 13 Of Socrates abused in a
Comedy by Aristophanes. 14 Of a Plane-tree beloved of Xerxes. 15 Of those who
besmeared the Seats of the Lacedemonian Ephori with soot. 16 Of Phocion. 17 Of
the wisdom of the Persian Magi, and of Ochus. 18 Of magnificent Suppers. 19
Of Alexander who would be called a God. 20 Of the meekness of King Antigonus.
21 Of Pausanias his friendship with Agatho the Poet. 22 That the Mantineans
were just Lawmakers. 23 That Nicodorus the Wrastler became a Lawgiver. 24 That
Milo was strong in body, but not in mind. 25 That the sixth of the Month
Thargelion was fortunate to the Greeks. 26 Of Hyperborean Apollo, and certain
wonders concerning Pythagoras. 27 That Anniceris was a good Charioteer, and
that he who bestows much pains upon little things, neglects the greater. 28
Upon what occasion Cock-fighiing was first instituted. 29 How Pittacus made an
Emblem of Fortune. 30 Of Plato. 31 That no Barbarian is impious. 32 How
Hercules his name was changed, and of the Oracle of Apollo concerning it. 33 Of
the Images of Rivers. 34 Of old age. 35 That sleep is the Brother of death, and
of the decease of Gorgias. 36 Of Socrates falling sick in his old age. 37 Of a
Law which prohibited the sick to drink Wine. 38 A Law of the Romans and other
people not allowing Wine to all persons, nor of all ages. 39 The Law of the
Cretans concerning learning. 40 That Beasts love not Wine, and of some Beasts
that will be drunk. 41 Of some who were lovers of drink, and great drinkers. 42
Of Plato's renown, and of his Laws for equal distribution. 43 Certain eminent
persons among the Grecians very poor. 44 A description of a Picture made by
Theon a Painter.
The Third BOOK.
1 Thessalian Tempe described. 2 Of Anaxagoras bearing the death of his
children with courage. 3 Of Xenophon bearing the death of his Son unmovedly. 4
That Dio was not troubled at the loss of his Son. 5 Antigonus seeing his Son
dead, was nothing troubled. 6 Of the Magnanimity of Crates. 7 Of the calumny of
the Vulgar. 8 That Phrynichus was chosen General for a certain Poem. 9 Of Love.
10 Of Lacedemonian friendship. 11 Of the Soul. 12 Of friendship amongst the
Lacedaemonians. 13 Of the drunkenness of the Papyrians. 14 Of the drunkenness of
the Byzantines. 15 Of the drunkenness of the Argives, Corinthians, Thracians
and Illyrians. 16 A comparison betwixt two Generals, Demetrius and Timotheus.
17 That Philosopy is not inconsistent with Political Government, and that some
Philosophers have governed Commonwealths. 18 Of the discourse betwixt Midas the
Phrygian and Silenus; and the incredible relations of Midas. 19 Of the
dissension betwixt Aristotle and Plato. 20 Of Lysander, and some gifts
presented to him. 21 Of the magnanimity of Themistocles. 22 Of the piety of
Aeneas, and compassion of the Greeks to the Persians. 23 Of Alexander. 24 How
much Xenophon was delighted with bravery. 25 Of Leonides, and three hundred
more who gave themselves up to death voluntarily, for the preservation of
Greece. 26 Of Pindarus the Tyrant. 27 Of Plato's poverty, and how he betook
himself to Philosophy. 28 How Socrates reformed the pride of Alcibiades. 29 Of
the poverty and pride of Diogenes. 30 Of certain persons extremely modest. 31
Of the diligence of Nicias in his Art. 32 Of Alexander and Hercules learning to
play on the Flute. 33 Of Satyrus a Player on the Flute. 34 A Law common to the
Romans and Lacedaemonians. 35 That it was not permitted to laugh in the Academy.
36 Why Aristotle left Athens. 37 A Law of the Ceans concerning old Men. 38 Some
things first found out at Athens. 39 What things some of old did eat. 40 Of
Satyrs, Tityri, and Silenes. 41 Many surnames of Bacchus. 42 Of certain Women
that fell mad. 43 Of a Lutenist murdered by the Sybarites. 44 Of one who might
have assisted his companion but would not: and of another that did assist, but
unfortunately. 45 An Oracle given to Philip. 46 A Law of the Stagirites. 47 Of
Timotheus and others, whom their virtues availed nothing.
The Fourth BOOK.
1 Several customs of Nations and People. 2 Of the differences betwixt
Nicostratus, who played upon the Lute only, and Laodacus, who both played and
sung to the Lute. 3 Of Polygnotus and Dionysius, Painters. 4 A Theban Law
concerning Artificers and Painters. 5 Persons that were mindful of benefits. 6
An Oracle concerning the Athenians. 7 That sometimes the dead rest not even
after death; and of Pausanias. 8 Of the vicissitude of Fortune. 9 Of the
Humility of Plato, and ingratitude of Aristotle. 10 What respect Pericles had
for the Athenian people. 11 Of the Luxury of Socrates. 12 Of the Picture of
Helena drawn by Xeuxis. 13 The saying and happiness of Epicurus. 14 Of sparing
and keeping riches. 15 Of some who in sickness learned Music and other
Sciences, in which recovering they became eminent. 16 Qualities of some of the
Ancients. 17 Wonders, and opinions of Pythagoras. 18 Of the respect and honor,
which Dionysius gave to Plato. 19 That Philip honored learning, and of
Aristotle. 20 Of Democritus, and of the renown of him, Theophrastus,
Hippocrates and others. 21 Of those who were beloved of Socrates and Plato. 22
Of the Luxury of the Athenians. 23 Of certain prodigal persons. 24 How
friendship may be best preserved. 25 Of the strange madness of Thrasyllus. 26
Of Electra. 27 Of the Gift of Pamphaes and Diotimus. 28 That Pherecydes fell
into a Phthiriasis because of his Atheism. 29 That Alexander ridiculously
believed there are infinite Worlds.
The Fifth BOOK.
1 That Tachos died upon using more delicate Diet. 2 Pherecydes how he died. 3
Of Hercules his Pillars. 4 Of some Trees growing in Delus. 5 Of Epominandas his
Indigence and Magnanimity. 6 Of the voluntary death of Calanus. 7 Of
Anacharsis. 8 How some have born Scoffs. 9 Of Aristotle. 10 The number of some
Ships and Arms, which the Athenians lost. 11 The Cruelty of a King of Thrace
toward his Children. 12 That Demades was fined for making a Decree, that
Alexander should be accounted a God. 13 That the Athenians were inclined to
Novelties. 14 An Attick Law concerning the Interrment of Bodies, and killing of
Oxen. 15 Places of Judicature in Athens for Murders. 16 That a little Boy was
condemned for Sacrilege. 17 Of the Superstition of the Athenians. 18 Of a Woman
with child condemned to death. 19 How Aeschylus condemned for Impiety was
preserved. 20 Of the Fasting of the Tarentines and Rhegians. 21 That Medea did
not kill her own Children.
The Sixth BOOK.
1 Of the wrath, Inhumanity, Contempt, Injustice, and Violence of some toward
others. 2 Of the Valor of the Son of Harmatidias. 3 Of Isadas a Boy. 4 Of him
that was betrothed to the Daughter of Lysander. 5 Of the Athenian Ambassadors.
6 Laconick Laws. 7 Of the Earthquake which happened at Sparta. 8 Of the Murder
of Artaxerxes. 9 Of a Treasure sought by the Delphians in the Pythian Temple.
10 A Law concerning Citizens made by Pericles. 11 Of Gelo offering to resign
the Government. 12 Of the Happiness of Dionysius, and what end it had. 13 Of
Tyrannical Governments in Greece, which have continued in Posterities. 14 Of a
Conspiracy against Darius.
The Seventh BOOK.
1 Of Semiramis, and how she obtained the Assyrian Empire. 2 Of the Luxury of
Strato and Nicocles. 3 A Consolatory Saying of Aristippus. 4 Of the praise of a
Mill. 5 Of the hand-labour of Ulysses and Achilles in many things. 6 The answer
of a Scythian concerning Cold. 7 Of Demosthenes his Watchfulness. 8 Of
Alexander's grief at Hephaestion's Death. 9 Of a Modest Woman. 10 Of the Wife
of Socrates. 11 Of the Shoes of the Roman Women. 12 An Apophthegm of Lysander
or Philip concerning Perjury. 13 Of the Tolerance of Agesilaus. 14 Of
Philosophers that went to War, and administered Civil Government. 15 How the
Mitylenaeans revenged themselves upon their revolted Confederates. 16 Of Rome,
Remus, Romulus, and Servia. 17 Of Eudoxus coming to Sicily. 18 That the
Egyptians are courageous in Torments; and of the Indian Women. 19 Of Solon's
Stratagem against the Megareans, and how afterward he overcame them by
Argument. 20 Of an old man, a Cean, that Died his Hair. 21 Of the Sedulity and
care of Caesar and Pompey, to learn such things which are requisite to govern
rightly.
The Eighth BOOK.
1 Of Socrates his Demon. 2 Of Hipparchus his Wisdom, his care of Learned
men; and of Homer's Poems. 3 The Athenian Custom of killing an Ox, and of the
Diipolian and Buphonian Festival. 4 Of the Luxury of Polyarchus. 5 Of Neleus
and Medon, and the Twelve Ionian Cities. 6 Of the ignorance of Learning and
Institution amongst the Barbarians. 7 Of the Marriages solemnized by Alexander,
after his Victory over Darius. 8 Of the Art of Painting. 9 Of a Tyrant killed
by his Friend. 10 Of Solon, and the Laws written by him and Draco. 11 Of the
decay and dissolution of things, and of the World it self. 12 Of Demosthenes,
Aeschines, Theophrastus, and Demochares. 13 Of some who never laughed. 14 Of
the death of Diogenes. 15 Of the Moderation of Philip upon a Victory; and of
what he would be minded continually. 16 Of Solon and Pisistratus. 17 Of
Oenycimus Monarch of the Zanclaeans. 18 Of Euthymus and the Hero in Temese, and
a Proverb. 19 The Epitaph of Anaxagoras, and his Altar.
The Ninth BOOK.
1 That Hiero loved Learning, and was liberal, and lived friendly with his
Brothers. 2 Of the Victory of Taurosthenes. 3 Of the Luxury and Pride of
Alexander and some others. 4 Of the diligence of Polycrates in hearing
Anacreon, and of his Jealousy. 5 Of Hiero and Themistocles. 6 Of Pericles and
his Sons dying of the Pestilence. 7 O^ Socrates his Equanimity in all things. 8
Of Dionysius his Incontinence. 9 That Demetrius also was Incontinent. 10 Of
Plato's little valuing Life. 11 Of Parrhasius the Painter. 12 Of the Epicureans
banished by the Romans. 13 Of the Gluttony and excessive Fatness 14 Of the
extraordinary Leanness of Philetas. 15 Of Homer. 16 Of Italy, and of Mares both
Man and Horse. 17 Of Demosthenes his Pride. 18 Of Themistocles. 19 That
Demosthenes refused, being called by Diogenes to go into a Cook's Shop. 20 Of
Aristippus. 21 Of Theramenes. 22 Of Some that studied Medicine. 23 Of Aristotle
being sick. 24 Of the Luxury of Smynderides. 25 How Pisistratus behaved himself
toward his Citizens. 26 Of Zeno and Antigonus. 27 Ingenuity of Manners. 28 Of
Diogenes. 29 That Socrates was fearless, and despised Gifts. 30 Of the
Providence of Anaxarchus. 31 Of a Wrastler who, having gained the Victory, died
before he was Crowned. 32 Of the Statues of Phryne a Curtizan, and the Mares of
Cimon. 33 The Answer of a young man to his Father, demanding what he had
learned. 34 Of persons richly clad. 35 Of Antisthenes taking pride in a torn
Cloak. 36 Of Antigonus and a Lutenist. 37 How Anaxarchus derided Alexander, who
would be esteemed a God. 38 Of Alexander, and the Harp of Paris. 39 Of
ridiculous and extravagant affections. 40 Of the Pilots of the Carthaginian
Ships. 41 Of Pausanias and Simonides. 42 Of Artaxerxes and Darius.
The Tenth BOOK.
1 Of Pherenice admitted to behold the Olympic Games. 2 Of the Continency of
Eubatas. 3 Properties of some Creatures. 4 Of Alexander's quickness in action.
5 Of Tyrants, out of Aesop's Writing. 6 Of Little men. 7 Of some Astronom^rs,
and of the Great Year. 8 Of Benefits. 9 That Philoxenus was a Glutton. 10 Of
the ancient Painters. 11 Of Diogenes having a pain in his Shoulder. 12 An
Apophthegm of Archytas concerning Men. 13 That Antilochus defamed himself. 14
Of Idleness. 15 Of those who were betrothed to the Daughters of Aristides and
Lysander. 16 Of Antisthenes and Diogenes. 17 Of those who grew rich by public
Employments. 18 Of Syracusian Daphnis, and of Bucolick Verses. 19 Of Eurydamus.
20 Of Agesilaus. 21 Of Plato. 22 Of Dioxippus.
The Eleventh BOOK.
1 Of Oricadmus, and the Art of Wrestling. 2 Of the Verses of Oroebantius,
Dares and Melisander. 3 Of Icchus, and Wrestling. 4 Of the Baldness of
Agathocles. 5 Of some persons unjustly condemned for Sacrilege. 6 Of an
Adulterer. 7 Of Lysander and Alcibiades. 8 Of the death of Hipparchus. 9 Of
certain excellent persons, Indigent, yet would not accept Gifts. 10 Of Zoilus.
11 Of Dionysius the Sicilian. 12 Of a Marchpane sent by Alcibiades to Socrates.
13 Of one in Sicily very sharp-sighted.
The Twelfth BOOK.
1 Of Aspasia. 2 Of the Muses. 3 Of Epaminondas, and Diaphantus, and Iolidas. 4
Of Sesostris. 5 Of Lais. 6 Of the Parents of Marius and Cato. 7 Of Alexander
and Hephaestion. 8 Of the Treachery of Cleomenes to Archonides. 9 How Timesias
forsook his Country voluntarily. 10 That the Aeginetae first coined Money. 11
Of the Pallantian Hill, and of the Temple and Altar dedicated to Fever. 12 Of
an Adulterer apprehended in Crete. 13 How Gnathaena the Curtizan silenced a
great Talker. 14 Of persons excellent in Beauty. 15 Of certain excellent
persons who delighted to play with Children. 16 Persons whom Alexander hated
for their Virtue. 17 Of Demetrius going to the House of a Curtizan. 18 That
Phaon was beautiful. 19 Of Sappho. 20 Of the Nightingale and Swallow. 21 Of the
Lacedemonian Women. 22 Of the Strength of Titormus and Milo, and of a certain
Proverb. 23 Of the Boldness of the Celtae. 24 Of the luxurious Diet and
Gluttony of Smynderides. 25 Many who improved and benefitted the most excellent
persons. 26 Of some persons addicted to Wine. 27 That Hercules was mild toward
his Adversaries. 28 Of the Leocorium at Athens. 29 What Plato said of the
Excess of the Agrigentines. 30 Of the Drunkenness of the Tarentines, and the
Luxury of the Cyrenaeans. 31 Of several kinds of Greek Wines. 32 Of the Vests
and Shoes of Pythagoras, Empedocles, Hippias, and Gorgias. 33 That the Romans
would not allow the Treachery of Pyrrhus his Physician. 34 Of the Loves of
Pausanias, and of Apelles. 35 Of the Perianders, Miltiades, Sibylls, and the
Bacides. 36 Of the number of the Children of Niobe. 37 Of the want of Victual
to which Alexander was reduced; and that some Towns were taken by Smoke. 38 Of
the Horses, and some Customs of the Sacae. 39 Of the Boldness of Perdiccas,
and of the Lioness. 40 Of the Provisions which followed Xerxes. 41 Of
Protogenes the Painter. 42 Of certain Men who were suckled by Beasts. 43
Certain persons who of obscure became very eminent. 44 Of those who lived a
long time in the Quarries of Sicily. 45 Of Midas, Plato, and Pindar, their
infancy. 46 Of a Sign which portended that Dionysius should be King. 47 Of
Aristomache Wife of Dio. 48 Of Homer's Poems. 49 That Phocion forgave Injuries.
50 Of the Lacedaemonians not addicting themselves to Learning. 51 Of the Pride
of Menecrates, and how Philip derided him. 52 To what kind of persons Isocrates
compared Athens. 53 Of several occasions of great Wars. 54 How Aristotle
endeavored to appease Alexander's Anger. 55 Of those who among the Libyans
were slain by Elephants, either in Hunting or in War. 56 What Diogenes said of
the Megareans. 57 Of the Prodigies which appeared to the Thebans, when
Alexander brought his Forces against their City. 58 Of Dioxippus. 59 Of Truth
and Beneficence. 60 Of Dionysius and Philip. 61 Of honor given to the Wind
Boreas. 62 A Persian Law concerning those who give the King Advice. 63 Of
Archedice a Curtezan. 64 Of Alexander dead.
The Thirteenth BOOK.
1 Of Atalanta. 2 How Macareus was punished for Cruelty. 3 Of the Monument of
Belus, and the unfortunate sign which happened to Xerxes there. 4 Of Euripides
drunk at a Feast. 5 Of Laius. 6 The properties of Arcadian, Thatian, and
Achaean Wines. 7 Of the taking of Thebes by Alexander, and of Pindar. 8 Of
Lysander. 9 Of Lamia. 10 Of Dionysius marrying two Wives in one day. 11 Of the
conquest over the Persians, and of Isocrates. 12 How Meton freed himself from
an expedition; and of the madness of Ulyfses. 13 Of the Munificence of
Ptolemee. 14 Of the Verses and Poetry of Homer. 15 Of some persons
extraordinary foolish. 16 Of the Apolloniats and of their Country, and of
Epidamnum. 17 A Proverb, and of Phrynichus. 18 Of Dionysius. 19 What Cleomenes
said of Homer and Hesiod. 20 Of one who died cheerfully through willingness to
see some of the dead. 21 Of Phrygian Harmony. 22 Of the Temple and Statue of
Homer. 23 Of Lycurgus the Lacedemonian. 24 Of some who have been harmed by
Laws, which they themselves have made. 25 Of Pindar in a contest worsted by
Corinna. 26 How Diogenes in extreme indigence comforted himself. 27 Of
Socrates. 28 Of the Servant of Diogenes torn in pieces by Dogs. 29 Of Hope. 30
Of Olympias grieving for Alexander's death, and want of burial. 31 That
Xenocrates was Compassionate. 32 How Socrates refelled the boasting of a
Curtizan. 33 Of the fortune of Rhodopis a Curtizan. 34 Of Dionysius. 35 What
natural remedies the Heart, being not well, uses. 36 Of the death of Eurydice,
Daughter of Philip. 37 Of Gelo, and those who conspired against him. 38 Of
Alcibiades. 39 Of Ephialtes. 40 Of Themistocles. 41 Of Phocion. 42 Of
Epaminondas. 43 Of Timotheus. 44 Of the emulation betwixt Themistocles and
Aristides. 45 Of the Cruelty of Dionysius. 46 Of the Gratitude of a Drag^n.
The Fourteenth BOOK.
1 How Aristotle stood affected as to love of Glory. 2 Of Agesilaus, and the
Barbarians breaking their Oaths. 3 Of Prodigality. 4 Of Aristides dying of the
biting of a Weezel. 5 What persons the Athenians chose for Government. 6
Aristippus his opinion concerning cheerfulness. 7 A L^cedemonian Law concerning
the Complexion and Constitution of the Body, and such as are too Fat. 8 How
Polycletus and Hippomachus argued the common people of Ignorance. 9 Of the
Patience of Xenocrates. 10 How Phocion retorted upon Demades. 11 How a King
ought to behave himself toward his Subjects. 12 How the Persian King employed
himself whilst he traveled. 13 Of the Tragedies of Agatho. 14 Of Stratonicus
a Lutenist. 15 Of the Discourses of Socrates. 16 Of the ambition of Hipponicus.
17 Of Archelaus, and of the Pictures of Zeuxis. 18 How one that was angry
threatened to punish his Servant. 19 Of the Modesty of Archytas in speaking. 20
Of a ridiculous Story. 21 Of the Poet Syagrus. 22 Of a Tyrant forbidding his
Subjects to talk together. 23 Of Clinias and of Achilles, who used to repress
anger by Music. 24 Of some persons, who have nothing valued Money in regard of
their Countrymen. And of some who slew their Creditors. 25 How one persuaded a
State concord. 26 Of Antagoras railing at Arcesilaus. 27 Of Agesilaus. 28 Of
Pytheas an Orator. 29 That Lysander brought wealth into Sparta. 30 How Hanno
would have Deified himself. 31 Of Ptolemee surnamed Tryphon. 32 Of Pimandridas,
who praised not his Son for gathering together Riches. 33 Of Plato and
Diogenes. 34 Of whom the Egyptians learned Laws, and of their Judges. 35 Of
Lais. 36 That they are ridiculous who think highly of themselves because of
their Parents. 37 Of Statu^s and Images. 38 Of Epaminondas and Pelopidas. 39
How Antalcidas found fault with a Present perfumed with Unguent. 40 Of the
Cruelty of Alexander Tyrant of the Pheraeans. 41 Of Apollodorus his Madness in
Wine. 42 A Sentence of Xenocrates. 43 Of Ptolemee and Berenice. 44 A
Lacedemonian Law concerning Covetousness. 45 Of certain Women worthy praise. 46
Of the Battle of the Magnetes against the Ephesians. 47 Of Zeuxis his Picture
of Helen, and of Nicostratus a Painter. 48 Persons of whom Alexander was
jealous. 49 Why Philip made the Sons of the noblest Persons wait on him.
THE END.

