May the Seventeenth, 1642.

Admirable, Good, True, and Joyful News from IRELAND.

Being an Exact Relation of the last weeks passages in IRELAND, dated from
Dublin May the 8. 1642.

Wherein is showed how by the undaunted Valor and wisdom of Sir Charles Coot,
the Town and Castle of Trim was taken from the Enemy, wherein 4000. of the
Rebels were, besides 4. Lords of the Pale; who were glad to fly with as many
more as could, the rest were taken prisoners, and about 200. or more killed.

By which happy victory 40 Protestants obtained their freedom, who were before
kept Prisoners by the Rebels in that Castle.

Likewise a Relation of another great overthrow given to the Lord Misery, by
the Lord President of MUNSTER.

With the names of some other Forts and Towns taken from the Rebels by the
Protestant Army.

Printed at London for John Wright, 1642.

An exact Relation of The last weeks passages in IRELAND. Dated from Dublin
May 8. 1262.
ON Tuesday April 26 some foot and horse of the Protestant Army, with two
large brass pieces were sent against the Castle of Leslep, and after some
small opposition, the enemy departed out at a back way unknown, and left the
Castle to us; some English men were found dead, killed by the Rebels, being
before prisoners unto them: When they were forced out of the Castle they burnt
Leslep Town and many Protestant houses. That day our men put a Garrison into
the Castle, and returned home to Dublin.

Wednesday the 27, the Lord Foil, and the Lord Digby, with some horse marched
from the Naas, and Sir Charles Coot met them with some foot and pieces, who
joining Forces made about 400 horse and 200 foot, and then marched toward a
place called Clancury, hanging some straglers by the way; but about the
foresaid Town were some 400 Rebels gathered together. Sir Charles Coot thought
of fighting, and drew out his men to that purpose, but these stood not, some
few our men killed, with only the loss of a boy straggling behind: So we
marched on toward Sir Luke Fitz Garret his Castle, and sent for him, but he
refused to come, we then coming not so near him as was intended, marched on to
Castle (...) to the noble Sir John Geffard, where we found much good he had
done to the whole Country, and in good time we relieved him, and that night the
Commanders staid with him: but billetted their men on Sir Lukes lands, who was
well provided for convenience; we rested all night quietly upon his land,
though he wished us further off.

Also that day many Priests about 17 were seized and clapped up in prison.

Thursday the 28 the Lord More came to us; accompanied with a Troop of horse,
having some few days before gone out of Tredath, and dared the enemy to the
Navan, killed and hanged some straggling Rogues, nere 250. the maine body of
them would not stand. That day we had some foot and horse went toward a place
called Bray, where they heard the Rebels to be busy, some few they hanged, and
brought 11 prisoners took in a boat at Sea to Dublin.

That day also we set forward to Philips Town, and took in the way a Fort of
the Rebels called Baliboging with little trouble, they being given to running,
we hanged some stragglers still as we went, as we did every day, toward 9 a
clock in the morning we entered Philips Town with some opposition, but much in
the Castle wherein were placed 70 Musketeers who withstood us valiantly, but
in vain, for we got it after two hours fight, 30 of them killed and the rest
taken by us and hanged, and their Constable of the Castle, among the rest one
Conyars: We hanged many of the Town, also in the Town is a passage made by
Art over a Bog, able to keep many men out with few, and no other way of
passage toward the Queens County, but much about; having taken it, we left
some there to guard it, and passed presently toward Castle Gasell without
opposition, for all their brags, only hagning stragglers, with much joy were
we in that Castle received, which has been drawn to many straights, but
having relieved it we returned back to Philips Town, as being the safest
place where we staid all night, and in the morning burnt the Town and
departed to the noble Sir John to Castle Jordan again; going within musket
shot of Sir Lukes Castle, but he would not be seen, neither did oppose us,
that night we stayed with Sir John, and did to Sir Luke as before, which he
took patiently because he could not help it.

Friday the 29 having relieved Sir John, we bent our course toward Trim, Sir
John with his men accompanying of us 5 miles, and returned to his charge,
leaving Trim to us: after we had parted with him, we met with a man which Sir
Charles pressed to know how Trim was in strength, which for fear of hanging he
confessed to have no less then 4000 in it, and 4 Lords of the Pale also, and
that Navan had 7000, some were thinking these too many to encounter, but Sir
Charles words were 30000 should not keep him from attempting to take the
Town, and so marched on, and when those in the Town perceived Sir Charles
resolution by their Scouts, when Sir Charles was within a mile of Trim, all
these foresaid mentioned betook themselves to their heels, leaving only a few
women and children, and the Town to us. Sir Charles entered the place and went
on to pursue them, killed some of the Rear of them, and there a bullet past
within three inches of his throat, but mist him, but the greater part of the
Rebels with their nimble heels which is their advantage, out-vvent us, and
got to the Navan and set fire of the Suburbs of it themselves, Sir Charles
returned tovvard night to the Town where he now is, and the second of May
sent news of it to Dublin, desiring more strength to pursue the victory, with
these merry words, that seeing he must at last dye in the field, he might kill
as many as he could before that time of them, who arrived in Dublin to do his
arrant.

In this exepdition at Philips Town and Trim were redeemed forty and more
English prisoners and fired each day many places.

Saturday the 30. some of our men scattered out without leave, to plunder some
of the Enemies horse, who fell foul on them being few, slew four of our
horsemen, not above five being there, and killed some Carmen, in all Soldiers
and others some twenty.

Among the rest one Marham a Vintner, Clavells wives father, and this way have
we lost more in straggling, then in Battle.

This day we heard out of Munster, that the Lord President was indifferent well
recovered, and had with Sir Thomas Vavasor chased the Lord Musery, and gave him
an overthrow and burnt a part of his Country.

On Monday the second of May, we had news, the English under the Lord Conway,
marched toward the Newry, and the Scots to the relief of Coulerand.

Tuesday the third we had news brought, that the Lord Conway on the one side,
and Sir Henry Tichbourne on the other had taken the Newry, but as yet it is
very doubtful how, either by fiight or the Enemies flying that it was taken,
which make some doubt of the truth of it, but little hope can the Enemy have in
holding of it: more of this next week: but it is from a friend who sent such
word from Tredoth, but it was not taken so soon as you could hear it in
London, as many Letters say from thence.

This day at ten clock of came a Trooper and Messenger from Sir Charles Coot,
and the Lord Digby, and Lord Foil, that they had fired a great part of the
Country, had relieved Castle Gassell, had destroyed Philips Town, a strong
Town and a bad passage, and had in their return home took the Castle and
Town of Trim, one of the places of most strength the Enemy had in those parts,
have delivered many prisoners out of Trim and Philips Town, brought by the
Enemy out of the North to be kept prisoners: this was an exceeding piece of
service beyond our thought till we heard of it; in Trim were four Lords of the
Pale that delivered themselves by their legs by running away; there is Sir
Charles now placing a garrision, it makes the old Sir Charles young again to
see God so bless him in his enterprises, but indeed most sincerely has he gone
on without by-respects, which is too much in some, and which daily does us
great harm. They hanged and killed some 200. or more, but the rest fled toward
the Navan, and for fear our men should follow them, burnt that Town
themselves and fled, as having no heart to stand.

On the fourth day some Troops went to Sir Charles cut to Trim, to strengthen
him there; where he is fortifying it, intending to prosecute his Victory
forward while they are flying, and to take the Castle of Navan, which they as
yet keep.

Also this day had we two Churchyards new made without the City, for such
dying there is amongst soldiers, nay I dare say, twenty for one killed, most
for want; this day in the morning were they Consecrated, our Churchyards in
the City are able to hold more.

On the fifth day the Lord Moore departed to Tredath, with two Troops of Horse.

I am now called away in such haste, that I cannot stay to write the rest, till
the next week I rest,

Dublin the eight of May, 1642.
In my last I acquainted your Lordship with a design then undertaken by my Lord
Lisse, for the relief of the Lady Ofaly, which his Lordship has prosecuted
with so much judgment and good success, that not only her Ladyship is put
into a condition of subsistence, in despite of what the Rebels were or are
like to be able to do, but upon intelligence given him, he has approved his
first intentions, and taken in a Town called Trim, from whence his Lordship
sent hither a party of Horse, desiring to be enabled to follow his good
fortune, by the sending to him one troop of Horse more, and 1200. foot, which
is condesended unto, and the troops will be sent home on Saturday next, no man
can observe his gallant inclinations, attended with his suitable events, with
greater delight than I do, Nor shall be more ready to serve him to ward
accomplishment of all his undertakings.

May 14. 1642. Ordered that this be forthwith printed. H. Elsing. Cler. Part.
de Com.

FINIS.

