A LETTER FROM A Gentleman in Grayes-Inn TO A Justice of the Peace in the
Country: EXPLAINING The Act of UNIFORMITY In that part which does concern
UNLICENSED PREACHERS.

Printed in the Year, 1662.

A LETTER FROM A Gentleman in Grayes-Inn TO A Justice of the Peace in the
Country. Explaining The Act for UNIFORMITY in that part which does concern
Unlicensed Preachers.
Honored Sir,
YOurs of the 20th. instant, I did receive; I am glad to hear of your welfare,
and cannot but be most ready to gratify your desire in any thing within my
power; you are pleased to require mine opinion concerning that part of the late
Act for Uniformity, which does empower Justices of the Peace to commit
Preachers unto Prison upon the Certificate of a Bishop.

Sir, my private opinion can be of little weight; yet, your Request is to me a
Command, and my Conjectures may point you unto more convincing expositions on
the Act.

This Statute does assign Imprisonment in two Cases, Unlicensed Schoolmasters,
and unlicensed Preachers; the last is that concerning which you do enquire, and
the branch of the Statute does run thus:

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any person by
this Act disabled Page 87.
to Preach any Lecture or Sermon, shall, during the time that he shall continue
and remain so disabled, Preach any Lecture or Sermon, That then, for every such
offense, the person or persons so offending, shall suffer three months
Imprisonment in the common Jail, without Bale or Main prize; and that any two
Justices of the Peace of any County of this Kingdom, and the places aforesaid,
and the Mayor or other chief Magistrate of any City or Town Corporate within
the same, upon Certificate from the Ordinary of the place, made to him or them
(...) the offense committed, shall and are hereby required to commit the person
or persons so offending to the. Jail of the same County, City, or Town
corporate accordingly.

I shall not insist on the hardness of the Case, that men should be sent to
Prison on a bare and blind Certificate, without any due and fair Conviction, or
ever being heard in their own Defense: But on the serious view of this Clause,
and consideration of this Act, mine opinion is this:

The Subject of this penalty, is not every Unlicensed Preacher, but only an
unlicensed, and therefore disabled, Lecturer: Men might Preach as Parsons or
Vicars, any constant or cursory occasional Sermon, and not be liable to this
Penalty; and if any of the Bishops shall make Certificate against any man so
Preaching, the Justices have no Authority to commit them, or him, to Prison;
but if a Justice of the Peace, or Mayor of any Corporation, shall commit any
person on such Certificate, the Prisoner may have his Habeas Corpus, and remedy
against the Mayor or Justices.

Sir, That my opinion may not come to you naked, and without proof, be pleased
to observe the reason on which I ground mine opinion.

The person shall be committed to prison for doing that which he was disabled
to do; but the person is only disabled to Preach any Lecture or Sermon, (i. e.)
Lecture-Sermon.

Sir, This Law does resolve a threefold disablement upon Ministers.

1. Such who are not Episcopally Ordained, and do not in all things conform,
are disabled to hold any Living or Page 8^.
Ecclesiastical promotion.

2. The not Episcopally Ordained, consecrating the Lords Supper, are disabled
to be made Priests for one whole Paeg. 8^*
year after.

3. Lecturers not Licensed, as is directed, are disabled to Preach any Lecture
or Sermon; and the doing this after disablement, is that which is punishable
with Three months Imprisonment.

Now, Sir, that you may see Lecturers, Preaching, fixed, stated Lecturers, are
the only persons disabled, and to be punished, observe.

1. Ministers, in all other Capacities, are compelled to Conformity by other
pains; and their non-preaching is provided for by other Remedies: The law
prescribes not two punishments for one offense; but there being a sort of
Ministers under the notion of Lecturers, not barred by any prescription to
Parsons or Vicars; the Law makes special provision against them, and this
penalty compels them to Conformity, or puts them to Silence.

2. The persons disabled, and work to which they are disabled, is best
discovered by that appellation by which they are discriminated in the Statute,
and that is not the name of Minister, Preacher, Parson, or Vicar, who were all
provided against in the foregoing part of the Law; but the name of Lecturer,
which I observe, is affected, and all along this part of the Statute, is used
to predicate the person to be disabled, and on doing what he is disabled, to be
imprisoned: It begins, No person, shall be, or be received as a Lecturer, or
allowed to preach as a Lecturer; It proceeds, every person licensed, assigned
or appointed, or received as a Lecturer; Again, so long as he continues
Lecturer; Again, it shall be sufficient for the said Lecturer; Again, the
Lecturer then to Preach, this name does note his office and work, to which he
is disabled (viz.) not simple Preaching, but Lecturing, or Preaching a Lecture.

3. The Qualifications, for defect of which he is disabled can square to no
kind of Preacher, or Preaching, but to Lecturers Preaching Lectures, for he must

1. Be approved, and thereunto Licensed; Thereunto is a Relative, which has
for its Antecedent, not Person, Vicar, or Preacher, but Lecturer, and Lecture:
this is not only plain by the Gramatical Connection of the words, but also by
the express terms subjoyned; Every person licensed, assigned, appointed, or
received as a Lecturer, to Preach on any day of the week; Now, Sir, he is only
disabled to do that whereunto he is not licensed.

2. This person is required, the first time he preaches, to read
Common Prayer, and to declare his assent and consent, and upon every first
Lecture day of every Month, so long as he continues Lecturer there, and for
not doing the same he is disabled to Preach the said, or any other Lecture, or
Sermon; the work to which he is disabled, is a stated Service which has
beginning and continuance in return of time, not a cursory transient and
occasional Act.

3. The Lecturer then to preach must be present at the reading Common Prayer
before he Preach his Sermon or Lecture.

Now, Sir, if the defect of these Qualifications disable, and so dispose under
the penalty, he that shall be thus punished must be a person capable of these
Qualifications, and that is none but a stated Lecturer.

Sir, I do not find the least ground for any Objection against my opinion, save
only in this, that the word (Sermon) is used in the Statute: and in this
provision of the penalty; and unto this, I answer;

1. Sermon is never used alone, and by it self, but ever conjunct with Lecture,
and enclosed in the same Comma; but when the Printers mistake is visible.

2. Sermon is joined to Lecture with this discretive (or) not disjunctively,
but exegetically, to explain the term Lecture; and hereof there is good
Reason; for Lecture properly signifies a Reading, but has been in Vulgar
accepceptation referred unto, and performed by, Preaching: That therefore the
Law might not be evaded by an equivocal term, the vulgar appellation Lecture
is explained by the mode of performance, Lecture or Sermon, and that Sermon is
thus exegetical, is evident by these Observations.

1. The Preacher hereby disabled is throughout this part of the Law,
praedicated a Lecturer, and not known by any other appellation whatsoever.

2. The qualifications before noted, do square with no kind of Preaching or
Preacher, but Lecturer Preaching a Lecture-Sermon.

3. Page 85.
Preaching or Reading are expressly mentioned as the specifical Acts, of the
Lecturers Lecturing. So in the first Clause which relates thereunto, None
shall be, or be received as a Lecturer, allowed to preach as a Lecturer, or to
preach or read any Lecture, or Sermon, (i. e.) any way speak openly any
Lecture-Sermon; for Lecture is the Genus, existing in the Species of Reading or
Preaching.

4. Page 86.
Preaching is often expressed to be the only act of the Lecturer, it may
therefore well be called a Sermon: the Statute says expressly, Every person
licensed, assigned, appointed, a Lecturer to Preach, shall the first time he
preaches, so long as he continues Lecturer or Preacher.

5. Lecture or Sermon are so conjoined in the Qualifications prescribed, they
must be Synonimous, and convertible, and exegetical, cannot be disjunctive,
thus; it is menoned, the place appointed for his Lecture or Sermon; the reading
Common Prayer at the time of the day when his Lecture or Sermon is to be
preached, and declare his assent and consent before his Lecture or Sermon: Now,
Sir, they cannot be disjunctive in the disablement, which are apparently
exegetical in the required Qualifications.

6. Preaching or Reading are expressed to be the different acts of Lecturing in
Cathedral, Collegiate, and University Churches or Chapels, though Preaching is
retained as the Lecturing Act in common and ordinary Lectures. So that there
was great and just cause to connex Sermon to Lecture, in directing a
Lecture-Sermon.

Sir, These things considered, you cannot but see mine opinion is grounded on
the plain and clear interpretation of the Law; So, that if any Bishops
Certificate reduce you into the Dilemma, you will hereby direct your course, to
commit Preaching Lecturers, but pass by and leave at liberty all other
Preachers whatsoever, as those; for Commitment of whom you have no Authority.
And so doing, which you cannot but be sure all the Judges will determine against
you. I am Sir

October, 30th 1662. Your Servant to Command F. A.



