AESOPS FABLES, WITH THE FABLES OF PHAEDRVS Moralized, TRANSLATED VERBATIM,
ACCORDING to the Latin, FOR THE USE OF GRAMMAR SCHOOLS, AND FOR CHILDREN,
That with the more delight, they may learn to read the English Tongue.

Published by H. P.

LONDON, Printed by I. L. for Andrew Hebb, at the sign of the Bell in Paul's
Churchyard.

1646.

THE PUBLISHER TO the READER.
TO make an Apology for the Translation of Schoole-books into English, were
vain: the great fruit that has redounded thereby to the Teacher and the
Learner, has sufficiently approved it: my part at this time is, to testify my
approbation of this Work after perusal, to satisfy the Printers motion:
accordingly, I have compared it with the Original Latin, and find it an exact
Grammatical Translation thereof: and therefore commend it to the use, as well
of young Grammar Scholars, as to the new learners of the English Tongue, who
by reason of the pleasant Fables therein, will be much allured and delighted to
learn to read English. Vale.

The Printer to the Reader.
THat this young AEsop might not prejudice the old one, it is thought good to
give the Reader notice, that there is extant another larger edition of AEsops
Fables (not Grammatically construed as this is) Primed of an English Letter, to
be sold where this Edition is, containing the Life of AEsop at large, together
with the Fables of Avian, of Alfonce, and of Poge the Florentine.

THE TABLE OF AESOPS FABLES.
Fable. 1. OF the Cock. 2. Of the Wolf and the Lamb. 3. Of the Mice and the
Frogs. 4. Of the Dog and the Shadow. 5. Of the Lion and certain other Beasts.
6. Of the Wolf and the Crane. 7. Of a Countryman and a Serpent. 8. Of the
Boar and the Ass. 9. Of the Citie-Mouse, and the Countrey-Mouse 10. Of the
Eagle and the Crow. 11. Of the Crow and the Fixon. Fable. 12. Of the Lion spent
with Age. 13. Of the Dog and the Ass. 14. Of the Lion and the Mouse. 15. Of
the Kite being Sick. 16. Of the Swallow and other Birds. 17. Of the Frogs and
their King. 18. Of the Doves and the Kite. 19. Of the Thief and the Dog. 20.
Of the Wolf and the Sow. 21. Of the Birth of the Mountains. 22. Of the Hound.
23. Of the Hares and the Frogs. 24. Of the Kid and the Wolf. 25. Of the Heart
and the Sheep. 26. Of the Countryman and the Snake. 27. Of the Fox and the
Storke. 28. Of the Wolf and the Carved-head. 29. Of the Iay. 30. Of the Fly
and the Emmet. 31. Of the Frogge and the Ox. 32. Of the Horse and the Lion.
33. Of the Horse and the Ass. 34. Of the Birds, and Foure-footed Beasts.
Fable. 35. Of the Wolf and the Fox. 36. Of the Heart. 37. Of the Viper and a
File. 38. Of the Wolves and the Lambs. 39. Of the Wood and the Countryman.
40. Of the Belly and the rest of the Members. 41. Of the Ape and the Fox. 42.
Of the Heart and the Oxen. 43. Of the Lion and the Fox. 44. Of the Fox and the
Weesill. 45. Of the Horse and the Heart.
The Table of Phaedrus Fables.
Fable. 1. OF the Wolf and the Lamb. 2. The Frogs desired a King. 3. The
proud Iay and the Peacocke. 4. A Dog carrying flesh over a River. 5. A Cow
and a Goat, a Sheep and a Lion. 6. The Frogs to the Sun. 7. The Fox to a Man's
Image. 8. The Wolf and the Crane. 9. The Sparrow Counselor to the Hare. 10.
The Wolf and the Fox with my Lord Judge, the Ape. 11. The Ass and the Lion a
Hunting. 12. The Heart at the Fountain. 13. The Fox and the Raven. 14. Of a
Cobbler, a Physician. 15. The Ass to an old Shepherd. Fable. 16. The Sheep, the
Heart, and the Wolf. 17. The Sheep, a Dog, and a Wolf. 18. A Woman in Labor.
19. A Bitch a Whelping. 20. Hungry Dogs. 21. An old Lion, the Bull, and an
Ass. 22. A Cat and a Man. 23. A faithful Dog. 24. The bursten Frog and an
Ox. 25. The Dog and the Crocodile. 26. The Fox and the Storke. 27. A Dog
and a Treasure, and the ravenous Vulter. 28. A Fox and an Eagle. 29. The Ass
scorning the Boar. 30. The Frogs fearing the wars of the Bull-battell. 31.
The Kite and the Pigeon.
FINIS.
AESOPS FABLES.
Of the Cock. Fable 1.
WHilst the dunghill Cock scratched in the dunghill, he found a precious
stone; saying, Wherefore do I find a thing so bright? if the Jeweller had
found it, none should have been more glad then he, because he would know the
worth of it: it is to me useless, neither do I esteem it much: yea, truly I
had rather have one grain of barley, then all the precious stones in the world.

Of the Wolf and the Lamb. Fab. 2.
THe Wolf, drinking at the head of a fountain, sees the Lamb drinking far
beneath him: he ran to him and rebukes the Lamb, because that he made muddy
the water: the Lamb begins to tremble, and to entreat him, that he would
spare him who was innocent, and that he, (since that he drank far beneath him)
could not trouble the drink of the Wolf, neither truly would he: the Wolf on
the other side rayleth upon him; Thou cursed thief it is to no purpose what
thou say, thou do wrong me always: thy father, thy mother and all thy
hateful stock, are enemies to me by all manner of ways, thou shall be
punished to me to day.

Of the Mice and Frogs. Fab. 3.
THe Mouse did wage war with the Frogs; they did strive concerning the
Government of the Marsh; the battle was very hot, and doubtful, the Mouse
being crafty hiding himself under the grass, sets upon the Frogge
treacherously* the Frog being stronger in breast, and better at leaping,
provokes his enemy in open fight: a bulrush was a spear to each one of them,
which battle being seen afar off, the Kite draws near, and whilst
neither of them takes heed to themselves for the desire of the battle, the
Kite snatcheth and teareth both the fighters.

Of the Dog and the Shadow. Fab. 4.
THe Dog swiming over a River, carried a piece of flesh in his mouth; the
Sun shining even as it happened, the shadow of the flesh did shine in the
waters, the which shadow being seen, the Dog snatching at it greedily, did
lose that which was in his chaps; therefore he being amazed with the loss of
the thing, which he had in his mouth, as also of hope, at first he was
astonished, afterward taking a courage, he cried out so: Wretch, measure was
only wanting to thy lust or desire, there was enough, yea more then enough, if
thou had not been a fool: now through thy foolishness thou have less then
nothing.

Of the Lion and certain other Beasts.
Fab. 5.
THe Lion had made a bargain with the Sheep and certain other beasts, to make a
common hunting: they went to hunt, an Heart is taken, they divide him: they
begin to take every part to every one as was meet: The Lion roared, saying, One
part is mine, because I am most worthy, again another part is mine, because I
am excellent in strength; Moreover, because in taking the Heart I have sweat
more then others, I challenge the third part: to conclude, unless ye grant to
me the fourth part, there is an end of friendship: his fellows hearing this,
depart empty and holding their peace, not daring to mutter against the Lion.

Of the Wolf and the Crane. Fab. 6.
THe Wolf having devoured a Sheep, by chance the bones did stick fast in his
throat, he goes about and he entreats help, no body helps him, every one
telling him that he had gotten a reward for his greediness, at length he
persuades the Crane with many flattering words, and with many promises, that
his long neck being put in his throat, he would pull out the bone, which did
stick in his throat, but he mocketh the Crane seeking his reward: he says,
thou fool, get thee hence, have thou not enough that thou live? thou owe
me thy life, if it had pleased me, I might have bitten off thy neck.

Of a Countryman and a Serpent.
Fab. 7.
A Countryman took home a Serpent found in the snow, almost killed through
cold, and laid her to the fire: the Serpent receiving strength and poison from
the fire, and afterward not being able to abide the heat, infected the whole
cottage with hissing; the Countryman runs to him, taking up a staff, he
chideth with him for the injury done, with words and stripes: Would he render
these thanks? would he take the life from him, who had given him life?

Of the Boar and the Ass. Fab. 8.
VVHilest the sluggish Ass mocked the Boar, he being angry, did gnash with
his teeth; o thou most slothful Ass, truly thou have deserved a beating, but
albeit, thou have been worthy of punishment, yet I am unworthy who should take
revenge of thee: mock on without danger, thou may do it scotfree, for thou
art escaped through thy sluggishnesse.

Of the City Mouse and the Country Mouse. Fab. 9.
IT pleased a Mouse of the City, to walk to the Country, the Mouse of the
Country sees her of the City, she bids her to Supper, the Supper is ready,
they go to supper, the Country Mouse brings forth whatsoever she laid up for
Winter, and she emptieth all her whole storehouse, that she might satisfy the
daintiness of so great a guest. Notwithstanding, the City Mouse wrinkling her
brow, dispraiseth the poverty of the country, afterward she commends the
plenty of the city: returning home, she takes the Country Mouse with her
unto the city, that she might make good in very deed, these things which she
had boasted in words: they go to the banquet, which the City Mouse had made
ready daintily: amidst the banqueting, the noise of the key is heard of them
in the lock, they begin to fear, and to fly, in flying, the Country Mouse
both unacquainted, and also not knowing the place, scantly was able to defend
her self: the servant going out, the City Mouse returns to the table, she
calls the Country Mouse, the Country Mouse at length creeps out, scantly
having laid aside fear, she asks the City Mouse who did invite her to
drink: whether or no, falls out this danger often? She answered, that it was
daily, and must be contemned: then the Country Mouse said, is it a daily
thing? Verily these your dainties have more gall then honey, or pleasure:
truly, I had rather have my poverty with security, then this your plenty
with such tronble.

Of the Eagle and the Crow. Fab. 10.
THe Eagle having gotten a cockle, she might not get out the fish, by force or
skill, the Crow coming to her, she gives counsel, the Crow persuades him to
fly aloft, and throw the cockle down from above upon the stones, for so it
will come to pass, that the shell will be broken, the Crow remains on the
ground, that she might watch the fall of the Cockle, the Eagle throws down
the Cockle; the shell is broken: the fish was snatched away by the Crow: the
Eagle being mocked is sorrowful.

Of the Crow and the Fixon. Fab. 11.
THe Crow having gotten a prey, makes a noise in the boughs of a tree, the
Fixon does see the Crow rejoicing, and runs to her: and says, The Fixon
saluteth the Crow with very much commendation, I have heard often times, that
fame was a liar, but now I have experience of this in the matter it self: for
as I go now this way by chance, looking up to you in a tree, I come speedily
to you blaming the fame: for the rumor is, that you are more black then the
pitch, and I see that you are more white then the snow; indeed by my judgment
thou overcomest the Swan, and thou art more white then the Ivy: but if thou
excel so in thy voice, as in plumes, truly I will say, that thou art the
Queen of all fowls: the Crow allured with this flattering, makes her to
sing: but the cheese did fall out of her bill, whilst she made her to sing:
which cheese fallen, was taken of the Fixon, the little Fox takes up a
laughter, then at the length, it shameth and it irketh the miserable Raven of
her own condition, and she sorroweth with the loss of the thing, mingled with
shame.

Of the Lion spent with Age.
Fab. 12.
A Lion who in his youth had made many his foes by his cruelty, was punished
in his old age: for the beasts give like recompense, the Boar strikes with
his tooth, the Bull with his horn, and first of all the little Ass, desirous
to put away the old name of sluggishnesse, triumphs over the Lion boldly with
words, and also his heels: then the Lion full of sorrow, says, These now hurt
me again, whom I have hurt in times past; and that justly, but these whom I
have done good unto sometimes, now do me no good again: yea also do me harm
undeservedly: I was a fool, who made so many to be my enemies: yea more
foolish, who put my trust in deceiving friends.

Of the Dog and the Ass.
Fab. 13.
VVHilest that the Dog did fawn upon his Master and Family, his Master and
the Household did make much of the Dog, the Ass seeing that, he began to sigh
very deeply, and began to grieve himself for his condition, he thinks it
handled badly, that the Dog should be welcome to every one in the house, and
to be fed from his Masters table, and that he gets the same favor by
idleness and playing: on the other side that he did carry the packsaddle, and
is beaten with the whip, he is never idle, and yet hated of all men: if these
good things come to pass by flattering, he determined to follow that Art which
is so profitable: therefore on a certain time, his Master returning home he
runs to meet him to try the matter, he leapeth upon him, he paweth upon
him with his hoofes: his Master crying out, the servants run to him: the
foolish Ass which supposed himself to have played* the part of a civil man,
was beaten with a club.

Of the Lion and the Mouse. Fab. 14.
THe Lion being weary with heat and running, when as he rested in the shadow
under the green leaves, and when a company of Mice did run over his back, he
awaking, takes one of many: the captive Mouse entreats, and cries that she
is unworthy, upon whom a Lion should wreak his anger: he deeming, that there
were no praise or credit in the death of so little a beast, he lets go the
prisoner, but not long after that, whilst that the Lion by chance did run
through the corne-field, he falls into the nets, he might well roar, but
could not get forth: the Mouse hears the Lion roaring miserably, she knows
his voice and creeps into the Meises, seeks the knots of the snares,
finds them being sought, and gnaweth them being found: the Lion gets forth
out of the nets.

Of the Kite being sick. Fab. 15.
THe Kite lay sick in bed, now almost ready to die, he entreats his Mother, to
go to pray unto the gods, his Mother made answer, that no help is to be hoped
for of the gods, whose holy Monuments and Altars, he had violated so often with
his ravenings.

Of the Swallow and other Birds.
Fab. 16.
When first of all, the Flax was begun to be sown, the Swallow does persuade
the little Birds, to hinder the sowing of it, saying, that snares should be
made for to catch them: they mock at her, and call the Swallow a foolish
Prophet: then at length the Flax sprung up, and waxing green, she warned them
again, to pluck up by the root that which was sown, they mock her again;
the Flax waxes ripe, she exhorts them to destroy the whole crop, now when as
they would not hearken to her, then giving counsel, the Swallow leaving the
company of the Birds, she procured the friendship of a man, she enters into a
covenant with him, and dwells in his chimney, and entiseth him with her
alluring song: nets and snares are made of the Flax for the rest of the Birds.

Of the Frogs and their King.
Fab. 17.
When the Nation of the Frogs was free from subjection, they made their
supplication to Jupiter, that a King might be given them: but Jupiter did begin
to smile at their Petitions, notwithstanding they did begin to desire
instantly, again and again, until the time that they compelled him: he
throws down a beam: that lump shook and beat the River with a mighty
noise: the Frogs astonished, hold their peace, they honor their King, they come
nearer by little and little, at length fear being cast from them, they jumpe
upon him, and leap upon it: the foolish King is to them a mockage and a
contempt: they trouble Jupiter again, and desire that a King might be given to
them, would be strong and stirring: Jupiter gives them the Storke, he walking
overthwart the Ditches stoutly, whatsoever Frogs he meets with, eats and
devoureth: but then the Frogs complained in vain of the cruelty of their
King, Jupiter hears them not, for likewise at this time they complain yet,
for the Stork going to his rest at evening, gone out of their holes they
murmr with a hoarse voice, but they do so in vain, for Jupiter wills,
that they who had once misused a courteous King, now should suffer a churlish
one.

Of the Doves and the Kite.
Fab. 16.
THe Pigeons in time past did wage war with the Kite, whom that they might
overcome, they chose a Goshawke for their King, he being made a King, does play
the enemy, not a King, he snatcheth at them and plucketh them no less then the
Kite: it repents the Doves of their enterprises: they think it had been
better to suffer the wars of the Kite, then the tyranny of the Hawke.

Of the Thief and the Dog.
Fab. 19.
THe Thief upon a time giving the Dog a piece of bread that he would hold
his peace, the Dog made answer, I know thy deceits, Thou give me bread, to
the intent that I should cease from barking, but I do hate thy gift, for if I
shall take the bread, thou will carry all my Masters goods out of this house.

Of the Wolf and the Sow.
Fab. 20.
THe little Sow was a littering, the Wolf did promise her, that he will be her
Keeper, the bigge-bellied Sow made answer, That she did not want the service of
the Wolf: If he would be counted so charitable, or if he desire to do her a
good turn, let him go further off; for the duty or service of the Wolf does
consist, not in his presence, but in his absence.

Of the Birth of the Mountains.
Fab. 21.
IN times past, there was a rumor, that the Mountains did bring forth young
Hills; Men run to see, they stood about it, looking for some Monster, not
without fear: at length the Mountains bring forth young, A Mouse comes out,
then all the people are like to kill themselves by laughing.

Of the Hound. Fab. 22.
A Master stirs forward his Hound, who now was waxed old, but he exhorts
him in vain, for his feet are become slow, so that he runs with no speed:
he had taken hold of a Beast, but the Beast slippeth away from the toothlesse
Dog, his Master rebukes him with words and stripes, the Dog makes answer,
That he ought to forgive him for such offense, by reason that he was waxed old
now, but was strong so long as he was young: but says the Dog, as I
perceive plainly, there is nothing pleasant without profit, thou did love me
when I was young and strong, but thou do hate me now whilst I am old and
weak; thou lovedst me, so long as I was able to catch a prey, now thou hate
me, when I am feeble, and slow, and wanting teeth: but if thou were a thankful
Master, whom thou lovedst in times past* whilst he was young, for profits
sake, thou would love waxed old, for his fruitful youth.

Of the Hares and Frogs.
Fab. 23.
VVHilest the Wood made a mighty noise through an unusual Whirlewind, the
timorous Hares begin to fly thence speedily: but when a great Poole withstood
the Hares running away, they stood still amazed and environed with dangers on
both sides, and they see the Frogs plunge in the Poole, which was a Motive of a
greater fear, at last one of the Hares, more wise then the others, said,
Wherefore fear we for nothing? we have need of couragiousnesse: for indeed we
have quickness of bodies, but we want boldness, we should not fly, for the
danger of a Whirlewind, but we should despise it.

Of the Kid and the Wolf.
Fab. 24.
When as the Goat was going forth to feed, she shuts up the Kid in her
house, warning him, to open the Port to no body, till such time as she returned
home again: The Wolf which heard that afar off, after the departure of his
Mother, he knocks at the door: he counterfeiteth the Goat in his voice,
commanding him to open the door: The Kid perceiving his guile, says, I will
not open it, for although thy voice plays the Goat well, notwithstanding I
see a Wolf through the chinks of the door.

Of the Heart and the Sheep.
Fab. 25.
THe Heart makes the Sheep as guilty before the Wolf, crying, That she owed
a measure of Wheat. But the Sheep forsooth was ignorant of the debt;
notwithstanding she promises, that she will give it, because of the presence
of the Wolf: The day for payment is appointed; it came; The Heart warns the
Sheep, she denies the debt: for that which she had promised, she excuses it,
because it was done by fear, and for the presence of the Wolf: and moreover a
Covenant, wrung by violence, ought not to be kept.

Of the Countryman and the Snake.
Fab. 26.
A Certain Countryman nourished a Snake, on a time being angry, he struck
the Beast with his Hatchet, the Snake slideth away, not without a wound:
afterward the Countryman falling into poverty, thought that that mischief
did fall upon him, for the injury done to the Snake, wherefore he entreats
the Snake, that he would return again; The Snake says, that he did pardon
him, but would not return, and that he would not be secure with the
Countryman, who had so great a Hatchet at home, and that the grief of the
wound was ceased, notwithstanding the memory was remaining.

Of the Fox and the Storke.
Fab. 27.
THe Fixon did bid the Storke to Supper, she powers out her meat upon the
Table, which seeing that it was of moist substance, the Storke nibling in vain
with her bill, the poor Bird went away with a flea in her ear, being mocked
for her labor, both it shamed her, and it irketh her of the injury. A few
days after, she comes back again, she bids the Fox to Supper, a vessel
of Glass was set upon the Table full of victuals, the which truly since it was
a vessel of a narrow neck, the wily beguiled Fox might well look upon her
cheer, and yet was hunger-bit, he could not taste, take, or sip: The Storke
very easily sucked up all with his long bill.

Of the Wolf and the Carved-head.
Fab. 28.
THe Wolf having found a Man's Head in the shop of the Imagemaker, he turns
it upside down, he wondreth at it, at length perceiving that, which it was
indeed, that it had no sense or understanding: O trim Head (says he) there is
much workmanship in thee, but not a whit of wit.

Of the Iay. Fab. 29.
THe Jay did deck her self with the feathers of the Peacocke, afterward
seeming to her self very brave, and disdaining her own kindred, she betaketh
her self to the flock of the Peacocks, at length they understanding her
deceit, they uncovered the foolish bird of her colored plumes, and rewarded
her with stripes.

Of the Fly and the Emmet.
Fab. 30.
THe Fly did chide with the Emmet, and she did brag that her self was noble,
but she infamous; Her self did fly, but the Emmet did creep; but moreover
her-selfe did haunt in the Palaces of Kings, but the Emmet did keep her self
in the cave of the earth, and eat corn or grain, and drink water, and she
did boast, that her-selfe did diet daintily, and yet had all these without
labor: On the other side, the Emmet said, that she was not base, but contented
with her own birth or parentage; but the Fly was unstable, and her-selfe was
constant, the grains and the water did taste so to the Emmet, as Pasties and
Wine to the Fly, and she had not these things by idleness, but by diligent
and painful travel: Moreover the Emmet was joyous and sure, beloved of all
men, and last of all, an example of labor: but the Fly is troubled with
danger, noisome to every one, hated of all men, to conclude, an example of
sluggishnesse: The Emmet mindful of the Winter season does lay up her
victuals: but the Fly does live for a day, either will be hungry in Winter or
certainly die.

Of the Frogge and the Ox.
Fab. 31.
THe Frog being desirous to be as great as the Ox, she stretched out her
self: Her son exhorted his Mother to cease from her foolish enterprise: for
says he, the Frog is nothing in a manner to the Ox: yet she begins to
swell the second time, her son or the young Padock cries out upon her, and
says, O Mother, although you burst with pride, or crack asunder, yet shall you
never exceed the great Ox: but when as, she puffed or swelled the third time,
she burst asunder.

Of the Horse and the Lion.
Fab. 32.
THe Lion come to eat and devour a Horse, but wanting strength through his
age, he did begin to find out some deceit: He professes he is a Physician, he
impeadeth the Horse with the conceit of his words, but the Horse opposes
deceit to deceit, and skill to the Lions skill; and feignes that he now has
hurt his foot in a thorny place, and requesteth, That he who was a Physician,
would look on the thorn and bring it out: The Lion does as the Horse did bid
him: But the Horse did strike the Lion with his heel, with so great force as
he was able, and incontinent, he takes himself to flight: At length the Lion
scantly returning to himself, (for he was almost killed with the stroke)
says, I receive the reward of my foolishness, and the Horse is escaped
justly: For because he has revenged deceit with deceit.

Of the Horse and the Ass.
Fab. 33.
THe Horse being attired with gay trappings and with a saddle, did run along
the way with a huge neighing, by chance a heavy laden Ass stood in his way as
he ran, the Horse stamping and staring for anger, and fiercely champing his
foaming bridle: said, Wherefore lazy sluggard stand thou in the Horses way?
I say, give place or I will trample thee under my feet: the poor Ass durst
not speak a word against him, but gives place to him with quietness: but the
belly of the Horse flying and running his race, burst asunder: then being
unprofitable for race and for show, he was deprived of his gay attire; and
afterward he was sold to a Carter: afterward the Ass sees him coming with a
Cart, and he speaks to him; Ho, you, good fellow? what ornament is this?
where is your golden saddle, your imbossed girts, where is your bright bridle?
so friend it was necessary to happen to the proud.

Of the Birds and foure-footed Beasts.
Fab. 34.
THere was a battle with the Birds, and with foure-footed Beasts: The hope of
victory was between both of them, fear was on both parts, the danger was
betwixt both of them, but the Bat leaving his fellows, falls off to the
enemies: The Birds overcome, the Eagle being their Captain and the Guide; but
they condemn the Bat, who fled away, that she should not return at any time to
the Birds, and that she should not fly at any time in the light: This is the
occasion to the Bat, that she flies not, but in the night.

Of the Wolf and the Fox.
Fab. 35.
THe Wolf, when he had enough prey, he lived in idleness, the Fox came unto
him, and enquireth the cause of his idleness: The Wolf perceived, that
deceits were a making for his banquets, pretends, that a disease was the
cause of it, and entreats the Fox, that she would go to pray unto the gods:
She sorrowing that her subtlety had no better success, She goes to a
Shepherd, and tells him, that the Dens of the Wolf were openly known, for his
enemy now careless might be oppressed unawares: the Shepherd runs upon the
Wolf, kills him: The Fixon gets the Den and the prey: yet she had but a
short joy in her wickedness: for not long after, the same Shepherd takes her
also.

Of the Heart. Fab. 36.
THe Heart beholding her self in a clear fountain, praises the height of her
forehead, and her craggie horns, but dispraiseth the slenderness of her
legs: whilst that she thus does judge, the Huntsman came upon her: The Heart
more swift then any bullet, flies away, and swifter then the Eastern wind,
driving the clouds: the Dogs do follow her flying: but when as she enters in
a great wood, her horns were entangled in the briars: then at length she
praises her legs, and dispraiseth her horns, which made her, that she was a
prey to the Dogs.

Of the Viper and the File.
Fab. 37.
THe Viper finding a File in a shop, began to gnaw it: The File smiled, saying,
What fool? what do thou? Thou shall wear first thy teeth, before thou
shall wear me, who do use to bite off the hardness of brass.

Of the Wolves and the Lambs.
Fab. 38.
AT a certain time, the Wolves and the Lambs had a truce, who by nature have
an enmity: hostages were given on either side, the Wolves gave their Whelps,
the Sheep gave a band of Dogs: the Sheep being in rest and feeding, the little
Wolves they howl, for the desire of their Mother, then the Wolves fall upon
them, they cry, that faith and truth was broken, and they devour the Sheep
destitute of the help of the Dogs.

Of the Wood and the Countryman.
Fab. 39.
AT what time the Trees also had their speech, the Countryman came into the
Wood, asking that he might take a handle to his Axe, the Wood grants it, the
Countryman began to cut down the trees, with a new made Axe, then truly too
late, it grieves the Woods for his light leave, she grieved that her self was
the cause of her own destruction.

Of the Belly and the rest of the Members. Fab. 40.
IN time past the Foot and the Hand accused the Belly, because that their
gains were devoured of her being idle: they command her, that either she
should labor, or she should not desire to be fed: she entreats once and
again, notwithstanding the Hands deny food; the Belly being starved with
hunger, when as all the limbs began to faint, then at the length, the hands
would needs be kind, but that was too late: for the Belly being weak for
lack of victuals, refused her meat: so whiles that all the members envy the
belly, they perish with the belly perishing.

Of the Ape and the Fox.
Fab. 41.
THe Ape prayed the Fox, that she would give part of her tail to cover her
buttocks, for says the Ape that that is a burden to her, which might be
profit and honor to the Ape, the Fixon made answer, that she had nothing too
much, and that she had rather that the ground should be swept with her tail,
then that the buttocks of the Ape should be covered therewith.

Of the Heart and the Oxen.
Fab. 42.
A Heart flying the Huntsman, took himself to a stall, and entreats the
Oxen, that he might have license* to hide himself in the crib, the Oxen say
they cannot be sure, for both the Master and the Servant will be present anon:
he says that he would be secure, so that they would not betray him, the
servant enters in and sees not the hidden Heart under the hay, and goes forth
again: then the Heart begins to rejoice and nothing now to fear: then one
of the Oxen, grave both for age and counsel, says, it was an easy thing to
deceive the servant who is as blind as a Mole, but that thou may escape my
Master who is most sharp in sight, this is the matter, this the pain:
incontinent afterward the Master comes in, who that he might redress the
oversight of the servant, looking on all things with his eyes, and groping the
crib with his hand finds the horns of the Heart under the hay, he calls in
his servants, they come running to him, and lay hands on the fierce Heart and
kill him.

Of the Lion and the Fox.
Fab. 43.
THe Lion was sick, and other beasts did visit him, only the Fixon did delay
his duty: The Lion sends a messenger unto her with a letter, the which
warned her to come, for that her only presence would be most acceptable to the
sick Lion: neither should there be any danger wherefore the Fixon should
fear: for truly says he, first of all the Lion is the greatest friend to the
Fixon, and therefore does desire her conference, and furthermore, that he was
sick and kept his bed; that although he would desire that which was not
lawful, notwithstanding he might not hurt him: the Fixon writes back again,
that she desires that the Lion may recover his health, and will pray for that
to the gods, but will not see him, and that she is terrified with his
footsteps, which footsteps, since they all are turned toward the Den of the
Lion, and none turned from it: which thing is an argument, that many beasts
have entered in, but none have gone from thence. Horat. I will declare that
which the subtle Fox heretofore answered to the sick Lion, because the
footsteps terrify me, which all look toward you, and none back again.

Of the Fox and the Wolf.
Fab. 44.
THe Fox being slender by long hunger, by chance crept through a very narrow
chinke into a barn, in the which when she was well fed, and afterward her
belly being full, hinders her assaying to get forth again: the Weesill
beholding her striving a far off, at the length she says, if she desired to
get forth, she must return to the hole empty where she came in empty.

Of the Horse and the Heart.
Fab. 45.
THe Horse waged war with the Heart, at length driven from his pastures,
requested man's help: he returns with the man, he comes into the field,
though overcommed before, now is made the conqueror: but notwithstanding his
enemy being overcome, and captivated, the conqueror must of necessity serve
man; for he bears the rider on his back; and a bit in his mouth.

FINIS.
PHAEDRVS FABLES.
The first Book of AEsops Fables, by the work of Phaedrus fri^^d to Augustus.
WHat matter or subject, AEsop the Author hereof found or invented, the self
same have I polished with Iambick verses. There is a double use of this little
Book, both for that it moves laughter, and because it directs a Wise man's
life with counsel or advise: but if any list to cavil, because not only
beasts, but also trees do speak, let him remember, that we but sport with
fained Fables.

The Wolf and the Lamb. Fab. 1.
THe Wolf and the Lamb, compelled by thirst, came to the same river, the
Wolf stood above, and the Lamb further beneath: then the villainous thief,
being stirred up by hunger sought occasion of quarrel, and said, Wherefore
did thou make this water muddy for me a drinking? the Lamb or Woollbearer
being afraid, inferred thus, How could I pray you good Master Wolf do that
which you complain of? the water runs down from you unto my draughts. He
thus convinced by the force of truth says, Before these six months thou
reviledst me: the Lamb made answer, Truly then I was not born: then by
Hercules, quoth he, thy father exclaimed upon me, and so he teareth in pieces
the Lamb apprehended with injurious death. This Fable is written for those
men, who oppress silly innocents upon forged causes.

The Frogs desired a King.
Fable 2.
When Athens flourished with equal Laws, malepart liberty marred the City,
and licentiousness let loose the ancient bridle of government, from hence
parties of diverse factions being in a conspiracy, Prince Pisistratus takes
the tower, and when the Athenians lamented that sorrowful subjection, not for
that he was cruel or tyrannous, but because it was a grievous burden to them
who were altogether unaccustomed with government, and when they begun to
complain, then AEsop told such a tale; the Frogs wandering without controlment
in marshes or ponds, desired a King of Jupiter with a loud cry, who might
repress dissolute manners by force: the father of the gods laughed, and gave
to them a little Block, which being thrown down into the ponds of a sudden,
greatly amazed the fearful nation, with motion and with rushing: when this
lay some certain time drowned with slime or mud, by chance one without noise,
puts up her head out of the pond, and having made trial of their King, she
calls all her fellows: laying aside fear, they swim to him, thick and
threefold, and so the saucy crew leaped upon their wooden god, which when they
had foully misused with all reproach, they sent to Jupiter, asking for another
King, because he who was given, proved unprofitable: then he sent to them a
water Serpent, who begun to take by violence every one of them with sharp
teeth: then the lazy Frogs in vain avoid death, and fear stops their
mouths: wherefore by stealth they prefer a supplication by Mercury unto
Jupiter, that he would help the poor afflicted: then the God Jupiter, on the
other part thus replied, since that you would not bear with your good gentle
King, endure ye now your evil. Oh ye also, oh citizens! says he, sustain
this evil patiently, lest that there come upon you a greater mischief.

The proud Iay and the Peacocke.
Fab. 3.
AESop has set forth this example, that it should not delight us to boast upon
other men's goods, but rather to lead our life, in his own condition. The Jay
swelling with vain pride, took up the feathers of a Peacock; which were
fallen down or mewed, and trimmed her-selfe therewith: afterward despising her
own kindred, associated her-selfe with the beautiful train of Peacocks: but
they take away the feathers from the foolish bird, and beat her away with their
beakes: the Jay being hardly dealt withal, began to return sorrowing, to her
own kindred, from whom being also driven away, she sets up a doleful
dittie: certain of them, whom she first despised, said, If thou had been
content with our seats, and would have suffered what nature had ordained,
neither then should thou have tried this reproach, nor thy calamity had felt
this repulse.

A Dog carrying flesh over a River.
Fab. 4.
HE loses justly his own, who so desires another man's: whilst a Dog
swimming over a flood, bore a piece of flesh, he saw his own shape in the
shining of the waters, and thinking another prey to be carried over by another
Dog, coveted to snatch at it: but his greediness was deceived, and he both
lost the meat, which he held in his mouth, neither could he attain unto that
which he much desired.

A Cow and a Goat, a Sheep and a Lion. Fab. 5.
THat there is never any faithful fellowship with a mighty man, this small
Fable witnesses this mine assertion. The Cow and the Goat and the patient,
harm*bearing Sheep, were companions with the Lion in the forest: when these
had caught an Heart of a huge stature, the Lord Lion thus inferred, (after the
division;) I choose the first part, because I am hight lord Lion; ye must give
to me the second share, in regard I am strong and puissant; then because I am
of more account, the third shall follow me: now if any touch the fourth
portion, he shall not escape scot-free: thus his only tyranny took away the
whole booty.

The Frogs to the Sun. Fab. 6.
AESop saw very sumptuous marriages of his neighbor a most notorious cunning
thief, and forthwith begun to tell this tale: once it was reported that the
Sun would marry a wife; then the Frogs took up a piteous cry even to the
heavens: Jupiter moved with their bitter exclaimes, enquireth the reason of
their complaint, then a certain inhabitant of the pond said, Oh dear
Sovereign, now one Sun burns up all our lakes, and causes us poor
wretches, to die on dry ground, alas, what will become of us, if the Sun
beget more Suns?

The Fox to a Man's Image. Fab. 7.
BY chance a Fox saw a Man's Image in stone; Oh what exquisite feature says he,
but wit it has none? This is spoken of them, whom fortune has given honor
and glory, but yet leaves them destitute of common sense.

The Wolf and the Crane. Fab. 8.
WHo so desires pay for his deserts of cruel fellows, is twice in fault,
first, because he helps the unworthy, and then, because now he cannot depart
undamnified: When as a bone swallowed, stuck fast in the throat of a Wolf,
constrained with great grief, he began to entice every one for money, that
they would draw out that bad bone: at length the Crane was persuaded by an
oath, and committing her long neck to his wessand, made with danger a medicine
for the Wolf: for which pains, when she asked earnestly a reward: Thou art
ungrateful, says the Wolf, who have drawn thy head safe from out of our
mouth, and yet requirest thou wages?

The Sparrow Counselor to the Heart.
Fab. 9.
LEt us show in few verses, that it is a folly to give counsel to other, and
not to take heed to our selves. The Sparrow did chide the Hare oppressed of the
Eagle, and sending forth grievous and bitter tears, says she, Where is now
that thy swiftness to be seen? wherefore slackened so thy feet? whilst she
speaks, the Hawke seiseth upon her unawares, and killed her crying with vain
complaints: the Hare half dead, yet in the comfort of the Sparrows death,
said, Thou that whilome wast secure and scornedst our evils, bewailest now thy
fatal destiny, with like complaint.

The Wolf and the Fox with my Lord Judge the Ape. Fab. 10.
Whosoever once is openly detected of foul deceit, although he tell truth,
notwithstanding is not believed: for so this short Fable of AEsop avoucheth it.
The Wolf charged the Fox with crime of theft: she denied, that she was
accessory to the fault: then the Ape sat Judge between them: now when both
parties had pleaded their own cause, the Ape is reported, thus to have given
judgment: You seem not to have lost what you demand, but I believe, that thou
have stolen, which so cunningly thou deniest.

The Ass and the Lion a hunting.
Fab. 11.
ONe boasting of his own praise with words, devoyd of virtue, deceives those
that know him not, but he is a laughing stock to those that know him. When as
the lord Lion would hunt accompanied with the Ass, he decked and attired him
with green leaves, and warned him also, to terrify and appall the beasts,
with an unwonted cry, that he might take them flying: he pricketh up his ears,
with a speedy shout, and with all his might, and so amazeth the little beasts,
with a new monstrous miracle, which being afraid, and whilst they seek for
their known passages, they are assailed with the horrible violence of the Lion,
who after that he was weary of the slaughter, he calls the Ass, and
commands to repress his cry: then he puffed with pride, says, How seems
this effect unto you, of my voice? so well quoth he and excellent, that unless
I had known thy courage and stock, I should have been in like fear.

The Heart at the Fountain.
Fab. 12.
THis tale averreth, that oftentimes, those things which we lightly esteem are
found more profitable, then things more commended. When the Heart had drunk he
stood still at the Fountain, and gazeth on his shape in the water, where
whilst with wonder, he praises his bowghy horns, and disableth too much, the
slender timber of his legs, he was affrighted on a sudden with the cries and
houles of Huntsmen, and began to fly through the champion, and deluded the
Hounds with swift running: at the last the wood received the wild beast,
wherein being by his horns entangled, began to be torn, with the fierce
biting of the Dogs: then dying, it is reported, he gave forth this piteous
moan: Oh I unhappy, who now at last perceive, how the legs availed me, which
I despised, and the horns which I prised, what grief have they brought me?

The Fox and the Raven.
Fab. 13.
Who so rejoices, that he is commended with glosing words, for the most part
is punished with foul remorse. When as a Raven purposed to have eaten a piece
of cheese stolen out of a window, and sitting on an high tree, the Fox did see
him, and then began thus to speak, Oh Master Raven, how great and excellent is
the beauty of your feathers! how much comeliness do you carry both in body
and countenance? If you had but a tunable voice, no Bird might be your fellow:
but he silly poor fool, whilst he coveteth to show his voice, loses the
cheese in his mouth, which quickly the crafty Fox snatched up with her greedy
teeth: then at length the astonished Crow being deceived, sighed sorrowfully:
by this Fable it is proved how much wit or policy avails, and that wisdom
always prevails above strength.

Of a Cobbler and a Physician.
Fab. 14.
When a bad Cobbler undone by poverty, began to make medicines in a strange
place, and sold restoratives in a counterfeit pretense, and had procured
himself fame by talkative juglings, when he lay visited with a sore disease,
the King of the City, for his trial, calls for a jugge, and then pretending
(a water being powered therein) that he mingled poison with his counterpoyson,
commanded him, to drink this, setting down his reward: then he confessed for
fear of death, that he was not made a Physician for any prudencie of Art, but
only made famous by the peoples wondering: the King summoning an assembly,
added moreover this: How great madness, think ye, is it, who make no scruple
to trust your heads to him, to whom no man ever gave his shoes to coble? Truly
I may say that this pertains to them, whose impudency is the purchase of
their folly.

The Ass to an old Shepherd.
Fab. 15.
OFtentimes in changing of Government, the poorer sort chang nothing besides
the manners and conditions of the Lord: that this is true, this little Fable
shows. A timorous old man fed an Ass in a meadow, he suddenly terrified with
the noise of the enemies, persuaded his Ass to fly, that he might not be
taken: but the careless Ass replied, In good sadness think you, that the
Conqueror will lay upon me double burdens? the old man denied it: therefore
said he, what care I whom I serve, whilst I carry but my own fardels?

The Sheep, the Heart, and the Wolf.
Fab. 16.
When as a cunning fellow induces men with a badde surety, he purposes not
to repay the principal, but rather to leave his creditor in the lurch. The
Heart asked the Sheep a bushel of wheat, the Wolf being surety: but she
suspecting cousenage, made answer: the Wolf always is accustomed to take away
by violence and to be gone, and you to fly out of sight with swift force:
where shall *I find you when the day of payment comes?

The Sheep, a Dog and a Wolf.
Fab. 17.
Liars and false witnesses were wont to pay punishment for their villainy. When
a certain Dog being a common Barretor, demanded of a Sheep a loaf of bread,
which bread he avouched, that he had lent him: the Wolf cited for witness,
said, that he did owe not one alone, for in truth he affirms, he owes ten:
the Sheep cast by false witness, paid what she ought not: after a few days,
the Sheep beheld the Wolf lying for dead in a ditch: says he, this reward of
deceit and lying is given of the high gods.

A Woman in Labor. Fab. 18.
NO body willingly resorteth to that place, which has harmed him. At the time
of Childbirth, a woman lay upon the bare ground, her forty weeks being
expired, sending forth most pitiful groans: her Husband exhorted, that she
would betake her body to the bed, whereby the better she might lay down the
burden of nature: I believe not, says she, that my grief can be ended in
that place, in which it was conceived in the beginning.

A Bitch a Whelping. Fab. 19.
THe fair words of an evil man have their snares, which that we may avoid,
the verses following do warn. When a Bitch great with Whelp, had desired
another Bitch, that she might lay her litter in her kennell, she obtained her
request easily: afterward she made her suit to the Bitch who required her own
place, craving but a short season, whilst she might lead away her whelps being
stronger and better able to go: this also being expired, the other began more
vehemently, to desire her own bed: well says she, if thou can match me and
my train, I will depart from this place.

Hungry Dogs. Fab. 20.
FOolish or simple counsel, not only wants success, but also calls
mortal men to destruction. Dogs saw an Hide sunk in the flood, now that
they might the more easily eat it, when they had drawn it out, they began to
drink up the water; but being first bursten, there thy perished, before that
they could attain what they desired.

An old Lion, the Bull and an Ass.
Fab. 21.
Whosoever has lost his former dignity is also a mocking stock to the base
and lazy in adversity. The Lion wasted by years and decayed of his strength,
when he was lying drawing his last breath, the Boar came upon him with
thunderbolt tuskes, and revenged his old grudge with blows: also the cruel
Bull out of hand pierced with his horns his enemies body: when the Ass saw
the Beast hurt without punishment, he kicked his forehead with his heels, but
he, breathing out his last, says, I have hardly brooked, that the strong or
the valiant should insult over me, but truly I seem twice to die, since I am
compelled to bear and suffer thee, the ignominy of nature.

A Cat and a Man. Fab. 22.
A Cat being caught of a Wariner, when she would avoid imminent death; I pray
you, says she, spare me, which cleanse for your good the house of noisome
Mice: he answered, certain I would do it, if this good turn were for my sake,
and would have forgiven thy offense: now because thou labouredst that thou
may enjoy the fragments, which they would gnaw, and also devour them, do not
count this vain matter as a good turn done to me: and so speaking, he
inflicted death upon the offender. They ought to acknowledge this spoken for
them, whose private commodity only serves themselves, and notwithstanding
boast their vain deserts, to ignorant men.

A faithful Dog. Fab. 23.
Who so is liberal of a sudden, perhaps is in request with fools, but lays
broken snares for the wise. When as in the night time a thief had cast bread
to a Dog, proving whether he might be corrupted with the meat profferred to
him: Oh quoth he, thou would stop my mouth, that I bark not for my Masters
goods; but thou art much deceived, for this thy sudden kindness warns me to
watch, lest thou make a commodity by my negligence.

The bursten Frogge and an Ox.
Fab. 24.
A Poor man perishes, whilst he will follow the rich and the mighty. In a
certain pasture, the Frogge beheld the Ox, and touched with envy at so
goodly stature, puffed-up her speckled skin; then she asked her children,
whether she was greater then the Ox; they denied it: again she stretched her
skin with greater endeavor, and enquired after the same manner, who was the
greater; they said the Ox: last of all, sore moved with wrath, and whilst she
desires to puff out herself more vehemently, she sprawled on the ground with
a bursten body.

The Dog and the Crocodile.
Fab. 25.
THey which give bad counsel to wary Wise men, both lose their labor, and
are foully derided. It is reported that Dogs in running do drink of the
River Nilus, that they may not be devoured of the cruel Crocodiles: wherefore
when a certain Bitch in running began to lap, so spoke the Crocodile: Lap what
water thou will by leisure, come hither, drink leisurely, and fear not, quoth
he, deceit; but she made answer, By Hercules I would do so, but that I know
you long for my flesh.

The Fox and the Storke.
Fab. 26.
THis small Fable warns, that we must hurt no body, but if any shall
mischief us, that we may punish them in like manner. The Fox is said to have
invited the Stork first to supper, and to have set before her a liquid broth
in a broad platter, which by no means the hungry Storke could taste of; who
when she had re-invited the Fox, set before her a long narrow neckt flaggon,
full of broken gobbets, then she putting her long beak into this is filled and
satisfied, and pineth her guest with hunger, who when she had licked in vain
the neck of the flaggon, we heard it reported, that the stranger bird spoke
after this manner: every one ought to suffer his own example with a patient
mind.

A Dog, and a Treasure and the ravenous Vulter. Fab. 27.
This matter may be very convenient for the covetous, and for them, who by
birth being low and poor, notwithstanding endeavor to be reported wealthy. A
Dog diging up man's bones, found a treasure; and because he profaned the
spirits which are divine substances, the fire of riches was cast upon him, that
he might perform punishments to the holy religion: therefore whiles he keeps
the gold, he forgets meat and consumes with hunger: overwhom the ravenous
vulter standing as report goes spoke, Oh dog, justly do thou lie for dead,
who desire on a sudden a Princes revenew, being but conceived and brought up
on a dunghill of three ways muck.

A Fox and an Eagle. Fab. 28.
ALthough men are in high estate, notwithstanding they ought to fear to
oppress the lower sort, because revenge is manifest to the ingenious, by his
industry. On a time an Eagle took up a Foxes Cubs, and laid them down in her
neast to her young ones, that they might eat: the Mother Fox following her
began to beseech her instantly, that she would not bring so great calamity
upon her poor caitifes: but she despised, because she was in a safe place:
therefore the Fox took from the Altar a burning firebrand, and therewith she
environed the whole tree with flames, threatening grief to her enemy, for the
loss of her blood: the Eagle now entreating to deliver her own from danger of
death, restored the Cubs safe to the Fox.

The Ass scorning the Boar.
Fab. 29.
OFtentimes fools, when they take up a vain laughter, defame others with sore
reproach, and provoke to themselves a mischievous danger. An Ass when he met a
Boar, said, God save you brother, he disdaining refused his kindred, and
enquireth wherefore he would lie so grossly: the Ass letting fly his heels,
made answer, Though thou deniest me to be like to thy self, yet certainly,
this is as good as thy tuskes: now when the Bore thought to make a valorous
resistance, yet refrained he his wrath, saying: Revenge is in a readiness to
me, but I will not be defiled with base lazy blood.

The Frogs fearing the wars of the Bull-battell. Fab. 30.
THe lowly are in jeopardy, when as the mighty are at variance. A Frog in her
pond, beholding the fight of Bulls, Alas, says she, how great mischief abides
us? being asked of another, wherefore she affirmed this, when as the Bulls
contended only for the Empire over the Herd, and lead a life far from them;
says she, the reason here is separate and a different kind: for whosoever
being banished from the kingdom of the Wood-land, shall fly away, will come
into the holes of the Marshes, and will press to death the Frogs, over-trodden
with his hard hoofes: and thus their fury concerns our life.

The Kite and the Pigeon.
Fab. 31.
Who so commits himself to be preserved of a tyrannous man, in seeking
succor and aid, he finds destruction. The Doves when as often they had
escaped the Kite, and had avoided death, with the swiftness of wings, then the
devourer turns his counsel into subtlety; and circumvented the unweaponed
nation with such like guile: Wherefore lead ye a miserable life, rather then ye
will create me King, league being confirmed, who may set you safe from all
injury? they being too credulous, deliver themselves to the Kite, who having
obtained the kingdom, begins to eat every one, and to exercise his Empire
with his cruel talons: then says one of the rest, deservedly are we punished.

FINIS.

