ADVICE To Young Gentlemen; OR, An Answer to the LADIES of LONDON.
To the Tune of, The Ladies of London.
This may be Printed, R. P.



ALl Jolly Blades that Inhabit the Town,
And with the fair Sex are contriving,
From the Gay Fop, to the honest bred Clown,
be advisd to resolve against Wiving;
Let not a prospect of Pleasure delude,
where so many Plagues are attending,
For it is the Nature of Wives to Obtrude,
and Miseries heap without ending
First, have a care of the Lady precise,
who exclaims against Drinking and Roaring,
That privately turns up the Whites of her Eyes
and in public abominates Whoring
But if you Coach her a mile out of Town
and quote her but Solomon's Uices;
With a slight trip you may tumble her down,
though seeming she modestly nice is.
Let no City-Girl your Freedom beguile,
she will cheat you with modest behavior,
Who sits like a Rabbit trust up for to boil,
and swears she is a Maid by her Savior:
But if you cunningly manage your Plot,
you will quickly be admitted under;
Her coy behavior will soon be forgot,
she will breath out her Soul in a slumber.


The Widow avoid where Policy lurks
pretending to act by her Conscience
That Is black as the Devil and large as a Turk's
she will tease you to Death with her Nonsense:
But if you love her and long for a Bout,
you never must stand mincing the matter,
Brush her with Iollitry briskly about,
and down with your Britches and at her.
Let not the Country wench that is coy,
insinuate into your favor
For when she knows what it is to enjoy
she quickly will change her behavior:
Turn an insatiate Miss of the Town,
to purchase Gallants she will endeavor;
Pawn from her Carcass her Paragon Gown
to maintain the courteous Pleasure.
But if your Uigor a Wife does require
and will not admit of forbearing;
Any may serve for to quench your desire,
there is no Barrel the better Herring.
When you have tied the true Lovers Knot
it is one of the Curses depending
To Father a brood you never half got,
without any further contending.


When the Wifes brought a Bed, least the Cucko grow in
the Midwife she makes an Oration
And cries the poor Infant is so like the Dad
it is worthy of your Observation;
Whilst the good Woman is pleased in her heart
to hear them so Err in their chatting,
Knowing her Husband and she was apart
when Bully, the Boy was a getting.
Now how to avoid so heavy a Curse,
I do like a Brother advise ye,
Never to take her for better for worse,
if you do, by my troth you are a Nisey,
For you without may get her consent
and never make half that Puther
Then when she is false, or her Portion is spent
you may change and make choice of another.
LONDON.

Printed for I. Back, at the Black Boy near Drawbridge on London Bridge.


