ADVICE TO THE PAINTER'S ADVISER.
WE Dogs and Lions by their Voices know,
For by their Notes themselves all Creatures show;
Yet here is a Thing I know not what to call,
He roars and barks; what is Good he curses all.
No Monster that e're yet from Africa came,
But what would start at thy prodigious Fame;
Yet we thy Name nor Pedigree can tell,
Thou dare Blaspheme beyond the Mouths of Hell.
What shall I call thee, Monster, or base Fiend,
That can daub Paper to so base an end?
Unmouth that Tougue, maugre its double Pale,
(Fit Instrument to tell the Devils Tale)
Which dared blaspheme that Sacred Majesty,
The voice of Angels joy'd to Deifie.
Foul Traitor, to bespatter such a King
With th'Aspish Poison of thy slandering,
Whose every Action (if the Truth we scan)
Speaks as much God, as his Foes find him Man?
A Prince so tender of his Subjects Good,
As would redeem the meanest with his Blood:
Heavens Joy, Earths Pride; when After-age shall tell
His Worth and Parts, 'twill want a Parallel.
Let Greece and Rome their Heroes Punies call,
Our Charles the Great I Am sure outdoes 'em all.
Cursed Caitiff, thy sharp Arrow, bitter word,
Gaul'd more than Europ's many edged Sword.
Ye Heavens look to it, he that attempts so high
As Vice-God Charles, threats Gigantomachy.
So he that stabbed famed Millain's Duke of yore,
By Practice at his Picture did no more.
But (Oh! the Devil) see the Serpent flies
To his first course, he doubles his Advice
To a poor Painter; to draw this and that,
And draws himself into the Lord knows what.
Even so those Brats of sin we blush to own,
We bring to others doors, and lay them down.
But (pox upon his Picture) to be short,
The wary White could have no color for it;
Else Hell had paid the Wages of the abuse,
His Quidlibit audendi's no excuse.
Kings failings (if they are any) ought not lie
An open Prospect for the Vulgar Eye.
He that drew Alexander's scarry Face,
Discreetly put his Finger on the place:
But where is the Artist that can frame a Line,
To Shadow or Eclipse the Glorious Shine
Of CHARLES'S Ray? what Eagle-eye can gaze
On so much Sun, or fully such a Blaze.
Illustrious in the Abstract, whose each Glance
Would strike Presumption out of Countenance;
Much less can any draw his Treasured Mind,
To every Noble Virtuous Mood inclined;
Unblemished as the Saints, the Sun less clear
In that first Shine which Summer'd all the Year:
Our Painters well knew this, who ever read over
A Face more puzling Art, a Mind much more.
Then, Devil do thy worst, with thy Advice,
CHARLES and his Court are 'bove thy Calumnies.
Powers and Dignities approach the Skies,
Like Ships the more the Waves do under rise.
But it is not each Gods-Fate alone, else why
Do Miscreants slight the Angels Ministry?
Ours is but little lower, one remove,
Vicegerent to the King of Kings above.
The best are still the most malign'd with wrong,
Virtue's no fence against a spiteful Tongue;
He spares no State, or Sex, each Princely one
Is The Object of his profanation.
Tho pure as new fallen Snow, free from offense,
As blameless Truth, and white as Innocence.
His breath blasts those, whose breath perfuming Air,
Makes all (save that) as sweet as they are fair,
Unbitter'd Bitterness it self of all.
Earth's Heavenly few, the most Angelical,
But Vice be damned, thou art like one of those,
Who giddi'd in a Ship at Sea, suppose
The Continent does move as well as they.
All tread awry to those whose Feet are splay.
If (though our thoughts are free) we must not think
Ill of the King; he that shall black his Ink,
And pale his Paper with words, startles more,
Than, Lord, have mercy, chalked upon the door.
To traduce Princes in the shapes of sin,
Wise Painters choose to draw the Devil in;
The marks of the Beasts, who casts an eye
On those (as on a Basilisk) must die.
The Mecha Pilgrims at their Prophets Tomb,
Need nothing else to make them blind or dumb.
Here now my Muse would sit as Judge at last,
And Sentence pass on every Sentence past;
But he is not worth the while, Avaunt, be gone;
Yet first attend thy Benedistion:
Thou that dare own, and do desire no Name,
But what is Registered to endless shame,
Live long in all the Plagues this World affords;
And if thou will repent and eat thy words
To choke thee; or, to give the Devil's due,
The Hangman draw thee, and thy Painter too.
FINIS.

