AN ADMONITION TO All Lying Brethren, Or A Cure for the Times. Showing the
beginning, folly, unworthiness and danger of Lying.

PSALM. V.VI. Thou shall destroy them that speak leasing: the Lord well abhor
both the bloudthirsty and deceitful man. MICAH VI.XI.XII.XIII. Shall I count
them pure with the wicked balances, and with the bag of deceitful weights?

For the rich men thereof are full of violence, and the Inhabitants thereof
have spoken lies, and their tongue is deceitful in their mouth.

Therefore also will I make thee sick in smiting thee, in making thee desolate
because of thy sins.

LONDON, Printed for J. P. 1642.

The best Cure of the Times.
AMongst other signs and predictions of the last days, that of St. Paul is
remarkable, 2 Timothy 3. This know also, that in the last deyes perilous times
shall come.

For men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud,
blasphemers, disobedient to Parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural
affection, truce breakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce, dispisers of
those that are good,

Traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasure, more than lovers of God,

Having a form of godliness; but denying the power thereof, from such turn
away, etc. How well the rest of those qualities agree with these times, let
others judge and consider. I shall only speak of that general and horrible
sin of lying and false accusation.

Lying was the first occasion of all evil in the World, when the Devil
persuaded the Woman that they should not dye. And as to mankind, so it is a
sore judgment upon a Nation, when God suffers them to be carried away with the
spirit of delusion, with the making and loving of lies. It has been the
opinion of some, that if lying were laid aside but for one month, this
Kingdoms peace (with Gods mercy) might be renewed, and if truth were once set
forward, Peace would presently meet and kiss it. And truly they do not speak
impertinently, for if dissension be compared to a fire, then lying is that
which blows the coals, and makes up the blaze, and is the only practice of
those that thrive and grow fat by the ruin of others; that instead of
quenching the fire, warm their hands at it, and say, A ha, I am warm, I have
seen the desired fire! Some Divines have distinguished them into three kinds,
A merry lie, an officious lie, a pernicious lie.

A merry lie, is when we lie for our own or others pastime, without any other
intention or harm; I can rebuke this in no better words than those of the
Apostle, Abstain from all appearance of evil; and with that of the Wiseman, We
must not offend, and say it was in sport: And since God (without any
distinction) has threatened the destruction of all lies, we must not allow our
selves liberty in any.

An officious lie, is when a man for the excuse or advantage or commendation of
his friends, shall exceed the bounds of truth. St. Austin was so curious in
this point, That when he had spoken some words of his deceased friend, which
might seem to be but an high expression or rhetorical complement; he had said,
That his soul and his friends soul were but one soul, that his life was tedious
to him after the death of his friend, because he would not live by halfes; and
yet for the same reason he feared to dye, least in him his friend should
totally perish. Yet afterward in his book of Retractations, he recanted this
speech as too lavish and affected. By this you see, what a lively and deligate
feeling good men have of the least over-lashing in this kind.

A pernicious lie, is when a man out of malice and injurious intent, shall
maintain a lie to the damage of an other man's honor, life, or fortune, and that
sometimes seconded with an oath. And as there is no sin that strikes so
dangerously at God and men, and a man's own soul as a false oath in trial of
truth; so of all sins, it should be least supposed among men, no man being
properly guilty of it, that did not forthwith turn into a devil; for how can
he otherwise choose that adds perjury to lying, and like Judas kisses the holy
Gospel and betrays it. Let all good men take advise by this, to set a door of
strength and closeness before their lips, and let nothing but truth open them,
and to be wary and circumspect where they speak every truth; for goodness lies
too open to treachery, because as they intend no harm, so they suspect none, he
that loves truth, may fear falsehood, There may be false brethren that
counterfeit Religion and discredit it. Amongst many other properties of a
Puritan, King James makes lying to be one, in his second Book called Basilicon
Doron, or the Kingly gift presented and dedicated to his Son, as his last Will
and Testament, in these words,

Take heed therefore my Son of these Puritans, the very pests of the Church and
Commonwealth, whom no deserts can oblige, neither oaths nor promises bind,
breathing nothing but sedition and calumnies, aspiring without measure, railing
without reason, and making their own imaginations without warrant of the Word,
the square of their conscience. I protest before the great God (and since I am
here as upon my last Will and Testament, it is no place for me to lie in) that
you shall never find among the Highlanders or border thieves greater
ingratitude and mor lies and viler perjuries, than among these phanaticke
spirits; and suffer not the principalls of them to brook your land, if you
list to sit at rest, except you would keep them for trying your patience, as
Socrates did an evil wife. And in the Page immediately before, I was often
calumniated in their popular sermons, not for any vice or evil that was in me,
but because I was a King, which to them is the highest evil.

Therefore if men would not have their Religion suspected, and the way of truth
to be evil spoken of, if they would be pure in heart, not pure by Art; if they
would be those that make godliness their greatest gain, not that make a gain
of godliness; then let them refrain lying as well as swearing.

But if this lying shall reflict upon sacred Majesty, if they shall calumniate
it in popular sermons (as King James) speaks, and found it by experience) if
they be so presumptuous as to speak evil of Dignities, then they may very well
own the other part of St. Judes description, and I farther refer them to the
2 Samuel 16. chap. 12 verse, Although evil can have no good reason, yet it is to
be considered, whether lying be not the greatest friend, and afford the best
countenance and apology to swearing. If frequent lying had not begot a just
incredulity, I see no reason, but the word of an honest man might have passed
for an oath. I speak not this to the least excuse of swearing, but to the
greater aggravation and damnation of lying, which yields to swearing even so
much shelter and defense.

To prove the malignity of this sin to be the higher, you shall perceive that
to promote any cause with lies, argues want of faith, and confidence in God,
want of civil faith and trust in men, want of policy, and leaves a suspicion
of guiltiness, and want of goodness in the cause.

First, want of faith in God, if they had any true affiance in the power and
protection of God, if they did at all consider that God has wisdom to
instruct, and strength and readiness to assist them, That he can turn round
the counsels of men, and make Achitophel politic against himself: If they did
seriously believe, that God can overruled the enterprises, and dissipate the
affections, and melt and amate the spirits of the strongest opposers of the
truth, they cannot so much as pretend to it, that go to promote it by lies and
forgeries.

Secondly, Next it betrays a want of civil faith and trust in men, if they
did not suspect men to be flagging from them, to be wavering and uncertain, if
they were not afraid of their friends, they would never use such unworthy means
to comfort and keep them up, fides fidem obligat, the way to make a man trusty,
is to trust him, and many men have taught others to deceive them, by being
afraid to be deceived. Pavor aurilia formidat, Fear is affrighted with her own
supplies, and suspects the very company that comes to help it: and they want
the true strength, that are feign to fortify with lies.

Thirdly, It betrays want of policy, for though lying for a while (like false
ware) be better slee'kt, and glister more, yet truth wears it out.

Although a lie may get ground at the first going out, yet truth will overtake
it, even the dullest at last will find himself to be deceived, and then men
will think them most odious and detestable that have beguiled them.

Though it may seem a trick of worldly policy to fetch in Prosolites, yet at
length they gain this gift amongst men to be mistrusted when they deal plainly,
and not to be believed when they speak truth, And so truth and honesty prove
the best policy. There is a great deal of slavery in a bad cause; it is a
miserable and wretched thing to lie and flatter, and thank, and crouch, and
fawn upon every one, not to dare to offend any, and yet to suspect all, that
they will not be faithful to them, that are themselves unfaithful: they fear
men are falling off, and therofore they fly to this poor refuge to keep them
together.

Lastly, lying leaves a suspicion and guiltiness and weakness in the cause: I
like the phancie of the Poet well, where he s^yes, That lying and spreading of
false alarums and rumors amongst the vulgar, is a sign of guiltiness.
Criminibus terrere novis hinc spargere voces,
in vulgum ambiguas, and quaerere conscius arma.
They make new treasons, and spread false Alarums,
And when themselves are guilty, take up Arms.
Lying argues weakness in the cause, and in the person, and therefore every
true soldier abhors it. Some give these two reasons why the lie should be so
hateful to a soldier. First, because it argues his cause to be such as he
ought not to dare to dye in, and therefore he is fain to maintain it with lies.
Secondly, because it shows him to be a coward, that he is afraid of men, and
dares be only valiant and presumptuous with God. Therefore let men think of
lying as meanly as they will, let them invent it as readily, and set it out as
plausibly, and disperse it as licentiously as they please, yet there is a
fearful doom upon it, They shall never enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, They
shall be reckoned amongst dogs, and murderers, and idolaters, Rev. 22.15. For
without are dogs, and sorcerers, whooremongers, and murderers, and idolaters,
and whosoever loves and makes a lie. But if they shall plainly declare
themselves to have no fear of God before their eyes, and that wotldly respects
only move them, then let them consider that they shall not be believed when
they speak truth: That Time is the wisest of all and will discover them, and
then they will be odious to them whom they have deluded, That falsehood may get
strength enough to ruin it self and others, but never long to flourish and
establish it self.

That although lying may hold up the flagge and display false colors for a
while, yet Truth will have the victory.

Magna est veritas and praevalebit.
The cause that's prop't with lies must surely fail,
Strong is the Truth, at length it will prevail.
FINIS.

