A BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF THE WHOLE WORLD.

WHEREIN Is particularly described all the Monarchies, Empires and Kingdoms of
the same, with their Academies.

AS ALSO, Their several Titles and Scituations thereunto adjoining.

Written by the Reverend Father in God, George Abbot, late Archbishop of
Canterbury.

The Fifth Eddition.

LONDON, Printed for Margaret Sheares, at the Blew Bible in Bedford-Street in
Coven-Garden, and John Play^ere at the White-Beare in the upper Walk in the
New-Exchange.

1664.

A Brief Description of the whole World.
THe Globe of the Earth does either show the Sea or Land. The Sea Of the seas.
general, is called by the name or Ocean, which coasteth all the World, and
takes his name in special, either of the place near The diverse names given
to the seas, and the reason why.
which it comes, as Oceanus Britanicus, Mare Germanicum, Sinus Perficus, Mare
Atlanticum, of the Hill Atlas, in the West part of Afric: or of the finder
out, as Fretum Magellanicum; or of some other accident, as the Red Sea, because
the sand is red, Mare Mediterraneum, because it runs between the lands of
Europe and Afric, Mare Icarium, because Icarus was drowned there, or the
like. There be some few Seas which have no intercourse with the Ocean, as Mare
Mortuum, near Palestina, Mare Caspium sive Hircanum, not far from Armenia: and
such a one is said to be in the North part of America.

The Straits or Narrow Seas, are Of the straits or Narrow Seas.
noted in the Latin by the name of Fretum, as Fretum Britannicum. The English
Narrow Seas, Fretum Herculeum, the Straights between, Barbary and Spain;
Fretum Magellanicum, etc.

The Earth is either Islands, Of the Earth.
which are those which are wholly compassed by the Sea, as Britannia, Sicilia,
Corsica; or the Continent, which is called in the English, The firm Land, in
the Latin, Continens.

The old known firm Land was contained only in Asia, Europe, and Africa.
Europe is divided from Africa by the Mediterranean Sea; from Asia by the River
Tanais: whereby appears, that the North parts of Asia and Europe in old time
were but little known and discovered.

Africa is divided from Europe by the Mediterranean Sea; from Asia by the River
Nilus: and so Asia by Tanais and Nilus, is severed from Europe and Afric.

Of Spain.
TO say nothing of England and Ireland, the most Western Country of Europe,
How Spain is bounded.
is Spain, which is bounded on the South with the Mediterranean, on the West
with the Atlanticke, on the North with Oceanus Cantabricus, or the Spanish
Seas, on the East with France, from which it is severed with certain
Mountains, called Montes Pyrenei, or the Pyrenay hills.

If we should enquire into the times that were before the coming of the
Carthaginians and Romans into Spain, we shall find nothing but that which is
either fabulous, or near to sables: here it The original name of the Country
of Spain.
was first called Iberia, ab Ibero flumine, afterward Hispania, ab Hispane, we
may take as a tradition: but their Gargoris their Ha bis, their Geryon exceed
belief of any, but those that will take all reports on trust. It is certain
that the Syrians planted a Colony there in the Isle of Gades, corruptly now
called Cadiz, or Cales: These troubled by their Neighbors desired aid of the
Carthaginians, a flourishing neighbor Commonwealth, descended of the Syrians,
as well as themselves, who sent first to defend the Gaditanes against their
neighbors, afterward heartned on by Carthaginians sent to defend the
Gaditanes.
their success in their first Expedi tion; these Carthaginians succes sively
sent thither three Captains, Hamilcar, Hasdrubal, and Hanibal who for the most
part subdued the Province and held it, till by Scipio's and the Romans Forces
they were dispossessed of it: Yet for many years after the fortunes of the
Romans stuck as it were in the subduing of that* Province, so that from the
time of ^he second Punick war, until the time of Augustus, they had business
made them in that Country continually, neither could they till then bring it
peaceably into the form of a Province.

It continued a Province of the Spain once a Province of the Roman Empire
Roman Empire until the time of Honorius the Emperor, in whose days the
Vandals came into it, conquering and making it theirs; then the Goths (the
Vandals either driven out, or called over into Africa*) entering erected there a
Kingdom, which flourished for many years, till by the coming Sarazens and
Moors erected it a Kingdom.
of the Saracens and Moors, their Kingdom was broken, who settling themselves
in Spain, erected it a Kingdom, changed the names of many places and Rivers
and gave them new names, such as they retain to this day, and continued for
the space of some hundred of years mighty in that Country, till they were
first subdued by Ferdinand: They were utterly expelled by Philip the T^ird.
afterward, and that now lately utterly expelled by Philip the Third.

After the coming in of these Africans in this Country, there were many
Kingdoms, as the Kingdom of Portugal toward the West; the Kingdom of
Granado toward the South; the Kingdom of Navarre and Arragon toward the East;
and the Kingdom of Castile in the middle of the Land: but the whole Dominion
is now under the King of Spain.

As Damalanus a Goes does write in the Treatise entitled, Hispania, Spain in
^ormer time twelve several Kingdoms.
there were in times past twelve several Kingdoms in Spain, which he names
thus: Castellae antiquae and novae, Leonis, Aragoniae, Portugalliae, Navarrae,
Granatae, Valentiae, Toleti, Galitiae, Algarbi^rum, Murtiae, Cordubae: which is
not to be wondered at, since in England, a far less Country, there were in
the time of the Saxons seven several Kingdoms and Monarchies.

In the best Maps of Spain, the Arms of these several Kingdoms do yet
distinctly appear: where for the Arms of Leons is given a Lion, which
manifestly argues, that whereas by some it is called Regnum Legionis, that
name is false, for it is Leonis, surable thereunto: for the Arms of Castile is
given a Castle, which was the cause that John of Gaunt, Son to Edward the
Third, King of England, did quarter with the Arms of England, the Castle and
the Lion, as having married Constance Daughter to Peter King of Castile; and at
this day the first and chief Coat of the King of Spain is a Castle quartered
with a Lion, in remembrance of the two Kingdoms of Castile and Leons.

In Corduba (as in times past it was called) stands Andaluzia, near unto
which the Island called properly Gades, but since; by depravation of the word
Cadiz, and commonly Cales, which was lately surprised by the English. The
Kingdom of Granada, which lies Granada 700. years Possessed by the Moors
Sarazens.
nearest to the Mediterranean, was by the space of seven hundred years
possessed by the Moors and Saracens, who do profess the Re^igion of Mahomet:
the reason whereof Rodericus Toletanus in the third (...).
book of history does show to be this; that whereas the Sarazens after Mahomets
time, had spread themselves all along Afric, even unto the Western part of
Barbary, a King of Spain called Rodericus, employed (in an Embassage to them)
one Julian, a Nobleman of his, who by his wise Demeanor, procured much
Reputation amongst the Moors; but in the time of his service, the King
Rodericus defloured the Daughter of the said Julian; which the Father took in
such indignation, that he procured those Saracens to come over into Spain,
that so he might be revenged on his King; but when those barbarous people had
once set foot in there, they could never be removed, until the time of
Ferdinando and Elizabeth, King and Queen of Spain, about a hundred years since.

The Author before named writes, that before the coming of those Moors into
Spain, the King Rodericus would needs open a part of a Palace which had been
shut long before, and had by descent from hand to hand been forbidden to be
entered by any: yet the King, supposing there had been great Treasure therein
broke into it, but found nothing there, saving in a great Chest, the Pictures
of Men, who resembled the proportion, Attire, and Armor of the Moors, A
strange and unexpected prophecy.
and a Prophecy joined therewithal, that at that time, when the Palace should
be entered, such a people as was there resembled, should invade and spoil
Spain, which fell out accordingly.

The Spaniards that now are, be a* very mixed people, descended of the Goths,
which in former times possessed that Land, and of those Sarazens and Jews,
which are the basest people of the World. Portugal added to the Kingdom of
Spain.


The Kingdom of Portugal d^d contain under it Regnum Algarbi^rum, but both
of them are now annexed unto Castile by the cun^ing of the K ng of Spain,
Philip he Second, who took the advantage after the death of Sebastian, who was
slain in Barbary; in the year 1578. Then after him reigned Henry who sometimes
was Cardinal, and Uncle to Sebastian; in whose time, although show was made
that it should be lawfully debared, unto whom the Crown of Portugal did belong,
yet Philip meaning to make sure work, did not so much respect the right, as by
maine force invaded, and since (to the great grief of the Portugals) has kept
it. The chief City of Portugal Lisbone the chief City of Portugal
is Lisbone, called in Latin Olysippo, from whence those Navigations were
advanced, by which the Portugals discovered so much of their South part of
Africa, and of the East Indies, possessed by them to this day. The City from
whence the Castilians do set forth their Sevill.
ships to the West Indies is Sevill, called in Latin Hispalis. Another Toledo.
great City in Spain is Toledo, where the Archbishopric is the richest
spiritual dignity of Christendom, the Papacy only excepted. The Magnificent
greatness of Spain and Portugal.


In the time of Damianus a Goes, there were reckoned to be in Spain four
Archbishopricks of great worth, three other inferior, and forty Bishoprics;
as also in Portugal, three Archbishopricks, and eight Bishoprics. He reckons
up also in Spain (besides the great Officers of the Crown) 17 Dukes, 41.
Marquesses, 87. Earls or Counts, and 9. Vicounts: as also in Portugal (besides
the Officers of the Crown) fix Dukes, four Marquesses, nineteen Earls, and one
Vicount. In Spain he says are seven Universities. The Country is but dry, and
so consequently barren, in comparison of some other places. What commodities it
does yield, it may be seen in a Treatise of Damianus a Goes, which he calls
his Hispania.

Not only this great and large Country heretofore divided into so many
Kingdoms, is now under one absolute King, but that King also is Lord of many
other Territories: as namely, of the Kingdom of Naples in Italy and the Duchy
of Millain, of the Isles of Sicily, Sardinia, Majorque, Minorque, Evisa, in the
midland sea; of the Islands of the Canaries in the Atlantique, besides diverse
strong Towns and goodly Havens in Barbary, within and without the Straits On
the back side of Africa he commands much on the Frontiery, besides the Islands
adjoining to the maine Land. In the Western Indies, he has Mexico, Brasil,
large Territories, with the Islands of the South, and the North Sea. And Philip
the second getting Portugal as a Dowry to that so^ct Marriage, got also all
the dependances of that Crown in Afric the East Indies, and the Atlantique
Sea, the Towns of Barbary, and the East Indies, willingly submitting themselves
unto him, but the Terceras he won by force at the first and second Expedition:
so if we consider the huge tract of ground that is The Empery of the Kingdom
of Spain the greatest in the^ ^an world.
under the Kings Dominion, we will say that the Empery of the King of Spain
is, in that respect, the largest that now is, or ever was in the World.

Of France.
THe next Country is France France how bounded.
which is bounded on the west with the Pyrenay hills, on the North with the
English Seas, on the East with Germany, on the South-east with the Alpe-hils,
on the South-west with the Mediterranean Sea.

The Kingdom of France is for France one of the most absolute Kingdoms of the
world.
one entire thing, one of the most rich and absolute Monarchies of the World,
having both on the North and South side the Sea standing very convenient for
profit of Navigation, and the Land it self being ordinarily very fruitful. The
consideration whereof caused Francis the first King of France, to compare this
Kingdom alone to all the Dominions and Seigniories of Charles the fifth
Emperor; for when the Herald of the said Charles, bidding Defiance to the King
Francis, did give his Majesty the title of Emperor of Germany, King of
Castaile, Arragon, Naples, Sicily, etc. Francis commanded his Herald to call
him so often King of France as the others had Titles by all his Countries;
implying that France alone was of as much strength and worth as all the
Countries which the other had.

Concerning this Argument, see the warlike and politic Discourses of Monsieur
de la Nove. He who writes the Commentaries of Religion, and state of France,
does show, that when there had been of late in France, in the days of Francis
the Second, and Charles the Ninth, three Civil Wars, Civil wars in France.
which had much ruinated the glory and beauty of that Kingdom, when a little
before the great Massacre, in the year One thousand five hundred seventy two,
there had been peace in that Country scant full two years, yet so great is
the riches and happiness of that Kingdom, that in that short time, all things
were renewed and repaired again, as if there had never been any such desolation.

The Revenue of the Crown of Revenue of the Crown of France exceeding great.
France is exceeding great, by reason of the Taxes and impositions, which
through the whole Kingdom are laid upon the Subjects: for their Sizes and
Toules do exceed all the Imposts and tributes of all the Princes of
Christendom; in as much as there are few things there used, but the King has
a commodity issuing out of them; and not only for matters of Luxury, as in
other states, but from such things as be of necessity, as Flesh, Wood, Salt,
etc. It is supposed at this day, that there be in the Kingdom thirty thousand
men, who are underofficers, and make a good part of their living by gathering
of the Kings tribute: This is much increased no doubt in these latter times:
but yet of old it was in so great measure, which caused that speech of
Maximilian the Emperor, as Johannes Eventinus witnesses, De Bello Turcico,
who said, that the Emperor of Germany was Rex Regum, meaning that his Princes
were so great men.

The King of Spain was Rex Hominum, because his People would obey their Prince
in any reasonable moderation.

The King of England was Rex diabolorum, because the subjects had there diverse
times deprived their Kings of their Crowns and Dignity. But the King of France
was R^x asinorum, in as much as his people did bear very heavy B^thens of
Taxes and Impositions. In this Kingdom of France is one great Misery In France
the Offices of Justice bought and sold.
to the Subjects, that the places and Officers of Justice are ordinarily bought
and sold, the beginning whereof was this: Lewis the twelfth, who was called a
Father of the Country began to pay the debts of his Predecessor, Charles the
seventh, ( which were very great) and intending to recover unto France the
Dukedom of Millain, and minding not to burden his people further than was
need, thought it a good course to set at sale all the Offices of the Crown; but
with the places of Justice he did not meddle. But his successors after him took
occasion also to make great profit of them, witness the Author contra
Machiavel. The Custom of France for mustering and pressing Soldiers.
l. 1. c. 1. By the customs of that Country, the King of France has not that
absolute power to muster and press out Soldiers as in England, and some other
places of Christendom the Princes have: But the manner is, when the King will
set forward any Military Service, he sends abroad his Edicts, or causes in
Cities and good Towns, the Drum to be stricken up, and whosoever will
voluntarily follow, he is enrolled. Notwithstanding he wanted few Soldiers,
because the Noble and Gentlemen of France do hold it their duty, and highest
honor, both to attend the King unto the wars, and to bear their own charges
yearly for many months. The person of the King of France has in former times
been reputed so sacred, that Guicciardine says of them, that their people have
regarded them in that respect of devotion, as if they had been demigods. And
Machiavel in his Questions upon Livie, says, that they doted so much upon
their Kings, that they thought every thing did become them which they did, and
that nothing could be more disgraceful, than to give any intimation, that such
or such a thing was not well done by their King. But this opinion is much now
decayed, the Princes of the blood are in the next rank under the King himself.

There be many and very rich goodly Cities in France, but the chiefest of all
is Paris, called Lutetia, Paris the chief City France.
quasi Luto sita, as some have merrily spoken: which place is especially
honored, first by the presence of the King, most commonly keeping Court and
Residence there. Secondly, by the great store of goodly houses, whereof part
belong to Noblemen, and part are houses of Religion. Thirdly, by the University
which is incomparably the greatest, most ancient, and best filled of al^
France. Fourthly, in that it is the chief Parliament City of that Kingdom,
without the Ratification of which Parliament at Paris, Edicts and Proclamations
coming from the King are not held authentical. Fifthly, by the great Traffic
of all kind of Merchandise which is used in that place.

The Parliament Cities in France, are places where their Terms are kept, and
in several Provinces are seven, unto which the causes of inferior Courts
within their distinct Provinces. may be brought by appeal; but the Parliament
of Paris has that Prerogative, that appeals from all Courts of the Kingdom
do lie there. That which we call our Parliament in England, is amongst them
termed Conventus Ordinum, or the States.

France in ancient time* (as Caesar reports in the first of his Commentaries)
The Kingdom of France divided into three parts.
was divided into three parts; Aquitania, which was toward the West; Celtica
toward the North and West; and Belgica which is toward the North. Belgium is
sometime called Gallia inferior, and sometime Germania inforior, but we
commonly call it the Low Countries: the Government whereof at this day, is not
at all under France, but Gallia Celtica, and Aquitania, are under the French
King.

The ancient Inhabitants of this Gauls, the ancient inhabitants of France.
Country, were the Gauls, who possessed not only all that we now call France,
being the greatest part of that the Romans called Gallia Transalpina, but also
a good part of Italy, which they call Gallia Cisalpina, a people whose
beginnings are unknown: this of them is certain, that they were a Nation of
valour^ for they not only sacked Rome, bu^ also carried their conquering arme^
into Greece, where they sat down^ and were called by the Name o^
Gallogrecians, or Galathians.

Some report also, that they en^ tred into Spain, and subdued an^ inhabited
that part which was cal^ led Lusitania, now Portugallia; bu^ howsoever their
former victori^ and greatness, they were by Iuli^ Caesar subdued, and made a
Provin^ of the people of Rome, and so co^ tinued under the Roman Empi^ till
about four hundred years af^ ter Christ, when in the ruin an dismembring of
the Roman Empir^ the French invaded Gaul, and er^ cted a Monarchy, which has
co^ tinued to this day in the succession of sixty four Kings, of three sev^ ral
races; that is to say, the Mer^ vingians, Carolovingians, and Cap^ vingians,
about twelve hundre years, and now flourishes under Lewis the 13. the now
reigning K^ of France.

Although the French have done many things worthily out of their own Country,
in the East against the Saracens, although they have ^or a while held Sicily,
the Kingdom of Naples, and the Duchy of Millaine, yet it has been observed
of them, that they could never make good their footing beyond the Alps, or in
other for reign Regions; Howbeit in it self, France is one of the strongest
Kingdoms in all Europe at this day.

That which we commonly call the Low Countries, contains seventeen several
Provinces, whereof the most part have several titles and Governors, as the
Dukedom of Brabant, the Earldom of Flanders, etc. Of which the inheritance
at several times, did fall on Daughters, who being married unto the Heir of
some of the other Provinces, did in the end bring the whole Country into one
entire Government, which was commonly called by the name of the Dukedom of
Burgundy; and yet so, that in the uniting of them together, it was by
composition agreed, that the several Provinces should retain their several
ancient Laws and Liberties, which is the reason yielded, why some of those
Provinces in our age, think themselves freed from obedience unto the King of
Spain, unto Note.
whom by inheritance they did descend, because he has violated their
liberties, to the keeping whereof, a^ the first composition, he was bound. When
this whole Country did be* long unto the Crown of France, the* Dukedom of
Burgundy was bestowed by Philip de Valois, K. of France, unto John de Valois, a
younger So^ of his, from whom by descent i^ came at last to Charles the Bold,
otherwise Proud Duke of Burgundy, who left one only Daughter, and she was
married to Maximilian the Emperor, of the house of Austria, from, whom the
inheritance descended unto Charles the fifth, Emperor, who yielding it over to
his Son Philip the second, did charge him to entreat that people well; which he
forgetting to do, under pretense of rooting out the profession of Religion did
entangle himself, and all that Country with a very long, bloody, and
wearisome war.

There is no part of Europe, which The riches of the states in General.
for the quantity of the ground does yield so much riches and commodities, as
the Low Countries do, besides their infinite store of shipping, wherein they
exceed any Prince of Christendom. They were in time past accounted a very
heavy dull people; and unfit for the Wars, but their continual combating with
the Spaniards, has made them now very ingenious, full of action, and managers
of great causes appertaining to fights, either by sea or land. The 17 Provinces
are these; Braba^t, Gelderla^d, The names of the 17 Provinces.
Artois, Valencois, Luxenburg Flanders, Henault, Lile, Namurce, Holland,
Zeland, Tornabu^, Tornacetium, Mechlin, Utrecht, and the East and West
Freezeland.

France has many petty Governments that do border upon it; as the Dukedom of
Savoy, the State of the Switzers, the Dukedom of Lorraine, the Burgundians, or
Walloons, against all which, the King is forced to keep his frontier Towns.

There is nothing more famous in this Kingdom then the Salique law, whereby it
is provided, that no woman, nor the heir of her (as in her right) shall enjoy
the Crown of France, but it goes always to the Heir Male.

The Author of the Commentaries against Machiavel, reputeth it a great blessing
of GOD, that they have the Salique Law in France, and that not so much (says
he) because Woman by the infirmity of their Sex, are unfit to govern, for
therein many men, who have enjoyed Kingdoms, have been, and are very
defective: but because by that means the Crown of France is never endangered
by Marriage of a forraigner, to come under the subjection of a stranger. And
this is the opinion of Philip de Comines, in the 8 Book of his Commentaries,
This Law is very ancient among them, so that it cannot certainly be defined
when it was Enacted, but By this Law Ed. the 3* K of England, was put by the
Crown France.
by virtue thereof, Edward the 3. King of England, and his Heirs, were cut off
from inheriting the Crown of France, whereunto by marriage of a Daughter, he
was Heir in general. And by reason of this Law, Henry the fourth, late King
of France, rather enjoyed that Dominion, than the Son of the Duke of
Lorraigne, who-was nearer of blood by descending from the Elder Daughter of
King Henry the second.

The Switzers are a People called The Switzers Government.
in old time, Helvetii, who have no Noblemen, or Gentlemen among them, but only
the Citizens of their Towns, the yearly Officers whereof, and their Council,
do govern their State. 23 Cities or Cantons in Switzerland.


There are in Switzerland 23 Cities or Towns, which they call their Cantons;
although some rather think that name properly does signify the Rulers of those
Towns, and of them some do retain to this day the Romish Religion, but some
others have embraced the Gospel. The Country where they live, is not very
fertile, and being far from any Seas, they have no vent for their people, but
by sending them forth as hired soldiers, which for their pay do fight
oftentimes in Italy and France, and sometimes in Germany. Near unto one part
of them, stands Geneva, which is challenged by Geneva:
the Duke of Savoy, to have heretofore belonged to his Dominion; but they
pretend themselves to be a free City; and by the help of Protestant Princes,
but especially by some of the Helvetians, do so maintain A rare and excellent
Law.
it. In this place there is a rare Law, that if any Malefactor who has fled
out of his own Country, be convinced of any grievous crime he suffers there,
as if he were in his own Country: Which they are forced to do, because their
Cities would be full of all sorts of Runnagates, in as much as they stand on
the confines of diverse Princes and States.

Of Germany.
THE next Country unto France, on the East side, is Germany, which is bounded
Germany how bounded.
on the West with France, and the Low Countries; on the North with Denmark, and
the Danish Seas, on the East with Prussia, Polonia, and Hungary; on the
South-East, with Istria and Illyricum; on the South with the Alpehils, and with
Italy.

The Governor General of this Country, is called the Emperor of The Emperor
Governor of Germany. Who be the seven Electors.
Germany, who is chosen by three spiritual Princes; the Archbishop of Collen,
called Coloniensis, the Archbishop of Ments, called Moguxtinus, and the
Archbishop of Trevers, called Treverensis; and three temporal Princes, the
Duke of Saxony, the Marquess of Brandenburgh, and the Count Palatine of Rhene;
which if they cannot agree, as to make a major part in their election, then the
King of Bohemia has also a voice, whereof it comes to be said, that there be
seven Princes Electors of the Empire. His manner of Election.


The manner of the choice of the Emperor, was established by a Decree, which is
commonly called Bulla Aurea, which was made by Charles the 4 Emperor of
Germany, and King of Bohemia, wherein he does set down all the circumstances of
the Election of the Emperor, and appoints the King of Bohemia to be Sacri
Imperii Archipincerna, which is the Cup Bearer.

The 3 Bishops of Colen, Ments, and Trevers, to be the Arch-Chancellours, of
the three several parts of the Empire; the Count Palatine of the Rhene, to be
Sacri Imperii, Archidapifer, which should have the setting on of the first
dish, the Duke of Saxony to be Sacri Imperii Archimariscallus, whose office is
to bear the sword, and the Marquess of Brandenburgh to be Sacri Imperii
Archi-Camerarius, or great Chamberlain; all which Offices they supply on the
day of the Emperors Coronation.

It appears by all the Roman The Empire went sometimes by succession and
sometimes by election.
Stories, that in times past, the Empire went sometimes by succession, as unto
the Sons of Constantine and Theodosius, sometimes by Election, and that either
of the Senate, or of the Soldiers, who oftentimes also in mutiny did elect men
unworthy, yet such as fitted their purpose: But now of late, the Electors do
choose some Prince of Christendom, who has otherwise a Dominion of his own,
which may help to back out the Empire, and therein of late has appeared the
great cunning of that which we call the house of Austria* whose greatest title
within this 300 years, was to be a mean Count of a mean place, namely the
County of Haspurg. But since that time, they have so planted and strengthened
themselves, that there have been 7 or 8 Emperors lately of that family; but
the Empire is not tied unto them, as may appear by the possibility, which the
Duke of Saxony, and Francis the great King of France, had to ascend to that
Dignity.

When Charles the fifth was chosen Emperor, one of the means whereby the
possession has been continued to that house has been the electing of some one
to be Rex Romanorum, whilst another of his Family was Emperor, which Charles
the fifth effected in his life time for his Brother Ferdinandus, Ferdin Em^eror.
who after succeeded him; and that has been the attempt of Albertus late
Cardinal, and now Archduke of Austria, that he might be established in the
hope of the Empire, during the life of his brother (...) the Second, now
Emperor and King of Bohemia: Rex Romanorum is he, who is f^rre already
invested in title to the Empire, so that upon the death, resignation, or
deposition of the then being Emperor, he is immediately to succeed.

He who is, now Emperor of Germany, is called Caesar, or Romani Imperii Caesar,
or Romani Imperii Imperator.
Imperator, but very improperly, in as much as the case is far different from
that which was when the Roman Empire did flourish; for then the Territories
thereof were very great, all under the Regiment of one man, unless it pleased
him to associate to himself some other. But The Empire divided by Theodosius.
Theodosius did divide the Empire into two soveraignties, which were called the
East and West Empires, and made Constantinople to be the chief seat of
Arcadius, one of his sons, and Rome to be the principal City, of Honorius, the
other; which Western Empire continued in his glory but a while; for the Goths
and Lombards, and other barbarous People, did both overrun it, and as good as
extinguish it; in the which case it continued to the days of Charles the
Great, who revived it again: but although there was some show of Dominion,
belonging unto him in Italy, yet his principal residence was in France, and his
successors after him, removed A great policy in the Bishops of Rome.
it into Germany; so that properly he is now to be called Imperator Germanorum.
It was a great policy of the Bishops of Rome, that the Emperor was wrought to
leave Italy, and keep himself in Germany; for the Popes did not like to have a
strong Neighbor so near, who might at his pleasure chastise or depose them, if
he saw good.

And the eunning of those Popes was such also, that they weakened the state of
the Emperor exceeding much in Germany, by giving great exemptions to the
Princes thereof, insomuch, that Munster rightly Munsters complaint.
complains. The Emperor bears the Spread Eagle with two heads, noting the
East and West Empire; but (says he) one of the heads is quite pulled off; and
so be almost all the feathers, and in the other head, although life remains,
yet there is little spirit or vigor.

Surius in his Commentaries of the year 1530. reports, that to the Emperor
of Germany belongs three Crowns: The one of Silver, which intends the
Kingdom of Germany: The second of Iron, which is for the Kingdom of Lombardy:
And the third of Gold, which is for the Sacred Roman Empire.

In Germany all are at a kind of Most of the Princes of Germany, take onthem as
absolute Governors
commandment of the Emperor: but most of the Princes otherwise take on them
as absolute Governors in their Dominions: so that they have liberty of
Religion; they do make Laws, they do raise soldiers, they do stamp money
with their own pictures, as absolute Princes? so does the Duke of Saxony, the
Archbishop of Colen, and the rest.

The Princes of Germany came to that great strength of theirs, by means of a
base and inferior man, who aspiring to the Empire (whereof How they came by a
great strength.
he was unworthy) was content to release unto the Princes, almost all kind of
their service and duty; so that their subjection since that time, is little
more then titulary, yielding only very small maintenance to the Empire, either
in tribute, soldiers, or otherwise: and albeit sometimes they refuse not to
come by themselves, or their Agents to the Diets, and Parliaments, holden by
the Emperor, yet that is as much for the safeguard of themselves from the
invasion of the Turk, who is not far from them, as for any other respect; and
the pay which they allow in such cases, is rather held by them to be a
contribution, than any imposition to be admitted by duty: and yet there is
extant a book where the particulars are mentioned, how the Princes and free
Cities are bound to maintain upon their own charge, three thousand eight
hundred forty two horses, and sixteen thousand two hundred foot, for the
service of the Emperor, when he shall see cause; but how small a trifle is
that, in respect of the strength of so huge a Country?

The Princes themselves are so The strengh of the Princes of Germany.
strong many of them, that they dare encounter with any who oppugn them,
insomuch, that whereas Charles the fifth, was doubtless the greatest Emperor
that had been from the days of Charles the Great, yet the Duke of Saxony, and
the Lantsgrave of Hassia, with some few Cities which were confederate with
them, did dare to oppose themselves against the said Charles: and entering the
field with him did oftentimes put him to great inconveniences: yea, it is
supposed by some, that howsoever he had a hand upon these two, yet his
inability to match the rufling of some of those Princes, was not the least
cause, why he resigned the Empire to his brother Ferdinando. The titles of
their Nobility.


The manner of Germany is, that the Title of Nobility which is in the Father,
commonly is imparted to all the Sons: so that every Son of a Duke of
Saxony, is called Duke of Saxony; and every Child of the Count of Mansfield, is
honored by the name of Count or Countes^e of Mansfield: but in the eldest House
the chief Livelihood does remain, for keeping upright the dignity of the
Family. Free States and Cities*


There are also Free States and Cities, which have the same Authority, as
Argentine, Franckeford, and others.

This is to be noted of the Germans; A Note worthy of observation.
that they may boast this above other more Westernly Nations of Europe, that
they are an unmixed Nation: for whereas the Lombards and Goths at several
times, have set down in Italy, and mixed themselves with the people thereof,
the Goths, Vandals, and Saracens in Spain, the Francks in Gaul or France,
and the Normanes also; the Saxons, Angles, Danes and Normanes, in Great
Britain; they have been free from such inundation and mixture; yea, many of
the people that have afflicted and inhabited these other Nations, have come
from thence, so that therein Germany has an advantage of these other Nations
that have been subject hereunto.

Of Italy.
ON the South side of the Situation of Italy.
Alps and Germany, lies Italy, stretching it self out at length toward the
South and East. It has on the South side, the Island of Sicilia; on the East
that part of the Mediterranean which is called Mare Adriaticum, or Mare
superum, which severeth Italy from Grecia: on the West side that part of the
Mediterranean, which is called Mare Tyrrhenum, or Mare Inferum; and the upper
or more Northen part of it near Liguria, Mare Ligusticum.

This Country for the figure thereof, is by some likened unto a long leaf of a
tree. It has in the middle of it, which goes all in length a mighty mountain,
named Mons Apen^inus, which is likened unto the Spina, or Ridge-bone of the
back. Out of this Hill spring diverse Rivers, which run on both sides of it,
into the Adriaticke, and Tyrrhene, or Tuscane Seas.

As in other Countries, so in Italy in times past, there were diverse several
people, and several Provinces, like our Shires in England, and so there be at
this day: but the main Italy divided into four parts.
division of Italy, is properly into four parts, as in our age we do account
it. The first Lombardy, which lies to the North. The second Tuscane, which
boundeth toward the Mediterranean Sea, which way Corsica the Island lies. The
third is the Land of the Church, which is the Territory of the Bishop of Rome,
and contains in it that which is called Romania. The fourth is Naples, and in
this division, now is all Italy comprehended.

The North part of this Italy, is that, which in ancient time was called Gallia
Togata, or Gallia Cisalpina, inhabited then by French men. It is now called
Longobardia, or Lombardia, wherein stand many rich Governments, as the Dukedom
of Millain, of Mantua, of Florence, and others. It is for the pleasantness
thereof, in respect of the soil, air* waters, and great variety of wines, and
fruits, likened now by some to Lombardy the Garden of God.
Paradise, or the Garden of God.

In this Italy, which was heretofore one entire Government, in the flourishing
estate of the Romans, are now many absolute States and Princedomes, by the
great policy o^ the Bishop of Rome, who thought The policy of the Bishop of
Rome.
it the best way to make himself great, to weaken the Empire. So he has not
only driven the Emperor out of all Italy into Germany* but ^ath diminished his
Majesty in both by making so many petty Governments, which hold themselves
sovereign Rulers, without relation to any other.

As there are many States in Italy, The States of Venice.
so one of the chiefest are the Venetians, called Resp Venetorum, or the State
of Venice, because they are not governed by any one, but by their Senate and
Gentlemen, although whey have a Duke, with those stamp their money is coined,
and in whose name all their executions of Justice are done. But this Duke is
every way limited by the State.

This City of Venice which joineth to a corner of Lombardy, stands in
Estuarium, or shallow of Earth, in the North part of the Adriaticke Sea, so
safely, that it is held invincible. There is in it but one street of firm
Land; into the other, the Sea does flow at every tide. They have been a great
and rich State, not only possessing much in Italy, as Padu^ their University,
and other things which still they do, but a great part of Illyricum, and many
rich Islands in the Mediterranean, as Candy called commonly Creta, Cyprus,
Zazinthus, and others.

But Cyprus was taken from them a little before that fight at sea, wherein Don
John of Austria, together with the Venetians, had so renowned a victory against
the Turk, at the fight near Lepanto.

The impoverishing of their State, The Venetians impoverished.
has partly been by the incroaching of the Turk, but especially by the
decaying of that Traffic which they had to Alexandria in Egypt for their
spices, and other riches of Persia, Arabia, and the East Indies since the
course of the Portugals to those Eastern Countries has been by Sea, by the
backside of Africa.

These Venetians, which in times past were great Warriors, do now altogether
decline enmity or hostility with all other Princes adjoining, and therefore by
all means do take up quarrels, and cease controversies, by wisdom and
patience, temporising with the Turk, the King of Spain, and the Emperor, who
are most like to offend them.

The manner of their Government The ex ^llency of their Government.
and the excellent course which they have in choosing their Duke is written by
Contarenus, and some others of their Countrymen. When they do make any wars,
they seldom send forth any General of their own but entertain some Prince of
Italy, who is renowned for the wars.

In Lombardy stands also the Dukedom of Millain, a most rich and pleasant
thing, which sometime had bin governed by a Duke of their own, but of late has
been possessed by the Spaniard and sometime by the French, and is now in the
Government and possession of the K. of Spain. Tuscany. Florence.


In Tuscany the Chief City, and Commander of all the rest, is Florence, where
is supposed to be the best Language of Italy, called the vulgar Italian, and
the most circumspect policy of all the Governments of Christendom, which has
much bin increased since the time of Machiavel, who was Secretary or Recorder
to that State. This was in times past ^ free City, but of late by the policy of
the Family of the Medices, it is brought under the subjection of a Duke, which
raig^eth as an absolute Prince, and by little and little, has so incroched on
his own Citizens and Neighbors round about him, that he has gotten to be
called (and that not unworthily) Magnus Dux Hetruriae, or the great The great
Duke of Tuscany.
Duke of Tuscany. A great part of the rising of the Family of the Medices,
which are now Dukes of Florence, may be ascribed to the cunning carriage of
themselves; but it has been much advanced forward by their felicity, in having
two Popes together of that house, which were Leo the Tenth, and Clement the
Seventh, who by all means labored to stablish the Governments of their Country,
upon their Kindred* and it made not the least access thereunto, that affinity
was contracted by them with the Kings of France, when K^erine de Medic^s Niece
to Pope Clement the Seventh, was married to the younger Son fo Francis the
first, whose Elder brother dying, that younger came to be King of France, by
the name of Henry the 2d. for as in the time of her husband she laid the
foundation of her aspiring, so after the death of the said husband, when she
bare the name of the Queen Mother. This Queen Mother swayed all at her pleasure
in France, during the successive reign of her three Sons, Francis the second,
Charles the ninth, and Henry the third: in all which time no doubt, she promoted
Florence, and the Florentines to her uttermost.

A good part of Italy is under the A great part of Italy under the Bishop of
Rome.
Bishop of Rome, which is commonly called, The land of the Church: where the
Pope is a Prince absolute, not only Spiritual as elsewhere he claims, but
also Temporal, making Laws requiring Tribute, raising Soldiers, and
executing Justice as a Monarch.

The Bishops of Rome do pretend, that Constantine the Great, did bestow upon
them the City of Rome, together with diverse other Cities and Towns, near
adjoining and the Demeans of them all to be as the Patrimony of Saint Peter, as
many times they do term it. But Laurentius, Valla, in his set Treatise of
this Argument, has displaied the falsehood of that pretense; and i^ truth, the
Greatness of the Popes The manner of the rising of the Popes greatness.
has risen first by Phocas, who killing his Master the Emperor of Rome, and
being favored by the Bishop of that Sea, and so aspiring himself to the
Empire, did in recompense thereof, suffer the Bishop of Rome to be preclaimed
Universal Bishop, and of likelihood gave unto him somewhat to maintain his
Estate. And afterward King P^pin o^ France, and Charles the Great his Son,
getting (by means of the s^d Bishop) the Kingdom of France, and the one of
them to the Empire, did bestow good possessions upon the Papacy; and since that
time the Popes have had so much wit, as by destruction of the Princes of Italy,
by encroaching on the favor of others, the great Monarchs of Europe and by
their waries and other devices, to keep and increase that Land of the Church.
which in our time is well enlarged by the policy of Clement the 8. late Pope*
who has procured that the Dukedom of Ferrara, is, or shall be shortly added
to his Dominion.

The chief residence of the Bishop of Rome, is Rome it self, which was first
founded by R^mulus, and afterward; so increased by others who succeeded him,
that it was built upon* 7. hills, and has had only reigning in it 7. Kings,
and has been ruled by 7. several sorts of Chief government: that is, Kings,
Consuls, Dec^m-viri, Tribunes of the People, Dictators, Emperors and Popes.

They first incroached on the neighbors about them in Italy, afterward; on all
Italy, Sicily, and some of the ^ands, till at length it proved to be the Lady
and chief Mistress of the world: whose incredible wealth and greatness in men,
treasure, shipping and armor, was so huge, that it did eve^ sink under the
weight of it self. Whereupon after diverse civil wars, as between Marius and
Sylla, Pompey and Caesar, with others, it was at length revoked unto one
absolute and Imperial Government. The Majesty whereof notwithstanding, was
afterward somewhat impaired by the building of Constantinople, which was
erected, or rather enlarged by Constantine the Great, and called Nova R^ma. But
when the division was made of the East and West Empire, it received a greater
blow, yet the maine overthrow of it was, when the Gothi and Vandals entered
Italy, sacked it, and possessed it at their own pleasure; so that it was (for a
time) almost quite forsaken and had no inhabitants, till the Bishops of Rom^
did make means to gather together some to people it again: and since those
times, a good part of the old building upon the Hills, has bee^ quite decayed
and rui^ated, and that, Rome, which now may be called (in comparison of the
old) new Rome is built on a lower ground, where the place was, which in times
past was termed Campus Martius, very near unto Tyber the River, which too well
appears by the sudden inundation of that Tyber; destroying and spoiling, Men,
Cattle and Houses, as very lately to their great loss was experimented.

The Bishops of Rome, as sometimes for their pleasure or profit, they do
withdraw themselves unto (...), or some other Towns of Italy: so the time was
when they removed their Court unto Avignon a City in France, standing near the
Mediterranean sea, and not far from Mersiles in Province, where continuing for
the space of seventy years, they so afflicted the City of Rome, for l^cke of
resort (which is very great when the Pope is there) that the Italians to this
day, do remember that time by the name of the Captivity of Babylon, which
continued ( as appears by the Scripture) for seventy years. Who so looks on
the description laid down by the Holy Ghost in the Revelation, shall see that
the Whore of Babylon there mentioned; can be understood of no place but the
City of Rome.

In the South part of Italy, lies the Kingdom of Naples, which is a Country
very rich, and full of all kind of pleasure, abundant in Nobility; whereof
comes to be said that Proverb* Naples for (...), Rome for Religion, Millain
for beauty, Florence for Policy, and Venice for Riches.

This was heretofore ruled by a King of their own, till the time of Joan Queen
of Naples, who by deed of gift, did first grant that Kingdom to the Kings of
Arragon in Spain; and afterward by will, with a Revocation of the former
Grant, did bequeath it to the house of Anj^u in France. Since which time the
Kingdom of Naples has sometimes been in the hands of the Spaniard, sometimes
possessed by the French, and is now under the King of Spain: unto this is
annexed also the Dakedome of Calabria.

This Kingdom of Naples lies so near to some part of Graecia, which is now
in possession of the Turk, that i^ may justly be feared, lest at some time or
other the said Turk, should make an invasion thereinto, as indeed he has
offered diverse times, and sometimes has landed men to the great terror of all
Italy; but for the preventing of that mischief, the King of Spain is enforced
to keep a good Fleet of Galleys continually at Otranto, where is the nearest
passage from Italy into Greece. This part of Italy was it, which in times past
was named Magna Graecia, but in ^ter ages it has been unproperly called one of
the Sicilies, which was reproved long since by Aeneus Silvius in his twelfth
Epistle; and yet till of late time, the Kings of Spain have been termed Kings
of both ^he Sicili^s*

There be moreover in Italy many other Princedomes and States, (...) the
Dukedom of Ferrara, the Dukedom of Mantua, the Dukedom of Urbine, the
Dukedom of Parma and Placentia, the State of Luca, the State of Genua,
commonly called the Genowaies, which are (...) by their Senate, but have a
Duke, as they have at Venice. There be also some others, by which means the
gl^ry and strength of Italy is decayed.

Of Denmark, Sweden, and Norway.
AS Italy lie^h on the S^uel Denmarkes (...).
side of Germany, so Denmark lies on the North, i^to the middle of which
Land, the sea breake^h in by a place called the Sound. The Impost of which
pass^ge (...) great riches, as an ordinary Tribu^e unto the King of Denmark.
This is a Kingdom, and ruled by an absolute Governor.

O^ the North and East side of Denmark, lies Suezia, commonly called Sw^den
or Swethe^; which (...).
is also a Kingdom of it self: Where the King professes himself to be Rex
Suecorum, Gothorum and Vandalorum: whereby we may know that the G^thes and
Vandals, which in times past did waste Italy, and other Nations of
Christendom, did come out of this Country.

This whole Country which contains in it, (...) Su^zia, and some part of
Denmark is Peninsula, being very much compassed about with the Sea: and this
is it, which in Ol^s Magnus, and Joannes Magnus, is termed Archiepisco^ us
Upsalensis; as also in some of the (...) ancient Writers, is called
S^a^dinavia: on the North and Went side of Sweden, lies Nor^egia, or Norway,
which is at this day under the Government of the King of Denmark, al^hough
heretofore it has been a ^ee Kingd^me of it self.

Beyond Norway toward Russia on the Northern sea, lies ^via, beyond that
Biarmia, then Happia or Hapland, a poor and cold Countre^, near Sin^s
B^ddicus: whereof there is little to be spoken but that it is said to be
subject to the great Kn^z, or Duke of Moscovie. But of these afterward.

Within the Sound, on the East part of the Sea, lies Dantzicke, about which
are the Towns of the Haustmen, Confederates and Allies unto the King of
Denmark.

These are very rich Towns by reason of Merchandise, which down the Rivers they
rece^ve out of Polonia, and transport into other parts of Christendom, through
the Sound of the King of Denmark. They li^e ^ f^ee people keeping amity and
(...) with the Kings of Sweden and Denmark, and with the Empe^our of Germany:
but within these late years, Stephen Bacour, the King of Polon, does challenge
them to be members of his Crown and Dignity, and by war^e forc^d them to
cap^tulate ^ith him.

There is no great thing to be noted in these Countries, but that from Denmark
comes much corn, to the supply of other parts of Christendom; and that from
all these Countries, (...) brought great furniture for war, or for shipping,
as Masts, C^bles, Steel, Riches of Denmark.
Saddles, Arm^ur, Gunpowder, and the l^ke: And that in the seas adjoining to
these parts, there are fishes of much more monstrous shape than el^e-where are
to be found. The people of those Countries are by their Their Religion.
^rofession Lutherans for Religion.

Of Russia, or Moscovia.
ON the East side of Sweden, Russia s^tuate.
beginne^h the Dominion of the Em^eror or R^ssia, although Russia or Moscovia
it self, do lie somewhat more into the East, which is a great and mighty
Monarchy, extending it self even from Lapland, and Finmarke, many thousand
miles in length, unto the Caspian sea: so that it contains in it a great part
of Europe, and much of Asia also.

The Governor there, calls Emperor of Russia.
himself Emperor of Russia, Great Duke ^f M^scovia, with many other Titles of
Princedomes and Cities, whose Dominion was very much enlarged by the Emperor
not long since dead, whom in Russia they ^ll Ivan Vasiliwich, in the Latin,
Johannes Basilides, who reigning long, and being fortunate in war, did very
much enlarge this mighty Dominion.

This man, ^s in his younger (...) he was very fortunate, and added very much
unto the Glory of his Ancestors, winning something from the Tartars, and
something from the Christi^ns in Livonia, and Litua^ia, and other confines of
his Country: so in his latter age growing more unweld^, and less beloved of
his Subjects, he proved as unfo^tunate, whereby it came to pass, that Stephen
Bacour, King of (...), had ^very great hand of him, winning from him* large
Provinces, which he before had conquered. Greg^ry the thirteenth Bishop of
Rome, thinking by his in^reaty for peace, between those two Princes, to have
won the whole Russian Monarchy, to the subjection and acknowledgment of the
Papacy, sent Rober^us Possevin. a Jesuit sent by the Pope to the Emperor.
Possevi^us, a Jesui^e ( but yet a great Statesman) as his Agent to take up
Controve^sies* between the Moscovit^, and the King of Polone, who prevailed so
far, as that ^e d^ew them to torlerable conditions, for both parties; but
when he began to exhort him to the accepting o^ the Romish Faith, the (...)
being therefore informed by the English Ambassadors (who he very much favored,
for his Lady, and Mistress, Queen Elizabeth's sake) that the Bishop of Rome was
^ proud Pr^late, and would exercise his pretended authority so far, as to make
Kings* and Princes hold his stirrup, yea to kiss his very feet; he utterly and
with much scorn rejected all obedience to him. Whereunto, when Possevinus did
reply, A fine excuse for the Popes pride
that the Princes of Europe indeed in acknowledgement of their sub^ection to
^im, as the Vi^ar of Christ, and successor of S. Peter, did offer him that
service, as to kiss his feet, but that the Pope remembering himself to be ^
mortal man, did not take that honor as due unto himself b^ did use to have on
his Part^phie the Caucifix, or Picture of Christ, hanging upon the Cross, and
that in truth he would have the Reverence done thereunto; the Emperor ^he
Emperors rage (...) the P^pe.
did grow into an exceeding r^ge, reputing h^s pride to be so much the greater,
when he would put the Cruci^ix upon his shoe; in as much as the Russians do
hold, that so h^ly a thing as that is highly profaned, if any resemblance of
it be worn above the girdle.

Possevinus in a Treatise written of his Embassage into that Country where he
discourses this whole matter, confesses that he was much Possevinus fear of
the Emperor.
afraid, lest the Emperor would have stricken him, and beaten out his brains
with a shrewd staff which then he had in his hands, and did ordinarily carry
with him: and he had the more reason so to fe^r, because that Prince was such a
Tyrant, that he had not only ^laire, and with cruel torture put to death very
many of his subjects, and Nobility before, showing himself more brutishly
cruel to them, than ever Nero and Caligulu were among the Romans; but he had
with his own hands, and with the same staff, upon a small occasion of anger,
ki^led his eldest Son, who should have succeeded him in his whole Empire.

The people of this Country are rude and unlearned, so that there i^ very
little or no knowledge amongst them of any liberal or ingenious Art: yea,
their very Priests and Monks (whereof they have many) are almost unlettered* so
that they can hardly do any thing more then read their ordinary Service: And
the rest of the People are, by reason of their ignorant Education, dull and
incapable of any high understanding; but very superstitious, having many
Ceremonies, and Idolatrous Solemnities; as the consecrating of their rivers by
their Patriarch at one time of the year, when they think themselves much
sanctified by the receiving of those hallowed waters; yea, and they bathe their
horses and Cattle in them; and also the burying of most of their people with a
pair of shoes on their feet, as supposing that they have a long journey to
go, and a letter in their hand to St. Nicolas, whom they reverence as a
special St. and think that he may give them entertainment, for their readier
admission into heaven.

The Moscovites generally have received the Christian Faith; but yet so, that
rather they do hold of Difference between the Greek and Latin Church.
the Greek and the Eastern, then of the Western Roman Church.

The doctrines wherein the Greek Church differs from the Latin, are these.
First, they hold that the holy Ghost proceeds from the Father alone, and not
from the Son. Secondly that the Bishop of Rome is not the universal Bishop.
Thirdly, that there is no purgation. Fourthly, their Priests do marry: and
fifthly, they do differ in diverse of their Ceremonies, as in having 4 Lents in
the year, whereof they do call one Lent, their great Lent.

At the time of the Council of Florence, there was some show made by the
Agents of the Greek Church, that they would have joined in opinion with the
Latins: but when they returned home, their Contrymen would in no sort
assent thereunto.

In the Northern parts of the Dominion of the Emperor of Russia, which have
lately been joined unto his Territories, as specially Lapland, The people of
Lapland very heathenish.
Biarmia, and thereabouts, they are people so rude and heathenish, that (as
Olaus Magnus writes of them) look whatsoever living thing they do see in the
morning at their going out of their doors, yea, if it be a bird, or a worm* or
some such other creeping thing, they do yield a Divine W^ship, and Reverence
thereunto for all that day, as if it were some inferior God. Damianus a Goes
h^th written a pretty Treatise, describing the manner of those Lappians: The
greatest part of the Country of Russia, is in the winter so exceeding cold,
that both ^he Rivers are frozen over, the land covered with snow, and such is
the sharpness of the air, that if any go abroad barefaced it causes their
flesh in a short time to rot, which befalls to the fingers and toes of diverse
of them: therefore for a great part of winter, they live in stoves and
hot-houses, and if they be occasioned to go abroad, they use many furs, whereof
there is great plenty in that Country, as also wood to make fire; but yet in
the summer time, the face of the soil and the air is very strangely altered,
insomuch, that the Country seems hot, the birds sing very merrily, and the
trees, grass and co^n, in a short sp^ce do appear so cheerfully green, and
pleasant, that it is scant to be believed, but of them which have seen it.

Their building is most of wood, even in the chief City of Mosco, insomuch,
that the Tartars (who lie in the North-east of them) breaking often into their
Countries, even unto the very Mosco, do set fire on their Cities, which by
reason of their wooden buildings, are quickly destroyed.

The manner of government which of late years has been used in Russia is very
barbarous, and little less than tyrannous: for the Emperor that last was, did
suffer his people to be kept in great servility, and permitted the Rulers and
chief Officers at their pleasures, to pil and ransack the common sort; but to
no other end, but that himself might take occasion when he thought good to call
them in question for their misdemeanor, and so fill his own coffers with flee
cing of them: which was the same course the old Roman Empire did use, calling
the Deputies of the Provinces, by the name of Spunges, whose property is to
suck up water, but when it is full, then it self is crushed, and yi ldeth
forth liquor for the behalf of another.

The passage by Sea into this country, The passage by sea into this Country.
which was wont to be through the Sound, and so afterward by land, was first
discovered by the English: who with great danger of the frozen Seas, did first
adventure to sail so far North, as to compass Lapland, Finmark Scricfinia and
Biarmia, and so passing to the East by Nova Zembla, half the way almost to
Cathaio, have entered the River called Ob, by which they disperse themselves for
Merchandise both by water and land, into the most parts of the dominion of the
Emperor of Russia.

The first attempt which was made The first attempt.
by the English, for the entrance of Moscovia, by the North seas, was in the
days of King Edw. the sixth, at which time the Merchants of London procuring
leave of the King, did send forth Sir Hugh Willoby, with shipping and men, who
went so far toward the North, that he Coasted the corner of Scricfinia and
Biarmia, and so turned toward the East: but the wheather proved so extreme, the
snowing so great, and the freezing of the water so vehement, that his ship was
set fast in the ice; and there he and his people were frozen to death, and the
next year some other coming from England, found both the ship, and their
bodies in it, and a perfect Remembrance in writing of all things which they had
done and dis covered; where amongst the rest, mention was made of a land which
they had touched, which to this day is known by the name of Sir Hugh Sir Hugh
Willobies Land.
Willobies Land. The Merchants of London did not desist to pursue this
discovery, but have so far prevailed, as that they have reached one half of
the way toward the East part of Chyna and Cathaio; but the whole passage is not
yet opened.

This Empire is at this day one of This Empire one of the greatest in the world.
the greatest dominions in the world, both for compass of ground, and for
multitude of men; saving that it lies far North, and so yields not pleasure
for good Traffic, with many other of the best situated nations.

Among other things which do argue the magnificence of the Emperor of Russia,
this one is recorded by many who have traveled into those parts, that when the
great Duke is disposed to sit in his magnificence, besides great store of
Jewels, and abundance of massy plate, both of Gold and Silver, which is openly
showed in his Hall, there do sit as his Princes, and great Nobles, cloached in
very rich and sumptuous attire, diverse men, ancient for their years, very
seemly of countenance, and grave, with white long beards, which is a goodly
show, besides the rich state of the thing. But Olaus Magnus, a man well
experienced in those Northern parts, does say (how truly I cannot tell) that
the manner of their sitting is a notable fraud and cunning of the Russian, in
as much as they are not men of any worth, but ordinary Citizens of the gravest,
and seemliest countenance, which against such a solemnity, are picked out of
Mosco, and other places adjoining, and have robes put on them, which are not
their own, but taken out of the Emperors Wardrobe.

Of Spruce and Poland.
IN Europe, on the East and Prussia hew situated.
North corner of Germany lies a Country called Prussia, in Latin most times
Borussia, in English, Pruthen, or Spruce, of whom little is famous, saving,
that they were governed by one, in a kind of order of Religion, whom they call
the Grand-Master: and that they are a means to keep the Moscovite, and the
Turk from some other parts of Christend me.

This Country is now grown to be a Dukedom, and the Duke thereof does admit
traffic with our English, who going beyond the Hance Towns, do touch upon his
country; and amongst other things, do bring from thence a kind of leather,
which was wont to be used i Jerkins, and called by the name Spruce Leather.
of Spruce-Leather-Jerkins.

On the E^t side ^ Germany, between Russia and Germany, ^eth Polonia or Poland,
which is a ^gdome P^lands sci tu^ ion.
diffe^ing from others (...) Europe; because the King there is ^osen by
Election out of some of the Princes near adjoining, as la^ely Henry the third
King of France. These Elections often^mes do make great factions there, so
that in taking parts, they grow often there into Civil war.

The King of Polonia is almost continually in war, either with the Moscovite,
who lies in the East and North-East of him; or with the Turk, who li^th on
the South and South E^st, and some^imes also with the Princes of Germany;
whereupon the Poles do commonly desire to chule warriors to their King.

In this Country are none but Their ii ves Reti gons.
Christians: but so, that liberty of ^ll Religion is p^rmitted, insomuch, that
there be Papists, Coil^dges of (...), both (...) (...) and (...) i^ opinion,
(...), Ar (...), and di^ers others

But of (...) years there (...) been They hate the Jesuits
(...) ea nest m^tions in their Par (...), that their Co ledges of J^suites
should be dissolved, and they ban^shed our of that K^ngdome, as of la^e they
were from France. The ^eason of i is, because that under color of Religion,
they do secretly deal in (...) causes, and many times sow sedi ^ons. and some
of them have given counsel to murder Princes: and ^ever they be, they are the
only in telligencers for the Pop^, besides that, many of the Papi^s, but
especially their Friars and orders of Religion) do hate and envye them: first,
for that they take upon them with such pride to be called Jesuits, as if none
had to do with Jesus but they, and are more inward with Princes then the rest
are. Secondly, because many of them are more learned then common Monks and
Friars. And thirdly, because they profess more strictly and severely, than
others do, the Capushins only accep^ed.

This is that Country, which in Their chief City. Cracovia.
times past was called Sarmatia, the chief City whereof is named Cracovia.

Of Hungaria and Austria.
ON the South-East side of Hungary (...).
Germany, lies Hungaria, called in the Latin Pannonia, which has been
heretofore divided into Pannonia superior, and Pannonia inferior: it is an
absolute Kingdom, and has been heretofore rich and populous. The Christians
that do live there, have among them diverse sorts of Religion, as in Poland.

This Kingdom has been a great obstacle against the Turks coming into
Christendom; but especially in the time of John Hunniades, who did mightily
with many great victories repulse the Tu^ks. Here stands Bunda, which was
Bunda.
heretofore a great Fortress of Christendom: but the glory of this Kingdom
is almost utterly decayed, by reason that the Turk who partly by policy, and
partly by force, does now possess the greatest part of it; so that the people
are fled from thence, and the Christians which remain there are in miserable
servitude: Notwithstanding some part of Pannonia inferior does ye^ belong to
Christendom.

The Turks for the space of these forty or fifty years last past, have kept
continual garrisons, and many times great Armies in that place of Hungary,
which yet remains Christened; yea, and sometimes the great Turks themselves
have come thither in person with huge Hosts* accounting it a matter of their re
ligion, not only to destroy as many Christians as they can, but also to win
their land, by the revenue^ whereof, they may maintain some Religious house,
which they think themselves in custom bound to erect: but so, that the maintai
ning thereof is by the sword, to be won out of the hands of some of those
whom they hold enemie^ to them.

Hungary is become the only Cockpit of the World, where the Turks do strive
to gain, and the Christians at the charge of the Emperor of Germany (who
entituleth himself King of Hungary) do labor to repulse them: and few
summers do pass, but that something is either won or lost by e^ther party.

That corner of Germany which lies nearest to Hungary or Pannonia Austria.
inferior, is called Austria, or Pannonia a superior, which is an ArchDukedome.
From which house (being of late much sprung) come many of the Princ^s of
Germany, and of other parts of Europe: so that the Crown Imperial of Germany,
has lately often besallen to some one of this house.

In this Country stands Vienna, Vienna.
that noble City, which is now the principle Bulwark of Christendom against
the Turk: from whence S^liman was repelled by Ferdinandus King of Hungary, in
the time of the Emperor Charles the fifth. It was in this Country, that Richard
the first, King of England, in his return from the Holy Land, was taken
prisoner by the ArchDuke of Austria, and so put to a grievous ransom.

There were lately diverse brothers of the Emperor Rodolphus the second, which
were all called by the name of Archdukes of Austria Arch Duks of Austria.
according to the manner of the Germans, who give the titles of the Fathers
nobility to all the children. The names of them were Matthias, Ernestus, and
the youngest Albertus, who for a good space held by dispensation from the Pope
the Archbish oprick of Toledo in Spain, although he were no Priest, and had
then also the title of Cardinal of Austria, and was employed for Viceroy of
Portugal, by Philip the 2d. King of Spain: but after the death of the Duke of
Parma, he was sent as Lieutenant general, and Governor of the Low-Ciuntries for
the K. of Spain, where since he has attained to the marriage of the Infanta
Isabella Eugenia Clara, eldest daughter to K. Philip the second, and last King
of Spain, and by her has he the style of Duke of Burgundy, although peaceably
he cannot enjoy a great part of that Country.

Through both Austria and Hungary, does run the mighty River Danubius, as
through Germany The River of (...).
does run the Rheinc: whereon grows Vinum Rhenanum, com monly cal^ed
Rhenisir wine.

Of Greece, Thracia, and the Countries near adjoining.
ON the South side of Hungary, and South-East, lies a Country of Europe,
called Scitu^tion of Dacia Transylvania, Walachia Moldavia, Servia.
in old time Dacia, which is large and wide, comprehending in it Transylvania,
Walachia, Moldavia, and Servia. Of which little is famous, save that the men
are warlike, and can hardly be brought to obedience. They have lately been
under the K of Hungary. These Countries of Transylvania, Walachia, and
Moldavia, have certain Monarchs of their own, whom they call by the name of
V^gnode, which do rule their Countries with indifferent mediocrity, while they
have the sway in their own hands, but confining upon the Turk, they are many
times oppressed and overcome by him, so that often they are his Tributaries:
yet by the wildness of the country, and uncertain disposition of the Rulers
and their people, he never has any hand long over them, but sometimes they
maintain war against him, and have slain down some of his Bassaes, coming
with a great Army against them; by which occasion it falls out, that he is
glad now and then to enter confederacy with them: so doubtful a kind of
regiment is that, which now adays is in those Countries.

The River Danubius does divide this Dacia from Mysia, commonly called Bulgaria
and Russia, which lies on the South from Danubius, and is severed from
Graecia, by the Mountain Haemus. The mountain Hamus


This Mountain is that, whereof they reported in times past, though but falsely,
that who so stood on the top thereof, might see the sea four several ways, to
wit, East, West, North and South: under pretense of trying which conclusion
(not Philip Alexanders Father, but a latter Philip King of Macedonia) did go up
to that Hill, when in truth his meaning was secretly to meet with others there,
with whom he might join himself against the Romans, which was shortly the
overthrow of that Kingdom. It should seem, that about this mountain it is
very cold, by reason of that jest which Athenaeus reported Stratonieus to have
uttered concerning that Hill, when he said, that for eight months in the year
it was very cold, and for the other four it was winter.

From Haemus toward the South, Grecia bounded.
lies Grecia, bounded on the West by the Ad iaticke sea, on the East (...)
Thracian^ sea, and Ma^e A^geum, on the South by the main Mediterranean sea.
This contained an old time four special parts, Peloponnesus, Achaia,
Macedonia, and Epirus.

Adjoining whereunto was Illyricum, Peleponnesus, which is now called Moreah,
in the south part of Moreah.
Grecia, being Peninsula, or almost an Island, for that it is joined by a little
strait called Ist^es, unto the rest of Graecia. Herein stood Sparta, Sparts.
and the ancient state of Lacedemon; the laws thereof were made by Lycurgus;
by the due observation of which, Tullie could say in his time, that the title
of Sparta in Lacedemon, had continued in the same means and behavior, for the
space of 700. years.

This Sparta was it which so often made war against the Athenians, and this
and Athens were called the two edges of Grecia.

Near the Isthmos, or Straits, stood the famous City of Corinth, Corinth.
which was in old time called the Key of Greece, and whether St. Paul wrote two
of his Epistles.

Aereus Sylvius in his Cosmograph call Treatise, De Europa, cap. 21 says, that
the straits which divide Moreah from the rest of Grecia, are in breadth but five
miles; and that diverse Kings and Princes did go about to dig away the earth,
that they might make it to be an Island. He names King Demetrius, Julius
Caesar, Caius Caligula, and Domitius Nero; of all whom he does note, that they
not only failed of their purpose: but that they came to violent and unnatural
deaths.

From the Isthmos, which is the end of Pelopennesus or Moreah, begins
Achaia, and spreads it Achaia.
self Northwards but a little way, unto the Hill Othris, which is the bounds
between Achaia and Macedonia: but East and West* much more largely, as Eastward
even unto the Island Eu^oea. with a great Euboea.
Promontory, and Westward bounding unto Epirus.

The inhabitants of this place, were they which properly are called Achivi;
which word is so often used by Virgil. Here toward the East part stood Beotia,
and upon the Seacoast, Beotia.
looking Southward toward Moreah, was Athens, which was famous Athens.
for the laws of Solon, for the wars against Sparta, and many other Cities
of Grecia; and for an University of learned men, which long continued there.

In this part of Greece, stood Pernassus Pernassus and Helicou.
and Helicon, so much talked of by Poets, and Phocis, and Thebes, and briefly
all the Cities whereof Livie speaking, does term by the name of Achai, or (...)
Archaeorum.

The third Province of Graeci^, Epirus.
c^lled Epirus, lies Westward from Achala, and ex^en s it self for a good
space that ^av; but toward the North and South it is but narrow, lying along
the seacoast, and looking Sou^hward on the Islands of Conegra and Cephalonia.
This was be Coun^ry wherein Olympias wife unto Philip of Maced^nia, and Mother
unto Alexander the g^ea, was born. This also was the Kingdom of that noble
Pyrrhus, which made such great wars against the Romans; and in our l^tter age
it was made re^owned by the valiant Scand rberg, who was so great a scou^ge
unto the Turk, whose life is so excellently written by Martinus Partesius.
From the East part o^ Epiru^ Northward, lies a Country, which was never noted
by an^ famous name; but as it should seen was sometime under Epirus, from which
it lies Northward: some imes under Macedonia, from which it lies Westward;
and sometime^ under Illyris, or Dalmatia, from which it lies Southward; and i
may be that there was in old time diverse free Cities there. Illyricum Illyricum*
which confineth upon Graecia to^ard the North and West, near un ^o the top of
the Adriatic sea, and not far from Venice, is for a good part of it at this
day under the Vene i^s.

The so^rth and greatest part o^ Macedonia.
^ld Grecia, was Maced^nia, which is fa^sty by the Maps of the R^man Emp^re,
placed on the West side of G^aecia; for in truth it ^yeth on the East side,
looking toward Asia the lesser, being bounded on the East side by the Sea
called Mare Egeum on the South side by Achaia, and the Hill Othris, and part of
Epirus: and on the West side, by certain great mountains: but on the North by
the Hill Haemus.

This was the Kingdom so famous in times past for Philip and Alexander his
son, who conquered the whole world, and caused the name of the third Empire to
be attributed unto this place. Here stood the hill Athos, whereof part was
dug down by the army of Xerxes the great King of Persia, who warred against
the Grecians. Here was the Hill Olymp^s, the City of Philipai, (...) he e the
Philippians dwelt, to whom Sr. Paul wrote. Here was Ampollonia, Amphipolis,
Ed^ssa, Pella, Thessalonica and B^rea; yea, and the whole Country of Thessalia,
lay on the South side of this part o^ Greece.

In this Country of Grecia, were in ancient times many Kingdoms and States, as
at this day there are in Italy: as the Maced^nians, the Kingdom of Epirus, the
State of Athens, the government of Sparta ^he City of Thebes, and very many
other places; insomuch that almost every Town had a peculiar government: But
now it is all under one^ Monarchy.

From Grecia (in old time) did Many fam^us things from Greece
almost all famous things come. These were they that made the wa^ against Troy;
that resisted Xerxes the mighty King of Persia, that had the famous Lawmakers,
as Solon Famcus Laws.
in Athens, and Lycurgus of Lacedemon; that took away the Monarchy from the
Persians, that brought forth the^ famous Captains, as Famous Captains.
Themistceles, Mil^iades, Alexander, and many others that were the Authors of
civility unto the Western Nations, and to some in the East; as Asia the less:
that gave to Italy and to the Romans, the first light of learning: because from
them The firstPoets.
arose the first Poets, as (...) Hesiodus, Sophocles, and diverse others. The
great Ph^losophers, Socrates, Pla^o, Aristotle, and all the Sects of the
Academicks, Stoics, Peripateticks, Epicure^ns, and almost all their The great
Orators.
Scholars. The great Orators, Demosthenes, and Aeschines, and in one word (the
Mathematics excepted, which came rather from the Chaldeans and the Egyp^ians)
the wh^le flowers of Arts and good Learning. On the North-East part of Graecia
stands Thracia, which tho^ Thracia.
here^ofore it has been distinguished, yet now is accounted as the chief part
of Greece. Here on the edge of the seacoast very near unto Asia, st^deth the
City called Bizantium, but since Constantinople, be cause Constantine the Great
did new build it, and made it an Imperial Constantinople.
City. This was the chief residence of the Emperor of Graecia, sometimes
called New Rome, and the glory of the East; where the general Council was once
assembled; and one of the seas of the Patriarks, who was called the Patriark of
Constantinople. But by the great discord of the Christians, all Graecia, and
this City are fallen into the hands of the Turk, who now makes it his place of
imperial abode. It was won (...) the time of Constantine the last Emperor; so
that by Constantine it obtained his honor, and by Constantine it lost it. In
this City lies resident with the Turk, an Ambassador or Agent for the King of
England.

The Christians that do now live in Grecia, are in miserable servitude unto the
Turk. They disagree in many things from the doctrine of the Church of Rome.

Of the Sea running between Europe and Asia.
IF there were no other Argument, Northern parts were not discovered in times
past.
that the Northern parts of the World were not discovered in times past, by any
that traveled that way, yet this would sufficiently avouch (...), that there
was never thought upon an^ land between Asia and Europe, higher than the River
Tanais; which does not extend it self very fa^ into the North, but is short of
the uttermost bounds that was by the space of four thousand miles; but this
river which by the Tartarians is now called Don, where it does run, it leaves
Asia on the Eastside, and Europe on the West, but going forward toward the
South, it disburtheneth it self into a dead Lake or Fen (for so it seems)
which is Meotis Palus Iustine Ovid.
called Meotis Palus, spoken of in the second book of Justine, and not
forgotten by Ovid de Ponto: and at this day in the dead of winter, it is
usually frozen, that the Scythians and Tartarians near adjoining, do both
themselves and their cattle, yea, sometimes with sleads after them, pass over,
as if it were dry land. On the Southern part of this Meotis is a narrow strait
of the Sea, which is commonly called by the name of Bosphorus Cimmerius.
Bosphorus Cimmerius, because (as it is thought) sometime Oxen have ventured to
swim cross there from Asia to Europe, or backward. When the water has run for
a pretty space i^ so narrow a passage, there begins ^ great and wide Sea,
named Pontus Euxinus, whether (as Pontus Euxinus.
Josephus reports) the whale did carry the Prophet Jonas, and there did
disburthen himself of his carriage, by casting him upon the land. At the mouth
of this Sea, is a very great strait, known by the name of Thracius Bosphorus,
where the Thracius Bosphorus.
breadth of this sea is not above one mile, serving Asia and Europe. O^ the
side of Europe stands Constantinople. On the side of Asia, the City called
Pera or Galatae, which for the neerenesse is by some, reckoned a part of
Constantinople. When any A strange custom among the Turks.
of the Turks Janissaries have committed ought worthy of death, the custom is,
is to send the same party in the night time over by boat from Constantinople to
Pera, whereby the way he is thrown i^ to the water with a great stone about his
neck, and then there is a piece of O^dnance shot off, which is a token of some
such execution. The Turk is forced to take this course, lest the rest of his
Janissaries should mutiny when any of their fellows is put to death.

By reason of the standing of Asia and Europe so near together, and the sea
running between them, which serves each place with all manner of commodities,
it appears that Constantinople is marve^lously, richly, and conveniently
sea^ed, and therefore a fit place from whence ^e Turk may offer to atc^ieve
att^mps.

After this st^ait, the sea opens it self more large toward he (...), and ^is
called by the name o^ (...) But then it groveth again into a ^other stra^t,
which they write to be (...) b^ead (...) two in (...): This is called H^ll
sp^ntus having on the one side (...) in Asia, on the otherside S^stus on the
side of Eu^pe. This is that place where Hellespon ^us X^rxes b^idge.
^rxes the great King o^ Persia, d^d ^ike his bridge over the Sea, so much
renowned in ancient history; which was not impossible, by reason of the
narrowness, the foundation of his bridge being rested on ships. Here also may
appear the reason of the story of Leander and Hero: which Leander is reported
for the love of Hero, to have often times swum over the Sea, till at last he
was drowned. From this stra^ ^outhward, the Sea grows more wide, and is
called afterward by the name of Mare Aegeum, and so Mare Aegeum.
descends to the full Mediterranean.

Of Asia, and first of Tartary.
ON the South side of Asia, (...) unto the Domini^ the Emperor of R^ssia, is
Tartary, in ancient Tartary b^unded.
time (...) Scy^hia, the bounds whereof did then extend them^es into a good
part of Europe; and therefore was called Scythia Europea: but the greatest part
of ^t lies in Asia, a mighty large Country, extending it self on the North to
the uttermost Sea, on the ^ast to the Dominion of the Great Cham, or Prince of
Cathaie; on the South down to Mare Caspium. The Tartarians which now inhabit
it, are men of great stature, rude of behavior, no Christians but Gentiles;
neither Their Religion.
do they acknowledge Mahomet, They have few or no Cities among them, but after
the manner of the old Scythians, do live in Wildernesses, lying under their
Carts, and following their droves of Cattle, by the milk whereof they do
nourish themselves. They sow no corn at all, because they abide not long in
any one place; but taking their direction from the North-pole-starre, they
remove from one coast of their Country, unto another. The Country is
populous, and the men are great warriors, fighting always on horseback with
their bow, arrows, and Their manner of wars
a short sword. They have amongst them infini^e store of horses, whereof they
sell many into the Countries near adjoining. Their ordinary food in their
wars is horseflesh, which they use to eat raw, being chafed a little by
hanging at their saddle.

They have great wars with the Countries adjoining, but especially with the
Moscovite, and sometimes with the Turk: from hence came Tamberlain, who
brought 700000. Tamberlain the Great, ^ Tartarian.
of the Tartarians at once into the field, wherein he distressed and took
prisoner Bajazet the great Turk, whom he afterward forced to feed as a dog
under his table.

They have now amongst them many Princes and Governors, as those have one,
whom they call the Crim Tartars: and those have ano there, which are the Tartars
of Ma gaiae, and so diverse others.

The English have labored (to their great expenses) to find out the way by
the North Seas of Tartaria; to go into Cathay and China; but by reason of the
frozen Seas, they have not yet prevailed: although it has been reported, that
the Flemmings have discovered that passage: which would be (very likely) to the
great benefit of the Northern parts of Christendom; yet that report does not
continue, and therefore it is to be thought; that the Flemmings have not
proceeded so far.

Of Cathaie and China.
NExt beyond Tartaria, on the North-East part of Asia, lies a great Country
called Cathaie, the bounds whereof extend themselves Situation of Cathaie.
on the North and East, to the uttermost Seas; and on the South to China. The
people are not much learned, but more civil then the Tartars; and have good
and ordinary traffic with the Countries adjoining.

This Country has in it many Kings, which are tributaries, and do owe
obedience unto one, whom they call the great Cham or Can of The great Can of
Cathaie.
Cathaie, who is the chief governor of all the Land, and esteemed for multitude
of people and largeness of dominion, to be one of the greatest Princes of the
World: but his name is the less famous, for that he lies so far distant from
the best Nations, and the passage into this Country is so dangerous, either for
the perils of the sea, or for the long space by Land. His Cambalu the chief
City of China.
chief Imperial City is called Cambalu. On the South side of Cathaie, and East
part of Asia, next to the Sea, lies China: and the people thereof, Osorius
describes by the name of Sina, and called their Country Synarum Regio. This
is a A very rich Country.
fruitful Country, and yields as great store of rich commodities, as almost
any Country in the World. It contains in it very many several Kingdoms,
which are absolute Princes in their Seats. The chief City in this Country is
called Quinsay, and is described to be of Quinsay the ^hiefe City.
incredible greatness, as were wont to be the ancient Cities in the East, as
Babylon, Ninive, and others.

This Country was first discovered by the late Navigation of the Portugals
into the East Indies.

The people of China are learned The people skillful in Ar^s.
almost in all Arts, very skilful workmen in curious fine Works of all sorts,
so that no Country yields more precious Merchandise then the workmanship of
them. They are great soldiers, very politic and crafty, and in respect
thereof, contemning the wits of others using a Proverb, That all other Nations
Their Proverb.
do see but with one eye; but they themselves have two.

Petrus Maffaeus Historiographer to the King of Spain for the Eastern Indies,
does report of them, that they have had from very ancient time among them,
these two things, which we hold to be the miracles of Christendom, and but
lately invented: The one is the use Two rare wonders invented in Chinai, guns
and printing.
of Guns for the wars, and the other is Printing; which they use not as we do,
writing from the left hand unto the right; or as the Hebrews and Syrians, from
the right hand unto the left: but directly downward, and so their lines at the
top do begin again.

Of the East Indies.
ON the South side of China, toward the Molucco llands, and the Indian Sea,
lies the great Country of India, extending it self from the The situ^tion of
the Indies.
South part of the Continent, by the space of many thousand miles westward unto
the River Indus, which is the greatest River^ in all the Country, except
Ganges, one of the greatest Rivers in the World; which lies in the East part
of the same Indies.

This is that Country so famous in ancient time, for the great riches thereof,
for the multitude of people, for the conquest of Bacchus over it: for the
passage thither for Alexander the Great, throughout all the length of Asia; for
his adventuring to go into the South Ocean with so mighty a Navy, which ^ew or
none had ever attempted before him. And certainly thither it was that Solomon
did send once in three years for his gold and other rich Merchandise: for the
Scripture says, that he sent his fleet from Ezion-geber, which stood upon the
mouth of the Red Sea, and it was the directest passage which he had unto the
Eastern Indies; whereas if his purpose had been to send to Peru, as some lately
have imagined, his course had been through the Mediterranean Sea, and the
Straits of G^lbraltar.

This Country had in ancient time, many absolute Kingdoms and Provinces: as
in the time of Alexander, Porus, Taxiles, and diverse In India are many Kingdoms
others. In it were many Philosophers, and men of great Learning, whom they
called Gymnosophistae, of whom was Calanus, who burnt himself before Alexander.

The men of the South part of India are black, and therefore are called men of
Inde. The cattle of all sorts that are bred there, are of Their Cattle v^ry
big.
incredible bigness, in respect of other Countries, as their Elephants, Ap^s,
Monkies, Emets, and others.

The riches hereof have been very Their Richs
great, with abundance of gold, insomuch that the Promontory, who is now called
Malacha, was in times past named Aurea Chersonesus. The commodity of spice is
exceeding great that comes from thence.

The Portugals were the first, The Portugals first discovered the Indies.
which by their long Navigations beyond the Equinoctial, and the farthermost
part of Afric, have of late years discovered these Countries to
Christendom: as heretofore to the use of the King of Portugal, so now of the
King of Spain, who is reputed owner of them.

The Portugals did find diverse Four Kingdoms by the Portugals discovered.
Kingdoms at their first arrival in those parts, as the Kingdom of Cal^cut,
the Kingdom of Cambaia, the Kingdom of Cananor, the Kingdom of Cochin, and
very many other, with the Kings whereof they first entering League and Traffic,
and having leave given to build Castles for their defense, they have since by
policy incroached into their hands a great part of the Country, which lies
near unto the Seacoast, and are mighty now, for the space of many thousand
miles together. The K. of Spain has there a Viceroy, whose residence is
commonly in the Imperial City called Goa. They do every year send The City of
Goa.
home great store of rich commodities into Spain.

The people of the Country when the Portugals came first thither, were for the
most part Gentiles, The Indians Religion.
believing in no one God: yea, at this day there are diverse of them who do
adore the Sun as their God, and every morning at the rising thereof, do use
very superstitious Ceremonies, which our Mer chants, who do trade to Aleppo do
oftentimes see; for diverse o these Indians do come thither wit^ Merchandise But
the Saracens wh^ reverence the Prophet Mahomet from the Bays or Gulphes of
Persia, and Arabia, do traffic much thither, so that Mahomet was known among
them: but in one Town called Granganor, they found certain Christians
dissenting in many things from the Church of Rome, and rather agreeing with the
Protestants, which Christians had received (by succession) their Religion from
the time of Thomas the Apostle; by whom (as it is recorded in the ancient
Ecclesiastical History) part of India was converted.

In this Country of India, are many great and Potent Kings and Kingdoms,
which had been alto gether unknown and unheard of in our part of the World, but
that we were beholding to the Portugals for their discovery, and before their
Navigation thither, by the back side of Africk^, to some Relations that we had
from the Venetians, who traded and traveled thither by land out of Turkey. The
(...) of these Kings and Kingdoms are these; The King of B^arme, the great
Mogol, the King of Narsing, Six Kingdoms.
Pegu, Siam, the forenamed King of Calecut, and others.

Of Persia.
THere be diverse Countries between India and Persia; but there are not famous.

Persia is a large Country, (...) of Persia.
which lies far West from India: it has on the North, Assyria and Media, on
the West Syria and the Holy Land, but next unto it Mesopotamia: on the South
the main Ocean, which enters in notwithstanding by a Bay called Sinus Perficus.

This is that Country, which in ancient time was renowned for the great
riches, and Empire thereof. These were they that took from the Assyrians the
Monarchy, and did set up in their Country the second great Empire, which began
under Cyrus, and continued unto that Darius, who was overthrown by Alexander
the Great. In this Country reigned the great Kings, The great and famous Kings
of Persia.
Cyrus, Cambyses, Darius the Son of Histaspes, the great Xerrxes, Artaxerxes,
and many others, which in profane writings are famous for their wars against
the Scythians, Egyptians and Grecians, and in the Scripture, for the delivery
of the Jews from Babylon by Cyrus, for the building of the (...). Temple at
Jerusalem, and for many things which are mentio ed of them in the Prophency of
Daniel,

The (...) of this Nation, although they were in former times very riotous, by
reason of their great wealth; yet after they had lost their Monarchy by the
Macedonians, they have grown great Persians great Soldiers.
Soldiers: and therefore as they did ever strongly defend themselves against
the old Romans; so in the time of Constantine, and the other Emperors, they
were fearful Neighbors to the Roman Government: and of late Time, they have
strongly opposed themselves against the Turks, ever making their party good
with them. And yet notwithstanding, in the days of Amurath the third, father
to Mahomet the Turk now reigning, the Turk had a great hand upon the
Persians; going so far with his Army, as that he took the strong City Taunus
standing within the Persians Dominions, near unto the Caspian sea, but this
loss was to be attributed partly to the great dissentions which were among the
Persians themselves, and partly to the multitude of the Turk his Soldiers,
who by fresh supply did overthrow the Persian, although he slew down many
thousands of them.

They fight commonly on horseback, Sophy of Persia.
and are governed as in time past by a King, so now by an absolute Ruler, and a
mighty Prince, whom they term the Shaw or Sophy of Persia. He has many
Countries and small Kings in Assyria and Media, and the Countries ad joning,
which are tributaries.

Among other the Sophies of Persia, about a hundred years since, there was one
of great power, called Ismael the Persian, who procured unto himself great fame
by his many and valorous attempts against the Turk Surius in his Commentaries,
writting upon him, says that upon some fond conceit, the Jews were strongly
of opinion, that he was that Messiah, whom unto this day they expect; and
therefore hoped that he should have been their Deliverer and Advancer: But he
adds in his report that it fell out so clean contrary, that there was no man
who more vexed and grieved them, than that Ismail did.

The Persians* are all at this day Their Religion.
Sarazens in Religion, believing in Mahomet: but as Papists and Protestants do
differ in opinion, concerning the same Christ, so do the Turks and Persians
about their Mahomet: the one pursuing the other, as Herericks, with most deadly
hatred, insomuch that there is, in this respect, almost comin^ all war between
the Turk and the Persians.

Of Parthia and Media.
ON the North-East side of Persia; lies that Country which in old time was
called Parthia, but now Situation of Parth^a.
named Arach; of whom, those great wars of the Romans with the Medians or
Armenians, in Tacitus, and ancient Histories are true.

This Country abounds on Media by the West, and it was in ancient time very
full of people: whose fight as it was very much on horseback, Their manner of
fight.
so the manner of them continually was for to give an Onset, and then to return
their ways, even to return again like to the Wild-Irish, so that no man was
sure when he had obtained any victory over them.

These were the people that gave Great wars of the Perthians against the
Romans.
the great Overthrow to that rich Marcus Crassus of Rome, who by reason of his
covetousness (intending more to his getting of gold, than to the guiding of
his Army) was stain himself, and many thousand of the Romans: The Parthians
with exprobration of his thirst after money, poured molten gold into his mouth
after he was dead. Against these, the great Lucullus fought many battles; but
the Romans were never able to bring them quite to subjection.

On the West side of Parthia, (having the Mare Caspium on the North, Armenia on
the West, and Persia on the South) lies that Country, which in time past was
called Media, but now Shirvan or Sirvan; which is at this day governed by many
inferior Kings and Princes, which are tributaries, and do owe subjection to
the Sophi of Persia. So that he is the Sovereign Lord of all Media, as our
English men have found, who passing through the Dominion of the Emperor of
Russia; have crossed the Mare Caspium, and Merchandized with the Inhabitants of
this Media.

This Nation in former times was A famous Nation.
very famous; for the Medes were they that removed the Empire from the
Assyrians unto them: which as in themselves it was not great, yet when by Cyrus
it was joined to that of the Persians, it was very mighty, and was called by
the name of the Empire of the Medes and Persians. Here it was that Astyages
reigned, the Grandfather of Cyrus and Darius* of the M^des.

The chief* City of this Kingdom, was called Ecbatana, as the chief City of
Persia was Babylon.

It is to be observed of the Kings, of Media, that in the summer time they did
use to retire themselves Northward unto Ecbatana, for avoiding of the heat; but
in the winter time they came down, more South unto Susis, which as it seems
was a warmer place: but by this means they were both taken for Imperial
Cities, and chief residences of the King of Media; which being known, takes
away some confusion in old stories. The like custom was afterward used also by
the Kings of Persia.

Of Armenia and Assyria.
ON the West side of the Situation of Armenia.
Mare Caspium; and of Media, lies a Country called by a general name,
Armenia; which by some is distinctly divided into three parts. The Divided into
three parts.
North part whereof being but little, is called Georgia; the middle part
Turcomania; the third part, by the proper name of Armenia. By which a man may
see the reason of difference in diverse Writers; Some saying, that the Country
whence the Turks first came, was Armenia, some saying Turcomania, and some
Georgia; the truth being, that out of one or all these Countries they did
descend. These Turks are supposed to be the issue of them whom Alexander the
Great did shut up within certain mountains near to the Mare Caspium.

There is this one thing memorable A memorable Note.
in Armenia, that after the great Flood, the Ark of Noah did ^est it self on
the Mountains of Armenia, where (as Josephus witnesses) it is to be seen yet
to this day, the hills whereon it rests, ^re called by some N^ae Montes.

The people of this Nation have retained amongst them the Chri^tian faith, as
it is thought from the ^ime of the Apostles; but at this say it is spotted with
many absurdities.

Among other Errors which the Bathing of their children.
Church of Armenia has been noted to hold, this is one, that they lid bathe
their Children; waving them up and down in flames o^ fire, and repute that to
be a necessary circumstance of Baptism: Which error arises by mistaking that
place of John the Baptist, where he says, That he that came after him (meaning
Christ) should baptize them with the holy Ghost, and with fire. In which place
the word does not signify material fire, but expresses the lively and
purging operation of the Spirit, like to the nature of fire.

On the South part of Armenia, bending toward the East, lies the Assyria
bounded.
Country of Assyria, which is bounded on the West with Mesopotamia. This
Country was that Land wherein the first Monarchy was settled, which began under
Ninus whom the Scripture calls Nim rod, living not long after Noah's Flood,
and it ended in Sardanapalus continuing a thousand and three hundred years.

The King of this Country was Senacherib, of whom we read ^n the book of the
Kings; and Kings of Assyria.
here reigned Nebuchadnezzar, who took Jerusalem, and led the Jews away
prisoners unto Babylon.

In this Country, is the swift The swift River Tygris. The City Ninive.
River Tygris, near unto the which was Paradise. Upon this River stood the
great City Ninive, called by profane Writers, Ninus; which was almost of
incredible bigness, and exceeding* populous, by the nearness of the River,
and mavelous fruitfulness of the soil; which, as Herodotus writes, did
return their Corn sometime two hundred, and sometimes three hundred fold, and
did yield sufficiency for to maintain it. This City for a long time, was the
Imperial Seat of the Monarchy; but being destroyed (as God foretold it should
be by the Chaldeans) the residence of the King was afterward removed unto
Babylon, a great City in Chaldea, first built by Semiramis.

Of Chaldea.
NExt unto Assyria lye^h Situation of Chaldea.
Chaldea, having on the East side Assyria; on the West, Syria, or Palestina; on
the North, Armenia; on the South, the Desert of Arabia.

This Country is often called by the name of Mesopotamia, which name it has,
because it lies in the middle of two great Rivers, Tygris and Euphrates. It is
called also by the name of Babylonia, which word of it self properly taken,
does signify only that part of the Country which stands about Babylon.

The chief City whereof was Babylon, Babylon be chief City of Chaldea.
whose ruins do remain unto this day. It was a rich and most pleasant City for
all kind of Delight; and was in the latter time of that Monarchy, the Imperial
City of the Assyrians, where Nebuchadnezzar, and other their great Kings did
^ye.

It was to this City that the children of Israel were carried captives, which
thereof was called the Captivity of Babylon.

The Kings of Persia also did keep their residence here, it was built upon the
River Euphrates, some part of it standing on the one side, and some part on the
other, having for its foundresse, Semiramis, the wife of Ninus.

Ammianus Marcellinus reports one thing of this Country, wherein the
admirable power of God does appear; for he writes The admirab^ power of God
in prese^ving the people.
that in these parts are a huge number of Lions, which were like enough to
devour both men and beasts throughout the Country* but withal he says, that
by reason of the store of water and mudd thereof, there do breed yearly an
innumerable company of Gnats, whose property is to fly unto the eye of the
Lion, as being a bright and orient thing; where biting and stinging the Lion,
he ^eareth so fiercely with his claws, that he puts out his own eyes, and
by that means many are drowned in the Rivers, others starve for want of prey,
and many the more easily killed by the Inha bitants.

It is supposed by Divines, that in this Mesopotamia, between the River Tygris
and Euphrates, Paradise Note.
did stand. This was the Country wherein Abraham the Patriarch was born: unto
which the Romans could very hardly extend their Dominion: For they had much to
do to get the Government of any thing beyond the River Euphrates. From this
people it is thought the wise men came which brought presents to Christ, by the
guiding of the Star.

For as in India, and all the Eastern parts, so especially in this Country,
their Noblemen and Priests, and very many people, do give themselves to all
Arts of Divination. Here were the great Southsayers, Enchanters, and wise men,
as they call them. Here were Here were the first A strologians.
the first Astrologians, which are so described and derided in the Scripture:
and against the Inhabitants of Babylon and Chaldea were the Laws of the Romans
made, which are against divining Mathematicians, who in Tullie de Divinatione,
and Cornelius Tacitus, as also in the Laws of the Emperors, are Ordinarily
collected by the name o^ Chaldeans: and indeed from these and from the
Egyptians, is supposed to have sprung the first knowledge of Astronomy.

It is thought that a great reason whereof these Chaldeans were expert in the
laudable knowledge of Astronomy, was partly because the Country is so plain,
that being without hills, they might more fully and easily discover the whole
face of the Heaven, and partly, because the old Fathers which lived so long not
only before, but in some good part also after the flood of Noah, did dwell in,
or near to these parts, and they by observation of their own, did find out and
discover many things of the heavenly bodies, which they delivered as from hand
to hand to their posterity: But as corruption does stain the best things, so
in process of time, the true Astronomy was defilled with superstitious Rules of
Astrology (which caused the Prophets, Isaiah and Jeremiah, so bitterly to
inveigh against them.) And then, in their fabulosity they would report, that
they had in their Records, Observations for five and twenty thousand years,
which must needs be a very great untruth, unless we will qualify it as some
have done, expounding their years not of the Revolution of the Sun but of the
Moon, whose course is ended in the space of a month.

Of Asia the less.
ON the North-west side of Mesopotamia, lies that Country which is now called
Natolia, but in times past, Asia minor, having on the North side Pontus
Euxinus, on the West, the Hellespont, and on the South, the maine Mare
Mediterraneum. In the ancient writings both of the Grecians, and of the Romans,
this is oftentimes called by the single name of Asia, because it was best
known unto them, and they were not so much acquainted with the farther places
of Asia the Great.

This Country in general, for the fruitfulness of the Land, standing in so
temperate a Climate, and for the convenience of the Sea every way, and so many
good Havens, has been reputed always a very commodious and pleasurefull
Country. It is wholly at this day under the Turk. The mountain Taurus goes
along from the West unto the East part of it.

The greatness of this Country is such, that it has comprehended many
Kingdoms and large Provinces, besides Cities of great fame. On the South-East
part thereof, near to Palestina lies Cilicia; Cilicia. The City Tarsus.
the chief City whereof is Tarsus, the Country of Saint Paul, the place
whither Solomon sent for great store of his gold, and provision for the Temple,
whither Jonas also fled, when he should have gone to Niniveh.

In the straits of the Cilicia, near to the mountain Taurus, did Alexander
Alexanders overthrow of Darius.
give a great overthrow in person to Darius, in the joining of their first
battle.

This place seems to have been very fortunate for great Fights; in as much as
there also near unto the straits, was the ba^ell fought out between Severus
the Emperor and Niger; who being Governor of the Romans of Syria, would
needs have aspired to the Empire, but in a battle which was very hardly fought
out, he was overthrown in the straits of Cilicia.

In the very corner where Cilicia is joined unto the upper part of Syria, is a
little Bay, which in times past was named Sinus Isicus, near unto which
Alexander built one of his Cities, which he called by his own name. But
howsoever in times past it was named Alexandria, The City of Alexandria
it is now by the Venetians and other Christians, called Alexandretta; who
should say, little Alexandria, in comparison of the other. In Egypt the Turks
do call* it Scandarond, and it is a petty Haven, where our Merchants do land
most of their goods, which are afterward by Camels carried up to Aleppo. At
this day the City is so decayed, that there be only a few houses there.

Westward from Cilicia, lies the Province called Pamphylia: wherein Pamphylia.
^he City of Seleuchus.
stands the City Seleucia, built by Seleuchus, one of the four great
successors of Alexander the Great.

On the West of this Pamphylia, stands Lycia, and more west from Lycia.
thence confining upon the I Will of Rhodes, is Caria; one of the SeaTownes Caria.
whereof, is Halicarnassus, which was the Country of Herodotus, who is one of
the most ancient Historians that is extant of the Gentiles, and who dedicated
his nine books to the honor of the Muses.

Here also was that Dionysius borne, who is called commonly Dionysius
Halicarnassus, one of the Writers of the Roman Story, for the first three
hundred years after Rome was built.

The whole Country of Caria is sometimes signified by the name of this
Halicarnassus, although it Halicarnassus.
was but one City; and thereupon Artemisia, who in the days of Xerxes, came to
aid him against the Graecians, and behaved her self so manfully in a great
fight at sea, when Xerxes stood by as a coward, is entitled by the name not of
Queen of Caria, but of Halicarnassus. Also in the days of Alexander the Great,
there was another Queen, named Ada; who also is honored by the title of Queen
of Halicarnassus.

We have thus far described those Cities of Asia the less, which do lie from
that part that joineth unto Syria, along the Sea coast Westward; but being
indeed the Southern part of Asia minor.

Now upwards toward the Ionia.
North, stands Ionia, where those did dwell, who had like to have joined with
Xerxes, in the great battle at sea, but that Themistocles by a policy, did
win them from him, to take part with the Gr^cians. Diodorus Siculus writes,
that the Athenians, who professed to be of kin to those Ionians, were on a time
mavelous importunate with them, that they should leave their own Country, and
come and dwell with them: which when the Ionians, hardly, but yet at length did
accept, the Athenians had no place to put them in, and so they returned with
great disgrace to them both.

A little within the Land, lying North and East from Ionium, was Lydia, which
sometimes was the Lydia.
Kingdom of Croesus, who was reputed so rich a King; when he was in his
prosperity, making best of his happiness, he was told by Solon, that no man
could reckon upon felicity so long as he lived, because there might be great
mutability of Fortune, which he after ward found true: For he was taken
prisoner by Cyrus, who was once minded Croesus overthrown by Cyrus.
to have put him to death, but hearing him report the advertisement of Solon
formerly given to him, he was moved to think that it might be his own case,
and so took pity on him, and spared his life.

These Lydians being inhibited afterward by Cyrus, to use any Armor, and give
themselves to Bathes and Stews, and other such effeminate things.

Upon the seacoast in Ionia stands the City Ephesus, which was Ephesus.
one of the seven Cities, unto which John in his Revelation did write hi^ seven
Epistles: and Saint Paul also directed his Epistle to the Ephesi ans, unto the
Church which was in this place.

This was one of the most renowned Cities of Asia the less, but the Fame
thereof did most arise from The Temple of Diana.
the Temple of Diana, which was there built, and was reputed for the
magnificence thereof, one of the seven wonders of the world. This Temple was
said to be two hundred years in building, and was burnt seven several times,
whereof the most part was by lightning, and the final destruction thereof came
by a base person, called Herostratus; who to purchase himself some fame, did
set it on fire.

This was the place of which it is said in the Acts of the Apostles, that all
Asia, and the whole World do worship this Diana.

Tully reports, De natura Deorum, that Tin^us being asked the reason, why the
Temple of Diana was on fire that night when Alexander the Great was born, gave
that jest thereof, that the mistress of it was from home; because she being
the Goddess of Midwives, did that night wait upon Olympias the Mother of
Alexander the Great, who was brought to bed in Macedonia.

Another of the seven Cities unto which John did write, is Smyrna, City of
Smyrna.
standing also in Ionia, upon the Sea coast, but somewhat more North then
Ephesus; which is the place where Polycarpus was Bishop, Polycarpus, Scholar to
St John the Evangel st.
who sometimes had been Scholar unto John the Evangelist, and living till he
was of great age, was at l^st put to death for Christ's sake, when before he had
been moved by the Governor of the Country to deny his Sa viour, and to burn
Incense to an Idol: But he answered that ^ourescore and six years he had
served Christ Jesus, and in all that time he had never done him harm: and
therefore now in his old age he would not begin to deny him.

The third City unto which the Epistle is directed in the Apocalypse, is Sardis:
which stands City of Sardis.
within the land in Lydia, as is described by the best Writers; and it was a
City both of great pleasure and profit unto the Kings in whose Dominion it
stood: which may be gathered hereby, that when once the Grecians had won it,
Durius Histaspis, or Xerxes, who were Kings of Persia, did give charge, that
every day at dinner, one speaking aloud, should remember him, that the Grecians
had taken Sardis, which intended, that he never was in quiet till it might be
recovered again.

There stood also in the Inland, Philadelphia, Thyatina, Laodicea, Four Cities
of ^ote.
and most of all to the North Pergamus: which were the other four Cities, unto
which St John the Evangelist did direct his Epistle.

Going upward from Ionium to the North, there lies on the Seacoast Eolis.
a little Country called Eolis: and beyond that, although not upon the Sea, the
two Provinces called Mysia major, and* Mysia minor.
Mysia Major, and Mysia Minor; which in times past, were so base and
contemptible, that the people thereof were used in speech as a proverb, that if
a man would describe one meaner then the meanest, it was said, he was Mysiorum
postremus.

On the West part of Mysia major, did lie the Country called Troas, wherein
stood Ilium, and the City of Troy, against which as The City of Troy.
both Virgil and Homer have written, the Grecians did continue their siege for
the space of ten years, by reason that Paris had stolen away Helena, the
wife of Menelaus, who was King of Sparta.

Eastward both from Troas and Mysia major, a good space within the land was the
Country called Phrygia, where the Goddess Phrygia.
which was called Bona Dea, or Pessinuntia, or Cybele, the mother of the old
gods, had her first abiding, and from thence (as Herodia^ wrteth) was brought
to Rome, as implying that good fortune should follow her thither.

In this Country lived that Gondius, who knit the ^ot called for the
intricatenesse thereof, Nodus, Gordianus; and when it Gordianus knot.
could not be untied, was cut in sunder by Alexander the Great, supposing* that
it should be his fortune, for the loosing of it so to be the Conqueror, and
King of Asia, as by a prophecy of the same Gordius had been before spoken.

Yet Northward from Phrygia, lies the Country of Bythinia; Bythinia.
which was sometimes a Kingdom, where Perusias reigned, that had so much to do
with the Romans.

In this Country stands the City Nicea, where the first General Ci^y of Nice.
Council was held against Arius the Heretic by Constantine the Great,
thereof called the Nicene Council^* Here stands also Chalcedon, Chalcedon.
where the fourth General Council was held by the Emperor Marcianus, against
the Heretic Nestorius.

From Bythinia Eastward, on the North side of Asia the less, stands the
Country of Paphlagonia, Paphlagonia
where was the City built by Pompey the Great, called by his name,
Pompeiopolis. On the South Pompciopolis.
of Paphlagonia, toward the Island of Asi^ minor, di^ stand the Country of
Galatia, whereunto Galatia.
Saint Paul wrote his Epistle to the Galathians. And this also was one of those
Countries where the Jews were dispersed, unto which Saint Peter wrote his
first Epistle; as also unto them which were in Pontus, Cappadocia, and
Bythinia, from whence Southward lies the Province termed Lyeaoni: And Lyeaonia.
from thence, yet more South, bordering upon Pamphylia, which touches the
Mediterranean sea, lies Pisidia, concerning which Pisidia.
Countries we find oftentimes mention made in such stories as do touch Asia the
l^sse.

From these Sourthern parts, if we return back again unto the North and East
of Asia major, lies the Kingdom of Pontus, confining The Kingdom of Pontus.
upon that which is named Pontus Euxinus. In this Pontus did reign
Mithridates, who in his younger Mithridates
days had traveled over the greatest part of Asia, and is reported to have
been so skillful, that he could well speak more then twenty Languages. His
hatred was ever great toward the Romans, against whom, when he meant first to
put his malice in practice, he so combined with the Naturals of those parts,
that in one night they slew more than threescore and ten thousand of the
Romans, carrying their intendment so close, that it was revealed by none till
the execution was done.

Pompey the Great was the man Pompey brought Mithridates to distress.
who distressed this Mithridates, and brought him to that extremity, that he
would gladly have poisoned himself, but could not; in as much as his stomach
had been used so before unto that kind of Treacle (which by reason of his
inventing of, unto this day is called Mithridate) which is made of a kind of
poison allaied, that no venom would easily work upon him.

Southward from this Pontus, stands the old Kingdom of Cappadocia,
Cappadocia.
which in times past was observed to have many men in it, but little money:
Whence Horace says, Mancipiis locuples eget aris Cappadocum Rex.

Eastward from this Cappadocia, as also from Pontus, is Armenia minor, Armenia
minor.
whereof the things memorable are described in the other Armenia. And thus much
touching Asia the less.

Of Syria, and Palestina, or the Holy Land.
SOuthward from Cilicia and Sy^ia bounded.
As^a the less, lies Syria; a part whereof was called Palestina: having on
the East Mesopotamia, on the South Arabia, on the west, Tire and Sidon, and the
end of the Mediterranean Sea.

The people of this Syria were Their ^ient ^ames.
in times past called the Ardmites. In their language is the transl^ion of the
New Testament, called Syriacke.

In this Country standed An^, Ci^y of (...).
which was sometimes one of the ancient (...) See, and is a City of reckoning
unto this day. Here also stands now the City of Al^ppo.
Aleppo, which is a famous M^rt Town for the Merchandising o^ the Persians,
and others of the E^st, and for the Turks, and such Countries as be adjoining.
Here stands ^th also Tripolis. Tripolis.


The South part of Syria, lying down toward Egypt* and Arabia, was the place
where the Children of Israel did dwell, being a Country of small quantity, not
200. Italian miles in length: it was so fruitful flowing with Milk and Honey,
(as the Scripture calls it) that it did maintain above thirty Kings Thirty
Kings.
and their people, before the coming of the children of Israel out of Egypt,
and was sufficient afterward to relieve the incredible number of the twelve
Tribes of Israel.

It is noted of this Country, Note.
that whereas by the goodness of the Climate wherein it stood, and the
fertility of the soil (but especially by the blessing of God) it was the most
fruitful L^nd that was in the World: Now ou^ Travelers by experience do find
the Country, in respect of the fruitfulness, to be changed, G^d cursing the
Land together with the Jews, the Inhabitants of it. It is observed also for
all the Eastern parts, that they are not so fertile as they have been in
former Ages, the Earth (as it were) growing old, which is an Argument of the
Dessolution to come by the day of Judgment.

Through this Country does The River Jordan.
run the River Jordan, which has heretofore been famous for the fruitfulness
of the trees standing thereupon, and for the mildness of the Air, so that (as
Josephus writes) when snow has been in other places of the Land, about the
River it has been so calm, that men did go in single thin linen garments.

In this Country stands the Lake, called Lacus Asphaltites, because
Asphaltites
of a kind of slime called Bitumen, or Asphaltum, which daily it does cast up,
being of force to join stones exceeding fast in building: And into this Lake
does the River Jordan run.

This Lake is it which is called Mare mornum.
Mare Mortuum, a Sea because it is salt; and Mortuum, or Dead, for that no
living thing is therein. The water thereof is so thick, that few things will
sink therein, in so much, that Josephus faith, that an Ox having all his
legs bound will not sink into that water.

The nature of this Lake (as it was supposed) was turned into this quality,
when God did destroy Sodom and Gomorrah, and the Cities adjoining, with fire
and brimstone from Heaven: for Sodom and the other Cities did stand near unto
Jordan, and to this Mare Mortuum: for the destruction of whom, all that Coast
to this day is a witness, the Earth smelling of brimstone, being desolate, and
yielding no fruit saving apples, which grow, with a fair show to the eye, like
other fruit; but as soon as they are touched, do turn presently to soot, or
ashes, as besides Josephus, Solinus does witness in his 48 Chapter.

The Land of Palestina had for Twelve Tribes of Israel.
i^s Inhabitants, all the Twelve Tribes of Israel, which were under one
Kingdom, till the time Rehoboam the Son of Solomon; But then were they
divided into two Kingdoms, ten Tribes being called Israel, and two Judah,
whose chief City was called Jerusalem. Jerusalem.


The ten Tribes after much Idolatry, Twelve Tribes divided.
were carried prisoners unto Assyria, and the Kingdom dissolved, other people
being placed in their room in Samaria, and the Country adjoining.

The other two Tribes were The Jews.
properly called the Jews, and their Land Judea; which continued long after in
Jerusalem, and thereabout, till the Captivity of Babylon, where they l^ved for
seventy-ye^es. They were afterward restored, but lived without glory, till the
coming of Christ: But since that time for a curse upon them and their
children, for putting Christ to death they are scattered upon the face of the
earth, as Runnagates, without certain Country, King, Priest, or Prophet.

In their chief City Jerusalem, was the Temple of God, first most gloriously
built by Solomon; and Jerusalem destroyed.
afterward destroyed by Nebuchadnezzar. By the commandment of Cyrus King of
Persia, was a second Temple built* much more base than the former. For besides
the poverty, and smalnesse of it, the^e wanted five things which were is the
former, as the Jews write. Note.
First, the Arc of the Covenant: Secondly, the pot of Manna: Thirdly, the Rod
of Aaron: Fourthly, the two Tables of the Law, written by the finger of God:
And fifthly, the fire of the Sacrifice, which came down from Heaven. Herod the
Great, an Edomite stranger, having gotten the Kingdom, contrary to the Law of
Moses, and knowing the people to be offended therewithal, to procure their
favor, he built a third Temple, wherein our Savior Jesus Christ and his
Apostles did teach.

The City of Jerusalem was Jerusalem twice destroyed. 1 By Nebuchadnezzar. 2.
By Vespasian.
twice taken, and utterly laid desolate; first by Nebuchadnezzar at the
Captivity of Babylon: and secondly, after the death of Christ, by Vespasian the
Roman (who first began the Wars) and by his son Titus, who was afterward
Emperor of Rome, who brought such horrible desolation on that City, and the
people thereof, by fire, sword and famine, that the like has not been read in
any History. He did afterward put thousands of them (on one some day) to be
devoured of the Beasts, which was a cruel custom of the Romans Magnificence.

Although Numbers and Times be not superstitiously to be observed (as many
foolish imagine) yet it is a matter in this place, not unworthy the noting,
which Josephus reports in his seventh book and tenth Chapter, de bello
Judaico, that the very same day whereon the Temple was set on fire by the
Babylonians, was the day whereon the second Temple was set on fire by the
Romans, and that was upon the tenth day of August.

After this destruction, the Land of Judea, and the ruins of Jerusalem. were
possessed by some of the people adjoining, till that about six hundred years
since, the Saracens did invade it: for expelling of whom from thence, diverse
French men and other Christians, under the leading of Godfrey of Bullen, did
assemble themselves, thinking it a great shame, that the Holy Land (as they
called it) the City of Jerusalem, and the place of the Sepulcher of Christ,
should be in the hands of Infidels.

This Godfrey ruled in Jerusalem by the name of a Duke: but his successors
after him, for the space of 87. years, called themselves Kings of Jerusalem:
About which time, Saladine (who called himself King of Egypt and Asia the
less) did win it from the Christians. For the recovery whereof, Richard the
first, King of England, together with the French King, and the King of Sicilia,
did go in person with their Armies, to Jerusalem; but although they won many
things from the Infidels, yet the end was, that the Saracens did retain the
HOLY LAND.

Roger Hoveden, in the Life of Henry the second King of England, does give this
memorable note, that at that time when the City of Jerusalem and Antioch, were
taken out of the hands of the Pagans, by the means of Godfrey of Bullen, and
others of his Company, the Pope of Rome that then was, was called Urbanus; the
Patriach of Jerusalem, Heraclius; and the Roman Emperor Frederick; and at the
same time when the said Jerusalem was recovered again by Saladine, the Popes
name was Urbanus; the Patriarch Jerusalem, Heraclius, and the Roman Emperor
Frederick.

The whole Country and City of Jerusalem in the Turks dominion.
Jerusalem, are now in the dominion of the Turk, who notwithstanding for a
great tribute does suffer many Christians to abide there.

There are now therefore two or more Monasteries and Religious houses, where
Friars do abide, and make a good commodity of showing the Sepulcher of Christ,
and other Monuments, unto such Christian Pilgrims as do use superstitiously to
go in pilgrimage to the Holy Land.

The King of Spain was wont to call himself King of Jerusalem.

Of Arabia.
NExt unto the Holy Land, Arabia bounded.
lies the great Country of Arabia, having on the North part, Palestina, and
Mesopotamia; on the East side the Gulf of Persia; on the South, the maine
Ocean of India, or Ethiopia: on the West Egypt, and the great Bay, called Sinus
Arabicus, or the Red Sea.

This Country is divided into three parts: North part whereof is called Arabia
Deserta, the Arabia divided into three parts.
South part, which is the greatest is named Arabia Foelix: and the middle
between both, that (which for the abundance of Rocks and stones) is called
Arabia Petrea, or Petrosa.

The Desert of Arabia, is that Of the Desert of Arabia.
place in the which God after the deliverance of the Israelites from Egypt, by
passing through the Red Sea, did keep his people under Moses, for forty years,
because of their rebellion; feeding them in the mean time with Manna from
Heaven; and sometimes with water miraculously drawn out of dry Rocks: for the
Country has very little water, almost no trees, and is utterly unfit for
tillage or corn.

There are no Towns nor inhabitants of this Desert: in Arabia Petrosa are some,
but not many.

Arabia Foelix, for fruitfulness of ground, and convenience standing every way
toward the Sea, is one of the best Countries of the world: and the principal
cause why it is called Foelix, is, for that it yields many things in
abundance, which in other parts of the world are not to be had; as Frankincense
especially, the most precious Balmes, Myrrh, and many other both Fruits and
Spices, and yields withal, store of some precious stones.

When Alexander the great was young, after the manner of the Macedonians, he
was to put incense upon an Altar; pouring on great store of Frankincense one of
the Nobility of his Country told him, that he was too prodigal of that sweet
perfume; and that he should make spare, until he had conquered the Land
wherein the Frankincense did grow. But when Alexander afterward had taken
Arabia, and had possession thereof, he sent a ship load of Frankincense to the
Noble man, and bad him serve the gods plentifully, and not offer incense
miserably.

This is that country wherein Mahomet born in Arabia.
Mahomet was borne, who being of mean parentage, was brought up in his youth in
the trade of Merchandise; but afterward joining himself with thieves and
robbers, his life was to rob such Merchants as passed through Arabia; and to
this purpose having gotten together many of his own Contrymen, he had
afterward a whole legion or more of the Roman Soldiers, who being offended
with Heraclius the Roman Emperor, for want of their pay, joined themselves to
him; so that at length he had a great Army, wherewith he spoiled the Countries
adjoining: And this was about the year of Christ 600.

To maintain his credit and authority with his own men, he fained that he had
conference with the Holy Ghost, at such times as he was troubled with the
falling sickness: and accordingly he ordained a new religion, consisting
partly of Jewish Ceremonies, and partly of Christian Doctrine, and some other
things of his own invention, that he might inveigle both Jews and Christians,
and yet by his own fancy distinguish his own followers from both.

The Book of his Religion is The Turks Alcaron.
called the Alcaron. The people which are Sectaries (whereas indeed they came
of Hagar, the Handmaid of Sarah, Abraham's wife, and therefore should of her be
called Ishmaelites or Hagarens) because they would not seem to come of a
bondwoman, and from him whom they suppose a bastard; they term themselves
Saracens, as coming from Sarah; they are called by some Writers, Arabians
instead of Saracens, their name being drawn from their first Country.

Mahomet did take something of The Turks Religion.
his doctrine both from the Jews and Christians: as that there is but one God;
that there is a life eternal in another world; and the ten Commandments,
which they do admit and believe; but from the Jews alone, the false Prophet
did borrow diverse things, as that all his males should be circumcised, that
they should eat no swines flesh; that they should oftentimes bathe, purge and
wash themselves; which diverse of their people, which are more religious than
the ordinary sort, do five times in the day, and therefore they have near to
their Churches and Houses of Devotion diverse Baths; whereinto when they have
entered and washed themselves, they do persuade themselves that they are as
clear from sin, as they were the first day they were born.

In this Country of Arabia stands a City called Mecha, where is The City
Mecha.
the place where Mahomet was buried, and in remembrance of him there is builded
a great Temple, unto which the Turks and Saracens yearly go on pilgrimage,
(as some Christians do to the Holy Land) For they account Mahomet to be the
greatest Prophet that ever came into the world; saying that there were three
great Prophets, Moses, Christ, and Mahomet: and as the doctrine of Moses was
better by Christ, so the doctrine of Christ is amended by Mahomet: In this
respect as we reckon the computation of our years from the incarnation of
Christ, so the Saracens account theirs from the time of Mahomet.

The Turks, whose fame began now about 3000 years since, have embraced the
opinions and religion of the Saracens, concerning Mahomet. Some of our
Christians do report, that Medina a City, standing three days journey from
Mecha, is the place where Mahomet was buried, and that by order from himself,
his body was put into an Iron Coffin, which being carried into a Temple, the
roof or vault whereof was made of Adamant, or perhaps of the Loadstone, is
attracted unto the top of the vault, and there hangs, being supported by
nothing. But there is no certainty of this Narration.

This false Prophet (as Lodovicus Vives, de veritate fidei, does write) being
desirous in some sort to imitate Christ Jesus, who foretold that he should rise
again within the space of 3. days, did give out that himself should rise
again; but he appointed a larger time, that was after 800. years, and yet that
time The blasphemous prophecy of Mahomet.
also is expired, but we hear no news of the resurrection of Mahomet. As the
Deviil has ever some device to blind the eyes of unbelievers, so he has
suffered it to be reported and credited among the Turks, that as Moses did
allude to the coming of Christ, so Christ did foretell somewhat of the
appearing of Mahomet. Whereupon it is ordinarily received among them, that when
Christ, in St John's Gospel, did say, That although he departed, he would send
them a Comforter, it was added in the Text, and that shall be Mahomet: But that
the Christians in malice to them, have raced out those words.

Their own books do mention that. Mahomet (while he lived) was much given to
lasciviousness, Mahomet a lascivious person.
and all uncleanness of body, even with very beasts; and his followers are so
senseless, that in imitation of him, they think no such wickedness to be
unlawful: For they are utterly unlearned, and most receive whatsoever is
delivered unto them out of the Alcaron, Mahomet having made it a matter of
death to dispute, sift, or call in question any thing which is written in his
Law.

On the West side of Arabia, between that and Egypt, lies the Gulf called of
the Country, Sinus Arabicus; by some, Mare Erithraeum, but commonly the Red
sea, The red sea
not from the redness of the water, but because the land and banks
thereabout, are (in color) red. This is the Sea, through the which (by Moses
the people of Israel were led, when they fled out of Egypt from Pharaoh, God
causing by his power, the waters to stand on both sides of them, that they
passed through as on dry land.

This is that Sea, through which the spices of the East Indies were in times
past brought to Alexandria in Egypt, and from thence dispersed into
Christendom by the Venetians: which spices, and Apothecaries drugs, are found
to be far worse than before time they were, by reason of the great moisture
which they take on the water, by reason of the long navigation of the
Portugals, by the back parts of Africa.

This is the sea, through the which Solomon did send for his gold, and other
precious Merchandise unto the East Indies, and not to the West Indies, as some
lately have disputed. Whereout the vanity of that opinion may appear that
America, and the West Indies, were known in the time of Solomon. For if he had
sent thither, his course had been along the Mediterranean, and through the
straits of Gibraltar, commonly called Fretum Herculium, between Spain and
Barbary: But the Scripture tells, that the Navy which Solomon sent forth, was
built at Ezion Geber, which is there also said to stand on the Red Sea. So his
course might be Eastward or Southward, and not Westward.

In the Desert of Arabia, is the Mount Horeb.
Mount Horeb, which by some is supposed to be the same that is called Mount
Sinai, where they think it was that Abraham should have offered up his son
Isaac. But this is certain, that it is the place where God in the wilderness
did give unto the people of Israel his Law of the ten Commandments, in
thundering, lightning, and great earth quake, in most fearful manner.

Of Afric and Egypt.
FRom Arabia and Palestina, Situation of Afric.
toward the West (...) A fricke, having on the North side, from the one end of
it to the other, the Mediterranean sea. The greatest p rt of which Coun try,
although it has been guessed at by Writers in former time, yet because of the
great heat of it, lying for the most part of it under the Zona Torrida, and or
the Wildernesses therein it was in former time supposed by many, not to be much
inhabited: but of certainty by all, to be very little discovered, till the
Portugals of late began their navigation on the back side of Africa to the
East Indies. So exact a description is therefore not to be looked for, as has
been of Asia and Europe.

Joining to the Holy Land, by a little Istmos, in the Country of Egypt, The
Country of Egypt.
which is a land as fruitful as any almost in the world, although in these
days it does not answer to the fertilty of former times.

This is that which in the time of Joseph did relieve Canaan, with corn, and
the family of Jacob, which did so multiply in the land of Egypt, that they were
grown to a huge multitude, when God by Moses did deliver them thence.

This Country did yield exceeding In fertility.
abundance of corn unto the City of Rome, whereupon Egypt as well as Sicilia,
was commonly called Horreum populi Romani.

It is observed from all antiquity, that almost never any rain did fall in the
land of Egypt. Whereupon the raining with thunder and lightning, and fire
running on the ground was so much more strange when God plagued Phara^h in the
days of Moses: But the flowing of the River Nilus over all the Country, their
Cities only, and some few hills excepted, does so water the Earth, that it
brings forth fruit abundantly.

The flowing of which river yearly, The flowing of Nilus.
is one of the greatest miracles of the world, no man being able to yield a
sufficient and assured reason thereof; although in Herodotus and Diodorus
Siculus, many probable causes and opinions are assigned thereof.

That there does not use any rain to fall in Egypt, besides other heathen
testimonies, and experiences of Travelers, may be gathered out of the
Scripture, for in the 10 Chapter of Deuteronomy, God does make an Antithesis
between the Land of Canaan, and Egypt, saying that Egypt was watered as a man
would water a garden of herbs, that is to say, by the hand: But they should
come into a Land which had hills and mountains* and which was watered with the
rain of Heaven: and yet some have written, that ever now and then* there is
mists in Egypt, which yield, though not rain, yet a pretty dew.

It is noted of this River, that if in ordinary places it do flow under the
height of fifteen cubits, that then for want of moisture, the earth is not
fruitful, and if it do flow above seventeen cubits, that there is like to be
a dearth, by reason of the abundance of moisture, the water lying longer on the
Land than the inhabitants do desire.

It is most probably conjectured, that the falling and melting of snow from
those hills which be called Lunae Montes, do make the increase of the River
Nilus. And the custom of the people in the Southern parts of Arabia is, that
they do receive into ponds and dams, the water that does hastily fall, and the
same they let out with sluices, some after some, which causes it ordinarily to
come down into the plains of Egypt.

For the keeping up of these Dammes, the Country of Egypt has time out of
mind paid a great tribute to Prester-John* Which when of late it was denied by
the Turk, Prester John caused all the sluices to be let go on the sudden;
whereby he marveliously annoied, and drowned up a great part of the Country of
Egypt.

In Egypt learning has been very Learning very ancient in Egypt.
ancient, but especially the knowledge of Astronomy and Mathematics, whereof
before the time of Tully, their Priests would report, that they had the descent
of 1500 years exactly recorded with observations Astrological; which as it is
a fable, unless they do reckon their years by the Moon, as some suppose they
did every month for a year, so it does argue knowledge to have been among them
very ancient.

Their Priests had among them a kind of writing and describing of things by
picture, which they did call their Hieroglyphica.

This in times past was a Kingdom, Their Pyramides one of the wonders of the
world.
and by the Kings thereof were built those great Pyramides, which were held to
be one of the seven wonders of the world, being mighty huge buildings, erected
of exceeding height, for to show the magnificence of their founders.

There is part of two or three of them remaining unto this day.

Diverse learned men are at this day of opinion, that when the children of
Israel were in Egypt, and so oppressed by Pharaoh, as is mentioned in the
beginning of the book of Exodus, their labor in burning of brick, was partly
employed to the erecting of some of those Pyramides, but the scripture does
only mention walling of Cities.

The founders of these Pyramides were commonly buried in, or under them: and it
is not unfit to remember, that the Kings, and great men of Egypt, had much cost
bestowed upon them after they were dead.

For in as much as Arabia was near unto them, whence they had most precious
balmes, and other costly Spices, they did with charge embalme their dead, and
that with such curious art, that the flesh thereof and the skin, will remain
unputrified for diverse hundred years: and all learned men think thousands of
years: Whereof experiments are plentifully at this day, by the whole bodies,
hands, or other parts, which by Merchants are now brought from thence, and does
make the Mummia which the Apothecaries use: the color being very black, and
the flesh clung unto the bones.

Moses does speak of this, when he says, that Jacob was embalmed by the
Physicians; after the manner of embalming of the Egyptians. But this manner of
embalming is ceased long since in Egypt.

In Egypt did stand the great City The City Memphis.
Memphis, which at this day is called Caire, one of the famous Cities of the
East.

Here did Alexander build that City, which unto this day is of his name, ca led
Alexandria: being now the greatest City of Merchandized in all Egypt: of which
Ammianus Marcellinus does observe, that there was never any, or almost have
ever been, but that once in the day the Sun has been ever seen to shine over
Alexandria. This City was one of the four Patriarchall seas. which were
appointed in the first Ni^ene Council.

This Country was governed by Good Laws made by the King of Egypt.
a King, as long ago as almost any Country in the World. Here reigned Amasis,
who made those good Laws spoken of by Herodotus, and Diodorus Sioulus: in
whose writings the ancient customs of the Egyptians are worthy to be read.

After Alexanders time, Ptolomeus one of his Captains, had this Kingdom, of
whom all his successors were called Ptolomeis, as before time all their Kings
were called Pharaohs, they continued long friends, and in league with the
people of Rome, till the time of Julius Caesar, but after wards they were
subjects to the Romans, till the Empire did decay.

When they had withdrawn themselves from the Romans government, they set up a
Prince of their own, whom they termed the Sultan or Souldan of Egypt; of whom,
about 400 years since, Saladine was one. But when the race of these were out,
the Mamabucks (who were the guard of the Sultaine, as the Janissaries be to the
Turk) appointed a Prince at their pleasure, till that now, about an 100 years
ago or less, the Turk Solimus possessed himself with the sole government of
the Country: so that at this day Egypt is wholly under the Turk.

There be Christians that now live in Egypt, paying their tribute unto the
Turk, as others do now also in Graecia.

Aeneas Sylvius does report in his History, de mundo universo, cap 60. that
diverse did go about to dig through that little Istmos or strait, which at the
top of the Red Sea, does join Egypt to some part either of Arabia, or of the
Holy Land; imagining the labor not to be great, in as much as they conceived
the space of ground to be no more then one thousand five hundred furlongs.
Sesostris the King of Egypt (as he says) did first attempt this. Secondly,
Darius, the great Monarke of the Persians. Thirdly Ptolomy, one of the Kings of
Egypt, who drew a ditch a 100. foot broad, 30. foot deep, and 37. miles and a
half long; but when he intended to go forward, he was forced to cease, for
fear of inundaiton, and overflowing the whole land of Egypt; the Red Sea being
found to be higher (by three Cubits) than the ordinary plain of Egypt was.
But Pliny affirms, that the digging was given over, lest the Sea being let
in, should mar the water of Nilus, which alone does yield drink to the
Egyptians.

Pet. Maffaeus in his Indian story, does tell, that there was a Portugal also,
that of late years, had a conceit to have had this work finished, that so he
might have made the third part of the old known world Africa, to have been an
Island compassed round with the Sea.

Men commonly in the description of Egypt, do report that whole Country to
stand in Africa, but if we will speak exactly, and repute Nilus to be the
bound between Asia and Africa, we must then acknowledge that the Eastern part
of Egypt, from Nilus, and so forward to the Red Sea, does lie in Asia; which is
observed by Peter Martyr in that pretty Treatise of his Delegatione Babylonica.

Although this Country of Egypt does stand in the self same Climat that
Mauritania does, yet the inhabitants there are not black, but rather dunne, or
tawny. Of which color Cleopatra was observed to be; who by inticement, so won
the love of Julius Caesar, and Antonie. And of that color do those runnagates
(by devices make themselves to be) who go up and down the world under the name
of Egyptians, being indeed but counterfets and the refuse of rascality of many
Nations.

Of Cyrene, and Afric the less.
ON the West side of Egypt, The Country of Cyrene.
lying along the Mediterranean, is a Country which was called in old time
Cyrene, wherein did stand that Oracle which was so famous in the time of
Alexander the Great, called by the name of the Temple or Oracle of Jupiter
Hammon, whither when Alexander did repair, as to take counsel of himself,
and his success, the Priests being before taught what they should say, did
flatteringly confess him to be the Son of God, and that he was to be adored:
so that as the Oracle of Delphos, and some other, were plain delusions of
Satan, who did reign in that dark time of ignorance: so this of Jupiter
Hammon, may be well supposed to be nothing else but a cousenage of the Priests.

In this Country, and all near about where the Oracle stood, are very great
wildernesses: where did appear to Alexander for four days journey, neither
Grass, Tree, Water, Man, Bird, nor Beast, but only a deep kind of Sand: so
that he was enforced to carry water with him for himself and his company (and
all other provision) on Camels backs.

At this day, this Country has lost his old name, and is reckoned as a part
of Egypt, and lies under the Turk.

In dry Countries, as in Africa, and the Wilderness of Arabia, they have much
use of Camels. First, because they can carry a huge burden of water and other
provision. Secondly, because that themselves will go a long time without drink
traveling (as Solinus writes) four days together without it, but then
drinking excessively, and that especially of muddy and puddle water: And
thirdly, because that in an extremity, those that travel with them do let them
blood in a vein, and suck out the blood; whereby as the owner is much
relieved, so the Camel is little the worse.

Westward from this Country, along the Mediterranean, lies that which in
ancient time was called Africa minor: for as in Asia one part above another,
was by an ex cellencie called Asia or Asta the less, so this part of Africa,
was termed by the Romans, sometimes Africa simply, some Afric the less.

In this Country did stand that place so famous mentioned by Salust, under the
name of Philionorum aroe; which was the bound in that time, between Afric
and Cyrene.

On the North and East part, hereof, in the Sea near unto the shore, was the
Quick-sand, which in times past did destroy so many ships, and was called
Syrtis magna as also on the North and West part, was the other sand called Sir
it is parva. Some part of this Country was heretofore under the Sultan of Egypt,
whose Dominion did extend it self so far to the West, and there was divided
from the Kingdom of Tunis: but it is now wholly under the Turk, and is
commonly reputed as a part of Barbary. For now, by a general name, from the
confines of Cyrene unto the West, as far as Hercules Pillar, is called
Barbary* though it contain in it diverse Kingdoms, as Tunis, Fessa and Morocco.

Of Mauritania and Caesariensis.
A Part of that Country, which by a general name is called at this day
Barbary, has in old time been called Mauritania, which was divided into two
parts: The East part whereof next to Africa minor, was called by the Romans,
Mauritania Caesariensis, as the other was called Mauritania Tingitania. In
Mauritania Caesariensis was the Country of Numidia, the people whereof were
used in the wars of the Carthaginians, as Light-horse-men, and for all nimble
services were very active.

In the East part of this Country standing in the sea, was that famous City of
Carthage, supposed to Carthage a famous City
be built by Dido, who came from Ty^us.

This City was it, which for the space of some hundred years contended with
Rome for the Empire of the world. In the Roman histories are recorded the
great wars which the people of Rome had with the City of Carthage.

In the first war of the three, the contention (...) the Isles of Sicilia,
Corsica, and Sardinia: when the victory fell to the Romans, and the
Carthaginians were glad to redeem their peace with the leaving of those Islands.

The second war was begun by Hanniball, who brake the league, and after he
had taken same part of Spain from the Romans, and sacked Sagantum, a City of
their friends, came first over the Pyrena hills to France, then over the Alps
to Italy, where he overthrew the Romans in three great battles, and much
endangered their estate; he continued in Italy with his Army, sixteen years,
till Scipio attempting on Carthage, forced Hanniball to return to rescue his
own Country. There was Hanniball overthrown, and his City put to a great
pension by Scipio, who for his victory there, was named Africanus.

In the third war (because the people of Carthage still brake the league)
their City was razed to the very ground by the earnest and continual counsel
of Cato the elder, fearing evermore so dangerous a Neighbor, though Scipio
Nasica counseled to the contrary; fearing lest if the dread of that enemy were
taken away, the Romans would grow either to idleness, or civil dissension;
which after they did. It is reported of Cato, that he never spoke his judgment
of any thing in the Senate, but his conclusion was thus: Thus I think for this
matter, and withal, that Carthage is to be razed down. And Scipio Nasica would
reply in his conclusion: Thus I think for this matter, and withal that
Carthage is not to be razed down.

Livy reports, that the way whereby Cato prevailed that Carthage should be
razed down, was this; while the question was very hot, he brings into the
Senatehouse green Figs, and let the Senators understand, that the same day
three weeks, those figs were growing in Carthage Town: whereby he made
mannifest unto them, that it was possible that an Army might be conveied from
Carthage to Rome in so short a time, as that they would not be able (on a
sudden, to resist, and so Rome might be surprised: whereby they all concluded,
that it was no safety for their City, to have so bad a neighbor so near unto
them.

In this Country toward the West, not far from Carthage stood Utica, whereof
the younger Cato was termed Cato Uticensis, because he killed himself there in
the Civil wars betwixt Caesar and Pompey, because he would not come within
the hands of his enemy Caesar.

Not far from thence Westward stands Hippo, which was the City where S.
Augustine was B shop.

This whole Country (at this day) is called the Kingdom of Tunis; the King
whereof, is a kind of stipendary unto the Turk: the people that inhabit there,
are generally Saracens, and do profess Mahomet.

Some do write that Tunis stands in the very place where old Carthage was;
which is not so, but is si^ua ed very near unto the old ruins of the other.
Against the King of Tunis, Charles the fifth had some of his wars by Sea.

Of Mauritania^ Tingitania.
THE other part of Barbary that lies along the Mediterranean, farthest into
the West, was called in old time Mauritana Tingitana. The people of which
Country were those which almost in all the old histories were called by the
name of Mauri; Those of the other Mauritania being rather termed Numidia.

Into the Northwest part thereof did Hercules come, and there set up one of his
Pillars, which answers to the other in Spain, they both being at the straits
of Gilbralter, in times past called Fretum Herculeum On the South part thereof,
lay the Kingdom of Bocchus, which in the The Kingdom of Bocchus.
tia^ of Marius had so much to do with the Romans. In the west part of this
Mauritania stands on the hill called Atlas minor; and on the Atlas minor
Atlas major.
South part is the great hill called Atlas major; whereof the maine Ocean which
lies between Mauritania and America is called Mare Atlantum. This hill is so
high, that unto those who stood on the bottom of it, it seemed to touch heaven
with his shoulders.

This Country has been long inhabited by the Saracens; who from thence finding
it to be but a short passage into Spain, did go over (now seven hundred
years ago) and possessed there the kingdom of Granado, on the South side of
Spain, till they were thence expelled by Ferdinandus, and Elizabeth, or
Izabell, King and Queen of Castile. In this Country since that time, have the
Spaniards taken some Cities and Holds; and so also have the Portugals: which by
the diverse event of victory, have often been lost and won by them.

Here it was that the Emperor Charles the fifth, had diverse of his great
wars against the Moors, as well as in the Kingdom of Tunis: For the
assistance of one who claimed to be King of a part of this Country, did
Sebastian the King of Portugal, go with all his power into Africa, in the year
1578. where unadvisedly bearing himself, he was slain, together with two other
the same day, who claimed to be Kings; so that there it was that true battle
was fought, whereof it was said, that three Kings died in one day: which battle
is called the battle of Alcazar, and was the ruin of the Kingdom of
Portugal, and the cause of the uniting it to the Crown of Spain Astrologers
did purpose, that the blazing Star which appeared the ^eare before, did
signify that i^l e^ent.

This whole Country does mais^aine in it, besides some Imperia^ government,
two absolute Kingdoms: the one of Fezza or Fez, which lies on the North part
toward the Mediterranean and Spain: the other is the Kingdom of Morocco, which
lies from above The Kingdom of Morocco.
the hill Atlas minor* to the South and West part of Mauritania. These are both
Saracens, as be also their people; holding true league with the Turk, and with
some other Christian Princes; a league only for Traffic and Merchandise.

It may be doubted whether it was in this Mauritana Tingitana, or rather but
near unto it, in Mauritania Caesoriens^, that which Saint Augustine in his book
De doctrina Christiana, does of his own knowledge report, that in a City of
that Country was this brutish custom, A brutish custom^uled in this coun^.
that once in the year (for certain days) the Inhabitants of the place did
assemble themselves into wide and large fields, and there divided themselves
each from other, so that perhaps the Fathers were on one side, and the children
or brother on the other; and did throw stones with such violence that many were
hurt, and diverse killed with the fury of that assault.

But S. Augustine relleth, that he de^esting the brutishness thereof, d^d make
a most eloquent and elaborate O^ation, or Sermon unto them; whereby he did
prevail with those of the City where he was, that the^ give over that foolish
and rude exercise: Yet Leo Ass^icanus, who lived about a hundred years since,
and in his own person traveled over the great part of Afric, does write in
his description of Afric, that in one place of the Kingdom of Fez, this
barba ^us custom is yet retained.

Of the other Countries of Afric, lying near the Sea.
FRom beyond the hill Atlas major, unto the South of Afric, is nothing
(almost it. Antiquity) worthy the readiag: and those things which are written
for the most part, are fables: For toward the South part of Afric, as well
as toward the North part of Europe and Asia, be supposed to be men of strange
shapes, as some with Dogs heads, some without heads, and some with one foot
alone, which was very huge, and such like: which that counterfeit Friar (who
write that book which is counted Saint Augustines, ad fraetres in Eremo; and
who would gladly father upon Saint Augustine, the erecting of the Augustine
Friars) does say, that he saw traveling down from Hippo, Southward in Africa:
But as the Ass in Aesope, which was clothed in the Lions skin, did by his
long ears show himself to be an Ass, and not a Lion; so this foolish fellow, by
his lying, does show himself to be a counterfeit, and not Saint Augustine.

In the new Writers there are some few things to be observed: as first, that
all the people in general to the South, lying with the Zona Torrida, are not
only blackish like the Moor, but are exceeding black. And therefore as in old
time by an excellency, some of them are called Nigritae, so at this day they
are named Negro's, as then whom no men are blacker.

Secondly, the Inhabitants of all these parts which border on the Sea coast,
even unto Caput bonae spei, have been Gentiles, adoring Their Religion. The
Portu gals have there settled themselves.
Images and foolish shapes for their Gods, neither bearing of Christ, nor
believing on Mahomet, till such time as the Portugals coming among them,
having professed Christ for themselves, but have won few of the people to
embrace their Religion.

Thirdly, that the Portugals passing along Africa to the East Indies, have
settled themselves in many places of those Countries, building Castles and
Towns for their own safety, and to keep the people in subjection, to their
great commodities.

One of the first Countries famous The Country of Guinea.
beyond Morocco, is Guinea, which we call Ginnie, within the compass whereof,
lies the Cape, called the Cape Verde, and the other, the Cape of the three
points; and the Town and Castle named Si^rta Li^na, at which place (as
commonly all Travelers do touch, that do p^sse that way for fresh ^er and
^ther sh^p-provision ^ur English men have found tra^ Their Commodities for
Trade.
icke into the parts of this Country, where th i^ greatest comm^dity is Gold,
and Elephants teeth; of both which there is good store.

Beyond that, toward the South, not ^arre from the Equinoctial, lies The
Kingdom of Congo.
the K^gdome of Congo, com monly called Mani-congo. Where the Portugals at
their first arrival finding the people to be Heathens without G^d, did induce
them to a profession of Christ, and to be baptized in great abundance, allowing
of the principles of Religion, until such time as the Priest did* teach them
to lead their lives ^
according to their profession; which the most part of them in no case
enduring, they returned back again to their Gentilisme. Their Religion


Beyond Mani-congo so fare to the South, as almost ten degrees beyond the
Tropicke of Capricorn, lies the Lands end; which is a promontory, now called
Caput bonae spei, which Vascus Gama the Portug^l did discover, and so called
it, because he had there good hope that the Land did turn to the North; and
that following the course th^reof he might be brought to Arabia and Persia,
but es^ecially to Calecut in India. Which course, when himself and other o^ his
Contrymen after him did follow, they found on the coast up toward Arabia,
the Kingdom of Mosambique, Melinda, Magadazo, and others? whose people were
all Gentiles, and now are in league with the Portugals, who have built diverse
holds for their safety. Of which Countries, and manners of the people, he that
lists to read, may find much in the History of Oso (...)* and Petrus
Maffaeus; but there is no matter of any great importance.

Beyond the Cape toward the North, before you come to Mosumbique, between the
Rivers of Cuama, and Sancto Spirito, lies the The Kingdom of Monomotapa.
Kingdom of Monomotapa, where the Portugals also have arrived, and so much was
done there by the preaching of Gonsalvo de Silva, a Jesuit, that the King and
Queen of that Country with many others were converted from Gentilisme Their
Religion.
to Christiani^y, and baptized: But certain Mahumetans incensing the King
thereof afterward against the Portugals, made him to revolt from his Religion,
and to put to death this Jesuit and diverse others. Which fact of his the
Portugals assavi^g to revenge with an Army sent for out of Portugal, they
profited little against him, but were themselves* consumed by the
discommodities of the Country, and the distemperature of the a^e.

There are also other Kingdoms sin this part of Afric, of whom we know
little besides their names The Kingdom of Adel, etc.
and site in general, as Adel, Monomugi, Angola, and therefore it shall be
sufficient to have named them in a word.

Of Abissines, and the Empire of Prester John.
IN the Inland of Afric, lies The Situation of the Empire of Prester John.
a very large Country, extending it self on the East, to some part of the Red
Sea, on the South to the Kingdom of Molinda, and a great way farther, on the
North to Egypt; on the West to Manicongo. The people whereof are called
Abissini, and it self the dominion of him, whom we commonly call in English
Prester John; but in Latin some term him Prestiosus Johannes, but the most
part Presbyter Johannes, One of the greatest in the world.
writing of him. As he is a Prince absolute, so he has also a Priestlike or
Patriarchall function and jurisdiction among them. This is a very mighty
Pr^nce, and reputed to be one of the greatest Emperors in the world.

What was known of this Country in former time, was known under the name of
Ethi^pia, but the voyages of the Portugals in these late days, have best
described it. The people therefore are Christians, as is also the Prince, but
differing in many things from the West Church; and in no sort acknowledging any
supreme Prerogative of the Bishop of Rome. It is thought that they have
retained Christianity even from the time of our Savior, being supposed to be
converted by the Chamberlain of Candace the Queen of Ethiopia, who was
instructed concerning Christ, by Philip the Evangelist in the Acts of the
Apostles. Eusebius (...) his Ecclesiastical story does make mention of this.
But they do to this da^ retain Circumcision: whereof the reason may be, that
the (...) (their Converter) not having any fu^ther conference with the Apostle,
nor any else with him, did receive the ceremonies of the Church imperfectly,
retaining Circumcision: which among the Jews was not aboli shed, when he had
conference with Philip.

Within the dominion of Prester John, are the mountains commonly Lunae Montes.
called Lunae montes: where is the first wellspring and rising of the river
Nilus: yet there are that fetch the head of this River out of a certain great
Lake toward the South, called Zembre: out of which toward the West, runs the
River of Zaire, into the Kingdom of Mani-congo; The R^ver of Zuama or Cuama,
toward the South, to the Kingdom of Monomo^apa, or Benomotapa, as the River
Nilus toward the North, through the Kingdom of the Abissines to Egypt, which
River running violently along this Country, and sometimes hastily increasing
by the melting of much snow from the Mountains, would over-runne and drown a
great part of Egypt, but that it is slaked by many ponds, dammes and sluices,
which are within the Dominion of Prester John. And in respect hereof, for the
maintenance of these the Princes of Egypt, have paid upto the Governor of the
Abissines, a great Tribute time out of mind: which of late the great Turk
supposing it to be a custom needless, did deny; till the people of the The
Abissines drowned Egypt.
Abissines by commandment of their Prince, did break down their dams, and
drowning Egypt, did enforce the Turk to continue his pay, and to give much
money for the making of them, very earnestly to his great charge, desiring a
peace.

In this Country also of Prester John, is the rising of the famous River
Nigar, supposed to have in The River Nigar.
it the most and the best precious stones of any River in the World, which
rising likewise out of a great L^ke out of that Mount, after it has run a
good space hides it self for the space of 60. miles under ground, then
appearing again after it has run somewhat further, makes a great Lake, and
again after a great tract, another; and at last after a long course, falls at
Cape Verde, into the Atlantic sea.

Ortelius in his larger Maps, describes it falling into the Sea, like Nilus in
Egypt, with seven streams or Ostia: but those that travel these parts say,
that there are only some Bays, but there is no River in those parts running
into the Sea, but (...).

There be other Countries in Afric, as Ag^simba, Libia interior, Nubia, and
others, of whom nothing is famous: but this may be said of Afric in general,
that it brings forth store of all sorts of wild Beasts, as Elephants, Lions,
Panthers, Tigers, and the like: yea, according to the Proverb, Africa semper
aliquid oportet novi; Oftentimes, new and strange shapes of wild Beasts are
brought forth there; the reason whereof is, that the Country being very hot, a
d full of Wildernesses, which have in them little water, the Beasts of all
sorts being enforced to meet at those few watering places that be, where
oftentimes contrary kinds have conjunction the one with the other: so that
there arifeth a new kind of Species which takes part of bo h. Such a one is
the Leopard, begotten of the Lion, and the Beast called Pardus, and somewhat
resembling ei her of them. A d thus far of Afric.

Of the Northern Islands.
THE Islands that do lie in the North, a^e in number almost infinite: the chief
of them only shall be briefly touched. Very far to the North in the same
Climate also with Sweden, that is, under the circle Articke, lies an Island
called in old time Thule, which was then supposed to be the farthest part of
the world North ward, and therefore is called by Virgil, Utima Thule. The
Country is cold, the people barbarous, and yielde h^ little Their commodities.
commodity, saving Hawks; in some part of the year there is no night at all.
Unto this land diverse of our English Nation do yearly travel, and do bring
from thence good store of fish, but especially our deepest and thickest Ling,
which are therefore called Isl nd ^ings.

It has pleased God, that in these Their Religion.
latter times, the Gospel is there preached, and the people are instracted in
Christianity, having also the knowledge of good Learning, which is brought
about by the means of the King of Sweden, unto whom that Island is now subject.

There is lately written by one of that Nation, a pretty Treatise in Latin,
which describes the manner of that Country; and it is to be seen in the first
Tome of Master Hackluits Voyage.

Southward from thence, lies Frizeland, called in Latin Frizlandia; Frizeland.
whereas the Frizeland joining to Germany, is in Latin called Frizia.

On the coast of Germany, one of the seventeene Provinces, is called Zealand,
in it stands Flushen and Middleburge.
Zealand, which continues in it diverse Islands; in whom little is famous,
saving that in one of them is Flishen o^ Flushen, a Town of war, and
Middleburge is another, a place ^f good Mart.

Livinus Limnius, and some of the low Germans, be of opinion, that this City
was fi^t built by Metellus the Roman; and that which now is called Middl^burge,
was at the first termed Metolli Burgum.

The States of the Low Countries, do hold this Province against the King of
Spain These Islands have been much troubled of late with inundation of water.

The Island that lies most West of any Fame is Ireland, which had Ireland.
in it heretofore many Kings of their own; but the whole land is now annexed to
the Crown of England. The people naturally are rude and superstitious; the
Country good and fruitful, but that for want of tillage in diverse places, they
suffer it to grow into boggs and deserts. A rare and admirable Note.
It is true of this Country (which Solinus writes of some other) that
Serpents and Adders do not breed there; and in the Irish timber, of certain
experience, no Spiders web is ever found.

The most renowned Island in Of Britain
the world is Albion, or Britania, which has heretofore contained in it many
several Kingdoms; but especially in the time of the Saxons. It has now in it
two Kingdoms, England and Scotland, wherein Four languages there spoken.
are four several languages; that is, the English, (which the civil Scots do
barbarously speak) the Welsh tongue (which is the language of the old
Britains;) the Cornish (which is the proper speech of Cornwall;) and the Irish
(which is spoken by those Scots which live on the West part of Scotland) near
unto Ireland. The commodities and pleasures of England are well known unto us,
and many of them are expressed in this verse:

Anglia, Mons, Pons, Fons, Ecclesia, Foemina, Lana. England is stored with
Bridges, Hills, and Wool;
With Churches, Wels, and Women beautiful.
The ancient inhabitants of this land, were the Britains, which Their
original.
were afterward driven into a corner of the Country, now called Wales; and it
is not to be doubted, but at first this Country was peopled from the continent
of France, or thereabout, when the sons of Noah had spread themselves from the
East to the West part of the world. It is not strange to see why the people of
that Nation do labor to fetch their pedigree from one Brutus, whom they report
to come from Troy; because the original of that truth began by Galfridus
Monumentensis, above 500. years agone, and his book contains great show of
truth, but was noted by Nubringensis, or some author of his time, to be merely
fabulous: Besides that, many of our English Nation have taxed the saying of
them, who would attribute the name of Brittannia unto Brutus, and Cornubia to
Corynaeus: Aeneas Sylvius. Epist. 1. 3. has thought good to confirm it,
saying; The English people (says he) do report, that after Troy was
overthrown, one Brutus came unto them, from whom their Kings do fetch their
pedigrees: Which matter there are no more Historians that deliver, besides a
certain English man, which had some learning in him, who willing to aequall
the blood of those Iflanders unto the Roman stock and generosity, did affirm
and say, that concerning Brutus, which Livy and Salust (being both deceived)
did report of Aeneas.

We do find in ancient Records and Stories of this Island, that since the first
possessions which the The Bri^taines five times conquered. First by the Romans.
Britains had here, it was overrun and conquered five several times. The
Romans were the first that did attempt upon it, under the conduct of Julius
Caesar, who did only discover it, and frighted the inhabitants with the name
of the Romans, but was not able to sarre to prevail upon it, as any way to
possess it; yet his successors afterward did by little and little, so gain
on the Country, that they had almost all of it; which is now called England;
and did make a great ditch or trench, from the East to the West sea, between
their dominion here, and Scotland. Diverse of the Emperors were here in person,
as Alexander, Severus, who is reputed to be buried at York. Here also was
Constantius, father unto Constantine the Great, who from hence married Helena a
woman of this Land, who was afterward mother to the renowned Constantine. But
when the Romans had their Empire much weakened, partly by their own discords,
and partly by that decay which the irruptions of the Goths and Vandals, and
such like invaders did bring upon them, they were forced to retire their
legions from thence, and so leaving the Country naked, the Scots, and certain
people called the Pictes, did break in, who most miserably wasted and spoiled
the Country. Then were the Inhabitants (as some of our Authors write) put to
that choice, that either they must stand it out and be slain, or give ground,
till they came to the sea, and so be drowned.

Of these Pictes, who were the Secondly, the Pictes who used to paint, or
pounse their faces.
second over-runners of this Land; some do write, that they did use to cut and
pounse their flesh, and lay on colors, which did make them the more terrible
to be seen with the cuts of their flesh. But certain it is, that they had
their name for painting themselves, which was a common thing in Britain in
Caesar's time, as he reports in his Commentaries, the men coloring their
faces with Glastone or Ode, that they might seem the more dreadful, when they
were to join battle.

To meet with the cruelty and oppression of these Barbars, the Thirdly* the
Saxons.
Saxons were in the third place by some of the Land called in, who finding the
sweetness of the soil and commodiousnesse of the Country every way, did
repair hither by great troops, and so seated themselves here, that there were
at once of them seven several Kingdoms, and Kings within the Compass of
England.

These Saxons did bear themselves with much more temperance and placability
toward those few of the Country that remained, then the Pictes, had done: but
yet growing to contention, one of their Kings with another, partly about the
bounds of their territories, and partly about other quarrels, they had many
great battles each with other.

In the time of these, Religion Their religion and devotion.
and Devotion, was much embraced, and diverse Monasteries, and rich Religious
houses were founded by them partly for penance which they would do, and partly
otherwise; because they thought it too meritorious: insomuch, that King Edgar
alone, is recorded to have built above four several Monasteries. And some
other of their Kings were in their ignorance so devoted, that they gave over
their Crowns, and in superstition did go to Rome, there to lead the lives of
private men.

These seven Kingdoms in the end, did grow all into one; and then the fourth
and most grievous scourge and conquest of this Kingdom, came in the Danes; who
Fourthly the Danes.
Lording it here diverse years, were at last expelled; and then William Duke of
Normandy, pretending that he had right thereunto by the promise of adoption, or
some other conveiance from Harald, did with his Normans pass over into this
Land, and obtained a great victory in Sussex, at a place which he caused in
remembrance thereof to be called Battle, and built an Abbey there, by the name
of Battle Abbey. He took on him to win the whole by conquest, and did bear
himself indeed like a Conqueror: For he seized all into his hands, gave out
Barons, Lordships, and Manors from himself: reversed the former Laws, and
Customs, and instituted here the manners and orders of his own Country; which
have proceeded on and been by little and little bettered; so that the
honorable government is established which we now see at this day.

It is supposed, that the faith of Christ was first brought into this land in
the days of the Apostles by Joseph of Arimathea, Simon, Zelotes, and some other
of that time: but without doubt not long after it was found here; which
appears by the testimony of Tertullian, who lived within less then 200.
years after Christ; And there are records to show, that in the days of
Eleutherius, one of the ancient B shops King Lucius the first that here
received Baptism and the Gospel.
of Rome, King Lucius received here both Baptism and the Gospel; insomuch that
it is fabulous vanity to say, that Austin the Monk was the first that here
planted the Christian Faith; for he lived 600. years after Christ, in the time
of Gregory the great Bishop of Rome: before which time Gildas is (upon great
reason) thought to have lived here; of whom there is no doubt, but that he was
a learned Christian: Yea, and that may be perceived by that which Beda has in
his Ecclesiastical story, concerning the coming in of Austin the Monk, that
the Christian Religion had been planted here before, but that the purity of it
in many places was much decayed; and also that many people in the Island were
yet Infidels: For the conversion of whom, as also for the reforming of the
other, Austine was sent hither, where he behaved himself so proudly, that the
best of the Christians which were here, did mislike him. In him was erected the
Archbishopric of Canterbury, which amongst old writers, is still termed
Dorobarnia: The Archbishops do reckon their succession by number from this
Austine.

The reason whereof Gregory Note.
the great is reported to have such care for the conversion of the Ethnicks in
Britain, was because certain boys which were brought him out of this
Country; which being very goodly of countenance (as our Country children are
therein inferior to no Nation in the world) he asked them what countrymen they
were; and it was replied that they were Angli; he said they were not unfitly so
called, for they were Angli tanquam* Angeli, nam vultum habent Angelorum. And
demanding further, of what Province they were in this Island; it was returned
that they were called Deires: which caused him again to repeat that word, and
to say that it was great pity, but that by being taught the Gospel they should
be saved de ira Dei.

England has since the time of the Conquest, grown more and more in riches;
insomuch that now more then 300. years since, in the time of King Henry the
third, it was an ordinary speech, that for wealth, this Country was Puteus
inexhaustus, a No Country like England.
Well that could not be drawn dry. Which conceit the King himself, as Matthew
Paris writes, did often suggest un^o the Pope; who there upon took advantage,
abusing the simplicity of the King, to suck out inellimable sums of money, to
the intolerable grievance of both the Clergy and Temporalty. And among other
things to bring about his purpose, the Pope did persuade the King, that he
would invest his young son in the Kingdom of Apulia* which did contain a great
part of all Naples; and for that purpose had from thence many thousands,
besides infinite sums which the King was forced to pay for interest to the
Popes Italian Usurers.

Since that time it has pleased God more and more to bless this Land, but
never more plentifully then in the days of our late, and now reigning
Sovereign, whose reign continuing long in peace, has peopled the Land with
abundance of inhabitants: has stored The riches of the country.
it with Shipping, Armor, and Munition, has fortified it many ways, has
increased the traffic with the Turk and Muscovite, and many parts of the
earth far distant from us, has much bettered it with building, and enriched
it with Gold and Silver, that it is now (by wise men) supposed, that there is
more Plate within the Kingdom, then there was Silver when her Majesty came to
the Crown. Some Writers of former times, yea, and those of our own Country
too, have reported that in England have been Mines of Gold, or at the least
some gold taken out of other Mines: which report has in it no credit, in as
much as the Country stands too cold, neither has it sufficient force of the
Sun to concoct and digest that metal. But truth it is that our Chronicles do
witness, that some silver has been taken up in the Southern parts, as in the
Tin-mines of Devonshire and Cornwall, and such is sometimes found now; but the
virtue thereof is so thin, that by that time it is tried and perfectly fined it
does hardly quit the cost: notwithstanding, Lead, Iron, and such basers metals,
be here in good plenty

The same reason which hinders gold ore from being in these parts, that is to
say, the cold of the climate, does also hinder that there is no wine, whose
grapes grow here. For although we have grapes, which in the hotter and warm
summers do prove good, but yet many times are nipped in the frost before they
be ripe, yet notwithstanding they never come to that concocted maturity as to
make sweet and pleasant wine; yet some have labored to bring this about, and
therefore have planted vineyards, to their great cost and trouble, helping and
aiding the soil by the uttermost diligence they could; but in the end it has
proved to very little purpose.

The most rich commodity which our Land has naturally growing, is Wool, for
the which it is renowned The rich commodity of wool.
over a great part of the Earth. For our Clothes are sent into Turkey, Venice,
Italy, Barbary, yea as far as China of late, besires Moscovie, Denmark, and
other Northern Nations: for the which we have exchange of much other
Merchandise necessary for us here* besides that, the use of this Wool does in
several labors set many thousands of our people in work at home, which might
otherwise be idle.

Amongst the Commendations Bridges.
of England, as appears in the place before named, is the store of good
Bridges: whereof the most famous are London Bridge, and that at Rochester. In
diverse places here, there be also Rivers of good Rivers.
Name, but the greatest glory does rest in three: the Thames, called in Latin
of Tame and Isis, Tamesis: Servene called Sabrina: and Trent, which is commonly
reputed to have his name of trente the French word, signifying thirty, which
some have expounded to be so given, because thirty several Rivers do run into
the same: And some other do take it to be so called, because there be thirty
several sorts of fishes in that water to be found, the names whereof do appear
in certain old verses recited by Master Camden, in his book of the Description
of England.

One of the honorable commendations which are reputed to be in this Realm, is
the fairness of our Fair and large Churches.
greater and larger Churches, which as it does yet appear in those which we
call Cathedral Churches, many of them being of very goodly and sumptuous
buildings; so in times past it was more to be seen, when the Abbeys, and those
which were called religious houses, did flourish; whereof there were a very
great number in this Kingdom, which did eat up much of the wealth of the
Land; but especially those which lived there, giving themselves to much
filthiness, and diverse sorts of uncleanness, did so draw down the vengeance
of God upon those places, that they were not only dissolved, but almost utterly
defaced by King Henry the eighth. There are two Archbishopricks, and 24 other
Bishoprics 2. Archbishopricks, and 24. other Bishoprics.
within England and Wales.

It was a tradition among old writers, that Britain did breed no Wolves in it,
neither would they live here; but the report was fabulous, in as much as our
Chronicles do write* that there were here such store of them, that the Kings
were enforced to lay it as an imposition upon the Kings of Wales, who were not
able to pay much money for tribute, that they should yearly bring in certain
hundreds of Wolves; by which means they were at the length quite rid from
Wolves.

The Country of Wales had in times past a King of it self; yea, and sometimes
two, the one of NorthWales, and the other of SouthWales, between which people
at this day there is no great good affection: But the Kings of England did by
little and little so gain upon them, that they subdued the whole Country unto
themselves; and in the end King Henry the 8. intending thereby to benefit this
Realm and them, did divide the Country into Shires, appointed there his
Judices Itinerantes, or Judges of the circuit to ride; and by Act of
Parliament, made them capable of any preferment in England, as well as other
Subjects. When the first news was brought to Rome, that Julius Caesar had
attempted upon Britain, Trully in the elegance of his wit (as appears in one
of his Epistles) did make a flout at it, saying, That there was no gain to be
gotten by it. For gold here was none, nor any other commodity to be had,
unless it were by slaves, whom he thought that his friend to whom he wrote,
would not look to be brought up in learning or Music. But if Tully were Note.
alive at this day, he would say, that the case is much altered, in as much as
in our Nation is sweetness of behavior, abundance of learning, Music, and all
the liberal Acts, goodly, buildings sumptuous apparel, rich fare, and
whatsoever else may be truly boasted to be in any Country near ad joining.

The Northern part of Britain is Of Scotland.
Scotland, which is a Kingdom of it self, and has been so from very ancient
time, without any such conquest, or maine transmutation of State, as has been
in other Countries. It is compassed about with the sea on all sides, saving
where it joyneth upon England: and it is generally divided into two parts, the
one whereof is called the Highland, and the other the Low-land.

The Low-land is the most civil part of the Realm, wherein religion is more
orderly established, and yields reasonable subjection unto the King, but the
other part called the High-land, which lies further (...) the North, or else
bends toward Ireland, is more rude and savage, and whither the King has not
so good access, by reason of Rocks and mountains, as to bring the Noblemen,
which inhabit there to such due conformity of Religion, or otherwise, as he
would.

This Country generally is more Scotland very poor in formertimes*
poor then England, or the most part of the Kingdoms of Europe: but yet of
late years the wealth thereof is much increased by reason of their great
traffic to all the parts of Christendom; yea unto Spain it self, which has of
late years been denied to the English, and some other Nations: and yet unto
this day they have not any ships but for Merchandise; neither has the King in
his whole Dominion any vessel called A man of war. Some that have traveled
into the Northern parts of Scotland, do report, that in the Solstitium
aestivele, they have scant any night, and that which is, is not above two
hours, being rather a d mnesse then a darkness. The language of the Country
is in the Lowland a kind of barbarous English. But toward Ireland side, they
speak Irish: which is the true reason The reason why it is said that in Britain
are four languages.
whereof it is reported, that in Britain there are four languages spoken that
is, Irish in part of Scotland, English for the greatest part, Welsh in Wales,
Cornish in Cornwall.

In the confines between the two Kingdoms of England and Scotland, which are
commonly called the Borders, there lie diverse outlaws and unruly people; which
being Borderers great robbers and stealers.
subject to neither Prince by their good wits, but so far as they list; do
exercise great robberies and stealing of cattle from them that dwell
therabout: and yet the Princes of both Realms, for the better preservation of
Peace and Justice, do appoint certain Warders on each side, who have power even
by Martial Law to repress all enormities.

The Queen of England had on Lord Warden of the Marches.
her side three: whereof one is called the Lord Warden of the East Marches, the
other of the west Marches, the third, the Warden of the middle Marches, who
with all their power cannot so order things, but that by reason of the outrages
thereabouts committed, the borders are much unpeopled; whiles such as desire to
be civil, do not like to live in so dangerous a place.

It has been wondered at by many that are wise, how it could be, that whereas
so many Countries, having in them diverse Kingdoms and Regiments, did all in
the end come to the dominion of one (as appears at this day in Spain, where
were wont to be diverse Kings, and so in times past in England, where the seven
Kingdoms of the Saxons did Note.
grow all into one) yet that England and Scotland, being continuate within one
Island, could never till now be reduced to one Monarchy; whereof in reason the
French may be thought to have been the greatest hindrance. For they having felt
so much smart by the Arms of England alone; insomuch that sometimes all that
whole Country almost has been over run and possessed by the English, have
thought that it would be impossible that they should resist the force of them,
if both their Kingdoms were united and joined into one.

The Custom theresore of the Kings of France in former times was, that by
their gold, they did bird unto them the Kings and Nobility of Scotland, and by
that means the Kings of England were no sooner attempting any thing upon
France, but the Scots by and by would envade England: Whereupon the Proverb
amongst our people grew, That he who will France win, must A Proverb
with Scotland first begin.

And these Frenchmen continuing The policy of the French.
their policy* did with infinite rewards break off the Marriage which was
intended and agreed upon between King Edward the sixth, and Mary the late
unfortunate Queen of Scotland, drawing her rather to be married with the
Dolphin of France, who was son to King Henry the second: and afterward himself
reigned by the name of King Francis the second: But this was so ill taken by
the English, that they sought revenge upon Scotland, and (...) them a great
overthrow in that (...) which was called Musselborough Musselborough field. The
barbarousnesse of the Scots in former times
field.

The people of this Country were in times past (...) barbarous, that they did
not refuse (...) flesh: which, as S. Hierom does (...) of them, he himself saw
some of (...) to do in France, and the (...) hereof went so far, that
Chrysostom in one place does allude to such a matter.

There be many little Islands adjoining unto the great Island Bri tain: as at
the very North point of The Orcades the people barbarous.
Scotland the Orcades, which are in number above thirty, the chief whereof is
named Orkney, whereof the people are barbarous.

On the West side of Scotland toward Ireland, lie the Islands called Hebrides,
in number 4. where inhabit the people ordinarily called the Red-shankes. Not
far from The Redshankes.
thence is the Isle Mona, commonly is called the Isle of Man, the peculiar The
Isle of Man.
jurisdiction of the Earls of Darby, with homage notwithstanding reserved to
the Crown of England.

On the North part of Wales, is the Island of Anglisey, which is reputed The
Isle of Anglisey.
a distinct Shire.

Toward France side, on the South part of England, is the Isle of Wight, The
Isle of Wight.
in Latin called Victis: which is a good hold in the narrow seas against the
French. More near France are the Isles of Gernsey and Jernsey, The Isles of
Gernsey and Jernsey.
where they speak French, and are under the Crown of England. There are also
many other, but of small account: As the Isles of Thanet and Sheppy, on the
side of Kent, the Sorlings or Sull^y, at the end of Cornwall, in number (as it
is said) 145. Caldey, Lunday, and the Flatholns, with others in the mouth of
Diverse other Islands
Severn: Holy-farn, Cocket, Islands on the side of Northumberland. And thus much
of Great Britain, and the Islands thereunto adjoining.

Of the Islands in the Mediterranean Sea.
THere be many Islands in the Mediterranean, renowned in all the old Writers;
but the chief of them only shall be touched. From the Pillars of Hercules
going Eastward, are two Islands not fa^re from Spain, which in times past
were called Insulae Baleares, for that the people of Insulae Baleares.
them did use (both for their delight and armor) s^ings* which they continually
(almost) carried about with them: and whereunto, as Pliny writes, they did
train up their Children from their youngest years, not giving them any meat,
till they had from some post or beam cast it down with a s^ing. Of these were
those Fonditors, or Sling-casters, which the Carthaginians and Spaniards did
use in their wars against the Romans. The lesser of these, which lies most
West, was called in the old time Minorica; The bigger, which lies more East,
was called Majorica; and now Minorica and Majorica are both under the domi^ion
of the King of Spain.

More Eastward in the Sea, called Mare inferum, or Tyrrhenum, ^ieth The Island
of Corsica.
the Island of Corsica, over against Genua: and direct Southward from thence
lies the great ^sland Sardinia, The Island of Sardinia
for the quiet possession of which two, the wars were oftentimes revived
between the old Carthaginians and the Romans: for these two Islands lie in the
middle very fitly.

The Island of Corsica is subject to the state of Genua; whither the Genoes do
transport things out of the Maine; and are ruled by their Governors, as the
Venetians do Candy.

This Island is but barren, either in respect of some other that lie near unto
it, or of the Country of Italy; but yet yields profit, ease, and honor unto
the States of G^ nua, which has little land besid^ it.

The Island of Sardinia also is n^ way so fruitful as Sicily, but it is under
the government of the King of Spain, and was the same which was promised to
Anthony the King of Note.
Navarre, father to Henry the fourth King of France, in recompense of (...)*
and the rest of the Kingdom of Navar, then and now detained from him and his
heirs by the Spaniard. But this was the device only of the Cardinal of
Lorain, who intending to draw him to Papistry, and to order his politic
purposes, did make show of this, which was no way meant by the Spaniard.

Further to the East, at the very point of the South p^rt of Italy, lies The
Island of Si^lia.
the great Island Sicilia, which some have supposed to have been heretosore a
part of the continent: but by an earthquake and inundation of water, to have
been rent off, and so made an Island. The figure of this Country is Triquetra,
triangle, or three square.

Justin in his 4 Book does seem to suspect that Sicily was in times past
fastened unto Italy. But Seneca in consolatione ad Martian, cap 97. does say
plainly, that it was sometimes a piece of the continent.

There was also a great contention for this Country between the Carthaginians
and the Romans: but the Romans obtained it, and had from thence exceeding store
of Corn yearly: whereupon Sicily was called Horreum Pope Rome. Here stood the
goodly City called Siracusa, which The City Siracusa.
was destroyed and sac^ed by Marcellus the Roman. When, as Livy writes of him,
he being resolved Note.
to set on fire that City, which was then one of the goodliest places of the
world, could not choose but break forth into tears, to see how vain and
transitory the glory of worldly things is here.

At that time lived Archimedes, Arthimides the famous Enginemaker.
who was a most admirable ingenious Engine-maker, for all kind of
fortifications: of whom it is said that by burning glasses which he made, he
did set on fire diverse ships which the Romans had lying in the Haven. When the
City was taken, he was making plots, and drawing figures on the ground, for to
prevent the assaults of the Romans, and being unknown, he was slain by some of
the Soldiers which did break in upon him. Some think that it was he, and not
Architas, which made the dove, of which it is written, that it was so equally
poised, that being thrown up into the air, it would hover or flutter there,
and in a good space not fall down.

This was in times past a Kingdom, Sicily once a Kingdom* two famous Tyrants
in it.
where the two Tyrants, the elder and the younger Dyonisius did reign; where
Gelo also, that great friend to the Romans, did remain.

It was afterward made a province, and gover^ed by a Praetor, or Deputy of the
Romans: whereof Verres was one, who was so inveighed against by Tully.

It grew afterward to be a Kingdom again, in so much that Tancredus was King
of Sicily, which entertained our Richard the first, when with Philip the King
of France, he went to the conquest of the Holy Land. Here was likewise Phalaris
The tyrant. Phalaris.
the Tyrant so famous, King of Agragentum.

The tyrannies which were used in The tyrannies of Sicily were very famous.
Sicily, were in times past so famous, that they grew into a Proverb; as,
Invidi a Siculinon invenere Tyranni tormentum majus; but they who were the
causes of all, did oftentimes speed very ill themselves; as appears by the
elder Dionysius, who being driven out of his Dominion, did flee into Italy, and
was glad there to teach children, that so he might supply his necessity. His
son grew more tyrannous then the father, and stood so far in fear of his own
people, that many times he caused himself to be shut up in a Tower, and his
guard to keep the door, that nobody might come at him; He durst not trust his
barber to shave or clip him, for fear of cutting of his Note that cruelty is
always attended with scar.
throat; but that which was done he caused his Daughters to do, who with the
thin innet skin of walnuts being set on fire, are said to have taken off the
hair of his face.

This was he, whose felicity when Damocles a flatterer did seem marvelousty
Damocles the flatterer
to admire, he caused him to be set one day at dinner in his royal seat, with
dainty fare before him; Plate, rich Hangings, Music, and all other matters of
delight; but withal, a naked sword, which was only tied with a single hair
of a horses mane, to be hanged directly over him; the fear whereof did so
fear the flatterer left it should fall upon him, that he continually looked
upwards, and about him, and took no joy of that which was before him: whereby
Dyonisius did evidently teach him, that the state of some Princes, howsoever it
seem glorious unto others, yet it does bring little contentment unto
themselves, by reason of the continual dangers which hang over them.

It is reported of this man, that when all the people of this Country did for
his cruelty continually curse him, there was one woman which daily did go to
the Churches, and prayed the gods to lengthen his life; where withal when
Dionysius was acquainted, marvelling himself at the reason of it, he sent for
her, and asked what good thing he had done unto her, that she was so Note how
the poor woman prayed for this Tyrant.
careful evermore to pray for him? But the woman answered, that it was not for
love, but for fear, that she begged these things of the gods: For (said she) I
am an old woman, I do remember when your Grandfather lived, who being very hard
unto his people, was much maligned by them, and they prayed that they might be
rid of him: which falling our, afterward your father came in place, and he was
worse than the former: which when the subjects could not endure, they prayed
also that he might dye, hoping that the next would be better: Then came your
self in place, who have much exceeded the cruelty of your father: And whereas
others wish that you were gone also trusting for amendment in the next, I that
have lived so long, and see that things grow worse and worse, do pray that you
may continue* because that if we should have one that should succeed you, if he
walk in the steps of his predecessors, he must needs be as bad as the Devil
himself; for none else in tyranny can go beyond you.

Phalaris of Agrigentum was he who proposed rewards unto him who invented new
torments: which caused Perillus to make a Bull of Brass, into the which if
offenders should be put, and fire should be set under, then it would make them
roar like a Bull: But when upon the A good note for all inventers of tortures
and cruelty, and likewise for time flatterers.
terror thereof none would so offend as to deserve that torment, Phalaris took
Perillas, the Author thereof, and to try the experience, put him into it,
whereby Perillus lost his life.

This Country is now also under the King of Spain, who among other titles was
wont to call himself King of both Sicilies, reckoning this Island for one, and
that part of Italy for another, which is now called Calabria, and was in the
Roman H stories named Magna Graecia.

There is nothing more renowned* in all Sicilia, either with new or old
Writers, then the mountain Aetna: which being on the outside often covered The
mountian Aetna
with snow, yet by a sulphurous or brimstony matter, does continually burn
within: yea, so that whereas it was supposed in the ages last before us, that
the matter being consumed, the fire had ceased, twice in our age it has broke
forth again, to the incredible loss of all the country adjoining, the ashes
thereof destroying vines and fruits, which were within the compass of many
m^les about.

Agatheas in his History does tell, that in his one time there was an
incredible deal of ashes which did fall about Constantinople, and the places
near adjoining, insomuch that the ground was covered with the same: which he
reputeth to have been brought from the hill in Sicily: But B^din in his Method.
Hist. does reprove this as a fable, which can have no show of truth, by reason
of the great distance of the place: notwithstanding it is certain, that
sometimes when it does strongly break out, the fields and vineyards, and all
the fruits within the compass of some miles, are much hurt therewithal.

The reason of this Fire was laid The reason of the fire in the mountain Aeina*
down by Justine in his 4. Books; and is since approved both by Historians and
Philosophers: which is, that within the ground there is great ^ore of Sulphu^e
and brimstony matter, which having once fire in it, is apt to keep it. And
whereas all the whole Country is full of chinks and chaps, and hollowness
within the ground, the matter which enters there, does minister substance to
the continuance of that ^me: as we see that water cast on coals in the Smiths
Forge, does make them burn more servently: and then into the Chin^es* and Ch^ps
the wind does also enter, which by blowing and (...), does both cause the fire
never to extinguish; and sometimes (according unto the strength of the blast)
does make flames break out either more or less.

There are in the Hill Aetna, two principal places which are like unto two
Furnaces with Tunnels on the top of them, where diverse times (but especially in
the Evening and night) the flame does appear, mounting upwards; and it is so
strong, that oftentimes it brings up with it burnt and scorching stones and
pieces of hard substances, which seem to be rent out of some rock, to the
great terror and danger of any that do come near.

This is that place whither Empedocles Note.
threw himself, that he might be reported a god.

This was it whereof Virgil does make his Tract called Aetna: which the Poets
did report to be the shop of Vulcan, where Cyclopes did frame the Thunderbolts
for Jupiter.

And to conclude, that is it which some of our gross Papists have not feared
to imagine to be the place of Purgatory: As they have been so foolish to think,
that there is also another place, called the Mount Vidu in Iseland, where
souls have another Purgatory to be punished in, but there by cold, which
Surius in his Commentaries is so absurdly gross as to report an ^allow.

The Papists have show for their The Papists Purgatory is the fiery Aeana
Purgatory in Aetna, out of that Book which is commonly called by the name of
the Dialogues of Gregory the Great; For in that Book there are diverse things
to that purpose. But our best Writers of late have discovered that that same
Treatise is a counterfeit, being made by a later Pope Gregory, and not by the
first of that name, ordinarily called Gregorius Magnus: who although he have in
his Works diverse things tending to superstition; yet he was never so absurd as
to write things so unprobable, foolish, and grounded upon so bare reports as
these were.

Such another Hill as the Mountain of Aetna is, was in time past. Vesuvius, a
Hill in Campania, which is part of Italy; but this never had the like
continuance as that of Aetna, although in the time of Pliny the fire did break
forth there, and so strongly, as that the elder Pliny, who spent all his time
in discovering the secrets of Nature, pressing near to behold it, was stifled
with the flame, smoke, ashes or that he died The death of Pliny the elder.
in the place, as is most excellently described in the Book of his Epistle
(...) his Nephew the younger Pliny.

Not far from Sicily on the ^outh lies the little Isle called in old ^ime
Melita: whence those dogs come which are so much desired under the names of
Canes Melitenses.

This was the place where S. Paul Note.
was cast up after his shipwreck in his journey to Rome, where the Viper hanged
on his hand, and did not hurt him.

This Country is now called Malta, Malta the only place for repelling the Turks.
and is one of the places most renowned in the world for repelling of the
Turks: When Soliman the Emperor of them did send against it a most mighty arm;
it was then defended by them, who are called the Knights of Malta, which by sea
do great spoil to the Galleys of the Turk that pass that way*

There were in times past diver^ Orders of Knights, and men that ^ad vowed
themselves to adventure their lives and whole state, for the maintenance of
Christ's Religion and some places of the earth, against the Infidels and
Sarazens.

The most ancient of all those The society of the Knights Templers.
were called the Templers, who were a great corporation or society, consisting
of diverse Gentlemen younger. brothers for the most part, out of all the Realms
of Christendom: Their chiese charge was to defend the City of Jerusalem, and
the Relics or remainder of the Temple there, and Sepulcher of Christ: for the
preservation of which places, together with the rest of the Holy Land, they had
given unto them* and purchased for their money, very rich and ample possessions,
in England, France, Spain, Italy, and other places of Europe; insomuch that in
the days of Matthew Paris, he reports that they had under them many
thousands of Manors.

They had also in every Kingdom where their Order was permitted a great and
ample house, where some chief of their company did lie, who received the Rents
within that Kingdom. and caused the money to be transported into the Holy
Land, and other Ordinances to be made and executed belonging unto their Order:
of which Houses the Temple, that is now in London was a chief one, which had
in former times belonged to the Jews, but was afterward translated to that
use, when the Holy Land was quite taken by Saladine, and could never be
recovered into the hands of the Christians since the society of these Templers
ceased: the Pope and the King The Pope and the King of France. conspiring their
ruin.
of France conspiring their ruins, and their Land, were dispersed into diverse
men's hands.

In the same time when the Timplers were in their strength, there was another
sort called the Hospitallers, Hospitallers
whose condition and im ployment was very like unto the other; both of them
fighting for the preservation of Palestina,

We read that sometimes these two companies had great jarrs between themselves,
whereby grew much hinderance to the wars against the Infidels.

All these were accounted as Orders of Religion, and therefore it was forbidden
them at any time to marry, without dispensation from the Pope; because not
being entangled to Wife and Children, they might be more resolute to adventure
their lives.

After them grew up the Order of* The Knights of Rhodes.
the Knights of Rhodes, who since they could not live in the Holy Land, yet
would abide as near unto it as possibly they might: and therefore partly to
preserve Pilgrims which should go to visit the Sepulcher of Chirst, and partly
to infest the Turk and Saracens; but especially to keep the enemies of Christ's
faith from encroaching further upon Christendom, which most earnestly they
did, and do desire, they placed themselves in the Island of Rhodes, where daily
doing grea f^th to the Turk Soliman the great Warrior could not endure them,
but with a mighty Army so ove l^id them, that he won the Island from them.

After the loss of Rhodes, the Island of Malta was given unto these Knights by
Charles the 5. Emperor; whereupon they are now called the Knights of Malta:
for the The Knights of Malta.
great Master after he came from Rhodes went into Candy, and from thence into
Sicily, and so into Italy, from thence he made a voyage into England and then
into France, and hastly in^o Savoy, from whence he departed with the Religion
into this Island, and there they continue and behave themselves as in the
former Island; and offering no violence unto Christians; they much hinder the
courses of the Turks from Graecia and Asia, and of the other Sarazens from Fez
and Morocco. They are very valiant men, fit to do great service, either by Land
or Sea, as appeared when Soliman did think to have surprised them and their
Island; the description of which war is dilipently laid down by Caelius s^undus
Curio, in a Treatise dedicated to Elizabeth Queen of England.

There have been diverse other Orders of Knights, yea, and some of them reputed
to be a kind of Religion, in Portugal, France, England Burgundy, and some
other places of Christendom; but because their service has not been emploi'd
purposely, as these, which are before mentioned, we do not touch them in this
place.

Near unto Graecia and Peloponnsus, on the West side toward Italy, is the Isle
of Corcyra, now termed The Isle Corsu. Cephalenia. Zon.
Corfu: and not far South from that, is Cophalenia; and from thence South is
Zon, called by Virgil Nemerosa Zacynthus: all which Islands are at this day
under the Venetians.

The greatest commodity which The commodities of the Country.
that Country does yield, are Corans, which are gathered of a kind of small
Grapes; and for the making whereof, they commonly one time every summer, for
the space of three weeks, have a continual drought day and night, in which
time the Currants are laid abroad in the open air, and may not be taken in;
insomuch that if the season do continue hot and dry, their merchandise is very
good; but if there fall any rain until the time be expired of their full
drying, the Currants are not good, but do mould and change their color to be
somewhat white like meal. The State of Venice, under whom this Island is, does
make a great commodity of the impost, or taxation, which is laid upon this
Merchandise, calling the Tribute which is paid for them, the Revenue of Saint
Mark: for unto The Impost laid on this Island, called, the Revenue of St Mark.
that Saint is the City of Venice dedicated, and they hold him for their Patron.

In this Island (besides the Merchants who repair thither) are diverse Italians,
who be there in Garrison for the Venetians, in one special Castle, which
commands the whole Island.

There are also diverse Friars of that Nation, who perform nnto their Country
men such exercises of Religion as are convenient.

They will not fuffer any of our Merchants to have Christian burial among
them, unless at his death he be confessed after the Romish fashion: whereupon
some have been forced to convey over some of their dead bodies into Morea,
(which is not far distant) to be buried there among the Greeks, and after
their fashion.

The natural Inhabitants of Zant Zant the Inhabitants Greeks.
are Greeks, both by Language and Religion, and observe all fashions of the
Greekish Church: in whose words (being now much corrupted and depraved) there
may yet be found some tokens and remainders of the old, pure, and uncorrupted
Greek.

There are in this Country great store of Swine kept, whereof the Inhabitants
do feed, and carry them into Morea: but the Turks there (by their Mahumetane
profession) will taste no Swines flesh.

In Zacynthus our English Merchants have an house of abode for their Traffic.
South-East from Moreah, lies the great Island Creta, Creta*
where Minos sometimes did reign, so famous for his severity.

This Country was then called Hec^tompolis, as having in it a hundred Towns
and Cities.

Here stood the labyri^th which The labyrinth of De dalus.
was the work of Dedalus, who conveyed the house so by the manifold turnings,
infiniteness of Pillars and Doors that it was impossible to find the way; yet
Theseus (by the help of Ariadne the Daughter of King Minos) taking a bottom of
thread, and ^ing the one end at the first door, did enter and sl^y the Minotaur
which was kept there, and afterward returned safe out again.

The ancient Inhabitants of this Country were such noted liars, that The most
noted liars.
(beside the Proverbs which were made of them, as, Crettenscmendacium, and
Cretisandum est cum Cretensibus) the Apostle Paul in his Epistle to Titus, who
was left there by him as Bishop of that Island, does cite a verse out of the
Heathen Poet Epimenides, that the Cretians are ever liars, evil beasts, and
slow bellies.

This Island is in our days called The Island Candy.
Candy, being the place from whence our Sugar of Candy is brought. It is under
the Venetians, and repute a part of their Seigniory; although the Turks, when
they had taken Cyprus, did think also to have surprised it, but that it pleased
God by the means of Don John of Austria, in the behalf of his brother the King
of Spain, and the Venetians to give the Turk that great overthrow at sea, in
the sight near unto Lepanto. Yet since that time (no doubt) the Turks have a
greedy eye upon the sland of Canay. Cithera, where was the sieve Temple of Venus.


Between Creta and Peloponnesus lies Cithera: There was the fine Temple of
Venus; who thereof by the Poets is called Citherea. The Islands, are many which
lie in the Sea called Mare Aegeum, from the bottom of Greece, unto the top of
the Hellespont, as all the Cyclades, Euboia, and the great Island Samos, and
Chios; so Seyres, where Achilles was born, and was King of that Diverse small
Islands.
Country; There is also Lesbos, and Cemnos, Mytilene, and Ithaca, (where
Ulysses was King, and Andnos, whither Themistocles was sent by the Athenians
for Tribute, as Plutarch lays down the History: Note.
Themistocles did tell them, that he came to demand Tribute, or some great
imposition upon them, being 'accompanied with two godd^sses; the one was
Eloquence, to persuade them; and the other, Violence, to enforce them.
Whereunto the Andr^ans made answer, that they had on their side two goddesses
as strong; whereof the one was Necessity, whereby they had it not; and the
other was Impossibility, whereby they could not part with that which they
never possessed. Of these places something may be read in the old History of
the Greeks. Diverse of these did strive that Homer was borne in them; but of
certain many of those Kings which Homer says came with Agamemnon to the siege
of Troy, were Kings but of those small Islands.

Eastward from thence, not far from some part af Natolia, or Asia the lesser,
is the Island of Rhodes, the The Island of Rhodes.
friendship of the inhabitants, whereof was in ancient time very much desired
by the Princes that had to do that way: so that Alexander first, and the Romans
afterward, did embrace their league.

Here was that huge and mighty Image of the Sun, which was called Colossus
Rhodius.

This Country was long defended by those who were called the Knights of Rhodes,
against the power of the Turk; and it was a great bulwark to defend
Christendom, till that in the year one thousand five hundred twenty and one,
Soly^an the Great Turk did win it from the Christians by force.

From thence Southward is the Isle Carpathus: but in the farthest The Isle
Carpathus. The Isle Cyprus.
end of the East part of the Mediterranean is Cyprus, which about 300. years
since was a Kingdom, and did afford great aid unto the Christians* that went
to conquer the Holy Land; but it is now under the Turk. The chief City thereof
is The City ^amogusta.
^amogusta, which is an Archbishops sea: for Christians for their tribute do
yet live there. In this Country in old time was Venus much honored, and
therefore she was called Cypria* as also Paphia, because she had a temple in a
City The City Paphos. The Island Tyrus.
there called Paphos.

Near unto Syria stood the Island Tyrus; against the pride whereof the Prophets
does much speak: this was a rich City for Merchandise and Navigation in old
time; and is the place from whence Dido and the builders of Carthage did come.

The destruction of it is most famous by Alexander the great. Of the rest of
the small Islands we do say nothing.

Of the Islands in the Indian Sea.
THe Islands are very many that do lie in the Sea adjoining to the East Indies*
but the most famous among them shall only be touched. Among old writers, as
especially appears by Solinus, was well known that which was then called
T^probana, which lies near the Equinoctial Line. It was in that time a
Monarchy, where the Kings reigned not by succession, but by election: and if
any of them did grow intolerable, he was deposed and enforced to dye, by
withdrawing from The Island of Sumatra
him all things necessary. This is now called Sumatra, and has in it diverse
Kings.

Not far from thence l^e Eastward Two Islands Iava major and Iava minor.
the two Islands called Java major and Java minor; which were also known to the
old Writers, as in general may be noted, that all the East part, either in the
Continent, or in the Islands have very many small Kings and Kingdoms.

From whence yet more East lies The Islands of Molucco's
a great number of ^les, which are now called the Molucco's, which are places
as rich for their quantity The great richs which the King of Spain receives
from hence yearly
as any in the World: from these it is that the Spaniards have yearly so great
quantity of all kinds of spice; neither is there any place of all the
East Indies, that does more richly furnish home their Carracts, than do these
Molucco's.

The Islands which are called by that name, are by some of our writers
accounted to be at least four and twenty or five and twenty; and some of them
which are the bigger, have in them two or three Kings apiece* and some of them
which are less, are either the several Dominions of several Kings, or else two
or three of them do belong to some one Prince. When Sir Francis Drake did Note.
compass the whole World, he came near unto these, but did not touch at any of
them; but Master Candish taking as large a journey, was in one or more of them,
where he found the people to be intelligent and subtle, and the Kings of the
Country to take upon them as great state as might be convenient for such petty
Princes.

Some of these Islands the Spaniards in right of the Portugals have got into
their own possession; with the Kings of some other they have leagued; and a
third sort utterly detest them. More Northward, over against China, lies a
Country consisting of a great many Islands The Island of Iapan.
called Japona, of Japan; the people whereof are much of the same nature with
the men of China: This Country was first discovered by the ^esuites, who in a
blind zeal have traveled into the farthest parts of the world, to win men to
their Religion. This Island is thought to be very rich.

About the parts of Japan there are di^ers people, whose most ordinary
habitation is at the Sea, and do never come into the Land, but only for their
necessities, or to furnish themselves with new vessels, wherein they may abide,
but lying not far from the Land they have ducks, and other fowls swimming
about them, which sometimes they take into their Boats and Ships, and in such
sort do breed them, to the maintenance of them and their Children.

Into this Iapan of late days have our English also sailed, as into other
parts of the East Indies, and there erected a Factory.

The rest that be either near unto Asia or Africa, because there is little
written of them, we pass over, only naming them: as the Philipin^, Borneo,
Banda^a: as also on the side of Afric, the Island of Saint Laurence, called
by the Diverssmal Islands only named.
inhabitants Madagas^ar, (...) and others of less note: And yet we do find in
Solinus and Pliny, but especially in Pomponius Mela, that it was known in old
time that there were many Islands near unto the East Indies, which as it might
be first discovered by the trafficking of the Islanders into the continent; so
no doubt that Navy which Alexander sent out to India, to des^ry and coast
through the Eastern seas, did give much light thereunto, partly by that which
themselves did see, and partly by those things which they heard in such places,
and of such persons as they met with in their travel.

Of the Islands in the Atlantic Sea.
THere be many Islands which he Westward from Africa, and from Europe: as those
which are called the Gorgades, that lie in the same The Islands of Gorgades
climate with Guinea, which are four in number, not inhabited by men* but they
are full of Goats. Peter Martyr in his first Decade, the sixth Book, says that
the Admiral Colonus, in the year of Christ 1498 sailing to Hispaniola with
eight ships, came to the Isle of Madera, The Isle Madera.
from whence sending directly the rest of his ships to the East Indies, he in
one ship with decks and two Carayels, sailed to the Equinoctial between which
and the Isle Madera, in the midst way lie 13. Islands of the Portugalls, in
old time called Hesperides, now Cabonerde, Hesperides.
two days sailing distant from the inner parts of Ethiope: one whereof is
called Bonavista. Northward Bonavista.
from thence, in the same climate with the South part of Morocco, lie those
which are called Canari^, or the fortunate Islands, which are seven Canary
Islands.
in number, being most fruitful, and very pleasant, and therefore called by
that name, Fortunate Insulae, This is famous in them, that it has pleased all
Cosmographers to make their Meridian to be their first point where they do
begin to reckon the computation of their Longitude; and unto them, after three
hundred and threescore Degrees to return again.

From these Islands it is, that those From hence she best Canary Sacks.
strong and pleasant Sacks, which are called Canary Wings are brought; and from
thence are fetched those that they call Canary Birds. These Islands are under
the Crown of Spain: The heat of the Country is very great and therefore
fitter for concoction; but besides that, the sail of it self is accommodated
thereunto, and by reason of them, both these Islands do bring forth a Grape,
which is sweeter in taste then any other Grape, and has that property with it,
that the Wine which is made thereof, does not ^ume into the head, like other
Sack, but does help the stomach, and exercise the force of it there. The slips
of their Vines have been brought into Spain, and some other places of Europe,
but they have not sorted to the same purpose as they do in their native
Country...

There do grow also in these Isles From hence great store of Sugarcanes.
good store of Sugarcanes, which yields plentifully that kind of commodite
unto Spain, either for Marmelets (wherein they much delight) or for other uses.

Peter Martyr in the beginning of his Decades which he has written de Orb
novo; does particularly touch the names, and some other things of these Islands.

On the backside of Africa also, just under the Equinoctial; is the Isle* of
Saint Thomas, inhabited by the The Isle of St. Thomas.
Portugals; which Island was taken in the later time of Queen Elizabeth by the
Dutch: it is reported that in the midst of this Island is an Hill; and over that
a continual cloud; where with the whole Island is watered, (such a like thing
as this is reported The Isle of Cloves.
of the Isle of Cloves:) The air of this Island is unwholesome, and there is
hardly seen any Portugal or stranger that comes to dwell there, which lives
till he be above forty years of age.

More Northward from Afric* lie those Islands which are called Azores
Insulae, being six or seven The Islands of Azores.
in number; of which Tercera is one of the chief: of whom, the rest by some are
called Tercera's, which are far inferior in fruitfulness unto the Canaries.
These were first under the Crown of Portugal, and one of them was the last
which was kept out from the King of Spain, by the Prior Don Antonio, who
afterward called himself King of Portugal, but the Spaniard at last took this
Terrera from him, and does possess all these Islands, together with the rest
of the Dominion, which did belong to the Portugal.

He who list to see the unadvised Note the unadvisedness of Don Antonio.
proceedings of Don Antonio, both in parting with Lisbon, and the rest of
Portugal, as also in losing these Islands which last of all held out for him,
let him read Conestagio of the union of Portugal to the Crown of Castile. But
these Azores have in times past yielded much Oade, which thereupon in England
was called Island Oade; but now they are the place where the Spaniards do
commonly touch* and take in fresh water, both going and coming to and from
America, finding that to pass directly without turning on either hand toward
America is very hard, by reason of the strong current of the water from the
gulf of Mexico, and so forward to the East: and therefore they are enforced
either to go lower to the South, and so to water in some part of Guinea, or
thereabout, or else to keep up as high as these Islands.

Of America, or the new World.
ALthough some do dispute out of Plato and the old Writers, that there was not
only a guess, but a kind of knowledge in ancient time, that besides Europe,
Asia and Africa there was another large Country lying to the West, yet he that
shall advisedly peruse the conjectures made thereupon, may see that there is
nothing of sufficiency to enforce any such knowledge, but that all antiquity
was utterly ignorant of the new found Countries toward the West. Whereunto
this one Argument most forcible, may give credit* The people of America utterly
void of all manner of knowledge of God* or goodness.
that at the first arriving of the Spaniards there they found in those places,
nothing showing Traffic, or knowledge of any other Nation; but the people
naked, uncivil, some of them devourers of men's flesh* ignorant of shipping,
without all kind of learning, having no remembrance of History or writing,
among them; never having heard of any such Religion as in other places of the
world is known, but being utterly ignorant of Scripture, or Christ, or Moses,
or any God, neither having among them any token of Cross, Church, Temple, o^
Devotion, agreeing with other Nations. The reasons which are gathered The
reasons conjectual of a new found World.
by some late Writers out of Plato, Seneca, and some other of the Ancient, are
rather conjectural, that it was likely that there should be some such place,
than any way demonstrative, or concluding by experience; that therewas any such
country: and the greatest inducement which they had to persuade themselves,
that therewas any more Land toward the West then that which was formerly
known, was grounded upon this, that all Asia, Europe and Afric, concerning
the longitude of the World, did contain in them but 180, degrees: and
therefore it was most probable, that in the other 180. which fills up the
whole course of the Sun to the number of 360 degrees, God would not suffer the
water only to possess all, but would leave a place for the habitation of men,
beasts, flying and creeping creatures.

I am not ignorant that some; who make too much of vain shows out of the
British Antiquities, have given out to the world, and written something to that
purpose, that Arthur sometimes King of Britain, had both knowledge of these
parts, and some Dominion in them: for they find (as some report) that King
Arthur had under his government many Islands, and great Countries toward the
North and West: which one of some special note has interpreted to signify
America, and the Northern parts thereof, and thereupon have Some have entitled
the Queen of England Sovereign of these Provinces.
gone about to entitle the Queen of England to be Sovereign of those
Provinces, by right of descent from King Arthur* But the wisdom of our State
has been such, as to neglect that opinion, imagining it to be grounded upon
fabulous foundations, as many things are which are now reported of King Arthur;
only this does carry some show with it, that now some hundreds of years since,
there was a Knight of Wales; who with shipping and some pretty company did go
to discover those parts: whereof as there is some record of reasonable credit
amongst the Monuments of Wales, so there is this one thing which gives
pregnant show thereunto; that in the late Navigation of some of our men to
Norumbega, and some other Northern parts of America, they find some tokens of
civility and Christian Religion; but especially they do meet with some words of
the Welsh language; as that a Bird with a whitehead should be called Pengwiun,
and other such like: yet because we have no invincible certainty hereof, and if
any thing were done, it was only in the Northern and worse parts: and the
intercourse betwixt Wales and those parts, in the space of diverse hundred
years, was not continued, but quite silenced: we may go forward with that
opinion, that these Western Indies were no way known to former ages.

God therefore remembering the prophecy of his Son, that the Gospel of the
Kingdom should before the day of judgment be preached in all coasts and
quarters of the world, and in his mercy intending to free the people; or at the
least some few of them, from the bondage of Satan (who did detain them in
blockish ignorance) and from their Idolatrous service unto certain vile
spirits, Their Religion.
(whom they call their Zemes, and most obsequiously did adore them.) raised up
the spirit of a man worthy of perpetual memory (one Christopherus Columbus* the
first discoverer of America.
Columbus, born at Genua in Italy) to set his mind to the discovery of a new
World; who finding by that compass of the old known World, that there must
needs be a much more mighty space (to the which the Sun by his daily motion did
compass about) then that which was already known and discovered; and
conceiving that this huge quantity might as well be Land (...) Sea, he could
never satisfy himself till he might attempt to make proof of the verity
thereof.

Being therefore himself a private man, and of more virtue than Nobility, after
his reasons and demonstrations laid down, whereby he might induce men that it
was no vain thing which he went about, he went unto many of the Princes of
Christendom, and among others to Henry the seventh, King of England, desiring
to be furnished with shipping and men fit for such a Navigation: but these men
refusing him, partly because they gave no credit to his Narration; and partly
lest they should be derided by their Neighbor Princes, if by this
Genoestranger they should be cousened; but especially, for that they were
unwilling to sustain the charges of shipping: At last he betook himself unto
the Court of Ferdinandus and Elizabeth, King and Queen of Castile, where also
at the first he found but small entertainment; yet persisting in his purpose
without weariness, and with great importunity, it pleased God to move the mind
of Elizabeth the Queen to deal with her husband to surnish forth to ships, for
the discovery only, and not for conquest: whereupon Columbus in the year
thousand four hundred ninety and two, accompanied with his brother In the year
1492. America discovered by Columbus.
Bartholomeus Columbus, and many Spaniards, sailed far to the West, for the
space of three score days and more, with the great indignation and often
mutinies of his company, fearing that by reason of their long distance from
home, they should never return again; insomuch that the General, after many
persuasions of them to go forward, was at length enforced to crave but three
days, wherein if they saw not the Island; he promised to return; and God did so
bless him; to the end that his Voyage might not prove in vain, that in that
space one of his Company did espy Fire, which was a certain Argument that they
were near to the Land: as it fell out indeed.

The first Land whereunto they came, was an Island* called by the The Island
Haity.
Inhabitants Haity, but in remembrance of Spain from whence he came, he termed
it Hispaniola: and The richs of the country:
finding it to be a Country full of pleasure, and having in it abundance of
Gold and Pearl, he proceeded further* and discovered another big Isle, which
is called Cuba: of the which being very glad, with The Island Cuba.
great treasure he returned unto Spain, bringing joyful news of his happy
success.

When Columbus did adventure to restrain the time of their expectation within
the compass of three days, engaging himself to return, if in that space they
saw no Land; there be some write, that he limited himself not at all
adventures, but that he did by his eye discern a difference in the color, of
the clouds which did arise out of the west, from those which formerly he had
seen: which clouds did argue by the clearness of them, that they did not arise
immediately out of the Sea, but that they had passed over some good space of
the Land, and thereby grew clearer and clearer, not having in them any new or
late risen vapors: but this is but conjectural.

The Spaniards, who are by nature a people proud; have since the death of
Columbus, labored to obscure his fame, envying that an Italian or stranger
should be reported to be the first discoverer of those parts.

And therefore have in their writings since given forth, that there was a
Spaniard which had first been there; and that Columbus meeting The pride of the
Spaniard, laboring to obscure the fame of Columbus.
with his Cards and descriptions, did but pursue his enterprise, and assume the
glory to himself.

But this fable of theirs does savor of the same spirit wherewithal many of
them in his life time did reproach him, that it was no matter of importance to
find out these Countries, but that, if that he had not done it, many other
might, and would. Which being spoken to Columbus it a solemn dinner, he called
for an Egg, and willed all the guests one after another to set it up on end.
Which when they could not do, he gently bruising the one end of it, did make it
flat, and so set it up, by imitation whereof each of the other did the same:
whereby he mildly did reprove their envy toward him, and showed how easy it
was to do that which a man had seen done before.

To go forward therefore: Columbus being returned to Castile, after his welcome
to the Princes, was made Great Admiral of Spain, and with a new Fleet of more
Ships was sent to search further: which he accordingly did, and quickly found
the maine Land, not far from the Tropic of Cancer.

Which part of the Country, in honor of Spain, he called Hispania Hispania
nova.
nova, in repect whereof at this day the King of Spain does entitle himself
Hispaniarum Rex.

Some there be which write, that Columbus did not discover further then the
Islands; and that he spent the greatest part of his former labors in coasting
Cuba and Hispaniola, to see whether they were* Islands, or a Continent; and
that some other in the mean time did thrust themselves forward and discryed
the firm Land: among whom Americus Vespucius the chief, of Of whom this
Country had its name.
whose name a great part of the Country is called at this day America.

They found the people both of the Manner of the people.
maine Lands and Islands very many in number, naked, without clothes or Armor;
sowing no Corn, but making their Bread of a kind of Root, which they call
Maiz. Men most ignorant of all kind* of Learning, admiring at the Christians,
as if they had been sent down from Heaven, and thinking them to be immortal,
wondering at their Ships, and the tacklings thereof; for they had no Ships of
their own, but big troughs, which they call their Canoes, being made hallow (or
the ^ody of a Tree) with the sharp bones of, Fishes: for iron and such like
Instruments they have none.

Although it do appear, that by the Wars of one of their petty Princes, or
Kings, whom they call Cassickes, had against another, many thousands of the
Inhabitants of those Countries were continually wasted and spoiled: yet the
number of them was so great in every part of the West Indies, that in
Hispaniola alone there were supposed to be by computation of the Spaniards
first arriving there, not so few as 2000000. which yet by the cruelty The
cruelty of the Spaniards*
of the Spaniards were so murdered, and other ways made away, that within
fifty years after (as their Writers report) there were scant any thousands in
that Island remaining of them.

The like is to be said of the populousness of other Coasts and quarters there.

The Armor which those people Their Armor.
did wear when they entered into the Wars, was nothing but some slight
covering, either made of Wood, or S^els of Fishes, or of Cotton-wooll, or some
such foolish matter. For they had no use at all of Iron or Steel, but the most
part of them came without any kind of clothing, or covering, yet armed with
Bows and Arrows, which were made sharp at the end with the scraping of
Fish-bones, or with Fish-bones themselves put on the end; like an Arrow-head;
and that oftentimes they dipped in a kind of most venomous poison: Some other
of them had for their Weapons great clubs, wherewith they did use to beat out
the brains of those with whom they did combat.

They had amongst them no good Note their bread.
or wholesome food, for even that Maiz whereof they made their bread, had in the
root thereof a most venomous kind of liquor, which is no better than deadly
poison; but they crush out that juice, and afterward do prepare the roo^, so
that it makes them a kind of Bread.

There was no sort of good Literature No good literature amongst them
to be found among them: nay, they could not so much as distinguish any times
the one from the other, but by a blockish kind of observation of the course of
the Moon, according to which they made their computation, but without any kind
of certainty, saving for some few Months which were lately past: but for the
set calcula^ing of ought which was done diverse years before, they could do
nothing therein, but only grossly aim at it.

But that in all Ages it has appeared, that Satan has used ignorance a^ one
of the chiefest means whereby to increase Idolatry, and consequently to
enlarge his kingdom* it were other wise incredible, that any who have in them
reason, and the shape of men, should be so brutishly ignorant of all kind of
true Religion, devotion, and understanding.

For the adoration which they do give, was only unto certain foul spirits,
which they call b^ the name of their Zemes. In remembrance of whom, diverse of
them did keep in their houses certain things made of cotton wool, in the
manner of puppets, or like Childrens babies, and to these they did yield a
reverance, supposing some Divine Nature to be Note how the Devil did strangely
delude these people.
in them, because sometimes in the Evening; and in the night time they had such
illusions offered unto them, as that they saw these their Puppets to move and
stir up and down in their houses, and sometimes to utter voices, and give
diverse s^gnifications of such things as they would have to be done, or not to
be done: Yea, and that with such effect from the devil also, that if their
wills and commandments we^e not fulfilled, there was some vengeance
orpunishments executed upon them or their Children, the more to keep them in
awe and servility, to the great enemy of mankind.

Not long after the Spaniards entered those parts, there were in diverse of the
Islands, and some parts of the Main, such incredible tempests, and disturbances
of the Air, by wind and rain, thunder and lightning, as that the like had
never been seen nor heard of in the memory of man: which are ordinarily
interpreted to be the special work of the Devil: who not unfitly is termed by
Saint Paul the Prince of the Air, as having a liberty given him of God there
sometimes to do strange executions: and of likelihood, he did make these stirs,
either grieving that the name of Christ was at all brought Note the malice of
Satan.
into those parts, or else seeking to fright the Inhabitants from associating
themselves with those who brought (although but superstitiously) the knowledge
of God, and the Redeemer, being desirous that they should look for more such
distemperatures and vexations, if they would confederate themselves with them.

The people were so ignorant of all humane and civil conversation, and
trafficking into those parts, at the first coming of the Christians thther,
that they thought they could never sufficiently admire their persons, their
shipping, or any other The admiration of the people at the approach of the men
and shipping.
thing which they brought with them: Whereupon they without ceasing gazed on
the manner of their Ships, seeing them to be so great, and consisting of diverse
Planc^es: But they were never satisfied with staring upon their Mastes, Sails,
Cables, and other Ropes and Tacklings, whereunto they had never beheld any
thing like before: and yet nature and necessity had taught them to make unto
themselves certain Vessels for the Sea, of some one tree, which they did use to
get down, not with cutting, but with fire: and when it lay along upon the
ground, they did use also fire, either to burn away that which was tough and
unfit without, or to make it hollow within: although they have also the shells
and bones of Fishes, whereby they made smooth*

But some of these Troughes or Canoes were so great, that sometimes above
twenty men have been found rowing in one.

The Trees of America, but especially The mighty bigness of the trees of
Brasile.
in Brasilia, being so huge, that it is reported of them, that several fam^les
have lived in several arms of one Tree, to such a number as are in some petty
Villages, or Parish in Christendom.

Among other strange opinions They conceiv^d them to be some gods.
which they conceived of the Spaniards this was one, that they were the sons of
some god, and not born of mortal seed, but sent down from Heaven unto them:
and this conceit was the stronger in them, because at the first, in such
conflicts as they had with them, they could kill few or none of them: the
reason whereof was, partly the armor of the Spaniards, and partly the want of
Iron and Steel upon the Arrows which the Americans did shoot: but they were
not very long of that opinion, that they were immortal, but reformed that
error, both by seeing the dead corpse of some of the Christians, and by trying
an experiment upon some of them also: for they took of them, and put their
heads under the water, and held them till they were choked; by which they knew
them to be of the same nature as other men.

Among other points which did They admired and feared a Letter.
show the great ignorance and unlettered stupiditie of these Indians, this was
one, that they could not conceive the force of writing of Letters; insomuch
that when one Spaniard would send unto another, being distant in place, in
India with any provision, and would write a Letter by him, what the fellow had
received from him; the poor Indian would marvel how it should be possible that
he to whom he came should be able to know all things which either himself
brought or the sender directed: And thereupon diverse of them did think that
there was some kind of spirit in the paper, and marvellously stood in fear of
such a thing as a Letter was.

This Country yields great abundance of strange Herbs, the like whereof are not
to be found in other parts of the World: as also some very rare beasts, as one
among the Some very rare Beasts.
rest, who by Peter Martyrs description, has some part like an Elephant, some
part like an Horse, and diverse other parts like diverse other Beasts; Nature
having studied to express a great many several creatures in one. The S^a
Crocodiles.


There are also found at the Sea or within some Rivers, Crocodiles, but not of
that hugeness as those that breed in Egypt in the River Nilus, whereof some
are described by Pliny to be at the least 24. Cubits in length; which argues
the Crocodile to be the greatest creature in the world that comes of an Egg.
Some rare stones.


There are also thereabout some extraordinary Stones growing in the Land; as
above others the Blood stones, whereof there are great store: but especially
there is one thing of great beauty and worth, that is, the abundance of
Pearls, which are taken in shell-fishes, and are of a great quantity, as any
that be in the Seas near to the East Indies: ^o that the true cause of the
plenty of Pearl in Europe, in this our Age, beyond that incomparably which
has been in the days of our forefathers, is to be ascribed to the discovery
of these Newfound Lands

There are also here diverse Trees Diverse tree not elsewhere found.
which are not to be found elsewhere: and many Roots, which serve for diverse
purpose^.

Among other things (whereof The abun dance of Kin and Bulls.
there is great plenty in those Western parts) is the abundance of Kine and
Bulls: whereof they report, that there is such store in Guba and Hispaniola,
that there are killed ^own diverse thousands every year, whereof the Spaniard
makes no other use, but to take the Tallow, or the Hide; which serves them in
their shipping, and for diverse other purposes; but the flesh, or the most part
of them, they suffer for to putrify, as making little account of it: partly
because of the heat of the Country, wherein they eat little flesh, and partly
because they have store of Hens, and other more dainty meat, whereupon,
together with fish, they do very much feed

It may seem a kind of miracle, unto him who looks no higher than the
ordinary rules of Nature, and does not expect the extraordinary and unlimited
power of God, that whereas a great part of America does lie in the Zona
Torrida, in the self same climate with Aethiopia, and the hottest parts of the
EastIndies, where the inhabitants are not only tawny, as all be in Egypt, and
in Mauritania, but also coaleblack and very Negroes; here there should be no
man whose color is black, except it be those which are brought out of Africa,
but that the people should be o^ a reasonable fair complexion; which is to be
ascribed only unto Gods peculiar will, and not to that which some foolishly
have imagined, that the generative seed of those people should be while, and
that other of the Aethiopians black; for that is untrue* in as much as the
Aethiopians case does not differ from the quality of other men.

The Spaniards did find the people The condition of the people of America.
to be here most simple, without fraud, giving them kind entertainment,
according to their best manner; exchanging for knives and Glasses, and such
like toys, great abundance of Gold and Pearl.

It is certain, that by the very light of Nature, and by the ordinary course of
humane shape, there were among this people very many good things, as
affability in their kind, hospitality toward strangers, which had not
offended them, according to their ability, and open and plain behavior, yea
and in some parts of these West Indies, The Religion.
there was an opinion in gross, that the soul was immortal, and that there
was life after this life: where beyond certain hills (they know not where) those
which dyed in defense of their Country, should after their departure from this
life, remain in much blessedness: which opinion caused them to bear themselves
very valiantly in their fights, either striving to conquer their enemies, or
with very good contentment, enduring death (if it were their hap to be taken,
or slain) in as much as they promised themselves a b^tter reward elsewhere: But
Yet many grievous sins by them committed.
withal, as it could not choose but be so, there were many other grievous sins
amongst them: as adoration of Devils, Sodomie, Incest, and all kind of
Adultery; Ambition in very high measure; a deadly hatred each of other: which
proceeded all from the fountain of ignorance wherewith Satan had blinded their
eyes: yet there were among them some, which by a kind of blind witchcraft had
to evil purpose, acquaintance, and intercourse with foul spirits.

The manner of their attire, or Their attire
beautifying themselves, which diverse of these people had severally in several
parts, did seem very strange unto them who came first into that country. For
some of them did adorn themselves with the shells of fishes, some did wear
Feathers about their heads, some had whole garments made of Feathers, and those
very curiously wrought, and placed together of diverse colors: to which purpose
they did most use the feathers of Peacocks or Parrots, or such other birds,
whose coloring was of diverse colors. Yea, in very many places they had their
lower lips bored through with a great hole, and something put into them, as also
into the upper parts of their ears, being pierced in like manner: which as it
seemed to themselves to be a point of beauty, so it made them appear to other
men to be wonderful ugly.

The quantity of gold and silver Infinite (...) gold and silver in America.
which was found in those parts was incredible, which is the true reason
wherefore all things in Christendom (as Bodin de Rep. observes) do serve to
be sold at a higher rate then they were in the days of our forefathers, when
indeed they had not so: for as he notes, it is the plenty of gold and silver
which is brought from this America, that makes money to be in greater store,
and so may more easily be given, then it could be in the days of our
Predecessors. Precious mines.


But for the thing it self, it is testified by all writers, that there were in
those* parts very great mines of the most precious metals, that in the banks of
rivers, with the washing of the water, there was diverse ^i mesfretted out very
good and big pieces of gold, which without melting and trying; was of
reasonable perfection; and the like was to be found in many places of the Land,
when the people did dig for their husbandry, or for any other use.

This made the inhabitants there (for the commonnesse of it) to account gold
and silver but as a vile thing; and yet by the reason of the color of it, for
variety sake, to be mingled with the Pearl, diverse of them did wear it about
their necks and about their arms. And yet we do find, that in some part of the
west Indies, the Kings did make some reckoning of gold, and by sire did try it
out to the best perfection; as Attabaliba his ransom
may appear by Attabaliba, who had a great house piled upon the sides with
great wedges of gold ready tried, which he gave to the Spaniards for a ransom
of his life; and yet they most perfidiouslie did take his life from him.

But the mean account ordinarily The Country people exchanged it for babl^
which the people had of gold, did cause them very readily to bring unto the
Spaniards at their first arrival great store of that metal, which they very
readily exchanged for the meanest trifies and gewgawes which the other could
bring, even such things as wherewith children do use to play: But there was
nothing more acceptable unto them then Axes and Hammers, Knives, and all tools
of Iron, whereof they rather make account to cut down their timber to frame it,
and to do other such necessaries to their convenient use belonging, then to
fight, or to do hurt each to other: and therein may appear the great variety of
Gods disposition of his creatures here and there; when in all that maine
Continent of America, but especially in that which lies between or near the
Tropicks, there is no Iron or Steel to be found; which without doubt gave great
way to the conquest of the strongest places there; as of Mexico by name, when
armed men with Gunnes, and other instruments of war, were to fight against
them which were little better then naked; and it was rightly upbraided by one
of his Countrymen to Ferdinandus Cortesius upon one of his returns from
America, having made exceeding boast of his great victories in those parts, and
coming afterward in service into Africa, where he being hardly laid unto by
the Moors, and showing ^o valor at all, it was remembered unto him, that it
was an easy thing for him to do al those exploits which he craked so much of
in the WestIndies, in as much as the people there had nothing to resist.

There was nothing more dreadful to those unarmed men, then the They dreaded
men on horseback.
fight of Horses and men riding upon them, whereof a very few did quickly
over-bear many thousands of them, even almost in the beginning of the discovery
of those parts.

Ferdinandus and Elizabeth, then King and Queen of Castile, and after them
Charles the fifth the Emperor, who succeeded in their right, partly to stir up
their subjects to action, and partly to procure unto themselves the more
treasure with less expense and trouble of their own, did give leave unto
diverse of their subjects, that by special commission they might pass into
those parts, and there have several Quarters and Countries allotted unto them,
where they might dig and try out Gold and Silver, on condition, that they did
allow clear unto The King had the fist part for his tribute.
the King, the fifth part of such commodities as did arise unto them; and
therefore near unto every Mine and Furnace; the King had his special
Officers, which did daily attend and take up his Tribute. And to the end that
all things might the better be ordered, both there, and in Spain (concerning
the affairs of those Countries) the King caused a Council and Council A
Council at Sivill for the government of America.
house to be newly erected at Sivill, where all things should be handled that
did grow to any controversy: and where the intelligences and advertisments
might be laid up as in a place of record, which should from time to time be
brought out of America: Of this Council Peter Martyr (who wrote the Decades)
was one, and continued there till he was very old; and therefore might upon the
surest instructions set down these things which he committed to story.

The desire of gain caused the Note the Spaniards cruelty.
Spaniards to seek further into the Countries: but the tyranny and the
covetousness of the Spaniards was such, in taking from them their goods, in
deflowing their Wives and Daughters; but especially, in forcing them to labor
in their, Gold Mines without measure, as if they had been Beasts, that the
people detesting them, and the name of Christians for their sakes, did some of
them kill themselves, and the mothers destroyed their children in their
bellies, that they might not be born to serve so hate full a Nation: and some
of them did in war conspire against them; so that by slaughter and otherwise
the people of the Country are almost all wasted nowwithin a hundred years,
being before many millions: and those which remain are as Slaves, and the
Spaniards almost only inhabit those parts.

It is not unknown to all the parts His insolency and tyrannising pride.
of Europe, that the insolency of the Spaniards is very great, even over
Christians, tyrannizing and playing all outrages wheresoever they get men in
subjection; and this makes them so hateful to the Portugals at home, to the
Italian in Milluin and Naples, but especially to the LowCountrey-men, who have
therefore much desire to shake off the yoke Their beastly bassness.
of their Governor. Besides tha^, they are men immoderately given to the lust
of the Flesh, making no conscience (even at home) even to get Bastards in their
young days, and reputeth it no infamy unto them to frequent Harlots and
Brothel-houses: but when they are abroad, especially in warlike services, they
are very outragous, impudently and openly deflouring men's Wives and Daughters.
It may easily then be guessed, what disorder they kept in the West Indies,
where the Countries are hot, and the women were not able to resist their
insolences; and how they did tyrannize over the poor unarmed people, making
them to drudge for them, not only like slaves, but bruit beasts: which gross
oversight of theirs was at the first so apparent, that all of good minds did
complain thereof, as appears by Peter Martyr himself, who in his writing to
the Pope, and other Princes, does much deplore the ill usage of them who in
name were Christians, toward those simple Infidels. And certainly it caused
many of them to blaspheme the name Note their inhnmanity
of God, and of Christ, and to renounce their Baptism, whereunto they were
either forced or entreated, when they measured the God of the Christians by the
actions of his servants, whom they sound to be blasphemers and swearers,
riotous and great Drunkards, ravenous tyrannous, and oppressors, unsatisfied,
covetous, fornicators, beyond measure given to incredible wantonness, and
exercising even among themselves, all kind of envy, contention, murders,
poisonings, and all sort of inhumane behavior.

Not long after the arrival of the The Friars complaint of their cruelty
Spaniards there, there were certain Friars and religious men, who moved with
some zeal to draw the people there to the Christian faith, did travel into
those parts, that so they might spread abroad the Gospel of Christ, and when
they came there, beholding the intemperance of their Countrymen, which turned
many away from the profession of Religion, they were much moved in their
hearts, and some of them by writings, and some other of them by traveling
personally back again into Spain, did inform the King and his Court, how
dishonorable a thing it was to the name of Christ, that the poor people should
be so abused: and how improbable it was that those courses being continued, any
of them would hardly embraced the faith.

The earnest Petition of these, caused Charles the fifth, the Emperor and King
of Spain, by his Edict and open Proclamation published in the West Indies, to
give liberty unto the Inhabitants and Naturals of the place, that they should
be in state of freemen, and not of bond: but his Note.
subjects were so inured proudly to domineere over them, that this did little
amend the condition of the people.

Since these days notwithstanding the blind zeal of the Spaniards has been
such, as that the Kings have been at some cost, and other men also have been at
a great charge to erect diverse Monasteries and religious Houses there, and many
have taken the pains to go out of Europe (as they think for Christ's sake) to
reside as Monks and Friars, in America.

There be established some Bi^ shopricks there, and other Governments
Ecclesiastical, and the Mass is there published, and Latin service, according
to the custom of the Church of Rome, laboring to root out their infidelity,
but mingling the Christian Religion with much Popish superstition. Mexico
described.


By reason that the Country is exceeding rich and fruitful, the Spaniards with
great desire did spread themselves toward the North, where they found some
more resistance, although nothing incomparison of Warriors: but the greatest
of their labor was to conquer the Kingdom of Mexico; which Mexico is a City
very great, and as populous almost as any in the the world; standing in the
midst of a great Marsh or Fen. The conqueror of this, was Ferdinandus
Cortesius, so much renowned in Spain unto this day.

If there were any thing at all in these West Indies which might savor of
civility, or any orderly kind of government, it was in the Kingdom of Mexico:
where it appeared unto the Spaniards, that there is a certain settled state,
which was kept within compass by some degrees and customs of their own: and
which was able to make some resistance (as it may be termed) if it be compared
with the other inhabitants of America; although little, if it be conferred with
the courses of Christendom: But the policy of the Spaniards was, that by
private means they came to understand of a King that confined near upon Mexico,
who as he was of good strength, so was he of exceeding malice toward these his
borderers, and by his forces and intelligence, Ferdinandus Cortesius and his
company came to have their will upon Mexico.

In this Country there stands A great Lake.
a very great Lake, which at the one end is very large, and almost round; but
toward the other end does contract it self again into a narrow room, and then
spreads wide again and round, only about the third part of the compass of
the greate^ end. In the lesser of the two, their are set some houses in four or
five several places, which represent our Villages: but in the greatest pan of
the Lake stands Mexico it self, being a City built of brick, to ^ good and
elegant proportion, where the water issues into diverse streets of it, as it is
in Venice, and from some part whereof there are diver Bridges unto the main
Land, mad also of brick, but from the other ^des, men do come by boats, where
of there is abundant store continually going in that Lake.

The Writers do record, tha^ there is to be found in this City, a bundance of
all kind of provision, but especially fruits, and other delightful things,
which are brought in from other parts of the Country.

This was the chief City of all Mexico the chief City of all those quarters.
those quarters, before the arrival of the Spaniards there, and in subjection
thereunto were many large Provinces, extending themselves every way: so that
the King of this place was a Prince of great estate. And accordingly thereunto,
the Spaniards at this day have made it their chief and royal City, where the
King keeps his Viceroy of Mexico for the West Indies, as he has his ViceRoy
at Goa for the East Indies: and from thence have all the parts of America (but
especially that which they call Hispania nova) their directions; and hence they
fetch their Laws, Ordinances, and determinations, unless it be such great
causes as are thought fit to be referred to the Council of Spain.

The Sea which confineth nearest The Gulf of Mexico.
unto this City is called the Gulf of Mexico; where, as in diverse other Bays
or Gulphes, the stream or current is such, that ships cannot pass directly to
and fro, but especially out of the Gulf, that they are forced to take their
course either high to the North, or low to the South.

In and near unto this Gulf are diverse Island, conquered and inhabited by the
Spaniards; as the forenamed Cuba and Hispaniola, where Diverse Islands in the
gulf of Mexico.
the Spaniards were visited by our English, in the time of Queen Elizabeth, and
their Towns of Sancto Domingo, and Saint Jago taken by Sir Francis Drake; as
also Jarvaica and Boriquen, otherwise called the Island of Saint Phu, where the
Earl of Cumberland took the Town of Porto-Ricco, and many other Islands of
less note.

In the Sea coasts of all this Nova Hispania, the King of Spain have built
many Towns and Castles, and therein have erected diverse Furnaces and Forges,
for the Trying and Fining of their Gold.

They that do write of the discovery of the West Indies, do report, that when
Columbus at the first went thitherward, in their greatest distraction and
doubtfulnesse of mind, whether to go forward or backward; and Columbus had
begged only two or three days respite, there was one of his company, who after
the Sea manner going up to discover the Land, did epsy some fire: for the
which being so happy and lucky a token, he did hope to receive at the hands of
the King of Spain, some bountiful reward: but when he returned home, there was
nothing at all given unto him, Note.
which he took with that malecontentednesse and disdain, that he fled over
into Africa, and there among the Moors did apostate and renounce the Christian
faith* so that he became a Saracen.

Of the parts of America toward the North.
THE rumor of the discovery of these parts being blown over Christendom, and
the great quantity of the Land, together with the fruitfulness thereof, being
reported abroad, some other Nations did enterprise to set foot therein: as
namely, the Frenchmen, who sent certain ships to a part of this Country, lying
North from Hispania nova, some few degrees without the Tropic of Cancer; into
which when they had arrived, because of the continual greenness of the ground
and trees, (as if it had been a perpetual spring) they called it Florida: where
after some few of And named it Florida.
them had for a time settled themselves, the Spaniards took notice of it, and
being unwilling to endure any such neighbors, they came suddenly on them, and
most cruelly slew them all, without taking any ransom. And the French in
revenge of this deed of the Spaniards, came in again afterward into this
Country, and slew those that were the slaiers of their country men: yet the
Syaniards for want of men, are not able to inhabit that Country, but leave it
to the old people.

The French had built in Florida, The river Mayo.
upon the River of Mayo, where they were visited by our Sir John Hawkins, a
Fort which they called Fort Carolin, and had reasonably assured themselves for
their defense against the Natives: but some malicious spirits amongst them fled
to the Spaniards, with whom they return again into Florida* to the murder and
overthrow of their own Countrymen.

He who list to see both the attempt of the Frenchmen for the inhabiting of
that part, and the usage of the Spaniards toward them, let him read the
Expedition into Florida, which is the end of Benzo's story, concerning the New
found World; and there he shall find both the covetous and infatiable nature of
the Spaniards; who would not endure the French near unto them, although there
was land sufficient, and much to spare for both of them; also their
perfidiousnesse Note the Spaniards unchistian cruelty.
in breaking of Oaths, and promises, and their unchristian cruelty, whereby
they massacred all.

The Spaniards also to the number of three hundred foot, and two hundred horse,
under the conduct of Ferdinando de Sota, entered Florida, about the year of our
Lord, 1550. and there conquered a thousand miles wide and large, and after four
or five years continuance in that Country, betook themselves again from
thence, and went to new Spain, landing at Panuc in Ships and Vessels that they
had built in Florida. And in all that time notwithstanding many conflicts with
the natives, and diverse discommodities* and wants which they sustained in the
Country, they lost but two hundred men.

After this departure of the Spaniards out of Florida, brought thither by
Ferdinando de Sota, who died in the Country; after the defeat of the French,
and their revenge again taken on the Spaniards, the King of Spain sent thither
some small forces to take possession of the Country, and sit down there; for no
other end, as it is thought, but to keep out other Nations from entering there:
the one half whereof set down on the River of Saint Augustine, and the other,
half a dozen leagues from thence, to the Northward, at a place by them called
Saint Helena.

In the year 1586. as Sir Francis Drake came coasting along from Sir Francis
Drakes Voyage.
Cartagena, a City in the main land to which he put over, and took it, after he
departed from Sancto Domingo, when the mortality that was amongst our English,
had made them to give over their enterpri^e, to go with Nombre de Dios, and so
over land to Panama, there to have stricken the stroke for the Treasure: he
was on the coast of Florida in the height of thirty, our men discryed on the
shore, a place built like a Beacon, which was made for men to discover to
Sea-ward: so coming to the shore, they marched along the Rivers side, till
they came to a Fort built all of whole trees, which the Spaniards called the
Fort of Saint John, where the King entertained half his Forces that he then
had in the Country, which were an hundred and fifty Soldiers; the like number
being at Saint Helena, all of them under the government of Petro Melendez,
Nephew to the admiral Melendez, that fifteen or sixteen years before had been
to bring with onr English in the B^y of Mexico; this Fort our English ^ook, and
not far from thence the Town also of Saint Augustine upon the same river, where
resolving to umdertake also the enterprise of Saint Helena, when they came to
the Havens mouth where they should enter they durst not for the dangerous
shoals: wherefore they sorsooke the place, coasting along to Virginia, where
they took in Mr. Ralph Lane and his company, and so came into England* as you
shall hear when we speak of Virginia.

In these Northern parts of America, but especially within the main Continent,
some have written (but how truly I cannot tell) that there is a sea which has
no enter course at all with the Ocean: so that if there be any third place
beside the Mare Caspium, and the Mare Mortuum in Palestina, which retained in
it self great saltness, and yet mingleth not with the other sea, it is in
these Countries.

There is also in new Spain a great salt Lake, as big or bigger than the dead
sea of Palestine, in the midst of which stands* the great City of Tenustitan,
or Mexico, the Mistress cr^imperiall City of those parts: and on the Banks or
sides* of that Lake many other Cities also beside, which though they are but
little in comparison of the greatness of Tenustitan, yet of themselves are
geeat. This Tenustitan is supposed to consist of 60 thousand houses, as you may
read in the third Chap. of the fifth of the Decades: and this City standing in
the midst and center of this salt Lake, go which way you will from the
Continent to the ^ity, it is at least a League and an half, or two Leagues on
the Lake unto it: some of the other Cities are said to be thirty, some of forty
thousand Houses; the names of these are, Mesiquail^ingo, Coluacana, Four cities
(...) in America.
Wiohilabasco, Iztapalapa, and others: the Lake, though it be in the midst of
the Land, has his fluxus and refluxus, his ebbing and flowing, like the Sea,
and yet seventy leagues distant from the Sea.

But certain it is, that toward the South of these parts, which is the
Northern part of Hispania nova, above Mexico, there is a burning The burning
hill in Americs.
hill, which often times breaks out into flames, as Vesuvius in Campania, did
in the days of the elder Pliny, and as Aetna has done many ages since and
before.

Peter Martyr his his fifth of his Decades, says, that eight leagues from
Tenustitan or Mexico, as Ferdinando Cortes went thither from the Chiurute
Calez, where is a Hill called of the Inhabitants Popecatepeque, as much as to
say, A smoakie mountain, at the top whereof there is a hole of a league and a
half wide, out of which are cast fire, and A strange fire.
stones with whitl-winds; and that the thickness of the ashes lying about the
Hill is very great. It is reported also elsewhere of this hill, that the flames
and the ashes thereof often times destroy the fields and Gardens thereabouts.
When Cortes, went by it, he sent ten Spaniards, with Guides of the Country, to
see and make report thereof unto him; two of which ten venturing further than
the rest, saw the mouth of this fiery gulf at the hills top: and had they not
happily soon returned toward their fellows, and sheltered themselves under a
rock on the side of the hill, such a multitude of stones were cast out with the
flame, that by no means they could have escaped.

The Englishmen also desirous by Of Virginia the first plantation.
Navigation to add something unto their own Country, as before time they had
traveled toward the farthest North part of America, so lately finding that
part which lies between Florida and Nova Francia, was not inhabited by any
Christians, and was a Land fruitful and fit to plant in, they sent thither two
several times, two several companies, as Colonies to inhabit that part,
which in remembrance of the Virginity of their Queen they called Virginia. But
this voyage being enterprized upon by private men, and being not thoroughly
followed by the State, the possession of this Virginia for that time was
discontinued, and the Country left to the old inhabitants.

There were some English people, The second planta ion.
who after they had understood the calmnesse of the Climate, and goodness of
the soil, did upon the instigation of some Gentlemen of England, voluntarily
offer themselves, even with their Wives and Children, to go into those parts to
inhabit; but when the most of them came there (upon some occasions) they
returned home again the first time: which caused that the second year there was
a great company transported thither, who were provided of many necessaries, and
continued there over a whole winter, under the guiding of M. Lane: but not
finding any sustenance in the Country (which could well brook wi^h their
nature, and being too meanly provided of Corn and Victuals from England) they
had like to have perished with famine; and therefore thought themselves happy
when Sir Francis Drake, coming that way from the Western- Indies, would take
them into his ships, and bring them home into their native Country. Yet some
there were of those English, which being left behind, ranged up and down the
Country (and hovering about the seacoast) made means at last (after their
enduring much misery) by some Christian ships to be brought back again into
England.

While they were there inhabiting, there were some children born and baptized
in those parts, and they might well have endured the Country, if they might
have had such strength as to keep off the inhabitants from troubling them in
tilling the ground, and reaping such corn as they would have sowed.

Again in the days of our now The third plantation.
reigning Sovereign, in the year of our Lord 1606. the English planted
themselves in Virginia, under the degrees 37, 38, 39. where they do to this day
continue, and have built three Towns and Forts, as namely James-town and
Henrico, Fort Henricke, and Fort Charles, with others, which they hold and
inhabit; sure retreats for them against the force of the natives, and
reasonable secured places against any power that may come against them by Sea.

In the same height, but a good distance Of the summer Islands
from the coast of Virginia, lies the Island called by the Spaniards La
Barmuda, but by our English the Summer Islands, which of late is inhabited also
by our Country men.

Northward from them on the coast lies N^rumbega, which is the south part of
that which the French men did without disturbance of any Christian for a time
possess. For the Frenchmen did discover a larg part of America, toward the
Circle Articke, and did build there some Towns, and named it of their own
Country Nova Francia.

As our English men have adventured very far for the discovery of newfound
lands: so with very great labor and diligence they attempted to open something
higher than Nova Francia: and therefore with some Ships they did pass thither,
and entered upon the Land, from whence they brought some of the people, whose
countenance was very tawny and dusky; which comes not by any heat, but the
great cold of the Climate, chilling and pricking them: but the digestion and
stomach of these people is very good, insomuch that like unto the Tartars, and
some other Norther nations, their feeding was (for the most part) upon raw
meat, their manners otherwise being barbarous and suitable to their diet.

They had little leatherne Boats, wherein they would fish near the brinks of
the Sea, and at their pleasure would carry them from place to place on their
backs.

Notwithstanding all their pains there taken, it was a great error and
ignorance in our men, when they supposed that they should find good store of
Gold-mines in those quarters: for the country is so cold, that it is not
possible to find there any full concoction of the sun, to breed and work such a
metal within the ground; and therefore howsoe ver they brought home some store
of earth, which they supsed to be Ore, and of shining stones; yet when it came
to the trial it proved to be nothing worth, but verified the Proverb, All is
not Gold that glisters.

In very many parts of these Northern Countries of America, there is very fit
and opportune fishing some pretty way within the sea, and therefore diverse
Nations of Europe, do yearly send fishers thither, with shipping and great
store of salt: where when they have taken fish; and dried it, and salted it at
the land, they bring it home into Christendom, and utter it commonly by The
fish of New found, land.
the name of New found-land-fish.

The English about the year 1570 did adventure far for to open the North parts
of America, and sailed as far as the very Circle Articke, hoping to have fonnd
a passage-by the North to the Moluccoes, and to China, which hitherto neither
by the North of Asia, nor by the North of America, could be effefected by them,
by reason of the very great cold and ice in the climate.

The rest of the Island (being a huge space of earth,) has not hither to by any
Christian to any purpose been discovered; but by those near the sea coast it
may be gathered, that they all which do there inhabit, are men rude and
uncivil, without the knowledge of God. Yet on the north west part of America,
some of our English men going through the straights of Magellane, and passing
toward the North by Hispania nova, have touched on a Country, where they have
found good entertainment, and the King thereof yielded himself to the
subjection of the Queen of England: whereupon Nova Al bion.
they termed it Nova Albion.

Sir Francis Drake, who touched upon that Country and for some pretty time had
his abode there, does report in his Voyage, that the country is very good,
yielding much store of diverse fruits delightful, both to the eye and taste: and
that the people are apt enough by hospitality to yield favor and entertainment
to strangers: but it is added withal, that they are marvellously addicted to
Wichcraft, and adoration of Devils; from which they could not be persuaded to
abstain even in the very presence of our Countrymen.

Of Peru and Brasile.
When the Portugals had first The Portugals discovery of Brasile.
begun their Navigation by Africa into the East Indies, some of them intending
to have held their course Eastward unto Catut bonae spei, were driven so far
Westward by tempest, that they landed in a large and great Country, which by a
general name is called Brasilia, where they began to enter traffic, and with
Towns and Castles to plant themselves, before that the Spaniard had discovered
Peru, which is the South part of America. So that at this day whatsoever* the
King of Spain has in Brasilia, it is in the right of the Crown of Portugal.

We may read in Guicciardine, how when the Spaniards toward the West, and the
Portugals toward the East, had descried many new-found-lands, there grew great
contention between them, what should be appropriated unto the one, and what
might be seized on by the other: therefore for the better establishing of peace
amongst them, they had both recourse unto Alexander the sixth, who was Pope in
the year 1492, and somewhat before and after: and he taking on him (after the
proud manner of the Bishops of Rome) to dispose of it, which belonged not unto
him, did set down an order between them; which was that all the degrees of
longitude, being 360. in the Globe being divided into two parts, the Spaniards
should take one, and the Portugals the other: so that in this division they
were to begin in those degrees, under which some of Peru stands; from the
which they counting forwards toward the East, did allow Brasilia, and 180
degrees to the Portugals Eastward, and so from Brasilia Westward to the
Spaniards as many: so that he had in his portion all America accept Brasilia. A
large Country, and much inhabited.


This Country is large, having in it many people, and several Kingdoms, which
are not all possessed by the Portugals; but so, that other Christians, as
namely the Frenchmen being driven out of their Country for Religion, have set
foot in there, though afterward again they have abandoned it.

What the Portugal do at this day in Brasilia, I know not: but it is likely
now, that whatsoever there is held by the Christians is reputed to be under the
Spaniards, as many other parts of Brasile promiscuously are: yet certain it
is, that now almost forty years since some of the Frenchmen, which professed
sincere religion, and could not then be suffered quietly to live in France, did
provide certain shipping, and under the conduct of one Villagagno a Note.
Knight of Malta, but their own countrymen did go thither and continued there
the space of one year, having Ministers and Preachers among them, and the
exercise of the Word and Sacraments: but after by the evil counsel of some of
the chief Rulers in France, which were addicted unto the Pope, the heart of
Villagagno was drawn away, insomuch that he contumeliously using the Pastors,
and chief of that company, did force them to retire into France: so that the
habitation there was then utterly relinquished, and has not si^ce been
continued by any of the French.

There is a learned man one Johannes Lyreus, who was in their voyage, and has
written a Tract called Navigatio in Brasiliam, which is very well worth the
reading, not only to see what did befall him and his company, but what the
manners of that people, with whom they did converse. The inhabitants here are
men also utterly unlearned; but men more ingenious than the common sort of the
Americans; goodly of body, and straight of proportion going always naked;
reasonable good Warriors after their country fashion, using to fat such
enemies as they take in the wars, that afterward they may devour them, which
they do with great pleasure. For diverse of the People of those quarters, as the
Caribees, and the Cannibals, and almost all, are eaters of man's flesh.

In this Country grows abundance The abundance of Brasile wood.
of that wood, which since is brought into Europe, to die red colors, and is
of the place whence it comes called Brasil wood; the trees whereof are
exceeding great.

The people of Brasil, where Lyrius and his fellows lived, are called by the
name of Tauvaupinambaltii, by description of whose qualities, many things may
be learned concerning the rest of the inhabitants near thereobout.

First then, they have no letters among them, and yet seem to be very capable
of any good understanding: as appeared by the speech of some of them, reproving
the Frenchmen for their great greediness and covetousness of gain, when they
would take so much pains, as to come from another end of the world to get
commodities there. Their computation is only by the Sun and Moon, whom they
hold to be of a Divine nature: and although they Their Religion.
know nothing truly concerning God, yet they have a dark opinion that the soul
does live after the separation from the body.

The men and women throughout the whole Country do go stark Their apparel.
naked, even very few of them having any thing on to cover their privities;
only some of them do pull some kind of ornaments through their ears, and the
most of them have their lower lip boared through with a great hole, therein
putting some device or other. The proportion of the Inhabitants


They look very disguisedly, but they are wonderful straight of limb and
proportion, insomuch that the Author writes that in all the time wherein he
lived among them, he saw not one crooked backed or misshapen in any part:
whereof seeking to give a reason, he ascribes it to this; that their children
are never swathed, or bound about, with any thing when they are first born, but
are put naked into the bed, with their parents to lie: which beds are devised
of Cotton wool, and hung up between two trees not far from the ground, in the
which flagging down in the middle, men and their wives and their children do
lie together.

But whether this be the true reason of the straightness of their bodies, it
may be doubted, from the authority of S. Hierom, who in one of his treatises
mentioning that the children of the noblest and* greatest Romans in his time
were very crooked, when other which were breed of meaner parents were not so,
imputes it to this cause, that the Gentlewomen of Rome, in a kind of
wantonness did not suffer their infants to be so long swathed as poorer people
did, and that thereby their joints and members not being tied and restrained
within compass, did fly out of proportion.

Certainly, howsoever there may be some reasons naturally given of these
things, it is much to be ascribed to the immediate will of God, who gives and
takes away beauty at his pleasure.

The men of these parts are very Note.
strong, and able of body, and therefore either give sound strokes with their
clubs where with they fight, or else shoot strong shoots with their bows,
whereof they have plenty: and if any of them be taken in the wars (after they
have been cramed of pur pose to be eaten of their enemies) they are brought
forth to execution, wherein mavelous willingly they do yield themselves to
death, as supposing that nothing can be more honorable unto them, then to be
taken, and to die for their Country. He therefore who is to kill the other, does
with very much insolency and pride insult, over him which is to be slain;
saying, thou art he which would have spoiled and destroyed us and ours, but
now I am to recompense thee for thy pains: and the other without all fear
replies, Yea, I am he that would have done it, and would have made no spare, if
I had prospered in mine intent; and other such suitable words, showing their
resolution to conquer, or willingly to die in the common cause of themselves
and their people. It is strange The Canibals or man eiters, which is the
country custom.
to see the inhumane and unatural custom, which many of the people of the
West- Indies have; for there are whole Islands full of such Canibals as do eat
man's flesh; and amongst the rest these (...) are famous that way; who when they
are disposed to have any great meeting, or to have any solemn feast, they kill
some of their adversaries, whom they keep in store for that purpose, and
cutting him out into collops, which they call Boucan, they will lay them upon
the coals, and for diverse days together make great mirth in devouring them:
wherein they have this fashion, very strange, that so long as they are in their
eating banquet, although it continue diverse days, they do never drink at all,
but afterward, when they are disposed to fall to drinking of a certain liquor
which they have amongst them, they will continue bousing at it for two or three
days, and in the mean time never eat. In many parts both of Hispania nova, and
Peru, as also in the Islands near adjoining, Their great use of Tobacco.
they have an herb whereof they make great use; of which some is brought into
diverse parts of Europe, under the name of Tobacco, Paetum, or Nicosiana,
although we have also much conterfeit of the same: the people of those parts do
use it as Physic, to purge themselves of humors, and they apply it also to
the filling of themselves, the smoke of it being received through a leaf, or
some such hollow thing* into the nostrils, head, and stomach, and causing the
party which receives it, to lie as if he were drunk or, dead for a space,
needing no food or nourishment in the mean while. Whereof it cannot be denied,
but that it is possible that by prescript of Physic it may by serviceable for
some purposes among us; although that also it be very disputable, in as much as
they who speak most highly of it, must and do confess that the force of it is
obstup^factive, and no other, whereby it produces his own effects, and wise
men should be wary and sparing in receiveing of such a thing. But when we Note.
do consider the vain and wanton use which many of our Countrymen have of
late taken up, in receiving of this Tobacco, not only many times in in a day,
but even at meat, and by the way* to the great waste both of their purse and of
their bodies, we may well deplore the vanity of the nation, who thereby purpose
themselves as ridiculous to the French, and other our neighbors. And
certainly, if it were possible that our worthy, warlike, and valiant
Progenitors might behold their manners (who do most delight therein) they would
wonder what a generation had succeeded in their rooms, who addict themselves to
so fond, and worse than effeminate passion.

Benzo, who lived among them of the West- Indies does call the smell of it a
Tartarus and hellish savor: And whatsoever looks into those Books, which our
Christians traveling thither have written concerning Note this ye Tobacconists*
those West- Indies, shall find that the inhabitants there do use it most as a
remedy against that which is called Lues venerea, whereunto many of them are
subject, being unclean in their conversation; and that not only in fornication
and adultery with women, but also their detestable and excrable sin of Sodomy.

After that the Spaniards had for a time possessed Hispania nova, for the
desire of Gold and Pearl, some of them traveled toward the South, and as by
water they found the Sea westward from Peru, which is always very calm, and
is by them called the South sea, as the other wherein Cuba stands 'is termed
the North sea, so by land they found that huge and mighty Country; which is
called Peru, wherein the people are (for the most part) very barbarous, A
description of the people of Peru.
and without God; men of great stature, yea, some of them far higher than the
ordinary sort of men in Europe; using to shoot strongly with bows made of
Fish-bones, and most cruel people to their enemies.

Our English people who have traveled that way, do in their writings confess
that they saw upon the South of Peru very huge and tall men, who attempting
upon them when they put to land for fresh water, were much frighted with their
Guns, or else doubtless had offered violence unto them; which our men fearing,
got them away as speedily as they could.

There was one Petrus de Cieca, a Spaniard, who when he had traveled two and
twenty years, returned back again into Europe, and wrote an excellent Book of
the Discovery of that whole Country. And he amongst other things does record,
that there are found in some parts of Peru, very huge and mighty bones of men
that had been Giants, who dwelt and were buried there.

Amongst these the Spaniards The riches of the Country of Peru.
(partly by force, but especially by perfidious treason) did get infinite sums
of Gold and Pearls, wherewith being allured, they hoped for more, by reason
that a great part thereof has under the Zona torrida, and that caused them to
spread themselves here and there, as far as they durst in the country, where in
some places they dug Gold out of the ^rth; and in some other they found it
ready dug and tried unto their hands, by the people of the Country, which
had used that Trade before their coming thither.

Amongst other creatures which are A strange story of the beast Cincia.
very famous in this Peru, there is a little beast called Cincia, which is no
bigger than a Fox, the tale whereof is long, the feet short, and the head like
a very Fox, which has a bag hanging under her belly, whereinto she does use to
put her young, when she sees them in danger of any hunter or passenger.

That Petrus de Cieca (of whom mention was made before) tells that himself
saw one of them, which had no less then seven young ones lying about her: but
as soon as she perceived that a man was coming near unto her, she presently
got them into her bag, and ran away with such incredible swiftness as one would
not have imagined.

After the Spaniards had conquered Mexico, they discovered Peru, traveling
toward the south, and as they prevailed against the Mexicans, taking part with
an enemy neighbor; so finding two brothers striving in Peru, Guas^ar and
Atabaliba, they so demeaned themselves in their difference that they ruined
both, and got their incredible store of Gold.

The first that attempted against the first attempters against the Peruvians.
the Peruvians, and destroyed their Kings, were James of Almagra and the two
brothers of Pizarres: but dealing treacherously and cruelly with the Peruvians,
they long enjoyed not their victory, but all of them died a violent death.

The people of Peru are in many places much wiser than those of Cuba,
Hispaniola, and some others parts of the Continent where the Spaniards first
landed, and therefore they have some orders and solemn customs among them; as
among the rest, they do bury their dead with observable ceremonies, laying up
their bodies with great solemnity into a large house prepared for that purpose.

They have also in one Province there a custom of carrying news and messages
veryspeedily, to the end the King and Governor of the Country may presently
take advertisement of any thing which falls out, and this is not on
horseback, or by the Dromedary or Else, as they use in other places, but only
men who pass over Rocks and through Bushes the next way, and in (...) set places
there be always fresh Posts, to carry tha^ further which is brought unto them
by the other.

The Spaniards have here and there scatteringly upon the seacoasts, set up
some Towns and Castles, but are not able to possess almost any thing of the
land: neither have they as yet discovered the inward parts thereof though daily
they spread themselves more and more: insomuch that it is supposed, that within
these seven years last past they have gotten into Guiana, where in former time
no ^ranger of that Nation has been.

Guiana is a country which lie^h to Guiana.
^he North sea in the same height, as Peru to the South (as it is discribed)
about five degrees from the Aequin^ctial, and that (as I take it) toward the
South.

The Country is supposed to be The rich ness an^ (...) os the* cuntry.
exceeding rich and to have in it many mines of gold (which have not yet been
touched, or at least but very l^tely, and to be exceeding fertile, and
delightful otherwise, although it lie i^ the heat of Zona torrida: but there is
such store of rivers and fresh waters i^ every part thereof, and the soil it
self has such correspondency thereunto, that it is reported to be as green and
pleasant to the eye, as any place in the world.

Some of our Englishmen did with great labor and danger pass by water into the
heart of the country, and earnestly desire that some forces of ^he English
might be sent thither, and a Colony erected there: by reason of the distance of
the place, and the great hazard, that if it should not succeed well, it might
prove dishonorable to our nation; and withal, because the Spaniards have great
companies and strength, although not in it, ye many ways about it, that
intendment was discontinued.

In diverse parts of this Peru, and near unto Guiana; there are very many great
rivers, which as they are fi^ for any navigation that should be attempted to go
up within the land, so otherwise they must needs yield health and fruitfulness
to those that i^habit there. The greatest of these rivers is that which some
call Oregliana, The river of the Amazone.
or the river of the Amazones. And next is the river Maragnone and down
toward. Magellane straights Rio de la Plata: and our English men do speak of
the river Orinoque* in the greatest of which this is famous; that for a good
spece after they have run into the main sea, yea, some write 20. or 30. Miles,
they keep themselves unmixt with the salt water, so that a very great way
within the sea. men may take up as fresh water, as if they were near the Land.

The first o^ our Nation that sailed ^ir Walter ^. leigh lid first (...) it to
the English.
to Guiana, and made report thereof unto us, was S. Walter Raleigh, who
^ravelled far up into the country upon the river Orinoque: after him, one or
two voyages thither did captain Kemish make, and now lately* captain H^recourt,
with others, have visited that Country,* where our men con^inued the space of
3. or 4. year^* being kindly entreated of the natives, who much desired them to
come and make some plantation amongst them hoping by them to be defended:
against They: have he* Spani^rds, and love the English.
the Spaniards, whom they greatly hate and fear* When Sir Walter Raleigh come
to Guiana, ^he overthrew the Spaniards that were in Trinidado, and took Bereo
their Captain or General prisoner: he loosed and set at*liberty four or five
Kings of the people of that country, that Bereo kept in chains, and sent them*
home to their own: which de^d of his did win him the hearts of the people, them
and make much to favor our English at this day.

Diverse also of that country, which amongst them are men of note, have been
brought over into England, and here living many years* are by our men brought
home to their-own country, whose reports and knowledge of our Nation is a cause
that they have been well entreated of these Guiancans, and much desired to plant
themselves amongst them.

Our men that traveled to Guiana, A strange story.
amongst other things most memorable, did report, and in writing delivered to
the world, that near unto Guiana, and not far from those place; where
themselves were, there were men without heads; which seemed to maintain the
opinion to be true which in old time was conceived by the Historians and
Philosophers, that there were Acephali, whose eyes were in their breasts, and
the rest of their face there also situated: and this our English travelers
have reported to be so ordinarily, and (...) mentioned unto them in those parts
where they were, that no sober man should any way doubt of the truth thereof.

Now because it may appear that the matter is but fabulous, in respect of the
truth of Gods creating of them, and that the opinion of such strange shapes and
monsters as were said to be in old time, that is* men with heads like Dogs,
some with ears down to their ankles, others with one huge foot alone,
whereupon they did hop from place to place, was not worthy to be credited
although Sir John Mandevile of late age fondly has seemed to give credit and
authority thereunto; yea, and long since he who took upon him the name of S.
Augustine, in writing that counterfeit Book Ad*frates in Ermo: It is fit that
the cerainty of the matter concerning these in Peru should be known: and that
is that in Quinbaia, Note.
and some other parts of Peru, the men are borne as in other places, and yet by
devises which they have, after* the birth of Children, when their bones and
gristles, and other parts are yet tender, and fit to be fashioned, they do
crush down the heads of the children unto the breasts and shoulders, and do
with frames of wood, and other such devices keep them there, that in time they
grew continuate to the upper part of the trunk of the body, and so seem to
have no necks or heads. And again, some other of them thinking that the shape
of the head is very decent, if it be long and erect after the fashion of a
Sugarloaf, do frame some other to that form by such wooden instruments, as they
have for that purpose, and by binding and swathing them to keep them so
afterward* And that this is* the custom of those people, and that there is no
other matter in it, Petrus de Cieca, who traveled almost all over Peru, and is
a grave and sober writer, in his description of those Countries* does report.

There be in some parts of Peru, Their strange devises to take fowls.
people which have a strange device for the catching of diverse sorts of fowls,
wherein they especially desire to take such as have their feathers of p^ed,
orient, and various colors, and that not so much for the flesh of them, which
they may eat, as for their feathers, whereof they make garments; either short,
as Cloaks, or as Gowns, long to the ground, and those their greatest Nobles do
wear, being curiously wrought, and by order, as appears by some of them being
brought into England.

And here by this mention of feathers it is not (...) to specify, that in the
sea, which is the Ocean lying Diverse flying fishes.
betwixt Europe and America, there be diverse flying fishes yet whose wings are
not feathers, but a thin kind of skin, like the wings of a Bat or Rearmouse:
and these living sometimes in the water, and flying sometimes in the air, are
well accepted in neither place: for below, either ravenous fishes are ready to
devourt them: or above the sea-fowls are continually beating at them.

Some of the Spaniards, desirous to see how far this Land of Peru did go
toward the South, traveled down, till at length they found the Lands end, and
a little strait or narrow Sea, which did run from the main Ocean toward Africa
into the South Sea. Magellanus straits.
One Magellanus was he that found this strait, and although it be dangerous,
passed through it, so that of his name it is called Fretum Magellanicum, or
Magellans straits.

And this is the way whereby the Spaniards do pass to the backside of Peru and
Hispania nova, and whosoever will compass the whole world (as some of our
English men have done) he must of necessity (for any thing that is yet known)
pass through this narrow strait. Ferdinandus Magellanus having a great mind to
travel, and being very desi rous to go unto the Molucco Islands by some other
way than by the back side of Africa, if it might be, did in the year 1520* set
forth from Sivill in Spain with five ships, and traveled toward the West-
Indies, and went so far toward the South, as that he came to the lands end,
where he holding his course, in a narrow passage toward the West, for the
space of diverse days, did at the length peaceably pass through the straights,
and came into a great sea, which some after his name do call Mare Magellanicum,
some others Mare pacaficus, because of the great calmness and quietness of the
waters there; but most commonly it is termed the South The South Sea.
sea; the length whereof he passed in the space of three months and 20. The
Moluccoes.
days, and came unto the Moluccoes, where being set upon by the East Indian
people himself and many of his company were slain: and yet one of his ships (as
the Spaniards do write) called Victoria* did get away from those Moluccoes, and
returning by the Cape Bonae spei on the South side of Africa came safe into
Spain*

So that it may be truly said, that if not Megellanus, yet some of his
Magellane the first that evercompased the world.
company were the first that did ever compass the World, through all the
degrees of longitude.

Johannes Lyrius, in the end of his Book De navigatione in Brasiliam, does tell
that Sir Francis Drake of England, when he passed through Magellane straights,
and so to the Molucco Islands, and then homeward from the East by Africa, did in
a device give the Globe of the earth, with this word or Motto, Primus m^
^ricumdedisti: which is not simple to be understood that never any had gone
round the world before him, but that never any of fame; for Magellane himself
was slain (as before is noted:) or else he did doubt of the truth of that
narration, that the Ship called Fictoria did return with safety into Spain.

The Maps which were made at first concerning America and Peru did so describe
the western part of Peru, as if when a man had passed. Magellane straits, and
did intend to come upward toward nova Hispania, on the further side, he must
have born West, by reason that the land did shoot out with a very great
Promontory, and bending that way.

But our English men which went with S. Francis Drake, did by their own
experience certainly find that the land from the uttermost end of the Straits
on Peru side, did go up toward the South directly, without bending to the
West, and that is the cause whereof all the new Maps and Globes, especially
made by the English, or by the Dutch, who have taken their directions from our
men, are reformed according to this new observation.

When the Spaniards had once found an ordinary passage from the South Sea
toward the Moluccoes, they never ceased to travel that way, and discovered
more and more, and by that means they had found out diverse Islands not known in
former ages; as two for example sake: a good distance from the Molucco's, which
because they be inhabited by men which do steal not only each from other, but
do pilfer away all things that they can from such strangers as do land there
abouts, they Insulae Latornum.
are called Insulae Latronum.

They have also descried some other nearer unto the East- Indies, which Insulae
Salomonis
they now term Insulae Salomonis. But the most renowned of all are those to
whom the name is given Philippinae, in remembrance of Philip Philippinae.
the second King of Spain, at whose cost they were discovered.

These Philippinae are very rich, and Their Riches.
from thence is brought abundance of costly Spices, and some other rich
merchandise, yea, and Gold too.

There were also some other Islands descried by Magellanus himself, Infulas
infortunatas.
which he called Insulas Infortunatas, as being of quality contrary to the
Canaries, which are termed the Fortunate Islands: For when he passing through
the South sea, and meaning to come to the Moluccoes, (where he was slain) did
land in these Islands, thinking there to have furnished himself with victuals
and fresh water, he found the whole place to be Barren and not Inhabited.

Of the Countries that lie about the two Poles.
HAving laid down in some measure the description of the old known world, Asia
Africa, and Europe, with the Islands adjoining unto them; and also of Americk*
which by some has the title of New found World: it shall not be amiss briefly
to say some thing of a fifth and sixth part of the Earth: the one lying near the
South Pole, and the other near the North: which are places that in former times
were not known, nor though of.

When Magellanus came down to Regio M^gellanica.
the Southern end of Peru, he found on the further side of the (...) main and
hugh Land lying toward the South Pole, which some have of his name called
since Regio Magellanica, and that so much the rather, because he touched upon
it again before he came to the Moluccoes.

Since his time the Portugals trading toward Calec^ and the East Indies, there
has some of them been driven by tempest so far as to that which many now call
the South Continent; and so diverse of sundery Nations have there by occasion
touched upon it.

It is found therefore by experience, for to go along all the degrees of
longitude, and as in some places it is certainly discovered to come up so high
toward the North, as to the Tropicke of Capricorn; so it is conjectured, that
toward the South it goes as far as to the Pole. The ground whereof is, that
never any man did perceive the Sea did pass through any part thereof, nay,
there is not any great river which has yet been described to come out o^ i^
into the Ocean: whereupon it is concluded, that since somewhat must fill up the
Globe of the Earth, from the first appearing of this land unto the very Pole:
and that cannot be any Sea, unless it should be such a one as has no
intercourse with the Ocean (which to imagine is uncertain) therefore it is
supposed that it comes whole out into the land to the Antartick Pole: which
if it should be granted, it must needs be acknowledged withal, that this space
of earth is so huge, as that it equalleth in greatness not only Asia, Europe,
and Africa, but almost America being joined unto them.

Things memorable in this country, are reported to be very few: only in the
East part of it, over against the Moluccoes, some have written that there be
very waste Countries and wildernesses; but we find not so much as mention
whether any do inhabit there or no. And over against the Promontory of Africa;
which is called Caput bonae spei, there is a country which the Portugals called
P sittacorum Psittacorum regio.
regio, because of the abundant store of Parrets, which they found there.

Near to the Magellane straits, in this south part of the world, is that land
the Spaniards call Terra delfuego: Terra del fuego.
those also which have touched at it in other places, have given to some parts
of it these names, Beach, Lucath, and Maletur, but we have no perfect
description of it, nor any knowledge how or by whom it is inhabited.

About this place the said Portugals A description of the people.
did at one time sail along for the space of 2000. miles, and yet found no end
in the land. And in this place they reported that they saw inhabitants, which
were very fair and fat people, and did go naked: which is the more to be
observed, because we scant read in any writer, that there has been seen any*
people at all upon the South coast.

More toward the East, not far from the Muluccoes, there is one part of this
Country, as some suppose, although some doubt whether that be an Island or no,
which comes up so high* toward the North, as the very Aequinoctial line, and
this Mov^ Guinea.
is commonly called Nova Guinea, because it lies in the same Climate, and is
of no other temperature then Guinea in Africa is.

I have heard a great Mathematitian in England find fault both with Ortelius
and Mercator, and all our late makers of Maps, because in describing this
Continent, they make no mention of any Cities, Kingdoms, or Commonwealth which
are seated and placed there: whereof he seemed in confidence of words to avouch
that there be a great many, and that it is as good a Country as Note.
almost any in the world: But the arguments why he gathered it to be so he did
not deliver; and yet notwithstanding it may be most probably conjectured, that
the Creator of the world would not have framed so huge a mass of Earth, but
that he would in his wisdom appoint some reasonable creatures to have their
habitation there.

Concerning those places which may be supposed to lie near unto the Northern
Pole, there has in times past something been written, which for the
particularity thereof might carry some show of truth, if it be not thoroughly
looked into. It is therefore by an old tradition delivered, and by some written
also, that there was a Friar of Oxford, who took on him to travel into those
parts which are under the very Pole: which he did partly by Negromancy (wherein
he was much skilled) and partly again by taking advantage of the frozen times,
by means whereof he might travel upon the Ice even so as himself pleased: It
is said therefore of him, that he was directly under the Pole, and that there
he found a very huge and blackrock, which is commonly Nigra Rupes.
called Nigra rupes, and that the said rock being diverse miles in circuit, is
compassed round about with the Sea; which Sea being the breadth of some miles
over, does run out into the more large Ocean by four several Currents, which
is as much to say, as that a good pretty way distant from the Nigra Rupes,
there are four several lands of reasonable quantity: and being situated round
about the rock, although with some good distance, are severed each from other
by the sea running between them, and making them all four to be Islands almost
of equal bigness. But there is no certainty of this report, and therefore our
best Mathematicians in this latter age have omitted it.

Our travelers of later years have adventured so far, to their great danger in
those cold and frozen countries, that they have descried Groinland, Groin-land
which lies as far, or beyond the circle Artick: but whether it go so far out
as unto the Pole, they cannot say: which is also to be afirmed of the Northern
parts of America, called by some Estote-land; for the opening whereof our
Englishmen have taken great pains, as may easily appear by the ^ew ^lobes and
Maps, in which all the Capes, Sounds and Furlongs, are called by English names.
Their purpose was in attempting this voyage, to have found out a passage to
China and Cathaio, by the North parts of America: but by the snows which fell
in August and September, as also by the incredible Ice there, after many
hazards of their lives, they were forc^d to return, not knowing whether there
be any current in the Sea, that might lead to the East Indies, or how far the
Land does reach Northward.

In like sor^, some of our English Merchants, to their great charges, set forth
^eets to descry the Seas toward the East: yet going by the North, and there
have found many unknown countries; as Nova Zembla, Nova Zembla, S Hugh
Willonghbies land.
Sir Hugh Willoughbies land, and other m^re: but of certain what is very near
unto the Pole they could never find. They have also so far prevailed, as to
reach one half of the way toward Cathaio by the North, going Eastward: insomuch
that by the River Ob, and by the Bay of St. Nicholas they bring the Merchandise
downwards into Russia: But whether the sea do go throughout, even to the
fatherest Eastern parts; or whether some great Promontory do stretch out of the
main Continent unto the very Pole, they cannot yet attain to know. These things
therefore must be left uncertain, to further discoveries in fature ages.

UNIVERSITIES.
In England.
1 Oxford 2 Cambridge.
Universities in Spain.
1 Toledo, latitude 40. 10. longitude 16. 40. 2 Sivill, lat ^7. ^0. long. 14.
20 3 Valencia lat 39. 55. long. 21. 10 4 Granada, lat, 37. ^0 long. 17. 1^ 5 S
Jago* lat. ^0. 5 long. 15. 40. 6 Valindolid, lat ^2 5. long 15. 45. 7 Alcalade
Henaros, lat. 40. 55. long. 17. 30 8 Salamanca, lat. 14. 10. long. 24 4 9
Caragoca, lat, 4^ 22 long. 22. 20 10 Signenc^, lat, ^4. 35. 20. long. 18. ^0.
11 Lerida, lat. 42 20 long 18. 10 12 Huesca, lat. 12 50. long. 2^. 20 13 Lisbon
lat. 38. 50. long 0 50 14 Coimbra, lat 40. long. 11. 2^. 15 Ebora, lat. 37, 38
long. 20
In the Isle Majorica.
1 Majorica.
In Polonia.
1 C^acovia. 2 Posne.
In Prussia.
1 Koningsberg
In Lituania.
1 Wild
In France.
1 Paris, lat 48. ^0. long ^3 2 Poictiers, lat. 46. 10 long 1^. 1^. 3 Lions,
lat. 44. 30 long. ^5. 40 4 Angers, lat. 47. 25. long 18. 10 5 Avignon, lat. 42.
30 long. 25 50 6 Orleans, lat. 47. 10 long. ^2 7 (...) lat. 46. 20 long. 22. 10
8 Cacn, lat 40. 45. long 1^. 20 9 Reims, lat 48, 30 long. 25, 25 10 Bordeaux,
lat 44, 30, long 17. 50 11 Tolouse, lat 43, 5, long 20 30. 12 Nismo, lat 42,
30, long, 25 13 Montpelie^. lat. 42, long 24, 30 14 Bisant^n. lat. 46, 3^,
long. 27, 48 15 Lole, lat, 46, 10, long 27
In Italy.
1 Rome, lat 41, 20, long, 38 2 Venice, lat, 44, 50, long, 37 3 Padna, lat, 44,
45, long, 32, 10 4 Bononia, lat, 43, 33, long, 35, 50 5 Ferrara, lat, 44, long,
^6 6 Millan, lat 44, 40, long, 33 7 Pavia lat, 44, long. 33, 5 8 Turin, lat,
43, 45, long, 31 30 9 Florence, lat, 42 35, long, 35, 50 10 Pisa, lat, 42, 40,
long, 35 11 Sienna, lat, 42, 20, long, 36, 15 12 Modena, lat, 13, 50, long, 35,
40
In Bohe^a.
1 Prague
In Germany.
1 Collen, lat. 51, long. 30 2 Basil, lat. 47, 40, long. 31 3 Alents, lat 50
long. 31 4 Witzburg, lat. 50 5 Triers, lat. 49, 50 6 Heidleberg, lat 49. 25,
long 33 7 Tubinge, lat. 49, 50 8 Ingolsted, lat 49, ^0 9 Erfurt, lat. 50 10
Leistgige, lat 51, 10 11 Wittenberg. lat. 51, 50 12 Frankford in Oder. 51, 10
13 Rostoch, lat 53 40 14 Grislwald lat 53, 10 15 Friburg. lat. 48 16 Marburg,
lat. 50, 40 17 Viena, lat 43 40 18 Diling in Suitzerland neat D^yaw.
In Germania Inferiori.
1 Lovain, lat. 50, long. 23 2 Doway, lat 50, 30, long. 29 3 Liege, lat 50 30,
long 29 4 Leiden, lat 5^, 10, long. 27, 20
In Denmark.
Copenhagen, lat. 56, 50, long 34, 30
In Moravi^.
1 Olmues
In Scotland.
1 Saint Andrews 2 Abe^don
Of England.
In England are contained S^ires 52 Bishoprics 26 Castles 186 Rivers 555
Chases. 13 Forests 68 Parkes 781 Clties 25 Parish-Churches 9725 Bridges. 956

FINIS.

