Advice to the Maidens of LONDON: To Forsake Their Fantastical TOP-KNOTS; Since
they are become so Common with Billings-gate Women, and the Wenches that cries
Kitchin-Stuff: Together with the Wanton Misses of the Town.
To the Tune of, Ye Ladies of London:
This may be Printed, R. P.



Now you young Females that follows the Mode,
both beautiful, brown, black, and muddy;
You must expect for to Reap what you have Sowed,
for making of Pride all your study:
These very Lines I send to you now,
concerning your Noddles adarning,
To^^^^ and Top-Knots we will not allow,
and therefore take this for a warning.
Do but consider the Women of Old,
who flourished not in large Laces,
Nor in your Glistering Silver and Gold,
but with many more Modest Graces;
But now at length these things are forgot,
and Women are monstrous wicked,
Susan and Joan they will have a Top-Knot,
although they have never a Smicket.
Every Dragel'-tayl'd Country Girl,
when once she comes up to the City,
If she can get but a Ribbon-^^^^al,
O then she is wondrous pretty:
Thus Al-a-mode they are willing to secur,
when e're they go trooping together,
Like a Fore-Horse of a Country Team,
decked up in their flourishing Feather.
HEre we may see what young Damsels will do,
before they will want of their pleasure,
Nancy and Nell of the Billings-gate Crew,
they will Mortgage their secret Crea^ure,
For a Top-Knot ^esure they will have one,
to wear on the^^ heads when they are ready,
And as they trip it to Islington,
ye scarce can know Joan from my Lady.
Kate the Cook-Maid is as fine as the rest,
behind there is no one shall leave her,
She Will have a Top-Knot to wear when she is dressed,
or else it would certainly grieve her;
Her Kitchin-stuff she often will sell,
to purchase that Ranting Attire,
And when she wears it it please her well,
to thank how Young Men her admire.
But as for those that have Money to seek,
and cannot tell where they shall find it,
They their Top-Knots will take up by the week,
and pay when the Devil is blinded;
What need they care if they have their Pride,
the Al-a-mode fashions of London,
Fine Hoods and Laces, with Top-Knots beside,
without which, alas! they are undon.
Some Misses wear as much Ribbon a top,
in this their most Savoy Attire,
As if their Head was a Milliners Shop,
and she would have no one pass by her,
But what should come and handle her Ware,
and they having Money, she would ease 'um,
Being dressed up in their Top Knot and Hair,
she may be sufficient to please 'um.
Seeing this Al-a-mode, wear of the Town.
by Gillians is practis^d so common,
It is high time that it now was said down
by every right Honest Woman;
If that you will but let them alone,
O then I shall not be Offended,
(...) and Dolly will straightways be known
from those that are better descended.
FINIS.
Printed for I. Blare, at the Sign of the Looking-Glass on London Bridge.


