Admirable News From IRELAND Both good and true: viz.

First, A humble Petition to the Honorable Houses of Parliament, of diverse
Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen of the Kingdom of Ireland now resident in London.

Secondly, A true Copy of a Letter sent from a Gentleman of worth in Ireland,
to a special friend of his, a Servant of great trust to the Kings Majesty:
Importing joyful News of a great overthrow given to the Rebels by Sir Simon
Harcot, and Sir Charles Coot.

Thirdly, A true Relation of all the first Occurrences and chiefest things of
note, that has happened in Ireland for a month past; being a true Copy of a
Letter sent to a Gentleman in London, and to one Master Clay in Lombard Street:
dated the twenty fourth of January. 1641.

Fourthly, Diverse other matters worthy of note.

Printed at London for Francis Coules. 1641.

To the Honorable Knights, Citizens, and and Burgesses of the Commons House of
Parliament.
The humble Petition of the Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen of the Kingdom of
Ireland now in Town,
Humbly showing,
THat your Petitioners have received many and particular advertisements from
all parts of the Kingdom of Ireland, which set forth the universal
desolations made in such plantations of the British, both English and Scotch,
wheresoever the barbarous Irish Rebels have come, to the utter destruction
both of the persons there inhabiting, and extirpating of the reformed
Protestant Religion there set up, through the Royal care and piety of K.
James of blessed Memory, and his Majesty that now is, and prosccuted by the
great industry and pious endeavors of near forty years travail by those who
have spent their whole lives in reducing that Kingdom to Civility, which is
now utterly desolated, by the proceedings so matchlessely cruel, that no age
nor story can parallel their inhumanities; some whereof your Petitioners are
informed have been touched upon by advertisements already brought to this
Honorable House, whereof there is so great variety, that volumnes were but
little enough to contain the particulars; many thousands of men, women, and
children, lying mangled on the face of the earth, crying loud to God and their
neighbor Kingdoms for relief against those Monsters, whose Conspiracy is now
so universal, that small ayds will be not only inconfiderable to effect the
work. but a means to lengthen the war, with the loss not only of the
treasure applied therein, but also of the persons employed, who being but few
will be in dan^er to be given up to the cruelties of the Rebels, by that means
(which God prevent) will they gain not only great access to their number,
but (which is much more considerable. that experience in war and use of Arms,
as may render them infinitely more able to make resistance against the
hereafter supplies; these particulars your Petitioners, out of the deep sense
they have of the calamities incumbent to that, and in danger to fall on this
Kingdom, with all humility crave leave to present; most humbly desiring, that
in pursuance of the zeal, and servency already shown to the glory and worship
of God, of the Honor and Renown of His most Excellent Majesty (both which
are now strongly assaulted and pusht at) and out of the tender commiseration
already expressed for the relief of that bleeding Kingdom;

That this Honorable Assembly will represent such prevalent arguments to his
Sacred Majesty, and the House of Peers, that the 10000. men tendered by the
Kingdom of Scotland and accepted of by this Honorable Assembly, may be
speedily ordered to resort unto Vlster: Not but that we do also desire there
may be as great a, proportion of Soldiers sent out of this Kingdom, as soon
as they can be prepared, if so it may please his Majesty and both Houses of
Parliament, the contagion of rebellion in Ireland having spread it self over
so many other parts of the Kingdom, and yet daily more and more increasing, as
will require the service of those who shall be sent out out of England for the
subduall of the Rebels, and comfort of his Majesty's good subjects in the
other Provinces.

But forasmuch as your Petitioners many of whose whole estates, and some of
whose wives, children, and nearest kindred and friends are already in the hands
and possession of those barbarous and bloody Rebels of Vlster, and that they
may have more then ordinary cause to fear, that the remaining Protestant
party, together with the important Towns of Caricfargus, Londonderry and
Colerane, being the chief, Bulwarks and Fortresses of that province, may for
want of speediest relief be surprised and destroyed, and by that means the
rest of the Kingdom extremely endangered, to the irrepairable damage and
discomfort of his Majesty, and all his good and loyast Subjects of all his
dominons; Therefore your Petitioners do most instatly supplicate this
Honorable Assembly, to endeavor the hastening thither with all possible
expedition the ten thousand men out of Scotland, whose assistance being within
three hours sail, may be soonest conveyed, and whose constitutions will
notably match with the rebels, being well able (as many of these petitioners
have known by former experience) to follow them through the bogs and Moorish
places (frequent in those parts) during the winter season, which other supplies
possibly may not be so fit for at this present; This number added to those
raised and to be raised in those parts (through Gods blessing) may soon check
these insolences, and contribute much for reducing that Kingdom to due
obedience, and yield unspeakable comfort, and relief to many thousand
disconsolate bleeding protestant souls, who have long languished in
expectation of aid from that and this Kingdom, the longer retarding whereof
will carry loud cries to heaven against those who cause the same?

And your Petitioners shall pray, etc.

Adam Viscount Loftus. Thomas Lord Folliot. Henry Lord Blayney. Robert Lord
Digby. Theodore Lord Docwra. Francis Lord Mountnorris. Sir George Blundell
Baronet. Sir Edward Loftus Knight. Sir Faithfull-Fortescue Knight. Sir John
Clattworthy Knight. Sir Robert King Knight, Sir Rob. Parkhurst Knight. Arthur
Annesley Esquire. Robert Wallop Esquire. Richard Fitzgerald Esquire. Arthur Jones
Esquire. John Moore Esquire. Nicolas Loftus Esquire, Raelph Whisller Esquire.
Richard Perkins. John Davis.


A true Copy of a Letter sent from a Gentleman of worth in Ireland, to a
special friend of his, a Servant of great trust to the Kings Majesty.
Importing joyful News of a great overthrow given to the Rebels.
Dublin 16. Jan. 1641.
TRedah was relieved on Tuesday night last by the two Pinnaces sent from hence,
and in happy time, for they were almost at their last morsel: The Pinnaces
enjoyed so fair a wind and so full a springtide, that the Rebels could not
possibly prevent their coming in. That night, in conjecture that the
Defendants within the Town, would be overjoyed with their new relief,
Captain Fox undermined a part of the Wall which was most weak, which Sir
Henry Tichbourn beheld all the time of their work until the breach was made
and two hunbred entered; and when as Sir Henry perceived as many as he could
master, he fell upon them and cut off all but eight men, who hardly escaped;
their Captain was killed, many were slain the day after.

Philip O-Reyley, an Arch-Rebell, and a man very mighty amongst them, is taken
and hanged.

The Lord of Dungarvon, has brought in Arms for five hundred foot* and one
hundred and twenty Horse out of England into Youghall, and twenty Barrells of
powder, part whereof is sent to Duncanvon, to the aid of the Lord of Esmond,
who is heseiged, and suspected for a Rebel: That Fort is well stored with
brass Ordnance, and like to become the greater loss.

The Lord Dungarvon, the Lord Braughill, and Sir William Courtney, with a
convenient Force, adjoined to the Lord President of Munster, who has fifteen
hundred foot, and four hundred Horse at command, so as if the Lord Muskerie,
and the Lord Roch stand firm, that yet stir not, there will be no fear of the
Rebels in that Province.

Sir Philip O-Neale, on Tuesday night came to Tredagh with one thousand foot,
and two hundred Horse.

Our numbers yet are so few, till further aid come out of England, that it
will be hazardous to adventure any part thereof, unless upon certain ground
and good advantages; for if we should receive a blow, the whole Kingdom might
be endangered.

The Towns near the Mountains, where Luke O-Toole and others kept their
rendevous, are all sacked and burnt: they fly at the voice of an Army in diverse
places. God granting peace in England, there is no fear of War in Ireland.

Irish Occurrences.
THe certain news we have, That last week on Thursday Captain Barkley
entered with his Pinace and three more into the river of Tredagh, and found it
half barred with Boats, and a great chain, which he suddenly burst, and made
that work useless; The town is relieved with good store of meal and other
provision, and Captain Barkley came to Dublin on Wednesday list; but I must
tell you, on his way homewards he burnt the town called Skeris, and got there
some plate and other good stuff.

At the time of the relief, one Captain Fox entered the town by permission of
Sir Henry Titchburne, with two hundred men, and came as far as the high Cross,
and there proclaimed the town was his; but in an instant Sir Henry Titchburne
gave him the salutation of a Soldier, for he and all his men were laid dead on
the place, and the rest of the Rebels durst not venture any further. It is said
by those that left Dublin on Wednesday last, That Sir Henry on Saturday last
sallied out and killed three hundred. It may be so. Since this, some Troops of
Horse went to Donboyne, seven miles from Dublin, in Month; and burnt it; the
mighty General Fingalls not daring to venture his person in the relief: the
Soldiers brought from thence four hundred Cowes, much other Cattle, and much
goods. Horses are dear in Dublin, yet two shillings will set hard to get a
good Naggplate for two shillings six pence the ounce, a merry world at Dublin.

We have a Letter from Sir Maurice Eustace. That a great Party of Wickloe,
Kildare, and Carlogh lie at Ratchcoole; but those that came forth on Wednesday
last here no such thing. Sir Charles Coote has been that way since, and has
burnt Clandarkan near Bellamount, a great town, and some other towns.

From Munster the intelligence is, the Lord Dungarvan is landed with Arms and
Munition, and is gone toward the Fort of Duncannon, in hope to relieve it,
wherein the Lord Esmund is, which if it be given up, will be a fault in him,
his son Sir Thomas Esmund is turned Papist, and out certainly in rebellion.

The Lord Viscount Mountgarret, and the Lord of Ikerryn, and the rest of the
Lords, except Muscrey and Roch, are out in Munster.

Kilkenny has taken it self, where my Lord Mountgarret is Governor for the
Rebels.

The Earl of Cork is at Yoghall with 600 Foot, and some Horse, to preserve
that place for the English landing.

As for Watersord it has taken it self also.

From Munster, the English have sent to Scotland to buy 2500 pounds Arms which
are now with them. We have no more news from them. If we had some ships from
the coast of Munster, they might prevent inconveniences, and burn towns that
are in rebellion. I know it will terrify them much, and put despair in their
minds, that succors cannot well come, but be taken.

FINIS.

