A TESTIMONY OF ANTIQUITY: Showing The Ancient Faith of the Church of England,
Touching the SACRAMENT Of the Body and Blood of the LORD, Here Publicly
Preached, And also received in the Saxons time, above Seven Hundred years ago.

Jeremiah 6. Go into the streets, and inquire for the old way: and if it be the
good and right way, then go therein, that ye may find rest for your souls. But
they say: we will not walk therein.



OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printer to the University, Anno Dom.
1675.

The Preface to the Christian Reader.
GREAT Contentions has now been of long time about the most comfortable
Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ our Savior: In the Inquisition and
determination whereof, many be charged and condemned of Heresy, and reproved
as bringers up of new Doctrine, not known of old in the Church before
Berengarius time, who taught in France, in the days when William the Norman
was by Conquest King of England, and Hildebrand, otherwise called Gregorius the
Seventh, was Pope of Rome. But that thou may know (good Christian Reader)
how this is advouched more boldly then truly, in especial of some certain men,
which be more ready to maintain their old judgment, then of humility to submit
themselves unto a truth: here is set forth unto thee a Testimony of very
Ancient time, wherein is plainly showed what was the judgment of the Learned
men in this matter, in the days of the Saxons before the Conquest* First thou
have here a Sermon or Homely, for the holy day of Easter, written in the old
English or Saxon speech, which does of set purpose, and at large, entreat of
this Doctrine, and i^ ^ound among many other Sermons in the same old speech,
made for other Festival days and Sondaies of the year, and used to be spoken
orderly according to those days unto the people, as by the books themselves it
does well appear. And of such Sermons be yet many books to be seen, partly
remaining in private men's hands, and taken out from Monasteries at their
dissolution: partly yet reserved in the I ibraries of Cathedral Churches, as of
Worcester, Hereford, and Exeter. From which places diverse of these books have
been delivered into the hands of the most Reverend Father, Matthew Archbishop
of Canterbury, by whose diligent search for such writings of History and other
Monuments of Antiquity, as might reveal unto us what has been the state of
our Church in England from time to time, these things that be here made known
unto thee do come to light. Howbeit the Sermons were not first written in the
old Saxon tongue: but were Translated into it, as it should appear, from the
Latin. For about the end of a Saxon book of LX Sermons, (which has about the
midst of it this Sermon against the bodily presence) be added these words of
the Translator, writ in Saxon, and thus Englished. He let pass many good
Gospels which he that list may Translate. For we dare not enlarge this book
much further, least it be over great, and so cause to men lothsomness through
his bigness. And in another book containing some of the Saxon Sermons it is
also thus written in Latin. In ho^ codicillo continentur duodecim Sermones
Anglicae, quos accepimus de libris quos Aelfricus Abbas Anglice transtulit. In
this book be comprised 12 Sermons which we have taken out of the books that
Aelfrick Abbot Translated into English. In which words truly there is also
declared who was the Translator, to wit, one Aelfrick. And so he does confess
of himself in the Preface of his Saxon Grammar, where he does moreover give us
to understand the number of the Sermons that he Translated thus. His words be
in Saxon, and thus in English. I Aelfrick was desirous to turn into our English
tongue from the art of Letters called Grammar this little book, after that I
had Translated the Two books, in Fourscore Sermons. But howsoever it be now
manifest enough by this above declared, how that these Sermons were Translated:
I think notwithstanding, that there will hardly be found of them any Latin
books being (I fear me) utterly perished and made out of the way since the
Conquest, by some which could not well brook this Doctrine. And that such has
been the dealing of some partial Readers, may partly hereof appear. There is
yet a very Ancient book of Canons of Worcester Library, and is for the most
part all in Latin, but yet intermingled in certain places, even three or four
leaves together, with the old Saxon tongue: and one place of this book handles
this matter of the Sacrament: but a few lines wherein did consist the chief
point of the Controversy, be rased out by some Reader: yet consider how the
corruption of him whosoever he was, is bewrayed. This part of the Latin book
was taken out of two Epistles of Alfricks before named, and were written of him
as well in the Saxon tongue, as the Latin. The Saxon Epistles be yet wholely
to be had in the Library of the same Church, in a book written all in Saxon,
and is Entitled A Book of Canons, and Shrift book. But in the Church of
Exeter, these Epistles be seen both in the Saxon tongue, and also in the
Latin. By the which it shall be easy for any to restore again, not only the
sense of the place rased in Worcester book, but also the very same Latin
Words. And the words of these two Epistles, so much as concern the Sacramental
bread and wine, we here set immediately after the Sermon: First in English,
then the words of the second, in English and Latin: delivering them most
faithfully as they are to be seen in the books from whence they are taken. And
as touching the Saxon writings they be set out in such form of Letters, and
dark speech, as was then used, when they were written: Translated also for our
better understanding, into our common and usual English speech. (...) now it
remains we do make known who this Aelfrick was, whom we here speak of, in
what age he lived, and in what estimation. He was truly brought up in the
Schools of Aethelwolde Bishop of Winchester, Aethelwolde I mean the Elder, and
great Saint of Winchester Church: So Canonized because in the days of Edgar
King of England, he conspired with Dunstane Archbishop of Canterbury, and
Oswalde Bishop of Worcester, to expel out of the Cathedral Churches, throughout
all England the Married Priests, which then were in those Churches the old
dwellers, as writes Renulphus Cestren^is in his Polli^ronicon, and to set up
of new the Religion, or rather Superstition and Hypocrisy of Monks, after that
the same had been a long time, by the just judgment of God, utterly abolished,
the Danes spoiling them, and cruelly burning them in their houses, as is at
large and plentifully confessed in the History of their own Churches. For this
new rearing up of Monkery is Aethelwolde called in most Histories, Pater
Monachorum, the Father of Monks. Under this Aethelwolde was Aelfrick traded up
in learning, as he witnesses of himself in the Latin Preface of his Saxon
Grammar, where speaking of his interpreting Latin words he writes thus. Scio
multis modis verba posse interpretari, sed ego simplicem interpretationem
sequor fastidium vitandi causa. Si alicui tamen displicuerit nostra
interpretatio, dicat quomodo vult. Nos contenti sumus sicut didicimus in
Scholis venerabilis praesulis Aethelwoldi qui multos ad bonum imbuit. I know
that words may be expounded diverss ways, but for to avoid lothsomness I do
follow the plain Interpretation. Which if any shall mislike he may do as he
thinks best: but we are content to speak, as we have learned in the Schools
of the most worthy Bishop Aethelwolde, who has been a good Instructor to many,
or who has brought up many to good. This he writes of himself. So upon this
his education in the Schools of Aethelwolde he became afterward to be an
earnest lover and a great setter forwards of Monkery, and therefore no less
busy writer and speaker against the Matrimony of Priests in his time. For
which respect he was afterward so regarded, that he was made by Oswalde Bishop
of Worcester (as reports John Capgrave) the First Abbot of St. Albons newly
restored, and replenished with Monks, and also made Abbot of Malmesbury by King
Edgar, (as reports William of Malmesbury) in the life of Aldelmus. And truly
he calls himself Abbot in diverse of his Epistles, although he never named of
what place, as in that he writes Egneshamensibus fratribus de consuetudine
Monachorum. To the Monks of Egnesham, of the order and manner of Monks, and in
this he writes to Wulfstane Archbishop of York, and in another against
Priests Matrimony sent to one Sigeferth, with whom was an Anchor abideing, which
defended the Marriage of Priests, affirming it to be lawful. The Epistle is in
the Saxon tongue, and in our English thus, Aelfrick Abbot does send friendly
salutation to Sigeferth. It is told me that I teach otherwise in my English
writings, then does thy Anchor teach, which is at home with thee. For he says
plainly that it is a lawful thing for a Priest to Marry, and my writings does
speak against this, etc. Thus as well in his own Epistles, as in all other
books of Sermons in the Saxon tongue, that I have seen I find him always
called Abbot, and only so called. Howbeit, John Capgr^v^ who (...) together
into one Volume the lives (...) the life of Oswalde, that Aelfrick last of all
advanced to the Archbishops See of Canterbury. In aliis inquit Angliae
partibus insignes Ecclesias ob praefixam causam Clerieis evacuavit, and eas
viris monastica institutionis sublimavit: quorum haec nomina sunt. Eeclesia S.
Albani, S. Aetheldredae Virginis in Eli, and ea quae apud Beamfledam constituta
honorabilis habebatur. Instituit enim in Ecclesia S. Albani Aelfricum Abbatem,
qui ad Archiepiscopatum Cantuariensem postea sublimatus fuit. In other parts of
England Oswald avoided out of the most notable Churches the Clarks, and
advanced the same places with men of the order of Monks, whose names be these:
S. Albons, The Church of the Virgin S. Aetheldrede in Ely, and that which is at
Beamfieot reputed very famous. He did appoint Abbot in S. Albons Aelfrick, who
was afterward promoted to the Archbishopric of Canterbury. Truly this
Aelfrick we here speak of, was equal in time to * Elfrick Archbishop of
Canterbury, as may certainly Who did put out secular Priests out of the Church
of Canterbury, as the story of that house shows.
appear to him that will consider, when Wulfstane Archbishop of York, and
Wulfsine Bishop of Scyrburn lived, unto whom Aelfrick writes the Saxon
Epistles, from which the words concerning the Sacrament hereafter following be
taken. And the certainty of this consideration, may well be had out of William
Malmesbury De Pontificibus, and out of the Subscriptions of Bishops, to the
Grants, Letters-Pattents, and Charters of Aethelrede who reigned King of
England at this time. Howbeit whether this Aelfrick, and Aelfrick Archbishop
of Canterbury was but one and the same man, I leave it to other men's judgment
further to consider: for that writing here to Wulfstane, he names himself but
Abbot, and yet Aelfrick Archbishop of Canterbury. was promoted to that his
Archbishop Stool six years before that Wulstane was wade Archbishop of
York, as is declared most manifestly in the Histories of Symeon of Durham,
Roger Hoveden, The Histories of Rochester, Flores Historiarum, Thomas Stubbs in
his History of the Archbishops of York, and in all other most Ancient
Histories, as well written in the old Saxon tongue, as in Latin: Moreover in
many Deeds and Writings of Gifts, made by King Aethelrede, when Aelfrick
subscribeth as Archbishop of Canterbury, then in them is one Aldulphus,
Wulfstanes predecessor named Arch-bishob of York, and Wulfstane himself
subscribeth but as an inferior Bishop. But be it, that this Aelfrick was only
Abbot, and not Archbishop of Canterbury, yet this is also most true, that
beside the praise of great Learning, and of being a most eloquent interpreter
(for which William of Malmesbury does greatly commend him) he was also of such
credit and estimation, to the liking of that age in which he lived, that all
his Writings, and chiefly these his Epistles, were then thought to contain
sound doctrine: and the Bishops themselves did judge them full of right good
Counsel, Precepts, and Rules to govern thereby their Clergy: and therefore did
most earnestly request to have these Epistles sent unto them, as do well appear
by Two short Latin Epistles, set before the Saxon Epistles, whereof the one is
sent to Wulfsine Bishop of Scyrburne, the other to Wulfstane Archbishop of
York. And after this also Bishops of other Churches among other Canons that
they collected out of general and particular Councels, out of the Books of
Gildas, out of the Penitentials of Theodorus Archbishop of Canterbury, out of
the Extracts of Egberhtus the Fourth Archbishop of York from Paulinus: out of
the Epistles of, Alcuinus teacher to Charles the great, and to conclude, out of
the Writings of the Fathers of the Primitive Church: among other Canons I say,
they collected together for the better ordering of their Churches, they do
place among them also these Two Epistles of Aelfrick, as is to be seen in Two
books of Canons of Worcester Library: whereof the one is all in the Old Saxon
Tongue, and there these Epistles of Aelfrick be in the same Tongue: the other
is for the most part all in Latin, and is entitled Admonitio spiritualis
doctrinae, where these Epistles be in the Latin Tongue, and be joined together
for an Exhortation to be made of the Bishop to his Clergy. There is also a like
book of Canons of Exeter Church, where these two Epistles in Latin be
appointed instead of two Sermons to be Preached, Ad Clericos and Presbyteros,
to the Clerks and Priests, and the Epistles be also in the same book in the
Saxon Tongue. And this book was given to Saint Peter's Church in Exeter by
Leofrick the first and most famous Bishop of that Church, as in his own Record
and Grant of all such Lands, Books, and other Things he gave unto the Church,
expressed in the Saxon Tongue, but in English thus:

Here is showed in this Book or Charter, what Leofrike Bishop has given unto
St. Peter's Minster at Exeter, where his Bishops Seat is; that is, That he has
got in again, through God's help, whatsoever was taken out, etc. First, showing
what Lands of such as was taken from the Church be recovered again, partly by
his earnest complaint and suit made for the same, partly by his giving of
rewards. Next, making also report what Lands, with other Treasure of his own,
he gave of new to the place. He comes at last to the rehearsal of his Books,
whereof the last here named is a Canon*book in Latin, and a Shrift-book in
English, is the Book we speak of, and has in it the Latin and Saxon Epistles
of Aelfrick. Thus as this Book of Exeter Church has this good evidence by
which it is showed, that Leofrike was the giver thereof; even so the Book of
Canons of Worcester Church, written all in Saxon, has in it most certain
testimony that the Writer thereof was the public Scribe of the Church, whose
name was Wulfgeat. For thus is it recorded therein, even with the same hand of
the Scribe wherein all the Book is written. In English thus: Wulfgeat the
Scribe of Worcester Church did write me. Pray I beseech you for his
transgressions the Creator of the world. And God grant that he be always happy
that writ me. The other Book of Canons of Worcester Library, which I have said
is for the more part in Latin, and is entitled Admonitio spiritualis
doctrinae, is written in so old an hand as is that of Exeter Church, and seems
to be possessed of Wulfstane, who was Bishop of Worcester in the days of
William the Conqueror. And that he should be the possessor of this ^ook, I do
thus affirm: when in his days Lanfrank made first this Law of Priests, in the
Council he held at Winchester, in the year of our Lord 1076. Decretum est, ut
nullus Canonicus llxorem habeat: Sacerdotum vero in Castellis, vel in vicis
habitantium habentes llxores non cogantur, ut dimittant: non habentes
interdicantur, ut habeant. Et deinceps caveant Episcopi, ut Sacerdotes, vel
Diaco^^^ non praesumant ordinare, nisi prius profite^^tur ut (...) non habeant.
That is, It is decreed that no Canon have a Wife. But of Prie^^s, such as have
Wives, dwelling in Castles and Villages, let them not be compelled to put away
their Wives: but such Priests as have no Wives, forbid them to have. And let
bishops take heed that they presume not to ordain Priests or Deacons, unless
they do first profess to have no Wives. Now albeit this and many other Councels
held from time to time, by the space more then of an hundred years after this
did little avail, but that the Priests did both marry, and still kept their
Wives, because as writes Gerardus Archbishop of York to Anselm, Cum ad
ordines aliquos invito, dura cervice re^^tuntur re in ordinando castitatem
profiteantur. When I call any to Orders, they resist with a stiff neck, that
they do not in taking Order profess Chastity. Or as is reported in the Saxon
story of Peterborow Church, speaking of the Councels of Anselm, of John of
Cremona, and of William Archbishop of Canterbury, All these Decrees availed
nothing, they all kept their Wives still by the Kings leave as they did before.
Yet it came to pass upon this Decree of Lanfrank, that the form of words
wherein the Priests should vow Chastity, was now first put into some Bishops No
such demand of this profession in any English pontifical before this time.
Pontifical. Ego frater N. promitto Deo, omnibusque Sanctis ejus castitatem
corporis mei secundum Canonum decreta, and secundum ordinem mihi imponendum
servare domino praesule N. praesente. And as the words were thus put into some
Pontifical in a general speaking, as the manner is; so in the beginning of this
Book we here speak of, wherein be Aelfrick's Epistles, are the self-same words
of profession, written in the same old hand, as is the rest of the Book; and
adds also there the special name of Wulfstane Bishop (who was present at this
Council of Lanfrank, and unto whom it did first appertain to exact of Priests
in the Diocese of Worcester this profession.) The words be these: Ego frater N.
promitto Deo, omnibusque Sanctis ejus castitatem corporis mei secundum Canonum
decreta, and secundum ordinem mihi imponendum domino praesule Wulfstano
praesente. I brother N. do promise to God and all his Saints chastity of my
body, according to the Decrees of Canons, and according to the order to be put
upon me before Wulfstane Bishop. By this I do affirm, that this Book did belong
to Wulfstane Bishop of Worcester; and so by him was afterward given to the
Library of that Church, where it now remains. Wherefore of this now declared:
First, touching the Sermon spoken of in the beginning, whereof (as of many other
contained in two Books) Aelfrick was but the Translator, and therefore were
Books of Sermons before his time. N^^^, touching the public receiving of the
Epistles of Aelfrick, wherein (I say) is denied the Bodily Presence; and also
by the infarcing afterward of these Epistles by Bishops into their Books of
Canons, in stead of Exhortations to be used unto their Clergy, it is not hard
to know not only so much what Aelfrick's judgment was in this controversy, but
also that more is, what was the common received Doctrine herein of the Church
of England, as well when Aelfrick himself lived, as before his time, and also
after his time, even from him to the Conquest. But what was the condition and
state of the Church when Aelfrick himself lived? In deed to confess the truth,
it was in diverse points of Religion full of blindness and ignorance; full of
childish servitude to Ceremonies, as it was long before and after; and too much
given to the love of Monkery, which now at this time unmeasurably took root,
and grew excessively. But yet to speak what the Adversaries of the Truth have
judged of this time, it is most certain, that there is no Age of the Church of
England which they have more reverenced, and thought more holy than this. For
of what Age have they Canonized unto us more Saints, and to their liking more
notable? First Odo Archbishop of Canterbury, who died in the beginning of King
Edgar's Reign. Then King Edgar himself, by whom Aelfrick was made Abbot of
Malmsbury. Then Edward called the Martyr, King Edgar's Bastard-Son. Then
Editha, King Edgar's Bastard-Daughter. Also Dunstane Archbishop of Canterbury,
of whom Aelfrick was greatly esteemed. Aethelwold Bishop of Winchester, under
whom Aelfrick had his first bringing up. Oswald Bishop of Worcester, and after
Archbishop of York, who made Aelfrick Abbot of St. Albons. Wulfsine Bishop of
Scyrburn, unto whom Aelfrick writes the first of the Epistles we here speak
of. Elfleda a Nun of Romesey, and Wulhilda Abbess of Barking, lived in the
days of King Edgar. And last of all Wulfritha, King Edgar's Concubine. All
these, I say, with some other more, be Canonized for Saints of this Age in
which Aelfrick himself lived in great fame and credit. Also Leofrick and
Wulfsine, whom we have showed to have been the givers of those (anon-books,
wherein be seen Aelfricks Epistles, be reverenced for most holy Men, and Saints
of their Churches. And these two lived Bishops in the coming in of the
Conqueror. Thus do some men now-a-daies, not only dissent in doctrine from
their own Church, but also from that Age of their Church which they have
thought most holy, and judged a most excellent pattern to be followed.
Wherefore what may we now think of that great consent whereof the Romanists
have long made vaunt, to wit, Their Doctrine to have continued many hundred
years, as it were linked together with a continual chain, whereof has been no
breach at any time? Truly this their so great affirmation has uttered unto us
no truth, as (good Christian Reader) thou may well judge by duly weighing of
this which has been spoken, and by the reading also of that which here
follows, whereunto I now leave thee.

Trusting that after thou have well weighed this matter of such manner of the
being of Christ's Body in the Sacrament, as shows this Testimony, no untruth
or dishonor shall need to be attributed to Christ's loving words pronounced at
his last Supper among his Apostles; no derogation to his most Sacred
Institution; no diminishing of any comfort to Christian men's souls in the use
of his reverend Sacrament: but all things to stand right up, most agreeably
both to the verity of Christ's infallible words, and to the right nature,
congruence, and efficacies of so holy a Sacrament; and finally most comfortable
to the conscience of man, for his spiritual uniting and incorporation with
Christ's blessed Body and Blood to immortality, and for the sure Gage of his
Resurrection.

Amen.
A SERMON Of the PASCHAL LAMB, And of the Sacramental body and blood of CHRIST
our Savior.
Written in the old Saxon tongue before the Conquest, and appointed in the
Reign of the Saxons to be spoken to the people at Easter, before they should
receive the Communion.
MEN beloved, it has been often said unto you about our Saviors Resurrection,
how he on this present day after his suffering, mightily rose from death. Now
will we open unto you, through Gods grace, of the holy housell, which ye should
now go unto, and instruct your understanding about this mystery, both after the
old Covenant, and also after the new, that no doubting may trouble you about
this lively food. The Almighty God bad Moses his Captain in the land of Egypt,
to command the people of Israel for to take for every family a Lamb of one year
old, the night they departed out of the country to the land of promise, and to
offer that Lamb to God, and after to cut it, and to make the sign of the Cross,
with the Lambs blood, upon the side posts, and the upper posts of their door,
and afterward to eat the Lambs flesh roasted, and unleavened bread with wild
lettice. God says unto Moses, Eat of the Lamb nothing raw, or sodden in water,
but roasted with fire. Eat the head, the feet, and the inwards, and let nothing
of it be left until the morning: if any thing thereof remain, that shall you
burn with fire Eat it in this wise. Gird your loins, and do your shoes on your
seet, have you staves in your hands, and eat it in have. This time is the Lords
Passover. And then was slain on that night in every house throughout Pharoahs
reign, the first born child: and Gods people of Israel were delivered from that
sudden death through the Lambs offering, and his bloods marking. Then said God
unto Moses. Keep this day in your remembrance, and hold it a great feast in
your kinreds with a perpetual observation, and eat unleavened bread always
seven days at this feast. After this deed, God led the people of Israel over
the red sea, with dry foot, and drowned therein Pharaoh, and all his army Exodus
14.
together, with their possessions, and fed afterward the Israelites forty years
with heavenly food, and gave them water out of the hard rock, until they came
to the promised Exodus 17.
land.

Part of this story we have treated of in another place, part we shall now
declare, (to wit) that which belongs to the holy housell. Christian men may
not now keep that old law bodily, but it behooves them to know, what it ghostly
signifies. That innocent Lamb which the old Israelites did then kill, had
signification after ghostly understanding of Christ's suffering, who unguilty
shed his holy blood for our Redemption. Hereof sing Gods servants at every
Mass. Agnus dei qui tollis peccata mundi, miserere nobis. That is in our
speech, Thou Lamb of God that take away the sins of the world, have mercy
upon us. Those Israelites were delivered from that sudden death, and from
Pharaohs bondage by Mat. 27. Mar. 15. Luke 24.
the Lambs offering, which signified Christ's suffering: through which we be
delivered from everlasting death, and from the Devils cruel reign, if we
rightly believe in the true Redeemer of the whole world, Christ the Savior.
That Lamb was offered in the evening, and our Savior suffered in the sixth age
of this world. This age of this corruptible world is reckoned unto the evening.
They marked with the Lambs blood upon the doors and the upper posts No such
sign commanded by God in that place of Scriture, but it was the blood that God
did look upon. Exodus 12.
Tau, that is the sign of the Cross, and were so defended from the Angel that
killed the Egyptians first born child. And we Understand this as that of S.
Paul, Ephesians. 2. Christ reconciled both to God in one body through his Cross.
ought to mark our foreheads, and our bodies with the token of Christ's rood,
that we may be also delivered from destruction, when we shall be marked both on
forehead, and also in heart with the blood of our Lords suffering. Those
Israelites eat the Lambs flesh at their Easter time, when they were delivered,
and we receive ghostly, Christ's body, and drink his blood, when we receive with
true belief that holy housell. That time they kept with them at Easter seven
days with great worship, when they were delivered from Pharaoh, and went from
that land. So also Christian men keep Christ's resurrection at the time of
Easter these seven days, because through his suffering and rising we be
delivered, and be made clean by going to this holy housell, as Christ faith in
his Gospel. Verily, verily, I say unto you, ye have no life in you except ye
eat my flesh, and drink my blood. He that cateth my flesh, and drinks my
blood, abides in me, and I in him, and has that everlasting life: and I shall
raise him up at the last day. I am the lively bread, that came John 6.
down from heaven, not so as your forefathers eat that heavenly bread in the
wilderness, and afterward died. He that eats this bread, he lives for ever.
He blessed bread before his suffering, and divided it to his Disciples, Matthew.
26. Luke 22. Mark 14.
thus saying. Eat this bread, it is my body, and do this in my remembrance.
Also he blessed wine in one cup and said. Drink ye all of this. This is my
blood that is shed for many, in forgiveness of sins. The Apostles did as Christ
commanded, that is, they blessed bread and wine to housell again afterward 1
Cor. 11.
in his remembrance. Even so also their successors and all Priests by Christ's
commandment do bless bread and wine to housell in his name with the Apostolic
blessing. Now some men have often This was now inquestion, and so before
Beringarius time.
searched and do yet often search, how bread that is gathered of corn, and
through fires heat baked, may be turned to Christ's body, and how wine that is
pressed out of many grapes, is turned through one blessing to the Lords blood.
Now say we to such men, That some things be spoken of Christ A necessary
distinction.
by signification, some thing by thing certain. True thing is and certain, that
Christ was born of a Maid, and suffered death of his own accord, and was
buried, and on this day rose from death. He is said bread by signifition, and a
Lamb, and a Lion, and some where otherwise. He is called Bread, because he is
our life and Angels life. He is said to be a Lamb for his innocence. A Lion
for strength wherewith he overcame the strong Devil. But Christ is not so
notwithstanding after true nature neither Bread, nor a Lamb, nor a Lion. Why is
then the holy housell, called Christ's body, or his blood, if it be not truly
that it is called? Truly the bread and wine which by the Mass of the Priest is
hallowed, show one thing without to humane understanding, and an other thing
they call within to believing minds. Without they be seen bread and wine both
in figure and in taste: and they be truly after their hallowing Christ's body
and his blood through ghostly mystery. An heathen child is christened, yet he
alters not his shape without, though he be changed within. He is brought to
the font-stone sinful through Adams disobedience. Howbeit he is washed from all
sin within, though he has not changed his shape without. The water in
Baptism, and bread and wine in the Lords supper, compared
Even so the holy Font water that is called the wellspring of life is like in
shape to other waters, and is subject to corruption, but the holy ghosts might
comes to the corruptible water, through the Priests blessing, and it may after
wash the body and soul from all sin, through ghostly might. Behold now we see
two things in this one creature. After true nature that water is corruptible
water, and after ghostly mystery, has hollowing might. So also if we behold
that holy housell after bodily understanding, then see we that it is a creature
corruptible and mutable: if we acknowledge therein ghostly might, then
understand we that life is therein, and that it gives immortality to them that
eat it with belief. Much is betwixt the invisible might of the holy housell,
and the visible shape of his proper nature. It is No Transubstantiation.
naturally corruptible bread, and corruptible wine: and is by might of Gods
word truly Christ's body, and his blood: not so notwithstanding bodily, but
ghostly. Much is Differences betwixt Christ's natural body, and the Sacrament
thereof.
betwixt the * body Christ suffered in, and the body that is hallowed to
housell. The body truly that Christ suffered in, was born of the 1. Difference.
Not the body that suffered is in the housell.
flesh of Mary, with blood, and with bone, with skin, and with sinews, in
humane limbs, with a reasonable soul living: and his ghostly body, which we
call the housell, is gathered of many corns: without blood, and bone, without
limb, without soul: and therefore nothing is to be understood therein bodily,
but all is ghostly to be understood. Whatsoever is in that housell, which
gives substance of life, that is of the ghostly might, and invisible doing.
Therefore is that holy housell called a mystery, because there is one thing in
it seen, and an other thing understanded. That which is there 2. Difference.
seen, has bodily shape: and that we do there understand, has ghostly
might. Certainly Christ's body which suffered death and rose from death, never
3. Difference.
dies henceforth: but is Eternal, and unpassible. That housell is Temporal,
not Eternal. 4. Difference.
Corruptible, and dealed into sundry parts. Chewed between the teeth, and sent
into the belly: howbeit nevertheless after ghostly might, it is all in every
part. Many receive Math. 15.
that holy body: and yet notwithstanding, it is so all in every part after
ghostly mystery. Though some chew less deal, yet is there no more might
notwithstanding in the more part, then in the less: because it is whole in all
men after the invisible might. This mystery is a 5. Difference.
pledge and a figure: Christ's body is truth it self. This pledge we do keep
mystically, until we be come to the truth it self: and then is this pledge
ended. Truly it is so as we before have said Christ's body, and his blood: not
bodily, but ghostly. And ye should not search how it is done, but hold it in
your belief that it is so done. We read in an other book called Vita patrum,
that two Monks desired of God some demonstration These tales seem to be
infarsed, placed here upon no occasion.
touching the holy housell, and after their request, as they stood to hear
Mass, they saw a child lying on the altar, where the Priest said Mass, and Gods
Angel stood with a sword, and abode looking until the Priest brake the housel.
Then the Angel divided that child upon the dish, and sbed his blood into the
Chalice. But when they did go to the housel, then was it turned to bread and
wine, and they did eat it, giving God thanks for that showing. Also S. Gregory
desired of Christ, that he would show to a certain woman doubting about his
mystery some great affirmation. She went to housell with doubting mind, and
Gregory forthwith obtained of God, that to them both was showed that part of
the housel which the woman should receive, as if there lay in a dish a joint of
a finger all beblooded: and so the woman's doubting was then forthwith healed.
But now hear the Apostles words about this mystery. Paul the Apostle speaks
of the old Israelites thus writing in his Epistle to faithful men. All 1. Cor.
10.
our forefathers were baptized in the cloud, and in the sea, and all they eat
the same ghostly meat, and drank the fame ghostly drink. They drank truly of
the Stone that followed them, and that Stone was Christ. Neither was that Note
this exposition which is now adays thought new.
Stone then from which the water ran bodily Christ, but it signified Christ,
that calls thus to all believing and Faithful men, Whosoever thirsts let
him come to me, and drink. And from his bowels flows lively water. John. 4.
This he said of the Holy Ghost, whom he receives which believes on him. The
Apostle 1. Cor. 10.
Paul says That the Israelites did eat Exodus 17.
the same ghostly meat, and drink the same ghostly drink; because that heavenly
meat that fed them forty years, and that water which from the Stone did flow,
had signification of christ's body, and his blood, that now be offered daily in
Gods church. It was the same which we now offer; not bodily, but Mat. 26. Luke.
22. Mark. 14.
ghostly. We said unto you ere while, that christ hallowed bread and wine to
housel before his suffering, and said, This is my body, and my blood. Yet he
had not then suffered, but so notwithstanding he Nov we eat that body which was
eaten beeore he was born by the faithful.
turned through invisible might that bread to his own body, and that wine to
his blood, as he before did in the wilderness before that he was born to men,
when he See a transubstantiation.
turned that heavenly meat to his flesh, and the flowing water from that Stone
to his own blood. Very many eat of that Manna.
heavenly meat in the wilderness, and drank that ghostly drink, and were never
the John. 6.
less dead, as christ said. And christ meant not that death which none can
escape; but that everlasting death, which some of that folk deserved for their
unbelief. Moses and Aaron, and many other of that people which pleased God, eat
that heavenly bread, and they dyed not that everlasting death, though they dyed
the common death. They saw that the heavenly meat was visible, and corruptible,
and they ghostly understood by that visible thing, and ghostly received it. The
Savior says: He that eated my flesh, and drinks my blood, has everlasting
life. John. 6.
And he bad them not eat that body wherewith he was enclosed, nor that blood to
drink which he shed for use, What body do the faithful now eat.
but he meant with those words that holy housel, which ghostly is his body, and
his blood, and he that tastes it with believing heart, has that eternal life.
In the old law faithful men offered unto God diverss Sacrifices, that had A
signification before Christ.
signification of Christ's body, which for our sins he himself to his heavenly
Father has A Sacrifice in Christ's time.
since offered to sacrifice. Certainly this housel which we do now hallow at
Gods Altar is A Remembrance after Christ Math. 26. Hebr. 10.
remembrance of Christ's body which he offered for us, and of his blood which he
shed for us. So he himself commanded, Do this in my remembrance. Once suffered
Christ by himself, but yet nevertheless his suffering is daily renewed at the
Mass through mystery of the holy housel. Therefore that holy Mass is
profitable both to the living, and to the This doctrine with praying to Images,
and to the dead bodies of men at their tombs took his beginning of the avarice
of Monks unto whom it was gainful.
dead: as it has been often declared. We ought also to consider diligently how
that this holy housel is bath Christ's body, and the body of all faithful men,
after ghostly mystery, as the wise Augustine says of it. If ye will
understand of Christ's body, hear the Apostle Paul thus speaking. Ye truly be
Christ's body and his members. Now is The housel is also the body of all
faithful men.
your mystery set on Gods Table, and ye receive your mystery, which mystery
ye your selves be. Be that which ye see on the Altar, and receive that which ye
your selves be. Again the Apostle Paul says by it: We many be one bread, and
one body. Understand now and rejoice, Many be one bread, and one body in
Christ. He is our head, and we be his limbs. And the bread is not of one corn,
but of many. Nor the wine of one grape, but of many. So also we all should have
one unity in our Lord, as it is written of the faithful Army, how that they
were in so great an unity, as though all of them were one soul, and one heart.
Christ hallowed on his Table the mystery of our peace, and of our unity: he
which receives that mystery of unity, and keeps not the bond of true
peace, he receives no mystery for himself, but a witness against himself. It
is very good for Christian men, that they go often to housel, if thy bring with
them to the Altar unguiltiness, and innocence of heart. To an evil man it
turns to no good, but to destruction, if he receive unworthily that holy
housel. Holy books command that No Scripture enforces the mixture of water
with the wine.
water be mingled to that wine which shall be for housel: because the water
signifies the people, and the The wine signisieth Christ's blood.
wine Christ's blood. And therefore shall neither the one without the other be
offered at the holy Mass, that Christ may be with us, and we with Christ; the
head with the limbs, and the limbs with the head. We would before have
entreated of the Lamb which the old Israelites offered at their Easter time,
but that we desired first to declare unto you of this mystery, and after how
we should receive it. That signifying Lamb was offered at the Easter. And the
Apostle Paul says in the Epistle of this present day, that Christ is our
Easter, who was offered for us, and on this day rose from death. The Israelites
did eat the Lambs flesh as God commanded with unleavened bread, and wild
Lettice: How we should come to the holy! Communion.
so we should receive that holy housel of Christ's body and blood without the
leaven of sin, and iniquity. As leaven turns the creatures from their
nature: so does sin also change the nature of man from innocence to
uncleanness. The Apostle has taught how we should feast not in the leaven of
evilness but in the sweet dough of purity and truth. The herb which they
should eat with the unleavened bread is called Lettice, and is bitter in taste.
So we should with bitterness of unfeigned repentance purify our mind, if we
will eat Christ's body. Those israelites were not wont to eat raw flesh,
although God forbad them to eat it raw, and sodden in water, but roasted with
fire. He shall receive the body of God raw, that shall think without reason
that Christ was only man like unto us, and was not God. And he that will after
man's wisdom search of the mystery of Christ's Incarnation, does like unto him
that does seethe Lambs-flesh in water; because that water in this same place
signifies man's understanding: but we should understand that all the mystery
of Christ's Humanity was ordered by the power of the Holy Ghost* And then eat
we his body roasted with fire; because the Holy Ghost came in fiery likeness to
the Apostles in diverse Tongues. The Israelites should eat the Lambs head, and
the feet, and the purtenance; and nothing thereof must be left over night: If
any thing thereof were left, they did burn that in the fire: and they break not
the bones. After ghostly understanding we do then eat the Lambs head, when we
take hold of Christ's Divinity in our Belief. Again when we take hold of his
Humanity with Love, then eat we the Lambs feet: because that Christ is the
beginning and end, God before all world, and Man in the end of this world. whit
be the Lambs Purtenance, but Christ's secret precepts, and these we eat, when we
receive with greediness the word of Life. There must nothing of the Lamb be
left unto the morning, because that all Gods sayings are to be searched with
great carefulness: so that all his precepts may be known in understanding and
deed in the night of this present life, before that the last day of the
universal resurrection do appear. If we cannot search out thoroughly all the
mystery of Christ's Incarnation, then ought we to betake the rest unto the
might of the Holy Ghost with true humility: and not to search rashly of that
deep secretness above the measure of our understanding. They did eat the Lambs
flesh with their loins girt. In the loins is the lust of the body. And he
which will receive that housel, shall cover that concupiscence: and take with
chastity that holy receipt. They were also shod. What be shoes but of the
hides of dead beasts. We be truly shod if we follow in our steps and deeds the
life of men departed which please God with keeping of hiscommandements. They
had Staves in their hands when they eat. This stafe signifies a carefulness
and a diligent overseing. And all they, that best know and can, should take
care of other men, and stay them up with their help. It was enjoined to the
eaters that they should eat the Lamb in haste. For God abhoreth slouthfulness
in his servants. And those he loves that seek the joy of everlasting life with
quickness, and have of mind. It is written: Prolong not to turn unto God, least
the time pass away through thy slow tarrying. The eaters might not break the
Lambs bones. No more might the Soldiers, that did hang Christ break his holy
legs, as they did of the two Thieves that hanged on either side of him. And the
Lord r^se from death sound without all corruption; and at the last judgment
they shall see him, whom they did most cruelly wound on the Cross. This time is
called in the Hebrew tongue Pasca, and in Latin Transitus, and in Enghish a
Passover; because that on this day the people of Israel passed from the land of
Egypt over the Red sea; from bondage to the Land of promise. So also did our
Lord at this time depart, as says John the Evangelist, from this world to his
heavenly Father-Even so we ought to follow our head, and to go from the devil
to Christ; from this unstable world to his stable kingdom. Howbeit we should
first in this present life depart from vice to holy virtue; from evil manners
to good manners, if we will after this corruptible life go to that eternal
life, and after our resurrection to Christ. He brings us to his everliving
Father who gave him to death for our sins. To him be honor, and praise of
welldoing, world without end Amen.

This Sermon is found in diverss Books of Sermons written in the old English or
Saxon tongue: whereof two books be now in the hands of the most Reverend Father
the the Archbishop of Canterbury.

Here follows the words of Aelfricke Abbot of St. Albons, and also of
Malmsbery, taken out of his Epistle written to Wulfsine Bishop of Scyrburn. It
is found in a book of the old Saxon tongue, wherein be XLIII. Chapters, of
Canons and Ecclesiastical Constitutions, and also Liber Poenitentialis, that is
a Penitential book or Shrift book, divided into Four other books, the Epistle
is set for the 30. Chapter of the Fourth book, Entitled in the Saxon tongue be
preost sinothe, that is, a Synod concerning Priests: and this Epistle is also
in a Canon book of the Church of Exeter.

SOme Priests keep the housel that is hallowed on Easter day all the year for
sick men. But they do greatly amiss, because it waxes hoary. And these will
not understand how grievous penance the Penitential book teaches by this, if
the housel become hoary and rotten: or if it be lost, or be eaten of Mise or of
beasts by negligence. Men shall reserve more carefully that holy housel, and
not reserve it too long, but hallow other of new for sick men always within a
week or a fortnight, that it be not so much as hoary. For so holy is the housel
which to day is hallowed as that which on Easter day was hallowed. That housel
is Christ's body not bodily, but ghostly. Not the body which he suffered in, but
the body of which he spoke, when he blessed bread and wine to housel a night
before his suffering, and said by the blessed bread, This is my body; and again
by the holy wine, This is my blood, which is shed for many in forgiveness of
sins. Understand now that the Lord, who could turn that bread before his
suffering to his body, and that wine to his blood ghostly; that the self same
Lord blesses daily through the Priests hands bread and wine to his ghostly
body, and to his ghostly blood. Here thou see good Reader how Aelfrick upon
finding fault with an abuse of his time, which was that Priests on Easter day
filled their housel box, and so kept the bread a a whole year for sick men,
took an occasion to speak against the bodily presence of Christ in the
Sacrament. So also in another Epistle sent to Wulfstane Archbishop of York, he
reprehending again this overlong reserving of the housel, adds also words
more at large against the same bodily presence. His words be these.

SOme Priests fill their box for housel on Easter day, and so reserve it a
whole year for sick men, as though that housel were more holy then any other.
But they do unadvisedly, because it waxes black, or altogether rotten by
keeping it so long space. And thus is he become guilty, as the book witnesses
to us. If any do keep the housel too long, or loose it, or Mise or other beasts
do eat it, see what the Penetential book says by this. So holy is altogether
that housel, which is hallowed to day, as that which is hallowed on Easter day.
Wherefore I beseech you to keep that holy body of Christ with more advisement
for sick men from Sunday to Sunday in a very clean box: or at most not to keep
it above a fortnight, and then eat it laying other in the place. We have an
example hereof in Moses books, as God himself has commanded in Moses law. How
the Priests should set on every Saturday twelve loaves all new baked upon the
Tabernacle: the which were called Panes praepositionis: and those should stand
there on Gods Tabernacle, till the next Saturday, and then did the Priests
themselves eat them, and set other in the place. Some Priests will not eat the
housel which they do hallow. But we will now declare unto you how the book
speaks by them. Presbyter missam celebrans, and non audens sumere
sacrificium, accusante conscientia sua, Anathema est. The Priest that does say
Mass and dare not eat the housel, his conscience accusing him, is accursed. It
is less danger to receive the housel, then to hallow it. He that does twice
hallow one Host to housel, is like unto those Heretics, who do Christen twice
one child. Christ himself blessed housel hefore his suffering* He blessed the
bread and brake, thus speaking to his Apostles. Eat this bread it is my body.
And again he blessed one Chalice with wine, and thus also speaks unto them.
Drink ye all of this it is mine own blood of the New Testamant which is shed
for many in forgiveness of sins. The Lord which hallowed housel before his
suffering and says that the bread was his own body, and that the wine was
truly his blood, he haloweth daily by the hands of the Priests bread to his
body, and wine to his blood in ghostly mystery, as we read in books. And yet
that lively bread is not bodily so notwithstanding: not the self same body
that Christ suffered in* Nor that holy wine is the Saviors blood which was
shed for us in bodily thing, but in ghostly understanding. Both be truly that
bread his body, and that wine also his blood, as was the heavenly bread, which
we call Manna, that fed forty years Gods people. And the clear water which did
then run from the Stone in the wilderness, was truly his blood, as Paul wrote on
some of his Epistles. Omnes patres nostri eandem escam spiritualem
manducaverunt, and omnes eundem potum spiritualem biberunt, etc. All our
Fathers eat in the wilderuess the same ghostly meat and drank the same ghostly
drink. They drank of that ghostly stone, and that stone was Christ. The
Apostle has said as you have heard, that they all did eat the same ghostly
meat, and they all did drink the same ghostly drink. And he says not bodily
but ghostly. And Christ was not yet born, nor his blood shed, when that the
people of Israel eat that meat, and drank of that stone. And the stone was not
bodily Christ though he so said. It was the same mystery in the old law, and
they did ghostly signify that ghostly housel of our Saviors body which we
consecrate now. This Epistle to Wulfstane, Elfrick wrote first in the Latin
tongue, as in a short Latin Epistle set before this, and another of his Saxon
Epistles he confesses thus. Aelfricus Abbas Wulfstano venerabili Arshiepiscopo
salutem in Christo. Ecce paruimus vestrae almitatis jussionibus transferentes
Anglice duas Epistolas quas Latino eloquio descriptas ante annum vobis
destinavimus, non tamen semper ordinem sequentes, nec verbum ex verbo: sed
sensum ex sensu proferentes. Behold we have obeyed the commandment of thy
Excellency, in Translating into English the two Epistles which we sent unto
thee written in Latin more then a year ago. Howbeit we keep not here always
the same order: nor yet Translate word for word, but sense for sense. Now
because very few there be that do understand the old English or Saxon (so muc h
i our speech changed from the use of that time, wherein Elfrick lived) and for
that also it may be that some will doubt how skilfully, and also faithfully
these words of Elfrick be Translated from the Saxon tongue: we have thought
good to set down here last of all the very words also of his Latin Epistle,
which is recorded in books fair written of old in the Cathedral Churches of
Worcester and Exeter.

QVidam vero Presbyteri implent alabastrum suum de Sacrificio, quod in Pasca
Domini sanctificant: and conservant per totum annum ad infirmos, quasi sanctior
sit caeteris sacrificiis, Sed nimirum insipienter faciunt. Quia nigrescit, and
putrescit tamdiu conservatum. Et Liber Poenitentialis pro tali negligentia
poenitentiam magnam docet: aut si a Muribus comestum sit: aut ab Auibus raptum.
Tam sanctum est sacrificium, quod hodie sanctificatur quam illud quod in die
Pas^ae consecratum est. Et ideo debetis a Dominicae in Dominicam, aut per duas,
vel maxim tres hebdomadas tenere sacrificium in alabastro mundo ad infirmos:
^e nigrescat, aut putrescat, si diutius servetnr. Nam in lege Moisi ponebant
sacerdotes semper omni sabbato panes propositionis calidos in Tabernaculo coram
Domino: and in sequenti sabbato sumebant illos soli sacerdotes, and edebant:
and alios novos pro eis ponebant* Facite and vos sacerdotes similiter.
Custodite caute sacrificium Christi ad infirmos, and edite illud, ne diutius
teneatur, quam oportet. Et reponite aliud noviter sanctificatum propter
necessitatem infirmorum, ne sine viatico exeant de hoc seculo. Christus Jesus
in die suae saenctae caenae accepit panem: benedixit, ac fregit: dedit
discipulis suis, dicens. Accipite, and comedite. Hoc est enim corpus suum meum.
Similiter and calicem accipiens gratias ^git, and dedit illis, dicens. Bibite
ex hoc omnes. Hic est sanguis meus Novi Testamenti, qui pro multis effundetur
in remissionem The words enclosed between the two half circles, some had rased
out of Worcester book, but they are restored again out of a book of Exeter
Church.
peccatorum. Intelligite modo Sacerdotes, quod ille Dominus qui ante passionem
suam potuit convertere illum panem, and illud vinum ad suum corpus and
sanguinem: quod ipse quotidie sanctificat per manus Sacerdotum suorum panem ad
suum corpus spiritualiter, and vinum ad suum sanguinem (Non sit tamen hoc
sacrificium corpus ejus in quo passus est pro nobis: neque sanguis ejus, quem
pro nobis effudit sed spiritualiter corpus ejus efficitur and sanguis: sicut
Manna quod de coelo pluit, and aqua quae de petra fluxit. Sicut) Paulus
Apostolus ait: Nolo enim vos ignorare fratres, quoniam patres nostri omnes sub
nube fuerunt: and omnes, mare transierunt and omnes in Moisi baptizati sunt in
nube and in mari. Et omnes eandem escam spiritualem manducaverumt: and omnes
eundem potum spiritualem biberunt. Bibebant autem de spirituali consequenti eos
petra. Petra autem erat Christus. Vnae dicit Psalmista. Panem coeli dedit eis.
Panem Angelorum manducavit homo. Nos quoque proculdubio manducamus panem
Angelorum* and bibimus de illa petra, quae Christum significabat: quotiens
fideliter accedimus ad sacrificium corporis and sanguinis Christi. AS the
writings of the Fathers, even of the First age of the Church, be not thought on
all parts so perfect, that whatsoever thing has been of them spoken ought to
be received without all exception, (which honor truly themselves both knew and
also have confessed to be only due to the most holy and tried word of God:) So
in this Sermon here published, some things be spoken not consonant to sound
doctrine: but rather to such corruption of great ignorance and superstition, as
has taken root in the Church of long time, being overmuch cumbred with
Monkery. As where it speaks of The Mass to be profitable to the quick and
dead: Of the mixture with water with wine: and whereas there is also made
mention of Two vain Miracles, which notwithstanding seem to have been
infarced, for that they stand in their place unaptly, and without purpose, and
the matter without them, both before and after, does hang in it selt together
most orderly; with some other Superstitious words, sounding to Superstition.
But all these things that be thus of some reprehension be as it were but by the
way touched: the full and whole discourse of all the former part of the Sermon,
and almost of the whole Sermon is about the understanding of the Sacramental
bread and wine, how it is the body and blood of Christ our Savior, by which is
revealed and made known, what has been the common taught doctrine of the
Church of England on this behalf many hundred years ago, contrary unto the
unadvised writing of some now a days. Now that this foresaid Saxon Homely,
with other Testimonies before alleged, do fully agree to the old ancient books
(whereof some be written in the old Saxon, and some in the Latin) from whence
they are taken: these here under written upon diligent perusing, and comparing
the same have found by conference, that they are truly put forth in Print,
without any adding, or withdrawing any thing for the more faithful reporting of
the same, and therefore for the better credit hereof have subscribed their
Names.

Matthew Archbishop of Canterbury, Thomas Archbishop of York.
Edmund Bishop of London. James Bishop of Durham. Robert Bishop of Winchester.
William Bishop of Chichester. John Bishop of Hereford. Richard Bishop of Ely.
Edwine Bishop of Worcester. Nicholas Bishop of Lincoln. Richard Bishop of S.
David's. Thomas Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield. John Bishop of Norwich. John
Bishop of Carlisle. Nicholas Bishop of Bangor.
With diverse other Personages of Honor and credit subscribing their Names, the
Record whereof remains in the Hands of the Most Reverend Father Matthew,
Archbishop of Canterbury.

FINIS.

