Advice to High-Sheriffs ABOUT Taking the Poll of Clergymen at
County-Elections.
Since the Clergy of England not only are a dead Weight at Elections for
Knights of Shires, but are so many Sollicitors in every Parish, for such as are
most likely to carry on their separate Interest; it has been no more than
requisite to show, in the Observations upon one of their Circular Letters, That
if they keep to the sense of their Church expressed in the Homilies, they
cannot be true to this Government. Nor ought a Man to omit the Observation,
That many of them who have sworn Allegiance to our present King and Queen,
declare, That they did it with such a reserve, as permits them still to believe
the late King to be their Sovereign Lord; and consequently, That it is their
Duty to promote his Interest in all things consistent with Self-preservation.
But all this Caution not being enough to draw off misled Men from their Party,
it is now become a Duty to one's Country, to show, That tho many of their Party
have Legal Voices in the Choice of Parliament Men, yet They themselves have
none.

I. They never pretended to it, nor was it in the least looked on as lawful in
the time of the Lord Coke, who speaking of the Procuratores Cleri, the Proxies
of the Clergy, says,

Some have thought, that because the Clergy were not Party to the Election of
the Knights, Inst. 4. f. 4.
Citizens, and Burgesses, That those Procuratores Cleri were appointed to give
their consent for them; but then they should have had Voices, which
questionless they never had. In another place he says, None of the Clergy are
eligible to be Knights, F. 47.
Citizens, or Burgesses of Parliament, because they are of another Body, viz.
of the Convocation.

Let any one show why this should be a good reason against their being chosen
to sit in Parliament, and yet not equally serve against their choosing
Representatives.

II. The Statutes 8 and 10 H. 6. upon which the Clergy found their Right, as
having Forty Shillings per Annum Freehold-Estate, can give them no color;
because, 1. The Statutes speak of such as have Forty Shillings a Year Freehold,
which implies having it in their own Rights; whereas the Clergy are seized of
their Livings only in the Right of the Church, whose Rights are provided for by
the Convocation. 2. The Statutes are not enabling, but restraining Statutes:
And whereas, before, all who owed Suit and Service to the County Court had
Voices at Elections, if their Income were never so small; the Statutes confine
the Right to such as have Forty Shillings per Annum Freehold, where the Right
of Election must in the nature of the thing be limited to such as are of the
same Body with that which is to be represented in Parliament. 3. It is supposed
to be of such as were obliged to attend at the County-Courts, the Notice there
being all that the Law ever required, though the late interposition of the
Clergy has occasioned the Proclaiming the Day and Place of Elections in the
Churches: but the Clergy, I dare say, will be loath to own that they are obliged
to attend at the County-Courts.


It is therefore advisable for the Sheriffs to take the Poll of Clergymen by
themselves, that if the Dead Weight cast the Balance, it may be left to the
Judgment of the Parliament, Whether they have Right to Vote, or no?

LONDON: Printed in the Year 1690.


