DIEV ET MON DROIT
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
I2 R
royal blazon or coat of arms
AN ADVERTISEMENT From the General Penny-Post-Office.
WHEREAS by an Order from the Postmaster General, bearing Date the 11 th of
March, 1684/5;, all Carriers, Stage-Coaches, Higlers, and Drivers of
Pack-Horses, are forbidden to Carry, or Re-carry any Letter, or Pacquets of
Letters, except what concerns their Packs, upon the Penalties therein expressed;
Therefore for the better Accommodation of all persons in their Correspondency,
there are Foot-Posts settled for the Collecting and Delivering of all Letters,
as well for the General Post Office as others, to these Towns round London,
brancht out from the Six Offices; as follows; Viz.

From the Office for WESTMINSTER-Preciinct, in Dukes-Court, near St.
Martins-Church, to Chelsey Twice a day; at Eight in the morning, and Two in the
afternoon. Blacklands Earls Court Sandy-End The Grove Parsons-Green
Wallham-Green North-End Fulham Hammersmith Chiswick Stran on the Green
Turnham-Green Old-Brandford New-Brandford Thissleworth Twittenham Knightsbridg
Brompton The Gower Kensington Shepherds-bush East-Acton Once a day; at Eight in
the morning. Acton-Town Little Eiling Great Eiling Hanwell Southall Hayes
Hillendon Uxbridg Northall Once a day; at Eight in the morning. Perrysfield
Ganford-Town and Green Harrow oth' hill Pinner Rickmansworth

From the Office for the TEMPLE-Precinct, in Chichester-Rents, near
Lincoln's Inn.

Pankridg Twice a day; at Eight in the morning, and Three in the afternoon.
Kentish-Town Hampstead Highgate Hendon Once a day; at Eight in the morning.
Edgworth Stanmore Bushee Watford

From the Office for St. PAULS-Precinct, at the Royal Bagni^-Coffee-House in
Newgate street, to Islington Five times a day; at 8 and 11 in the morning, and
2, 4, and 7 afternoon. Holloway

From the Office for the Hermitage-Precinct, on Little Tower Hill, to Limehouse
Three times a day; at 8 and 12 in the morning, and 4 in the afternoon. Poplar
Blackw^al Stepney Bow Twice a day; at Eight in the morning, and Two in the
afternoon. Stratford Upper and Lower Brumley East and West Ham Upton Once a
day; at Eight in the morning. Plaistow Greenstreet

From the Office for SOUTHWARK Precinst, in Fowl-lane in the Borough, to
Lambeth-Marsh Four times a day; at 8 and 11 in the morning and 2 and 6 in the
afternoon. Lambeth-Town South-Lambeth Fox-hall Nine-Elms Twice a day; at Eight
in the morning, and Two in the afternoon. Clapham Battersea Wandsworth Putney
Wimbleton Roe Hampton Barns Barn-Elms Moreclack East and West Shene Richmond
Kew Ham Newington-buts Kennington Wallworth Camberwell Peckham Dulwich
Stockwell Once a day; at Eight in the morning. Stretham Wodon Beddington Upper
and Lower Sheen Wallington Casehalton Morden Martin Upper and Lower Tooting
Craydon Reddriff Seven times a day Upper and Lower Deptford Twice a day; at
Eight in the morning, and One in the afternoon. Greenwich Charlton Woolwich
Plumsted Leigh Lusam Bechingham Eltham

From the General Penny-Post-Office at Crosby-house in Bishopsgate-street.

Hoxdon Three times a day; at 8 and 12 in the morning, and 5 in the afternoon.
Kingsland Newington-Green Newington-Town Tottenham Once a day; at Eight in the
morning. Edmonton Southgate Enfield Northall Mile-End Three times a day; at 8
and 12 in the morning, and 5 in the afternoon. Hackney Lowlayton Once a day; at
Eight in the morning. Layton-stone Walthamstow Woodford Chigwell Wanstead

And for prevention of Delays, This is further to give Notice, That such
persons as send Letters to any of the aforementioned Towns, and cannot
conveniently deliver them into the proper Offices, are to allow a
proportionable time for their conveyance from the Receiving-houses to the said
Offices from whence they are dispatched: And such Letters that are directed to
the Towns most remote, and of Consequence to be delivered in the Morning, it
would be convenient they should be left overnight, before the Messengers bring
in their last Walks.

NOTE, That for every Letter and Parcel from these Towns to London, you are to
pay One Penny at the Receiving-houses there: And from London to the aforesaid
Towns, the Messenger is allowed for his own pains and Care, to take a Penny for
each Letter or Parcel at the delivery, and no more.

Any person (either in City or Country) that desires one of these Papers,
sending to any of the abovenamed Six Offices, may have them delivered Gratis.


