THE ADVICE OF A Father: OR, COUNSEL to a CHILD. DIRECTING Him how to demean
himself in the most important passages of this LIFE.

Malis omnia plena sunt.

Issid. Tu autem noli vinci a malo.

Luth. in Eccl. cap. 7. p. 29. Creed, stude, vive, pinge aeternitati.

Cor. A Lapid. LONDON, Printed for the Author, M.DC.LXIV.

To his Son.
Dear Child,
LOoking back to the perils that I have passed, in my passage through the
boisterous Sea of a troublesome world; being affected with my own folly, and
willing to witness my affection to thee, I am forced to shame my self, to show
the course I steered, that thou may steer another course. Let my experience
excuse thine; by me take thou warning; I would not presage a shipwreck, but
prevent it; out of doubt there will be storms at Sea; when thou see the
wracks upon the Rocks, steer so, as to shun that which has split me; expect to
meet with cross and cruel blasts; prepare thy tackling for a tempest, lest the
Ship be over-set, or come to shore too soon. Man is of few days, and full of
trouble; his stay short, his sorrows sharp, he is no other, but the Channel
wherein the waters of Marah flow; what a variety of misery attends him? still
in a state of sorrow; one wave comes upon the neck of another, and threatens to
drown him. It were as needless as endless, to give thee an account of the
cares and crosses he is subject to; thou will know too much of this too soon.
It is my design to fit thee for the encounter, that being forewarned, thou
may be forearmed, that no force may foyl thee. I would have thee to acquit
thee bravely, to scorn either to stagger or startle. Promise not to thy self a
happiness that never any had; the decree is upon record, and there is no
exemption, or exception. Look about thee, and tell me, if thou can, the
condition free from trouble! Roses have their prickles; there are motes in the
Sun; conveniences have their inconveniences, and comforts their contraries;
neither is the honey worth the stinging: If thou attainest the thing thou
wishedst for; thou will want what thou did wish for in it: never any gave
chase to the creature, that came not home by Weeping Cross; yet is it not so
much the fate of most, as their fault, that they suffer: a wise man will miss
the Mire, and shun the Sloughs wherein I have stuck. Take heed to thy
standing; it is not the unevenness of the way, but carelessness, that commonly
occasions falling: I have known some come down on plain ground, that have stood
in a rugged place. Let neither hand nor foot stir, but as thine eye directs
them; manage thy affairs with discretion; if Providence has dealt thee an ill
Game, mend it by thy play; the best Gamester usually winnes. Create not to thy
self crosses, and do nothing to deserve them: Why should thou purchase pain?
or, make any work for Repentance?

When things go cross, make a virtue of necessity, and be content, where thou
can not prevent: to sit down and cry, will neither lighten thy burden, nor
shorten thy journey. Slight what thou can not shun; what must be, why not
willingly? Have thou vinegar to drink? make not thy draughts more tart with thy
tears. Take the sour with the sweet; what is not toothsome, may be wholesome;
besides, it becomes a Child to drink of the cup his F^^^^^ gives him; he knows
best, what is best for thee. Why should thou then be troubled at any thing?
snarle not at the stone, but learn to smart and smile. Every Bird will sing in
the Sun, and the Spring; Be thou merry in a Winter's day; what falls out
without thy fault, concerns not thee to feel. Be still the same in every state;
imitate the Cedar, not the Shrubb; move not with the greatest blasts, and let
not changes change thee.

It will be all alike e're long, whether thy way has been up hill or down,
fair or foul, when thou art at home: The Traveller forgets his weary steps,
when he has recovered his Journey; what though it may blow hard? a storm may
drive thee to thy Harbor; and it matters not how much thou have been tossed,
when thou art landed. The poor Mariner thinks no more of the Sea, when arrived,
unless to make the Shore the sweeter; and O the pleasant prospect on Mount
Zion! Let this bear thee up, it shall be better in a little while; suffering
will not last long; afflictions will leave thee, or thou them; it will clear
up, or thou get shelter; storms will be spent, or else be past; the Furnace is
not to consume, but refine; and after thy trials comes thy triumph. Have a good
heart, Heaven will make amends; one hours being in glory, will requite all:
Suppose sweat, blood, and tears should mix together, and thou with pain
should get the prize, when what is won is worth it; Can a Crown cost too
dear? look up, and hold out, hoping but a while; what is in thine eye, shall be
in thine hand.

Thus, thou see what thou may expect, and need not be surprised. I
would willingly fit thee for the worst, and leave some token of my love behind
me, that thou may-learn to live, when I am dead. I know not how soon thou
may be deprived of the counsel of a Father, as thou were too soon of the
care of a most tender Mother. Never man lost better Wife, nor ever had Child
greater loss: But she needs not an Encomium, and is above my praise; I shall
show my love best to her, in my love to him she left me; this put me upon the
present, which (by accident) is become public, I am too conscious of my own
weakness, to go about to teach the world wisdom: But as for thee, I am
persuaded thou will not despise my Affection. Remember what I tell thee, when I
am rotten, and forgotten; thou art entering upon the Stage, I am going off; so
act thy part, that at thy Exit, the Spectators may clap their hands; do nothing
unworthy of them or thy self; In a word, so live, that thou may never be
ashamed to live, nor afraid to dye; to thee to live, let it be Christ, and to
dye will be gain. The Lord guide thee with his Counsels, and afterward receive
thee to Glory.

So prays, Thy truly affectionate Father, etc.

THE ADVICE OF A Father.
CENT. I.
I.
BEgin to be good betimes, thou can not be good too soon, nor too good: Set
out in the morning, tarry not till noon; better want way, than want day:
Consider what thou have to do, and which way thou may best dispatch it, thy
business will take up all thy time: Be not idle, lest thou want for thy work;
besides, there is no reason the Devil should have the bud, whilst God stays
till the fruit fall.

II.
Be up, and doing early, let not the Sun see thee in Bed; Turn out when the
Cock calls, break off sleeping at break a day, indulge not a drowsy temper:
Wherefore should thou waste thy time, thou have not that to spare which thou
do mispend? And what thou spendest this way, reckon lost: Why should thou
live but half thy days, in the Grave there will be enough of sleeping.

III.
Let God be the first and last in thy thoughts, close and open thine eyes with
him. When thou lie down, think that ere long thou shall be laid lower; and
let thy rising mind thee of a Resurrection: As sleep shows a dying, so waking
types out a time when the dead shall wake: It will not be Night always, the
Trumpet will sound, and the day break* methinks I see the Prisoners of Hope
stir, and jog each other, and hear their bones clatter.

IV.
Do all as for Eternity, and remember there must be an Account given: A little
while, and the Judge will set upon the Bench, and the Books shall be brought
forth; thy present actions will then either acquit or cast thee: So behave thy
self, that thou may be bold at the Bar, while the condemned Malefactor
trembles. Take heed lest thy Conscience come not in as a witness against thee.
Live, as if thou were to merit Heaven, and to save thy self; yet trust not to
thy works, to be justified by them, be sure to make sure of a pardon.

V.
Be diligent in thy Calling, therein thou may serve both God, and thy self.
Be not sloathful in business, set to whatever thou set about; Do what thou
do in as little time as thou can, and with all thy might, what thy hand
finds to do. Mind thy employment, it is not thy pleasure that pays thee; but
before thou setlest in any way, weigh the wages with the work, and see how it
will turn to Account; it is tyresome to toil for nothing, and he that cannot
find any fruit of his labor, will soon faint.

VI.
Let the Intervales of thy time; be well employed, interline the void spaces
with works of piety, and let not thy particular Calling encroach upon thy
general; have some time to spend in Gods service, give to him what is his, and
to thy self what is thine; there is a time for Devotion, and a time for
Divertion: Learn to know the fittest season for every thing, what is out of
time, is out of tune.

VII.
Busy not thy self about Trifles, like Domitian, in catching Flies, or in
things that do not concern thee; as good do nothing, as to no purpose; it is a
great purchase, where thou have but thy labor for thy pains. He is ill
employed, which grasps the water, or is sifting sand, especially when his work
wants him; Thou have enough to do, in doing that which must be done; it were
improvident to put off an important business, and when thou needst not, to
neglect it* Dispatch while it is called to day, to morrow may not be thine.

VIII.
Let thy Recreations be such as suits best with thy condition and employment,
and the least expensive either of money, or time: Buy not thy pleasure too
dear, the cost will abate the comfort. Be not effeminate in thy sports, those
which are most manly, will best become thee; yet let them not be too violent,
lest they prejudice thy health, and do thy body harm.

IX.
Make not Recreation thy business: Thou were not sent into the world, as the
Leviathan into the Sea, to take thy fill of pleasure: In the sweat of thy
brows thou must eat thy bread, and work out thy salvation with fear and
trembling. Consider, on this moment depends Eternity, and then be idle if thou
can. Thy diligence should be somewhat answerable to the work, and to the
wages; be not content to do a little good, or to glorify God a little;
besides, Heaven deserves thy pains, and the Race is got by running; he that
wins the Crown, shall wear it.

X.
Be serious in what concerns the welfare of thy soul; make sure of God and
glory, and never be satisfied, till thou can say, that both are thine. Be not
contented to continue in a Christless state, why should thou hang over Hell
by a Twine-thread? Often ask thy self the question, how stands the case between
God and thee? what evidence thou have for Heaven? Hazard not a happiness at any
rate; dare not to live, as thou do not dare to dye.

XI.
Walk according to Rule, and regulate thy actions by right reason. Do nothing
unseemly, and what may shame thy profession, or thy self. Shun whatever seems
scandalous, and carries with it but the appearance of evil. Set a high value
upon thy Reputation, better lose thy life, than have thy Credit lost. Manage
thy Affairs with discretion, and take heed thou do not forfeit thy esteem
with wise and good men. Be not only pious, but prudent; temper thy zeal with
judgment.

XII.
Suit thy self to thy state, and buckle to a cross condition; let not thy mind
be higher than thy means, but submit to a mean fortune. Lower thy Sails in a
storm, and yield to the time; make some potent friend thy Harbor, till the
Tempest is over. The Shrub may shelter it self behind the Cedar. Go cheerfully
away with thy burden, and make afflictions no affliction; slight what thou
can not shun, thou will get no good by struggling.

XIII.
Be reserved, yet courteous in thy carriage; let not all that see, know thee.
Be civil to every body, but familiar with a few, all are not fit for friends.
Discover not thy self, till thou have discovered what others are; and try,
before thou trust. Seem strange in strange company; freedom is a folly, and
incurs a censure. Say little, let others speak, the least harm comes by
silence; Thou may take an advantage by their words, which thou give them
by thine.

XIV.
Let thy Garb be grave, rather rich, than gaudy; yet not so costly, as comely;
be neither the first nor the last in a fashion, none but a conceited fool will
be singular. Conform in thy Clothes to the custom of the place wherever thou
art; Why should thou be wondered at? Be not profuse in thy Apparel, but cut
thy Coat according to thy Cloth; it becomes a Gentleman to have more in his
pocket, than upon his back; yet till thy deserts make thee known, the outside
will set thee forth, and thy Clothes gain thee credit in the worlds eye; but be
sure think not the better of thy self for thy fine feathers; thou have reason
to think the worse, if thy worth be in thy wear; it is much more for thy honor
that thou did grace them, than they thee.

XV.
Be moderate in thy expenses, yet be not base; know when to spare, and when to
spend. Be generous upon a good occasion; but be sure to see whether your
Accounts will bear it. What thou do, do upon design, unless they be Acts of
charity, or courtesy, then hate the thoughts of requital. Waste nothing, lest
thou want; profuseness has made many poor, and poverty is worse than death to
an ingenuous spirit. Live within thy self, it is sad to live upon others. Let
thy layings out be less than thy comings in, that thou may lay up for a
rainy day; a good Estate is the best shelter.

XVI.
Look not upon Wine when it sparkles in the Cup, drink nor for delight; of all
Vices, take heed of Drunkenness, there is no sin so shameful, and so much
unmans a man. This not only disorders, but banisheth reason. A Drunkard is
metamorphized into a Beast, incapable of counsel, and only fit for evil; other
Vices come alone, but Drunkenness is ever attended with other Vices.

XVII.
Set a Knife to thy Appetite, and make not thy belly thy god. Be not delicate
in thy Diet, let thy stomach be thy sauce. Mind more what is wholesome, than what
is roothsom; it is a poor pleasure to please the palate. Desire not many
Dishes, Enough is as good as a Feast; and why should thy eye be bigger than thy
belly? A little suffices nature, to satisfy hunger is the end of eating.

XVIII.
Desire rather to be accounted a good Christian, than a good Companion; and let
not the persuasions of any person tempt thee beyond thy temper. Humor no man to
thy own prejudice; consult with convenience in complying with thy company;
rather displease them, than do any thing to displease God. Delight not in
drinking Healths, not that it is not lawful to remember a friend, but the
consequent is usually ill; it is better for both to pray for his health, and to
drink for thy own.

XIX.
Be sober thy self, and frequent such society; shun the company of intemperate
persons, least thou be drawn in. If by accident thou art amongst them,
discover a dislike of their proceedings, and make not their practice thine
Disengage thy self with what expedition possible, and come no more amongst
them; thy company offends them, and theirs thee.

XX.
Go not into suspected places, and be not found upon the Devils ground. The
best way to secure thy self, is to keep out of harms way. Keep thy station, if
thou would keep thy standing, tempt not the Tempter to tempt thee. Perchance
thy Conscience can dispense with more than thy Credit can; avoid the scandal,
as thou would avoid the sin; and remember, thy Reputation is easier lost,
than recovered.

XXI.
Delight not in seeing others distempered; it is a mad kind of mirth that mad
men make, and why should thou love that in any, which thou would not in thy
self? Force no man beyond sobriety, or his own desire; act not the Devils part,
tempt not to intemperance, prevent it what thou can. I wonder that any should
make themselves sport in making another stagger, it is a sad sight to me;
theirs is the sin, whilst his is the shame. I will not glory that others have
drunk too much, or that I can drink more; this were to endeavor to damn them
or my self: What joy can I take in that Victory, where the Devil wears the
Garland, and the reward is Hell.

XXII.
Use all things with a moderation and indifferency, and be not brought under
the power of any thing; let all be (in a manner) alike to thee. Do not love so,
as to long; be as well content to want, as to enjoy; know how to be without
what thou have, and live above what thou live upon; let not thine heart be in
thine eye, or in thine hand.

XXIII.
Keep thy body under, if pampered, it will be unrulie; it needs a bridle
rather, than a spur: Hold the Reins in thine own hand. Deny thy self in what
thou do desire, that thou may learn to desire but what thou do enjoy;
sometimes stop where thou may go further; what is lawful to use, may be
expedient to refuse; it is better to take up of thy self by degrees, than to be
forced to a stand upon a full carrier.

XXIV.
Be thankful for what thou have, and he that gave thee that, will give thee
more; if thou have less than others, perchance thou want less. He that made
the Vessel, knows how to trim her, and to suit her ballast to her burden.
Whatever thou have, make it not too much by ingratitude; if it be beneath thy
desire, yet it being above thy desert, thou have reason to be thankful, and
there is no such way of begging.

XXV.
Study others, but first and most thy self; Travel not so far abroad, as to
neglect home, be not a stranger to thy own breast; if thou art not made to thy
mind, endeavor to mend one; where nature is defective, let it be thy care to
supply nature; something may be done to set thy self straight, if thou were
born bad; be new born.

XXVI.
Render to every man his due, whether it be respect, or reward. Deny none what
he deserves, lest he complain, and be heard; if thou have wronged any, repent,
and restore; quiet thy Conscience, and content him. Take up the controversy
whilst thou art in the way, let not the Judge decide it; God takes part with
the injured person, and such a one pleads hard.

XXVII.
Proportion thy Charity to the necessity of others, and thy own ability. Reckon
what thou give to be lent, not lost; thou have good security, God is become
thy Debtor; the Beggars purse is his Treasury, the poor man is his Receiver,
and he security for the poor man. If the person be wicked, and really want,
give for Gods sake, and pity him as a man; where the object is doubtful, rather
relieve a Droan, than let a Be perish; better give to mistaken want, than that
any want thorough thy mistake.

XXVIII.
Be oftener in propounding questions, than in deciding them; ask rather, than
answer. Why should not the gain be thine, this is the way to better thy
knowledge? thy ears teach thee, not thy tongue. Be inquisitive, and enquire
till thou know no more to know; so long as thou art ignorant, be not ashamed
to be instructed; it is never too late to learn. If thou can not satisfy thy
self, seek satisfaction elsewhere; all know not alike, nor none all things;
thou may help another, and he thee.

XXIX.
Have a high esteem of Learning, this will make thee a Gentleman without help
of Herauldry; consult with thy fancy, thereunto suit thy study; where pain is a
pleasure, profit may be expected. If thy Genius aim at gain, bend thy
endeavors either to the Law, or Physic, from both thou will find a double
advantage. The first shows thee the way to get, and keep an Estate; by the
other thou may both enrich and cure thy self. I know no Professions like
these, that are so surely profitable; you hazard not what you have, and what
you get is clear gain.

XXX.
Let not thy Books be many, but of the best. Thou art never the worse Scholar,
if thy Library lay in thy head. Thou have no more Learning than what thou
carriest about thee, that which lies by, is the Authors, not thine. If Books
would make a Scholar, the Bookseller might bear the Bell. Let thy choice be
answerable to the profession thou intendest, and value not the Treatise by its
Volume; such have more of paper, than of pith; and more reading, than reason.
The soul is usually too scanty for such vast bodies.

XXXI.
Read men as well as Books, both will make thee complete, and accomplished.
Follow the best, not the most, nor them in all things neither, but as they
follow the grand Exemplar. Let other men's harms secure thee, thou may learn
wisdom by their folly, by shunning the Rock on which they split. This is the
advantage of him that follows, he sees with more eyes than his own, and cannot
be surprised.

XXXII.
Be not so Bookish, as to neglect thy Estate; he is an ill Geometrician, that
overlooks his own spot, this were to study to show thy self a fool; what
greater weakness than to be wiser abroad than at home? And how many have I
known thus Book-learned? whose wealth has wasted with their lamp, and have
parted with possession for an empty notion; better burn thy Books, than be thus
abused; but why may not a Scholar, be more than a mere Scholar?

XXXIII.
Set bounds to thy desire of knowledge. There is no less wisdom in leaving,
than wit in learning. Know where to stop, when thou must not know; let thy
study be with safety and security. Come not too near to Aetna, lest it burn
thee; be not overcurious in searching into hidden things; secrets are to be
secret, touch not forbidden fruit, the Tree of Knowledge is denied thee. Thou
can not forget the sad effect which did arise from tasting, let ignorance
sometimes content thee; he knows enough, that knows all but what will hurt him.

XXXIV.
Be not conceited of thy Parts of Learning. Think meaner of thy self, than
others think; modesty will make thee the more admired. Humility passes the
strictest Critic without suspect, or searching. Pride puts a low esteem of
what is most deserving, and makes liable either to contempt or censure, the
proud person. Let not the apprehension of your own worth, place you on the
Pinnacle from whence so many are fallen. This sin of Angels (or rather Devilish
sin) I find the most Seraphick spirits subject to; yet see no reason that men
of reading, should pride themselves with another plumes, having nothing they
can lay claim to, but what they have stoll'n, begged, or borrowed.

XXXV.
If thou have a mind to add the Practick to the Theorick, and do intend to
travel, take some counsel for thy companion, lest all thy Traffic be but
Trifles, and thou make no better an improvement of thy stock, than the adding
of affection to thy solly; and show thy self one of Solomon's Factors, to bring
back Apes and Peacocks, or at best but a little gold, the product of
dear-bought experience.

XXXVI.
It being supposed thou art no stranger at home, steer thy Course to those
Parts where thy projects are most probably to be accomplished; what may best
suit with thy pleasure, may not sure so well with thy profit; yet he that
travels in the capacity of a Merchant, is usually sure, though slow, and has a
double advantage, and improves both mind and estate at once, with the same
expense, hazard and trouble.

XXXVII.
Wherever you come, seem not much concerned with the Customs of the Country,
lest dislike occasion dispute, and dispute danger* in matter of Religion. Be
very modest; when thou can not wave thy turn to speak, frame thy discourse
rather by way of Question, than Answer; as one whose business is to learn, not
to teach. Comply with the Ceremonies of each place, so far as thou may with
Conscience, which in a Traveller had not need to be very tender, who ought to
be rather a Sceptick, than a Zealot.

XXXVIII.
Keep still the mean between Superstition and Profaness, and let not the place
prejudice thee; the sins most proper to it see, and shun; be sure thou be
neither surprised, nor scared into sin; as a preservative against a foreign
infection, keep close to duty; constantly in the morning ask advice what to do,
and at night call thy self to account for what thou have done; be the same
abroad, as at home; though thou changest the Climate, thou needst not change
thy self.

XXXIX.
Be courteous in thy carriage, and as liberal as thou can. Conform to the
custom of the Country, and the humors of the Company; let not thy behavior be
either light or lofty. They that cannot understand thee by thy language, may
know thee by thy carriage. Be neither captious, nor censorious; condemn none,
and compare nothing. If thou must give thy judgment, and find it does
displease, rather cry peccavi, than stand it out; it is ill coping with Cocks
on their own Dunghill.

XL.
Look upon Wine and Women to be the Scylla and Carybdis, whereon most
Travelers split; keep thy head, and heart whole, and thou needst not fear any
thing. Consort but little with your own Contrymen, lest you lose one part of
your errand, Language. Take heed of play* which usually causes passion, and
ends in earnest. Make no show of any sums of money you carry about you; the
best way to bear your charges is by Exchange, the luggage is less, and the loss
can be but single. Inn in the chief Inn, if thou mindest either thy credit or
security; keep thy self reserved, it is dangerous to discover thy designs; know
as much of others as thou can, but let others know as little as thou can of
thee.

XLI.
In Reproving, mind the person, and the time* nothing requires more prudence,
than a right Reproof; if he be above thee, let it be with the more meekness,
and in much humility; with thy equal thou may be the more bold, and bolder
with thy inferior. Be sure to take the fittest season; without great reason
reprove none; but when alone, a man may be willing to hear of that whch he
would not have another hear of.

XLII.
Be not guilty of the crime thou reprovest another for. How can thou blame
any, if thou thy self be blameworthy? This were to discover a detestation
to the person, rather than to the fault; and such a Reproof can never be
well-given, nor well-taken. Reform thy self before thou rebukest them, lest the
stone fly back, and thou be thine own accuser.

XLIII.
If thou would have another do as thou say, say but as thou do; the best
arguments are drawn from example; this argues thou art in earnest when thy life
leads the way. Words are but wind, but seeing is believing; example works more
than precept. How can I follow his counsel, whom I know to be bound to the same
place, yet steers another course? I shall sooner suspect he will deceive me,
than himself.

XLIV.
Launch first forth with a low Sail, hoise by degrees; to strike were a shame,
and better to go slow, than to over-set. Be not lavish, though it blows fair,
the wind may vary. Husband thy stock discreetly, spend not too fast of the
store, lest thy provision be dispatched before thy Voyage; there is no
necessity that thou should either starve or surfeit.

XLV.
Do not precipitate thy Revenge; slight, or at least dissemble an injury, till
thou can either forgive, or require it. Be not captious, things are as they
are taken; make the best construction of what is doubtful, perchance the injury
was not intended, and is by chance, not choice; in such a case never hurt him
willingly, who did thee harm against his will. Indeed if the affront were
designed, it may be convenient to call the person to account, though seldom at
the same time. Let prudence provide an opportunity, then show thy self a man,
but withal a Christian.

XLVI.
Contend not with those that are much below thee; it is a discredit to dispute
with an inferior; what can thou expect to get worth thy while, or worthy of
thy self? sue a Beggar, and thou know what follows; the best is but thy
labor lost, and oftentimes the loss proves greater; he had better have
forgiven the debt, that cannot recover his charges.

XLVII.
Let thy Recreation be a servant to thy business, lest thou become a slave to
thy Recreation; enjoy thy pleasure, but let not thy pleasure enjoy thee.
Dispatch thy work, and do not loyter; resting is after labor, and thereunto
tending; unbending of the Bow is in order to a bending.

XLVIII.
Contemn not the most contemptible enemy; it is dangerous to despise the vilest
or the weakest. Give not thy adversary any advantage; why should thou disarm
thy self, to arm him? Necessity and opportunity may make a Coward valiant; if
he flies, follow not the Chase too fast, neither break the Bridge behind him;
thou gettest no less glory by his flying, than thou would do by his falling;
be not foolhardy; I have known some by jesting, have lost their lives in
earnest.

XLIX.
Be not engaged for any thou can not be surety with security. The Borrower is
a servant to the Lender, and thou to both. Thou to ease them, take the burden
upon thy own back; which while it lies on thee, they look, and laugh; this thou
do deserve, by making another debt thine, which if possibly thou may not
pay, yet to lose thy liberty is too much; who would be under the lash of the
Law, that may be free?

L.
Prize neither men, or things, by what they seem, but by what they are. A
Bristow stone looks like a Diamond, and may be as well set. Value not the Jewel
by her frame, nor any thing by its cover: The Book is not the better for its
Clasps, nor does an Estate make a man the better; though the Coat be never so
costly that a Fool wears, yet it is but a Fools Coat; and what more common,
than to see a Ring in a Swines snout?

LI.
Have low thoughts of thy self. He is the most holy, that is the most humble;
and though it be impossible that a wise man should not know himself, yet it is
no small part of prudence to seem not to see it; affectation is the greatest
folly; there is nothing so much does prejudice thy Reputation, and take off the
praise due to thy parts.

LII.
Be not puffed up with the report of a Parasite; it is natural for a Sycophant to
dissemble; thou can not know thy complexion by a false Glass; think not thy
face is as it flatters thee. I know too well what I am, to believe them, that
speak well of me; none loves a friend more, nor more abhors falsehood; they
deceive themselves, that go about to deceive me; in this sense to deceive the
deceiver is no deceit.

LIII.
Be not prodigal to praise, or dispraise either things, or persons; what
need thou discover thy opinion; to be over-busie, is a badge of folly; who
can tell the inconvenience it may occasion, if another take up the Cudgels, and
engage thee into a dispute or quarrel? what did not concern thee to meddle,
will concern thee to maintain.

LIVE.
Laugh not at thy own Jests, lest others laugh at thee; it loses much of its
briskness, if it be not sudden; why should it be seen, before it be spoken, or
heard. Thou speak to the ear, not to the eye; and he that would strike to
purpose, must not discover when the blow is coming.

LV.
Let not thy Jests be too smart; thou had better lose a Jest, than a Friend.
Touch not at all, at least but gently, the galled place; few men love true
Jests; these often breed bad blood, and sometimes turn to earnest; rub not too
hard, take away thy hand when it does any more than tickle.

LVI.
Be content to be paid in thine own Coin; what thou will give, take; there were
no sport if it be not banded; do as thou would be done to, another may expect
the like liberty without distasting. Thou have made a Rod for thine own back,
though it smart, thou may the better bear it; he that gives the first blow,
has little reason to be angry, though he be struck again.

LVII.
As thou love thy liberty, be not entangled in the Labyrinth of Love; to be a
slave to a woman, is the basest bondage; thou can not more unman thy self;
why should thou part with thy Prerogative? I have read of some, whose heads
stand in their breasts; make thou the moral, and let every part keep its proper
place; there is no necessity thou should be a mad man, or a monster.

LVIII.
If thy veins swell, and thy blood boil, perchance Galen can cool, or cure
thee; try all ways before a woman, lest the Remedy prove worse than the
Distemper. Besides, to gratify thy appetite, is like drink in a burning
fever, which does increase thy thirst, and thy longing. To tame the flesh,
there is nothing like to Physic, and to fasting; if thou do not indulge the
humor, the swelling will go down of it self.

LIX.
When the spirit moves, consider the mischief of Marriage, and the sin and
shame to meddle with a Strumpet; if this will not conjure down the Devil, thou
art in danger; if the storm continues, thou have thy choice, either to sink at
Sea, or to be ship-wrackt in the Harbor; and the case may be so, that thou
had better cast thy self into the arms of the Ocean, than the embraces of a
wife.

LX.
Marriage, though the most serious transaction of our lives, and a matter of
the greatest concern and moment, yet is the most governed by chance, and its
comfort the most uncertain; it being impossible to perceive the imperfections
of either person, till experience has made way for a bitter Repentance; in
other things we try before we buy, but here we are forced to take all on trust,
and run a Risco, which if considered, none would be so hardy to hazard a
happiness at hand, for a hope at such an adventure; neither is the yoke to be
shifted, be it never so strait and uneasy; nay, though thine might fit
another neck, and another thine; it is hard that what is in choice an act of
the will, should be continued rather by constraint, than consent.

LXI.
If my persuasion cannot prevail to hinder thee from dashing upon this Rock;
let thy fancy sleep while thy judgment chooses; for though do what thou can,
thou may be cheated; yet prudence may in part prevent. Choose rather by the
ear, than by the eye, that may dazzle and deceive thee; a good fame, is better
than a good face; besides the danger of doting upon an adored beauty, it being
a question not yet decided, whether she can be fair, and honest too; she had
need be more than a woman that can resist the temptations of opportunity, and
importunity; yea, though grace should guard the Fort, and proffers should not
prevail, ^t may be assailed by force, or taken by treache^y, and surprise; he
that cannot get the key, may pick the lock; yet if a wife be wise, she will
rather conceal the Cuckold, than produce his horns by her carriage or
confession; it is a comfort in such a case, that sometimes he knows not
himself, nor the world him.

LXII.
Let thy chief aim be at goodness, mind not her person so much, as her
principles, and her practice. A bad woman can never make a good wife; there is
little hopes that she that is not holy, will be honest; and she that knows not
her duty to God, will not know her duty to her Husband. The English Laws are
too far in women's favor, to force obedience.

LXIII.
Look not only after grace, but good nature; see to the disposition, most of
the comfort of a married condition consists therein; mind thy own peace, more
than the piety of an ill humoured person. I have known a Diamond ill set, and
grace grafted upon a Crab-stock; where there is a pearl, there may be poison.
I like not the conjunction of Heaven and Hell, neither would I have thee marry
in hopes to mend; this were to purchase pains or Repentance.

LXIV.
It is not enough the disposition be good, unless it suit with thine; likeness
is the ground of love; propriety without proportion, gives little satisfaction;
it is the right mixture of humors that makes the harmony; if the temper be not
tuned, the Musick's marred; what is good in its self, and for another, may not
be so for thee.

LXV.
Marry not one too much above thee in birth, lest she prove thy Mistress, or at
least expect it. Great inconveniences many times arise from matching into great
families, to whom you become a servant, if not a slave; neither will subjection
serve without your substance; honor will devour you by putting you upon
immoderate expenses, to maintain a port like your self; of this it may be said,
as of the Grand Seniors Horse, Wherever it comes, no grass will grow.

LXVI.
Thou may give a shrewd guess at the comfort of a married condition by the
portion; when ever thou partest with thy liberty, let thy fetters be of gold;
set not too low a price upon thy freedom; if thou must be a drudge, let thy
wages be worth it; why should thou thrash for nothing? Be sure to make sure
of what she has; trust not the common report; fame is a friend to the female
Sex; expect the money fall short, and allow accordingly. Remember this, when
thorough a restless humor being discontented with thy condition, thou desire
change, that a fat sorrow is better than a lean one.

LXVII.
If thou art provided of a person thus accomplished, yet do not promise thy
self too great a satisfaction; why should thy hopes deceive and befool thee?
ask thy self when ever did thou give chase to any creature, and came not
home by weeping cross; has the fruition at any time answered the expectation?
was the fruit according to the flower? but supposing thou should have a
happiness that never any had, yet time makes all things tyresome, if not
loathsome; the most honeysweet enjoyment sowres with standing; comforts cease to
be comforts by continuance; when as a few cold winters have snowed upon your
head, and your blood grows chill, and begins to retire, you will then conclude
my counsel to be Canonical.

LXVIII.
If thou art so tame to permit thy neck to be put into a noose, draw even in
the same yoke; let love sweeten the services; what thou must do, do willingly;
stand not too much upon Superiority, as thou prizest thy peace and quiet;
beside, what difference can there be, where two persons are made one? there is
no distinction of mine, and thine, at least in the use; thank thy self, if
(with thy liberty) thou have lost thy propriety, thou were born free, and made
to govern; if thou have forfeited thy Supremacy, it is thy own fault, and what
is more obliging than a free act? it were now a folly to complain; make thy
condition as comfortable as thou can, having chose one thou love, love thy
choice.

LXIX.
Reckon not the want of Issue any great want: Children are certain cares, and
uncertain comforts; a wise man may beget a fool; the child is not always like
the father; how many Monsters have I seen produced of judicious Parents, who
have been like Vipers to those that begot and bred them? some have been both
their sorrow, and their shame; what though thou have none to hand thy name to
posterity! many Kings and Emperors have dyed childless; if thou want an
Heir, there are enough that want an inheritance.

LXX.
If thou art a father, let not a fond affection destroy thy child; bend the
Twig betimes, while it will bend; delay too long, and it will grow too strong.
Season his younger years; the Vessel favors as it is seasoned; let him suck
pious and prudent principles with his milk, that he may be habitually good;
this will make him learn his duty with less difficulty, and do it with more
delight.

LXXI.
Be thy self a good guide to thy son; Parents are patterns; if thou would
have him write fair, set him a fair Copy; the child cannot be blamed, if he be
like the father, at least by him; lead the way that he should go; example does
more than precept; the eye directs better than the ear; and it is usually seen,
like father, like son.

LXXII.
Know when to cherish, as when to correct, and steer thy course according to
the nature and temper of thy child; if fair means will do, never use foul;
insinuate into his mind goodness by degrees; this will make him in love with
virtue; for which let him see thou art more willing to reward him, than to
reprove and punish Vice; he that commends his child when he does well, teaches
him to do better.

LXXIII.
Bring not thy son up in idleness; why should a droan consume thy labor? study
his genius before thou disposest of him in a Profession; never force his fancy;
no good will be done against the hair; improve his natural parts what is
possible by art and industry; knowledge is the Diamond in the Ring, and makes
the man a Gentleman. Let not thy child know, especially him thou have placed in
a Calling, what thou have to leave him, lest depending upon the one, he neglect
the other, and both strings fail him; neither let thy provision hinder his
employment; two getters is little enough for one spender; besides, it is good to
walk with a Horse in ones hand; and he stands surest, that has something to
uphold him.

LXXIV.
Behave thy self so in thy family, that those below thee may both love and fear
thee; be not too familiar with thy servants, neither let them be privy to thy
secrets. This were to change the relation, and make thy self the servant; and
those whom thou dare not displease, will dare to displease thee. Keep a
distance with discretion; that others may know their places, do thou know thine.

LXXV.
Be not imperious, yet keep the staff in thy own hand; let them rather see thy
power, than feel it; least while they fear it, they hate thee; such will never
do thy work well, unless when thy eye is upon them; and who would be such a
slave to servants? Choose those that will be careful without chiding; and
delight to see them cheerful in their business, and to do it with delight.

LXXVI.
Provide for their support and maintenance; let them not want in their work, be
punctual likewise in their pay; their wages is their due, when their work is
done; the labourer is worthy of his hire; if he deserve better, encourage thy
servant in well-doing; this will engage him for the future to do well; in thy
contract leave something to thy choice; the advantage is double, in what thou
give above the bargain.

LXXVII.
Let not their business be a bondage; their restraints ought to be reasonable;
allow some time to unbend the bow; there is a time to labor, and a time to
loyter; be not unmerciful to thy Beast, much less to thy servant; consider him
as a man, and more as a Christian; allow him rest and recreation proportionable
to his employment.

LXXVIII.
As thou art accountable, be careful of thy charge; thou have a double trust,
of soul and body both; if either miscarry, a reason will be required, and thou
must answer it. The great Master minds his meanest servant; all stand in a like
capacity to him; he has no respect of persons; thou and those below thee now,
will soon stand upon even ground.

LXXIX.
Reckon thy servants among thy children; the difference is only in degrees;
both make up the economy; thou art the father of the family; a wise servant is
better than a foolish child; cast him not off in old age, when he has spent
himself in thy service; a faithful servant does well deserve to be accounted
amongst thy friends.

LXXX.
Rebuke in private; public reproof hardens; and he is most prone to offend,
who is past shame; rather than to be always chiding, rid thy hands of such a
servant; better do thy work thy self, than to have such ado to have it done; if
he be at man's Estate, strike him not; blows become neither thee nor him.

LXXXI.
Keep no more servants than needs must; many by their footmen had been
unhorsed. Let thy Revenue exceed thy Retinue; why should others consume thee?
look upon thy servants as sharers with thy prosperity; if thy condition be
clouded, and a storm threatened, they will soon leave thee for shelter. I have
read of an extravagant respect of some; but a Swallow or two does not make a
Summer; fewer servants have dyed for their Masters, than there have been
Masters by their servants undone.

LXXXII.
Be not hasty in the choice of a friend, but slower in the changing; fix not
thy affections suddenly; but where thou do fix, fasten; constancy is the
unseparable companion of friendship, whereas to waver is a crime unpardonable;
try before thou trust, and never question after trial; thou can not wrong thy
friend more than to suspect him.

LXXXIII.
Do nothing to displease God, and let nothing he does displease thee; let there
be but one will between him and thee, and his thine; behave thy self as in his
eye, and in his audience; he is witness, and he is Judge; if thou have
offended, punishment is thy due; thou have no reason to repine, when justly
beaten; whatever the sentence is, it is no less just than severe; if thou
would escape the stroke, shun the sin.

LXXXIV.
Read thy own mortality in the monuments of dead men; as they are, thou must
be; they are gone, and thou art going; their Bell is rung out, and thine is
tolling; a little while, and thy place shall know thee no more; the Grave is
ready for thee, and Death stands at the door; he is knocking now, and ere long
will force his entrance. Do what thou have to do, that before thou dyest, thou
may have done. Dispatch, lest thou be prevented; live to dye, that thou
may but dye to live.

LXXXV.
Compare what thou have received with what thou have deserved, and thou will
see thy sorrows have been fewer than thy sins; it might have been worse, if not
here, yet in Hell; a living man has no reason to complain; it is mercy thou
art capable of mercy; that judgment is not pronounced, a reprief is more than
thou deservest; what then is a pardon! afflictions are but fleabites; it is a
favor to be burnt in the hand, when the crime merits a Halter.

LXXXVI.
Intend a public good; rather than a private; the gain on every side will be
greater, and the greatest thine; thou can not effect a general good without
doing thy self good; that which is beneficial to the whole, cannot be
prejudicial to any part; be not of a scanty spirit, thou art not born for thy
self; the whole Creation claims a share; it were monstrous a particular
interest should outweigh the world.

LXXXVII.
Think not thy friends departed to be lost, they are only sent before; they
have dispatched their Journey whilst thou art jogging on; the storm still
beats on thee, but they are housed; what thou have in thine eye, they have in
their hand; they have got the Crown, and thou art yet to conquer; thy Robes are
red, but theirs white; they have finished their Voyage, and are landed, but
thou must keep the Sea. All tears are wiped from their eyes, while thy cheeks
are bedewed with tears; mourn not for them, but for thy self; they are so much
the more happy as the sooner.

LXXXVIII.
If thou would avoid sin, avoid the occasion; it is easier to shun the
temptation, than to resist it; come not near the pitch, lest thou be defiled;
keep out of harms way; it is no discretion to dally with danger; the Fly singes
her wings by playing with the flame. Depend not upon thy own strength; many
have lost their power by their presumption; better be careful than confident;
it is hard standing in a slippery place, and a rare thing not to deny Christ in
the High Priests Hall. Take heed of nibling at the bait, lest the Hook catch
thee. Shut thine eyes till the temptation is past; it is not enough to be
fortified with a resolution; so was Alipius, yet when he looked, he liked. Thou
have to do with a subtle tempter; what he cannot do by strength, he does by
slight; though as a Lion he could not pull the Apple, yet as a Serpent he could
climb the Tree.

LXXXIX.
Look upon thy life as a stream that runs and returns not; every day thou art
dying, and to yesterday thou art dead; thy house of clay is continually
undermining, and will fall; every sickness makes it shake, and stagger; and who
can tell but the next disease may destroy it? I cannot think to live long;
Lord, let me live well; it matters not how soon I dye, when I have done; I
cannot be too soon with thee, nor happy too soon.

XC.
Is thy condition clouded? it will clear up, and the Sun shine; give not way to
sorrow, but bid thy griefs be gone; consider to what thou art designed, and let
thy hopes cheer thee; it were a shame for a Saint to look sad; what melancholy,
and going to glory? will not Heaven make amends? thou art yet under Age, have
patience but awhile, and the Heir enters upon his inheritance; the Prince may
pass disguised in a strange Land, but take state upon him in his own
Territories. I value not what my way is, when it leads home; I mind not my
Journey, but my Journeys end.

XCI.
Create not to thy self Crosses; why should thou seek for a knot in a
Bullrush? Be not solicitous for to morrow; thou can not tell whether to
morrow may be thine; sufficient for the day, is the evil thereof; perchance
what thou fear, may not befall thee, and then thy trouble is for nothing;
however, it will be time enough when it comes. I will enjoy what I have, let
what will come; why should I refuse to quench my thirst, for fear I want drink
the next day?

XCII.
Expect not a Heaven upon Earth; few meet with two Heavens; one is enough, two
too much; the portion cannot be in expectation and possession both. Would
thou eat thy bread, and have it? think not thy way should be strowed with
Roses; working precedes a reward, a Crown implies a Conquest; suffering is
proper to thy present state; would thou have thy Inn like thy dwelling place?

XCIII.
Consider what has befallen others, and thou will not wonder whatever befalls
thee. Do things go bad, it goes worse with better men. Art thou poor? it has
been still the fate of the bravest persons; some have been so by choice, but
most by chance; wealth is but vanity, and usually vexation; like a garment too
big, or too long: If my father deals with me as with the rest of his children,
shall it not content me? there is no reason the most undutiful should have a
double portion.

XCIV.
Let not the miseries common to mankind, make thee either mourn, or murmur; the
back was made for the burden; see others laden as well as thou, and how many go
away more nimble under a greater weight. Suppose some have a lesser Cross to
carry, yet do not thou repine; if thou be better able, why should not thy
will be proportionable to thy power? I am born to trouble, I will do my best to
bear it.

XCV.
Be satisfied with thy station, and stir not from thy standing; if thou art
near the bottom, look to thy feet lest they slip, thou may come lower; if
thou art got up the hill, take heed lest thou fall; the surest way is to stand
still; thou may be happy, and keep where thou art. Content does not hang so
high, but thou may reach it upon the ground; what though another has more,
if thou do want less? more than enough is too much, and lesser would be
better; too great a Sail for a small Vessel is dangerous; but suit the Sail to
the ship, and she goes sure.

XCVI.
Accustom thy self to sobriety, and do not indulge thy sensual appetite in the
provisions of thy life; give not the flesh the reins, set bounds to thy
desires, and keep them within their banks; let not nature be thy limit, but
necessity; leave thy longing, lest thou lose it; it may be sooner ceased, than
satisfied; learn to stop, know when thou art well; it is a torment to Tantalize.

XCVII.
When pleasures tempt thee, turn them round; see how they look behind, view the
shadowy side, as well as that which is next the Sun; reckon upon a return, and
consider what the remembrance is like to be; if thy delights be sinful, sighs
and sorrow will make them sour and unsatisfying; take his word who took his
fill of all, and let his experience prevent thine; yet if bought wit be best,
look back to the time of thy own disappointments, and when thou art about again
to be cheated, remember what thou have already found, and be no more abused; It
is thine own fault to be deceived twice.

XCVIII.
Upbraid no man with his weakness; do not discover a deformity, if thou can
conceal it; lay thy finger upon the Wart, and let not others see the shame;
never report it to disparage him, or advance thy self. Admire that goodness
that supports thee, when others slip; let their failings humble thee; the
fountain is the same, though it runs not alike clear; thou might have been
as he is, and may be; look to thine own feet; let him that stands, take heed
lest he fall.

XCIX.
Change not thy opinion of persons, as they change their affection; consider
what they are in themselves, not what they are to thee; their kindness or
unkindness makes no essential alteration; it is more an accident, than a
quality; perchance thou have deserved the difference, the change is then in
thee, not in them; no wonder the effect alters with the cause.

C.
Never boast of thy sin, nor glory in thy shame, cast a vail over thy naked
part; if possible, shun the scandal; it is not necessary that others see, what
God sees, and thy self. Plead not in a wrong cause, this argues impudency, not
penitency. Blush when thou art too blame; be more ready to confess thy fault,
than to excuse it. Do not contend, but amend; ingenuity lies in acknowledgment.

CENT. II.
I.
WHen Pride makes thy plumes rise, consider what thou were in thy birth, and
what thou shall be; uncleanness in the womb, and rottenness in the tomb* filthy
in conception, and filth in thy dissolution; what art thou between these, but
weakness and wildness? Consider but the pollutions of thy nature, the
prevarications of thy life, the dirt of death, and then be proud if thou can.

II.
Be angry, but sin not; let not the Sun go down upon thy wrath, show thy self
willing to be reconciled; be not passionate, but soon pacified; if anger boil
within thy breast, seal up thy lips; the fire that wants vent, will suppress it
self; words like blows, often blow a spark into a flame; if any has injured
thee, think whom thou have wronged, and bear with others, as God bears with
thee.

III.
Do not covet what thou have not, but content thy self with what thou have; he
is rich, that is satisfied; want lies in desire. Covetousness is a thing the
most contradictory to it self, and causes what it pretends to cure; like
drinking in a fever, which does not quench the thirst, but make it the more
violent; the desire does not cease, though thou have what thou do desire;
happiness lies in the use, not in the principle; a man may starve with Bills
and Bonds about him; it were a madness to abstain from meat, because thou art
hungry; or from any thing, because thou love it; thou have but what thou do
enjoy; what lies by is liker to be another than thine.

IV.
Receive what God gives thankfully, and return what he requires cheerfully;
take all in good part that he does; look not to the messenger so much as to him
that sent him; bid him welcome, if not for his own sake, yet for his Masters;
think nothing too hard to suffer, nor too dear to part with for a Father;
filial affection will carry thee far; slaves serve for hire, but love in a son
is the only motive to duty.

V.
Let Gods glory be thy aim, and the end of every action; he made thee, and thou
were made for him; that in thee, and by thee, he might glorify himself; in his
honor consists thy happiness; he might have been happy without thee, but thou
without him can not be happy; to serve him, is the way to enjoy him; those
which honor him, he will honor; his glory will be thine; do that for his
sake, which thou would for thine own.

VI.
Love the World as about to leave it; look upon thy self as departing, and
things as passing by; how can thou fix thine eye, where the motion is
perpetual, and thou can not make a minutes stop or stay? Thou see thy
comforts but as thou art sailing, they will soon be out of sight; thou art
launching forth into an Ocean of Eternity, where thou can not see Land; a
little while, and all thy delights are gone; the Curtain will be drawn, and the
Play done.

VII.
Be not contented to be good thy self, unless thou can be an instrument to
make others good; there is comfort in company; who would go to Heaven alone? it
is a grief to a Christians heart, to see the path to Zion overgrown, and that
so few follow; fain he would that the dust did flee, that Troops went up
together; it is pity friends should part to meet no more; my bowels yearn over
them I love, lest any should miscarry.

VIII.
Say nothing but what thou will stand to; why should the Truth suffer, or thy
own Reputation? be neither the first, nor forward in any strange Report, lest
thy Credit be called in question, though the Report be true; if it be so to
day, it will be so to morrow; and more certain, if not in it self, yet to
others, and to thee; when ever I tell what I hear, I will tell who told it me,
at least when I find it startle; let the Author bear the blame, why should I?

IX.
In the morning think what thou have to do, and at night ask thy self what thou
have done; so spend every day, that thou may delight to review thy actions;
why should thou conclude with a sigh, or a tear? if possible prevent
Repentance. Do nothing that may need a pardon; yet wherein thou have
prevaricated, let confession follow upon commission; fear not to see thy score,
but to increase it; call thy self to account, and chide thy self.

X.
Commend no man to his face, and behind his back do not discommend him; to do
either, argues a base spirit; if thou know any good of him, let others know
it; if any ill, tell it to himself; of the dead and absent if thou can, speak
well; if not, say nothing; accuse none that cannot answer for themselves; what
credit to conquer, where there is none to oppose thee! to talk high, is the
property of a Coward, especially when his enemy is absent; I will scorn to take
advantage of any; to come behind is dishonorable; I shall likewise fear him
that flatters, lest while he smiles, he smite me.

XI.
It matters not how long thou live, but how well; to crowd a great deal of
work into a little room, bespeaks thy diligence; I shall not measure my life by
days, but by doing; not by my stay, but by my service. I would live to labor,
and when my Master has no more to do, I am content to be no more, that time
and task may end together; there is no such misery as to be buried alive.

XII.
Whatever thou do, have an eye at death; do nothing now, which thou would
not then have done, and still suppose the next act to be the last; look upon
thy self as dying, and reckon upon a time of reckoning; believe thou art before
the Judge, and the Jaylors behind thee; this will make thee not dare to do, in
doing of which thou dare not dye.

XIII.
Better is the man without money, than money without the man; I never thought
any the better for his Bags; an Ass may be laden with gold; I have seen fools
advanced, and wise men wait, and what more unseemly sight? how little
proportion appears in providence, when fools have fortune, and wise men chance!

XIV.
Friendship makes prosperity brighter, and burdens lighter; I am not more my
own, than my friends in every estate; I enjoy my self in him; he is my solace
in the Sun, and shelter from the storm.

XV.
Besides sin there is nothing dreadful; the punishment is less than the crime;
I will fear nothing but to offend, and will choose rather to suffer, than to
sin.

XVI.
A common misery is less a misery; there is comfort in company, though in
trouble; a general grief is not grievous, none can repine when all suffer; a
personal affliction is most affecting; this is the sting of sorrow, to suppose
our state without a parallel; a burden is better born by many, than by a single
shoulder; why should I complain, where the case is common? if others suffer,
why not I?

XVII.
Whatever befalls me without my fault, I will bear with an undaunted mind; it
is my fate, not my folly; and why should I make that worse, which I could not
make better? I will not fear what I cannot foresee; but slight what I cannot
shun: I can bear where I am not too blame, and where my weakness did not mar,
it will be my wisdom to mend.

XVIII.
There is nothing more Noble than to deserve well of ones Country; we are not
born for our selves, and what reason to return our lives where we had them! it
has been the brave resolution of many bad men, to sacrifice themselves for a
common good; in this they have excelled themselves; what care have Heathens had
of their Country, for which it was sweet (they said) to dye! and they did what
they said.

XIX.
A sure friend is best known in an adverse state; we know not whom to trust,
till after trial; there are some that will keep me company while it is clear
and fair, which will be gone when the clouds gather; that is the only
friendship, which is stronger than death, and those the friends whose fortunes
are embarked in the same bottom; who are resolved to sink, and swim together.

XX.
My friend is as it were my self; there is but one soul in two bodies, neither
am I more my own, than my friends; I have nothing but what is his; what I have,
he has; if he will, he may command both me and mine.

XXI.
Whatever thou do, do quickly; it may be too late to tarry for leisure; want
of a power, follows want of will; delays are dangerous; what thou art unfit
for to day, perchance to morrow thou will be more unfit; besides, who can call
another moment his? I will dispatch what I have to do, lest something be left
undone; I had rather want work, than time; and finish too soon, than be
surprised.

XXII.
There are many not worthy of light, on whom the Sun shines; prosperity is
oft-times the portion of the basest of men; there is no judging by appearance;
all is not gold that glisters; a Dunghill will stink still; let me be a flower,
though I grow in the shade; Providence appoints the place; what is good for
others, may be bad for me.

XXIII.
Necessity is no friend to freedom; there is no liberty where there is no
remedy; I will come under the least obligation possible, and act by choice, not
constraint; what is forced, is not thank-worthy; that which is free, is only
kindly; I will have my hand observe my heart; then shall I do what I will,
while I will but what I do.

XXIV.
As the Furnace tryes the Gold, so misery proves the man; his suffering shows
his strength, troubles are the only trials; the resolution is known by the
opposition, the patience by the pain.

XXV.
I never thought him happy, who thought himself miserable; the mind is the man;
if another has what I can be without, what is he the better, or I the worse,
while he wants more, and I less? he is not happy that enjoyes, but that does
not desire. Satisfaction lies not in Addition, but Substraction. A Monarch may
be miserable; but content is more than a Kingdom; I can be what I will, while I
will be what I can.

XXVI.
Socrates passing through the Market, cries out, How much is here I do not
need? Nature is content with little, Grace with less: Poverty lies in opinion;
what is needful is soon provided, and enough is as good as a Feast; I am worth
what I do not want; my occasions being supplied, what would I do with more?

XXVII.
The fear of Death is worse than Death it self; it is better to be dead, than
always dying; give me the man that dares to dye, that opens his breast boldly,
and bids to Death defiance; that can welcome the King of Terrors, and look him
in the face with a smile. I will account my last enemy, my best friend, who
shows me my Crown when almost spent, and helps me to what I fought for.

XXVIII.
They may kill, but cannot hurt: 'Twas the saying of Seneca, when doomed to
dye, and it argued a brave Heroic spirit, Whom need a Christian fear, whose
life is hid with Christ! he is out of Gunshot, the reach of men and Devils;
whatever happens, nothing harms him; to kill him is the greatest kindness; you
send him but to Heaven the sooner.

XXIX.
I have read of a Philosopher, that being pounded in a Mortar, bid his
Tormentors in derision beat on the Sack of Anaxarchus; he looked on the body,
but as the bag, and knew the treasure was secure; it matters not what becomes
of the Casket, when the Jewel's safe; and what though the shell be cracked,
when the kernel is whole and untoucht? it were below me to shrink, or look pale
at any thing, when Heathens can bear torments with a smooth brow; if they can
be so valiant, it were a shame for a Christian to be a Coward.

XXX.
He fights with a shadow, that fights with a Saint; who can neither be hit, nor
hurt; a Christian walks invisible, and is invulnerable; you strike at you know
not what; the stone falls short, it never comes near him.

XXXI.
In living as in swimming, the lesser luggage the better; why should I then
repine to be eased of what does hinder? perchance if I had not lost, I had been
lost; it is a mercy in a shipwreck to escape naked; what I lament, might have
drowned me.

XXXII.
Opportunity comes neither often, nor continues long; it is good striking while
the Iron is hot; to lose the occasion, is the loss of all. I will endeavor to
take the fittest time for every action, lest I should slip the season; I cannot
promise my self any other opportunity, than the present; I will hoise Sail
while the wind is fair.

XXXIII.
Fortune does often favor the most daring; Nothing venture, nothing have;
desperate designs many times succeed, and things beyond hope happen; I have
known strange results of a resolution; while some have sought death, they have
found both life and glory; I will look before I leap; then leap at all; he is a
Coward that will shun the Combat, where the Crown countervails the Conquest.

XXXIV.
It is uncertain how the Evening proves; who knows whether the Sun will shine
at setting; it sometimes goes down clear, and sometimes in a cloud; there is no
depending on what is doubtful; since I cannot foresee what may fall out, I will
provide for that I cannot prevent, that I may bring my mind to my condition,
when I cannot my condition to my mind.

XXXV.
Divine wrath proceeds to punish by degrees, but makes amends for its slowness,
with its severity; the longer the blow is fetching, the sorer is the stroke;
abused patience turns to fury; forbearance is no acquittance; I had rather fear
before I feel, than feel before I fear.

XXXVI.
He has every thing that desires nothing; a contented mind is richer than
Croesus, or then the Indies; this turns all we touch to gold, and is the only
pearl of price, more worth than a World. He is the happy man, that can see and
scorn, who does not covet, but contemns, and has at home, what others seek
abroad; what does he not enjoy, who enjoyes himself?

XXXVII.
Satisfaction lies in proportion, and in propriety; without both there can be
no content; what is not fit, or not our own, will never make us happy; that
serves best that suits best, is most comfortable, and most comely; I will shape
my Last to my foot; a Shoe too big is uneasy, and too little pinches; what
matches the mind, must likewise be the man's, or all is nothing; I may starve
for famine, while another has food to spare; what is that to me, which is not
mine?

XXXVIII.
That which is ill-gotten, is usually ill-spent; a covetous Father has
commonly a prodigal son; what the one rakes, the other scatters; he that knows
not how to get, knows not how to keep; lightly come, will lightly go; what is
gained by ill means, is spent in an ill manner; besides what comes in an
unwarrantable way, is not blessed, but blasted; how have I seen wealth to waste
like butter against the Sun? I have known a curse accompany an Estate, till the
canker has consumed it.

XXXIX.
The Pilot governs the Ship with wisdom, not with violence; not by force, but
dexterity; I will endeavor to do by prudence, what I cannot do by power; where
the Lions skin is too short, the Foxes may serve to piece it; that what the
hand could not act, the head may effect; yet will not I separate the Serpent
from the Dove.

XL.
A wise man is moderate in prosperity, and in adversity valiant; a great mind
is not easily moved; it is the shrub, not the Cedar, that is shaken with every
blast; I like that man, who is the same in a storm, and in a calm; who stands
firm in spite of wind and weather; whatever alters, it is alike with him; he
changes not with changes.

XLI.
It is more noble to refuse, than to receive; he that accepts, loses his
liberty, and becomes a debtor; where I do not need, I had rather deny, than
desire; every courtesy is obliging; why should I be bound, when I may be free?
yet if I must receive a kindness, I will mind not more what it is, than from
whom it comes; I shall not love the Present, where I do not like the Person.

XLII.
Hope the best, think of the hardest, and bear whatever happens; let not thy
spirit sink; keep thy head above water, and no danger of drowning; the heart is
the fort, which unless surrendered, cannot be taken; I will prepare for a Siege,
resolving not to give up whilst I can hold out; and it is in my choice whether
I will be Conqueror or conquered; I will not give way to grief; I am not gone
till grief gets in; suppose my Cup be sour, why should I make it more tart
with my tears?

XLIII.
Sleep is the image of death, its picture and resemblance: Sleep is but a
breathing death, and death a breathless sleep; the greatest difference is in
their age, sleep being the elder brother; why should I fear the one, that with
the other am so familiar? I will go to my bed as to my grave, and to my grave
as to my bed; it matters not, dust or down, when asleep; I am sure to rise at
break a day, and what would I do up sooner?

XLIV.
Every man has his lot; nothing can befall us, but what was before designed;
there is no such thing as chance; our Father has appointed his children their
several portions, why then am not I satisfied with what comes to my share? what
serves others, might serve me; shall I be more dainty, and less dutiful?
besides, it is decreed, nor can I change my fate, what was determined, must be
done in spite of what opposes.

XLV.
He that knows most, knows little to what he does not know; our knowledge is
but in part; a Pismire may puzzle the profoundest wit. I admire at the pride,
and impudence of those persons, who think to lade the Ocean with a
Cockle-shell, yet are gravelled in a fellow creature! how may those eyes look
against the Sun, which a Candle dazles: I will not pry within the vail, nor
search into what is secret; it was therefore hid, that I might not know it; I
will wait till it be revealed; in the mean while adore what I cannot comprehend.

XLVI.
It has much startled me, and wiser men, to see the good fare ill, and the bad
fare best; that virtue is neglected, and vice rewarded; but why should I
wonder, when bones are thrown to Dogs? were those things good, good men should
have them; slaves are paid off with these; my wages will be more, the longer it
runs on, and my pay-day will come; I shall soon see how all things have been
working for the best, that every River tended to its Ocean, and each
Circumference to its Center; that it was the end of every Providence to do me
good; it is imperfect what I take asunder; but when all parts are put together,
it will appear beautiful; when what is in the mystery, shall be in the history;
and what is now a forming, shall be brought to open view.

XLVII.
Bread and water suffices nature; none to these are poor; what is necessary is
at hand; every field will afford us food; hunger is not dainty, there needs no
sauce to a good stomach; I will eat to live, not live to eat; to be a slave to
my belly, nothing were more below me, or more base; I never thought it worth my
study to have my palate pleased; water will quench my thirst, and Wine can do
no more.

XLVIII.
In the same vein may be gold and poison; there are motes in the Sun, and a
sting where there is honey; there is nothing pure and uncompounded; there is a
dark side, as well as a bright; conveniences have their inconveniences, and
comforts their contraries; Roses have their prickles; the sweetest state is but
bitter sweet; my happiness lies in my self, I am not the worse for what I want;
neither do I think had I more, I should be the more happy.

XLIX.
Leisure without learning is death, and idleness the grave of a living man; it
was a brave saying of Scipio (and every Scholar can say it) That he was never
less alone, than when alone. I pity those who spend themselves, and mispend
their time, in doing nothing, or worse than nothing; who are alvvayes either
idle, or ill employed; I am resolved no day shall pass without a line; let me
converse with the dead; I desire no better company; Books are the best
Companions; I will live to learn, and learn to live.

L.
There is none but thinks he must sometime dye, yet when the time comes, he
turns his back, and trembles; it is strange that in so long a space we cannot
prepare for so short a work, and of so much weight; this is the last cast,
and all lies at stake; it is not so much how we live, as how we dye; he
acts well, that comes off the stage with applause; I will endeavor so to
perform my part, that at my Exit the Spectators may clap their hands.

LI.
None can grieve much, and grieve long; extremities are not lasting; the
sharpest sorrovv is the soonest spent; what is violent, is not permanent; it
vvasts its self, and is quickly gone: What though my sufferings be sharp, when
they are but short! a constant pain is vvorst; a little little while, and all
my qualms will be over; the other puff, and then a calm; storms will be
spent, or else be past.

LII.
That which was hard to endure, may be svveet to remember; to repeat a pain
is a pleasure; with what delight will a Soldier relate his Conquest? and
the poor Mariner when he comes to his Port, will please himself in recounting
his past toil; what pleasure will it be to me to see the Sea from the shore,
when I have finished my Voyage, and am landed?

LIII.
There is the most content in a mean condition; a great Estate is a great
burden; what care does it cost in keeping? and he that has most, has no more
than he enjoyes, besides the trouble; I am of his mind, who desired neither
riches, nor poverty; betvveen both is best; there is more tranquillity, more
security; I would not be so lovv, lest I am trod on; nor too high, lest I
fall; let me not be exposed to contempt, nor want content till I envy others.

LIVE.
Do not depend upon prosperity, nor yet despair when things go cross; he that
sails with a fresh and fair gale, cannot tell but the vvind may turn; here is
nothing constant but inconstancy; suppose it be not overcast, sometimes it
rains, and the Sun shines; yet a man may be so provided, as not to fear a
shovvre; whatever the Weather is, I will keep my Coat about me; if it be
well now, it may be worse; and if it is not so well as it was, it may be
better than it is.

LV.
Have thou an ill-hand dealt, mend it by thy play; he has no reason to
complain, that vvins the game; a little stock vvell-husbanded, may amount to a
great Sum; and what matter, where thou have it, whether it were given or
gotten; where Providence has not provided, a man is his own purvior; and if
he please, may please himself. I have known a smoke blown to a flame, and seen
the fire go out; some have brought their pence to pounds, and others a Noble to
nine pence.

LVI.
The low Cottage stands surer, than the lofty Turrets, less liable to wind and
weather; Riches have been a snare to many, who have lost for them, themselves;
a fair Estate is but the fairer mark; the bigger Butt to shoot at; the tall
Cedar may come down, when the shrub keeps its station; I have seen the surly
Oak fall, while the Reed stands.

LVII.
Steer not by the stars; though they may govern thee, yet God governs them; it
is true, the heavenly have an influence upon the earthly bodies, and the effect
does naturally follow the cause; from such a principle, such a product; yet
there is no rule without exception, and things are oft-times diverted by
overruling power; the stream does not always keep its course, and channel^;
much must be allowed to emergencies, and contingencies; I wonder at the
boldness of some men, who dare to pry into secrets, and take upon them to
discover Decrees, as if they knew the mind of God, and were of his
Cabinet-counsel; they tell you they have their tidings from the stars, as if
the stars told tales.

LVIII.
There are none so insolent, as those who are advanced from nothing; set a
Beggar on Horseback, and he will ride; he domineers most, who rises from the
Dunghill; his condition being in the extreme, his mind cannot keep a mean; and
he can never rule right, who cannot rule himself; there is no slavery so
intolerable, as to be subject to a vile person; I do not like the Thistle
should sway the Scepter.

LIX.
He cannot be proud, that thinks either what he was, or will be; whatever may
raise us up, yet dust will keep us down, and dust we are in composition, and
shall be in dissolution; the best is but refined earth, but earth at best;
beauty is but skin-deep, within is filth, and putrefaction; a fair outside but
filled with ashes; the most despised creature is of the same clay with me; if I
am put to a nobler use, it is the Potters pleasure; the metal is the same;
though I be better burnished, we are alike in the lump, and shall be when we
are broken; if I look but to my feet, the Peacock will let fall his Plumes; I
will endeavor to learn what I am, and to remember what I learn; let me never
forget my Maker, nor my self.

LX.
The Be sucks honey out of a stinking Weed, and the Chemist will extract gold
out of a baser metal; a wise man will gain by every thing; his enemies Weapon
shall save his life; the Physician makes a potion of a Vipers; it is not
impossible to get good out of evil, neither is the good the worse; why should I
value the pearl the less, for being in a Toads head?

LXI.
Rather sin thy self, than cause another to sin; of two evils choose the least;
he is the greatest Traitor, that engages others in the Treason; the guilt is
aggravated, where the crime is compounded; to sin alone, is less a sin; it is a
treble offense where I force it; single in the person I compel, but double in
my self; it is a bad bargain where both are losers.

LXII.
It is a saying more common, than commendable, He knows not how to live, that
knows not how to dissemble; though there are few so impudent to plead for it,
many by their practice approve it; how is cheating grown a custom? to flatter
is to be in the fashion; who can tell the heart by the hand or tongue? most men
row one way, and look another. I do not condemn discretion; nor think I am
bound to speak the truth at all times, nor all the truth; but my intention must
be good, it is the end that mends, or marrs the action; and though plain
dealing should dye a Beggar, yet honesty will at last be found the best policy.

LXIII.
Always be doing something, be never idle, rather do and undo, than do
nothing; it is better to pick straws, than to blow thy fingers; but none can
want work, but they who want will; I fear those whose time is now a burden,
will have too much cause to call back time; I will not lose a day, lest I want
what I lose.

LXIV.
It is in living, as in sailing, whether I sit, or walk, wake or sleep, I still
make some way toward my Harbor; my Glass is running, my Taper burning,
whether to work by, or to waste; my time spends, however I spend my time.

LXV.
What uncertainties are poor creatures at, who are sure of nothing, not of
themselves; we and ours are still in motion, tending to a center and
conclusion; whatever has a being, either decays or dies; but this is worst of
all, we sometimes lose our comforts before we leave them, they are taken, and
we are left to lament their loss; who can tell what a day may bring forth? what
alterations have I seen in a lesser space? I have seen it clear, and in an
instant overcast; the Wind may soon come about, and the Tide as soon turn; the
World rings changes; it is a poor content which is placed in what is perishing,
and subject to casualty or corruption; Lord, let me love what I can neither
lose, nor over-love.

LXVI.
It is decreed all must dye; some are gone, we are going, and the rest must go;
there is no repealing this sentence, nor from it any appeal; neither is the
Executioner to be bribed, he scorns Crowns and Scepters; when the Warrant is
signed, thou art a dead man, neither tears nor prayers will serve thy turn;
Death spares not sexes, sorts nor sizes, all are alike to him, who dispatches
all; what though my Cottage be convenient, I must turn out; why then should I
fix my affection, where I cannot fix my habitation?

LXVII.
Did not my Conscience convince me, I might wonder what need Philip had of a
Monitor, with his Memento mori; it is strange that we living among Tombs,
should forget to dye; every creature may serve for a remembrancer to mind us of
what we are made of, besides those sad spectacles still in view, which are more
lively emblems of mortality; methinks we may hear them say, as you are, so were
we; as we are, you must be.

LXVIII.
What a bustle do some men make, who are snatched away of a sudden in the midst
of their pride and folly? the stir they keep upon the stage, and in an instant
the Curtains drawn, and their part is done; the Prince must put off his Robes,
and he who thought a World too little, has but his length of ground.

LXIX.
I have observed those are nearest their end, who have obtained their ends;
when what was proposed, is performed, and men begin to please themselves, then
Death steps in, and divides stakes; it is best to sit loose from every thing,
to be indifferent in what we do enjoy; why should we promise, and expect to be
disappointed?

LXX.
How does experience disprove the Proverb, That stolen goods are sweet; the
little satisfaction to be found in an unlawful pleasure, in the fruition there
is a reflection, which takes off the edge of our appetite, and blunts our joy;
what content can there be in that for which Conscience smites? I will reckon
within the Hive there are stings, as well as honey, sin will end in sorrow;
Lord, when I am tempted to that which is not warrantable, let me consider the
cost, and see whether the account will bear it; shall I delight in that which
concludes in grief and groans? why should I buy Repentance at so dear a rate?

LXXI.
As the Tree falls, so it lies; as Death leaves us, so judgment finds us; how
should we gird up our selves, when at the end of the Race is either Heaven or
Hell, and there is no setting out again; should we miscarry now, we are lost
for ever, it will be too late to mend? that had need to be well, which is
but once done; I do not think there is another space to live our lives over; I
will therefore act as for Eternity, as one that has but a cast for all; I
pity those who put their Repentance to hazard of a Purgatory, supposing there
were such a place, it were better to pay our debts, than to go to Prison.

LXXII.
It was a smart saying of the Pirate to Alexander, I am accounted a Thief,
because with one Vessel I rob a sevv, whilst you that with your Army waste
all, are called by another name; that is theft in a private person, which
makes a Prince a Conqueror; the one comes to the Gallovvs by the same means,
the other gets glory; not but he whose thefts are greatest, must needs be the
greatest thief; neither is he less deserving punishment that steals by day,
than he that steals by night; this is the reason the revvard is not the same,
where there is no law, there is no transgression.

LXXIII.
By much laughter thou may know a fool; it deforms the face, and no less the
mind; a great spirit is not easily moved, nor a solid substance soon stirred;
it is the unballasted Vessel that mounts with every wave, to be suddenly
affected argues a frothy spirit; it shows little discretion, sometimes to
express our joys. I have known some, whose wit has exceeded their wisdom, so
tickled with their own conceits, that while they would in a Jest be counted
witty, have given occasion to be in earnest taxed of folly.

LXXIV.
More than enough is poison, nature is soon satisfied; too much meat does but
clog, and oppress the stomach; what is not necessary to keep alive, does but
hurt and destroy; a million more dies of surfeit, than of hunger; more by food,
than famine; as the Troculus serves the Crocodile, so death serves us; it
usually goes in at our mouths that kills us.

LXXV.
Drink not to intemperancy, too much liquor will put out the fire; besides
other effects of drunkenness, which is both a sin and shame; what will he not
do, who knows not what he does; and how much is it below a man to unman
himself? what more unseemly sight, than to see a beast in humane shape? nay, a
beast is not so unreasonable.

LXXVI.
The abuse does not hinder the use of any thing in its self lawful; the best
may be abused, and the best corrupted proves worst; as the sweetest Wine makes
the sowrest Vinegar; there is nothing good but in its season; I will look to
the time, as much as to the thing; as that may be bad to another, which is not
so to me, so neither may it be always bad.

LXXVII.
In things indifferent it is good to deny our selves; all that is lawful, may
not be expedient; it is more safe not to make use (sometimes) of our liberty,
than to go to the last link; none but a fool will come as near danger as he
can; a wise man will keep at a distance; who knows the force of a temptation?
it is hard to turn in a narrow Room; he that will do all he may, will soon do
more; besides, I verily believe most men lose themselves in lawful things, and
are undone, in doing that which may be done; it is not enough a thing is good,
if not good for me; a circumstance may alter the case, and make an action
sinful.

LXXVIII.
He that lies upon the ground can fall no lower; this is the security of a mean
condition, it is without fear of changes; it may be better, but cannot well be
worse; the shrub cannot fall far; happen what will, he that is poor is safe; he
shrowds himself under his own obscurity, and is guarded by his poverty; let
Wind, or Tide, or both turn, it cannot injure him.

LXXIX.
The punishment thou deservest bear patiently; it were injustice to repine, if
justly punished; blame none but the crime, and thy self; thou have thy due,
what would thou then desire? there is no reason thou should have either
less or more; the penalty bearing proportion with the offense, what fault can
the offender find?

LXXX.
If thy suffering be undeserved, be not only patient, but cheerful; kiss the
Rod, and bid the affliction welcome; scorn to flinch; when thou see the blow,
it were a shame to stir or startle; if thou do suffer for well-doing, do not
grieve, but glory; it is matter of joy and triumph; consider but from whom it
comes, for what, and for whom; I will take all in good part, that comes from my
Father, as it comes to me in love; why should I be troubled at that which is
for my good, or what I endure for him? I know my Cross will prove my Crown, I
will therefore smart, and smile.

LXXXI.
He that spends more than he needs, may need what he spends. Prodigality is the
greatest folly; no wonder if he that wastes, wants; he is the wise man, who in
plenty provides for a day of scarcity, and lays up for a wet day; that lives
within himself; saving is the best way of getting, all is sure gain; it is good
walking with a Horse in ones hand; what is the end of profuseness, but a
Prison, or a Halter?

LXXXII.
To be over frugal, argues a poor and mean spirit; such are good to none, not
to others, nor to themselves; a man has but what he enjoyes; for any thing
more, he is not much the better; what we make use of, is only ours, the rest
signifies little, and is little less another; as I would not be lavish, so
neither will I live so much below my fortunes, as to be their slave; I abhor
what is base and beggarly, and scorn more a person of a poor spirit, than the
poorest person.

LXXXIII.
That falls out sometimes in a day, which never fell out before; it does not
follow what never was, shall never be; unlikely things are brought to pass, and
who can tell what may happen? what alterations have I seen? such as no ear
(till now) has heard of; who could imagine the changes which of late have
been? it is not mine only, but the Worlds wonder; what has been, may be? I
will not then presume, here is nothing constant, neither can I be certain of
any thing.

LXXXIV.
Avoid sloth, if thou would avoid scorn; shame is the reward of a sluggard;
idleness will bring thee to want and beggary; there is nothing of price and
value, but what is purchased by sweat and pains; they are pebbles, not pearls,
which are to be had for stooping; gold is not got by gaping, nor honor without
toil and hazard; it is working earns the wages, and running wins the race;
fighting makes way for conquest, and conquest for the triumph; without
striving, is got neither gold, nor glory.

LXXXV.
As you season the Vessel, so it smells; bend the Twig while it is young, the
soft Wax will take any impression, but delay may make that difficult, which was
at first easy; it is better dealing with a child, than with custom; let the
seed be good thou sowest, or Weeds will be all thy Crop; the ground will bring
forth Wheat or Tares, upon thy husbandry very much depends thy harvest.

LXXXVI.
It is as unreasonable as dangerous to defer amendment, till we can sin no
more; no thanks then, sin leaves us, not we sin; shall we spend the day in the
Devils drudgery, and put off God with the evening? shall Satan have the flower,
and God have the bran; he that deserves all, surely deserves best; we need not
fear to begin too soon, that cannot do too much; I never heard of any good too
young, or too good.

LXXXVII.
It is as ridiculous, as unreasonable, to put off Repentance to old age; what a
folly is it to leave the hardest work to the weakest time? we shall find it
work enough then to grapple with our distempers and disease; enough to do to
dye; besides, though true Repentance is never too late, yet late Repentance is
seldom true.

LXXXVIII.
He that will divulge his own secrets, never trust with thine; how can he that
is false to himself, be true to thee? neither is any fit to make a friend, who
has not this retentive faculty; it were folly in any to make such a choice,
and the greatest treachery to betray, wherein there is imposed confidence; I
think no wrack can force me to commit this unpardonable sin; I will not know
what I may not keep, but will keep what I know.

LXXXIX.
There is nothing I more abhor, than a backbiter; this is the very worst of
Vermin; these the incendiaries and firebrarnds of a Nation; the Salamanders
that live in the flames; it is a cowardly part to come behind, and below a man
of metal; I will scorn to take any advantage of my greatest enemy, he shall
see the blow when I strike it, and before he feels it; neither will I make a
party against a single person, it is childish to complain; what has another to
do with my wrong? besides the injustice to condemn without witness, or at least
confession; evidence cannot be taken, but face to face; he that passes any
other sentence, is a Murderer, not a Judge.

XC.
Blame not another wherein thou art blameworthy; thou can not accuse him,
but thou do shame thy self; in his fault, thou may see thy own; the same
Glass will discover both thy face and his; you are cast by your own confession,
and condemned out of your own mouth; should I reprove, and be guilty, my
Conscience would check me no less for hypocrisy, than for the Crime I enveigh
against; neither is a party a competent Witness.

XCI.
I have read of those that have laughed till they have dyed; but have seen some
laugh till they have cried; hence I conclude, that mirth in its extreme is
madness; I pity those who go merrily to execution, and dye laughing; give me
that joy which ends not in tears, that joy which has no end; why should I
drink of puddle water, when I may follow the stream to the Ocean.

XCII.
Have thou a breathing time, it is to fit thee for the next encounter; do not
think thy foes though they flee, are fovled; Satan has his stratagems, it is
his craft to conceal his courage; he is not routed when he retreats; his flying
is but in order to a further fighting, and goes back only that he may return
with greater force; I will still stand upon my guard, lest I should be
surprised, an enemy is not to be trusted.

XCIII.
Do not depend too much upon prosperity; Clouds may return, the Sun may be
eclipsed, and the day overcast; suppose the wind be now fair, it may come
cross, and the gale against thee; I have known some blown back to Sea, when
within sight of shore; and others arrived at the Haven of a supposed happiness,
and mored at Anchor, have I seen shipwrackt in the Harbor.

XCIV.
Conveniences have their inconveniences, and comforts their crosses;
thousands have found sorrow from whence they looked for satisfaction; and
proportionable to the expectation, is the disappointment; the fear of losing
what we have, takes off much from the delight in enjoying; besides creatures
cannot perform as they promise us, or we our selves; why should I catch at a
shadow, or set my heart upon that which is not; a Glass is not a Diamond, it
may cut, but cannot content.

XCV.
Prepare for the worst, the best will help it self; if what thou fear fall
not out, thou art made amends for thy lost labor; fewer words cannot imply
more folly, than to say I never thought; it were better to see and shun, than
to feel the stroke, rather prevent than repent. I will have my Armor ready,
though I do not use it, lest I enter the lists naked; I will expect, and I
shall the better withstand the shock; what though the Sea be smooth, the wind
may rise of a sudden? a Calm is the fittest time to get my tackling ready
against ensuing storms.

XCVI.
It is a comfort in misery to have a companion; good company makes foul way
fair; besides, the stream being divided, is the less violent; a burden is
better born by two, than by a single shoulder; yet would I not desire another
misery, though it make me the less miserable; I had rather suffer alone, than
have a partner in sin and suffering.

XCVII.
Ask forgiveness where thou have offended; it is more base to do an injury,
than to beg pardon; it is ingenuity to acknowledge, but to persist argues a
froward spirit, and makes the crime double; it were a shame should the wronged
party seek for peace; the fault I have committed, I will not think it below me
to confess; why should I engage in a bad cause? there is no necessity I must be
a Coward, or not a Christian.

XCVIII.
Where the wrong is mutual, and both too blame, let each condescend to other,
and meet half way; set injury against injury, and the account is balanced; and
if so, it were as good to give a general discharge, as to receive and pay; why
should there be a difference, when the fault is equal? it is a folly to fall
out for nothing; there needs no more but to shake hands, and friends; blowing
will not quench the fire; when the enmity is over* what matter who strikes sail
first? if one must, why not I? why should I be conquered by courtesy, and let
another prove himself the better man?

XCIX.
It is natural to err, but to persist therein Devilish; we have our dark side,
as well as our bright; our night, as well as day; the clearest-sighted may be
mistaken, the worst is when the mistake is maintained. I have known some
convinced of their sin, yet will not confess for shame; Conscience must give
way to credit; if I am out of my way, it were better I went back than go on
wrong. I had rather be accounted a fool by others, than find I had fooled my
self; I may be weak, I will not be wilful.

C.
A public offense requires a public acknowledgment; others must be satisfied
as well as thy self; I have seen how some can leap from one extreme to another,
with the greatest ease, and without the least regret; as if whatever cause they
undertook, must be therefore good; I will not think much to recant, when I have
cause to repent; he that escapes the penalty, may well undergo the penance.

CENT. III.
I.
WHere there is no necessity, launch not forth any farther than thou may
return, before the storm takes thee; how many might have rid securely in the
Harbor, who by putting to Sea, have suffered shipwreck? to be too forward to
engage thy self in danger, is to be foolhardy; be not concerned with what
concerns not thee; consider the call, as well as the cause; who is to do, what
is to be done; run not before thou art sent, it is good sleeping in a whole
skin.

II.
If endeavors will not do, it is best to give way awhile, and stay for a
fitter season; take shelter till the rain is over; clouds will be distilled, or
dispelled; if thou can not row against the stream, cast Anchor, and tarry
till the Tide turns, the Wind may come about, though now it be full against
thee; there is more skill, and no less valor seen, in making a good retreat,
than in fighting; it is better to retire, than to be routed; he that flies may
fight again; to day may be another, to morrow may be thine.

III.
Pluck not a Coal from the Altar, lest it fire thy Nest; take heed of meddling
with the Churches Patrimony; it were impious to alienate any thing given to
pious uses; once devoted, the Donor has not power to alter; much less have
thou; yea, what was in him superstition, would be in thee sacrilege.

IV.
Play not with Scripture; it is dangerous jesting with edge Tools; do not sport
with what is Sacred; to make the Bible thy pasttime, were both sinful and
saucy; reverence Gods Word as the Word of God; to deride the message, were to
scoff at him that sent it; be not too bold with thy betters; more manners would
become thee better.

V.
In matters of moment be sure thou art always serious; inconsideration may be
of ill consequence; it is good to look before you leap, lest you leap and fall;
resolve not rashly, lest you repent at leisure; weigh all circumstances with
the thing thou intendest, and reckon upon what may, as well as upon what should
be; endeavor nothing but what is feasible, and before thou engagest on any
design, ask thy self this question, What if it be not effected? it were folly
to run a hazard, where the profit will not countervail the danger; the pearl
may not be worth the price; gold may be bought too dear; compare conveniences
with the inconveniences, and see whether the honey be worth the stinging.

VI.
Be not over-wise in thy own conceit; this were to proclaim thy self a fool;
besides the dangerous effects of so great a folly; how many depending upon
their own strength, have run headlong into ruin, and undone themselves?
presumption precedes peril; the danger is nearest, when least thought of; I
will suspect my own wisdom, lest I hazard my reputation with wise men, and by
refusing help, whilst I choose to stand alone, I chance to fall unpitied.

VII.
Abhor pride, lest all abhor thee, there is nothing so insufferable as a proud
person; he cannot admire himself more, than others detest and scorn him; if a
Tempest rises, he has no Port to friend, nor no Anchor; the Ship had need be
tite, and well provided of tackling, that must weather out the storm; it is the
highest policy to be low and humble in a high place, and great preferments;
there is no way like this, to stay thee in the state thou art, nor more
probable to help thee if the Tide turn; if others are below thee, be thou below
thy self.

VIII.
Kill sin in its conception, before it comes to the birth; quench the fire
while it is but a spark, a spark may flame; it is dangerous to dally with lust;
that may overmaster thee, which might have been easily mastered, if taken in
time; jest not with the knife, lest thou cut thy fingers; make not sin thy
sport, for fear it prove a snare; do not slight the most seemingly contemptible
enemy; I will account the first motion to evil, evil, and crush the Cockatrice
in the Egg; what a monstrous offspring comes of a corruption, and temptation?

IX.
Buy not Repentance too dear; he that sins upon the easiest terms, has no
cause to brag of his bargain; how little soever it cost him, he will find
himself a loser, when the Account is balanced; I envy not those who pay for
their pain; my pain shall pay me; what a price is Hell at! Heaven may be had
sometimes better cheap.

X.
Walk warily, thou have many eyes upon thee; God, Angels and men observe thee;
thou had need act well, that have so many Spectators; behave thy self as in
public view; do nothing but what is fit to be done in the face of the Sun;
what is acted in the Closet, shall be published upon the Housetop; when I am
tempted to any works of darkness, I will consider that the day will discover,
and my sin will prove my shame; God sees now, and all shall see.

XI.
Let thy head affect thy heart; zeal without knowledge is like the mettald
Horse unmanaged; give me light as well as heat; I had rather know what I do,
than do I know not what; what comfort can I take in the way I walk blindfold,
besides the danger of straggling, or of stumbling.

XII.
Let not thy knowledge be without affection; this is like a frosty Moonshine,
that gives light, but no heat; God looks to the heart more than to the hand;
and prefers the will before the deed; he that lives not up to his light, is the
least excusable; to know, and not to do, deserves double stripes; ignorance is
less a Crime than disobedience; the one may procure pardon, when the other
cannot procure pity.

XIII.
When we want our comforts, we are mad for anger; and when we have them, we are
mad for joy; still extravagant, and upon the extreme; never well, neither full
nor fasting; never as we would, or should be; if God cut short our Commons,
then we languish; if we have plenty, how apt to surfeit!

XIV.
Learn in all Estates to be content; know how to want, and to abound; let every
condition be alike to thee; do not only submit, but be satisfied; if thy Cup be
empty, do not repine; is it full? do not spill; carry a steady hand, and keep a
constant course; be still the same; whatever alters, do not thou; subscribe to
the will of God, and let his will be thine; conclude every thing for the best,
which he thinks best.

XV.
Afflictions like a violent shower, makes a great noise, but does little hurt;
what though the storm beats upon the Tiles, when thou art within the house, and
it comes not nigh thee! it is but retiring home, and thou may find a shelter
in thy self against wind, and weather; I need not suffer unless I will; if I am
resolved, what can trouble me?

XVI.
Prosperity is no proof of patience; Stars show not themselves in the day, they
appear brightest in the darkest Winters night; it argues courage to cheer up,
when things go cross and contrary; to bear a burden, and make no bones of it,
is brave and noble; he is a man for me that can encounter crosses as
unconcerned, and can endure either heat or cold; I will suit my self unto my
state; if I cannot be what I will, I will be what I can.

XVII.
Advise before thou do adventure; be well resolved in what thou resolvest
on; let counsel go before execution; it is too late after practice to ponder; I
will deliberate, before I determine; it were better to be a Prometheus, than
an Epimetheus.

XVIII.
Be as thou would be accounted; in deceiving others, thou do deceive thy
self; and remember nothing is so odious both in the eyes of God and men, as an
hypocrite; this is a Devil incarnate, and a white Devil is the most dangerous;
Hypocrites they are painted Sepulchers, Wolves in Sheeps clothing, nothing
less than they seem; I will take heed of those who can smile, and smite;
laugh in my face, and kill me; I know not their intention, by their motion;
from such good Lord deliver me; I fear not all the Devils in Hell, so much as a
false friend.

XIX.
Let not thy tongue run at random, and whatever thou say, stand to; maintain
what thou do affirm; it were a shame to unsay any thing; to eat thy words,
argues either fear, or folly; I will not be rash, but resolute; shall I recant
when I am in the right? why should the truth, or my reputation suffer?

XX.
Of all sins, take heed of lying; other sins will lose thy credit with good
men, but this with all men; this is the fate of a notorious liar, he is never
believed, whether he speak true or false; whatever he says is therefore
suspected; it has no more authority than the Author; I will not be first in a
fresh report, lest I incur this censure; nor too credulous to blame all I hear,
or as soon as I heard it; what is true to day, will be no less true to morrow,
but more certain; my eyes are not so easily deceived as my ears; I can say what
I see, but not all I hear.

XXI.
Accustom not thy self to swearing, and shun all such society; learn not the
language of Hell, and take not the Devil for thy Tutor; common Swearers are of
the society of Satan; there may be some excuse for sins that produce either
pleasure or profit; but what can be said for Swearing, which produces neither?
I have often wondered at those desperate fools, that will destroy themselves for
nothing? They value their souls but little, who sin at so cheap a rate?

XXII.
Come not near the house of an Harlot, lest the fair outside tempt thee in;
consider the inconvenience that may accrue; at the best thou will buy
Repentance; besides, it is but for a pleasure, proper to a beast, below a man;
it were a shame for thee to be a Pimp to thy body; thou art greater, and born
to greater things.

XXIII.
It is a common, but false assertion, That stolen Goods are sweet; the
consideration of the sin, soures the most desired enjoyment; this, if it takes
not off the edge of our appetite, yet it blunts our joy, and makes the pleasure
less a pleasure; the checks of Conscience will cool our courage, and very much
abate our contentment; what for want of thinking, is honey in the mouth, will
be bitter in the belly; how nauseous will thy sweet morsels be, when thou
come to chew the cud? I like not that which like the Be flies away, and
leaves only a sting behind it; give me that joy that ends not in sorrow, the
joy that has no end.

XXIV.
Before thou enterest upon any action, consider not only whether it be lawful,
but whether it be expedient; that may be lawful in it self, but not at such a
time, or perchance not at all to thee; a circumstance alters the case, and
makes an action sinful; what is one man's meat, is another poison; in doing a
good action, I may do ill, both in relation to my self, or to the season; what
is commendable, may not be convenient.

XXV.
In things indifferent do as others do, it might be thy sin to be singular, at
least it would signify a perverse temper; besides, what is he better than a
fool, that thinks he can see more with two eyes, than with twenty; be not
contrary wherein thou may agree, lest thou be accounted rather cross,
than conscientious; what thou may freely do, not doing, may offend.

XXVI.
Think not all things indifferent that are so in their own nature; what was so
before, being commanded, cease to be indifferent; the Powers thou art to obey
having bound thee, which to resist, would show thee to be a bad Subject, and no
good Christian; Subjection is a positive Injunction; I will do my duty, and not
dispute what the Magistrate does command; if it be not a sin to do, it will be
a sin to disobey; and in things disputable, I had rather commit an unknown sin,
than sin against a known Law; I cannot give God what is Gods, unless Caesar
has his due.

XXVII.
Be not overprying into the practice of thy Prince; not his life, but his Laws
are to be thy Rule* there must be some allowance for his liberty, power is a
very great temptation; how much more when it meets with occasion and
encouragement; it is hard standing in a high and slippery place; I have known
some who with their stations have so changed themselves, that they who before
were supposed Saints, have proved neither good Magistrates, nor good men.

XXVIII.
If the stream of Government be either black or bracky, impute it rather to the
veins thorough which it passes, than think it so in its spring; if the Sun
shine not always clear, it is (it is like) occasioned by some interposing
Cloud; this is the unhappy fate of Princes, to suffer both by and for their
servants; neither see I a way to help it, till Argus, and Briareus, meet in a
single person.

XXIX.
Submit to the lowest Officer, as to thy General; there is a Majesty in the
meanest Magistrate, whom if thou do disobey, thou despisest him he
represents; and have a care lest that Authority which authorized him, chastise
thee; though sometimes Jack in an office be a busy fellow, and possibly the
powers may go beyond their power, yet thou have no commission to examine
theirs, neither are they accountable but to higher, or the highest.

XXX.
Be not much concerned in the Government of the Church, so long as the
substance does not suffer; if Religion flourish, and be professed in its
purity, it matters not whether the Barque be guided by Presbyters, or by
Prelates; what Gods Vicegerent shall appoint, shall please me.

XXXI.
Be neither superstitious, nor too precise in matters of Ceremony; in things
lawful, conform according to the institution of the Church, of which thou art;
no doubt she has a power in circumstantials, and may command where it is not
before forbidden; for the positive part it is not material, though it be not
expressly enjoined by God himself; sure the Church has some liberty of which
every private person is not a proper Judge; grant what is injoined to be
doubtful, with me the Legislative has the casting voice; to hear all were
impossible, and the way to have none heard.

XXXII.
Have a care of disturbing the Churches peace, upon a slight occasion; there is
scarce a greater sin than Schism; besides, none but an ungracious Child will
call his Mother Whore, and thereby proclaim himself a Bastard; it were Viper
like, to tear the bowels that bred thee; and it is an ill Bird that defiles his
own Nest; for my own part I look upon no Ceremony in our Church sufficient to
ground a separation, so long as it serves only for order and decency; I
conceive there is no holiness placed therein; methinks neither vesture nor
gesture should cause a variance; black and white, kneeling or sitting are alike
to me, either color or posture might serve, if neither had been appointed.

XXXIII.
Take heed of censuring those that take a greater latitude than thou do; that
may be a sin to thee, which is not so to them, it is impossible thou should
be Judge of another man's conscience, look to thine own, and leave his to him;
he stands or falls to his own Master, and his Account may not concern thee.

XXXIV.
As the weak should not censure the strong, so the strong should bear with the
weak; there are babes as well as fathers, and some stomachs that are more
squeamish, the same food is therefore improper, and incongruous; if a Child be
fearful, do not blame him, it is lest he fall, pity his weakness, and help to
uphold him; I will give him my hand, that cannot stand alone, and go his pace
that cannot go mine; we are going the same way, why go we not together, and
refer our inconsiderate differences to be decided in Heaven? in that Church
there is a perfect harmony of conformity and uniformity; now we know but in
part, and it is impossible but in lesser points we differ; but it is but to
wait awhile, and all controversies shall be reconciled; and I fear all parties
blamed, in this especially, their uncharitableness to each other; I wish for
order in the Church; yet though I should look on all things therein very
innocent, yet others not seeing with my eyes, are offended, and know not how to
help it. I would therefore deny my self much of my own liberty, for her peace,
and their satisfaction; since things indifferent in themselves may not so seem
to all, I would (if possible) have nothing done that is an offense to any, at
least what may be undone; and I conceive he is most in fault, that will fall
out for nothing, especially when he knows another must wound his conscience by
complying, and cannot yield, but sin, it is pity that Paul and Barnabas should
part, that those who have the same Head and Heaven, have not the same heart;
that Children should fall out in their way home, and the same Tribe cannot go
to the house of God, but in divided Troops; I wish none were more scrupulous
than my self; but since they cannot come to us, let us go to them; what is
matter who goes furthest, so we meet; this will manifest our humility and
self-denial; the Churches gain will be infinitely greater than our loss, and I
see no other way for settlement but by substraction; let zeal give way to
charity, mercy is better than sacrifice; we lose little that deserves
complaining; it is but a shadow, and the shell we so much contend for and
dispute.

XXXV.
Think not the worse of any persuasion, for the irregular practices of any
person; it is the principle makes the opinion, why then should the abuse take
away the use, or make it the less esteemed? the sweetest Wine may prove the
sowrest Vinegar, yet is not the Wine the worse; I will not have a lower value
of what is good, though patronized by bad men; I will mind the Maxim, not the
man; if the line be crooked, I conclude the fault is in the hand, not in the
Rule.

XXXVI.
Let not a small difference in judgment, make any difference in affection; may
not hearts agree, though heads differ; it were well if all were of the same
mind, but this is rather to be desired, than expected; if the distemper be not
mortal, and have not touched the vitals, I mean the controversy lie only in
circumstantials, what hinders but for all this, we may go hand in hand to
Heaven; there may be a unity, though not a uniformity; as for me, I will love
the Image of Christ wherever I see it, and them for it; I will look more at the
truth of grace, than at the measure, as knowing a spark may arise to a flame,
and that growth is by degrees.

XXXVII.
Be not so wedded to thy own opinion, as to conclude none can be in the right,
but thou, who made thee infallible, or a Judge of another man's Conscience? may
not he claim the same liberty, to judge thine? wherein thou do dissent from
any, be first assured thou art not mistaken, and then endeavor to inform them
(in meekness and compassion) of their mistake; and if this be not the way to
win them, I am indeed mistaken.

XXXVIII.
Be all things to all men, that thou may gain some; if they cannot go with
thee, go as far as thou can with them, let not every punctilio part you: Are
they in danger, your company is the more needful, and it is pity to let them
perish? the Shepherd will leave his flock, to follow a straggling Lamb? and he
that suffers another to destroy himself, does destroy him; yet herein be wise,
lest his deliverance prove thy destruction; venture not without a Warrant,
remember Charity begins at home.

XXXIX.
Affect not any party, for any persons sake; good men may err, the best are
but men; do not pin thy faith upon another sleeve; take not thy Religion on
trust, look more to the foundation, than to the builders, or the building; I
will follow others no farther than they are followers of Christ; they shall be
mine, as he is their example; I will not admire men, nor Paul, nor yet Apollos.

XL.
Do not broach any new Doctrine, the best is from the beginning; Antiquity is a
mark of Verity; the foundation was laid at first, and there is no adding to
fundamentals; I shall suspect what is new, and cannot think any thing necessary
should be unknown till now; in point of faith, I am not bound to insert any
novel conceit in my Creed; Humane inventions are no Essential parts of Divine
Worship.

XLI.
Serve God with thy body, as well as with thy soul, he likes not a slovenly or
unmannerly service; consider thy distance, and do as becomes thee; familiarity
is good amongst Fellows, but Reverence becomes our Devotion; I wonder to see
Christians so Clownish, so Uncivil, and withal so captious, that those who are
not so saucy as themselves, must be accounted superstitious; though a Ceremony
be in it self nothing, yet it serves to set out the service, and being designed
but for decency, it is strange it should give distaste; I love to see the
Spouse in a neat, though not in a wanton dress; as one that would please her
Husband, not her Lovers; I confess gaudy, and light attire, is a sign of a
light Huswife; duckings and cringings are no marks of modesty, yet may the
Church be comely; is none but a Harlor handsome?

XLII.
Keep thy judgment to thy self, why should others know what thou art, or
paraphrase upon thy opinion; herein thou have a great advantage, to change thy
mind when thou art mistaken, and yet continue to others thinking, in the same
mind; how can they condemn thee of weakness, that are themselves never the
wiser? if truth and conscience will excuse me, I had rather be a Spectator,
than an Actor in a doubtful case; a looker on runs less hazard, and sees best;
why should I be drawn into dispute or danger? I have known two fight, and a
third run away with the bone; let who will crack the shell, if the kernel be
but mine.

XLIII.
Engage not so far in any party, as to make its quarrel thine; why should
thou espouse an interest to endanger thy self? I need no other instance than
the present times to prove the prejudice; how many to gain a name, have lost
themselves, who might have stood, if they had not sided? besides the public
injury, and what so great a crime, as to occasion or increase a Schism, and
division in Church or State? for my part I know none (nor would be known) by
any faction or distinction; I were a fool (when I may be free) to confine my
self; I think all parties are too blame, there is no Garden without its Weeds;
I will not take all that comes, but pick and choose here and there a flower.

XLIV.
Do not run before thou art sent, or a wrong way, thou had better wait than
work, when what thou do should not be done, at least by thee, expect a call,
it is the command must bear thee out, the Warrant only differs the Executioner
from the Murderer; above all take heed thou do not invade the Magistracy, or
the Ministry; touch not the Ark, or Gods Anointed; it is a Paradox in Divinity,
as in Policy, for a private person to be in a public place; I like not
wandering Comets, let every star be fixed in its orb and sphere; I will do what
good I can in my station, out of which I will not go, though to do good.

XLV.
Read Gods Book with Reverence, and in things disputable conclude as the Church
determines, which if not in it self infallible, yet is less like to err than
thee, or any particular party, or private person; besides, he that herds with
the flock, has obedience to bear him out, when an out-lier has more danger,
and less excuse; take heed of being too positive, in the Prophetical part of
Scripture; how many of our over-bold Expositors, have proved false-Prophets?
follow the line that runs through the whole laborinth, let not the tracts,
though of good men, be thy guide, every example is not for imitation; to see a
wrack, may save the Ship.

XLVI.
Question not the truth of Scriptures; this were to shake the foundation, and
to make God a liar and impostor; what blasphemy to imagine he should put such a
Cheat upon his creatures, and that the World should be so abused? if in every
Science there is a Rule, much more in Religion; and if there were no Law, there
could be no transgression; yet although in point of practice, he that runs may
read his Lesson; I confess in matters of faith, some things are sublime, above
the capacity of blind Reason to comprehend; what I do not see, is a Subject for
belief, I cannot think the Scripture contradicts its self, though so it should
seem to me.

XLVII.
Take heed of a scrupulous, as of an erroneous Conscience; be not too nice and
squeamish; it is possible to be over-righteous, do not winch at every touch,
nor bogle at every block; starting is an ill quality; yet as I would not have
thee fearful, so less foolhardy; keep thy Conscience tender, though not raw;
it is better to do less, than thou might, than more than thou may.

XLVIII.
Do not concern thy self much in the manner of Devotion; I know no Decree that
Religion may not change her dress; the worship may be the same, though not in
the same garb; what a command makes lawful, custom will make commendable; I
like neither the sticklers for, nor opposers of what in themselves are
insignificant, what need such a stir for nothing? I will conform to the course
of others in matters of Ceremony, as knowing my clothes be not my skin, and why
should I wear that I may not with decency divest in case the fashion alters?

XLIX.
Do not persevere in a known Error, rather return than go on in a wrong way;
suppose thy Reputation something suffer, better thou, than the truth; be not
obstinate, why should thou be beaten for stubbornness? I will recant what I
have reason to repent; and when I see my folly, I will confess, and endeavor
to amend my fault; let the World judge as it will, the sin is worse than the
shame; and of the two, I had rather venture my credit, than wound my
conscience; sins against light, are not light sins.

L.
In matters of Religion, lay not too great a stress on Reason, not that I think
any thing unreasonable is commanded, but it becomes not thee to dispute what
thou art to do; neither is God obliged to tell thee why he will have it done;
it is enough thou know his will, thy part is to fulfill; besides, what need
of a prospective, were things near and within the reach of Reason? I confess
Reason commands belief, yet I am bound to believe, what I cannot prove by
Reason.

LI.
Be not curious in School Divinity; though it sharpen thy wit, it will blunt
thy faith; be contented that something should be concealed; to be over-wise is
dangerous; pry not into secrets; come not too near the fire, lest it burn thee,
and thou know its nature, by its operation; it were better to continue
ignorant, than to buy thy knowledge at so dear a rate; I will not put God to
prove what he says, but will conclude it therefore true, because he has said
it.

LII.
Think not to wade thorough the hypostatical union; can a Child contain the
Ocean in a Cockle-shell? it is too deep for thee to fathom; admire, and adore
what thou can not apprehend! I wonder at those bold wits, who dare to
approach so near the Sun; I confess my eyes does soon dazzle; I had rather know
God by his goodness, than by his greatness; neither do I ever expect fully to
know him. He is a very fool that cannot puzzle the wisest in a fellow creature;
and if so, I could not believe him to be a God, whom a creature can comprehend.

LIII.
Let not every new light lead thee, lest thou losest thy way, and thy self; be
not easily persuaded out of a beaten path; without reason, never leave the
Road; why should thou straggle, and follow thine own inventions, or another?
keep with the flock; the sheep in the fold are safer than they which wander;
steer by the Stars, not by a Meteor, or a Comet; let not an Ignis fatuus be thy
guide; I will not credit every new conceit, nor submit my reason to a phanatick
whimsie; every Child that is Christened, is not Legitimate; and why should I be
Surety to a Biat, that may prove a By-blow?

LIVE.
Meddle not with Church Lands; Sacrilege is a Capital sin, besides the danger
of incurring the Clergies censure, who being supported by power or policy,
cannot want an opportunity to be revenged; never was Bull so baited as thou will be; a Sword is not so sharp, as a Satyrs pen; Aqua fortis is not so
piercing, as Ink and Vinegar; had I a mind to play the Thief, it should be with
lesser noise and notice; for rather than some will lose, they will wake the
World with bauling; if they cannot force me, they will be sure to tire me out,
and make me glad to yield, that I may be quiet; neither will it be enough I
take away nothing, if I leave not something behind me.

LV.
Ply not thy prayers as Seamen do their Pump, only in a storm, and for fear of
sinking; if thou have nothing to ask, return thanks for that thou have
received; who values a friend, that never comes near him, but when he comes to
beg? this argues little love, but signifies something lacking; I would be
constant in my devotion, were there no occasion; God may justly deny my desire,
should I neglect my duty?

LVI.
Do not dare to enter upon any weighty employment, without asking leave and
direction; he is an ill servant, that does not desire to know his Masters mind;
it may be that thou would do, must be undone, or at least not now done; I am
not at my own disposal, nor can I without permission dispose of my self;
besides, without a blessing I do but furrow Seas, and plow the Sand.

LVII.
If thou would have God to answer thy prayers, let thy practice answer them;
do as thou say, endeavor what thou do desire, and expect not a miracle;
where means are appointed, up and be doing; something on thy part is expected;
there is a time for action, as well as for devotion; thou may have thy
Throat cut upon thy knees; the Sword of the Spirit is not the only weapon.

LVIII.
Let prayers for temporal things be always with a proviso; when thou have
proposed what will please thee, let God do what pleases him; be willing to
receive no more than he is willing to give; for be assured, he will give
neither less nor more, than will do thee good; I desire nothing but what comes
freely, and had rather want the thing, than the will; besides it may be best to
be denied, when I ask what would do me harm.

LIX.
Be positive in thy petitions for spiritual things; God will give here grace,
and hereafter glory; in what is absolutely necessary, thou may be
peremptory; resolve to request, till thy requests are granted; he may deny, and
give at length; there is reason thou should beg, before he bestows; I will
not be discouraged, though I see no return; I am content to tarry his time;
what I desire is worth the waiting.

LX.
Let not Gods Decree discourage thee; thy duty must be done; besides, the means
as well as the end is determined; the manner as the matter; what thou may
have for asking, thou may not have without; spare to speak, and spare to
speed; the worst is but to lose thy labor; it will be a satisfaction, thou
have complied with thy Obligation; but what though thou have not the same, if
thou have something better in its self, or at least for thee! however, Gods
pleasure is the end of our prayers; if I do what I am commanded, I have my
reward, in that I have obeyed; I dare not draw the Curtain, or dive into Gods
Decrees, his commands only concern me.

LXI.
If profit be thy end in the choice of thy Profession, reckon upon the hazard
no less than upon the gain; consider well what risco thou do run, and set the
receipts against it; the greater is thy adventure, the better had need be thy
Voyage; if thou have an Estate already, it were a folly to put that in danger,
lest thou have less than thou had; but if thy case be desperate, then have at
all; he that has nothing, can lose nothing.

LXII.
It is a poor Trade that will not pay a man's pains; he has little enough that
only lives by his labor; and it is very hard, if two hands cannot maintain a
back and belly; it is a beggarly blaze, that is not worth the blowing; better
it were to play, than work for nothing; I pity those who toil, and cannot
catch; whilst some draw shoals to shore, these are at it with their Net, while
others do but angle.

LXIII.
Be not too eager to be rich; haste makes waste; it is good to go on gently, at
least, at first; design nothing but what thou have great probability to
dispatch; and grasp no more than thy hand will hold; too many Irons will put
out the fire; I have known some neglect their business by being over-busie, who
had done well, if not over-done; fair and softly goes far, and sometimes the
farthest way about is the nearest way home.

LXIV.
The surest way to get an Estate, is to put up what thou gettest; herein thou
runst no hazard, all is clear gain; and a penny saved, is twopence got; I do
not judge a man by his incomes, but by his expenses; a bad Trade may turn
better to Account, than a better; he that takes but little, and saves it, has
more to show than he that has greater takings, but spends all.

LXV.
Let not the strange success of some, encourage thee to the same course; it
does not follow that thy endeavors shall be alike succeeded; more thereby have
been marred, than made; and how many times have they themselves been at a point
of being undone? I will ponder well the project I go upon, and look rather at
what may be, than what has been: I were a fool to make any person my
president, unless I were sure the same event would attend me; I will drive on
my designs the most likely way; why should I leave, or allow any thing to a
contingency, or to chance? I may better presume upon a probability, than depend
upon a possibility.

LXVI.
If thou art in a thriving way, make use of thy time, and do not trifle; hoise
Sail while the Wind is fair; thou know not how soon thou may be becalmed;
a Trade is a ticklish thing; the Wind is not more wavering; and I have often
wondered at the simplicity of some, who live up to the height of their gettings,
not considering their comings in are casual; who can tell whether this year may
be like the last, or the next like this? it is good making Hay while the Sun
shines, opportunity will be past; I will lay up while I can, I may lay out when
I will; a wise man will not spend to spare, but spare to spend.

LXVII.
It argues a light spirit to be soon stirred; give me a man that is moved at
nothing; he is the greatest Conqueror that can overcome himself; why should
another fault make me guilty of so great a folly? yet if ever I am over-angry,
the end of my passion shall be the beginning of my repentance; the Rain
naturally follows the Thunder; I may be passionate, but I will not persist;
neither will I be more angry with any, than (for that anger) angry with my self.

LXVIII.
It is better to expect a disappointment, than to promise a product
proportionable to the purpose; who knows what the project may produce? the
event is very uncertain; many things fall out between the Cup, and the Lip;
neither can the success be seen; I will not wonder whatever happens, though the
means and the end do differ; I can but use my own endeavor, must leave the
rest to my Fathers pleasure; I propose, it is his Prerogative to dispose; when
I have performed what belongs to me, I will acquiesce in what he does, and I
have done.

LXIX.
Study rather to be good, than to be great; be better than others, and thou art
the best man; Dignity sometimes destroys, and still decays; but in virtue
there is no vanity; worth is the only wealth; it is goodness, not greatness,
that will do thee good; this will stand thee in stead, when Riches takes wings,
and the bubble breaks; I will esteem of my self by my mind, and scorn to
borrow, or be beholding; let others glister, my treasure lies too deep to be
discerned; I cannot want gold, when the Mine is mine.

LXX.
Nothing is more hard than to be high and humble; prosperity begets pride; how
do the Sails swell with a fresh gale? top and top-gallant out shall stand, when
the Wind stands fair; how lofty have I seen some advanced from a low estate?
what a change has that change wrought? none can tell who they are, by what
they were, so little be they like themselves.

LXXI.
Strive not for priority; it is the person graceth the place, and not the place
the person; the best goes not always foremost, nor uppermost; it is a pitiful
honor that proceeds from a right hand; a wise man values neither way nor wall;
he cannot be so much below others, as these are below him; besides, when desert
is discovered, he shall be called up, and placed so much higher.

LXXII.
A disturbed mind is like troubled waters, which gives but a bad reflection;
look not in the Glass at such a time, or in such a Glass; at least do not judge
according; thou see thy folly, not thy face; if thou would know thy self,
stay till all be still; thou art not as thou seem, passion is not thy
complexion; what a Metamorphosis will grief or anger make? why should I then
give way to an extreme of either? this were to proclaim my self a Changeling by
my countenance and converse; there is no necessity I should appear a mad man,
or a fool.

LXXIII.
Embarque not all in the same bottom, lest thy self (if the ship) sink; run
no more hazard than needs must; and where thou need not, trust none; let not
thy whole stock be at Sea at once; have two strings to thy Bow; keep a
reserve, something to trust to when the rest fails; thou may lose, and not
lose thy self; why should one disaster destroy thee?

LXXIV.
Take heed of bearing too great a Sail, though the Wind blow right; many a
Vessel has been over-set with a fair gale; art thou got up on high, let it not
make thy head giddy? neither think higher of thy self, because thou art seated
higher; if thou art affected, let it be with the fear of falling; thou art in
no little danger, consider the peril, more than the place.

LXXV.
Be not ashamed to confess, what thou were not ashamed to commit; is not the
sin the same to the eye, as to the ear? what is secret, God sees, and the World
shall see; why should thou then be shie to make the discovery sooner? it
were a folly for a known offender to stand upon his vindication; pleading
guilty sometimes procures a pardon; if I cannot clear, I were better accuse my
self, and cry peccavi; I will plead mercy, where I cannot plead merit; and
implore his favor, whom I have offended.

LXXVI.
Think not too well of thy self, lest others think worse of thee; be not wise
in thy own conceit; a conceited fool is so much more a fool; there is little
hope of him who cannot teach, nor will learn; he that knows most, knows he
knows little, to what he does not know; I will not reckon I know enough, till I
know all; why should I think much to learn, while there is more to know, and
others know more?

LXXVII.
Be careful in the choice of thy company; as they are, so art thou; let them be
as thou would be; like will to like, birds of a feather will flock together;
associate thy self with such society as are not come to such a pass to be past
shame; take heed lest thy acquaintance bring thee either into punishment, or
repentance; this is the advantage of good company, it will make thee good, or
at least so esteemed.

LXXVIII.
Has any wronged thee? forgive the person, and forget the wrong; it is a poor
patience, that cannot outlive the others injury; do not dispute, but despise;
to contemn is the way to conquer; pass by affronts with a scorn; why should it
trouble thee that Asses kick, and Dogs bark? see what they are, and slight what
they do; it is not for thee to concern thy self with that which does no more
concern thee; am I injured? perchance the man is below my anger; or to be
angry, is below me.

LXXIX.
There is no remedy where the wound is mortal; the dart of death is deadly; he
strikes once, and strikes not again; no salve can cure that sore; the blow
being given, life is gone, and when all is done, the man is dead still; I will
endeavor to do that well, which I can do but once; and seeing I must dye, I
will prepare for what I cannot prevent, and do that willingly which I cannot
avoid; that what necessity forces others, may be matter of choice to me; and
when the fatal message comes, I will go merrily away with the messenger,
knowing he is sent by my father, to fetch his child home.

LXXX.
He knows not what is sweet, that knows not what is sour; there must be a
difference, or there can be no distinguishing; we understand things best by
comparing them with their contraries; the night shows the day; health is best
known by sickness, and wealth by want; what though it be ill at present! it may
serve but for a foil; to set forth the future; by remembering what I was, I may
know what I am.

LXXXI.
He gives well that gives willingly, when the heart goes with the hand; what is
forced is not kindly, and deserves neither thanks, nor praise; the manner is as
considerable as the matter, and the giver as the gift; that courtesy is to be
contemned, which comes by constraint; the worth lies in the will, and I will do
as I would be done to; what I give, shall be both quick and free.

LXXXII.
Wise men say least; wisdom lies not in words; a hollow Vessel gives the
greates^ sound, and the shallow stream makes the mos^ noise; he knows how to
speak, that knows how to be silent; it is the puddle that appears most; the
spring lies low, and hid; it requires time to aim to hit the mark; but a fools
bolt is soon shot, and flies at rovers; I ever thought them the wisest, who say
not most, but to the most purpose; who will not lose a word, and strike seldom,
but strike home; why should I give another advantage over me, or lose my own
advantage? besides, I learn by another, not by my self.

LXXXIII.
So love thy friend, as to hate his faults; the vice is no part of the man; the
Wen is a blemish to the body, so is sin to the soul; the succors do but spoil
the Tree; and what injury to him I love, to hate what harms him?

LXXXIV.
Strike while the Iron is hot; delays are dangerous; it is good making Hay
while the Sun shines, to take the benefit of time and tide; do with all thy
might what thou have to do, lest Night come on, and it be left undone; why
shall I defer till to morrow, what may be dispatched to day? especially in what
imports me, and run a hazard, and need not; besides, he that is unfit to day,
may be more unfit to morrow; I will not sleep till I have cast up my Account,
and made my peace; a short reckoning is soonest cleared, and the smallest Suit
the easiest granted.

LXXXV.
No Creature comfort can give content; Husks are a windy food; they swell, but
do not satisfy; he that has most, has still too little, there is something
wanting still; a globe will not fill a triangle; God is the only adequate, and
commensurate good; other things, though patch't and peeced, and put all
together, are yet too short and scanty; I can drink dry all but the Ocean, and
go away dry; there is no quenching my thirst in sipping a^ the stream; all to
me is nothing, to him who is all in all.

LXXXVI.
Peril produces pleasure; after the greatest danger is most delight; we value
the conquest by the combat, our comforts by what they cost us; far fetched, and
dear bought, want for no price; how shall I esteem the Victory after the fight
is over? how shall I prize my Crown purchased by sweat and blood? after a
tyresom Journey, home will then be home; the more weary, rest will be the more
welcome.

LXXXVII.
He that is not devout in his devotion* though he say his prayers, he does not
pray; and how can he think God should hear him* that does not hear himself?
lip-labor is bu^ lost-labour; if the heart goes not with the tongue, well may
the hand be empty; he tha^ asks he knows not what, may expect an answe^ he
knows not when; I will not be rash in my requests, lest I beg what may do me
harm nor yet cold, lest I teach denial.

LXXXVIII.
It was a good saying of Seneca, So live with men, as if God saw thee; so speak
to God, as if men heard thee; regulate thy actions by this golden Rule, then
shall thou acquit thy self to God and men, and hereby comply with both, either
out of fear, or shame.

LXXXIX.
He has no profit by his pains, where Providence does not prosper; if God does
not succeed, all is labor in vain; early up, and never the near; the Race is
not to the swift, nor the Battle to the strong; what strange disappointments
have I seen, and as strange success! I have known a man whose eyes have been in
his head, to catch nothing, when a blind man has caught the Hare; it is not
the means, but the blessing; some toil to be tantalized, when what others
touch, turns to gold; many by their ingenuity have been undone, while fortune
favors fools.

XC.
Let thy Company be such as thou would be thy self; conformity is the ground
of communion; likeness causes love; what suits, serves best; besides, let him
be what he will, thou will be known by him; tell me with whom thou walk, and
I will tell thee what thou art; can two go together, unless they be agreed?
what fellowship can light have with darkness? I will be careful of nothing
more, than in the choice of my company, on which depends both my credit, and my
comfort; I do not approve of that person for a friend, whose principles and
practice I approve not of; if the strings jarre, it marrs the Music; I cannot
dispute without I dissent and differ, which is inconsistent with that affection
I bear to my friend.

XCI.
He that is false to another, may expect others to be so to him; and if he
suffer, he may thank himself, he is paid but in his own Coin; had I no other
Reason, I would be honest, lest I teach a knave to play the knave; for should I
deceive, I show the way how I may be deceived; by the same method I injure
others, they may injure me.

XCII.
Nothing more usual, than after mirth to be melancholy; the day buries it self
in darkness; mourning must take its turn, and sorrow has its season; for every
thing there is a time, and after laughter the heart is sad; give me that joy
which ends not in regret, nor grief; and is sweeter in the stomach, than in
swallowing; that is only worth prizing, which is when past, a pleasure; I will
not value any thing, in which I cannot in the revievv rejoice.

XCIII.
Riches rule the roast, money is the only Monarch; gold is the Worlds god,
wealth wants not for Worship; this is the Lord Paramount, the most absolute
Prince on Earth; and he that is a Favorite, is wise, valiant, every thing; I
have blushed sometimes to see a silly Ass to be esteemed for his trappings; he
is the best man that is mounted, though vviser walk; for my own part I will
not judge of the Jevvel by the Cabinet; vvherever I find vvorth, I shall admire
and imitate.

XCIV.
Cast thine eyes often upon the sorrovvs of others; see how their Cheeks are
bedevved with tears; look back to them below thee; consider their case,
whose condition is worse than thine; hearken to their sighs, and grumble if
thou can, vvhilest thou hear them groan; what though things go cross, and
against the hair! it is not so bad as it might have been, and it may be better.

XCV.
An envious man lives languishing, and dies living; he is sick at the heart,
and the disease the more dangerous; his distemper lies within, there are the
vultures gnavving; nothing will do him good, but what others have, and will
not part with; thus does he starve himself many times in a full pasture,
because he cannot get into his Neighbors field; he sees what he wants, and
wants what he sees; why should another happiness be my torment? if he smile,
must I look pale and wan? may we not both be happy?

XCVI.
The end Crowns the Action; we praise for what is past, and clap not hands till
the act be over; the end is all; all is well that ends well; Vice may awhile
flaunt it, but Virtue will bear the Bell; this only will hold Water, and will
not shrink in the wetting; what though the way be rugged! it is good enough
that leads to glory. I mind not my Journey, but my Journeys end; it matters not
much what the Morning is; the Evening crowns the day.

XCVII.
He grieves at last, whom a temptation has deceived; the peril may be
pleasing, but the pain will be piercing; sweet meat, but sour sauce; poison
may be wrapped up in sugar; the bait hides the hook; I will fear most, what I
most affect; knowing the danger lies in what I love, though I do not love the
danger; I will tie my self as fast by a resolution, as Ulysses did his Sailors,
lest Sirens should shipwreck me; if perhaps I escape drowning, yet this will be
all my reward, to reflect upon my folly with grief and shame.

XCVIII.
What thou borrowest, pay willingly; remember it was lent, not given; on these
conditions thou did receive, to return; if thou art stinted to a day, fail
not in thy time, lest he that supplied thy occasions, want for his own, and
thou lose thy credit, and thy friend; besides, there is not the same reason
that what thou did ask of him, he should ask of thee; I have experienced it
to be a lesser crime to deny, than to demand; I expect no thanks for those
favors that are not restored, till required.

XCIX.
It is better to dye once, than to be always dying; than to live in fear, pain
or shame; I have wondered that to those whose conditions have been thus
qualified, death should be no more welcome; I had rather not be, than be
miserable; where I cannot live, let me dye with honor.

C.
There is no Physician like to a faithful friend; Galen cannot cure what
Achates can; in all my griefs I can go to my friend, and ease my self of all;
whatever is too heavy for me alone, he sets to his shoulder, and to both it is
no burden; this we do for each other, and without pain to either; if our
crosses come together, and we are both loaded, we then discharge our grievances
by exchange; perchance my back may bear his better, and his mine.

CENT. IV.
I.
WHat the eye does not see, it does not affect; we look, and then we like;
there can be no discovery in the dark, and consequently no desiring; I were a
fool to dote upon that face, whose beauty I can wink into blackness, and in a
moment can cause to vanish; I will keep the Casement shut, lest what gets into
the Window, make way for a greater mischief.

II.
Contemn not good counsel, though it comes from a contemptible person; what
have to do with him? his advice concerns thee; the best wits have been the
basest men; some slaves have had great souls; the liquor is not the worse for
the homeliness of the Vessel; gold is no less gold, though in a poor man's
purse; I will take more notice what things are, than whence they come; a
Diamond may be set in Copper; the Case is no part of the Jewel; it were not in
it self the worse (why then in my esteem?) though it came off the Dunghill;
under a Threadbare Cloak, may be a wise man though he drink water, the brain
is little beholding either to back or belly.

III.
Thou art sure to dye, and perchance to day; a greater matter has been
effected in a lesser time; I enjoy not my life by Lease, and Tennants at will
have not always warning; what reason have I then to be ready, that when I
leave this house of Clay, I may remove to my house in Heaven?

IV.
Few care how well* they live, but how long; they reckon their lives by the
time they tarry, as if they came into the World for nothing; to go out as they
came, not considering he has the greatest applause, not that acts most, but
best; I believe I have more business here than only to look on; it behooves me
to bestir my self, lest before I dispatch my task, death should dispatch me.

V.
Divinity teaches doing, not saying; to live great things, not to speak great
words; ayrie notions make a noise, but that which is solid does not sound; the
deepest Waters are the most silent; when the Sun is highest, it casts the least
shadow; thorns make the greatest crackling; profession lies in practice; in the
life is the life of Religion; I like example better than precept, when the
person proves the president.

VI.
He that suits with his Estate, is a rich man; Wealth consists not so much in
quantity, as in the quality of the professor; he that has less, may have
enough; and he that has most, can have no more; a lesser Ship needs lesser
Sail; there can be no poverty where there is proportion; sutableness is the
ground of satisfaction; a Cottage will content a Codrus; it is not what I have,
but what I am; less will serve a dwarf, than a Giant; and me perchance, than
another man; I do not want what I can be without; Water may quench my thirst,
and a few grains may serve my turn, as well as a Granary; I need no more in my
Journey than will bear my charges, the rest will be supplied at home.

VII.
Felicity is an unquiet thing; Alexander weeps there were no more Worlds to
conquer; how projective is prosperity! how restless is the man through care and
contrivance! he beats his brain, and every vein works; he sees something he
still lacks, and leaves no stone unturned to attain it; which when he has, he
is unhappy still, and perchance in greater torment; he is never satisfied, full
nor fasting; for when he knows not what he wants, he wants he knows not what.

VIII.
He is not poor that has not much, but he who would have more; want lies in
wishing; he lacks most, that longs most; none so rich, as he that does not
covet, but contemn; he has all, that desires nothing; he has content, and
content is all; I will not judge of the man by his money, but by his mind; and
he who thinks a little is not enough, will think enough too little.

IX.
There is no torture to a tormenting Conscience; better the body wrack^ than
the mind; a wounded spirit who can bear? this is a Hell on this side Hell; how
do the flames of that infernal fire scorch, and singe a poor soul, reflecting
upon its sins, and sentencing of its self? dreadful is the doom of a condemning
Conscience; no storm like that which is raised by the Wind, that rises out of
the bottomless Pit; Lord, let it blow, and beat, and what it will, so the
Vessel be tite, and there be but a calm within; let the Bird in my breast sing,
though in a Winter-season; I had rather the World were against me, than be
against my self.

X.
Men speak evil of thee, but they are evil men; the tongue does but declare
what the heartendites; from bad thou can not expect better; what is filthy in
the fountain, cannot be fair in the stream; no wonder thou have not a good word
from such as these; likeness produces love; I will suspect my self if any
speak well of me, of whom I cannot speak well; neither will I value the yelping
of every Curre, no more than the Moon the Dogs barking; that serves for a foil
to set me forth, which sets forth their folly.

XI.
Study to please the best, not the most; respect the nature, rather than the
number; the quality, not the quantity; gold is tried by the touchstone, not by
the balance; wise men judge of things as they are, not as they seem, and there
are few which are competent Judges; who can think himself the wifer for
pleasing fools?

XII.
If thou will be happy, resolve to despise, and to be despised; slight what
thou can not shun, and endure what thou can not cure; stand upon thy guard,
and let nothing get within thee; keep what thou can in thine own keeping, and
trust none but thy self; see not with another eyes, but always have thi^^
about thee; think thy present state still the best, if not in it self, yet for
thee; look not upon that as good, which cannot make thee better; have nothing
in admiration, and be sure have as low thoughts of thy self, as others can have
of thee; prepare for the worst, but make the best of what befalls thee; resolve
thy will into the Will of God, and thou need not be troubled at any thing.

XIII.
Let not the Authority of the Speaker move thee, mind what is said, not who
speaks; there is no man but may err; Homer himself sometimes sleeps; I will
not pin my faith upon another sleeve, nor take the position from the person;
whoever is my friend, I am more a friend to truth; and if the Devil be in the
right, I should wrong him not to believe him; an enemy may by chance give good
counsel; honey from a Weed is not worse, than that drawn from a flovver; a
blind man may hit the mark, and a better Archer miss it.

XIV.
Bear cheerfully where there is no remedy; patience is the only prudence; make
a virtue of necessity, what must be, why not willingly? to sit down and
cry, will not lessen our burden, or our way; to pore upon our grief, makes it
the more grievous; that is not a trouble which we do not think of; give me
the man that can both smart and smile; that sleeps sweetly in a storm, and
carries his Crosses as unconcerned; who, notvvithstanding the greatest
difficulties, goes merrily about his work, and is jogging on all vveathers; I
will mind my duty more than my danger, and fear nothing but to offend; I will
assent to what I cannot prevent, and do nothing by constraint, but by choice;
it were a shame for me to sigh for sorrovv, or to startle at any blovv; what
pleases God, shall please me.

XV.
Think every day thy last; thou could never yet call to morrow thine; there
is no necessity thou should have a day to dye in, as much may be done in a
moment, the stroke is soon given; look not for death before thee, the Sergeant
comes behind; the time past is dead and gone, the present upon departing; I
have been long dying, and cannot look to live long; there will be a last day,
and this may be my last.

XVI.
He values not his labor, that overcomes; neither pain nor peril is reckoned
by him that gets the prize; the end makes amends for the means; he that vvins
the race, never repents the running; what though Heaven cost me hot water? it
will be richly vvorth it; a Crown will require my contests, and my combats;
I that sovve in tears, shall reap in joy; the Harvest will pay for all, I
shall have my wages when working time is done; what is in hope, shall be in
hand; red Robes shall put on white; no sign of sweat, nor blood; no more foes,
no more fighting.

XVII.
There is nothing more miserable than man, nor more proud; what creature so
helpless, and so unhappy? his body more brittle than that of beasts, and his
mind in continual trouble; I am still subject to sickness and to sorrow;
diseases and discontents prey upon this carcass, like Vultures upon the
Carrion; what am I? but the channel wherein the waters of Marah flow.

XVIII.
The fairest flowers do soonest fade; beauty is soon blasted; that which
flourishes at noon, toward night withers; there is an end of all perfection;
all is vanity; what is the world? but a poor empty thing; both in the whole,
and in every part, its pleasures perish and putrefie, and that which smells the
sweetest, decays and dies; its profits are only gilded, not Gold, which rubs
off while in your hands; as for its honors, they are but as smoke, a blast' or
bubble; I will love nothing much, which I cannot love long; I find, the less I
lean upon a brittle staff, the longer it keeps from breaking; inordinate
affection, usually causes sudden separation.

XIX.
It is better to endure, than to do evil, to suffer, than to sin; the crime is
worse than the punishment; nothing shall force me to offend; why should I
displease my God, or defile my self? besides the hazard I run of Hell, I know
the worst of what can befall me here, but know not what may follow; the
inconvenience of an after reckoning.

XX.
Innocence is the greatest felicity; a good Conscience is a continual feast;
this is the only music which makes a merry heart; this makes Prisoners sing,
when the Jailer trembles; it matters not who accuses, if I can clear my self;
there is no Law, where there is no transgression; yet would I not be guilty,
were I sure to pass unpunished; Conscience might condemn, which is both
Witness, Judge, and Jury.

XXI.
Liberty is a thing inestimable, there is nothing in the world of so great a
value; he must needs be poor, who has not this pearl; to be confined is the
greatest torment, though a Palace were the Prison; a man may be no less a
prisoner, though his fetters were of Gold; I cannot but wonder to see some so
lightly to esteem their freedom, who for preferment will sell themselves for
slaves, forced to dance attendance, when they might command; I am free, and
cannot brook to be bound; I had rather loose my life, than my liberty; why
should I be tied to persons, or to place?

XXII.
There is nothing more detestable than disgrace; nothing more odious than
servitude; we are born to honor and liberty, let us keep these, or die with
glory; my credit is my crown, and my liberty my life; all were gone, should I
part with these; I would sooner dye, than live in shame; better it is to dye
bravely, than to live basely.

XXIII.
As thou sowest, so thou reapest; the seed is the same, as to its nature, and
its quality; Corn will continue Corn, and Tares will be Tares still; he that
sows to the flesh, shall reap corruption; I will mind my Seeds-time, as I would
find my Harvest, knowing as I am now, I shall be then; if I loyter in the
Spring, my Crop will be according.

XXIV.
Piety is the foundation of virtue; where the Spring is polluted, the stream
cannot be pure; and where the groundwork is not good, the building is not
lasting; he does nothing, that begins not well; that is only praiseworthy,
which proceeds from a right principle; Divinity is a better stock than Morality
to graff on; little can be expected from depraved nature; I do not look for
Grapes from Thorns, nor Figs from Thistles; as is the tree, so is the fruit.

XXV.
Affect not ostentation; covet rather to be good, than to appear so; imitate
the Publican rather than the Pharisee; in cheating the world, thou will cheat
thy self; let the inside be the better side; deserve praise, but do not desire
it; forget what thou art, and press forward to what thou should be; content
not thy self with the measure thou have attained; there is no standing at a
stay, and while another is better, thou may mend.

XXVI.
Think no sin small, the least is a load too heavy for the backs of men and
Angels; a crime committed against an infinite God, deserves to damn thee; and
what comfort can it be in Hell, to consider a small matter has brought thee
thither, or might have kept thee thence? I will look upon it as an aggravation
of the offense, to offend for little or nothing; besides, I may fear lest I
count great sins small, and little sins none.

XXVII.
Promise nothing to your prejudice, however perform what you promise; no Bond
binds like the word of an honest man; be careful of engaging, and then let thy
care be to disengage thy self; it matters not though the Obligation be not
sealed by an Oath, or subscribed by Witness; thy Conscience is as a thousand,
and will put the Bond in Suit; it were better pay the Principle, than
Principle, Cost, and Charges.

XXVIII.
Do not only submit to the Will of God, but subscribe likewise to his Wisdom;
conclude not things go cross, when every circle tends to its center; whatever
befalls thee, is best for thee; if it be not good in it self, yet it does thee
good; Providence is not purblind; there is no such thing as chance; the wheel
is full of eyes, though some dispensations seem dark.

XXIX.
Be not a Servant to thy Slaves, thy Money, or thy Body; thou art not born to
so base a bondage; why should thou obey, where thou may command? use thy
Estate, and enjoy thy self; let all be subservient to thy Soul, and thy Soul to
the Lord of all; know thy place, and keep a distance; suffer no encroachment to
be made upon thy Prerogative; every thing is below thee, if thou be not
below thy self.

XXX.
Look upon that to be good, which is lawful, not what is gainful; go not out of
Gods blessing, into a warm Sun; serve him rather than thy own turn; take not
any unwarrantable course to purchase wealth; better want, than be wicked, it
will appear so at last, in the winding up of the bottom; I had rather be poor
and pious, than grow rich in a wrong way.

XXXI.
Trouble not thy self that others have fewer troubles; the burden is but
proportioned to the back, and he that lays on, will either lift with thee, or
lighten; it argues courage in thee, and confidence in thy Captain, that thou
art chose for a Champion; the hardiest Soldier is set to the hardest service;
as is thy venture, so will be thy victory; thy conquest will be as thy combat;
who will refuse any thing, where what is got, is glory? see the Trophies and
the prize; reckon upon the Laurel; thou must fight, but shall not be foiled;
and it matters not what Heaven cost thee, when the reward is worth it.

XXXII.
Let thy thoughts be provident, but not perplexive; do thou foresee a sorrow?
prevent it if thou can, if not, entertain it with a smile; why should every
scratch rankle? it were a folly to fret and sum, for what thou can neither
help nor binder; Patience becomes the Pilot, though the winds blow cross; what
I do not occasion, I will bear as unconcerned; if the fault be not mine, why
should the feeling?

XXXIII.
Live as one that must die, and perhaps the next moment; be always in a
traveling posture, in a readiness to be gone; sit loose to the world; consider
thou art upon thy way, not at home; thy Inn is no dwelling place; fix not thy
affections, where thou can not fix thy habitation; give not death a double
labor, to send thy soul from thy body, and thy heart from the creature; I will
look upon all as dying, and my self half dead; what may be, is uncertain; what
is past, is dead to me; hence I conclude, I can call no more than the present
minute mine.

XXXIV.
Whenever thou art solicited to sin, consider how dear it cost Christ, and how
dear it will cost thee; trace him from the Garden to Golgatha; nay, from the
Cratch to the Cross; and see what he suffered for imputed sin; what then may
thou expect to suffer for thine own? if thou can not sin at a cheaper rate,
it will not be worth thy while to sin; lay the pleasure against the punishment,
and see how the scale stands.

XXXV.
Have thou done any thing that does displease? to despair is more displeasing;
if Justice be thy foe, yet Mercy is thy friend; confess thy fault, and amend;
do so no more, and all is well; a lame leg may be as strong as ever, and the
sick as sound; none but a Cain thinks his sins too great to be forgiven; this
were the greatest sin; to despond, were to disparage God, and his Grace, and at
once to question his Mercy, and Christ's Merits; it is a double wrong to offend,
and after to doubt of pardon.

XXXVI.
Run not the danger of a Deathbed Repentance; why should thou hazard
Heaven? besides the folly of deferring what must be done; and if at all, why
not now? time tarries not, and assure thy self there will be no calling back of
time; there is no working in the Grave, whither thou art going; the day is for
doing, night draws on, the Curtains will be drawn; imagine thou hear Death
cry, Dispatch, the next voice may be Depart; let a Deathbed find thee fit, not
fit thee; thou will have enough to do, to die.

XXXVII.
Look upon thy Taper, and there see the Emblem of thy time; if a blast blow it
not out, yet it burns, and like as the wax, so do thou waste; perchance thy
decay is insensible, yet one day succeeds another, and thy last day will come;
the silver cords will be loosed, and the golden bowls be broken; death proceeds
by degrees, but it will e're long diffuse it self through every member, and it
will be said of thee, as thou have said, He is dead; others are gone, and thou
art going to a Land of darkness, as Darkness it self; it will not be always
thus, thy Grave will be dug, and the Bells ring for thy Funeral; walk as
becomes the light, it will not last long; burn clear to the socket; why
should thou go out in a snuff, and leave a stink behind thee?

XXXVIII.
Labor not to lengthen thy life, but to better it; do much in a little time;
he has lived long enough, that has lived well enough; a good life, makes a
great age; do not desire to be longer from God, than needs must; make haste,
rid away thy task betimes; to protract thy work, prolongs thy wages; after the
heat, comes the hire; pay-day comes after labor; a recompense signifies
something done; and when the account is taken, thy life will be measured by
action, not by hours.

XXXIX.
Desire to be dissolved; to be with Christ, is best of all; here is nothing
worth thy stay, though Heaven be worth the waiting; be therefore content to
live, but willing to die; watch for the word, when the voice shall cry, Come,
and echo back, Amen, even so come Lord Jesus; what do thou part with, but
pain for pleasure, a Prison for a Palace, fetters for freedom! at best, but a
few crumbs that fall from the Table, to take thy fill at the first hand, with
the Bridegroom and his friends.

XL.
Be cheerful in every con^ition; what a dishonor is it to the Master, for the
Servants to be still repining? it argues the wages is not worth the work; it
discourages those who want employment; I have often thought the generality of
Professors too blame, for their lumpish melancholy carriage, which brings an
ill report upon Religion, as if it marred all mirth, and were inconsistent with
their Profession; when none have less cause to be sad, than a Saint, nor indeed
any besides to be cheerful.

XLI.
Be courageous, and fear nothing, but to offend; in doing thy duty, despise thy
danger; venture upon any thing, upon the warrant of a command; he that bids
thee, can bear thee out; perchance beasts shall not bite, nor the fire burn,
however, better thou lose thy life, than he his glory; he can give thee
another, and reward thee for the former; thy loss will be thy gain; none shine
brighter in Heaven, than those who swim thither, in streams of their own blood.

XLII.
Run not into a needless danger; it is not the Cause, without the Call, makes a
Martyr; thou will have no comfort in a suffering thou bring upon thy self;
keep thy station, and stir not out, without thy Commander calls thee; he cannot
do well, that disobeys; Soldiers and Saints are under discipline, and are not
to be disposed of at their pleasure; thy place is appointed, where thou must
either fight in, or fall.

XLIII.
If another have wronged thee against his will, willingly forgive the wrong;
let the intention make amends for the action; thou art hit by accident, he did
not aim at thee; his hand perchance might slip, or his eye dazzle; who can be
against a mischance, though it prove a misfortune? I look upon him as less in
fault, who is sorry that he hurt me, than he who would, but could not; I will
measure the mischief by the malice, and the malice by the meaning.

XLIV.
Let him who is thy Alpha, be thy Omega; God gave thee to thy self, give thy
self to him; Rivers run to the Ocean; every thing tends to its center; live to
him, by whom thou live; look upon thy self not as thy own, and what thou
have, to be none of thine; remember the reckoning, when the account is to be
called; thou art entrusted as a Steward, be faithful to thy trust; hide not thy
Talent, the same will not serve, the principle is expected with the
improvement; every year must have its increase; thy sum will be the greater,
the more thou have, and the longer; why should I tarry, that must account for
my time? Lord, fit me for thee, and take me to thee; take my heart, and then
take me; I would be with thee, were I but untyed; if my work be done, or may
be, by another, I am desirous to be discharged; I came from thee, and shall be
restless till I come to thee.

XLV.
Love God for himself, and other things for him; use the creature, to enjoy
God; thou may see the Potter in the Clay; in his workmanship, admire his
wisdom; let every thing be in subordination to him, there is no reason for a
Rival; he will be paramount, his power claims that prerogative; deny him not
his due; he made thee Lord over other creatures, that he might be Lord over
thee and them; they serve thee, that thou may serve him.

XLVI.
Look upon every action of thy life, to be a matter of moment, and be well
advised in what thou do; do not delay, yet deliberate; propose, ponder, and
then proceed; undertake nothing rashly, and go through with what thou
undertakest; let the executative part be dispatched as soon as possible, lest
thou should be too late; loyter not, after thou art set out, for fear thou
be benighted; thy work increases, and thy time decreases; in a word, let thy
carriage be, as becomes a wise man, and a Christian.

XLVII.
Be good, though thou be not so accounted; if thou can not satisfy
others, satisfy thy self; whoever accuses, yet let thy conscience clear thee;
persevere in a good cause, though neither thou, nor thy cause prospers;
remember, the Crown is given, not to them that combat, but to them that conquer.

XLVIII.
Scruple not to observe those days the Church has celebrated, and remember
the institution was for imitation, rather than recreation; besides, surfeting
cannot please that Saint, who pleased God by fasting; I cannot wrong Saints
departed more, than to make their memory the occasion of my sin and shame; I
will keep therefore Holy Days holy.

XLIX.
In every thing, look to the end through the means; it is not enough God has
promised, something on thy part is to be performed; make good the condition,
and he will make good his promise; up and be doing; man is not such a helpless
creature as he imagines; he deserves to sink, that will not endeavor to save
himself, neither will desires do; thou may wish thy heart out, and yet want
thy wish; he that is fallen into a pit, may pray and perish.

L.
So live, as that thou may neither be afraid to dye, nor ashamed to live;
let grace be thy guide to glory; to live let it be Christ, and and then to dye
will be gain; deserve well in thy way, but desire to be at thy journeys end;
let not the sight of thy last stage scare thee; so act thy part, that thou
may leave the stage with applause, and the spectators may clap their hands;
all my aim is to come bravely off; my acting may please others, but does not
please me.

LI.
Have high thoughts of Heaven; yonder twinkling Stars are but the pavement of
that House; if those be under foot, what is over head? eye has not seen, nor
ear heard, what God has provided for them that love him; what is the World?
but a howling Wilderness to the Celestial Canaan, and yet there is some
delight in the Desert. From thence draw this deduction, If the Outhouses be so
stately, what is the Palace of the Great King? the glory which is reserved, and
shall be revealed; our Cockle-shells are too little to lave that Ocean, in
which we shall be swallowed up to all eternity; if a cluster has such
sweetness, what is there in the Vintage? the first fruits fall short of the
Harvest; if a few glimpses of glory, which God affords his Servants in their
straits be so satisfying, how will it be, when faith is swallowed up of
fruition? if praelibations be so pleasing, what will it be to drink at the
Wellhead? if we have so much to bear our charges in our journey, what shall we
meet with at home? if there be so much laid out for sinners, what is there laid
up for Saints? when God shall cull his Wheat from the Tares, in the day when he
makes up his Jewels.

LII.
He that is penitent, is innocent; tears will wash away the foulest spots;
since I cannot be without sin, I would not be without sorrow; that which is
sweet in the mouth, may be bitter in the stomach; then shall I fear forbidden
fruit, when I find my pleasant morsels of such hard digestion; it is better not
to be sick, than cured, and Repentance is a Purge; I will use it, not as food,
but Physic; I wish I could be well without it; but Lord, where I am not
innocent, make me penitent.

LIII.
It is never too late to do well; better now than not at all; I will labor the
more, the more I have loytred, that I may fetch up what I have lost, and redeem
what I cannot recall; that as I have hitherto lived to little purpose, I may do
much in a little time; he gets soonest to the Goal, not that sets out first,
but runs fastest.

LIVE.
The remembrance of a past labor is sweet; the Saylor sings when the storm is
over, and the weary Traveller when he comes to his Inn, will please himself in
telling of his toil and trouble; what was grievous to undergo, may be
delightful to review; to repeat a past pain, is a pleasure; I will not so much
think of my grief, as my glory I shall gain by my tossings when I am landed;
the worse has been my passage, the more welcome will be my Port.

LV.
Death will equal all; in the Grave there are no degrees; rich and poor are
there alike; it is a place that admits of no priority; Bones do not justle; who
knows the Cedar from the Shrub, when both are consumed to ashes? there is no
distinguishing Dives by his dust; it will soon be the same with the beggar and
the best; mountains must be levelled with the lowest plains, and great ones
with the ground.

LVI.
What might have been, may be; that which is past, may return; it may clear up,
and be overcast again; all things here are still in motion, and ebb, as well as
flow; I will so anchor, as not to fear when the tide falls, to be left on Land;
it may be worse, although it now goes well; the wind may turn, and the black
Clouds that were blown over, may be blown back; I will provide for what I
cannot prevent; it is wisdom to foresee the shower.

LVII.
Death passes upon all; the slayer follows the slain; the Judge, as sure as
the Condemned, dies; the Jailer, as the Prisoner; there is no condition is
excepted; it is a Decree, from whence there is no appeal; the Prince is as
subject to this arrest, as the poorest Peasant; the Grave is the general
meeting place; it matters not much who get thither first, whither all are
going, and where all meet; all the days of my appointed time will I wait, till
my change comes.

LVIII.
There is nothing in the world but death certain; we know whither we are bound,
but what may befall us in our voyage, we do not know; it does not always blow
alike; we are sometimes up, and sometimes down; seldom steer steady; yet we
still sail to the same Port, though not by the same Point; what uncertainty am
I at, that can neither find out what degree I am in, nor judge at my course by
my Compass? since I cannot be sure, I will not be secure.

LIX.
He that has least trouble, lives best; a quiet life, is the only life; what
content can there be in a crowd? it is sad being at Sea in a storm? a hurry of
business makes but our passage the more boisterous; I would neither be idle,
nor much employed; I do not think the world worth wasting my self, or my time;
a man may get, and be a loser; Gold may be bought too dear; I will delight in
what I do, and enjoy what I have; while others strive for Crowns, my mind is to
me a Kingdom.

LX.
Pleasure is soon past, and oft-times leaves more cause of penitence, than of
remembrance; the sweetest morsels slide down the soonest, and the soonest make
us sick; what is wholesome, is seldom toothsome; where there is honey, there is
a sting; sorrow is the effect of sin; the sweetest Rose has its prickles;
there is a bitter sweet in the best state; vanity will prove vexation; pleasure
ends in repentance, if not in pain; why should I covet what cost too dear? it
is a bad bargain, where the profit will not countervail the pain.

LXI.
Use causes custom, and custom takes away conscience; he that sins often, will
not know when he sins; to do nothing else, will make it seem nothing; what was
at first strange, will by degrees become familiar, and gets acquaintance by
continuance; I will endeavor to crush the Cockatrice in the egg; a spark is
easier quenched than the flame; the best way to prevent a mischief, is, to
stifle sin in its motion; I will keep temptation at arms end, lest if it get
within me, I receive the foil, and joining with corruption, should carry me
captive.

LXII.
There is nothing so bitter, which a brave mind cannot bear; great sufferings
suit best with a great spirit; a heavy load with a strong shoulder, it is not
the burden, but the back; not what is laid on, but him that bears it; Lord,
give me what thou command, and command what thou please; if thou call
me to that I never did, give me that I never had; let one hand be under, as the
other is upon me, that I may carry my crosses cheerfully, and troubles may not
trouble me.

LXIII.
The way to Hell is easy; there is no difficulty in going down hill; it is a
plain path that leads to the infernal pit; I will not mind my baiting place so
much as my journeys end; nor the way I go, as whither I am going, neither
complain that it is no better; all is well, that ends well; I am, or shall be
past the worst, and Heaven will make amends for all.

LXIV.
It is best to die, before thou desire? how many deaths must he die, that
lives till he desires to die? we wish not for the worst, and it is more wisdom
to prevent, than to cure; I will not think that can come too soon, which may
prevent both sin and sorrow; I cannot be too soon happy, nor rid of sin too
soon.

LXV.
That which an Age was building, is not an hour destroying; what famous
Fabrics, the work and wonder of many Ages, have been soon consumed to ashes;
some Cities lie buried in their ruins, and nothing of some to be seen; here is
no abiding City; I will seek that which is above, whose builder and maker is
God.

LXVI.
Vices are learned without a Master; weeds need no sowing; what grows wild,
will grow alone; nature will nourish her own, which she both produces and
provides for, without the help of Art, while what is good, is gained by sweat
and pains; I will the least value what cost the least trouble, and comes
without care, as knowing Gold is got with difficulty, and Pearls with pain; but
Pebbles are in every place.

LXVII.
I will account that my Country, where I am well; why should I be confind?
suppose I be not where I was born, what was in my Parents power, is now in
mine; I am left to my own liberty, to pitch where I please; what folly were it
to restrain my self, who am not obliged to persons, or to place? why should not
my body be as free as my mind? and neither Sea nor Land can bound my thoughts;
let narrow souls take up with a narrow room; the world is my Country,
wherever I am, I shall think my self every where at home.

LXVIII.
The greatest happiness consists in a man's own will, and it is in his own power
to make himself happy; felicity lies in fancy; he was a brave fellow, that
thought all the Ships that came to Athens were his own; who so rich as he? I
am, as I esteem my self; it matters not though I have not of my own, when what
another has, is mine.

LXIX.
Moderation in prosperity, argues a great mind; to keep an even course, when
all Sails draw, shows the Ship to be well ballasted; I will not value my self
by what I have, but by what I am; the change of my condition, shall never
change me; whatever alters, yet will not I; this shall be my Motto, Still the
same.

LXX.
This is the miserable condition of mankind, we are born one way, but dye many;
how many thousand casualties are we subject to? the least whereof might prove
as mortal as Goliah's Spear? no creature so contemptible, which cannot kill us;
what a strange uncertainty are we at, that are sure of nothing? we daily walk
over many Graves, and carry our lives in our hands; since I know my sentence, I
will prepare my self, not knowing but the next accident may prove the
Executioner.

LXXI.
He that cannot hope, let him not despair; many things fall out, which could
not be foreseen; and who can tell what may happen! why should I give my self
for gone? it may clear up at noon, or in the afternoon; after a storm, comes a
calm; a foul morning may prove a fair day; but if my case be concluded, and my
sun be to set in a cloud, it is but withdrawing for a while; in the Grave all
is close, and still; I shall there be well, though no where else; let it rain,
or blow, or what it will, it shall neither wet, nor awake me.

LXXII.
That grief is light which is capable of counsel; it is a good sign to see the
plaster at the sore; the wound is worst that festers; no trouble like to that
which is felt, not seen; the disease that seizes the heart, is most dangerous;
I am resolved my sorrows shall not enter past skin deep; why should my mind be
concerned in all that concerns me; this may be my remedy in every malady, to
retire home; and it is but keeping the door shut, and the wind cannot enter; so
that if I suffer, I may thank my self.

LXXIII
All things here run round; there is nothing new under the Sun; what is, was,
or may be; the wheel is still turning; that which is past, will come about
again; I will not wonder at what I see; it is no more than what has been
before; let my case be what it will, I am neither first nor last; others have
drank of the same cup, and some will pledge me.

LXXIV.
Small things through concord are increased, but discord destroys all; peace
produces plenty; but variance, want; I like not those Salamanders, whose
Element is the Fire; if possible, I would live peaceably with all men;
quietness is the greatest happinnesse; I will strive neither to give, nor to
take offense, but carry my self as circumspectly as I can, tha^ there may be no
occasion of contention, either from me, or them.

LXXV.
What is past, cannot be recalled; Time is ball'd behind; millions will not
fetch back the last moment; gone once, and ever gone; the stream runs, but
returns no more; the Clock never strikes backward; if the Glass be turned up
again, it is for another hour; how prodigal have I been of that which both the
Indies cannot buy! Lord make me more thrifty of my time, lest what I have lost,
I lack; I have done but little; night draws on, and there is no working in the
Grave, whither I am going.

LXXVI.
There is no pleasure but by continuance cease to be a pleasure; too much of
one thing, is good for nothing; honey may become loathsome; choice gives
content; to be confined, marres all; the daintiest dish, if always fed on,
proves unsavory; the sweetest Wine, will turn sour; the softest bed, to lie
on long, will be uneasy; there is no satisfaction in any single comfort; I
long, and loath, and love again; this is the life I lead; hence I conclude,
creatures cannot give content; I will go farther, and fare better.

LXXVII.
Is any outward affliction befallen thee? snarle not at the stone, but see the
hand that threw it; look upward, and look inward; it is the Father corrects his
Child; know thy fault from feeling; blame none but him thou may, thy self,
and thank thy folly; learn instruction from correction; kiss the Rod, and take
heed thou be not beaten for stubbornness; welcome the message, and the
messenger shall be discharged.

LXXVIII.
Is thy Estate gone? it was another before thine, and what wonder it is now
another? who can hinder what will away? grieve not for that thou could not
keep, but get that thou can not lose; perchance if thou had not lost, thou
had been lost; think of thy deliverance, as well as of thy damage; however,
it were childish to complain; have thou lost what thou had? thou may have
what thou have lost; but if it be not recoverable, why should thou vex thy
self for nothing, and make thy draughts more tart with thy tears?

LXXIX.
Art thou banished, or imprisoned? all places are alike to a wise man; he
scorns to be confined; neither seas, nor walls, can binder him; what if thy
body be bounded? thy mind is free; when abroad, at home; though I leave my
place, I do not leave my company; my best friend will not leave me; and what do
I not enjoy, whilst I enjoy my God and my self?

LXXX.
Do reproaches trouble thee? slight what thou can not shun; despise what thou
do not deserve; concern not thy self with their cattle; what is that to thee?
it were a folly to mind the yelping of every Curre; what is the Moon the worse
for the Dogs barking? let Rabshecaies rail, and Shimeies slander, I would
value it no more than the wagging of a straw; shall every scratch ranckle?
consider, it is the common fate of good men to be ill spoken of; this serves
for a foil to thee; the filth will blow back into their own faces.

LXXXI.
Art thou sick? it is but the flesh that feels; it is the body only upon the
bed; the soul is free, not subject to disease; but suppose a sympathy between
such friends; yet consider, the Potion that makes thee sick, does thee the most
good; thou have to do with a wise Physician, who knows when to use Corrosives,
and when Cordials; he prescribes to the nature of the distemper no more than
necessary, no less than will work the Cure; besides, the disease sometimes
proves the remedy.

LXXXII.
Do things go ill with Church, or State? a common calamity is best born; if
thou can not divert the plague, endeavor to secure thy self; take shelter
for a while, storms will be spent, or else be past; should the ship miscarry, a
planck might conveigh thee to shore; but why should thou fear the Vessel,
when God guides the Helm? let him alone to steer; at Sea thou may look for
change of weather; keep thou close in thy Cabin; what have thou to do to
meddle? steering belongs not to the Passenger, but to the Pilot.

LXXXIII.
Has death deprived thee of thy dearest friends? thou art following as fast as
thou can; their glass is run, thine is running; their bell rings out, and
thine is towling; bear with their absence, but a while; you are not like to be
long asunder; and what though parting be bitter, a meeting will make amends.

LXXXIV.
Have thou lost a good Wife? it is for her good; thy loss, is her gain; it is
better being in Heaven than here; she has finished her course, and got her
Crown; storms still beat on thee, but she is housed; thou art working, she is
paid; what thou have in propriety, she has in possession; mourn no more; it is
incongruous to grieve for one in glory; save thy tears for thy self; thou
may need them, not she; if this will not suffice, yet cheer up for shame;
consider, as thou were a husband, so thou art a man.

LXXXV.
Is thy Son dead? no marvel, thou did beget him mortal; flowers are sometimes
plucked before they are blown; Graves are not all of a size; no age will exempt
from death; it is more wonder thou have lived so long, than that he dyed so
young; what though the fruit falls, when the tree stands?

LXXXVI.
Art thou afraid of death? be more familiar, and thou will less fear it; thou
came upon condition to return; and is not home to be desired? death is but a
dirty lane, that leads to our Fathers house; what though body and soul part?
both are safe, and the better part happy; is the weary traveller loath to rest?
does the soldier like to be besmeared with sweat and blood? death welcomes me
first with victory, and helps me to what I fought for.

LXXXVII.
Is it dying thou fear most? or to be dead? do thou dread the pain? I
verily believe thou have endured more; but be it what it will, it must be; if
light, thy patience is the less; if great, to bear it bravely will be the
greater glory; consider, what is violent, cannot be lasting; it will either
consume thee, or it self; if the storm be extreme, it is a sure sign it will
soon be spent; it is but winking, and thou openest thy eyes in heaven.

XXXVIII.
Do thou fear more to be dead, than to die? is the flesh unwilling to lie
rotting in the grave? not seeing any, unseen? why should this trouble? the
grave is a bed of Down, on which thou will sleep sweetly; there is no noise to
disturb thee; all is hush and still; the prisoners there shall rest together,
and hear no more the voice of the oppressor; there is no sound of chains and
shackles; thy bolts shall be beaten off at the prison door; be not afraid to
enter into thy Chamber, till the indignation's past; thou art there secure,
though no where else out of harms way; let it rain, and blow, and what it will,
it shall neither wet nor awake thee.

LXXXIX.
Does Satan buffet? courage yet, thy foes will soon either flee or fall; the
next shock may be the last; one encounter more may put an end to all; but what
needst thou fear fighting, who need not fear foiling? thou art sure to come off
a conqueror, and to leave the field with flying colors; suppose it cost thee
sweat and blood; the more difficulty, the more glory; O hold out for a while;
win the day, and wear the Crown.

XC.
Be not cast down, whatever thy crosses be; suit thy self to thy state, and
conclude the present condition is always best, if not in it self, yet for
thee; take heed of being surprised; let nothing seem strange, which has been,
or may be; look upon whatever happens, as thine own choice; why should thy
desire thwart Gods decree? let thy will in his be done; be cheerful, as becomes
a child going home; what though the way be bad? thou art in sight of thy
fathers house, and heaven will requite all. I value not my journey, but my
journeys end.

XCI.
Have not hard thoughts of Providence; however it goes, yet God is good, and
all shall work to that intent to thee; be quiet, and let him alone; things are
framing for his glory, and for thine; he knows best, what is best; whatever
befalls a Saint, is for the best; I will look beyond the means to the end; and
what comes from love, I will take in love; why should I question his care, or
skill, that searches before he skins the sore; a wise Surgeon cuts to cure.

XCII.
Consider thy distance, and do not dispute with thy Maker; what reason to
reason the case with him? must his word or thine stand? shall the Clay
contradict the Potter? he that made the vessel, may mar it at his pleasure,
and who can hinder? how easy could he crush and crack thee? shall a silly
creature be a competitor with his Creator? must he ask thy consent beforehand?
or, does he need thy counsel; take heed lest stripes bring not down thy
stomach; I will lay my hand upon my mouth, when his is upon my back; if I
groan, I will not grumble; I were better to bend, than to break; what likes
him, shall like me.

XCIII.
Be not peremptory in thy petitions; it is a mercy sometimes to be denied; thy
desire might undo thee; ask nothing but with submission, and upon condition;
and do not think thy prayers lost, if they be not answered; much less, if an
answer be delayed; what thou beggest, may not be fit for thee, or at least,
when thou would have that which would do thee harm, God loves thee too well
to give it.

XCIV.
Does any thing trouble thee? see from whom it comes, from whence, and for
what; troubles arise not out of the dust; snarle not at the stone; it were
folly to revile the Rod; shall I murmr when I am justly beaten? no wonder I
come home by weeping Cross; when I wander I have no cause to blame any but my
self; I will be more sorry for my fault, than for the effect; I have more
reason to repent than repine.

XCV.
In all thy griefs, thou may go to the Throne of Grace, and there disburden
thy self of all; spread thy case before the Lord, and let not thy countenance
be any more sad; acquaint him with thy straits, and assure thy self it shall go
well; will a Father deny his Child any thing? at least, what may do him good?
consider thy relation, and question if thou can, his care, or his affection;
and it being supposed he loves thee, bounty proceeds from bowels; this shall
satisfy me, God knows, and pities, and will supply; I shall not want what I
want, and cannot be without; if I have not what I would, I have what I should.

XCVI.
Learn to live by believing; fruition comes short of faith; what is the world
to that which thou expectest, and is providing for thee? it is but to wait
awhile, and what is in thy eye, shall be in thy hand; thou shall have enough to
bear thy charges here, and is not that enough? he that pays thee thy pension,
will pay thy portion; I will not part with my hopes for millions of Crowns and
Scepters; my delight lies in desire; what I lack now, I shall not long; the
heir will enter upon his inheritance, and take possession.

XCVII.
Set not too high a value upon any creature; for shame be not besotted to a
borrowed beauty; it is the paint sets off the picture; why should thou admire
her for that is none of hers? consider the complexion, not the colors; she is
(at best) but filthy fair; I will adore no face, that is either false or
fading; I like not the beauty which is not skin deep, or no more; that to me is
most lovely, which is most lively, and most lasting.

XCVIII.
See things as they are, not as they seem; it is ill judging by outward
appearance, or at the first view; compare the sour with the sweet, and tell me
whether is the most predominant; Roses have their prickles, and Bees their
stings as well as honey; I have dissected creature comforts, and cannot find
any thing to term happiness; experience tells me, I might have excused my
pains; and taken the word of a wiser man, it is well if I have only lost my
labor; I might have lost my self.

XCIX.
The Heathen could say, it was the delight of the Gods, to see a good man bear
his troubles bravely; there is no sight like a contented Christian, and none
has more reason to be content; whatever befalls him, is for the best, and to
make him better; every thing he touches, turns to gold; he may meet sometimes
with a cross, or a loss, yet the account will bear it; give me a man that is
still the same under variety of dispensations; who lights still upon a square,
and changes not with changes; it argues a great mind, to sing in a storm, and
a winters season; I would bear up the Helm, though the wind be in my teeth, and
scorn to strike Sail; my face shall not discover either regret or fear, lest my
countenance accuse me of cowardice; I would meet a frowning fortune smiling.

C.
There is a bitter-sweet in the worst state; no suffering should make a S^int
sad; do not disparage thy profession, and thy expectation; eye but Christ and
thy Crown, and murmr if thou can; look to Jesus; compare thy way with his,
and thine is fair; he bore the brunt; thou take the field when the battel's
won, and the heat of the day is over; but what matters what the encounter is!
the conquest will be the greater, and consequently the triumph; I shall be
satisfied with my reward, though I fight to the throat in blood; what hazard
can I run for Heaven? shall I be weary of my work, when my wages will be
according? it cannot be he who wins the wager, should repent the way.

FINIS.

