A PLOT FOR A CROWN, IN A VISITATION-SERMON, At CRICKLADE, MAY the Fifteenth,
1682. Being a Parallel between the Heir and Husbandmen in the Parable, and the
Rightful Prince, and his Excluders in Parliament. By N. ADEE, Vicar of
Rodborne-Cheyny, in Wiltshire. Published in its own Vindication.

How could thou bear, thou meeker Moses, how?
Was ever Lion bit with Whelps till now?
Bl. Trib. Eleg. K. Char. I. -- Praesens malejudicat Aetas,
Judicium melius Posteritatis erit.
LONDON, Printed by R. W. and are to be sold by Walter Davis in Amen Corner,
1685.

THE PREFACE.
I Do not publish this under the Umbrage of that common Excuse, which serves to
Usher many Books into the World, viz. That I did it at the entreaty, or for the
satisfaction of Friends: But the things which I write, have been torn from me
through the Midwifery of those Carnifices, Obstetrices, virulently disaffected,
and pernicious Tongues.

Seeing the severe Censures this has laid under are not yet expired, I cannot
expect that they will ever be buried, unless I obviate their obloquy by a
Publication.

Therefore as my whole Country are Witnesses of the Aspersions I have hereby
sustained, they may now assoil my Infamy: And though I have born it so long
against my Will; yet they will now see, that I have born it undeservedly.

I delivered such Truths which I thought necessary to rebuke the Spirit of
Rebellion, that was gone abroad in those distracted Times; neither courting the
Favor, nor valuing the Displeasure of the most formidable Democraticks; being
content with the purchase of Reproof, and Censure from them, whilst their
Mealy-mouthed Orators have been rewarded with Honor, and Preferment too.

If yet nevertheless, some Heterogeneous Judgments may condemn me, as much for
Publishing hereof, as for Preaching; and it may be, not altogether without
Cause too, seeing I have adventured in Favor to Truth, to publish a Discourse
prepared for the Pulpit, and not for the Press, in its Native disorder, without
the Addition or Diminution of one Sentence: I therefore hope the Courteous
Reader, will in Candor Pardon some rough, and harsh Expressions, which might
easily, but not honestly be amended. If so, I am much pleased (whatever may
happen) that Posterity may know, that I never tamely consented to the betraying
of the Liberty, Property, and Prosperity of my Country. The Basis whereof is
centered in the Succession of the Crown, to the Descendants in the Right Line.

For that Head which God and Nature has given unto the Body Politic, as well
as Natural, is better than any other, though fancied of Gold, turning on
Spondyles of Silver, or whatever Chimera our Republicans insinuated into their
Myrmidons.

The two Houses of Parliament, together with their pretended infinite
Privileges, are but Sprouts from that great Porphyrian Tree, the Prerogative
Royal; which though it be possible for them to shake, yet they can never remove
without their own Eradication. Besides, as it is fatal to some Bodies, when
they are so far corrupted as to breed Serpents in them, which die not, until
they have devoured that Womb, which gave them Birth, and Being: So it is a
fatal sign of a decaying Kingdom, when it breeds such Vermin, which naturally
corrode, and deface the Head, they must needs quickly confound the Symmetry of
the whole, as some of our state Empericks would have done: For a Reprimand of
whom I composed this Harangue, as the time allotted me would permit; and not
against any Protestant Members of a Loyal Parliament; but only against the
exorbitancy of them, who sought to bring down the Crown from Perch to popular
Lure; so to pinion the Prerogative Royal, that they might by Parliamentary
Privileges, perch into the Throne themselves. Seeing Church and State in a
Conflagration, I intended only to point out the Incendiaries, and our danger,
and to throw what drops I could, toward the quenching of those Flames; whilst
some Men then like Nero, did sit and sing at them.

These things considered, I hope, notwithstanding the Flouts and Slanders, (the
common Acclamations wherewith this has been caressed;) it may meet with a
candid Reception, from Persons of unprejudicate Judgments, considering the time
when it was Preached, and the Reasons why now Printed.

It had been Supervacaneous for me (as Matters then were) to have forsaken my
Subject, to have prosecuted the Text in the common Method: For there was no
more need (by a Concatenation of Reason, and Logical Inference) to prove the
Analogy of the Text, with some Men's Practices at that time, than it was to
detain a Man to hear proved by long and elaborate Arguments, That his House was
on Fire, when he saw it ready to burn down about his Ears.

As the Occasion then required (Men daily expecting a more formidable
Parliament,) according unto my bounden Duty, 2 Timothy 4.2.
I did Reprove, Rebuke and Exhort.

When neither Reason, Sir Leol. Jenkin's Speech in Parl.
Religion, nor the Law, and Oaths of the Land could prevail, all other the most
sober Reasoning could be to no purpose; for more serious Sentiments were fitter
for a more serious, and considerate Age. The Theater then, if well tuned, might
have prevailed more with those Clinkers, than our well set Pulpits. And when
the Echo of every Conventicle did resound with the Bigottry of their
Demogogues, I thought it high time to declaim against their Collusion: For
nothing makes People more suspicious of Goodness, than when they see their
Ministers, as well as Magistrates, to become Flatterers, and to follow a
Multitude to do evil. But my fault has always been (long before I had so
public an opportunity) that I was a Cynick, rather than a Sycophant toward
them, who with their deluding Clamors, cried down Arbitrary Principles, yet
under the form of an Ordinance, would have introduced Arbitrary Government.

To enumerate all the cogent reasons which extorted a Consent from me to
prostitute so imperfect a Discourse, would swell it beyond the bulk of a
Preface. Therefore I shall not perplex thee with the rehearsal of all the
Motives and Calumnies that occasioned it.

The Publication hereof, being of it self too honorable, though too modest a.
Refutation of them:

Yet lest, whilst I seek to resartiate my torn Reputation, I plunge my self
into greater Dishonor by a total silence; I shall mention some of the
Contumelies and Causes. Job 21.3.
Suffer me then that I may speak, and after that I have spoken, let them mock
on.

1. If I spoke Truth, yet it was Truth ill said, because ill timed, and
Rashness in me (one of the meanest of them which serve at the Altar) to set my
self against the Torrent of the Times, making my self vile in the esteem of all
sober Persons, (as the Minions of the Rout styled themselves) as if I had been
bereaved of my Intellectuals, when I undertook this Enterprise. Whereas I am
not yet sensible wherein I have committed any great Error, unless it be, for
not taking any man's Advice in the matter. But had I consulted with any of
them, I might have been better satisfied in the whole as useful and orthodox,
For eyes dimmed with Faction or Prejudice, see Truth but ill-favouredly. And
what to expect from them, I have since learned by Experience, when to
aggrandize my infamy, I have been traduced to have been the libellous Author of
some obscene Lampoons, which the spurious Wit of a sportive Satyrist could
invent.

Thus by an old Romish Device, juggled into our Malcontents Heads, they first
cast an Odium on the most zealously Loyal, and Orthodox Ministers, that
thereby, they might render their Labors ineffectual, by turning all they say
into a Ridicule. Therefore I cannot expect that this will escape the envious
Nails of some Capricio's, who scratch at all things of this nature, which have
not a snack of their Democratical Idea: and the most authentic Quotations I
have here used, may render me as an egregious Plagiary. Alas! such Reproaches
as these, I am prepared to bear, being used to some of an higher nature: for,
since by the Bill of Exclusion the Crown has been voted as a Lottery, and the
Clergy have decryed that villainous Cheat, Calumny is become a large proportion
of a Minister's Personal Dues, but payable to me by custom, with other
Perquisites; which if I receive not, I am prone to think I am choused of plain
dealing.

2. April 23. 1683. immediately after Divine Service, in the face of the
Congregation, without instigation or provocation on my part, one (who thought
himself the best man there) derided me, and this my Sermon, with all the scorn
and infamy he could; saying, That it was unreasonable, and abominable Stuff:
which I am sure was seasonable and suitable too. Pro. 25.11.
And a word fitly spoken, is like Apples of Gold in Pictures of Silver. But
when my Adversary saw Railery would nothing prevail, he used Threats, and after
much Ribaldry, he added, In majorem terrorem, Sir or Sir, We shall have a
Parliament for you e're it be long. A matter I had no just reason to fear; tho
I am sorry that there was ever occasion given, through the Error of some, that
the Supreamest Council of the Kingdom should be mistaken by any Scoundrel, for
being a Bugbear to Religion, Loyalty, and the Laws.

3. I have had reason to fear, that there was Evil intended against me by the
conspiring League, for that I have been pitied by one, who should know better
than others, in these words, Sir, I am sorry for you, and wish you knew what
Enemies your Visitation-Sermon has raised you; and have been cautioned by
others, To prepare my self to give an Account of it. To which I may add a
nefarious design of procuring hands against me; which, I suppose, by the
upright steerage of the Government dwindled into nothing. And the various
Censures brought me of it from above sixty miles distance, etc. which I delight
not to remember; because now I hope, it will clear it self from what Fame, or
Prejudice have imposed on it.

Of all that has been said, I am not yet conscious to my self that my Crime
(if any) is more than venial, and that out of the redundancy of Duty too.

For, the Proceedings of the Houses of Commons, in the two last Parliaments,
gave too great a Specimen of their being Patrons of Schism in the Church, and
Sedition in the State; which might have proved incurable, if our last Good
King, in his Princely Wisdom, had not prevented it. I need not mention
Particulars; his said Majesty's Declaration has done it for me, to the great
satisfaction of all considerate men. I hope they will have better Successors
for the future, who may retrieve their ancient Honor.

To which end it would be a happy Omen, if they would loyally agree, as in a
Synaxis, to ratify (if need so require) the Established Religion, and to
follow such wholesome measures as their Royal Master shall prescribe them; and
not to fly in his sacred Face, by thwarting his Counsel, piercing his Soul
through the sides of his Friends and Favorites, as others have done his Royal
Ancestors; and all this, to gain among their Creatures the Reputation of daring
Persons, and being their Countries Patriots. Faulconers observe, that none but
witless Buzzards are so rashly daring as to sly at their Sovereign Eagle: and
the most generous Hero's always submit to Majesty and better Reason, Norunt cui
serviunt leones.
weighing the ends of Counsel before they try or vote them. The two Houses of
Parliament are to the King and Kingdom like Fire and Water, the best of
Servants whilst restrained within the bounds of their serviceable Usefulness;
but if once they are permitted to range, and rove beyond their necessary
respective bounds or limits, too sad Experience have told us, they have been
arbitrary, and destructive Masters.

By that one attempt of the Bill of Exclusion, the Commons chalked out a way
for calcining of Allegiance, which seeing it might not be broken all at once,
yet it seemed to them advisable, that it might be done by little and little;
which though it had not its end, yet it had its Complement so far, as to
discharge their Mussulmans from their Obedience unto the Fifth Commandment: and
had instigated some Ravilliack or Felton to have merited the Thanks of the
prevailing Party of that House, if God in his Mercy had not prevented it.

4. I seemed as in a Prophetic Rapture to open the Curtains of Heaven, and to
foretell futurities, Conspirators and their Doom.

But as I abhor the spurious Brood of Enthusiasms, so do I disown their
suppositious Parent, the Spirit of Prophecy, in this Age of the Church; yet
notwithstanding, I humbly claim that ordinary measure of the Spirit, the
conduct whereof God has promised, and annexed unto the religious use of his
Word and Sacraments: thereby I foresaw, That the Expectation of the Wicked
should perish. Pro. 10.28.
And as Jotham in his Parable foretold the Destruction of Abimelech and the men
of Shechem, Judge. 9.
for their Conspiracy and their Murder; so, without Lynceus's, Eyes I foresaw,
that those Momes of Reformation, and the latent Wiles of their subterrancous
Cabals (discernable then only by influencing the Vulgar) would be discovered
too, if our Sins did not prevent it. And likewise observing the Series of God's
Judgments on Rebellions in all Ages, it was no Oracle to foretell the
Catastrophe of their Tragical Designs. Thus the profound Imminentis tunc
Ecclesia and Reipublicae Tempestatis men's prophetis contubernalis praesaga, in
Mar. ccc.
Mr. Mede foretold our late intestine Troubles in Church and State.

Tho some are fallen, yet their Dagon is not down; for as Garnet, etc. pass for
Saints in Rome, so do these for Martyrs among their Brethren of the Holy
League, who do more than whisper, that there was no Plot nor Evil intended
against His late Majesty, and our present most Gracious King, for no other
reason, but only Conditionem Principum miserimam, quibus de conjuratione
comperta non crederetur nisi occisis. Flav. Dom.
because they were not murdered in the Conspiracy.

Mariners observe, that greater Sholes of some. Phocenae.
Fish appearing, portend a Storm. If too many of that Leaven should resume
their Seats again, they will presage no Calm. For as the Howlings of Wolves in
their midnight Revels declare the draught of Blood which they hunt after; so
the jovial Shoutings of Malcontents, at some Elections, declare the teeming
hopes of a Jubilee they expect from their vaunting Suffragans: but as there is
a greater appearance of better Stars, so have we greater hopes of more Halcyon
days.

The Odium this has layn under, together with the great diligence which has
been used to depreciate as well as suppress these Sheets, has discouraged me
from imploring the Patronage of my most noble Friend, the Honorable Colonel
Strangways; which I might have presumed to do, not only on the account of his
known Integrity, and approved Loyalty, even in the times of Trial, but on the
great Experience of former Favors from his generous Ancestors, as well as from
himself and only Brother, Wadham Strangways Esquire; Governor of Portland.
in those days when true Religion was deemed Treason, and Loyalty Rebellion:
though there was never more need of so great a Hero to screen me from menaced
dangers; I am content (whatever my Destiny may be) that I have not prostituted
the Honor of so worthy a Friend unto so bespattered a Treatise. For writing of
which, though I have been blamed for laying aside my Policy, yet I have not
heard, that I have been traduced for quitting my Loyalty, or Integrity.

What I have here alleged in my Vindication, I hope may be sufficient: for, I
think it not consistent with Christian Prudence to say all that may be said,
though in my own Defense, lest naked Truth, like the bright Sun unto sore Eyes,
make the formal Hypocrites stare and startle, who whilst cherished pass for
serious Penitents; but if gauled, they will appear neither cordial Loyalists, nor
true Conformists.

LUKE 20.14. But when the Husbandmen saw him, they reasoned among themselves,
saying, This is the Heir, Come, let us kill him, that the Inheritance may be
ours.
AS our blessed Lord taught in the Temple, the Jewish Sanhedrim came unto him,
insidiously questioning his Authority. But he, who knew their thoughts,
answered not their Words. But confounded them with a Question concerning John's
Baptism (though at other times, we find that he asserted his own Authority.) To
which they, after they had reasoned among themselves, falsely replied, That they
could not, that is, they would not, tell him whence it was. And then Jesus said
unto them, neither tell I you by what Authority I do these things.

Afterward he was pleased in a Parable to show unto them what he was, by
telling plainly what they, and their Progenitors were, and whereunto their
Intentions did tend.

The Parable is of a certain Husbandman, who planted a Vineyard, and let it
forth to Husbandmen, and went into a far Country for a long time: He went
voluntarily, he was not driven from his own forcibly, as others have been.

At the season he sent his Servants unto them for the Fruit of the Vineyard;
but they beat, and shamefully entreated, and wounded those Servants he sent
unto them, and sent them away empty. But then the Lord of the Vineyard said,
What shall I do? I will send my beloved Son, it may be they will reverence him.
But when the Husbandmen saw him, they reasoned among themselves, saying, This
is the Heir, Come, let us kill him, that the Inheritance may be ours.

Our Lord was pleased to speak unto them parabolically, to the end he might
fulfill the Scriptures, confound their Wisdom, and leave them without excuse.

Therefore he does here in a sublime manner declare his own Divinity, by
representing unto them their past Deeds, and Designs to come: Their Fathers
impiety, and their own intended cruelty. So that as plainly as they saw his
Humanity, they might conceive of his Divinity.

By this Parable we understand,

1. The great Love God had for the Jews, who was pleased to become their Lord
in choosing of them to be his Vineyard. This his Vineyard he fenced; Mat. 21.33.
He dug a Wine Press, and built a Tower in it: He did all that could be
done, that he might make it fruitful. But after all that expense of Toil and
Treasure, Isa. 5.2.
He looked that it should bring forth Grapes, and it brought forth wild Grapes.

A Vineyard which was not only fruitless, but expensive to the Owner:
fruitfully full of Thorns to crown him, perfidious Friends and ungrateful
Enemies, which commonly are the Train of too merciful and too bountiful Princes.

2. We may consider here also, the irreligious ingratitude of the Jews, who
were so far from giving their Lord any return of Fruit according unto his Love,
and care of them, that they consulted the contrary: And that not so weakly as
to Exclude him only his Lawful Birthright; but to make sure work with him, they
Voted his Death.

The Text contains the manner how they resolved, and the matter they resolved
on. This is the Heir, etc. It was the final Resolution of these Traitorous
Politicians, who were not bred so many Years in the Jews Politic School, their
long Parliament, the Sanhedrim, as to conclude on so weak a Title, as by an Act
of Exclusion to settle on them and theirs, the Prerogatives Royal of their
usurped Vineyard. Knowing that such an unjust Title, would not become so strong
as a Weavers, much less as a Gordian knot, neither would it need the Sword of
an Alexander to rescind it: For it would unloose of its own accord

For Laws that are founded on Blood, Perjury, Injustice, Treason or Rebellion,
are abrogated the first day of their Promulgation: For it is not at the Peoples
choice whether they will observe such Statutes or no: For that Law, which is
contrary unto the Law of God, does tie a man only to the Penalty; it binds not
his Conscience at all to the Performance.

For the better understanding of the Text, consider;

By Vineyard is meant the Church, and State of the Jews. By Lord of the
Vineyard, God Almighty, who was pleased himself to become their Lord and King,
and to choose them from among all the Nations of the Earth to become his People.

By Husbandmen, all sorts of Men among the Jews, who were bound to do their
Lord Service, in their respective places, both in Church, and State, as he had
placed them; but more particularly the chief Priests, Scribes and Elders.

By those his Servants which were sent unto them, understand the Prophets, and
Messengers of God, who from time to time were sent unto the Jews, to call them
to their own Work, and the Work of their King: That is to repent, and practice
a better Obedience, and not that every Ploughman should become Statesman; nor
every confident Mechanic put on the Ephod, nor intermeddle with the Affairs of
Church, or State, who were not called thereunto. But the Jews were for Stoning,
and Killing of those who were sent unto them, though they came for their good,
to reduce them to a better understanding, and more honest purposes.

By the beloved Son, who was sent; the Son of God, whom he was pleased at last
to send unto those Rebellious, and Ungrateful Husbandmen.

By Heir, the same with Son, differing here only in the Relation to the Lord
who sent him.

Come let us kill him, that the Inheritance may be ours: Is so well understood
of every one who has read the Gospel of our Lord and Savior's Passion, or its
pourtraicture, the Martyrology of our Royal Martyr, that it needs no
Explanation.

Our dear Savior, though he foreknew the Determination of these wicked
Husbandmen, yet as his Father was pleased to send, so was he to be sent, and to
fulfill the Prophecies, and Predictions that related to him. So he voluntarily
came unto them, that he might become the Sacrifice for our Redemption.

And then, so soon as the Husbandmen saw him, they resolved, (for I suppose
they made no long delay, lest they might lose their opportunity, and Christ the
Heir might have passed over Jordan, their Countries Tweed, and then they might
be forced to change their designed Measures) to make an Act of Exclusion when
they might kill him. Therefore, When the Husbandmen saw him, they reasoned
among themselves.

This their Design was not so light and frivolous, as that they should
enterprise it rashly, at all Adventures; therefore they went considerately to
work. They reasoned, that they might ripen their Treason, and bring it to its
designed end. Therefore they convened by way of Assembly, and were the
Sanhedrim or Jewish Parliament, These parli'd and plotted how they might bring
High Treason to pass. But yet it was Conventus Malorum, a Conventicle they held
in a Parliamentary way; wherein they contrived this bloody Expedient, To kill
the Heir that they might enjoy his Inheritance. They were loath to part with
that pleasant Vineyard, they had so long usurped: Nay, they, who were so unjust
to their Landlord, as not to yield him any of the Fruit, were very unlikely to
yield up the Vineyard; But what they had gotten by Murder, and Sedition, they
were resolved to keep by Blood, and Treason; so accordingly they voted, and
their Vote we have here in Terminis, This is the Heir, Come, let us kill him.

Verily! a very fine Vote for Tenants, and Subjects to pass against their Liege
Lord, and Sovereign. It Is observable, that a Parliament of Traitors, or a
Sanhedrim of Conspirators never yet designed good to Prince or People; for when
such meet, their reasonings tend only to turn the Commonweal into a Common woe;
for Reason nor Religion has neither Tongue nor Ear in such Assemblies. For I
do not find, that ever our Savior had so much fair-quarter allowed him by this
great Council of the Jews, as to be heard in his own defense; Though he was
their great King, the everlasting God, the Prince of peace. Heard indeed he
was, but it was as people use to hear Sermons; that is, with a deaf ear: his
Words were not weighed, nor his Reasons considered. I confess that he was
questioned, and buffetted too, to serve as a pretext for the Rulers, and as a
blind for the people, and led forth also to confront the Witnesses; but he was
not heard according to the merits of his cause, not acquitted as he ought, but
condemned as they pleased. This is observable here, that the Mercy and Justice
of the Jews then, did exceed that of some Christians now. But in this, as it
was their desire, the Ebullition of their malice, so it was his Choice too; for
he was born to this end, and in it, his Will was done in Earth, as it is in
Heaven. There was no fault found in him; Joh. 18.14
but it was judged expedient that one should dye for the people. That is,
Caiaphas, one of the leading Members in the Sanhedrim, made a Speech there, Dr.
Ham. on Joh. 11.50.
and grounded this Expedient on a politic Maxim they had, That they might do
any thing to keep the people from Destruction, which they feared from the
Romans, to whom they were then subject. And this they feared, by reason of the
Admiration the people had him in for his Miracles; Dr. Ham. on Joh. 11, 48.
they feared that he who professed himself the Messiah, would become their
King, which the Romans would look on as a Rebellion, and so tempt them to come
with an Army, and destroy them. It was this politic Reason prevailed in the
great Council of their Nation, against Justice and Equity, their Religion,
Laws, and Oaths; yea all that was sacred, not only to vote away their Lord's
Inheritance, but his Life too.

These Mechanics having gotten his Royal person into their hands, they said,
This is the Heir, come, let us kill him.

These very men, who it is likely were the Heads of popular Factions in their
respective Countries, were some of them, who e're while (as it were) courted
him with Hosanna in the highest, who when they had gotten hold of him, they
were for a Crucify him, Crucify him. Such is the Vicissitude of popular
Favor, that these very men, who courted him most when he was riding into
Jerusalem, forsook him soonest when he was led into Jerusalem. Such commonly is
the fate of unfortunate Princes, Tacit.
who being once fallen into the dis-favour of the profanum vulgus; Tam
benefacta quam malefacta premunt; they rake up their former Favors in
Oblivion, and reckon their good deeds, as well as bad, into the number of
Oppressions. And then they are easily led by their Tub Orators, and designing
Leaders, to know no pity, nor to show mercy toward them. What may be said or
done, be it true or false, shall be said, and done by them, to bring their ends
to pass: but can we ever expect truth from such, who have forsaken the Faith?
If their Tongues were any slander, the Virtues of the best and most
compassionate Princes should ever be sullied by them.

Thus Christ, the King of the Jews, when he came to fulfill, was charged to
disannul the Law, to change their Religion, and the Customs which Moses
delivered them. Acts 6.14.
When they had nothing to allege against Christ truly, they devised somewhat
falsely: by which they hoped to extenuate their Treason, by imputing evil to
Christ, who never did any. But his Innocence quickly appeared, to his own
Vindication, and their Confusion: Luke 23.14.
for Pilate declared in his defense, saying, I have examined him before you,
and have found no Fault in this man touching those things whereof ye accuse
him: v. 23.
yet notwithstanding they were earnest to have him crucified; v. 33.
And they crucified him and the Malefactors; v. 31.
one on the right hand, and the other on the left. But if they did these things
in a green tree, what shall be done in the dry? So according to their Proverb,
Utter desolation followed this their Treason. So true a Prophet was Christ in
this Parable to foretell to the Jews both his own Sufferings, and their Cruelty
and Destruction. For according unto his Word at the time appointed, Luk 20.16
The Lord of the Vineyard came and destroyed these Husbandmen, and gave the
Vineyard to others. Thus commonly the Wheel of Treason breaks the Necks of them
who at first turned it. Their malevolent Reasonings brought on their own Pates
direful Conclusions, even their own Destruction. So true is it, that he who
votes for Treason, gives his Voice for his own death; which will appear, not
only in Judas, who betrayed, and the Jews, who killed their King; but in all
those Traitors and Conspirators, who have at any time devised the Death of
their lawful Princes and Sovereigns, few, or none, ever came without Ignominy
and Sorrow unto their Graves. Of which there are many Instances.

In the Jews Vote against our Savior, we may observe:

1. Their Confession who Christ was. They acknowledged That he was the Heir.
Surely he was no doubtful or presumptuous Heir, for we do not find that ever
they denied him his right to the Vineyard, or Kingdom of Israel; for that in
their Vote here, they confessed and declared, as in a full Parliament, Nemine
contradicente, that Christ was the Heir.

2. We may consider the Condition or Quality of those Conspirators, they were
(...), Husbandmen, or Farmers, mere Mechanics, a word of large Extent. Such it
may be who were bred to the Plough and the Spade. Whosoever had cunning enough
to plot against, and Treachery to betray the rightful Heir, and Covetousness
enough to seize upon his Inheritance, were sufficiently capacitated to be
Members of this Jewish Parliament, or Sanhedrim.

3. Here is their unanimous Agreement, together with their final Resolve: Come,
let us kill him: Come, here, is not the voice of their Precept of calling to
this their Assembly; but it is their Celeusmae seu clamor ad Theologos
Hierarchiae Anglicanae.
Celeusma, Shout, Noise, or Watchword, to call together all their
nonconforming, but yet consenting Brethren in this, and as many others as they
could too, to join hands, and assist with them at this Regicide, the Murder of
the Heir.

Now, verily, all those Guiles of God, Religion, and the Good Old Cause,
disappeared, when they had thus brought their Plot to its maturity. Such
Shadows then vanish of their own accord.

4. Here Is their wicked Instigation, to this their traitorous Resolution; That
the Inheritance might be theirs. I suppose that these wicked Conspirators had
some hopes of easing themselves from the Roman Yoke, by turning Monarchy into
Democracy. This seems to me probable, for that they aspired to the Vineyard,
and Birthright of their Lord and Sovereign: for they believed, that if they
had killed the rightful Heir, that the Romans, who had but an usurped Title,
which they got, and kept by the Sword, might by better steel be taken, and
maintained from them.

This temporal Inheritance of our Lord that he was born to, Mat. 2.2.
was only the Kingdom of the Jews: and this was all that these Husbandmen did
covet by killing of Christ, the rightful Heir. But if we consider his just
Dominions, according unto his Inauguration, and God's Designation, then we find
not only the Land of Jury did belong unto him, Heb. 1.2.
but the whole World too. But these Husbandmen, the Jews, aimed at the
Partition, and enjoyment of his Kingdom of Judea only: and therefore as
Republicans use to do, they were resolved, though they waded through Blood and
Treason, to attain that Inheritance.

Thus in hopes to exchange their Mattocks and Shovels for Crowns and Scepters
(for in a Commonwealth most Statesmen prove not only as Kings, but are Tyrants
too) every one Rehoboam-like, makes his Little-singer heavier than the rightful
Heir's Loins: Heyl. Geog. 206.
for what is gotten by Rebellion, must be kept by Force and Treason. Hence it
is said of Venice, the best Free State in the World, that Christians live
better under the Turk than under the Venetians. Prove. 28.2.
And Solomon tells us, that it is for the Transgression of a Land, that many
are the Princes thereof. Yet notwithstanding, how many are there among us that
court their own Infelicity.

Our Lord himself was the only begotten of his Father, the true Heir of the
Crown of Jury, who in this Parable gave the Malcontents of his own Kingdom
such divine Warnings, as might melt them into pity toward him; but their
wicked Hearts were so far from being mollified, that they were the more
enraged: and tho they saw his Miracles, Signs, and mighty Wonders, that he
wrought among them, and by them saw, that he was the very same that was
shadowed forth unto them in this Parable; yet they did as it were shut their
eyes, and stop their ears, that they might not see with their eyes, and
understand with their hearts, so that they might persevere in their Rebellion
against him. Nay they could not but confess (had not the Fear of Caesar
supplanted the Fear of God) That these very Works and Sufferings, that Christ
did undergo, should be performed by their expected Messiah and King; for that
he fulfilled all that was foretold of him. So that they had not sufficient
Excuse for doubting, much less for denying him to be their anointed King,
Priest, and Prophet.

By his Miracles he asserted to them his Divinity, by his Sufferings, his
Humanity. He gave himself unto them to be a pattern and example of all Virtue
and holy living; and he gave his Gospel, the supremest and exactest Law that
ever was, to teach them to conform themselves to his Example: so that his
Words, as well as his Works, were enough to convince them, that he was the
rightful Heir. And verily, a man might confidently believe, that none could be
more ignorant among them who was the rightful Heir of their Vineyard or
Kingdom, than we can be ignorant who is the Heir of our British Crown and
Diadem.

But we read, that some, had they known what they did, would not have crucified
the Lord of Glory. And St. 1 Cor. 2.8. Acts 3.17.
Peter told the Jews, that through Ignorance they killed Christ, as did also
their Rulers.

Doubtless, the Literati among the Jews knew well enough whom they conspired
against. But here I understand it of the illiterate, who were likely among the
Scribes and Elders, as well as Commons of Israel: for there were in Israel, as
well as Nineveh, such who could not discern between their right hand and their
left. And of these, it is very likely some of the rich were advanced to be of
the Sanhedrim, though not for their Wisdom, yet for their Weakness, that they
might carry on the Designs of their Patriots, which men of Wisdom and Courage
would never have done. And I suppose (but it is only my Supposition) that the
choosing into the Sanhedrim, might be much like to the Election of the new Pope
in the Roman Conclave, and Members into most of our Diets and Councils in
Christendom; that is, by Bribery and Rewards: the Spit and the Spigot, Promises
and Threats, make the new Pope, the Burgesses and Burgomasters, in most places
in Europe. If they who were chosen among the Jews had furious Zeal enough for
their own Party, and Leaders, to exalt themselves, and to pull down the Crown;
they had Wit enough, though not Wisdom, to dive into the merit of the Cause.
Such as these are giddy enough always to vote against the Heir, alas! though
they are ignorant wherein such Votes may end. Their fiery Zeal is such, that if
they are bid go, they will run into Murder, and Treason too. Of this sort were
also the Drudges, Vassals, or Servants of the Husbandmen, who looked no farther
than the Command of their Masters or Leaders. Of which sort there are too many
among us, who have after the same manner disturbed the Quiet of this our
Israel; who with Ignatius Loyala account such bloody Obedience better than
Sacrifice.

As Absalom in his Conspiracy, 2 Samuel 15.6 v. 11.
by his Blandishments, stole the hearts of the men of Israel; and it is
observable, That with him went two hundred men out of Jerusalem, that were
called, and they went in their simplicity, and they knew not any thing: so, how
many are there among us, who follow the new Deformers? but alas! they follow
them in the simplicity of their hearts, not knowing any thing, being so amazed
with the specious pretensions of Religion and Loyalty, that they cannot see
what is either; for they zealously advise the overthrow of both, by consulting
the Exclusion of the Heir of our British Vineyard.

Such brave Fellows as these are the only Husbandmen to become Members in a
Fanatic Parliament: and their ignorant Followers would serve as well for
Churchwardens too. My Reason is, Because that the one as well as the other,
have such seared Consciences, that they can violate Religion, Loyalty, Laws,
and Oaths, without remorse, with this Salvo (if they gain not the better in the
cause) they will say with the Jews, they did it ignorantly.

But I shall prove that some of the Jews could not be ignorant who Christ was,
whatever they might pretend to the contrary.

They knew that he was descended from the Royal Line, from the Loins of
Abraham, and the Seed of David. But this compared with his other Royalties, was
but an Act of Christ's Degradation, proceeding from his Humiliation, Isa. 9.7.
v. 6.
to sit on the Throne of David: for he was the mighty God, the everlasting
Father, the Prince of Peace. His Birth was foretold to them of whom he should
be born; the very place where, and the time when, Micah 5. Flav. Dom. caused
the line of David to be diligently sought out, and extinguished, for fear lest
he were yet to come out of the House of David which should enjoy the Kingdom.
Anal. Caesar. Romans
even when the whole World was taxed. And as I have read, that Christ himself
stands on the Tax-Roll with Joseph and Mary.

And it was by the very Providence of God, Ham. on Luke 2.
that Mary went from Nazareth to Bethlehem to be enrolled; that she should
there fall in Travel, and bring forth, that so the Seed of David, and Branch of
Jesse, that was conceived in Nazareth, should be born in Bethlehem where Jesse
and David was born.

The Stars of Heaven pointed to him, Mat. 29. Luke 2.10
and the Angels did minister unto him, and proclaimed his Incarnation. All
their great and good Kings were figures of this King. David spoke of him,
saying, Lo, I come: Ps. 40.7.
in the Volume of the Book it is written of me: that is, the whole Volume of
Scripture did testisie of him; which because it was read unto them every
Sabbath Day, they could not choose but know that he was their King: for as Face
answers Face, so Christ answered, and fulfilled all those Types, Figures, and
Prophecies that had relation to him. Besides, we have Pilate's Testimony, when
the Jews cried out, Jo. 19.15.
Crucify him, Crucify him. What! said he, shall I crucify your King? To
which I may add, the plain Confession of the Husbandmen here in the Text,
saying, This is the Heir: no suppositious or presumptive Heir. There was no one
living betwixt the Crown and him, if it might descend in its right line; for
this is spoken here, as in the Person, so in the sense of the whole Nation of
the Jews, none could deny it. Whence we may observe, that there was more truth
in the conspiring Jews, who killed Christ, than is among many of our
Republicans now, for that they did not charge his Birth falsely.

But as the Jews Confession added to the Confirmation of our Savior's Title,
so their so full Acknowledgment of him, added to his Grief and Sorrow; that
they who were his own Tenants, Subjects, and Servants, should plot and conspire
his Death, and that not rashly, but advisedly, by the supremest Council of his
Kingdom. If we enquire where this so horrible Treason was hatched? We shall
find that it proceeded from their Factions and Divisions which arose from their
Lusts. Schism in the Church, and Sedition in the State, have but one Parent,
that is a Furious and Fanatic Zeal, which have ever infested the Church of God
in all Ages, and have spilt the blood of her Servants, from the blood of Abel
unto the blood of Zacharias, which perished between the Altar and the Temple;
and from the Blood of Zacharias unto the blood of our Messiah, and from thence
unto the blood of our Royal Martyr. And as Zacharias was slain by the Jewish
Zealots, (...), in the midst of the Temple; so Christ, and our dear and dread
Sovereign, were slain in the midst of their own Kingdoms, by the Zeal and
Treason of their own Subjects. And, to our Grief be it spoken, they rest not
there, but as Herod when he persecuted the Church, and killed James the Brother
of John with the Sword; and because he saw it pleased the Jews, Acts 12.1, 2, 3.
he proceeded farther to take Peter also.

Thus our Zealots having killed the Father, they proceed to take the Sons also.
This too plainly appears, for that they are come as near the Jews Vote in the
Text, as under the present circumstance of things they durst. They are only
come yet to vote the Heir out of his Vineyard; but if that Act should once pass
the great Sanhedrim of our Nation, you shall quickly then see, what they will
be at next. Then will follow, as in its fit time, Come, let us once more drive
away our great Landlord into a far Country again, and then kill the Heir, that
the Inheritance may be ours. Alas! there is no wildfire so raging as an
Enthusiastic Zeal; it hurries men on, against all sense and reason, Vt mala
quem scabies, and morbus regius urget,
Aut fanaticus error. -- Hor. de Art. Poet.

It stings men to Madness, it drives them on to horrible Plots and mischievous
Treasons, even to their own Destruction.

This (praised be God) we have seen verified, that that Treason which was
hatched in Hell (by God's Blessing on the Wisdom of our Solomon) was blasted on
Earth, to the great comfort of him and us. And I have still some hopes, that
God will yet deliver us; but my Fear exceeds my Hopes.

My Hopes are grounded on this:

1. Because that according unto a Maxim in Politics, That Plots in the State
should be used as Stratagems in War; that is, they are not fit for a second
Usage, because known Plots are commonly counter-plotted: and we see, both by
the Votes and Practices of our late grave Senators, that they climb toward the
Throne by the same steps their usurping Tutors gained the Inheritance. They
pointing where they will strike again, may teach us, if we are not besotted,
how we may ward that blow.

2. A second ground I have for these Hopes, I shall give you in the Words of
the Pious and Reverend Bishop Brownrig, taken out of his Sermon on Haggai 2.23.

The Word of God must be fulfilled: therefore said he long ago; Nobility, i. e.
The Prime and Top of the Nobility is the Quarry out of which God raises the
Captain of his People; Eccl. 10.17.
Blessed art thou, O Land, when thy King is the Son of Nobles. 'Twas Queen
Elizabeth's Answer to those that desired her to acknowledge her Successor,
Thronus meus est Thronus Regum; Nolim ut vilis succedat mihi. The highest of
the Nobility gives a great Capacity for Rule and Authority. 'Twas God's Curse
on the Philistines, that a Bastard should Rule over them, Zach. 9.6. God he
established Zerubbabel's Monarchy, and raised it out of Nobility, and settled
it on a constant Succession, made it hereditary, Shealtiel comes by a lineal
Descent from the Loins of David. David calls this the Establishment of his
Throne. 2 Samuel 7.19.
Thou have spoken of thy Servants House for a great while to come. God has
been careful to maintain this lineal Descent; 2 Chronicles. 24.1.
rather Joash, a Child of seven years old, shall be placed in the Throne, than
this Succession be interrupted.

'Twas that which troubled Hezekiah most, That, if he had died of his great
Sickness, he had left no Heir of the Crown behind him. Ezekiel. 21.
If Coniah dye Childless, yet reserve the Diadem for him whose Right it is, to
whom it belongs. 'Twas one Exception they took against Herod, Nec nascendo, nec
vivendo meruit regnum, He wanted both Birth and Breeding to make him a King.
Thus far that Reverend Prelate. If this be so, it is not for every Pope and
Parliament to Crown whom they please; for that Right is the Lord's. If they
should fetch a Bastard out of Ashdod, and set the Crown upon him, yet we know
that God can, and in his time will pull it off too. For when the Crown is set
upon a wrong Head, Thus says the Lord God, remove the Diadem, and take off the
Crown. I will overturn, overturn, overturn it, and it shall be no more, until
he come whose right it is, and I will give it him, Ezekiel. 21.26, 27.

But as I have reason to hope, so alas! I have reason to fear too, that in time
they may crown their Design, by casting our Heir out of his Vineyard, and
seizing on his Inheritance; but how long they may keep it, if they should get
it, that God knows.

My Reasons are, that what has been may be.

1. Because though God's Mercies in the present Instance do abound toward us,
yet our Sins notwithstanding do superabound toward him.

2. We have been unthankful for the Restoration of our most Gracious Heir to
his Inheritance, and for all those Blessings we enjoy by him.

3. Rebels and Traitors never think themselves safe, who once strike at the
Crown, unless they strike off the Crown from Him, and His who wears it.

4. Therefore such Moles will never cease plotting and working, until they have
either pulled down the Crown, or brought themselves to Confusion. And it is just
with God, to punish the deeds of Darkness in some, by deeds of Darkness from
others; so here for our Sins, to leave us not Vine nor Vineyard neither.

But if such a Knack should pass, which they so earnestly contend for, and we
as earnestly pray against; I fear it would have direful Effects: As,

1. The Confutation of a chief Principle in our Protestant Religion.

2. It may produce a War which may last many Years. It will prove unto us a
Pandora's Box; it will bring with it such epidemical Evils.

As there were some who set against the Heir in the Text through Ignorance, and
some through Wilfulness; so there were some also who kept themselves Neuters,
through Cowardice; content if they might but sit under their own Vines, and
their own Fig Trees, and drink every one the Waters of his own Cistern. Isa. 36
They mattered not who had the supreme Power, an Usurper, or the rightful Heir.
Of which sort were Joseph of Arimathea; Luke 51.
tho he consented not unto Christ's Death, Jo. 7.50.
yet he appeared not for his Life. And Nicodemus when he should have done his
Sovereign Service, tho he confessed that he came from God, yet he was ashamed
to own him as his Lord. But these, no doubt, believed that Christ was not only
their King, but the Savior of the World too; Lu. 24.46.
for that, thus it was written, and thus it behoved Christ to suffer. For them
then, voluntarily to set themselves solely against the whole Torrent of the
Jews malice, was not only to resist Man, but God too. The case betwixt them and
their Sovereign was extraordinary, and no President for any man's practice now;
unless it be to maintain his Majesty's Right when he may be heard, and to stand
by him at such a time as this is, when we may do him Service: Cum vitia prosunt
peccat qui recte facit.
for there was a time not long since, when in the present Instance we could not
be heard.

If it be a Protestant's Duty to defend the Principles of his Religion, then it
is to defend the Birthright of Kings; and that it is not lawful to depose or
exclude them from their lawful Inheritance, as these two Brethren, the Papist
and Presbyterian, maintain both by their Doctrine and Practice.

If so, surely it is the bounden Duty of every Minister, in an especial manner
to defend his Religion, and the Prerogatives Royal. We that are Christ's
Ambassadors, may not suffer the Regalities of his Vineyard to be torn from him,
without be traying our Trust to our God and our King too. As in Murder all are
Accessaries who are present, so it is in Treason. But we by our silence make
our selves Principals, by not teaching the People herein what to do, and what
to eschew; for he who hinders not Sin and Sedition when he may, commands it.

Think not that any of us, who tamely sit still, and suffer willingly the loss
of our Right in our David, shall be acquitted: no more than they were who
consented to the Civil War against our King (as it is phrased) tho the same was
a Rebellion in Ireland: Mat. 27.24
and with Pilate to wash our hands, and to say, We are not guilty of the Blood
of this just man. There are no Neuters in Treason, as there are no lukewarm
persons in Heaven: we must be for God or against him. So we must be for the
Lord of the Vineyard, and his Heir, or against them. As there is no device can
absolve us from our Obedience to our Parents; so there is no Act can absolve us
from our Allegiance to our Prince, they stand both equally proped by one
Command, Ex. 20.12.
without Dispensation or Absolution; whatever the Pope, the Papist, and the
Commons in Parliament, the Presbyterian God, pretend to the contrary.

As the King is justly defended by the Law in his Person, and Prerogatives from
all Invaders; so is his Successor to descend unto us, by the same Tenure: for
he will not derive his Title from Man, but God, as does his Predecessor. And if
he or his Posterity should become evil Princes (which God forbid that any of
the Posterity of our Royal Martyr should be so tainted) yet God can make them
to become good Kings, Prove. 21.1.

To affirm then that an House of Husbandmen, common Mechanics, or
Country-Farmers, who at first were called together by the Sovereign Lords of
our Vineyard to consult de dubiis and arduis regni: who the nearer they were
raised toward the Sun which exhaled them, the more exorbitant and formidable
they grew: whether by Cunning and Policy, or Might and Rebellion, I shall not
now determine.

When such as these shall form themselves into an High Court of Justice, or a
Grand Committee (sometimes equivalent Terms for an Arbitrary Council) and
assume to themselves greater Authority than that paternal Power which gave them
Birth and Being. That is to alter the Course of Government, Causa non
impedientes are numbered by Philosophers among moral efficient Causes.
and steerage of our Obedience. He who does thereto tamely consent, does betray
his Christian Trust and Courage too, as well as he who does so unjustly vote,
and act for our Slavery.

For by our silence,

1. We consent, that the Crown is elective, and not hereditary.

2. We despise God's Providence over us, in forsaking his Choice for us; we
choose for our selves, which is in effect to do as Israel did, not only to
reject the lawful Heir or Successor, but God too, 1 Samuel 8.7. For man's Law as
it ought not to add, so it ought not to diminish from the Law of God. These are
but waste words to you of the Clergy, who sufficiently know your Duty herein;
would to God you had all the Courage and Goodness to practice it as well.

To discourage us from our Duty, it is said, that there is an Act made which
gave to our Virgin Queen, together with her Parliament, the power of the Crown,
and that no man may since affirm that, that may not be done without severe
penalties; therefore I shall not reply unto it, either Pro or Con: only this I
say, let us remember that we are Protestants, and not a miscellany of Papists
and Dissenters, and let not the fear of Man raze out our Love and Duty to God
and our King.

If such an Act should pass, we cannot foresee the Evils which it would bring
with it, both to Church and State, as before intimated. But I suppose the
Intent of its Promoters is, to punish the true and orthodox Protestants, and to
promote their Adversaries to divide this our most gracious Sovereign's
Inheritance between them.

The passing of such an Act, would be like the Passing Bell which rang at the
Command of Peter of Arragon in Sicily, which was the Signal to the Sicilian
Massacre.

Let all then, but especially we of the Clergy, set our selves against all
whatsoever that shall endeavor the deposing of our good and merciful King, or
the Exclusion of his Heirs and Successors, or the Division and Desolation of
this his Inheritance our British Vineyard.

Let each of us with Nehemiah cast away fear, Chap. 6.11
and say, Should such a man as I flee? or warp from Protestant Principles, when
the very Foundation of our Religion, our Laws, and our Loyalty, stands at
stake? It is a shame for Protestant Ministers to own such exotic Principles
and Practices, as are now by some designing Leaders patronized, who yet affect
the name of Protestants notwithstanding. Which principles were they examined by
you, you would easily find, that they who defend them are of no Religion, but a
Gallamalfry of Popery and Presbyterism: for whatever is faced with Faction, is
lined with Popery.

Do you think, that such men as these owe any good Will to our Sion, who durst
be so impudently bold as to fly at our Sovereign? Such men as these do as much
good in a Parliament House, as a MONKEY in a Glass-shop, who will never cease
their setting of things in better order, until they have broken all in pieces.

Now these are the men which I beseech you, Brethren, to mark, To. 16.17.
for they cause Divisions and Offenses, contrary to the Doctrine which ye have
learned; and avoid them.

Let not any of them, either Father or Son, have your Voice or Assistance, to
be Members of our Senates. For Treason is such an hereditary Leprosy, that the
Royal Ocean of Mercy and Bounty can scarce purify it: for such think, that it
is ground enough for them irreconcileably to hate whom they have thus offended.
I am sorry that ever any of our Function should be so weak and pusilanimous, so
far to forsake their Station, as to stand by those men, who so far set
themselves against our Sovereign Lord, as to elect such men who durst oppose
his Successor. Don't ye dream that you shall gain any great Boon by it. They
may promise you Oliveyards and Vineyards, greater Parsonages, and a
superintendant power in your respective Parishes, but I doubt they will deceive
you, when they have served themselves by you: for it is a known Maxim, To love
the Treason, but to hate the Traitor. But if they chance to be condemned, you
may then have as many thanks as the Ladder, and the Hangman, and all those
subservient helps which brought them to that Doom. But if they should prosper,
and prevail in their Attempts, how highly soever you are honored by them now
above your Brethren, yet all the favor you may expect from them then will be,
Only the same Polyphemus granted to Ulysses, namely, That he should be devoured
the last of his Companions.

Now I have but little to say unto you who are Churchwardens: your Faults I
need not tell you, for the whole Town and Country talks of them. Matters would
never have come to this pass, had you, and such as you, made Conscience of your
Oaths; but they who make no bones of Oaths, will make no scruple of Treason:
for by the Transactions of what is lately past, one would think, that the
likeliest men to serve in our Parliaments would be such only as you, or such
who have been actually in Arms against the King or his Father. My Reason is,
because such men seem to please the Layety best, for that they will be sure (if
they can) to vote down the Heir, and all his Supporters.

But it is the parts and duties, both of Priests and People, to stop such in
their Career when opportunity shall offer it self, that we like Protestants
should choose Protestants, and not men of blended Principles, and so by this
means prevent their final Resolve, viz. This is the Heir: come, let us kill
him, that the Inheritance may be ours. From which Vote, good Lord deliver us,
for Jesus Christ his sake; to whom, with the Father and Holy Ghost, be ascribed
all Honor, etc. now and evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

