Sr. Roger L'Estrange Knt.
VOS NON VOBIS
G. Kneller pinxit.

R. White sculpsit.

portrait

FABLES, OF AESOP And other Eminent MYTHOLOGISTS:

WITH Morals and Reflections.

By Sir Roger L'Estrange, Knight.

LONDON,

Printed for R. Sare, T. Sawbridge, B. Took, M. Gillyflower, A. and I.
Churchil, and I. Hindmarsh, 1692.

THE PREFACE.
WE have had the History of Aesop so many times over and over, and drest-up so
many several Ways; that it would be- but Labor Lost to Multiply Unprofitable
Conjectures upon a Tradition of so Great Uncertainty. Writers are divided about
him, almost to all manner of purposes: And particularly concerning the
Authority, even of the greater part of Those Compositions that pass the World
in his Name: For, the Story is come down to us so Dark and Doubtful, that it is
Impossible to Distinguish the Original from the Copy: And to say, which of the
Fables are Aesops, and which not; which are Genuine, and which Spurious:
Beside, that there are diverse Inconsistencies upon the Point of Chronology, in
the Account of his Life, (as Maximus Planudes, and Others have Delivered it)
which the whole Earth can never Reconcile. Vavasor the Josuite, in a Tract of
his, de Ludicra Dictione, takes Notice of some four or five Gross Mistakes of
This Kind. [Planudes (says he) brings Aesop to Ba^ylon, in the Reign of
Lycerus; where there never was such a Prince heard of, from Nabonassar ( the
first King of Babylon) to Alexander the Great. He tells also of his going into
Egypt in the Days of King Nectenabo; which Nectenabo came not into the World
till well nigh Two Hundred Years after him. And so he makes him Greet his
Mistress upon his first Entrance into his Master's House, with a Bitter
Sentence against Women out of Euripides; ( as he pretends) when yet Aesop had
been Dead, a matter of Fourscore Years, before The Other was Born. And once
again, He brings him in, Talking of the Pyraean Port, in his Fable of the Ape
and the Dolphin: A Port, that the very Name on it was never thought of, till
about the Seventy Sixth Olympiad: And Aesop was Murdered, in the Four and
Fifti'th.] This is enough in All Conscience, to Excuse any Man from laying
overmuch Stress upon the Historical Credit of a Relation, that comes so
Blindly, and so Variously Transmitted to us: Over and above, that it is not one
jot to our Business (further then to Gratify an Idle Curiosity) whether the
Fact be True or False; whether the Man was Straight, or Crooked; and his Name,
Aesop, or (as some will have it) Lochman: In All which Cases, the Reader is
left at Liberty to Believe his Pleasure. We are not here, upon the Name, the
Person, or the Adventures of This Great Man; but upon the Subject of his
Apologues and Morals; And not of His alone, but of several other Eminent Men
that have Written after his Copy; and abundantly Contributed in those Labors,
to the Delight, Benefit, and Instruction of Those that were to come after them.

There are, it is True, a Certain Set of Morose and Untractable Spirits in the
World, that look upon Precepts in Emblem, as they do upon Gays and Pictures,
that are only fit for Women and Children, and make no more reckoning of them,
then of the Fooleries of so many Old Wives Tales. These are a sort of People
that are Resolved to be pleased with nothing that is not Unsociably Sour, Ill
Natured, and Troublesome; Men that make it the Mark as well as the Prerogative
of a Philosopher, to be Magisterial, and Churlish; As if a Man could not be
Wise and Honest, without being Inhumane; or, I might have said, without putting
an Affront upon Christian Charity, Civil Society, Decency and Good Manners: But
they are not aware All this while, that the Foundations of Knowledge and Virtue
are laid in our Childhood; when Nothing goes Kindly down with us, that is not
Seasoned and Adapted to the Palate and Capacity of 'those Tender Years. It Is in
the very Nature of us, first, to be Inquisitive, and Hankering after New and
New Sights and Stories: And 2dly, No less Sollicitous to Learn and Understand
the Truth and Meaning of what we See and Hear: So that betwixt the Indulging
and Cultivating of This Disposition, or Inclination, on the One hand, and the
Applying of a Profitable Moral to the Figure, or the Fable, on the Other,
here is the Sum of All that can be done upon the Point of a Timely Discipline
and Institution, toward the Forming of an Honorable, and a Virtuous Life. Most
Certain it is, that without This Early Care and Attention, upon the Main, we
are as good as Lost in our very Cradles; for the Principles that we Imbibe in
our Youth, we carry commonly to our Graves; and it is the Education, in short,
that makes the Man. To speak All, in a Few Words, Children are but Blank Paper,
ready Indifferently for any Impression, Good or Bad, for they take All upon
Credit; and it is much in the Power of the first Comer, to Write Saint, or
Devil upon it, which of the Two He pleases. Wherefore let the Method of
Communication be never so Natural and Agreeable, the Better, the Worse still,
if the Matter be not Suited to the Prudence, the Piety, and the Tenderness that
is Requisite in the Exercise of such a Function. Now This is a Nicety that
Depends, in a Great Measure, upon the Care, Providence, Sobriety, Conduct and
Good Example of Parents, Guardians, Tutors, etc. Nay it Descends to the very
Choice of such Nurses, Servants, and Familiar Companions, as will apply
themselves Diligently to the Discharge of This Office.

As it is beyond All Dispute, I suppose, that the Delight and Genius of
Children, lies much toward the Hearing, Learning, and Telling of Little
Stories; So this Consideration holds forth to us a kind of Natural Direction to
begin our Approches upon that Quarter, toward the Initiating of them into some
sort of Sense* and Understanding of their Duty. And This may most properly be
done in a way of History and Moral; and in such a manner, that the Truth and
Reason of Things, may be Artificially and Effectually Insinuated, under the
Cover, either of a Real Fact, or of a Supposed One: But then These very Lessons
Themselves may be Gilt and Sweetened, as we Order Pills and Potions; so as to
take off the Disgust of the Remedy; for it holds, both in Virtue, and in
Health, that we love to be Instructed, as well as Plisick'd, with Pleasure.
This is an Article that would both Bear and Require a Volume: But without
Dwelling any longer upon it, I shall content my self with some short General
Touches, and so Proceed.

It may be laid down in the First Place, for an Universal Rule, never to suffer
Children to Learn any thing, (now Seeing, and Hearing, with Them, is Learning)
but what they may be the Better for All their Lives after. And it is not
sufficient neither, to keep Men clear of any Thought, Word or Deed, that is
Foul, Scandalous, and Dishonest; but there are Twenty Insipid Twittle-Twattles,
Frothy Jests, and Iingling Witticisms, that look, as if they had no Hurt in
them; and yet the Wonting of us to the Use and Liking of These Levities, Leads,
and Inures us to a Misunderstanding of Things, that is no less Dangerous then a
Corruption o^ Manners. Beside, that there is no need of Entertaining them with
These Fopperies, having so much Choice of Useful Matter at hand, and as Good
Cheap. Briefly, in the Case of This Method of Instruction and Institution, let
but the Fancy or the Figure be Clear and Pertinent, and the Doctrine in the
Direction of it can never fail of being so too. But without This Guard and
Caution upon the Conduct of the Affair, This Humor of Mythology may turn to a
Poison instead of a Nourishment: And under the Pretext of a Lecture of Good
Government, Degenerate into an Encouragement to Vanity and Debauch. For while
the Memory is Firm, and the Judgment Weak, it is the Director's Part to Judge
for the Pupil, as it is the Disciples, to Remember for Himself; And we are also
to take This along with us, that when a Child has once Contracted an Ill Train
or Habit, it will Cost as much time to Blot out what he is to Forget, as to
Possess him of what he is to Retain in his Memory.

Let it not be Understood now, as if the Thing it self were Childish, because
of the Application of it; or as if Boys and Men were not Indifferently of the
same Make, and Accountable more or less for the same Faculties and Duties. So
that the Force and Dignity of This way of Operation, holds good in all Cases
alike; For there is Nothing makes a Deeper Impression upon the Minds of Men, or
comes more Lively to their Understanding, then Those I^structive Notices that
are Conveyed to them by Glances, Insinuations, and Surprise; and under the
Cover of some Allegory or Riddle. But, What can be said more to the Honor of
This Symbolical Way of Morallizing upon Tales and Fables, then that the Wisdom
of the Ancients has been still W^apt up in Veils and Figures; and their
Precepts, Councels, and sal^tary Monitions for the Ordering of our Lives and
Manners, Handed down to us from all Antiquity under Innuendo's and Allusions?
For what are the Egyptian Hierogliphicks, and the whole History of the Pagan
Gods; The Hints, and Fictions of the Wise Men of Old, but i^ Effect, a kind of
Philosophical Mythology: Which is, in truth, no other, then a more Agreeable
Vehicle found out for Conveying to us the Truth and Reason of Things, through
the Medium of Images and Shadows. But what needs any thing more be said for the
Reputation and Authority of This Practice and Invention, considering the
Frequent and the Edifying Use of Apologues in Holy Writ: And that our Blessed
Savior Himself, has not only Recommended, but Inculcated, This way of Teaching
by Parab^es, both in his Doctrine and Example, as the Means that Divine
Providence made use of for the Gaining of Idolaters and Infidels over to the
Christian Faith? What was it that brought, even David himself to a Sight and
Detestation of h^ Sin in the Matter of Uriah, and to a Sense of his Duty, but
the Prophet Nathan's telling him a Story at a Distance (and by God's Own
Direction too) of a Rich Man that had a World of Sheep himself, and yet forced
away a Poor Man's Only Lamb from him, that he Loved as his Own Soul? How did
David take Fire at This Iniquity in Another Man, till upon second Thoughts his
Conscience brought it home to his Own Case, and forced him to pass Judgment
upon Himself? Now This is but according to the Natural Biass of Humane Frailty,
for every Man to be Partial to his own Blind-side, and to Exclaim against the
very Counterpart of his Own Daily Practice. As what is more Ordinary, for
Example, then for the most Arbitrary of Tyrants, to set up for the Advocates
and Patrons of Common Liberty; or for the most Profligate of Scoffers and
Atheists, to Value themselves upon a Zeal for the Power, and Purity of the
Gospel? In two Words, What Is more Familiar then to see Men Fighting the Lord's
Battles (as they call it) against Blasphemy and Profaneness, with One hand;
and at the same time offering Violence to his Holy Altars, Church and Ministers
with the Other: Now These People are not to be dealt withal, but by a Train of
Mystery and Circumlocution; a Downright Admonition looks liker the Reproach of
an Enemy, then the Advice of a Friend; or at the Best, it is but the Good
Office of a Man that has an Ill Opinion of us: And we do not Naturally Love to
be Told of our Faults, by the Witnesses of our Failings. Some People are too
Proud, too Surly, too Impudent, too Incorrigible, either to Bear, or to Mend
upon the Liberty of Plain Dealing. Others are too Big ^gain, too Powerful, too
Vindictive, and Dangerous, for either Reproof, or Council, in Direct Terms.
They Hate any Man that is but Conscious of their Wickedness, and their Misery is
like the Stone in the Bladder; There are Many Things Good for it, but there is No
Coming at it; and neither the Pulpit, the Stage, nor the Press, Dares so much
^s Touch upon it. How much are we Obliged then, to Those Wise, Good Men, that
have furnished the World with so sure, and so Pleasant an Expedient, for the
Removing of All These Difficulties! And to Aesop, in the First Place, as the
Founder, and Original Author, or Inventer of This Art of Schooling Mankind into
Better Manners; by Minding Men of their Errors without Twitting them for what is
Amiss, and by That Means Flashing the Light of their Own Consciences in their
Own Faces! We are brought Naturally enough, by the Judgment we pass upon the
Vices and Follies of our Neighbor, to the Sight and Sense of our Own; and
Especially, when we are led to the Knowledge of the Truth of Matters by
Significant Types, and Proper Resemblances; for we are much more Affected with
the Images of things, then with the True Reason of them. Men that are Shot-free
against All the Attacques of Honor, Conscience, Shame, Good Faith, Humanity,
or Common Justice, have yet some Weak side or other, like Achilles's Heel, that
was never dipped; and This Contrivance of Application, by Hints, and Glances, is
the Only way under the Heavens to Hit it. [Who shall say to a King, What Do
thou?] comes up to the very Stress of This Topique. There Is no Meddli^g with
Princes, either by Text, or Argument. Morality is not the Province of a
Cabinet-Councel: And Ghostly Fathers Signify no more then Spiritual Bug-bears,
in the Case of an Unaccountable Privilege. Tell the House of Israel of their
Sins, and the House of Jacob of their Transgressions: was a Guide, Undoubtedly,
like an Old Almanac, for the Yea^'twas Writ in; but Change of Times and
Humors, calls for New Measures and Manners; and what cannot be done by the
Dint of Authority, or Persuasion, in the Chapel, or in the Closet, must be
brought about by the Side-Wind of a Lecture from the Fields, and the Forests.
As the Fable of the Raging Lion Preaches Caution, and Moderation, to the
Extravagances of Cruel, and Ambitious Rulers, by showing them that Tyranny is
the Scourge of Humane Nature, in Opposition to All the Blessings of a Well
Ordered Government; and that they do but Plague other People, to their Own
Infamy* and Ruin. The Old Lion in Disgrace, Reads a Lesson to us of the
Improvidence, and the Desperate Consequences of a Riotous, and a Careless
Youth. The Fox in the Well, holds forth to us upon the Chapter of a Late
Repentance. The Frogs Petitioning for a King, bids People have a care of
Struggling with Heaven for they know not what. It is Certainly True, that the
most Innocent Illustrations of This Quality may lie open to a Thousand Abuses
and Mistakes, by a Distorted Mis-application of them to Political, or Personal
Meanings; but Those Cap^icious Fault-Finders, may as well pick a Quarrel with
the Decalogue it self, upon the same Pretense; if they shall come once to Apply
to This or That Particular Wicked Man, the General Rules that are Delivered for
the Government of Mankind, under su^b and such Prohibitions; as if the
Commandments that Require Obedience, and Forbid Murder, Uncleanness, Theft,
Calumny, and the like, were to be Struck out of the Office, and Indicted, for a
Libellous Innuendo upon All the Great Men that may come to be Concerned in the
Pains and Forfeitures therein Contained. In fine, it is the Conscience of the
Guilty, in All These Cases, that makes the Satyr. Here is enough said, as to
the Dignity, and Usefulness of This way of Informing the Understanding what we
Ought to do, and of Disposing the Will to Act in a Conformity to That
Perception of Things; having so Clear an Evidence of Divine Authority, as well
as the Practice of the Best of Men, and of Times, together with the Current of
Common Consent, Agreeing all in favor of it. I shall now Wind up what I have
to say, as to the Fables Themselves, the Choice, the Intent, and the Order of
them, in a very Few Words.

When I first put Pen to Paper upon This Design, I had in my Eye only the
Common School-Book, as it stands in the Cambridge and Oxford Editions of it,
under the Title of [Aesopi Phrygis Fabulae; una cum Nonnullis Variorum Autorum
Fabulis Adjectis:] Propounding to my self, at that Time, to follow the very
Course and Series of that Collection; and in One Word, to Try what might be
done, by making the Best of the Whole, and Adapting Proper and Useful Doctrines
to the several parts of it, toward the turning of a Excellent Latin Manual of
Morals and Good Councels, into a Tolerable English One. But upon Iumbling
Matters and Thoughts together, and laying One thing by Another; the very State
and Condition of the Case before me, together with the Nature and the Reason of
the Thing, gave me to Understand, that This way of Proceeding would never
Answer my End. Insomuch, that upon this Consideration, I Consulted other
Versions of the same Fables, and made my Best of the Choice. Some that were
Twice or Thrice over, and only the self-same Thing in other Words; These I
struck out, and made One Specimen serve for the rest. To say Nothing of here
and there a Trivial, or a Loose Conceit in the Medley, more than This; that
such as they are, I was under some sort of Obligation to take them in for
Company; and in short, Good, Bad and Indifferent, One with Another, to the
Number in the Total, of 383. Fables. To these, I have likewise subjoined a
Considerable Addition of other Select Apologues, out of the most Celebrated
Authors that are Extant upon that Subject, toward the Finishing of the Work. As
Phaedrus, Camerarius, Avienus, Neveletus, Apththonius, Gabrias, or Babrias,
Baudoin, La Fontaine, Aesope en Belle Humeur, Audin, etc.

Another Man in my Place now, would perhaps take it for a Notable Stroke of
Art, and Good Breeding, to Complement the Reader with Twenty F^oleries of
Apology, and Excuse, for such an Undertaking: As if the Honestest, and the most
Necessary Part of a Man's Life, and Business, were a thing to be Ashamed of.
Now All that I have to say upon this Common Place, is in Three Words, that I
meant well in what I have done; and let the Performance be what it will, I
Comfort my self yet in the Conscience of a Good Intention. I shall not Charge
any of My Failings upon the Importunity of my Friends, though I have not Wanted
Earnest and Powerful Instances and Encouragements to proceed upon This Work;
over and above the Impulse of a Natural Curiosity and Inclination that led me
to it. But these were Temptations that I could Easily have Resisted, or put by,
in favor of a Carcass that is in a manner, past Labor; if it had not been for
Another Motive, that I shall now tell the Reader in Confidence, and so Conclude.

This Rhapsody of Fables is a Book Universally Read, and Taught in All our
Schools; but almost at such a rate as we Teach Pyes and Parrots, that Pronounce
the Words without so much as Guessing at the Meaning of them: Or to take it
Another way, the Boys Break their Teeth upon the Shells, without ever coming
near the Kernel. They Learn the Fables by Lessons, and the Moral is the least
part of our Care in a Child's Institution: so that take Both together, and the
One is stark Nonsense, without the Application of the Other; beside that the
Doctrine it self, as we have it, even at the Best, falls Infinitely short of
the Vigor and Spirit of the Fable. To supply This Defect now, we have had
several English Paraphrases and Essays upon Aesop, and Diverse of his Followers,
both in Prose and Verse: the Latter have perchance Ventured a litte too far
from the Precise Scope of the Author, upon the Privilege of a Poetical
License: And for the Other of Ancient Date, the Morals are so Insipid and Flat,
and the Style and Diction of the Fables, so Course and Uncouth, that they are
rather Dangerous, than Profitable, as to the purpose they were Principally
Intended for; and likely to do Forty times more Mischief by the One then Good
by the Other. An Emblem without a Key to it, is no more then a Tale of a Tub;
and that Tale sillily told too, is but One Folly Grafted upon Another. Children
are to be Taught, in the first Place, what they Ought to do. 2dly, The Manner
of Doing it: And in the third Place, they are to be Inured, by the Force of
Instruction and Good Example, to the Love and Practice of Doing their Duty;
whereas on the Contrary, One Step out of the way in the Institution, is enough
to Poison the Peace, and the Reputation of a whole Life. Whether I have, in
this Attempt, Contributed or not, to the Emprovement of these Fables, either in
the Wording, or in the Meaning of them, the Book must Stand or Fall to it self:
But this I shall Adventure to Pronounce upon the whole Matter, that the Text is
English, and the Morals, in some sort, Accommodate to the Allegory; which could
hardly be said of All the Translations, or Reflections beforementioned, which
have served, in truth, (or at least some of them) rather to teach us what we
should Not do, then what we should. So that in the Publishing of these Papers,
I have done my Best to Obviate a Common Inconvenience, or, to speak Plainly,
the Mortal Error of pretending to Erect a Building upon a False Foundation:
Leaving the whole World to take the same Freedom with Me, that I have done with
Others: Provided that they do not Impute the Faults, and the Mis-Pointings of
the Press, to the Author, and that they Consult the Errata for other Mistakes.

AN Alphabetical Table, Referring to the NUMBER of the Respective FABLES.
A
FAB. ANT and Fly. 34 Ant and Pigeon. 203 Ant and Grasshopper. 217 Ant formerly
a Man. 188 Ape wanting a Tail, and Fox. 51 Ape and Fox King. 116 Ape and two
Brats. 248 Apes Dancing. 375 Ape and Dolphin. 169 Ape and Mountebank. 397 Ape
Judge, Fox and Wolf. 415 Ape and Lion in's Kingdom. 416 Apes Kingdom. 413
Apples and Horse-Turds. 134 Arion and a Dolphin. 382 Aristotle's Tyrant. 189 Ass
and Lion Hunting. 7 Ass Braying and Lion. 10 Ass and Whelp. 15 Ass and
Mastiffe. 191 Ass and Ungrateful Maste^. 24 Ass, Ape and Mole. 26 Ass and
Wolf. 36 Ass and Pampered Horse. 38 Ass Laden and Horse. 63 Ass, Lion and Fox
Hunting. 206 Ass to Jupiter. 208 Ass in a Lions Skin. 224 Ass and Two
Travelers. 376 Ass and Countryman (Alarm.) 262 Ass puts in for an Office.
306 Ass, Sick and Wolf. 314 Asses Wish. 317 Ass Green and a Widow. 332 Ass,
Lion and Hare. 346 Ass Lion and Cock. 150 Ass Wild and Tame. 190 Ass^s to
Jupiter. 191 Ass and Frogs. 192 Ass Galled and Raven. 193 Ass, Lion and Fox,
[Treachery.] 194 Ass and Old Man. 358 Ass to be Taught Grammar. 263 Asses and
Countryman. 372 Ass, Lion and Wolves. 396 Two Asses Laden with Salt and
Sponge. 408 Ass Judge of Music. 414 Asses Two. Laden. [Oats and Money.] 417
Ass Challenged by a Boar. 418 Ass and Shadow. 421 Asses Skin. 437 Ass carrying
an Image. 487 Astrologer and Traveller. 94 B.
FAB. Bat and Weazle. 39 Bat, Birds and Beasts. 40 Bat, Bramble and Cormorant.
144 Belly, and Members. 50 Bear and Two Friends. 227 Beasts and Fishes League.
274 Bear and Bees. 290 Three Things better for Beating. 316 Bever Hunted. 89
Bee-Master. 166 Be went over to the Drones. 461 Bees and Drones. 474 Birds and
Beetles. 289 Bitches Bed-maker. 463 Bitch ready to Puppy. 323 Bishop and
Curate. 356 Blackbird afraid of a Kite. 409 Bladder with Beans. 423 Blinkard
Buying of Wheat. 371 Washing a Black-a-more. 159 Boar and Horse. 56 Boy and
False Alarums. 74 Boy and Fortune. 233 Boy and Thief. 241 Boy and Goldfinch.
295 Boy and his Mother. 98 Boy and Snake. 131 Boy and Cockles. 163 Boys and
Frogs. 398 Boy would not learn his Book. 454 Boar and Fox. 319 Brother and
Sister. 473 Bustard and Cranes. 212 Bull and Goat. 218 Bull and Mouse. 245 Bull
and Ram. 331 Bull and Gnat. 450 C.
FAB. Cat and Cock. 2 Cat and Venus. 61 Cat and Mice [Dissembling.] 318 Cat
Counterfeiting and Mice. 115 Case of Conscience at Play. 498 Camel at first
Sight. 70 Camel praying for Horns. 78 Capons Fat and Lean. 264 Cardinal and an
Old Friend. 276 Christian and Pagan. 362 Cock and Diamond. 1 Cock and a Fox
Case. 400 Cock and Horses. 439 Cocks and Patridge. 84 Cock and Two Young Men.
58 Collier and Fuller. 64 Countryman and S^e Fr^en. 9 Countryman, Snake and
Child. 30 Countryman and Fortune. 231 Countryman and an Ox. 242 Countryman
and a Boar. 244 Countryman and Hercules. 246 Countryman and Hawk. 257
Countryman and River. 259 Countryman and Mouse. 280 Countryman and Kid. 340
Country-fellow Climbing a Tree. 369 Countryman and Hog. 360 Countryman and
Jupiter. 460 Countryman and Panther. 490 Covetous Man and an Envious. 238
Covetous Ambassador. 275 Counsel of Birds for Choosing Kings. 309 Cockle and
Jupiter. 322 Corrupt Officer. 344 Cocks Fighting. 123 Cock and Fox [Peace.] 353
Counsel of Beasts. 399 Cobbler turned Doctor. 401 Cobbler and Financier. 40^
Country-fellow and a River Running. 422 Consultation about securing a Town. 448
Crow and Mustle. 12 Crow and Pitcher. 239 Crow and Raven [foreboding.] 178 Crow
and Dog. 179 Crow and Raven. 462 Crab Old and Young. 221 Crows and Pigeons. 386
Cuckoo and Hawk. 261 Cunning Woman. 93 Cuckoo and Little Birds. 419 D.
FAB. Daw and Borrowed Feathers. 33 Daw and Pigeons. 181 Daw with a String at's
Foot. 182 Demades the Orator. 253 One willing to put off Death. 350 Death and
an Old Man. 113 Devil Refused to Marry. 459 Demetrius and Menander. 447 Dog and
Shadow. 6 Dog and Thief. 21 Dog Old and his Master. 25 Dog, Sheep and Wolf. 29
Dog and Butcher. 59 Dog in a Manger. 76 Dog with a Bell. 226 Dog and Lion. 250
Dog run away from his Master. 288 Dog Invited to Supper. 106 Dog and a Wolf.
119 Dog and Cock on a Journey. 143 Dog Trusty and his Master. 464 Dog and his
Master. 484 One Bit by a Dog. 88 Dog and Cat. 488 Dogs and a Raw Hide. 420 Dogs
Town and Country. 284 Dr. and Patient [All's well.] 95 Dr. and Patient [sore
Eyes.] 114 Drs. and a Sheep. 485 Dr. Vint'ner and Botcher. 494 Droll and a
Bishop. 296 Droll and a Crooked Old Man. 277 E.
FAB. Eagle and Arrow. 48 Eagle and Fox. 72 Eagle and Daw. 75 Eagle and Owl.
214 Eagle and Tortoise. 220 Eagle and Beetle. 378 Eagle and Pie. 279 Eagle and
Rabbets. 333 Eagle and Man. 107 Eagle, Cat and Snow. 403 Eagle sets up for a
Beauty. 445 Eagle and Leveret. 483 Eele and Snake. 271 Enemies Two at Sea. 91
Estritch, Birds and Beasts. 41 F.
FAB. Father and his Sons [Unity.] 62 Father and Sons [Industry.] 108 Farmer
and his Dogs. 69 Fawn and Stag. 124 Farmer and his Servant. 170 Fisherman with
Little Fish. 216 Fishermans Good Luck. 110 Fishermen Disappointed. 112 One at a
Fish-Dinner. 407 Fisherman and Pipe. 109 Fishing in Troubled Waters. 168 Fir
and Bramble. 237 Fishes and Drying Pan. 273 Fig Tree and Thorn. 466 Fly upon a
Wheel. 270 Flea and Man. 139 Flea and Hercules. 140 Florentine and
Horse-Courser. 361 Flattery, No Law against it. 480 Fox and Lion. 13 Fox and
Stork. 31 Fox and Carved Head. 32 Fox and Sick Lion. 54 Fox and Weazle. 55 Fox
and Lion [first fight.] 71 Fox and Hare to Jupiter. 79 Fox and Leopard. 252 Fox
and Worm. 225 Fox and Cat. 374 Fox and Hedgehog. 254 Fox and Gossips. 263 Fox
and Sick Cock. 315 Fox and Hare. 325 Fox Praising Hares Flesh. 338 Fox and
Goat. 83 Fox that lost his Tail. 101 Fox and Bramble. 102 Fox and Crocodile.
103 Fox and Huntsman. 104 Fox and Grapes. 129 Fox and Crab. 17^ Fox Condemned.
406 Fox and Wolf. 4^ Fox and Cock [sore Eye] 4^ Fox and Dragon. 47^ Fowler and
Pigeon. 66 Fowler and Chaffinch. 291 Fowler and Blackbird* 96 Fowler and
Partridge. 132 Fool and a Hot Iron. 438 Fool and a Sieve. 465 Fortune Tellers.
92 Fortune and Two Friends. 453 Frog and Mouse. 4 Frogs Choose a King. 19 Frog
and Ox. 35 Frogs and Tortoises. 286 Frogs wanting Water. 142 Frogs Two
Neighbors. 165 Frogs and Bulls. 404 Frogs and Sun. 405 Friar, Laique and Wolf.
366 Friends Few. 486 One had a mind to Try his Friends 337 G
FAB. Gardener and his Dog. 151 Gardener and his Landlord. 387 Gardener and
Mole. 440 Gnat and Be. 345 A Man Refuses a Glyster. 313 Gnat and Lion. 201 One
Dreamt he found Gold. 359 Goat and Vine. 149 Gourd and Pine. 380 Goose and
Gosslin. 222 H
FAB. Hares and Frogs. 27 Hare and Sparrow. 431 Hare and Tortoise. 1^3 Hares,
Foxes and Eagles. 187 Two Men and a Halter. 477 Hen and Golden Eggs. 247 Hermit
and Soldier. 301 Hedgehog and Snake. 324 Hen and Swallow. 195 Hedge destroyed.
449 Sick Hermit. 281 Hercules and Pluto. 455 Horse and Lion. 37 Horse and Hog.
299 Horse Skittish. 479 Horse-man's Wig Blown off. 228 Hound and Mastiff. 172
Husbandman and Stork. 73 Husbandman and Ceres. 256 Husbandman turned Soldier
and Merchant. 305 Husband, Wife, and Ghostly Father. 357 Husband and Wife twice
Married. 302 Hunts-man and Currier. 300 Husband Jealous. 312 Hypocrite. 497 I
FAB. Image Exposed to Sale. 446 Impertinent and a Philosopher. 327 Impertinent
Doctor and Patient. 205 Impostor to the Oracle. 86 Industry and Sloth. 352 Joy
and Sorrow near akin. 433 Jupiter and an Ape. 213 Jupiter and a Be. 125
Jupiter and a Serpent. 138 Jupiter and Frauds. 183 Jupiter and Modesty. 184
Jupiter's Wedding. 185 Jupiter and a Herds-man. 200 Jupiter's Altar Robbed. 385
Jupiter and a Farmer. 435 Jupiter's Two Wallets. 388 K
FAB. Kite Sick and her Mother. 17 Kite, Hawk and Pigeons. 20 King and a Rich
Subject. 389 Kingsfisher. 167 L
FAB. Lark and her Young. 52 Lark in a Net. 145 Lapwing Preferred. 297 Lad
Robbing an Orchard. 342 Large Promises. 111 Lamb, Wolf and Goat. 384 Laconique
Tried and Cast. 492 Lady in Tears for a Set of Horses. 496 Luck Good and Bad.
230 Lion and Bear. 5 Lion Old. 14 Lion and Mouse. 16 Lion and Frog. 202 Lion
and Goat. 210 Lion and Bulls. 236 Lion and Man. 240 Lion and Mouse. 303 Lion
and Hog. 344 Lion and Bull. 120 Lion in Love. 121 Lion, Fox and Wolf. 156 Lion
and Man in the Wood. 430 Lion, Boar and Vulturs. 456 Lion Generous. 472 Lion
Raging. 412 M
FAB. Man and Satyr. 2^ Man Wicked and the Devil. 308 One that Cured Madmen.
368 Man and Weazle. 441 Man and a Swallow. 127 Man and a Wooden God. 105 Man
and the Picture of a Lion. 100 Man and Two Wives. 141 Unhappy Match. 173 Young
Fellow about to Marry. 425 Matchiavel Condemned. 49^ Mercury and Fishermen. 37^
Mercury and a Traveller. 9^ Mercury and a Carpenter. 12^ Mercury and a
Statuary. 170 Mercury and Tiresias. 171 Merchant and a Seaman. 390 Mice and
Oak. 287 Mice, Cat and Bell. 391 Millar and Ratt. 500 Miser burying his Gold.
146 Miser and his Bags. 351 Miser and Rotten Apples. 458 Mountain in Labor. 23
Mountebank and Bear. 478 No to Morrow. 495 Mouse in a Chest. 255 Mouse City and
Country. 11 Mouse and Kite. 321 Mole and her Dam. 13^ Moon begs a New Gown. 425
Mule Boasting. 418 Musician 176 N
FAB. Nightingale and Hawk. 343 Nightingale and Bat. 462 One would hear no Ill
News. 457 Nurse and Wolf. 219 O
FAB. Oak and Reed. 215 Old Fellow and Young Wench. 278 Owl and Lirtle Birds.
379 Owl and the Sun. 434 Ox and Heifer. 249 Oxen and Timber. 294 Oxen and a
piece of Timber. 265 One carried his Plough to Ease his Oxen. 373 P
FAB. Peacock to Juno. 80 Peacock and Pie. 204 Peacock and Crane. 234 Peach,
Apple, and Black-berry. 135 Pigeon and Pie. 260 Pigeon and Picture. 196 Pigeon
and Crow. 197 ^ons Reconcile the Hawks. 347 (...) sets up for Sovereignty. 334
Plain Horse wins the Prize. 339 One that Lost his Money at Play. 370 Priest and
Pears. 298 Priest and Epiphany. 364 Priest and Sick-man. 367 Two Pots. 229 R
FAB. Raven and Wol^es. 381 Raven and Swan. 160 Rats that Eat Copper. 451 Raven
and Snake. 180 Reason of State. 482 River Fish and Sea Fish. 251 River and
Fountain. 307 Rich Man would be no Richer. 400 Rich Man and Poor. 468 Rich Man
and Servant. 282 S
FAB. Satyr and Fire. 471 Seamen Praying to Saints. 272 Sheep and Crow. 77
Sheep-biter Hanged. 330 Sheep Quarrels with the Shepherd. 335 Shepherd turned
Merchant. 99 Shepherd and Wolves Whelp. 155 Shepherd and Sheep. 199 Shepherd,
Wolf and Fox. 443 Shipwreck of Simonides. 476 Smith and his Dog. 117 Snake and
File. 44 Snake to Jupiter. 285 Snake and Crab. 154 Soldiers and Two Horses. 292
Son Singing at's Mother's Funeral. 311 Sow and Dog. 152 Sow and Bitch. 153 Two
Soldiers go Halves. 429 The Incorrigible Son. 329 Spider and Goat. 388 Spaniel
and Sow 293 Stag Drinking. 43 Stag and Oxen. 53 Stag and Horse. 57 Stag with
One Eye. 147 Stag and Lion. 148 Sun and Wind. 223 Swallow and Other Birds. 18
Swallow and Spider. 258 Swan and Stork. 267 Swan and Goose. 158 Swallow and
Crow. 161 T.
FAB. Tailor and his Wife. 354 A Tavern Bill paid with a Song. 365 Thrush taken
with Birdlime. 49 Thrush and Swallow. 65 Thunny and Dolphin. 90 Thieves that
Stole a Cock. 177 Tree and Wedge. 47 Old Tree Transplanted. 82 Trees Straight
and Crooked. 266 Travelers and a Bag of Money. 164 Travelers by the Seaside.
189 Two Travelers of Differing Humors. 393 Two Travelers find and Oyster. 411
A Bragging Traveller. 85 Travelers Dreaming. 481 Trumpeter taken Prisoner. 67
Tiger and Fox. 235 V.
FAB. Usurers and Curryers. 392 Vulturs Invitation. 211 W.
FAB. Wax and Brick. 304 Wasps in a Honey-Pot. 126 Wasps, Patridges and
Husbandman. 137 Old Weazle and Mice. 81 Wench parting with her Sweetheart. 269
A Creaking Wheel. 339 The Inconsolable Widow. 268 An Old Man gives over
Whoring. 326 Widow had a mind to Marry. 283 Wife and Drunken Husband. 157 Wolf
and Lamb. 3 Wolf and Crane. 8 Wolf and Sow. 22 Wolf, Kid and Goat. 28 Wolf
and Fox. 42 Wolves and Sheep League. 45 Wolves and Dogs agree. 394 Wolf, Lamb
and Goat. 60 Wolf and Kid. 207 Wolf and Procupine. 320 Wolf and Sheep-skin.
328 Wolf and Lion. 130 Wolf and Kid. 174 Wolf and Sheep. 186 Wolf turned
Shepherd. 395 Wolf turns Religious. 436 Wolf and Fox. 467 Wolf and Hog. 469
Wolf and a Weak Young Man. 341 A Trepanning Wolf. 499 A Woman and her Maids.
209 An Old Woman and the Devil. 282 A Woman would Dye for her Husband. 310 A
Woman brought Fire into the House. 348 A Woman and a Fat H^n. 87 Woman and Two
Daughters. 198 A Woman Drowned. 355 Woman Trusted with a Secret. 427 Woman and
Thrushes. 428 Woman, Cat and Mice. 442 Woman Revived with Beating. 452

ERRATA.
FAB. 29. l. Penult. for into r. in. p. 85. l. 17. dele When People, p. 98. l.
13. dele it seems, p. 104. l. 7. for me thee, r. sue me, p. 127. l. 5. r. in
debt. p. 132. l. 13. for The r. This Freak, p. 136. 3. Lines from the Bottom,
for Noise-Blustring, r. Noisy, Blustering, p. 151. l. 8. for In r. On, p. 159.
l. 19. r. Tracing, l. 21. Things, p. 163. l. 19. Thing, p. 165. l. 21. for once
r. one, p. 174. l. 4. for drop r. dropped, p. 178. l. 10. r. World. p. 196. l.
13. Poltron. p. 231. l. 13. for Leaner, r. Lean, p. 247. l. 8. for Fable, r.
Table, p. 253. l. 4. for Engaged, r. Enraged, p. 286. dele of the Two Fables
above, p. 296. l. 10. for Last, r. Left, p. 336. l. 10. for ofter, r. after, p.
373. l. 3. for Advice, r. Advise, p. 373. 2 Lines from the Bottom, r. Advanced,
p. 381. l. 10. for Height, r. Weight, p. 385. l. 16. after Why, r. how comes,
etc. p. 389. 4 Lines from the Bottom, r. a Lasch^ Demission, p. 396. l. 10.
from the Bottom, r. and Consume, etc. p. 470. l. 7. from the Bottom, for Ye, r.
Yea, p. 473. l. 10. for Uncertainty, r. Necessary, and for of Christian, r. of
a Christian, p. 479. l. 12. for Reaks, r. Freaks. Pref. p. 3. l. 9. for
Plisick'd r. Phisick'd.

The Reader will Observe some Literal Mistakes also, wherein the Sense of the
Matter will Direct him: And the Printing of This Book in several Houses has
Occasioned some Disorder in the Pages, but none in the Fables, to which the
Alphabetical Index refers.

THE LIFE OF AESOP.
CAP. I. Of Aesop's Country, Condition, and Person.
AESOP (according to Planudes, Camerarius and Others) was by birth, of Ammorius
a Town in the Greater Phrygia; (though some will have him to be a Thracian,
others a Samian) of a mean Condition, and in his person deformed, to the
highest degree: Flat-Nos'd Hunch-Back'd, Blobber-Lipp'd; a Long Missshapen
Head; His Body Crooked all over, Big-Belly'd, Baker-Legg'd, and his Complexion
so swarthy, that he took his very Name from't; for Aesop is the same with
Aethiop. And he was not only Unhappy in the most scandalous Figure of a Man
that ever was heard of; but he was in a manner Tongue-Ty'd too, by such an
Impediment in his speech, that People could very hardly understand what he
said. This Imperfection is said, to have been the most sensible part of his
Misfortune; for the Excellency of his Mind might otherwise have Attoned in some
Measure, for the Uncouth Appearance of his Person (at least if That Part of his
History may pass for Current.) There goes a Tradition, that he had the good hap
to Relieve certain Priests that were Hungry, and out of their way, and to set
them Right again, and that for that good Office, he was, upon their Prayers,
brought to the Use of his Tongue: But Camerarius whom I shall Principally
follow, has no Faith in the Miracle, And so he begins his History with the
tracing of him to Samos, and from thence Prosecutes it through the most
Remarkable Passages of his Life, to the Last Barbarous Violence upon him at
Delphos. As to his Impediment in his speech, whether there were any such thing
or Not, or how he came to be cured of it, the Reader is at Liberty what to
Believe and what Not. And so likewise for Twenty Other Passages up and down
this History; Some of them too Trivial, and others too Gross to be taken
Notice of, Upon this Argument and Occasion: Let it suffice, that (according to
the Common Tradition) he had been Already Twice Bought and Sold; and so we
shall Date the Story of his Adventures; from his Entrance into the Service of
at least a Third Master.

As to the Age he lived in, it is Agreed upon among the Ancients, that it was
when Croesus Governed Lydia; as also that Xanthus, a Samian, was his Master.
Herodotus will have it to be one Iadmon, a Samian too; but still according to
the Current of most Writers, Xanthus was the Man.

CAP. II. Aesop and his Fellow-slaves Upon their Iourny to Ephesus.
IT was Aesop's Fortune to be sent to Ephesus, in Company with other Slaves to
be sold. His Master had a great many Burdens to Carry, and Aesop begged of his
Companions not to over Charge him. They found him a Weakling, and bad him
please himself. The Parcel that he Pitched upon was a Panyer of Bread; and
twice as heavy as any of the rest. They called him a thousand Fools for his
pains, and so took up their Luggage, and away they Trudged together. About
Noon, they had their Dinner delivered out of Aesop's Basket, which made his
Burden Lighter by one half in the Afternoon, than it had been in the Morning:
And after the next Meal he had Nothing left him to Carry, but an Empty Basket.
His Fellow-Slaves began Now to Understand, that Aesop was not so Arrant a Fool
as they took him for; and that they Themselves had not half the Wit they
Thought they had.

CAP. III. The Sale of Aesop to Xanthus.
UPON the Merchants Arrival at Ephesus, he made a quick Riddance of All his
Slaves but Three. That is to say, a Musician, an Orator, and Aesop. He dressed
up the Two Former in Habits answerable to their Profession, and Carried them to
Samos, as the Likelyest Place for a Chapman. He showed them there in the open
Market, with Aesop for a Fool betwixt them; which some People took much offense
at. While they were attending upon the Place, there came among other Samians,
one Xanthus an Eminent Philosopher of that City, with a Train of his Disciples
at his Heels. The Philosopher was mightily pleased with the Two Youths, and
asked them one after another about their Profession, and what they could do.
The one told him he could do any thing, the other that he could do every thing;
and this set Aesop a laughing at em. The Philosophers Pupils would Needs know
what it was that made Aesop so merry. Why says he, if the Question had been put
by your Master, I should have told him the reason of it.

Xanthus in the mean time was beating the Price of the Two other Slaves, but
the Terms were so high, that he was just upon turning about to go his way, Only
his Pupils would needs have him put the same Questions first to the Ill
favored Fellow, that he had done to the other Two; and so Xanthus, for the
Humor sake, Interrogated Aesop what He could do. Nothing at all, says he. How
comes That says the Philosopher? My Companions, says the Other, Undertakes
every thing, and there is Nothing left for me to do. This gave them to
Understand, that the Man knew well Enough what he said, and what he Laughed
at. Well! says Xanthus, but if I should give Money for you Now, would you be
Good and Honest? I Will be That, says Aesop whether you Buy me or No. Ay but tell
me again says the Philosopher, Will Not you run away? Pray says Aesop, did you
ever hear of a Bird in a Cage that told his Master he Intended to make his
Escape? Xanthus was well enough pleased with the Turn and Quickness of his Wit;
but says he, That Unlucky Shape of yours will set People a Hooting and Gaping
at you wherever you go. A Philosopher says Aesop should Value a man for his
Mind, Not for his Body. This presence of Thought gave Xanthus a High Opinion of
the Wisdom of the Man; and so he bad the Merchant set him his Lowest Price of
That Miserable Creature. Why says he, you had as good Cheapen a Dunghill; but
if you will bid me like a Chapman for either of the Other Two, you shall have this
Phantome into the Bargain. Very good says the Philosopher; and without any
more ado what is your selling Price? The Merchant speaks the Word, The
Philosopher pays the Money, and takes Aesop away with him.

CAP. IV. Xanthus Presents Aesop to his Wife.
XANTHUS had no sooner made his Purchase, and carried his Jewel home with him,
but, having a kind of a Nice Froward Piece to his Wife, the Great Difficulty
was how to put her in humor for the Entertainment of this Monster, without
throwing the House out at the Window. My Dear, says he, You have been often
complaining of Careless Servants; And I have bought you one Now that I am
Confident will fit your Turn. He shall Go and Come and Wait and do Every thing
as you would have him; Oh, your Servant Sweet heart says she, but what did he
Cost you? Why Truly very Reasonable; but at present He Is a Little Tanned and
out of case you must know, with his Journey, says the Husband, and so he Ordered
him to be Called in. The Cunning Gipsy smoked the Matter presently. Some
Monster says she, I Will be Hanged else. Wife, Wife, says Xanthus If you are a
good Woman That that Pleases Me Must Please You too. While These Words were
between his Lips, up comes Aesop toward them, she gave him a Fierce Look, and
Immediately discharged her Choler upon her Husband. Is this a Man, or a Beast?
says she, and what Clearer Proof in the World Could You have given me Now, of
an Insufferable Hatred and Contempt? Aesop said not one Word all This While;
'till Xanthus Rowzd him with a Reproof. Oh Villain! says he; to have a Tongue
and Wit at Will upon All other Occasions, and not one Diverting Syllable Now at
a Pinch, to Pacify your Mistress! Aesop, after a short Pause upon it, Bolted out
an old Greek Saying, which is in English to this Effect, From Lying at the
Mercy of Fire, Water, and a Wicked Woman, Good Lord Deliver us. If the Wife was
heartily angry before, This Scomm made her Stark Mad, and the Reproach was so
Cutting too, that Xanthus himself did not well know how to take it. But Aesop,
brought himself off again from the Malice of any ill Intention, by a Passage
out of Euripides to this Purpose. The Raging of a Tempestuous Sea; The Fury of
a Devouring Fire, and the Pinching Want of Necessaries for Life; are Three
Dreadful Things, and a Body might reckon up a Thousand more; but all this is
Nothing to the Terrible Violences of an Impetuous Woman, and therefore says he,
Make your self as Glorious on the other side, in the Rank of Good Women.
Vavasor the Jesuit, in his De Ludicra Dictione, takes Notice of a Blunder here
in the Chronology of the Story. For Aesop was Murdered at least Fourscore
Years before Euripides was Born. But to follow the Third of the Relation; Upon
this Oblique Admonition, the Woman came to her self again, And took Aesop into
her good Graces, who rendered his Master and Mistress All the Offices of a
Faithful Servant.

CAP. V. Aesop's Answer to a Gardener.
SOME Two or Three Days after the Encounter above mentioned, Xanthus took
Aesop a long with him to a Garden to buy some Herbs, and the Gardener seeing
him in the Habit of a Philosopher, told him the Admiration he was in, to find
how much faster Those Plants shot up that Grow of their own Accord, then Those
that he set Himself, though he took never so much Care about them. Now you that
are a Philosopher, Pray will you tell me the meaning of This? Xanthus had no
better answer at hand, then to tell him, That Providence would have it so:
Whereupon Aesop brake out into a Loud Laughter. Why how now Ye slave You, says
Xanthus, what do you Laugh at? Aesop took him aside and told him, Sr I Laugh at
your Master, that Taught You no better: for what signifies a General Answer to
a Particular Question? And it is no News Neither that Providence orders All
Things: But if you will turn him over to me, You shall see I Will give him another
sort of Resolve. Xanthus told the Gardener, that it was below a Philosopher to
Busy his head about such Trifles; but says he, If you have a Curiosity to be
better Informed, you should do well to ask my Slave here, and see what he le
say to you. Upon This, the Gardener put the Question to Aesop, Who gave him
this Answer. The Earth is in the Nature of a Mother to what She brings forth of
her Self out of her own Bowels; Whereas She is only a kind of a Step Dame, in
The Production of Plants that are Cultivated and Assisted by The Help and
Industry of Another: so that it is Natural for her, to Withdraw her Nourishment
from the One, toward The Relief of the Other. The Gardener, upon this, was so
well satisfied, That he would take no Money for his Herbs, and desired Aesop to
make Use of his Garden for the future, as if it were his own.

There are several Stories in Planudes, that I shall pass over in this Place
(says Camerarius) as not worth the while: Particularly The Fables of the
Lentills, the Bath, the Sows Feet, and several Little Tales and Jests that I
take to be neither well Laid, nor well put together; Neither is it any matter,
in Relations of this Nature, Whether they be True or False, but if they be
Proper and Ingenious; and so contrived, that the Reader or the Hearer may be
the better for them, That Is as much as is required: Wherefore I shall now
Commit to Writing Two Fables or Stories, One about the bringing his Mistress
home again, when she had left her Husband; Which is drawn from the Model of a
Greek History set out by Pausanias in his Description of Beotia; The Other,
upon the Subject of a Treat of Neates Tongues, which was taken from Bias, as we
have it from Plutarch in his Convivium Septem Sapientum.

CAP. VI. Aesop's Invention to bring his Mistress back again to her Husband,
after she had Left him.
THE Wife of Xanthus was well-born and wealthy, but so Proud and Domineering
withal, as if her Fortune and her Extraction had Entitled her to the
Breeches. She was Horribly Bold, Meddling, and Expensive; (as that sort of Women
commonly are) Easily put off the Hooks, and Monstrous hard to be pleased again:
Perpetually chattering at her Husband, and upon All occasions of controversy,
Threatening him to be gone. It came to this at Last, That Xanthus's stock of
Patience being quite spent, he took up a Resolution of going another way to
Work with her, and of trying a Course of Severity, since there was nothing to
be done with her by Kindness. But this Experiment, instead of mending The
matter, made it worse; for upon harder Usage, The Woman grew Desperate, and
went away from him in Earnest. She was as Bad it is true as Bad might well be,
and yet Xanthus had a kind of Hankering for her still: Beside that there was
matter of Interest in the Case: and a Pestilent Tongue she had, that the Poor
Husband Dreaded above all things Under the Sun: but the man was willing however
to make the Best of a Bad Game, and so his Wits and his Friends were set at
Work, in the fairest Manner that Might be, to get her home again. But there was
No good to be done in it it seems; and Xanthus was so visibly out of Humor
upon it, that Aesop in Pure Pity bethought himself Immediately how to Comfort
him. Come Master (says he) Pluck up a good heart; for I have a Project in my
Noddle that shall bring my Mistress to you back again, with as good a Will as
ever she went from you. What does me Aesop, but away Immediately to the Market
among the Butchers, Poulterers, Fishmongers, Confectioners, etc. for the Best
of Every thing that was in Season. Nay he takes private People in his way too,
and Chopps into the very house of his Mistresses Relations, as by Mistake. This
Way of Proceeding set the whole Town a Gog to know the Meaning of all this
Bustle, and Aesop innocently told every body That his Masters Wife was run away
from him, and he had Married another: His Friends up and down were all Invited
to come and make Merry with him, and This was to be the Wedding Feast. The News
flew like Lightning, and happy were they could carry the First Tidings of it to
the Run-away-Lady: (for every body knew Aesop to be a Servant in That Family.)
It Gathered in the Rolling, as all Other Stories do in the Telling: Especially
where Women's Tongues and Passions have the Spreading of them. The Wife, that
was in her Nature Violent, and Unsteady, ordered her Chariot to be made ready
Immediately, and away she Posts back to her Husband: falls upon him with
Outrages of Looks and Language; and after the Easing of her mind a Little; No
Xanthus, says she, Do not you Flatter your self with the hopes of Enjoying
another Woman while I am Alive. Xanthus looked upon this as one of Aesop's
Master pieces; and for that Bout All was well again betwixt Master and Mistress.

CAP. VII. An Entertainment of Neates Tongues.
SOME few days after the Ratification of This Peace, Xanthus Invited several
Philosophers of his Acquaintance to Supper with him; and Charges Aesop to make
the Best Provision he could think of, for their Entertainment. Aesop had a Wit
waggish Enough, and This General Commission furnished him with Matter to work
upon. So soon as ever the Guests were set down at the Table, Xanthus calls for
Supper, and Expected no less then a very Splendid Treat. The First Service was
Neates Tongues sliced, which the Philosophers took Occasion to Discourse and
Quibble upon in a Grave Formal way, as The Tongue (for the purpose) is the
Oracle of Wisdom, and the like. Xanthus, upon This, calls for a Second Course,
and after That for a Third, and so for a Fourth, which were All Tongues, over
and over again still, only several ways Dressed: Some Boiled, Others Fried,
and some again served up in Soupe, which put Xanthus into a Furious Passion.
Thou Villain, says he, Is this according to my order, to have Nothing but
Tongues upon Tongues? Sr says Aesop, without any hesitation, Since it is my Ill
fortune to fall under this Accusation, I do Appeal to All These Learned
Persons, whether I have done Well, or Ill, and paid that Respect to your Order
which I ought to do.

Your order was, That I should make the Best Provision that I could think of
for the Entertainment of These Excellent Persons, and if the Tongue be the Key
that Leads Us into All Knowledge, what could be more proper and suitable then a
Feast of Tongues for a Philosophical Banquet?

When Xanthus found the Sense of the Table to be on Aesop's side; Well my
Friends says he; Pray will You Eat with me to Morrow, And I Will try If I can
mend your Cheer; and Mr Major Domo, says he to Aesop, let it be the Care of
your Gravity and Wisdom to Provide us a Supper to Morrow, of the very worst
Things You can Think of.

CAP. VIII. A Second Treat of Tongues.
XANTHUS's Guests met again The Next day according to The Appointment; and
Aesop had provided them the very same Services of Tongues and Tongues over and
over, As they had the night before. Sirrah (says Xanthus to his Servant) what is
the Meaning of This; That Tongues should be the Best of Meats One Day, and the
Worst the Other? Why Sr says he, There is not any Wickedness under the Sun,
That the Tongue has not a part in. As Murders, Treasons, Violence, Injustice,
Frauds, and All Manner of Lewdness: for Counsels must be first Agitated, The
Matter in Question Debated, Resolved upon, and Communicated by Words, before
the Malice comes to be executed in Fact. Tongue Whether will Thou! (says the
Old Proverb) I go to Build (says the Tongue,) and I go to pull down.

This Petulant Liberty of Aesop, Galled his Master to the very Soul of him, and
one of the Guests, to Help forward his Evil Humor; Cried out, This Fellow is
enough to make a Body Mad. Sr (says Aesop) you have very Little Business to do
of your own I perceive, by the Leizure you have to Intermeddle in Other Peoples
Matters; You would find some other Employment else, then to Irritate a Master
against his Servant.

CAP. IX. Aesop brings his Master a Guest That had no sort of Curiosity in him.
XANTHUS laid hold of the Present Occasion, and was willing enough to be
furnished with a Staff to beat a Dog. Well Sirrah, says he, since this Learned
Gentleman is too Curious; go you your way's and find me out a Man that has no
Curiosity at All, Or I Will Lace your Coat for ye. Aesop, the next day, Walked
the whole Town over on This Errand; and at Last, found out a Slovenly Lazy
Fellow, Lolling at his Ease, as if he had Nothing to do, or to take care for;
and so up to him he went in a Familiar Way, and Invited him to his Masters to
Supper. The Clown made no Ceremony of promising, but fell Presently to asking
what kind of Man his Master was? And what, says he, are we going just now? (for
this Poor Devil look^d upon a Meals Meat Gratis, as a Blessing Dropped into his
Mouth out of the Skies) Come (says Aesop) we are going this very Moment; and
Wonderfully Glad he was to find by the Booby's Discourse, That he had met with
a Man so fit for his Purpose. Away they went together, and so strait into the
Parlour, where the Blockhead Throws Himself down Dirty and Beastly as he was,
Upon a Rich Couch. After a very little While, in comes Xanthus to Supper, and
asks Aesop who That Man was? Why This is the Man, says Aesop, that you sent me
for; that is to say a Man that has no Curiosity in him at All. Oh that is very
well, says Xanthus, and then told his Wife in her ear, That if she would but
be a Loving and Obedient Wife to him, and do as he bad her, he would now save
her Longing, for, says he, I have been a Great while Seeking for an Occasion to
pick a Quarrel with Aesop, and I have found it at last. After this Whisper,
Xanthus takes a Turn in the Parlour, and calls aloud to his Wife. Hark ye
Sweet Heart, says he, go fetch some Water, and Wash the Feet of my Guest here.
Away she goes, brings a Basin to the side of the Couch, where the Clown was
laid at his Length, and bad him put forth his Feet for her to Wash them.
Xanthus Little thought he would have done it. But the Clown, after a Little
Stumble within himself, that 'twas fitter for the Maid to do it, then the
Mistress; Well says he, If it be the Custom of the Family, it is not for me to
be against it: and so he stretched forth his Feet to the Washing.

So soon as ever the Company had taken off the Edge of their Stomachs; Xanthus
calls for a Bumper, and puts it into the hands of the Clown, making No doubt
but he would have Allowed his Host the Honor of being his Taster. The Fellow,
without any Scruple, Whips up the Drink, and gives Xanthus the Pott again
Empty, who was now the Second Time Disappointed upon the Matter of Curiosity,
or No Curiosity At All. He had a Mind still to be upon Poor Aesop's bones, and
made another Trial of the Humor of his Guest. There was a particular Dish that
the Clown fed very Heartily upon: Xanthus fell into a Rage against the Cook for
the Ill-Dressing of it, and Threatened to have him brought and Lashed in the
very Parlour. The Bumpkin took no Notice of it at All, but without Speaking one
Word on the Cooks Behalf; It was Nothing to him he thought, what other People
did with their Servants.

They were come Now to their Cakes and Pyes, and the Clown Guttled Upon them
without mercy. Xanthus Resolves then upon Another Trial; Calls for his
Pastry-Cook and tells him, Sirrah, says he, you spoil every thing that goes
through your hands. There Is neither Spice, nor any other Seasoning here. The
Cook told him, That if they were either Over or Under-Bak'd, it was his Fault;
But for the Spice and Seasoning, it was his Mistresses, for it was All put in
that she Delivered. Nay Wife, says Xanthus, if it sticks there, By All that is
Sacred, I Will Treat you no better then if you were a Slave bought with my Money.
Wherefore Strip Immediately and Prepare for a Dog-Whip. Xanthus thought with
himself; that If any thing in the World could move this Barbarous Brute, he
would have put in a Word at Least to save a Woman of Honor from so Scandalous
an Indignity, But says this Loggerhead to himself; There Is an old saying; What
have We to do to Quench other Peoples Fires? And I Will even keep my self Clear
of Other Peoples Matters; Only he took Xanthus by the Hand indeed, and told him
if he would but Stay a Little, he would go fetch his own Wife too, and so they
might take the Lash by Turns. In one word, Xanthus missed his Aim at last; and
though he was troubled at the Miscarriage, he could not but Laugh yet at the
Simplicity of the Man, and Confess, that Aesop was in the Right, in bringing a
Person to him that had no Curiosity at all.

CAP. X. Aesop's Answer to a Magistrate.
IT happened some few days after the Last Passage above, that Xanthus, having
some Business at the Public Hall, sent Aesop to see if there were any Great
Throng of Men there; A Magistrate meets him Upon the Way, and Asks him whether
he was going? Why truly, says Aesop, I am going I know not whither. The
Magistrate took it that he Banter^d him, and bad an Officer take him into
Custody and Carry him to Prison. Well, says Aesop, to the Magistrate; Is it not
true Now, that I did not know Whither I was going? Can you Imagine, that when I
came out of the house this Morning, I had any thoughts of going to Prison? The
Magistrate was well enough pleased at the fancy, and Discharged him Upon it,
and so he went forward to the Hall; Where among a world of People, he saw one
Man arrest another upon an Action of Debt. The Debtor Pleaded Poverty; but if
he would Compound for half, it should go hard but he^d make a Shift to Pick it
up, he said. Well with all my Heart, says the Creditor, Lay down the Money upon
the Nail, and the Business is done: for a man had better Content himself with
Half, then Lose All, And I reckon that Money as good as lost, that a Man must
go to Law for; Aesop upon this, went back and told his Master, that he had been
at the Hall, and saw but one Man there; This was a Riddle to Xanthus; Insomuch
that he went himself to Learn the Truth of the Matter. When he came to the
Place, he found the Court extremely Thronged, and turning short upon Aesop, in
great Indignation, Sirrah, says he, are All these People come since you told me
there was but one Man here? It Is very true, says Aesop, There was a Huge
Crow^d, and yet but one Man that I could see in That vast Multitude. This seems
to be taken out of the Life of Diogenes.

CAP. XI. Xanthus undertakes to Drink the Sea dry.
THERE happened not Long after This, to be a Merry Meeting of Philosophers; and
Xanthus, one of the Company. Xanthus had already gotten a Cup too much; and
Aesop finding they were like to set out his hand; Sir, says he, it is the Humor
of Bacchus, they say, first to make men Cheerful, and when they are past That,
to make 'em Drunk, and in the Conclusion, to make them Mad. Xanthus took
Offense at Aesop; and told him, That was a Lecture for Children. ( Laertius
makes this to be the saying of Anacharsis) The Cupps went round, and Xanthus by
this Time had taken his Load, who was mightily given to talk in his Drink; and
whatever was uppermost, out it came, without either Fear or Wit. One of the
Company observing the weak side of the Man, took the Opportunity of Pumping him
with several Questions. Xanthus (says he) I have read somewhere, that it is
Possible for a Man to Drink the Sea Dry; but I can hardly believe it. Why says
Xanthus, I Will venture my House and Land upon it, that I do it my self. They
Agreed upon the Wager, and presently off went their Rings to Seal the
Conditions. But Early the next Morning, Xanthus missing his Ring, thought it
might be slipped off his Finger, and asked Aesop about it. Why truly, says Aesop,
I can say Nothing to the Loosing of your Ring; But I can tell you that you Lost
your House and Land last night: and so Aesop told him the Story on it, which his
Master it seems had utterly forgotten. Xanthus began now to Chew upon the
Matter, and it went to the Heart of him to consider, That he could neither do
the thing, nor yet get quit of his Bonds. In this trouble of Thoughts he
Consults Aesop, (whose advice before he had rejected) what was to be done in
the Case. I shall never forget, says Xanthus, how much I owe you for your
Faithful Services; and so with fair Words Aesop was prevailed upon to Undertake
the bringing of him off. It Is Impossible to do the thing (says he) but if I
can find a way to Dissolve the Obligation, and to gain you Credit by it over
and Above, That Is the Point I suppose that will do your business. The Time
appointed, says Aesop, is now at hand, Wherefore do you set a bold face upon
it, and go to the Sea side with all your Servants and your Trinkets about you,
and put on a Countenance, that you are just Now about to make good your
Undertaking. You Will have Thousands of Spectators there, and When they are got
together, let the Form of the Agreement and the Conditions be read, Which runs
to this Effect. That you are to Drink up the Sea by such a Certain Time, or to
forfeit your House and Land, upon Such or Such a Consideration. When This is
done, call for a Great Glass, and let it be filled with Seawater, in the Sight
of the Whole Multitude: Hold it up then in your Hand, and say as Follows. You
have heard Good People, what I have Undertaken to do, and upon what Penalty if
I do not go Through with it. I confess the Agreement, and the Matter of Fact as
you have heard it; and I am now about to drink up the Sea; not the Rivers that
run into it. And therefore let All the Inlets be Stopped, that there be Nothing
but pure Sea left me to drink, And I am now ready to perform my part of the
Agreement, But for any drinking of the Rivers, There is nothing Of that in the
Contract. The People found it so clear a Case, That they did not only agree to
the Reason and Justice of Xanthus's Cause, but hissed his Adversary out of the
Field; Who in the Conclusion made a Public Acknowledgment, that Xanthus was
the Wiser and Better Man of the Two; But desired the Contract might be made
void, and offered to Submit Himself further to such Arbitrators as Xanthus
Himself should direct. Xanthus was so well pleased with the Character his
Adversary had given him, of a Wise Man, That All was Passed over, And a final
End made of the Dispute. Plutarch makes this to have be'n the Invention of Bias.

CAP. XII. Aesop Baffles the Superstition of Augury.
IN the days of Aesop, The World was mightily addicted to Augury; that is to
say, to the Gathering of Omens from the Cry and Flight of Birds. Upon this
Account it was, that Xanthus one Day sent Aesop into the Yard, and bad him look
well about him. If you see Two Crows (says he) you will have good Luck after it,
but if you should Chance to spy One Crow Single, it is a Bad Omen, and some Ill
will betide you. Aesop stepped out and came Immediately back again, and told his
Master that he had seen Two Crows. Hereupon Xanthus went out himself, and
finding but One, (for the Other was flown away) he fell Outragiously upon Aesop
for making Sport with him, And ordered him to be soundly Lashed for it, but just
as they were stripping him for the Execution, In comes One to Invite Xanthus
abroad to Supper. Well Master, says Aesop, and where is the Credit of your
Augury Now? When, I that saw Two Crows, am to be beaten like a Dog, and You
that saw but One, are going to make merry with your Friends? The Reason and
Quickness of this Reflection, Pacified the Master for the Present, and saved the
Poor Fellow a sound Whipping.

CAP. XIII. Aesop finds hidden Treasure.
AS Xanthus was Walking once among certain Monuments, with Aesop at his Heels;
and Plodding upon several Epitaphs, there was one Inscription in Greek Letters,
that Xanthus with all the Skill he had, could not tell what to make of. Well,
says Aesop, let me see a Little If I can Uncypher it. And so after laying
Things and Things together a While, Master, says he, What will you give me, If
I find you out a Pott of Hidden Treasure now? One Half of it, says Xanthus,
and your Liberty. So Aesop fell to Digging, a Matter of four Yards from the
Stone that had the Inscription; and there found a Pott of Gold which he took up
and Delivered to his Master; and Claimed his Promise. Well, says Xanthus, I Will
be as good as my Word; but you must first show me how you came to know there
was Treasure, by the Inscription: for I had rather be Master of That Secret,
then of the very Gold it self. Aesop Innocently opened the whole Matter to him.
Look you Sr, says he, Here are these Letters. a; b; d; o; e; th; ch; which are
to be thus Interpreted, a stands for (...); b for (...); d for (...); o for
(...); e for (...); th for (...); ch for (...); In English, dig Four Paces from
this Place, and you shall find Gold. Now, says Xanthus, if you are so good at
finding out Gold, you and I must not part yet. Come Sir, says Aesop,
(perceiving that his Master played Fast and Loose with him) To deal freely with
you, This Treasure belongs to King Dionysius. How do you know that? says
Xanthus. Why by the very Inscription, says Aesop: for in That Sense, a stands
for (...); b for (...); d for (...); o for (...); e for (...); th for (...); ch
for (...). In English, Give Dionysius the Gold you have found. Xanthus began to
be afraid when he heard it was The Kings Money, and Charged Aesop to make no
Words on it, and he should have the One Half. It Is well, says Aesop; but This
is not so much your own Bounty yet, as The Intention of Him that Buried it; for
the very same Letters direct the Dividing of it. As for Example once again Now.
a stands for (...); b for (...); d for (...); o for (...); e for (...); th for
(...); ch for (...); In English, Divide the Gold that you have found. Why then,
says Xanthus, let us go home and share it. No sooner were they got Home, but
Aesop was presently laid by the Heels, for fear of Blabbing, crying out as
Loud as he could, This comes of trusting to the Faith of a Philosopher; The
Reproach Nettled his Master: But however he caused his Shackles to be taken off
upon it, and Admonished Aesop to keep his Licentious Tongue in a Little better
Order for the future, if ever he hoped to have his Liberty. For That, says
Aesop, Prophetically, I shall not Need to Beg it of you as a favor, for in a
very few days I shall have my Freedom, whether you will or no.

CAP. XIV. Aesop Expounds upon an Augury, and is made Free.
AESOP had thus far born All the Indignities of a Tedious Slavery, with the
Constancy of a Wise Man, and without either Vanity or Abjection of Mind. He was
not Ignorant however of his own Value; Neither did he Neglect any honest Way or
Occasion of Advancing his Name and his Credit in the World; as in One
Particular Instance among the Samians, on a Strange Thing that happened There
upon a Very Solemn Day. The Ring, it seems, that had the Towne-Seale upon it was
laid somewhere in Sight, Where an Eagle could come at it; She took it up in
the Air, and dropped it into the Bosom of a Slave. The Samians took this for a
Fore-boding, that Threat'ned some dismal Calamity to the State, and in a
general Consternation They presently called a Council of their Wise Men; and
Xanthus in the first Place, to give their Opinions upon This Mysterious
Accident. They were All at a Loss what to Think on it; only Xanthus desired some
few Days time for further Consideration. Upon This, he betook himself to his
Study, and the More he Beat his Brains about it, the further he found himself
from any hope of Expounding The Secret. This put him into a deep Melancholy;
which made Aesop very Importune, and Impatient, to know the Cause of it; with
Assurances, That he would serve his Master in The Affair, Whatever it was, to
the Uttermost of his Power. Xanthus hereupon laid the Whole Matter before him,
and told him in Conclusion, that he was not only lost in his Reputation, but in
Danger to be Torn to Pieces by the Rabble. When Aesop found how the Case stood,
Never Trouble your Head any further, says he, Do but follow my Advice, and I Will
bring you off as well now as ever I did before. When you Appear to Morrow to
give in your Answer, I would have you Speak to the People after this Manner.

I need not tell your Wisdoms, That so Many Heads so Many Minds, and so many
several Men, so many several Conceptions of Things; Nay and further, That
every several Art, or Profession requires a Distinct Faculty or Disposition,
that is more or less Peculiar to it self. It is the Custom of the World for
People in All Cases where They are either Ignorant or Doubtful, to Repair to
Men that have the Reputation of Philosophers, for Council and Satisfaction.
But this, under favor, is a Great Mistake; for it is with Philosophers, as it
is, I say, with other Arts and Professions that have their Functions a part the
One from the Other. Wisdom, it is true, may be called properly enough the
Knowledge of Things Divine and Humane, but will you therefore expect that a
Philosopher should do the Office of a Shoemaker or a Barber, because the Trades
are conversant about Humane Things? No No Gentlemen, a Man may be a Great
Philosopher without any Skill at All in the Handling of the Awl, or the Razor.
But if the Question were Concerning the Government of Life and Manners, the
Nature of Things Celestial or Terrestrial; The Duties that we owe to God or
Man; you could not do better then repair to Philosophers for satisfaction. But
for reading upon Prodigies; or Commenting upon the Flights of Birds, or the
Entrails of Beasts, These are Things quite Beside the Philosophers Business. If
there be any thing you doubt of that falls under the Cognizance of Philosophy,
I am ready to serve you in^t; But your present Point being Augury, I shall take
leave to Acquaint you that a Servant I have at home, is as likely to make a
Right Judgment that way as any Man I know. I should not Presume to name a
Servant; Neither Perchance would you think fit to make use of one; If the
Necessity of your present Distress, were not a very Competent and Reasonable
Excuse.

Here Is your Speech, says Aesop; and your Credit saved whether They Will hear me
or Not. If they send for me, The Honor will be yours, in Case I Deliver my
self to their Liking, and the Disgrace will be Mine then if I Miscarry. His
Master was pleased beyond Measure with the Advice, but he did not as yet
Understand Whether it Tended.

Xanthus Presented himself Early the next Morning before the Council, Where
he Dilated Upon The Matter according to his Instructions, and so referred Them
to his Servant for the Clearing of the Difficulty. The People with one Voice
cried out Where is he? Why does he not Appear? Why has not his Master Brought
him along with him? In short, Aesop was Immediately fetched into the Court, and
at the very First Sight of him, They All burst out a Laughing by Consent. This
Fellow, says one, may have Skill perhaps in Divining, but he has Nothing that is
Humane about him. Another asked Where he was Born, and whether or no Blocks had
the Faculty of Speech in his Country. Aesop, upon This, Addressed himself to
the Council.

You have here before ye, (says Aesop) an Ungracious Figure of a Man, which in
truth is not a Subject for your Contempt, Nor is it a Reasonable Ground for
your Despair, upon the Matter in Question. One Wise Man values Another for his
Understanding, not for his Beauty; Beside that the Deformity of my Person is no
Incapacity at All as to your Business. Did you never taste Delicious drink out
of an Ill Looked Vessel? or did you never drink Wine that was Vapid, or Eager,
out of a Vessel of Gold? It Is Sagacity and Strength of Reason that you have
Occasion for, not the force of Robust Limbs, nor the Delicacies of Color and
Proportion. Wherefore I must Beseech ye not to Judge of My Mind by my Body, nor
to Condemn me Unheard. Upon this, they All cried out to him, If he had any
thing to say for the Common Good, That he would speak it. With your favor,
says he, It is for that End I presume, that ye have called me hither, and it is
with a Great Zeal for your Service, that I stand now before ye: But when I
consider the Weight of the Matter in hand, and the Office That I am now to
Perform, it will as little stand with your Honors Perhaps, to take the Opinion
of a Slave into your Counsels and Debates, as it will with my Condition to
offer it. Beside the Risque I run of my Masters Displeasure upon the Event. But
All This may yet be Obviated, my Fears secured, my Modesty gratified, and your
own Dignity preserved, only by making me a Freeman before hand, to Qualify me
for the Function. They All said it was a Most Reasonable Thing, and presently
Treated about the Price of his Liberty, and ordered the Quaestors to pay down
the Money. When Xanthus saw that the thing must be done, He could not Decently
stand Higgling about the Price; But making a Virtue of Necessity, he chose
rather to Present Aesop to the Commonwealth, then to Sell him. The Samians
took it very kindly, And Aesop was Presently Manumiz'd, and made a Citizen in
Form, Proclaim^d a Freeman; and after this Ceremony, he Discoursed upon the
Subject of the Portent as follows.

I shall not need to tell so many Wise and Knowing Men, that the Eagle is a
Royal Bird, and signifies a Great King; that the Dropping of the Ring into the
Bosom of a Slave that has no Power over himself, portends the Loss of Your
Liberties, if you do not look to your selves in Time; And that some Potent
Prince has a Design upon ye. This put the Samians all a-fire to hear the Issue
of the Prediction. In some short time after there came Ambassadors from Croesus
the King of Lydia, to Demand a Tribute on the Behalf of their Master, and
Threat^ned the Samians with a War in Case of a Refusal. This Affair came to be
Debated in the Council, where the Majority was rather for Peace with Slavery,
then for running the Risque of a Dispute; but they would not come to a
Resolution yet, without first Consulting Aesop What They had best to do; Who
gave Them his Thoughts upon it in Words to This Effect.

Every Man in this World has Two Ways before him, That is to say, first, The
Way of Liberty, that is Narrow and Rugged at the Entrance, but plainer and
Smoother still the further you go. Secondly, The Way of Servitude or Slavery,
that seems to be Easy at first, but you will find it afterward to be full of
Intolerable Difficulties. The Samians, upon These Words, Declared themselves
Unanimously for Liberty, and that since they were at present Free, They would
never make Themselves Slaves by their own Consent: So the Ambassadors Departed,
and there was a War Denounced.

When Croesus came to Understand the Resolution the Samians had taken, and how
Inclinable they were to a Compliance, 'till Aesop, by the Power only of a few
words, Diverted them from it, he Resolved to send for and Discourse with Aesop.
So He made an Offer to the Samians, upon their sending Aesop to him, to put a
Stop at present to the course of his Arms. When Aesop came to hear of their
Proposition, he told them That he was not against their sending of him,
Provided only that he might tell them One Story before he Left them.

In Old Time, (says he) when some Beasts talked better Sense then Many Men do
now a days, there happened to be a Fierce War betwixt the Wolves and the Sheep,
And the Sheep, by the help of the Dogs, had rather the Better on it. The Wolves,
upon This, offered the Sheep a Peace, on Condition only that they might have
their Dogs for Hostages, The Silly credulous Sheep agreed to it, and as soon as
ever they had parted with the Dogs, The Wolves brake in upon them, and
Destroyed them at pleasure. See Fab. 45.

The Samians quickly smelt out the Moral of this Fable, and cried out, One and
All, that they would not part with Aesop: But this did not hinder Aesop however
from putting himself abord, and taking a Passage for Lydia with the Ambassadors.

CAP. XV. Aesop. Presents himself before the King of Lydia.
IMmediately Upon Aesop's Arrival in Lydia, he Presented himself before the
King, who looking upon him with Contempt, Hatred, and Indignation; Is This a
Man says he, to hinder the King of Lydia from being Master of Samos? Aesop then
with a Reverence after the Lydian Fashion, deliver*d what he had to say.

I am not here (says he, Great King) in the Quality of a Man that is Given up by
his Country, or under the Compulsion of any force; But it is of my own Accord
that I am now come to lay my self at your Majesty's feet, and with this only
Request, that you will vouchsafe me the Honor of your Royal Ear, and Patience
but for a few words.

There was a Boy hunting of Locusts, and he had the Fortune to take a
Grasshopper. She found he was about to kill her, and Pleaded after this Manner
for her Life. Alas (says she) I never did any Body an Injury, and never had it
either in my Will or in my Power to do it. All my Business is my Song; and what
will you be the Better for my Death? The Youth's Heart relented and he set the
Simple Grasshopper at Liberty. Your Majesty has now that Innocent Creature
before you: There Is Nothing that I can pretend to but my Voice, which I have
ever employed so far as in me Lay, to the Service of Mankind. The King was so
Tenderly moved with the Modesty and Prudence of the Man, That he did not only
give him his Life, but bad him ask any thing further that he had a Mind to, and
it should be Granted him. Why then, says Aesop, (with that Veneration,
Gratitude and Respect that the Case required) I do most humbly implore your
Majesty's favor for my Countrymen the Samians. The King Granted him his
Request, and Confirmed it under his Seal; Beside that the Piety of making that
Petition his Choice, was a further Recommendation of him to his Royal Kindness
and Esteem.

Aesop, soon after This, returned to Samos with the News of the Peace, where he
was Wellcomed with All the Instances of Joy and Thankfulness Imaginable;
Insomuch that they Erected a Statue for him, with an Inscription upon it, in
Honor of his Memory. From Samos he returned afterward to Croesus, for whose
Sake he Composed several of Those Apologues that Pass in the World to This Day
under his Name. His Fancy lay extremely to Traveling; but above All other
Places, he had the Greatest Mind to see Babylon: To which End he got Letters of
Recommendation from Croesus to the King there: who, according to Herodotus, was
a Friend, and an Ally of Croesus's, and his Name, Labynetus; not Lycerus, as
Planudes has Handed it down to us upon a Great Mistake. But his Curiosity led
him first to pass through Greece, for the sake of the Seven Wise Men, whose
Reputation was at That Time Famous All over the World. He had the Good Hap in
his Travels to find them at Corinth, together with Anacharsis, and several of
their Followers and Disciples, Where they were All Treated by Periander at a
Villa of his not far off the Town. This Encounter was to the Common
Satisfaction of the Whole Company; the Entertainment Philosophical, and
Agreeable, and among other Discourses, they had some Controversy upon the
Subject of Government; and which was the most Excellent Form: Aesop being still
for Monarchy, and the Rest for a Commonwealth. He Traveled thence, a while
after into Asia, and so to Babylon, according to his first Intention.

CAP. XVI. Aesop Adopts Ennus. Ennus's Ingratitude and Falseness, and Aesop's
Good Nature.
IT was the Fashion in those Days, for Princes to Exercise Trials of Skill in
the Putting and Resolving of Riddles, and Intricate Questions; and He that was
the Best at the Clearing or Untying of Knotty Difficulties carried the Prize.
Aesop's Faculty lay notably that way, and rendered him so serviceable to the
King, that it brought him both Reputation and Reward. It was his Unhappiness to
have No Children, for the Comfort and Support of his Old Age; So that with the
Kings Consent, he Adopted a young Man, who was Well Born, and Ingenious enough,
but Poor; His Name was Ennus. Aesop took as much care of his Institution, as if
he had been his own Child, and Trained him up in those Principles of Virtue and
Knowledge that might most probably render him Great and Happy. But there is no
working upon a Flagitious and Perverse Nature, by Kindness and Discipline, and
it is time lost to think of Mastering so Incurable an Evil: So that Ennus, after
the Manner of other Wicked Men, heaping One Villainy upon another, Counterfeits
his Fathers Name and Hand to Certain Letters, wherein he Promises his
Assistance to the Neighbor Princes against Labynetus. These Letters Ennus
carry's to the King, and Charges his Father with Treason, though in Appearance,
with All the trouble and unwillingness that was possible, Only a Sense of his
Duty to his King and to his Country, swallowed up All other Respects of
Reverence and Modesty that a Son ows to a Father. The King took All These
Calumnies for Instances of Ennus's Affections to him, without the Least
Suspicion of any Fraud in the Matter: So that without any further Enquiry, he
ordered Aesop to be put to Death. The Persons to whom the Care of his Execution
was Committed, being well Assured of his Innocence, and of the Kings
Ungovernable Passions, took him out of the way, and Gave it out that he was
Dead. Some few Days after this, there came Letters to Labynetus from Antasis
the King of Egypt, wherein Labynetus was Desired by Amasis to send him a
certain Architect that could raise a Tower that should Hang in the Air, and
likewise Resolve All Questions. Labynetus was at a Great Loss what answer to
return, And the Fierceness of his Displeasure against Aesop being by This time
somewhat Abated, he began to Enquire after him with Great Passion, and would
often Profess, That if the Parting with One half of his Kingdom could bring
him to Life again, he would Give it. Hermippus and Others that had kept him out
of the Way, told the King upon the Hearing of This, That Aesop was yet Alive;
so They were commanded to bring him forth; which they did, in All the
Beastlyness he had Contracted in the Prison. He did no sooner Appear, but he
made his Innocence so manifest, that Labynetus in Extreme Displeasure and
Indignation, commanded the False Accuser to be put to Death with most Exquisite
Torments; But Aesop, after All this, Interceded for him, and Obtained his
Pardon, upon a Charitable Presumption, that the Sense of so Great a Goodness
and Obligation would yet work upon him. Herodotus tells this Story of Cambyses
the Son of Cyrus, and Croesus, and with what Joy Cambyses received Croesus
again, after he was supposed to be put to death by his own Order; but Then it
Varies in This, that he Caused Those to be put to Death, that were to have seen
the Execution done, for not Observing his Commands.

CAP. XVII. Aesop's Letters of Morality to his Son Ennus.
UPON Aesop's coming again into Favor, he had the King of Aegypt's Letter
given him to Consider of, and Advised Labynetus to send him for Answer, That
Early the next Spring he should have the Satisfaction he Desired. Things being
in this State, Aesop took Ennus Home to him again, and so ordered the Matter,
that he wanted neither Counsels nor Instructions, nor any other Helps or
Lights that might Dispose him to the Leading of a Virtuous Life, as will Appear
by the Following Precepts.

My Son (says he) Worship God with Care and Reverence, and with a Sincerity of
Heart void of All Hypocrisy or Ostentation: Not as if that Divine Name and
Power were only an Invention, to Frigh Women and Children, but know, That God
is Omnipresent, True and Allmighty. Have a Care even of your Most Private
Actions and Thoughts, for God sees Thorough you, and your Conscience will bear
Witness against you. It is according to Prudence, as well as Nature, to pay
that Honor to your Parents that you Expect your Children should pay to you. Do
All the Good you can to All men; but in the First Place to your Nearest
Relations, and do no Hurt however, where you can do no Good. Keep a Guard upon
your Words as well as upon your Actions, that there be no Impurity in Either.
Follow the Dictates of your Reason, and you are Safe; and have a Care of
Impotent Affections. Apply your self to Learn More, so long as there is any
Thing Left that you do not know, and Value Good Council before Money. Our Minds
must be Cultivated as well as our Plants; The Improvement of our Reason makes
us like Angels, whereas the Neglect of it turns us into Beasts. There Is no
Permanent and Inviolable Good, but Wisdom and Virtue, though the Study of it
signifies Little without the Practice. Do not think it impossible to be a Wise
Man, without looking Sour upon it. Wisdom makes Men Severe, but not Inhumane.
It is Virtue not to be Vicious. Keep Faith with All Men. Have a Care of a Lie,
as you would of Sacrilege. Great Bablers have No Regard either to Honesty or
Truth. Take Delight in, and frequent the Company of Good Men, for it will give
you a Tincture of their Manners too. Take heed of that Vulgar Error, of
thinking that there is any Good in Evil. It is a Mistake when Men talk of
Profitable Knavery, or of Starving Honesty; for Virtue and Justice carry All
that is Good and Profitable along with them. Let Every Man mind his own
Business, for Curiosity is Restless. Speak Ill of No body, and you are no more
to Hear Calumnies then to Report them: Beside that, they that Practice the One,
Commonly Love the Other. Propose Honest Things; Follow Wholesome Counsels, and
Leave the Event to God. Let no man Despair in Adversity, nor presume in
Prosperity, for All Things are Changeable. Rise Early to your Business, Learn
Good Things, and Oblige Good Men; These are three Things you shall never Repent
of. Have a Care of Luxury and Gluttony; but of Drunkenness Especicially; for
Wine as well as Age makes a Man a Child. Watch for the Opportunities of doing
things, for there is Nothing Well done, but what is done in Season. Love and
Honor Kings, Princes and Magistrates, for they are the Bands of Society, in
Punishing the Guilty, and Protecting the Innocent.
These, or such as these, were the Lessons that Aesop read daily to his Son;
but so far was he from mending upon Them, that he grew Every Day worse and
worse, showing that it is not in the power of Art or Discipline to Rectify a
Perverse Nature, or (as Euripides says) to Make a Man Wise that has no Soul.
But however, according to Neveletus, he came soon after to be Touched in
Conscience for his Barbarous Ingratitude, and Dyed in a Rageing Remorse for
what he had done.

The Spring was now at Hand, and Aesop was preparing for the Task he had
Undertaken About the Building of a Tower in the Air, and Resolving All Manner
of Questions: But I shall say no more of That Romantic part of the History,
then that he went into Egypt, and Acquitted himself of his Commission to
Amasis with Great Reputation. From thence back again to Labynetus, Laden with
Honors and Rewards; from whom he got leave to Return into Greece; but upon
Condition of Repassing to Babylon by the First Opportunity.

CAP. XVIII. Aesop's Voyage to Delphos; his Barbarous Usage There, and his
Death.
WHEN Aesop had almost taken the Whole Tower of Greece, he went to Delphos,
either for the Oracle sake, or for the sake of the Wise Men that Frequented
the Place. But when he came thither, he found Matters to be quite otherwise
then he expected, and so far from deserving the Reputation they had in the
World for Piety and Wisdom, that he found them Proud, and Avaritious, and
Hereupon Delivered his Opinion of Them under this Fable.

I find (says he) the Curiosity that brought me Hither, to be much the Case of
People at the Sea side, that see something come Hulling toward them a great way
off at Sea, and take it at first to be some Mighty Matter, but upon Driving
Nearer and Nearer the Shore, it proves at last to be only a heap of Weeds and
Rubbish. See Fab. ^89.

The Magistrates of the Place took Infinite Offense at this Liberty and
presently entered into a Conspiracy against him to take away his Life, for fear
he should Give them the same Character elsewhere in his Travells, that he had
done there upon the Place. It was not so Safe they thought, nor so Effectual a
Revenge to make him away in private; but if they could so contrive it, as to
bring him to a shameful End, under a Form of Justice, it would better answer
their Business and Design. To Which Purpose they caused a Golden Cup to be
secretly conveyed into his Baggage, when he was packing up to Depart. He was no
sooner out of the Town upon his Journey, But Immediately Pursued and taken upon
the way by Officers, and Charged with Sacrilege. Aesop denied the Matter, and
Laughed at them All for a Company of Mad Men; But upon the Searching of his
Boxes, they took the Cup, and showed it to the People, Hurrying him away to
Prison in the Middle of his Defense. They brought him the Next Day into the
Court, Where Notwithstanding the Proof of his Innocence, as clear as the Day,
he was Condemned to Dye; and his Sentence was to be Thrown Headlong from a
Rock, Down a Deep Precipice. After his Doom was past, he Prevailed upon Them,
with much ado to be heard a few Words, and so told them the Story of the Frog
and the Mouse, as it stands in the Fable.

This wrought nothing upon the Hearts of the Delphians, but as they were
Bawling at the Executioner, to Dispatch and do his Office, Aesop on a Sudden
gave them the Slip, and Fled to an Altar hard by there, in hopes that the
Religion of the Place might have Protected him, but the Delphians told him,
that the Altars of the Gods were not to be any Sanctuary to those that Robbed
their Temples; Whereupon he took Occasion to tell them the Fable of the Eagle
and the Beetle to this Following Effect, As it stands in the Book, Number. 378.

Now says Aesop (after the telling of this Fable) you are not to Flatter your
Selves that the Prophaners of Holy Altars, and the Oppressors of the Innocent,
shall ever Escape Divine Vengeance. This Enraged the Magistrates to such a
Degree, that they commanded the Officers Immediately to take Aesop from the
Altar, and Dispatch him away to his Execution. When Aesop found that Neither
the Holiness of the Place, nor the Clearness of his Innocence was Sufficient to
Protect him, and that he was to fall a Sacrifice to Subornation and Power, he
gave them yet one Fable more as he was upon the Way to Execution.

There was an Old Fellow (says he) that had spent his Whole Life in the
Country without ever seeing the Town, he found himself Weak and Decaying,
and Nothing would serve, but his Friends must needs show him the Town once
before he Dyed. Their Asses were very well Acquainted with the Way, and so they
caused them to be made Ready, and turned the Old Man and the Asses Loose,
without a Guide to try their Fortune. They were overtaken Upon the Road by a
Terrible Tempest, so that what with the Darkness, and the Violence of the
Storm, the Asses were Beaten out of their Way, and Tumbled with the Old Man
into a Pit, where he had only time to Deliver his Last Breath with This
Exclamation. Miserable Wretch that I am to be Destroyed, since Dye I must, by
the Basest of Beasts; by Asses. And that is my Fate now, in suffering by the
Hands of a Barbarous Sottish People, that Understand Nothing either of Humanity
or Honor; and Act Contrary to the Ties of Hospitality and Justice. But the
Gods will not suffer my Blood to lie Unrevenged, and I doubt not, but that in
Good Time the Judgment of Heaven will give you to Understand your Wickedness by
your Punishment. He was speaking on, but They Pushed him Off Head long from the
Rock, and he was Dashed to Pieces with the Fall.

The Delphians, soon after This, were visited with Famine and Pestilence, to
such a Degree, that they Went to Consult the Oracle of Apollo to know what
Wickedness it was had brought these Calamities upon Them. The Oracle gave them
this Answer, That they were to Expiate for the Death of Aesop. In the
Conscience of their Barbarity, they Erected a Pyramid to his Honor, and it is
upon Tradition, that a Great Many of the Most Eminent Men among the Greeks of
that Season, went afterward to Delphos upon the News of the Tragical End of
Aesop, to Learn the Truth of the History, and found upon Enquiry, That the
Principal of the Conspirators had laid Violent hands upon Themselves.

UTILE DULCI



THE FABLES OF AESOP, etc.
FABLE I. A Cock and a Diamond.
AS a Cock was turning up a Dunghill, he spied a Diamond. Well (says he to
himself) this sparkling Foolery now to a Lapidary in my place, would have been
the Making of him; but as to any Use or Purpose of mine, a Barley-Corn had been
worth Forty on it.

The MORAL.
He that is Industrious in an Honest Calling, shall never fail of a Blessing.
It Is the part of a Wise Man to Prefer Things Necessary before Matters of
Curiosity, Ornament, or Pleasure.

REFLECTION.
THE Moralists will have Wisdom and Virtue to be meant by the Diamond; the
World and the Pleasures of it, by the Dunghill; and by the Cock, a Voluptuous
Man, that Abandons himself to his Lusts, without any regard, either to the
Study, the Practice, or the Excellency of Better Things.

Now, with favor of the Ancients, this Fable seems to me, rather to hold forth
an Emblem of Industry and Moderation. The Cock lives by his honest Labor, and
maintains his Family out of it; His Scraping upon the Dunghill, is but Working
in his Calling: The precious Stone is only a gaudy Temptation that Fortune
throws in his way to divert him from his Business and his Duty. He would have
been glad, he says, of a Barley-Corn instead on it; and so casts it aside as a
thing not worth the heeding. What is all this now, but the passing of a true
Estimate upon the matter in question, in preferring (...) which Providence has
made and pronounced to be the Staff of Life, before a glittering Gew-Gaw, that
has no other Value, then what Vanity, Pride, and Luxury, have set upon it? The
Price of the Market to a Ieweller in his Trade, is one thing, but the
intrinfick Worth of a thing, to a Man of Sense, and Judgment, is another. Nay,
that very Lapidary himself, with a coming Stomach, and in the Cock's place,
would have made the Cock's Choice. The Doctrine, in short, may be this; That we
are to prefer things necessary, before things superfluous; the Comforts and the
Blessings of Providence, before the dazzling and the splendid Curiosities of
Mode and Imagination: And finally, that we are not to govern our Lives by
Fancy, but by Reason.

FAB. II. A Cat and a Cock.
IT was the hard Fortune once of a Cock, to fall into the Clutches of a Cat.
Puss had a Months Mind to be upon the Bones of him, but was not willing to pick
a Quarrel however, without some plausible Color for it. Sirrah (says she) what
do you keep such a bawling, and screaming a Nights for, that no body can sleep
near you? Alas, says the Cock, I never wake any body, but when it is time for
People to rise, and go about their Business. Nay, says the Cat, and then there
never was such an incestuous Rascal: Why, you make no more Conscience of Lying
with your own Mother, and your Sisters -- In truth, says the Cock again, that is
only to provide Eggs for my Master and Mistress. Come, come, says Puss, without
any more ado, it is time for me to go to Breakfast, and Cats don't live upon
Dialogues; at which word she gave him a Pinch, and so made an end, both of the
Cock, and of the Story.

FAB. III. A Wolf and a Lamb.
AS a Wolf was lapping at the Head of a Fountain, he spied a Lamb, paddling at
the same time, a good way off down the Stream. The Wolf had no sooner the Prey
in his Eye, but away he runs open-mouth to it. Villain (says he) how dare you
lie muddling the Water that I Am a drinking? Indeed, says the poor Lamb, I did
not think that my drinking there below, could have foul'd your Water so far
above. Nay, says the other, you will never leave your chopping of Logic, till your
Skin's turned over your Ears, as your Fathers was, a matter of six Months ago,
for prating at this saucy rate; you remember it full well, Sirrah. If you ll
believe me, Sir, (quoth the innocent Lamb, with fear and trembling) I was not
come into the World then. Why thou Impudence, cries the Wolf, have thou neither
Shame, nor Conscience? But it runs in the Blood of your whole Race, Sirrah, to
hate our Family; and therefore since Fortune has brought us together so
conveniently, you shall even pay some of your Forefathers Scores before you
and I part; and so without any more ado, he leapt at the Throat of the
miserable helpless Lamb, and tore him immediately to pieces.

The MORAL of the Two Fables above.
It Is an Easy Matter to find a Staff to Beat a Dog. Innocence is no Protection
against the Arbitrary Cruelty of a Tyrannical Power: But Reason and Conscience
are yet so Sacred, that the Greatest Villainies are still Contenanc'd under that
Cloak and Color.

REFLECTION.
PRIDE and Cruelty never want a Pretense to do Mischief. The Plea of Not Guilty
goes for Nothing against Power: For Accusing is Proving, where Malice and Force
are Joined in the Prosecution.

When Innocence is to be oppressed by Might, Arguments are foolish things; nay,
the very Merits, Virtues, and good Offices of the Person accused, are improved
to his Condemnation: As the Industry and Watchfulness of the Cock here, in the
calling of People out of their Beds to work when it is time to rise, is turned
upon him as a Crime. Nay, such is the Confidence of a spightful Cruelty, that
People shall be charged (rather than fail) with things utterly impossible, and
wholly foreign to the Matter in question. The Lamb it self shall be made
malicious. And what is this now, but the lively Image of a perverse Reason of
State, set up in opposition to Truth and Justice; but under the August Name and
Pretense, however of Both? As Loyalty, for the purpose, shall be called
Rebellion, and the Exercise of the most Necessary Powers of Government, shall
pass for Tyranny and Oppression. Decency of Religious Worship shall be made
Superstition; Tenderness of Conscience shall be called Phanaticism, Singularity
and Faction; and the very Articles of the Christian Faith shall be condemned
for Heresy. Villainies have not the same Countenance, when there are Great
Interests, Potent Mediations, Presents, Friends, Advocates, Plausible Colors,
and Flourishes of Wit, and Rhetorique, Interposed betwixt the Sight and the
Object. There are ways of Deceiving the Eyes, as well as of Blinding them; so
that the Cause of the Innocent must be Remitted at last to that Great and Final
Decision, where there is no longer any Place for Passion, Partiality,
Corruption, or Error. But as to the Business of This World, when the Cocks and
the Lambs lie at the Mercy of Cats and Wolves, they must never expect better
Quarter; especially where the Hearts Blood of the One, is the Nourishment and
Entertainment of the Other.

FAB. IV. A Frog and a Mouse.
THere fell out a Bloody Quarrel once betwixt the Frogs and the Mice, about the
Sovereignty of the Fenns; and whilst Two of their Champions were Disputing it
at Swords Point, Down comes a Kite Powdering upon them in the Interim, and
Gobbles up both together, to Part the Fray.

FAB. V. A Lion and a Bear.
THere was a Lion and a Bear had gotten a Fawn betwixt them, and there were
they at it Tooth and Nail, which of the Two should carry't off. They Fought it
out, till they were even glad to lie down, and take Breath. In which Instant, a
Fox passing that way, and finding how the case stood with the Two Combatants,
seized upon the Fawn for his Own Use, and so very fairly scamper'd away with
him. The Lion, and the Bear saw the Whole Action, but not being in condition to
Rise and Hinder it, they passed this Reflection upon the whole matter; Here have
we been Worrying one another, who should have the Booty, 'till this Cursed Fox
has Bobb'd us Both on it.

The MORAL of the Two Fables above.
It Is the Fate of All Gotham-Quarrels, when Fools go together by the Ears, to
have Knaves run away with the Stakes.

REFLECTION.
THIS is no more than what we see Daily in Popular Factions, where Pragmatical
Fools commonly begin the Squabble, and Crafty Knaves reap the Benefit of it.
There is very rarely any Quarrel, either Public, or Private, whether betwixt
Persons, or Parties, but a Third Watches, and hopes to be the Better for it.

And all is but according to the Old Proverb, While Two Dogs are Fighting for a
Bone, a Third runs away with it. Divide and Govern, is a Rule of State, that we
see Confirmed and Supported by Daily Practice and Experience: So that it is none
of the Slightest Arguments for the Necessity of a Common Peace, that the
Litigants Tear one another to pieces for the Benefit of some Third Interest,
that makes Advantage of their Disagreement. This is no more than what we find
upon Experience through the whole History of the World in All Notable Changes,
and Revolutions; that is to say, the Contendents have been still made a Prey to
a Third Party. And this has not been only the Fare and the Event of Popular
Quarrels, but the Punishment of them; for the Judgment still Treads upon the
Heel of the Wickedness. People may talk of Liberty, Property, Conscience, Right
of Title, etc. but the Main Business and Earnest of the World, is Money,
Dominion, and Power, and how to Compass Those Ends; and not a Rush matter at
last, whether it be by Force, or by Cunning. Might and Right are Inseparable,
in the Opinion of the World; and he that has the Longer Sword, shall never
want, either Lawyers, or Divines to Defend his Claim. But then comes the Kite,
or the Fox, in the Conclusion; that is to say, some Third Party, that either by
Strength, or by Craft, Masters both Plaintiff and Defendent, and carries away
the Booty.

FAB. VI. A Dog and a Shadow.
AS a Dog was crossing a River, with a Morsel of Good Flesh in his Mouth, he
saw (as he thought) Another Dog under the Water, upon the very same Adventure.
He never considered that the One was only the Image of the Other; but out of a
Greediness to get Both, he Chops at the Shadow, and Loses the Substance.

The MORAL.
All Covet, All Lose; which may serve for a Reproof to Those that Govern their
Lives by Fancy and Appetite, without Consulting the Honor, and the Justice of
the Case.

REFLECTION.
THIS is the Case of Unreasonable, and Insatiable Desires; as in Love,
Ambition, and the Like; where People are still reaching at More and More, till
they lose All in the Conclusion.

There are more Meanings of Substance and Shadow; of Mistaking One for The Other;
and Losing All by Chopping at More; than the Bare Sense and Letter of the Dog,
the Flesh, and the Image here in the Fable. Under these Heads are comprehended
all Inordinate Desires, Vain Hopes, and Miserable Disappointments. What shall
we say of those that spend their Days in Gaping after Court-Favours and
Preferments; Servile Flatteries; and Slavish Attendances? That Live, and
Entertain themselves upon Blessings in Vision? (For Fair Words and Promises,
are no more than Empty Appearances) What is all This, but Sacrificing a Man's
Honor, Integrity, Liberty, Reason, Body, Soul, Fortune, and All, for Shadows?
We place our Trust in Things that have no Being; Disorder our Minds, Discompose
our Thoughts, Entangle our Estates, and Sell our selves, in One Word, for
Bubbles. How wretched is the Man that does not know when he is Well, but passes
away the Peace and Comfort of his Life, for the Gratifying of a Fantastical
Appetite, or Humor! Nay, and he Misses his Aim, even in That too, while he
Squanders away his Interest, and Forfeits his Discretion, in the Pursuit of One
Vanity after Another. Ambition is a Ladder that reaches from Earth to Heaven;
and the First Round is but so many Inches in a Man's way toward the Mounting of
All the Rest. He Is never well till he is at the Top, and when he can go no
Higher, he must either Hang in the Air, or Fall; For in This Case, he has
nothing above him to Aspire to, nor any Foot-Hold left him to come down by.
Every Man has what is Sufficient, at Hand, and in Catching at more than he can
carry away, he loses what he Had. Now there is Ingratitude, as well as
Disappointment, in All these Rambling and Extravagant Motions: Beside, that
Avarice is always Beggarly; for He that Wants, has as good as Nothing. The
Desire of More and More, rises by a Natural Gradation to Most, and after that,
to All; Till in the Conclusion we find our selves Sick and Weary of All that is
possible to be had; sollicitous for something else, and then when we have spent
our Days in the Quest of the Meanest of Things, and at the Feet too of the
Worst of Men, we find at the bottom of the Account, that all the Enjoyments
under the Sun, are not worth Struggling for. What can be Vainer now, than to
Lavish out our Lives and Fortunes in the Search and Purchase of Trifles; and at
the same time to lie Carking for the Unprofitable Goods of this World, and in a
restless Anxiety of Thought for what is to come. The Folly, in fine, of these
Vexatious and Frivolous Pursuits, shows it self in all the Transports of our
Wild and Ungoverned Affections.

Here is further set forth in this Emblem, All the Fabulous Torments of Hell,
even Above-Ground. Men that are Tainted with this Appetite are ready to dye of
Thirst, with Tantalus, and the Water running at their very Lips. They are
Condemned, with the Sisters, to the Filling of Tubs with Holes in 'em; which is
but a Lively Figure of so much Labor spent in Vain, upon the Gratifying of
Unreasonable Desires. What Is a Man's Contending with Insuperable Difficulties,
but the Rolling of Sisiphus's Stone up the Hill, which is sure beforehand, to
Return upon him again? What Is an Eternal Circulation of the same Things, as
well as the same Steps, without Advancing one Inch of Ground toward his
Journey's End, but ^xion in the Wheel? And all this while, with Cares, and
Horrors at his Heart, like the Vultur that is Day and Night Quarrying upon
Prometheus's Liver.

But after all that is said upon this Subject, of our Mistake, and Punishment,
the Great Nicety will lie in Rightly Distinguishing betwixt the Substance, and
the Shadow; and in what degree of Preference the one stands to the other. Now
this must be according to Epictetus's Distribution of Matters, into what we
have in our own Power; and what not; and in Placing things Honest and
Necessary, before other Subordinate Satisfactions. Aesop's Dog here was in the
Possession of a very Good Breakfast, and he knew very well what he had in his
Mouth; but still, either out of Levity, Curiosity, or Greediness, he must be
Chopping at something else, that he neither Wanted, nor Understood, till he
lost All for a Shadow; that is to say, for just nothing at All.

FAB. VII. A Lion, an Ass, etc. a Hunting.
A Lion, an Ass, and some other of their Fellow-Forresters, went a Hunting one
day; and every one to go share and share-like in what they took. They plucked
down a Stag, and cut him up into so many Parts; but as they were entering upon
the Dividend, Hands off says the Lion: This Part is mine by the Privilege of my
Quality: This, because I Will have it in spite of your Teeth: This again, because
I took most Pains for it; and if you Dispute the Fourth, we must even Pluck a
Crow about it. So the Confederates Mouths were all stopped, and they went away as
mute as Fishes.

The MORAL.
There Is no Entering into Leagues or Partnerships, with those that are either
too Powerful, or too Crafty for us. He that has the Staff in his Hand will be
his Own Carver. Bought Wit is Best.

REFLECTION.
SAVING the Incongruity of making the Ass a Beast of Prey, we are to learn from
hence the Danger of Unequal Alliances; where the Poor and the Weak lie at the
Mercy of the Rich and the Powerful; and no Remedy but Patience and Resignation.

People should have a care how they Engage themselves in Partnerships with Men
that are too Mighty for them, whether it be in Money, Pleasure, or Business.
Find out something, says a Court-Minion, and then upon the Discovery, he lays
hand on it for himself. So Says, and so Does the Lion here to the Ass and his
Companions. Now this is only a Stateway of Fishing with Cormorants. Men in
Power, Plunge their Clyents into the Mud, with a Ring about their Necks; So
that let them bring up what they will, nothing goes down with them that they
shall be ever the Better for. And when they come in Conclusion to Cast up the
Profit and Loss of the Purchase, or the Project; what betwixt Force, Interest,
and Good Manners, the Adventurer scapes well if he can but get off at last with
his Labor for his Pains.

Ambition, and the Insatiable Thirst of Money, Greatness, and Glory, know no
other Bounds of Justice or Conscience, than the Measures of a Corrupt Appetite.
Services are paid with Smoke and Fair Words; and there goes a World of
Unprofitable Ceremony to the Mortifying of an Honest Man. Promises and
Protestations are only Passages of Course, and mere Expletives; that in the
Construction of Civility, and Good Breeding, signify no more than [ Your
Humble Servant Sir.] All, in short, that the Lion says and does, in this
Instance, is but according to the Practice of Men in Power in a Thousand other
Cases.

FAB. VIII. A Wolf and a Crane.
A Wolf had got a Bone in's Throat, and could think of no better Instrument to
Ease him of it, than the Bill of a Crane; so he went and Treated with a Crane
to help him out with it, upon Condition of a very considerable Reward for his
pains. The Crane did him the Good Office, and then claimed his Promise. Why how
now Impudence! (says the other) Do you put your Head into the Mouth of a Wolf,
and then, when you have brought it out again safe and sound, do you talk of a
Reward? Why Sirrah, you have your Head again, and is not that a Sufficient
Recompense?

The MORAL.
One Good Turn they say requires another: But yet He that has to do with Wild
Beasts (as some Men are No Better) and comes off with a Whole Skin, let him
Expect No Other Reward.

REFLECTION.
THIS Fable will bear Diverse Morals; as First, That it is but Due Gratitude to
be Thankful to our Preservers. Secondly, The Crane's Good Fortune can hardly
Excuse his Facility. And then the Crane did Ill again to Insist upon a Reward;
for a Good Office pays it self; neither was he reasonably to Expect that so
Perfidious a Creature should keep Touch with him. Thirdly, Though the Wolf was
to blame for not making Good his Promise, there is yet in Equity a kind of a
Reward, in not Chopping off his Head when he had it at Mercy.

The Case of the Crane here, is a Case of Conscience; for it is a Nice Business
to Determine, how far Wicked Men in their Distresses May be Relieved; How far
they Ought to be Relieved; and to what Degree of Loss, Labor, and Difficulty, a
Sober, a Wise, and a Good Man may Interpose to their Redress. He may Give; he
may Lend, he may Venture, so far as Generosity and Good Nature shall prompt
him; provided always that he go no farther than the Conscience of the Cause, or
of the Action will Warrant him. A Man is at Liberty, it is true, to do many Kind
and Brave Offices, which he is not Bound to do: And if the Largeness of his
Heart shall carry him beyond the Line of Necessary Prudence, we may reckon upon
it only as a more Illustrious Weakness.

Here is a Fiction of One Crane that escaped, that there might not want One
Instance of an Encouragement to a Dangerous Act of Charity: But this One
Instance is not yet sufficient to justify the making a Common Practice of it,
upon the same Terms. It Is possible for One Blot not to be Hit; or to be
Over-seen perhaps. And so it is as possible for One Ill Man, either not to think
of the Mischief he could do, or to slip the Occasion of it; but such a
Deliverance however, is a Thing to Thank Providence for, without standing upon
a Reward for the Service. The Bone in the Throat of the Wolf, may be Understood
of any sort of Pinch, or Calamity, either in Body, Liberty, or Fortune. How
many do we see Daily, Gaping and Struggling with Bones in their Throats, that
when they have gotten them drawn out, have Attempted the Ruin of their
Deliverers! The World, in short, is full of Practices and Examples to Answer
the Intent of this Fable; and there are Thousands of Consciences that will be
Touched with the Reading of it, whose Names are not written in their Foreheads.

FAB. IX. A Countryman and a Snake.
A Countryman happened in a Hard Winter to spy a Snake under a Hedge, that was
half Frozen to Death. The Man was Good Natured, and Took it up, and kept it in
his Bosom, till Warmth brought it to Life again; and so soon as ever it was in
Condition to do Mischief, it bit the very Man that saved the Life on it. Ah thou
Ungrateful Wretch! Says he, Is that Venomous Ill Nature of thine to be
Satisfied with nothing less than the Ruin of thy Preserver?

The MORAL.
There are Some Men like Some Snakes; It Is Natural to them to be doing
Mischief; and the Greater the Benefit on the One side, the More implacable is
the Malice on the other.

REFLECTION.
HE that takes an Ungrateful Man into his Bosom, is well nigh sure to be
Betrayed; and it is no longer Charity, but Folly, to think of Obliging the
Common Enemies of Mankind. But it is no New Thing for good Natured Men to meet
with Ungrateful Returns. Wherefore Friendships, Charities, and Kindnesses,
should be well Weighed and Examined, as to the Circumstances of Time, Place,
Manner, Person, and Proportion, before we Sign and Seal. A Man had much better
take a Tiger into his Grounds, than a Snake into his Bosom. How many Examples
have we seen with our own Eyes, of Men that have been picked up and Relieved
out of Starving Necessities, without either Spirit, or Strength to do Mischief,
who in requital have afterward conspired against the Life, Honor, and Fortune
of their Patrons and Redeemers. Did ever any of these Human Snakes lose their
Venom for lying under some Temporary Incapacity of Using it? Will they be ever
the less Dangerous and Malicious, when Warmth shall bring them to themselves
again; because they were once Frozen and Benumbed with Cold? The very Credulity
Encourages an Abuse, where the Will to do Mischief only waits for the Power,
and Opportunity of putting it in Execution. Facility makes the Innocent a Prey
to the Crafty: Wherefore it is highly necessary for the One to know how far,
and to Whom he Trusts; and for the Other to understand what he is to Trust to.
The Snake, after his Recovery, is the very same Snake still, that he was at
first. How many People have we read of in Story, that after a Pardon for One
Rebellion, have been taken in Another with That very Pardon in their Pockets,
and the Ink scarce Dry upon the Parchment? Now all this is no more than the
Proverb in a Fable: Save a Thief from the Gallows, and he will Cut your Throat.

FAB. X. A Lion and an Ass.
AN Ass was so Hardy once, as to fall a Mopping and Braying at a Lion. The
Lion began at first to show his Teeth, and to Stomach the Affront; but upon
Second Thoughts; Well! (says he) Ieer on, and be an Ass still. Take notice
only by the way, that it is the Baseness of your Character that has saved your
Carcass.

The MORAL.
It is below the Dignity of a Great Mind to Entertain Contests with People that
have neither Quality nor Courage: Beside the Folly of Contending with a
Miserable Wretch, where the very Competition is a Scandal.

REFLECTION.
SCOUNDRELS are apt to be Insolent toward their Superiors; but it does not yet
become a man of Honor and Wisdom, to Contest with Mean Rascals; and to Answer
Every Fool in his Folly. One Indignity is not to be Revenged by Another.

The very Contest sets the Master and the Man upon the Same Level; and the Lion
was in the Right, not to Cast away his Displeasure upon an Ass, where there
was only Reputation to be Lost, and None to be Gotten. The very Beasts of the
Forest will Rise up in Judgment against such men. Contempt in such a Case as
This, is the only Honorable Revenge.

FAB XI. A City Mouse and a Country Mouse.
THere goes an Old Story of a Country Mouse that Invited a City-Sister of hers
to a Country Collation, where she spared for Nothing that the Place afforded;
as Moldy Crusts, Cheese-Parings, Musty Oatmeal, Rusty Bacon, and the like. Now
the City-Dame was so well bred, as Seemingly to take All in Good Part: But yet
at last, Sister (says she, after the Civilest Fashion) why will you be
Miserable when you may be Happy? Why will you lie Pining, and Pinching your
self in such a Lonesome Starving Course of Life as This is; when it is but going
to Town along with Me; to Enjoy all the Pleasures, and Plenty that Your Heart
can Wish? This was a Temptation the Country Mouse was not able to Resist; so
that away they Trudged together, and about Midnight got to their Journeys End.
The City Mouse showed her Friend the Larder, the Pantry, the Kitchen, and Other
Offices where she laid her Stores; and after This, carried her into the
Parlour, where they found, yet upon the Table, the Relics of a Mighty
Entertainment of That very Night. The City-Mouse Carved her Companion of what
she liked Best, and so to it they fell upon a Velvet Couch together: The Poor
Bumkin that had never seen, nor heard of such Doings before, Blessed her self
at the Change of her Condition, when (as ill luck would have it) all on a
Sudden, the Doors flew open, and in comes a Crew of Roaring Bullies, with their
Wenches, their Dogs, and their Bottles, and put the Poor Mice to their Wits
End, how to save their Skins. The Stranger Especially, that had never been at
This Sport before; but she made a Shift however for the present, to slink into
a Corner, where she lay Trembling and Panting 'till the Company went their Way.
So soon as ever the House was Quiet again, Well: My Court Sister, says she, If
This be the Way of Your Town-Gamboles, I Will even back to my Cottage, and my
Moldy Cheese again; for I had much rather lie Knabbing of Crusts, without
either Fear or Danger, in my Own Little Hole, than be Mistress of the Whole
World with Perpetual Cares and Alarums.

The MORAL.
The Difference betwixt a Court and a Country Life. The Delights, Innocence,
and Security of the One, Compared with the Anxiety, the Lewdness, and the
Hazards of the Other.

REFLECTION.
THE Design of This Fable is to set forth the Advantages of a Private Life,
above Those of a Public; which are certainly very Great, if the Blessings of
Innocence, Security, Meditation, Good Air, Health, and sound Sleeps, without
the Rages of Wine, and Lust, or the Contagion of Idle Examples, can make them
so: For Every Thing there, is Natural and Gracious. There Is the Diversion of
All Healthful Exercises for the Body; The Entertainment of the Place, and of
the Rivers, without any Base Interest to Corrupt, either the Virtue, or the
Peace of our Lives. He that is a Slave in the Town is a kind of a Petty Prince
in the Country. He loves his Neighbors, without Pride, and lives in Charity
with the Whole World. All that he sees is his Own, as to the Delight of it,
without Envying the Prosperity. His Doors are not Troubled with either Dunns,
or Fools, and he has the Sages of All Times in his Cabinet for his Companions.
He lives to Himself as well as to the World, without Brawles or Quarrels, of
any sort whatsoever. He sees No Bloody Murders; He hears No Blasphemous
Execrations; He lives free from the Plagues of Jealousy and Envy: And This is
the Life in fine, that the Greatest, and the Wisest Men in the World, Have, or
would have made Choice of, if Cares and Business had not Hindered them from so
Great a Blessing.

It Is against Common Justice to pass Sentence without hearing Both sides: And
the Only way to come to a True Estimate upon the Odds betwixt a Public and a
Private Life, is to Try Both. Virtue is only Glorious in the Native Simplicity
of it, and while it holds no Communication with Interest, Fancy, Sense, or
Ornament: Wherefore Aesop has done Wisely to cast the Issue of the Question
upon the Experiment, Far from Jupiter (says the Adage) far from the Thunder.
What signifies the Splendour, and the Luxury of Courts, considering the Slavish
Attendances, the Invidious Competitions, and the Mortal Disappointments that go
along with it. The Frowns of Princes, and the Envy of those that Judge by
Hearsay, or Appearance; without either Reason or Truth! To say nothing of the
Innumerable Temptations, Vices, and Excesses, of a Life of Pomp, and Pleasure.
Let a man but set the Pleasing of his Palate against the Surfeits of Gluttony
and Excess, The Starving of his Mind against a Pampered Carcass; The Restless
Importunities of Tale-bearers and Back Friends, against Fair Words and
Professions only from the Teeth outward: Let him, I say, but set the One in
Balance against the Other, and he shall find himself Miserable, even in the
very Glutt of his Delights. To say All in a Word; Let him but set the Comforts
of a Life spent in Noise, Formality, and Tumult, against the Blessings of a
Retreat with Competency and Freedom, and then Cast up his Account.

What Man then, that is not stark Mad, will Voluntarily Expose himself to the
Imperious Brow-beatings and Scorns of Great Men! to have a Dagger struck to his
Heart in an Embrace; To be torn to pieces by Calumny, nay to be a Knave in his
own Defense! for the Honester the Worse, in a Vicious Age, and where it is a
Crime not to be like the Company. Men of that Character are not to be Read, and
Understood by their Words, but by their Interests; their Promises and
Protestations are no longer Binding than while they are Profitable. But Baudoin
has done so well upon this Fable, that there needs no more to be said to it.

FAB. XII. A Crow and a Muscle.
THere was one of Your Royston-Crows, that lay Battering upon a Muscle, and
could not for his Blood break the Shell to come at the Fish. A Carrion-Crow, in
this Interim, comes up, and tells him, that what he could not do by Force, he
might do by Stratagem. Take this Muscle up into the Air, says the Crow, as High
as you can carry it, and then let him fall upon that Rock there; His Own
Weight, You shall see, shall break him. The Roystoner took his Advice, and it
succeeded accordingly; but while the One was upon Wing, the Other stood
Lurching upon the Ground, and flew away with the Fish.

The MORAL.
Charity begins at Home, they say; and most People are kind to their Neighbors
for their Own sakes.

REFLECTION,
IT is no longer an Amity of Virtue, but of Design, when we seek our Own
Interest, under Color of obliging Others; and men of Frankness and Simplicity,
are the most easily Imposed upon, where they have Craft and Treachery to deal
withal. The Imposture, in Truth, can hardly Miscarry, where there is a full
Confidence on the One side, and a Plausible Address and Disposition on the
Other; Wherefore it is good to be Wary, but so as not to be Inexorable, where
there is but any place for Charity it self to hope for better things; Not but
that a Supine, Credulous Facility exposes a man to be both a Prey, and a
Laughing stock, at once. It Is not for us to judge of the good Faith of men's
Intentions, but by the Light we receive from their Works. We may set up this
for a Rule however, that where the Adviser is to be evidently the Better for
the Council, and the Advised, in Manifest Danger to be the worse for it, there is
no Meddling. The Crow's Counsel was good enough in itself; but it was given with
a fraudulent Intention.

FAB. XIII. A Fox and a Raven.
A Certain Fox spied out a Raven upon a Tree with a Morsel in his mouth, that
set his Chops a watering; but how to come at it was the Question. Ah thou
Blessed Bird! (says he) the Delight of Gods, and of Men! and so he lays himself
forth upon the Gracefulness of the Ravens Person, and the Beauty of his Plumes;
His Admirable Gift of Augury, etc. And now, says the Fox, If thou had but a
Voice answerable to the rest of thy Excellent Qualities, the Sun in the
Firmament could not show the World such Another Creature. This Nauseous
Flattery sets the Raven immediately a Gaping as Wide as ever he could stretch,
to give the Fox a taste of his Pipe; but upon the Opening of his Mouth, he
drops his Breakfast, which the Fox presently Chopped up, and then bad him
remember, that whatever he had said of his Beauty, he had spoken Nothing yet of
his Brains.

The MORAL.
There Is hardly any man Living that may not be wrought upon more or less by
Flattery: For we do all of us Naturally Overween in our Own Favor: But when it
comes to be Applied once to a Vain Fool, it makes him forty times an Arranter
Sot than he was before.

REFLECTION.
THIS Fable shows us the Danger and the Nature of Flattery. It calls Good
Things by Ill Names, and Ill by Good; but it will never be out of Credit, so
long as there are Knaves to Give it, and Fools to Take it. It is never more
Pernicious than in the Courts of Great Princes, because a good deal of it looks
like Duty; as in private Cases, it carries a face of Friendship. The way to
Rise is to Please, and whatever is gotten by it, comes by Treachery. It Is a
Design that endangers both Body, Soul, and Estate; and not One Man of a Million
that is Proof against it. But Great and Good Men will rather look for their
Character in the Writings and Precepts of the Philosophers, than in the
Hyperboles of their Flatterers. For they know very well that Wise Books are the
Only True Friends.

There Is a Fawning, Crafty Knave, and a Vain, Easy Fool, well met, in this
Fable of the Fox and the Raven; which is no more at last, than One sort of
Rascal Cajoling Another; And then to show us, both that Impudence will stick at
Nothing, and that a Self-Conceited Fop will swallow Any thing, the Raven's
Beauty forsooth, and his Voice are the Topiques, that Reynard has made choice
of to Dilate upon. The two main Ends of Flattery, are Profit, or Safety, though
there are many others too that are less Principal; but in some respect or
other, Reducible to these Heads. The One is too Mercenary, and the Other too
Servile, for a man of Worth. There are also several sorts and degrees of it
under this Division; and diverse ways of Address and Application. But Flattery
is Flattery still, and the Moral extends to All.

It Is in it self an Unmanly, Slavish Vice; but it is much Worse yet for the
Alliance it has to Hypocrisy: for while we make other people think Better of
themselves than they Deserve, we make them think Better of Us too than We
Deserve: For Self-love and Vanity on the One hand, Assists the Falseness and
the Considence on the Other, while it serves to confirm weak Minds in the
Opinion they had of Themselves before; and makes them Parties, effectually, in
a Conspiracy, to their Own Ruin. The Measures, and the Artifices of it are
Many, and in diverse Cases so like Sincerity, that what betwixt Custom, and the
Nature of the Thing, it looks, in truth, like a Virtue, and a Duty; that is to
say, where it is so managed, as to be rather Instructive than pussing up. As
for Example, for a body to say, [ This or That was Wisely foreseen,] Or [ You
intend, I presume, to go This or That Way to Work:] and the like. Such an
Insinuation as this is, carries the Force in it of a Tacit, and a prudent
Advice; for it both serves to point out the Reason of the thing, and it
preserves the Decency of that Respect which ought to go along with it. It Is a
good Hint, the very suggesting of such or such a Precaution, though the
consideration perhaps never came near the to others Thought. But there is a
certain Habitual Meanness of Soul, which has so far prevailed in the World,
that Common Civility is no less Tainted by Course and Custom, than Friendship
and Conversation is by Corruption.

It is the Parasites Act to cast himself into all Shapes that may sort with the
Figure of his Patron, in what Post, Function, or Administration soever; and to
frame the Air and Countenance of his Words, Looks, and Actions accordingly,
with a respect to his Power, Wisdom, Conduct, Bravery, Generosity, Justice, or
what other Subject he thinks fit to treat upon. So that let him be never so
Perfidious, Shallow, Rash, Timorous, Envious, Malicious, Proud, Covetous, etc.
a Little Court Holy Water Washes off all Stains. And what is this upon the Main
now, but an Exchange of Air for Substance, and parting with All that either is,
or ought to be Dear to us, for a Song. The Flatterer, first Counsels his Patron
to his Loss; and then betrays him into the making himself Ridiculous; as what
can be more so, than for a Raven to Value Himself upon his Croaking, or an Ass
upon his Braying? The only Benefit, or Good of Flattery is this; that by
Hearing what we are Not; we may be Instructed what we Ought to be.

FAB. XIV. An Old Lion.
A Lion that in the Days of his Youth and Strength, had been very Outrageous
and Cruel, came in the end to be Reduced by Old Age, and Infirmity, to the last
Degree of Misery, and Contempt: Insomuch that All the Beasts of the Forest;
some out of Insolence, others in Revenge, some in fine, upon One Pretense, some
upon Another, fell upon him by Consent. He was a Miserable Creature to all
Intents and Purposes; but Nothing went so near the Heart of him in his
Distress, as to find himself Battered by the Heel of an Ass.

The MORAL.
A Prince that does not secure Friends to Himself while he is in Power and
Condition to oblige them, must never expect to find Friends, when he is Old and
Impotent, and no longer Able to do them any Good. If he Governs Tyrannically in
his Youth, he will be sure to be Treated Contemptuously in his Age; and the
Baser his Enemies are, the more Insolent, and Intolerable will be the Affront.

REFLECTION.
This may serve for a Lesson to men in Power, that they Treasure up Friends in
their Prosperity, against a time of Need; for He that does not Secure himself
of a stock of Reputation in his Greatness, shall most Certainly fall Unpitied
in his Adversity: And the Baser his Enemies are, the more insupportable is the
Insolence, and the forwarder will they be to Trample upon him.

The Case of this Miserable Old Lion may serve to put Great Men in mind, that
the Wheel of Time, and of Fortune is still Rolling, and that they themselves
are to lie down at last in the Grave with Common Dust: And without any thing to
support them in their Age, but the Reputation, Virtue and Conscience of a well
spent Youth. Nay Age it self, is well-nigh sufficient to Deface every Letter
and Action in the History of a Meritorious Life. For Old Services are Buried
under the Ruins of an Old Carcass: But there are None yet that fall so
Unpitied; so Just, so Necessary, and so Grateful a Sacrifice to the Rage and
Scorn of the common People, as those that have raised themselves upon the
Spoils of the Public: Especially when that Oppression is Aggravated with a
Wanton Cruelty, and with Blood and Rapine, for the very love of Wickedness. It
is a kind of Arrogance, in such a case, to be Honest, where it is both a
Fashion, and a Credit to be Other.

The Lion is here upon his Deathbed; Not a Friend left him, nor so much as an
Enemy, with either Fangs or Claws, that does not stand Gaping and Waiting for a
Collop of him. Here he lies, Faint, Poor, and Defenseless, under the Judgment
of Divine Vengeance, and the Animadversion of Humane Justice, both at once;
stung in his own Thoughts with the Guilty Remembrance of the Pride and Riot of
his Youth, Abandoned and Despised, by the Righteous Retaliation of Heaven it
self: All his Sins, as well as all his Adversaries; his Frauds, and Cruelties;
Broken Vows, Promises and Contracts, his Tyranny and Hypocrisy, and the
Iniquity, in fine, of All his Councels, and Practices for the Ruin of the
Guiltless flying in the face of him.

FAB. XV. An Ass and a Whelp.
A Gentleman had got a Favorite- Spaniel, that would be still Toying, and
Leaping upon him, Licking his Cheeks, and playing a Thousand pretty Gambles,
which the Master was well enough pleased withal. This Wanton Humor succeeded
so well with the Puppy, that an Ass in the House would needs go the same
Gamesom Way to Work, to Curry favor for Himself too; but he was quickly given
to Understand, with a Good Cudgel, the Difference betwixt the One Play-Fellow
and the Other.

The MORAL.
People that live by Example, should do well to look very Narrowly into the
Force and Authority of the President, without Saying, or Doing Things at a
Venture: for that may Become One Man, which would be Absolutely Intolerable in
Another, under Differing Circumstances.

REFLECTION.
Under the Allegory of the Ass, is Insinuated the License of a Buffoon.
There Is Mischief and Scandal in the very Sport, and Humor of it. There are
some men that seem to have Brutal Minds wrapped up in Humane Shapes, Their very
Caresses are Rude and Importune, and with Aesops Ass here, their very
Complements deserve a Correction, rather than an Encouragement, or a Reward.

All Creatures have somewhat in them peculiar to their Several Species; and
that Practice is still the Best which is most Consonant to the Nature of them,
by a Common Instinct. The Fawnings of an Ass are as Unnatural as the Brayings
would be of a Dog, and a man would as soon Choose him for his Bed fellow as for
his Play fellow. He that follows Nature is never out of his Way; and that which
is Best for every Man, is Fittest for him too. He does it with Ease and
Success, whereas all Imitation is Puti'd, and Servile.

FAB. XVI. A Lion and a Mouse.
UPon the Roaring of a Beast in the Wood, a Mouse ran presently out to see what
News: and what was it, but a Lion Hampered in a Net! This Accident brought to
her mind, how that she her self, but some few Days before, had fallen under the
Paw of a Certain Generous Lion, that let her go again. Upon a Strict Enquiry
into the Matter, she found This to be That very Lion; and so set her self
presently to Work upon the Couplings of the Net; Gnawed the Threads to pieces,
and in Gratitude Delivered her Preserver.

The MORAL.
Without Good Nature, and Gratitude, Men had as good live in a Wilderness as in
a Society. There is no Subject so Inconsiderable, but his Prince, at some time
or Other, may have Occasion for him, and it holds through the Whole Scale of
the Creation, that the Great and the Little have Need one of Another.

REFLECTION.
There is Nothing so Little, but Greatness may come to Stand in need on it, and
therefore Prudence and Discretion ought to have a place in Clemency, as well as
in Piety and Justice. It Is Doing as we would be done by; and the Obligation is
yet Stronger, when there is Gratitude, as well as Honor and Good Nature in the
Case. The Generosity of the Lion, and the Gratitude of the Mouse; The Power,
the Dignity, and the Eminence of the One, and the Meanness of the Other; do all
Concur to the making of this a very Instructive Fable. Who would have thought
that Providence should ever have laid the Life of a Lion at the Mercy of a
Mouse? But the Divine Wisdom that brings the Greatest Ends to pass by the most
Despicable Means, Orders the Reward of Virtue, and the punishment of Vice, by
Ways only known to it self, in token of an Approbation of the One, and a
Dislike of the Other.

Here Is a Recommendation of Clemency and Wisdom, Both in One; for the Lion, in
sparing the Life of the Mouse, saved his Own; and has left us in this Fable, an
Instance of a Grateful Beast, that will stand upon Record to the Confusion of
many an Ungrateful Man; that is to say, against those that in their Prosperity
forget the Friends, that to their Loss and Hazard, stood by and succored them
in their Adversity. This is a Sin of so odious and Dangerous an Example, that
it puts even Piety, and Gratitude it self out of Countenance. And then the
Tenderness on the other side, is Matter of Interest, and ordinary Prudence, as
well as of Virtue. If this Lion had killed the Mouse, what would the other Mice
have said or Done afterward, when they should have found the same Lion in the
Toil? [Have a care Good People; for this is He that killed our Sister, and we
cannot save His Life, without Hazarding our Own. If the Huntsmen Kill Him, we
are sure He Will never Kill Us; Beside that we shall have one Enemy the fewer
for it, when he is gone.] Now the Reason of Aesops Mouse here, works quite
Another way. This Lion, (says he) gave Me my Life, when he had it at Mercy, and
it is now My Turn, and Duty, to do what I can to preserve His. No Flesh, in
fine, can be so Great, as not to tremble under the Force and Consequences of
this President.

FAB. XVII. A Sick Kite and her Mother.
PRay Mother (says a Sick Kite) Give over these Idle Lamentations, and let Me
rather have your Prayers. Alas! my Child, (says the Dam) which of the Gods
shall I go to, for a Wretch that has Robbed All their Altars?

The MORAL.
Nothing but the Conscience of a Virtuous Life, can make Death Easy to us;
Wherefore there is No Trusting to the Distraction of an Agonizing, and a
Deathbed Repentance.

REFLECTION.
THE Kite's Deathbed Devotion and Repentance works like the Charity and Piety
of a great many Penitents we meet with in the World; that after the Robbing of
Temples, the profaning of Altars, and other Violences of Rapine and
Oppression, Build an Hospital perhaps, or some Little Almshouse, out of the
Ruins of the Church, and the spoils of Widows and Orphans; put up a Bill for
the Prayers of the Congregation; Wipe their Mouths, and All Is well again. But
it is not for a Wicked Life to trust to the Hazzards of an Uncertain State, and
Disposition at the point of Death. When Men come to that Last Extremity once,
by Languor, Pain, or Sickness; and to lie Agonizing betwixt Heaven and Hell,
under the stroke either of a Divine Judgment, or of Human Frailty, They are not
commonly so sensible of their Wickedness, or so Effectually touched with the
remorse of a true Repentance, as they are Distracted with the terrors of Death,
and the Dark Visionary Apprehensions of what is to come. People in that
Condition do but discharge themselves of Burdensome Reflections, as they do of
the Cargo of a Ship at Sea that has sprung a Leak: Every thing is done in a
Hurry, and men only part with their Sins in the one Case, as they do with their
Goods in the other; to Fish them up again, so soon as the storm is over. Grace
must be very strong in these Conflicts, wholly to Vanquish the weaknesses of
Distressed Nature. That certainly is none of the time to make Choice of for the
Great Work of reconciling our selves to Heaven, when we are divided, and
confounded betwixt an Anguish of Body, and of Mind: And the Man is worse than
Mad that Ventures his Salvation upon that Desperate Issue. We have abundance of
these Sick Kites in the World, that after a Sacrilegious Life, spent in the
Robbing of the Church, would willingly be thought to Die in the Bosom of it.

FAB. XVIII. A Swallow and other Birds.
THere was a Country Fellow at work a Sowing his Grounds, and a Swallow (being
a Bird famous for Providence and Foresight) called a company of Little Birds
about her, and bad *em take Good Notice what that Fellow was a doing. You must
know (says the Swallow) that all the Fowlers Nets and Snares are made of Hemp,
or Flax; and that is the Seed that he is now a Sowing. Pick it up in time for
fear of what may come on it. In short, they put it off, till it took Root; and
then again, till it was sprung up into the Blade. Upon this, the Swallow told
'em once for All, that it was not yet too Late to prevent the Mischief, if they
would but bestir themselves, and set Heartily about it; but finding that no
Heed was given to what she said; She even bad adieu to her old Companions in
the Woods, and so betook her self to a City Life, and to the Conversation of
Men. This Flax and Hemp came in time to be Gathered, and Wrought, and it was
this Swallows Fortune to see Several of the very same Birds that she had
forewarned, taken in Nets, made of the very Stuff she told them off. They came
at last to be Sensible of the folly of slipping their Opportunity; but they
were Lost beyond All Redemption first.

The MORAL.
Wise Men read Effects in their Causes, but Fools will not Believe them till
it is too late to prevent the Mischief. Delay in these Cases is Mortal.

REFLECTION.
MANY and Many a time has this been our own Case, both public and private,
when we would not Believe the Danger of things 'till the Evil was come upon us:
But Good Council is cast away, upon the Arrogant, the Self-conceited, or the
stupid, who are either too Proud to take it, or too Heavy to Understand it.

The Sowing of Hemp Seed, and of Plot-seed is much at one. The Design, and the
End are Destruction, Both Alike. The Swallow proposes the Preventing of ill
Consequences in their Causes, and Obviating the Mischief Betimes: But that
Counsel is either thrown off with a Raillery, or not minded at all: Governors
would have enough to do, they Cry, to trouble their Heads with the Politiques
of every Meddling Officious Impertinent. Well! It takes Root; shows itself in
the Blade, Advances, and Ripens: And still the Swallow is but the same Fool
over again, for continuing the same Advice. The Hemp comes at last to be
pluckt-up, Pill'd, Dressed, and Spun; The Nets and Snares made and laid; and
yet all this while the Birds could never find a time to Bethink themselves,
till they came to be Hampered, and Ruined past Recovery.

What is all this but a perfect Emblem of the Method of Destroying Kingdoms and
States. Cautions, or the common Ways of Anticipating, or Defeating (...), are
below the Wisdom of men of Intrigue, and Cabal; till at last, a Faction comes
to be too hard for the Government. Now whether this befalls a Kingdom by Envy,
Ignorance, Conspiracy, Treachery, or Presumption, it comes all to a case, so
long as it does the Work. It is the Bane of Society, and in truth, even of
particular Persons too, when betwixt Laziness and Neglect, men slip all the
Opportunities, with the Birds here in the Fable, of a Safe, and of a Happy Life.

FAB. XIX. The Frogs Choose a King.
IN the days of Old, when the Frogs were All at liberty in the Lakes, and grown
quite Weary of living without Government, they Petitioned Jupiter for a King,
to the End that there might be some Distinction of Good and Evil, by Certain
Equitable Rules and Methods of Reward and Punishment. Jupiter, that knew the
Vanity of their Hearts, threw them down a Log for their Governor; which, upon
the first Dash, frighted the whole Mobile of them into the Mudd for the very
fear on it. This Panick Terror kept them in Awe for a while, 'till in good time,
one Frog, Bolder than the Rest, put up his Head, and looked about him, to see
how squares went with their New King. Upon This, he calls his Fellow Subjects
together; Opens the truth of the Case; and Nothing would serve them then, but
Riding a-top of him, Insomuch that the Dread they were in before, is now turned
into Insolence, and Tumult. This King they said was too Tame for them, and
Jupiter must needs be Entreated to send 'em Another: He did so, but Authors are
Divided upon it, whether 'twas a Stork, or a Serpent; though whether of the Two
soever it was, he left them neither Liberty, nor Property, but made a Prey of
his Subjects. Such was their Condition in fine, that they sent Mercury to
Jupiter yet once again for Another King, whose Answer was This: They that will
not be Contented when they are Well, must be Patient when Things are Amiss with
them; and People had better Rest where they are, than go farther, and fare
Worse.

The MORAL.
The Mobile are Uneasy without a Ruler: They are as Restless with one; and the
oftn'er they shift, the Worse they Are; So that Government, or No Government; a
King of God's Making, or of the Peoples, or none at all; the Multitude are
never to be satisfied.

REFLECTION.
THIS Fable, under the Emblem of the Frogs, sets forth the Murmuring, and the
Unsteadiness of the Common People; that in a State of Liberty will have a King:
They do not like him when they have him, and so Change again, and grow Sicker
of the Next, than they were of the Former. Now the Business is only this: They
are never satisfied with their present Condition; but their Governors are still
either too Dull, or too Rigid. It Is a Madness for him that is Free, to put
himself into a state of Bondage, and rather than bear a Less Misfortune to
Hazard a Greater.

This Allusion of the Frogs runs upon All Four (as they say) in the Resemblance
of the Multitude, both for the Humor, the Murmur, the Importunity, and the
Subject Matter of the Petition. Redress of Grievances is the Question, and the
Devil of it is, that the Petitioners are never to be pleased. In one Fit they
cannot be Without Government: In Another they cannot bear the Yoke on it. They
find Absolute Freedom to be a Direct State of War; for where there is no Means
of either preventing Strife, or Ending it, the Weaker are still a Prey to the
Stronger. One King is too Soft, and Easy for them; Another too Fierce! And
then a Third Change would do Better they think. Now it is Impossible to satisfy
people that would have they know not what. They Beg and Wrangle, and Appeal,
and their Answer is at last, that if they shift again, they shall be still
Worse; By which, the Frogs are given to Understand the very truth of the
Matter, as we find it in the World, both in the Nature, and Reason of the
Thing, and in Policy, and Religion; which is, That Kings are from God, and that
it is a Sin, a Folly, and a Madness, to struggle with his Appointments.

FAB. XX. The Kite, Hawk, and Pigeons.
THE Pigeons finding themselves Persecuted by the Kite, made Choice of the Hawk
for their Guardian. The Hawk sets up for their Protector; but under Countenance
of That Authority, makes more Havoc in the Dove-House in Two Days, than the
Kite could have done in Twice as many Months.

The MORAL.
It Is a Dangerous Thing for People to call in a Powerful and an Ambitious man
for their Protector; and upon the Clamor of here and there a Private person,
to hazard the Whole Community.

REFLECTION.
IT is Highly Dangerous, and Imprudent, for a People in War to call in an
Enemy-Prince to their Defense. There Is no Trusting a Perfidious Man, nor any
Enmity like the Pretended Protection of a Treacherous Friend.

There is no Living in this World without Inconveniences, and therefore People
should have the Wit, or the Honesty, to take up with the Least, and to bear the
Lot, which is not to be Avoided, with Honor, and Patience. How many
Experiments have been made in the Memory of Man, both in Religion, and in
State, to mend Matters, upon pretense that they were Uneasy, by making them
Intolerable, And whence is This, but from a Mistaken Opinion of the Present,
and as False a Judgment of the Future! And all for want of Rightly
Understanding the Nature and the Condition of Things, and for want of Foresight
into Events. But we are Mad upon Variety, and so Sick of the Present, (how much
soever Without, or Against Reason) that we Abandon the Wisdom, and the
Providence of Heaven, and Fly from the Grievances of God's Appointment, to
Blind Chance for a Remedy. This Fable in One Word was never more Exactly
Moralized than in our Broils of Famous Memory.

The Kite was the Evil Counselor; The Freeborn People that Complained of
them were the Pigeons; The Hawk was the Power or Authority that they Appealed
to for Protection. And what did all this come to at Last? The very Guardians
that took upon them to Rescue the Pigeons from the Kite, destroyed the Whole
Dove-House, devoured the Birds, and shared the Spoil among Themselves.

FAB. XXI. A Dog and a Thief.
AS a Gang of Thieves were at work to Rob a House, a Mastiff took the Alarm,
and fell a Baying: One of the Company spoke him Fair, and would have Stopped his
Mouth with a Crust: No, says the Dog, This will not do, for Several Reasons.
First, I Will take no Bribes to Betray my Master. Secondly, I am not such a Fool
neither, as to sell the Ease and Liberty of my Whole Life to come, for a piece
of Bread in Hand: For when you have Rifled my Master; pray who shall Maintain
Me?

The MORAL.
Fair Words, Presents, and Flatteries are the Methods of Treachery in Courts as
well as in Cottages, only the Dogs are Truer to their Masters than the Men.

REFLECTION.
WHEN Ill Men take up a Fit of Kindness all on a sudden, and appear to be
Better Natured than Usual, it is Good Discretion to suspect Fraud, and to lay
their Words, and their Practices together: The Greater the Trust, the Greater
is the Treachery, and the Baser is the Villainy too. This Moral reaches to All
sorts of Trustees whatsoever.

It were well if All Two-Footed Servants were but as Faithful to their Masters
as This Four-Legg'd Animal. A Loaf of Bread was as much to Him as a Bag of
Guineas to a Great-Officer; And why should not the One make as much Conscience
of Betraying his Patron for Gold, as the Other of doing it for a Crust? Beside
the Right Reasoning of the Dog upon the Consequence of Things. If I take Your
Bread, (says he) You Will Rob My Master. But in the Other case it is not so much
a Deliberation of what will follow upon it, as a kind of Tacit Composition, that
does as good as say [ For so much Money I Will shut my Eyes, and let You Rob my
Master.] Here Is an Emblem now, of the Foresight, Fidelity, and Duty of a Trusty
Servant, on the One hand, and of the Flattery, Arts and Practices that are
Employed by Evil Men to Corrupt him on the Other.

Under the figure of This Faithful Trusty Servant; is Couched a Lecture to All
men of Business; let them be Counselors, Confidents, Favorites, Officers,
Soldiers, Traders, or what you will. For there are Good and Bad of All Kinds
and Professions. So that Aesop's Dog is a Reproach to False Men. Public
Persons have their ways of Temptation, and Address, as well as Private. And He
that suffers a Government to be Abused by Carelessness, or Neglect, does the
Same thing, with Him that Maliciously and Corruptly sets himself to Cozen it.
This holds as well too in the Private Case of being either Principal or
Accessory to the Robbing of a House; Only the Former, is a Treachery of a
Deeper Dye. There are Loaves at the Gates of Courts and Palaces, as well as at
the Door of a Cottage; and to Encourage the Abuse, there are a Thousand Quirks
to avoid the Stroke of the Law, though None to Avoid the Guilt of the Sin.
There needs no Contract Express; No Explicit Confederacy; for the Consent, and
the Assistance is Implied in receiving the Present; Or according to the Word in
Fashion, the [ Acknowledgment:] which is only a Softer Name for a Bribe. Now
this Acknowledgment is of the Nature of a Direct Bargain, where the Sum, or the
Reward is agreed upon before the Thing be done; though there is room yet for a
Distinction, even in These Cases, betwixt what is done Openly and Barefaced, and
a Thing that is done in Hugger mugger, under a Seal of Secrecy and Concealment.
But the Conscience at last is the Best Judge of the Fraud. And without any more
Words, the Dog in the Fable performed All the Parts of a Trusty Servant.

FAB. XXII. A Wolf and a Sow.
A Wolf came to a Sow that was just lying down, and very kindly offered to take
care of her Litter. The Sow as Civily thanked her for her Love, and desired she
would be pleased to stand off a little, and do her the Good Office at a
Distance.

The MORAL.
There are no Snares so Dangerous as those that are laid for us under the Name
of Good Offices.

REFLECTION.
ALL Men are not to be Believed, or Trusted in All Cases; for People Generally
Speaking are kind to their Neighbors for their Own Sakes. [ Timeo Danaos, and
Dona ferentes] A Wise Man will keep himself upon his Guard against the whole
World, and more Especially against a Known Enemy, but most of All against that
Enemy in the Shape of a Friend. As the S^w had more Wit than to Entertain a
Wolf for her Nurse.

FAB. XXIII. A Mountain in Labor.
When Mountains cry out, people may well be Excused the Apprehension of some
Prodigious Birth. This was the Case here in the Fable. The Neighborhood were
All at their Wits end, to consider what would be the Issue of That Labor, and
instead of the Dreadful Monster that they Expected, Out comes at last a
Ridiculous Mouse.

The MORAL.
Much ado about Nothing.

REFLECTION.
WHAT are All the Extravagant Attempts and Enterprises of Vain Men in the
World, but Morals, more or less of This Fable? What are Mighty Pretenses,
without Consideration, or Effect, but the Vapors of a Distemper, that like
Sickly Dreams, have neither Issue nor Connection? And the Disappointment is not
All neither; for men make themselves Ridiculous, instead of Terrible, when this
Tympany shall come to End in a Blast: and a Mountain to bring forth a Mouse.

FAB. XXIV. An Ass and an Ungrateful Master.
A Poor Ass, that what with Age, Labor, and Hard Burdens, was now worn out to
the Stumps in the Service of an Unmerciful Master, had the Ill Hap one day to
make a False Step, and to fall down under his Load. His Driver runs up to him
Immediately, and Beats him almost to Death for it. This (says the Ass to
himself) is according to the Course of the Ungrateful World. One Casual Slip is
enough to Weigh down the Faithful and Affectionate Services of Long Life.

FAB. XXV. An Old Dog and his Master.
AN Old Dog, that in his Youth had led his Master many a Merry Chase, and done
him all the Offices of a Trusty Servant, came at last, upon falling from his
Speed and Vigor, to be Laden at Every turn with Blows and Reproaches for it.
Why Sir, (says the Dog) My Will is as Good as ever it was; but my Strength, and
my Teeth are gone; and you might with as good a Grace, and Every jot as much
Justice, Hang me up because I Am Old, as Beat me because I Am Impotent.

The MORAL of the two FABLES above.
The Reward of Affection and Fidelity must be the Work of another World: Not
but that the Conscience of Well-Doing is a Comfort that may pass for a
Recompense even in This; in Despite of Ingratitude and Injustice.

REFLECTION.
THESE Fables are a Reproof to the Ungrateful Cruelty of those that will
neither Forgive One Slip, nor Reward a Thousand Services, but take more Notice
of a Particular Unlucky Accident, than of a General Laudable Practice. But One
Stumble is enough to Deface the Character of an Honorable Life. It is a
Barbarous Inhumanity in Great Men to Old Servants, to make the Failings of Age
to be a Crime, without allowing the Past Services of Their Strength and Youth,
to have been a Virtue. And This is found in Governments, as well as in Courts,
and Private Families; with Masters and Mistresses, as well as in States.

It Is a miserable Thing, when Faithful Servants fall into the hands of
Insensible, and Unthankful Masters; Such as Value Services only by the Profit
they bring them, without any regard to the Zeal, Faith, and Affections, of the
Heart, and pay them with Blows, and Reproaches in their Age, for the Use,
Strength and Industry of their Youth. Nay Humane Frailty it self is Imputed to
them for a Crime, and they are Treated Worse than Beasts for not being More
than Men. Here Is an Old Drudging Curr turned off to Shift for Himself, for want
of the very Teeth and Heels that he had lost in his Masters Service. Nay, if he
can but come off for Starving, it passes for an Act of Mercy. Under These
Circumstances, the Bare Sense of a Calamity is called Grumbling, and if a man
does but make a Face upon the Boot, he is presently a Malcontent. It may be a
Question now, whether the Wickedness, or the Imprudence of this Iniquity be the
more Pernicious; for over and above the Inhumanity, it is a Doctrine of Ill
Consequence to the Master Himself, to show the World how Impossible a Thing it
is for a Servant to Oblige and Please him: Nay, it is some sort of Temptation
also to Impiety and Injustice, when Virtue and Duty come to be made Dangerous.

And yet it is not One Master perhaps of Twenty, all this while, that either
directs, or takes Notice of These Indignities. It goes a Great Way, it is true,
Barely to Permit them. One while perchance the Master is not Aware of what is
done, and then in Other Cases, it may fall out Effectually to be his Own Act,
even against his Own Will: That is to say, when the Passions of Imperious, and
Ill Natured Servants are Covered with the Name and Authority of their Patrons,
in the Abuse of a Trust that was Placed in 'em for Honester, and for Nobler
Ends. It is Congruous enough yet to Apply the Moral of This Fiction, rather to
the Driver of the Ass, and to the Huntsman that Managed the Chase, than to the
Master Himself: But the Ass and Dog were Beaten however, for being Old, and
spent, in Despite of All the Bonds and Instincts of Honor, Piety, and Good
Nature.

FAB. XXVI. An Ass, an Ape, and a Mole.
AN Ass and an Ape were Conferring Grievances. The Ass complained mightily
for want of Horns, and the Ape was as much troubled for want of a Tail. Hold
your Tongues Both of ye, says the Mole, and be Thankful for what you have, for
the Poor Moles are Stark Blind, and in a Worse Condition than either of ye.

FAB. XXVII. The Hares and the Frogs.
ONce upon a time the Hares found themselves mightily Unsatisfied with the
Miserable Condition they Lived in, and called a Council to Advise upon it. Here
we live, says one of 'em, at the Mercy of Men, Dogs, Eagles, and I know not how
many Other Creatures and Vermin, that Prey upon us at Pleasure; Perpetually in
Frights, Perpetually in Danger; And therefore I am absolutely of Opinion that
we had Better Die once for All, than live at This rate in a Continual Dread
that is Worse than Death it self. The Motion was Seconded and Debated, and a
Resolution Immediately taken, One and All, to Drown Themselves. The Vote was no
sooner passed, but away they Scudded with That Determination to the Next Lake.
Upon this Hurry, there leapt a Whole Shoal of Frogs from the Bank into the
Water, for fear of the Hares. Nay, then my Masters, says one of the Gravest of
the Company, pray let us have a little Patience. Our Condition I find is not
altogether so bad as we fancied it; for there are Those you see that are as
much afraid of Us, as we are of Others.

The MORAL of the TWO Fables above.
There Is No Contending with the Orders and Decrees of Providence. He that Made
us knows what is Fittest for us; and Every man's Own Lot (well Understood and
Managed) is Undoubtedly the Best.

REFLECTION.
It Is the Intent of These Two Fables, to show, that no People are so Miserable,
but that at some Time or Other, in some Thing or Other, they have Reason to
Account themselves Happy. And if they would but duly consider, how it is with
many of their Neighbors, they would find it their Duty to be Thankful, that it
is no Worse with Themselves. It is some Relief to the Miserable to show them
that there are Others yet more Miserable, and there is not any thing so
Timorous, but something else is afraid of It. There are Those, it is True, that
Die for the very Fear of Death, and Plunge themselves into Certain Misery, upon
the Bare Apprehension of it: But this comes rather from their Spleen, than
their Misfortune.

Since so it is, that Nature Provides for the Necessities of All Creatures, and
for the Well-Being of Every One in it is kind: And since it is not in the Power
of any Creature to make it self Other than what by Providence it was Designed
to be; what a Madness is it to Wish our selves Other than what we Are, and what
we Must continue to Be: Since the Thing is Bounded, and the Whole Matter
Pre-Determin'd. Every Atome of the Creation has its Place Assigned: Every
Creature has its Proper Figure, and there is No Disputing with Him that Made it
so. Why have not I This? and why have not I That? are Questions for a
Philosopher of Bedlam to ask; and we may as well Cavil at the Motions of the
Heavens, the Vicissitude of Day and Night, and the Succession of the Seasons,
as Expostulate with Providence upon any of the rest of Gods Works. The Ass
would have Horns, and the Tinker would fain be in Bed with my Lady. The Ape
would have a Tail; and why should not a Mountebank Complain that he is not a
Minister of State or Justice? But in short, the Poor, Wretched, Blind Mole puts
in with her Doctrine to take up the Quarrel.

And what is the Case of the Hares now, but an Instance to Fortify us against
Panick Frights and Terrors, for Trivial Causes; where the Fears are a great
deal more Terrible than the Dangers? In All These Cases, we fancy our selves
much more Miserable than we Are, for want of taking a True Estimate of Things.
We fly into Transports without Reason, and Judge of the Happiness, or Calamity,
of Humane Life, by False Lights. A Strict Enquiry into the Truth of Matters
will Help us in the One, and Comparison will set us Right in the Other. The
Dogs and the Eagles Frighted the Hares; The Hares Frighted the Frogs, and the
Frogs, Twenty to One, Frighted something else. This is according to the Course
of the World, One Fears Another, and some body else is afraid of Him.

It may seem to be a kind of a Malicious Satisfaction, that One Man (...) from
the Misfortunes of Another. But the Philosophy of This Reflection stands upon
Another Ground; for Our Comfort does not Arise from Other peoples being
Miserable, but from This Inference upon the Balance, That we suffer only the
Lot of Humane Nature: And as we are Happy or Miserable, compared with Others,
So Other People are Miserable or Happy Compared with Us: By which Justice of
Providence, we come to be Convinced of the Sin, and the Mistake of our
Ingratitude. What would not a man give to be Eased of the Gout or the Stone? Or
supposing an Incurable Poverty on the One Hand, and an Incurable Malady on the
Other; Why should not the Poor Man think himself Happier in his Rags, than the
Other in his Purple? But the Rich Man Envies the Poor man's Health, without
considering his Want; and the Poor Man Envies the Others Treasure without
considering his Diseases. What Is an Ill Name in the World to a Good Conscience
within Ones self? And how much less Miserable upon the Wheel, is One man that
is Innocent, than Another under the Same Torture that is Guilty. The Only Way
for Hares and Asses, is to be Thankful for what they Are, and what they Have,
and not to Grumble at the Lot that they must bear in spite of their Teeth.

FAB. XXVIII. A Wolf, Kid, and Goat.
A Goat that was going out one Morning for a Mouthful of Fresh Grass, Charged
her Kid upon her Blessing, not to Open the Door till she came back, to any
Creature that had not a Beard. The Goat was no sooner out of sight, but up
comes a Wolf to the Door, that had Overheard the Charge; and in a Small Pipe
calls to the Kid to let her Mother come in. The Kid smelt out the Roguery, and
bad the Wolf show his Beard, and the Door should be Open to him.

The MORAL.
There never was any Hypocrite so Disguised, but he had some Mark or Other yet
to be known by.

REFLECTION.
HERE is Prudence, Caution, and Obedience, recommended to us in the Kids
refusal to Open the Door; and here is likewise set forth in the Wolf, the
Practice of a Fraudulent, and a Bloody Impostor. This Moral runs through the
Whole Business of Humane Life, for so much as the Plot is carried on against
the Simple and the Innocent, under False Colors, and Feigned Pretenses. There
are Wolves, in Policy, as well as in Mythology; and if the Kids Obedience had
not been more than her Sagacity, she would have found, to her Cost, the Teeth
of a Wolf, in the mouth of a Goat; and the malice of an Enemy covered under the
Voice and Pretense of a Parent.

FAB. XXIX. A Dog, a Sheep, and a Wolf.
A Dog brought an Action of the Case against a Sheep, for some Certain Measures
of Wheat, that he had lent him. The Plaintiff proved the Debt by Three Positive
Witnesses, The Wolf, the Kite, and the Vultur, ( Testes Probi and Legales) The
Defendent was cast into Costs and Damages, and forced to sell the Wool off his
Back to Satisfy the Creditor.

The MORAL.
' It Is not a Straw matter whether the Main Cause be Right or Wrong, or the
Charge True or False; Where the Bench, Jury and Witnesses are in a Conspiracy
against the Prisoner.

REFLECTION.
NO Innocence can be Safe, where Power and Malice are in Confederacy against
it. There Is No Fence against Subornation, and False Evidence. What Greater
Judgment can befall a Nation, than for Sheep to be made Trespassers, and
Wolves, Kites, and Vulturs to set up for Witnesses! This is a Large Field, if a
body would Amplify upon it: But the History of of the Age in Memory will be
the Best Moral of This Fable. There Is No Living however without Law: and
there is No Help for it in many Cases, if the Saving Equity be Overruled by the
Killing Letter of it. It Is the Verdict that does the Business; but it is the
Evidence, True, or False that Governs the Verdict. So that, (as it sometimes
falls out) the Honor of the Public may come to be Concerned in the Defense
and Support of an Undetected Perjury. The only Danger is the giving too much
Credit to the Oaths of Kites and Vulturs. That is to say, of Witnesses so
Profligate as to bring a Scandal even upon Truth it self, where it is so
Asserted.

FAB. XXX. A Countryman and a Snake.
THere was a Snake that Bedded himself under the Threshold of a Country House:
A Child of the Family happened to set his Foot upon it; The Snake bit him, and
he Di'd on it. The Father of the Child made a Blow at the Snake, but Missed his
Aim, and only left a Mark behind him upon the Stone where he Struck. The
Countryman Offered the Snake, some time after This, to be Friends again. No,
says the Snake, so long as you have This Flaw upon the Stone in Your Eye, and
the Death of the Child in your Thought, there is No Trusting of ye.

The MORAL
In Matter of Friendship and Trust, we can never be too Tender; but yet there is
a Great Difference betwixt Charity and Facility. We may Hope Well in many
Cases, but let it be without Venturing Neck, and All upon it, for New-Converts
are Slippery.

REFLECTION.
It Is Ill Trusting a Reconciled Enemy; but it is Worse yet, to Proceed at One
Step, from Clemency and Tenderness, to Confidence and Trust: Especially where
there are so many Memorials in Sight, for Hatred and Revenge to work upon. It Is
Generous however to Forgive an Enemy; though Extremely Hazardous to Grace him
in the doing of an Ill Thing, with the Countenance of a Deference to his Merit.
Nay, a Bare Easiness of Pardoning has but too often the Force of a Temptation
to Offend again. It Is a Nice Business to Indulge on the Left Hand, without
Punishing on the Right, for there must be No Sacrificing of a Faithful Friend
to the Generosity of Obliging a Mortal Enemy. But the Case is then most
Deplorate when Reward goes over to the Wrong side, and when Interest shall be
made the Test and the Measure of Virtue. Upon the whole Matter, the Countryman
was too Easy, in Proposing a Reconciliation; (the Circumstances duly
Considered) And the Snake was much in the Right on the Other hand, in not
entertaining it from a man that had so many Remembrancers at Hand still, to
Provoke him to a Revenge. It Is a great Error to take Facility, for Good
Nature: Tenderness, without Discretion, is no better than a mere Pardonable
Folly.

FAB. XXXI. A Fox and a Stork.
THere was a Great Friendship once betwixt a Fox and a Stork, and the Former
would needs Invite the Other to a Treat. They had Several Soups served up in
Broad Dishes and Plates, and so the Fox fell to Lapping, Himself, and bad his
Guest Heartily Welcome to what was before him. The Stork found he was Put upon,
but set so Good a Face however upon his Entertainment; that his Friend by All
means must take a Supper with Him That night in Revenge. The Fox made Several
Excuses upon the Matter of Trouble and Expense, but the Stork in fine, would
not be said Nay; So that at last, he promised him to come. The Collation was
served up in Glasses, with Long Narrow Necks, and the Best of Every thing that
was to be had. Come (says the Stork to his Friend) Pray be as Free as if you
were at home, and so fell to 't very Savourly Himself. The Fox quickly found
This to be a Trick, though he could not but Allow of the Contrivance as well as
the Justice of the Revenge. For such a Glass of Sweetmeats to the One, was
just as much to the Purpose, as a Plate of Porridge to the Other.

The MORAL.
It Is allowable in all the Liberties of Conversation to give a Man a Rowland
for his Oliver, and to pay him in his Own Coin, as we say; provided always that
we keep within the Compass of Honor, and Good Manners.

REFLECTION.
AESOP has here given us the Fiction of a Case, wherein it may not be Amiss to
repay an Abuse in its own Kind. The Mockery of the Fox was a Reproach, as it
Hit the Stork on the Weak side; but That which was Rudeness, and Ill Nature in
the Aggressor, was only a Monitory Justice, and a Discreet Sharpness in the
Other. But This is the Fate Commonly of Drolls and Buffoons, that while they
think to make Sport with Others, they serve only in the conclusion for a
Laughing Stock Themselves.

There Is Nothing looks Sillier than a Crafty Knave Outwitted, and Beaten at
his Own Play. The Foxes Frolic went too far, in regard it was both upon an
Invitation, and under his Own Roof. Now the Return of the Stork was only a Quid
pro Quo, and a Warrantable Revenge, even according to the Rules of Good
Manners, and Good Fellowship; for the Fox's leading the Humor gave the Other
not only a Provocation, but a kind of a Right to Requite him in his Own Way:
Beside that it was the Cleverer Mockery of the Two. This may serve to Reprove
Those Liberties in Conversation that pass the Bounds of Good Nature, Honor,
Honesty, and Respect. When they Exceed These Limits, they Degenerate into
Scurrility, Scandal, and Reproach: for in All Cases, an Eye must be had to the
Due Circumstances of Measure, Time, Place, Occasion, and Person. The Laws of
Humanity, and Hospitality must be kept Sacred upon any Terms: for the Wounding
of a Friend for the sake of a Jest, is an Intemperance, and an Immorality, not
to be Endured. There was somewhat of This in the Fox's leading the Frolique.

FAB. XXXII. A Fox and a Carved Head.
AS a Fox was Rummidging among a Great many Carved Figures, there was One very
Extraordinary Piece among the Rest. He took it up, and when he had Considered
it a while, Well, (says he) What Pity it is, that so Exquisite an Outside of a
Head should not have one Grain of Sense in it.

The MORAL.
' It Is not the Barber or the Tailor that makes the Man; and it is No New Thing
to see a Fine Wrought Head without so much as One Grain of Salt in it.

REFLECTION.
MANY a Fool has a Fair Outside, and Many a Man of Fortune, and (...) has not
so much as Common Sense. We have a Whole World of Heads to Answer the Drift of
This Emblem: But there is No Judging however by the Senses, of Matters that the
Senses can take No Cognizance of; as Virtue, Wisdom, and the Like. The
Excellency, in fine, of of the Soul is above the Beauty of the Body: Not but
that the Graces of the One, and the Endowments of the Other, may Encounter
sometimes, (how rarely soever) in One and the Same Person. But Beauty and
Judgment are so far yet from being Inseparable, that they seem Effectually to
Require, More or Less, a Diversity of Temperament: Beside that More Care is
taken to Cultivate the Advantages of the Body than those of the Mind. To Wrap
up all in a Word, the World it self is but a Great Shop of Carved Heads; and
the Fox's Conceit will hold as well in the Life, as in the Fiction.

FAB. XXXIII. A Daw and Borrowed Feathers.
A Daw that had a mind to be Sparkish, Tricked himself up with all the
Gay-Feathers he could Muster together: And upon the Credit of these Stoll'n, or
Borrowed Ornaments, he Valued himself above All the Birds in the Air Beside.
The Pride of This Vanity got him the Envy of all his Companions, who, upon a
Discovery of the Truth of the Case, fell to Pluming of him by Consent; and when
Every Bird had taken his Own Feather; the Silly Daw had Nothing left him to
Cover his Nakedness.

The MORAL.
We steal from one Another all manner of Ways, and to all manner of Purposes;
Wit, as well as Feathers; but where Pride and Beggary Meet, people are sure to
be made Ridiculous in the Conclusion.

REFLECTION.
EVERY thing is Best, and Every Man Happiest, in the State and Condition
wherein Nature has Placed them; But if Daws will be setting up for Peacocks, or
Asses for Lions, they must Expect, and Content themselves to be Laughed at for
their Pains. The Allusion of the Daw here, and his Borrowed Feathers, Extends
to All sorts of Impostors, Vain Pretenders, and Romancers, in Feats of Arms,
State, Love, or the Like. It Points also at the Empty Affectation of Wit and
Understanding; in which case, it fares as it does with men that set up for
Quality, Birth, and Bravery, upon the Credit of a Gay Outside; for Authors may
be Cozened upon the Tick, as well as Tailors: Nay, we have seen some, even of
our First Rate Writers, that have been Better at Disguising other Peoples
Works, than Furnishing any thing of their Own; That is to say; upon the taking
of them to pieces, the Stuff and Trimming is found to be Wholly Stolen, and
New-Fourbish'd; and Nothing, in short, that they can Assume to Themselves but
the Needle and Thread that Tackt the Composition together. Now when these
Plagiaries come to be Stripped of their Borrowed, or Pilser'd Ornaments, rhere's
the Daw in the Fable truly Moraliz'd.

FAB. XXXIV. An Ant and a Fly.
THere happened a Warm Dispute betwixt an Ant and a Fly. Why, Where Is the
Honor, or the Pleasure in the World, says the Fly, that I have not My Part in?
Are not All Temples and Palaces Open to me? Am not I the Taster to Gods and
Princes, in All their Sacrifices and Entertainments? Am I not served in Gold
and Silver? And is not my Meat and Drink still of the Best? And all This,
without either Money or Pains. I Trample upon Crowns, and Kiss what Ladies Lips
I please. And what have You now to Pretend to all this While? Why, says the
Ant, You Value Your self upon the Access You have to the Altars of the Gods,
the Cabinets of Princes, and to All Public Feasts and Collations: And what is
all This but the Access of an Intruder, not of a Guest. For People are so far
from Liking Your Company, that they Kill ye as fast as they can Catch ye.
You're a Plague to 'em Wherever You Come. Your very Breath has Maggots in 't,
and for the Kiss you Brag of, what is it but the Perfume of the Last Dunghill
you Touched upon, once Removed? For My Part, I live upon what is my Own, and
Work Honestly in the Summer to Maintain my self in the Winter; Whereas the
whole Course of Your Scandalous Life, is only Cheating or Sharping, one Half of
the Year, and Starving, the Other.

The MORAL.
Here Is An Emblem of Industry, and Luxury, set forth at large: with the Sober
Advantages, and the Scandalous Excesses of the One and of the Other.

REFLECTION.
THIS Fable Marks out to us the Difference betwixt the Empty Vanity of
Ostentation, and the Substantial Ornaments of Virtue. It shows that the
Happiness of Life does not lie so much in the Enjoying of small Advantages, as
in living free from Great Inconveniences, and that an Honest Mediocrity is
Best. The Fly stands up for the Pride, the Luxury, and the Ambition of Courts,
in the preference of Palaces, to Caves, and Private Retreats. The Ant contents
her self with the Virtue of Sobriety, Retirement, and Moderation: She lives
upon her Own, Honestly Gotten and Possessed, without either Envy or Violence;
Whereas the Fly is an Intruder, and a Common Smell-Feast, that Spunges upon
Other peoples Trenchers.

A Man can hardly fancy to himself a Truer Image of a Plain, Honest, Country
Simplicity, then the Ants part of the Dialogue in This Fable. She takes pains
for What she Eats; Wrongs No body; and so Creates No Enemies; She wants
Nothing, and she Boasts of Nothing; Lives Contented with her Own, and Enjoys
all with a Good Conscience. This Emblem recommends to us the Blessings of a
Virtuous Privacy, according to the just Measures of Right Nature, and in Few
Words, comprizes the Sum of a Happy State.

The Fly, on the Contrary, leads a Lazy, Voluptuous, Scandalous, Sharking Life;
Hateful wherever she comes, and in Perpetual Fears and Dangers. She flutters,
it is true, from place to place, from Feast to Feast, Brags of her Interest at
Court, and of Ladies Favors: And what is This Miserable Insect at last, but the
very Picture of one of our Ordinary Trencher-Squires, that spend their time in
Hopping from One Great man's Table to Another, only to Pick up Scraps, and
Intelligence, and to Spoil Good Company! I cannot see one of These Officious,
Humble Companions, Skipping up and down from Levee to Levee, and making himself
Necessary, wherever he thinks fit to be Troublesome: I cannot hear a Finical
Fop Romancing, how the King took him aside at such a time; What the Queen said
to him at Another; How many Ladies fell out who should have him to her self;
What Discourse passed; Where he is to Eat to morrow; What Company; What Dishes;
What Wine; Who Loves Who; and what Intrigues are afoot in Church and State,
etc. Without More Words I cannot Hear the Chat, or see the Vanity of these
Pragmatical Empty Busybodies without thinking of the Fly in the Fable. And
This Application was the True End of Writing it.

FAB. XXXV. A Frog and an Ox.
AS a Huge Overgrown Ox was Grazing in a Meadow, an Old Envious Frog that
stood Gaping at him hard by, called out to her Little Ones, to take Notice of
the Bulk of That Monstrous Beast; and see, says she, if I don't make my self
now the Bigger of the Two. So she Strained Once, and Twice, and went still
swelling on and on, till in the Conclusion she Forced her self, and Burst.

The MORAL.
Betwixt Pride, Envy, and Ambition, men fancy Themselves to be Bigger than they
are, and Other People to be Less: And This Tumor Swells it self at last 'till
it makes All Fly.

REFLECTION.
THIS Fancy is a Lash upon Those that set up to Live above their Quality and
Fortune, and pretend to spend Penny for Penny with men of Twenty times their
Estate, and therefore must needs Burst in the Conclusion! But Pride and
Ambition Pushes men forward, not only to Extravagances, but Impossibilities,
though to the Certain Undoing of the Weaker and the Meaner: When they come to
Vie Power and Expense with Those that are too High, and too many for them.

Men that would be Bigger than God has made them, must even Expect to fall to
Nothing. This Affectation strikes upon All the Weaknesses that Pride, Envy, or
Ambition can fancy to it self, provided always that we do not take Emulation
for Envy. In One Word, when men's Hearts and Thoughts are puffed up into a
Desire of Things Unnatural, the Tumor is Incurable. But they are Weak Minds
commonly, that are Tainted with This Evil. They take False Measures, both of
Themselves, and of Others, without considering the Limits, Bulk, Fortune,
Ability, Strength, etc. or in truth, the very Nature of the Things, Matters, or
Person in Question. They set up Competitors for Learning, Power, Estate,
Policy; They Censure their Betters, Despise their Equals, and Admire
Themselves: But their Greatness all this while, is only in Imagination, and
they make All fly with the Frog at last, by Straining to be Bigger than they
Are, and Bigger than it is possible for them to Be.

FAB. XXXVI. An Ass and a Wolf.
AN Ass had got a Thorn in's Foot, and for want of a Better Surgeon, who but a
Wolf at last, to draw it out with his Teeth! The Ass was no sooner Eased, but
he gave his Operator such a Lick under the Ear with his Sound Foot for his
Pains, that he Stunned him, and so went his way.

FAB. XXXVII. A Horse and a Lion.
THere was an Old Hungry Lion would fain have been Dealing with a piece of Good
Horseflesh that he had in his Eye; but the Nag he thought would be too Fleet
for him, unless he could Supply the want of Heels, by Artifice and Address. He
puts himself into the Garb, and Habit of a Professor of Physic, and according
to the Humor of the World, sets up for a Doctor of the College. Under this
Pretext, he lets fall a Word or two by way of Discourse, upon the Subject of
his Trade; but the Horse Smelt him out, and presently a Crotchet came in his
Head how he might Countermine him. I got a Thorn in my Foot The Other day, says
the Horse, as I was Crossing a Thicket, and I Am even quite Lame on it. Oh, says
the New Physician, Do but hold up your Leg a little, and I Will Cure ye
immediately. The Lion presently puts himself in posture for the Office; but the
Patient was too Nimble for his Doctor, and so soon as ever he had him Fair for
his Purpose, gave him so Terrible a (...) upon the Forehead with his Heel, that
he laid him at his Length, and so got off with a whole Skin, before the Other
could I ^ccute his Design.

The MORAL of the Two (...) above.
Harm Watch, Harm Catch, is but according to the Common Rule of Equity and
Retaliation, and a very ^arrantable Way of Deceiving the Deceiver.

REFLECTION.
THERE IS No Trusting to the Fair Words of Those that have both an Interest, and
an Inclination to Destroy us; Especially when the Design is carrv'd on under
the Masque of a Friendly Office. It is but reasonable to Oppose Art to Art, and
where we suspect False-Play, to Encounter One Trick with Another: Provided
always that it be Managed without breach of Faith, and within the Compass of
Honor, Honesty, and Good Manners. The Wolf had the same Design upon the Ass,
that the Lion had upon the Horse; and the Matter being brought to a Trial of
Skill between them, the Countermine was only an Act of Self-Preservation.

FAB* XXXVIII. A Horse and an Ass.
IN the Days of Old, when Horses spoke Greek and Latin, and Asses made
Syllogisms, there happened an Encounter upon the Road betwixt a Proud Pampered
Jade in the Full Course of his Carriere, and a Poor Creeping Ass, under a Heavy
Burden, that had Chopped into the same Track with him. Why, how now Sirrah, says
he, Do You not see by these Arms, and Trappings, to what Master I belong? And
Do You not Understand that when I have That Master of mine upon my Back, the
Whole Weight of the State rests upon My Shoulders? Out of the way thou slavish
Insolent Animal, or I Will Tread thee to Dirt. The Wretched Ass immediately
Slunck aside, with this Envious Reflection betwixt his Teeth. [ What would I
give to Change Conditions with That Happy Creature there.] This Fancy would not
out of the Head of him, 'till it was his Hap some Few Days after to see This
very Horse doing Drudgery in a Common Dung-Cart. Why how now Friend (says the
Ass) How comes This about? Only the Chance of the War, says the Other: I was a
Soldiers Horse, you must know; and my Master carried me into a Battle, where I
was Shot, Hacked, and Maimed; and you have here before Your Eyes the
Catastrophe of My Fortune.

The MORAL.
The Folly, and the Fate, of Pride and Arrogance. The Mistake of Placing
Happiness in any thing that may be taken away, and the Blessing of Freedom in a
Mean Estate.

REFLECTION.
WE are to Gather from hence, that people would never Envy the Pomp and
Splendor of Greatness, if they did but consider, either the Cares and Dangers
that go along with it, or the Blessings of Peace, and Security in a Middle
Condition. No man can be truly Happy, who is not every Hour of his Life
prepared for the worst that can befall him. Now This is a State of Tranquillity
never to be Attained, but by keeping perpetually in our Thoughts the Certainty
of Death, and the Lubricity of Fortune; and by Delivering our selves from the
Anxiety of Hopes and Fears.

It falls Naturally within the Prospect of This Fiction to Treat of the
Wickedness of a Presumptuous Arrogance, the Fate that Attends it; The Rise of
it; and the Means of either Preventing, or Suppressing it; The Folly of it; The
Wretched and Ridiculous Estate of a Proud man, and the Weakness of That Envy
that is Grounded upon the mistaken Happiness of Humane Life.

If a body may be Allowed to Graft a Christian Moral upon a Pagan Fable, what
was it but Pride and Arrogance that first threw Lucifer out of Heaven, and
afterward, Adam out of Paradise? [ Ye shall be as Gods] was the Temptation; an
Impotent, and a Presumptuous Affectation of Vainglory was the Sin; and a
Malediction Temporal and Eternal was the Punishment. Now if the Charms of an
Unruly Ambition could so far prevail upon the Angels Themselves in their
Purity; and upon Mankind in a State of Innocence, how Strict a Guard ought we
then to keep upon our selves, that are the Children of disobedience, and bring
the seeds of This Deadly Vanity into the World with us in our very Veins?

It is highly Remarkable, that as Pride, and Envy are the Two Passions, that
above All Others give the Greatest Trouble to the Sons of Men, so are they
likewise the First Emotions of the Mind that we take Notice of in our
Approaches to the Exercise of our Reason. They begin with us in the Arms of our
Nurses, and at the very Breasts of our Mothers; for what is the meaning of All
the Little Wrangles and Contentions else, which Child shall be most made off;
or which Baby shall have the Gayer Coat? So that These Affections are in truth,
Connatural to us, and as We our selves grow up and Gather Strength, so do They;
and pass Insensibly from our Inclinations into our Manners. Now the Corruption
must needs be Strong, where Humane Frailty strikes in so Early with it, and the
Progress no less Mortal, where it is suffered to go on without Control: For
what are all the Extravagances of the Leudest Life, but the more Consummated
Follies and Disorders, of either a Mis-taught, or a Neglected Youth? Nay, what
are All the Public Outrages of a Destroying Tyranny and Oppression, but
Childish Appetites let alone 'till they are grown Ungovernable? Beside, that it
is Infinitely Easier to prevent Ill Habits, than to Master them; As the
Choking of the Fountain is the surest Way to Cut off the Course of the River.
It should be Considered too that we have the seeds of Virtue in us, as well as
of Vice; and when ever we take a Wrong Biass, it is not out of a Moral
Incapacity to do Better, but for want of a Careful Manage and Discipline, to
set us Right at First.

Wherefore Children should be Molded while their Tempers are yet Pliant and
Ductile. As Pride, for the Purpose, that Arises from a False Opinion of Things,
should be Obviated by Enforming their Understandings. And so for Envy; the very
Disposition to it is to be Sweetened, as Flowing from a Certain Froward
Tincture of Ill Nature. (I speak This of the Malevolent, Cankered Passion of
Envy, which, in Effect, is Little or Nothing akin to the Silly Envy of the Ass
here in the Fable.) In One word, Children should be seasoned betimes, and
Lesson'd into such a Contempt, and Detestation of This Vice, as neither to
practice it Themselves, nor to Approve it in Others. This is, in Little, the
Foundation of a Virtuous Life, and there goes no more than Judging, and Acting
Aright, to the Character of a Good Philosopher, a Good Christian, and a Good
Man: For to Know, and to Do, is the Compendium of our Duty,

It is not for Every Twatling Gossip yet, or some Empty Pedant, presently to
Undertake This Province; for it requires a Critical Nicety both of Wit, and of
Judgment, to find out the Genius, or the Propensions of a Child, and to
Distinguish betwixt the Impulses of Envy, and Those of Emulation: Betwixt the
First Motions of a Churlish, and Impetuous Insolence, and Those of a Serene
Greatness, and Dignity of Mind. It is not, I say, for Every Common Eye, or
Hand, to Divide so Accurately betwixt the Good, and the Evil, the Gracious, and
the Perverse, as to Hit the precise Medium of Encouraging the One, without
Discouraging the Other. And This Faculty of Discerning is not enough neither,
without a Watchful Assiduity of Application. The Just Season of Doing Things
must be Nicked, and All Accidents Observed and Improved; for Weak Minds are to
be as Narrowly Attended, as Sickly Bodies: To say Nothing of the Infinite
Curiosity of the Operation, in the Forming of our Lives and Manners: And that
not One man of Ten Thousand is Competently Qualified for the Office. Upon the
Whole Matter there must be an Awe maintained on the One Hand, and at the same
time, a Love and Reverence Preserved on the Other. And all this must be Ordered
too with so Gentile a Softness of Address, that we may not Hazard, either the
Stifling, or the Quenching of Generous Inclinations, by bearing too Hard upon
them, or the Licentiating of any thing that is Course and Vulgar, out of a
foolish Facility or a Mistaken Pity. It is with our Passions, as it is with
Fire and Water, they are Good Servants, but Bad Masters, and Subminister to the
Best, and Worst of Purposes, at once. This is enough said, as to the
Wickedness, and the Fate of Pride; The Source and Danger of it, together with
the only sure and Effectual Means of Remedy.

The Moral leads me in the Next place, to Consider the Folly of both the Horse
and the Ass; The One, in Placing his Happiness upon any thing that could be
Taken away; and the Other, in Envying that Mistaken Happiness, under the Abuse
of the same Splendid Illusion and Imposture. What Signifies a Gay Furniture,
and a Pampered Carcass; or any other Outward Appearance, without an Intrinsic
Value of Worth and Virtue? What signifies Beauty, Strength, Youth, Fortune,
Embroder'd Furniture, Gaudy Bosses, or any of Those Temporary, and Uncertain
Satisfactions, that may be taken from us with the very next Breath we draw?
What Assurance can any man have of a Possession that Every Turn of State, Every
Puff of Air, Change of Humor, and the least of a Million of Common Casualties
may Deprive him of? How many Huffing Sparks have we seen in the World, that in
the same day have been both the Idols, and the Sport and Scorn of the same
Slaves and Fools? Nay, how many Emperors and Princes, that in the Ruff of All
their Glory have been taken down from the Head of a Conquering Army, to the
Wheel of the Victors Chariot? Where Is that Advantage under the Sun that any
but a Mad man would be Proud of? Or where is That Pride it self that any Mortal
in his Right Wits, would not find Reason to be Ashamed of? Take it singly, and
what is there More in it, than an Unnatural, and an Unmanly Tympany, that Rises
in a Bubble, and spends it self in a Blast? Take it in Complication, and we
find a Thousand Weaknesses, Iniquities, and Vexatious Cutting Miseries wrapped up
in it. What can be more Imprudent than to Affect Reputation by the Methods of
Infamy? To Aspire to Greatness by the ways of becoming Odious and Contemptible?
And to Propose the Erecting of a Mighty Fabric, upon a Bottom that will
Certainly sink under the Weight?

The Disappointments of Those that Build their Hopes in this World upon a False
Basis, fall under These Three General Heads. The Advantages we Value our selves
upon, may either be Taken from Us; or We from Them: Or, which is much at One,
we may be brought by a Thousand Accidents to lose the Use and Relish of them.
As first for the Purpose; they may be taken from Us, by Cheats, Robberies,
Subornations, False Oaths, Forgeries, Corrupt Judges; To say nothing of Fires,
Earthquakes, Tempests, Inundations, Insurrections, and Other Violences without
Number. Secondly, We may be taken from Them, by as many Ways as there are out
of This World. A Fly or a Hair shall do the Office of a Rope. And then for the
Third Branch, an Indisposition, a Fever, an Acute Pain, an Impetuous Passion,
an Anxious Thought, Impotency and Old Age, shall do the Work of Taking away
both the Gust, and the Comfort of them. Nay, the very Loss of One Pleasure is
enough to Damp, if not to Destroy the Relish of Another.

But now to carry the Allusion One Step further yet; It may be literally
Asserted, that All Proud Men, over and above the Stroke of a Divine Judgment,
are Miserable, even in Themselves, and that no Circumstances in This World can
ever make them Other. Their Appetites are Insatiable, and their Hearts
consequently never at Rest; Whether it be Wealth, Power, Honor, Popular
Esteem, or whatever else they pretend to. They Envy, and they are Envied. It Is
Impossible for them to be at rest, without Enjoying what it is Impossible for
them to Attain. They live Gaping after More, and in a perpetual Fear of Losing
what they have already. The Higher they are Raised, the Giddier they are; the
more Slippery is their Standing, and the Deeper the Fall. They are never Well,
so long as Any thing is above them: And their Ambition carries them on to the
Supplanting of their very Masters and Makers: When yet by a most Ridiculous
Contradiction, they lie Effectually, (in the very same Instant) at the mercy of
the men they most (...). [ The Silver, being Ten Thousand Talents, is given to
Thee (says Ahasuerus to Haman,) The People also, to do with them, as it seems
good unto Thee. Esther, Cap. 3. V. 11.] Who would have Imagined now, that the
Stiff Crossness of a Poor Captive, should ever have had the Power to make
Haman's Seat so Uneasy to him? Or that the want of a Cap, or a Cringe, should
so Mortally Discompose him, as we find afterward it did! If Large Possessions,
Pompous Titles, Honorable Charges, and Profitable Commissions; If a Plentiful
Issue, Court Favors, or the Flowing Bounty of a Gracious Prince, could have
made This Proud man Happy, there would have been Nothing wanting to his
Establishment. But All This did not do his Work, it seems; neither, as big as
he was, did there in Truth, need any Great Matter to Unsettle him. But he was
as sure to sink under the Infirmity of his Own Mind, as if he had been Doomed
to Sink in the Fate of a Common Ruin.

When Haman saw Mordecai in the Kings Gate, (says the Text) that he stood not
up, nor Moved for him, he was full of Indignation against Mordecai.
Nevertheless, Haman Refrained himself, and when he came Home, he sent and
called for his Friends, and Teresh, his Wife; and told them of the Glory of his
Riches, and the Multitude of his Children, And All the Things wherein the King
had Promoted him, and how he had Advanced him above the Princes and Servants of
the King. Tea, Esther the Queen (says he) did let no man come with the King
unto the Banquet that she had prepared, but my self; and to morrow am I Invited
unto her also with the King [Yet All This Avails Me Nothing, so long as I see
Mordecai the Jew sitting at the Kings Gate, Esther, Cap. 5. V. 9. 10, 11, 12,
13.]

This Instance of Haman's Case may serve, in a Good Measure, for a Moral to the
Arrogance of the Horse here in the Fable; only Haman's Pride was the more
Invidious and Malicious of the Two. To Wind up the Story; Mordecai was an Eye
sore to Haman, and a Gallows of Fifty Cubits High was prepared for him by the
Order of Haman, Cap, 5. V. 14. But the King, upon Examination of the Matter,
Ordered Haman Himself to be Hanged. [ So they Hanged Haman upon the Gallows
that he had prepared for Mordecai, Cap. 7. V. 10.] Haman's Pride, in fine, was
a Torment to him, and he was not only Punished By it, and For it, but by a
Righteous Judgment of Retaliation, he suffered Death Himself upon the very
Gibbet that he had provided for Another.

How Wretched a Creature was Haman now, even in the Caresses of his Royal
Master, and in the very Rapture of all his Glories! And how Vain again were All
the Marks and Ensigns of his Character and Power; that were not able to support
him against one Slighting Look of a Sorry Slave! He had the World at Will, we
see; but All was as good as Nothing to him, so long as he saw Mordecai the Jew
sitting in the Kings Gate. Where Is the Sober Man now, that would not rather
choose to be Mordecai in the Gate, upon These Terms, than to be Haman in the
Palace? The One had the Blessing of a Conscience that Fears Nothing but God;
the Other was Haunted with a Fantastical Weakness of Mind, that makes a man
Dread Every thing, and stand in awe of his Own Shadow! A Word, a Thought, an
Imagination, a Countenance is enough to Break his Sleep, and to Shake the very
Foundations of the Babel that he has Built. He fancies Every Bolt that is
Levelled at his Vices, to be Pointed at his Person, and finds himself Wounded
in the Morality of the most Innocent Reproofs. He Is a Slave to All Passions,
All Accidents, and All sorts of Men. A Jest, a Banter, a Lampoon; Nay a Glance,
an Insinuation, or a Bare Casuality, with the Help of a Guilty Conscience, and
a Suspicious Gloss of Application, is enough to Murder him; for he Conceits
himself to be Struck at, when he is not so much as Thought of: as I dare
appeal to the Consciences of a Thousand Top Gallant Sparks, that will fancy
their Own Case to be the Key to This Moral. He makes himself Odious to his
Superiors, by his Haughtiness; to his Equals, by a Restless Course of Factious
Competitions; and then he never fails of a Vi^ulent Hatred and Envy, from those
that are Below him; So that he is Beset with Enemies on All hands, the Meanest
of which is not without Many and Many a Way to the Wreaking of a Malice, and to
the Gratifying of a Revenge. As to the Wretchedness of his Condition, it is all
a case to Him, whether he be Teiz'd out of his Life by a Judgment of Flies and
Lice, or Stung to Death by Fiery Serpents. And he is not only Tormented by
Others, but the very Tormenter of Himself too. Nay, rather than want a
Colorable Ground of Trouble, he Creates it. His Pride is a Continual Drought
upon him, and a Thirst never to be Quenched. His Conscience, his Fancy, his
Fears, Jealousies, and Mistakes; Every thing helps on toward his Undoing. And
now to the Infinite Variety of Plagues that Wait upon Pride, there is likewise
as Great a Diversity of Imperious Humors for This Misery to Work upon. As for
Example, There is a Pride of Stomach, a Pride of Popularity, a Pride of Brow,
Equipage, and Parade. There Is a Pride of Tongue without either Brains, or Heart
to Support it. There is an Abject, (in fine) and there is a Surly Pride; But to
Conclude, there is All This, and a Thousand times more of the same Kind and
Color, that lies Naturally Couched under This Allegory. And not One Instance
at last, that is not verified by Many and Many an Example.

Now as to the Envy of the Ass it was a Double Folly; for he Mistakes both the
Horses Condition, and his Own. It Is Madness to Envy any Creature that may in a
Moment become Miserable; Or for any Advantage that may in a Moment be taken
from him. The Ass Envies the Horse to day; and in some (...) Days more, the
Horse comes to Envy Him: Wherefore let no man Despair, so long as it is in the
Power, either of Death, or of Chance, to Remove the Burden. Nothing but
Moderation and Greatness of Mind can make, either a Prosperous, or an Adverse
Fortune Easy to us. The Only Way to be Happy is to submit to our Lot; for No
man can be properly said to be Miserable that is not wanting to Himself. It is
Certainly True, that many a Jolly Cobbler has a Merrier Heart in his Stall, than
a Prince in his Palace.

FAB. XXXIX. A Bat and a Weazle.
A Weazle had seized upon a Bat, and the Bat begged for Life. No, No, says the
Weazle, I give No Quarter to Birds. Ay (says the Bat) but I Am a Mouse you see;
look on my Body else: and so she got off for That Bout. The same Bat had the
Fortune to be Taken a While after by Another Weazle; and there the Poor Bat was
forced to beg for Mercy once again. No, says the Weazle, No Mercy to a Mouse.
Well (says 'Tother,) but you may see by my Wings that I Am a Bird; and so that
Bat escaped in Both Capacities, by Playing the Trimmer.

FAB. XL. A Bat, Birds, and Beasts.
UPon a Desperate and a Doubtful Battle betwixt the Birds and the Beasts, the
Bat stood Neuter, 'till she found that the Beasts had the Better on it, and then
went over to the Stronger side. But it came to pass afterward (as the Chance of
War is Various) that the Birds Rallied their Broken Troops, and carried the
Day; and away she went Then to 'Tother Party, where she was Try^d by a Council
of War as a Deserter; Stripped, Banished, and finally Condemned never to see
Daylight again.

FAB. XLI. An Estriche, Birds, and Beasts.
THe Estriche is a Creature that passes in Common Reputation, for Half-Bird,
Half-Beast. This Amphibious Wretch happen^d to be Taken Twice the same Day, in
a Battle betwixt the Birds and the Beasts, and as an Enemy to Both Parties. The
Birds would have him to be a Beast, and the Beasts Concluded him to be a Bird;
but upon showing his Feet to Prove that he was No Bird, and upon showing his
Wings, and his Beak, to prove that he was No Beast, they were Satisfied upon
the Whole Matter, that though he seemed to be Both, he was yet in Truth neither
the One, nor the Other.

The MORAL of the Three FABLES above.
Trimming in some Cases, is Foul, and Dishonest; in Other^, Laudable; and in
some again, not only Honest, but Necessary. The Nicety lies in the skill of
Distinguishing upon Cases, Times, and Degrees.

REFLECTION.
WE are here taught in some Cases to Yield to Times and Occasions; but with a
Saving still, to Honor, and to Conscience. A Wise and an Honest Man will
always Mean the same Thing; but he is a Fool that always says the same Thing.
Aesop however Condemns the Double Practices of Trimmers, and All False,
Shuffling, and Ambidextrous Dealings. He gives also to Understand, that Those
that pretend at the same time to serve Two Masters, are True to Neither.

The Three Fables next above have a Great Affinity One with Another, and yet
not without some Remarkable Diversities neither. From the Emblem of the Bat and
Weazle, we are to Gather, that there are Certain Ways, Cases, and Occasions,
wherein, Disguises, and Artificial Evasions are in some Measure Allowable,
provided only that there be No Scandalous, or Malicious Departure from the
Truth. This Shuffling of the Bat in the Paw of the Weazle, was but making the
Best of what he had to say, and to show for Himself, toward the saving of his
Life. There was No Breach of Faith, or of Trust in it; No Abandoning of a Duty,
No Thought of Treachery; Nor in Effect, any thing more in it, than a Fair
Christian Way of putting out False Colors.

The Bat that stood Neuter, may serve for the Character of a Timeserving
Trimmer: He Betrays his Party, first, in withdrawing his Assistance. Secondly,
In going over to the Stronger Side, and Declaring Himself an Open Enemy when
his Fellows had the Worst on it. His Judgment, in fine, was Just, and if All
Double Dealers and Deserters were served as This Bat was, it would be an
Example of Terror to Renegades and of Encouragement to Honest Men.

The Estriches Case seems to be Different from the Other Two. He Fought,
(though it is not said on which side) and he was Taken in the Battle. He had the
Shape, but not the Heart of a Trimmer, and it was rather Nature then Fraud,
that brought him off. Now there are Many things in an Affair of This Quality
that may be Warrantable, even upon the Nicest Scruples of Honor, in him that
suffers the Violence, which perchance would not be so in the Aggressor.

FAB. XLII. A Wolf and a Fox.
A Wolf that had a mind to take his Ease, Stored himself Privately with
Provisions, and so kept Close a while. Why, how now friend says a Fox to him,
we have not seen You abroad at the Chase this many a day! Why truly says the
Wolf, I have gotten an Indisposition that keeps me much at Home, and I hope I
shall have Your Prayers for my Recovery. The Fox had a Fetch in it, and when he
saw it would not Fadge; Away goes he presently to a Shepherd, and tells him
where he might surprise a Wolf if he had a mind to it. The Shepherd followed
his Directions, and Destroyed him. The Fox immediately, as his Next Heir,
repairs to his Cell, and takes possession of his Stores; but he had Little Joy
of the Purchase, for in a very short time, the same Shepherd did as much for
the Fox, as he had done before for the Wolf.

The MORAL.
It Is with Sharpers as it is with Pikes, they Prey upon their Own kind: And it is
a Pleasant Scene enough, when Thieves fall out among themselves, to see the
Cutting of One Diamond with Another.

REFLECTION.
It Is Impossible for an Envious Man to be Happy. He makes the World his
Enemies, and the Mischief that he does to Others, returns in a Judgment upon
his Own Head. There Is No Trusting of a Crafty Designing Knave. I do not speak
of the Trust of Privacy and Confidence only; but a Wise Man would not so much
as Venture himself in such Company, nor let him come within distance of so much
as knowing how to put a Trick upon him. This Fable shows us the Danger of such
Conversation. And it shows us likewise the Just Fate that Attends the
Treachery, even of One Traitor to Another: The Wolf had a Design upon the Fox;
The Fox had a Counter-Design upon the Wolf: (which was no more then a Couple
of Crafty Knaves well Matched) And the Shepherd did Justice upon them Both.

FAB. XLIII. A Stag Drinking.
As a Stag was Drinking upon the Bank of a Clear Stream, he saw his Image in
the Water, and Entered into This Contemplation upon it. Well! says he, If These
Pityful Shanks of mine were but Answerable to this Branching Head, I can but
think how I should Defy All my Enemies. The Words were hardly out of his Mouth,
but he Discovered a Pack of Dogs coming full-Cry toward him. Away he Scours
cross the Fields, Casts off the Dogs, and Gains a Wood; but Pressing thorough a
Thicket, the Bushes held him by the Horns, till the Hounds came in, and Plucked
him Down. The Last Thing he said was This. What an Unhappy Fool was I, to Take
my Friends for my Enemies, and my Enemies for my Friends! I Trusted to my Head,
that has Betrayed me, and I found fault with my Legs, that would otherwise
have brought me off.

The MORAL.
He that does not thoroughly know himself, may be Well Allowed to make a False
Judgment upon other Matters that most Nearly concern him.

REFLECTION.
THIS is to show us how perversely we Judge of Many Things, and take the Worse
for the Better; and the Better for the Worse; upon a very great Mistake, both
in what we Despise, and in what we Admire. But we are rather for That which is
Fair, and Plausible in Appearance, then for That which is Plain and Profitable
in Effect; Even to the Degree of Preferring Things Temporal to Eternal.

He that would Know Himself, must look into Himself. It Is only the Resemblance,
or the Shadow that he sees in the Glass, Not the Man. It Is One Thing to fancy
Greatness of Mind; Another Thing to Practice it; for a Body may Promise, nay
and resolve upon Many Things in Contemplation, that he can never make good upon
Trial. How did the Stag despise the Dogs here, at the sight of his Armed Head
in the Fountain; but his Heart went quite to another Tune, when the Hounds were
at the Heels of him. We are likewise taught here, how subject Vain Men are to
Glory in That which commonly Tends to their Loss, their Misfortune, their
Shame, and their very Destruction; and yet at the same time to take their Best
Friends for their Enemies. But there is a Huge Difference betwixt a False
Conception of Things, and the True Nature and Reason of them. The Stag Prided
himself in his Horns, that afterward Shackled, and were the Ruin of him; but
made slight of his Pityful Shanks, that if it had not been for his Branching
Head, would have brought him off.

FAB. XLIV. A Snake and a File.
THere was a Snake got into a Smith's Shop, and fell to Licking of a File, She
Saw the File Bloody, and still the Bloudyer it was, the more Eagerly she Licked
it; upon a Foolish Fancy, that it was the File that Bled, and that She her self
had the Better on it. In the Conclusion, when she could Lick no Longer, she fell
to Biting; but finding at last that she could do no more Good upon it with her
Teeth, then with her Tongue, she Fairly left it.

The MORAL.
It Is a Madness to stand Biting and Snapping at any thing to no manner of
purpose, more then the Gratifying of an Impotent Rage, in the fancy of Hurting
Another, when in truth, we only Wound our selves.

REFLECTION.
THIS Fable sets out the Malignity of some Spiteful People, that take so much
Pleasure in the Design of Hurting others, as not to Feel, and Understand that
they only Hurt themselves. This is the Case of Those that will be Trying
Masteries with their Superiors, and Biting of That which is too Hard for their
Teeth. There Is no Contending with an Adversary that is either Insensible, or
Invincible: And the Rule holds, in Matters, not only of Actual Force and
Violence, but of Fortune and Good Name; for it is no better then Downright
Madness, to strike where we have No Power to Hurt, and to Contend where we are
sure to be Worsted. The Doctrine is this, That Every Man should Consider his
Own Strength, and Act accordingly.

FAB. XLV. A League betwixt the Wolves and the Sheep.
THere was a Time when the Sheep were so Hardy as to Wage War with the Wolves;
and so long as they had the Dogs for their Allies, they were, upon all
Encounters, at least a Match for their Enemies. Upon This Consideration, the
Wolves sent their Ambassadors to the Sheep, to Treat about a Peace, and in the
Mean Time there were Hostages given on Both Sides; the Dogs on the part of the
Sheep, and the Wolves Whelps on the Other Part, 'till Matters might be brought
to an Issue. While they were upon Treaty, the Whelps fell a Howling; The Wolves
cried out Treason; and pretending an Infraction in the Abuse of their Hostages,
fell upon the Sheep immediately without their Dogs, and made them pay for the
Improvidence of leaving themselves without a Guard.

The MORAL.
It Is senseless to the Highest Degree to think of Establishing an Alliance
among those that Nature her self has Divided, by an Inconciliable Disagreement.
Beside, that a Foolish Peace is much more Destructive than a Bloody War.

REFLECTION.
To take This Fable in a Political Sense; a Peace that puts People out of
Condition of Defense, in case of a War, must expect a War; and such a State as
leaves them at the Mercy of an Enemy, is Worse then War it self. There Is no
Trusting to the Articles and Formalities of an Outside Peace, upon the
pretended Reconciliation of an Implacable Enemy. Christian Religion bids us
Forgive: But Christian Prudence bids us have a Care too, whom we Trust. It Is
just in the World as it is in the Apologue. Truces, and Cessations, are both
Made, and Broken, for Present Convenience; and where the Allies find they may
be the Better for it, we may lay down this for an undoubted Truth, that there
can never want a Color for a Rupture, where there is a Good Will to it. It Is No
New Thing ing in the World for the Dogs that are to keep the Wolves from
Worrying the Sheep, to be delivered up to the Enemy for Hostages, for fear the
Sheep should Worry the Wolves. This was our very Case within the Memory of Man,
when Matters were brought to the same Issue in the Kingdom by it, that they are
here in the Fable: Witness the several and several Treaties and Proposals that
were set a foot under the Countenance of a Good Will to Peace: Where only such
Conditions were insisted upon by the Designing Party, as would be almost
Equally Destructive to all Honest Men, whether they were Granted or Refused.
The One Way the Wolves were to have the Sheep left at Mercy; and the Other Way,
the Scandal was turned upon the Refusers, as the Enemies of an Accommodation;
Nay and the very Dogs were turned into Wolves too; while Lawyers, and Divines,
made the Law and the Gospel Felons of themselves, and suborned the Scriptures
against the very Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles,

FAB. XLVI. An Axe and a Forest.
A Carpenter that had got the Iron-Work of an Axe already, went to the Next
Forest to beg only so much Wood as would make a Handle to it. The Matter seemed
so small that the Request was Easily Granted; but when the Timber Trees came to
find that the Whole Wood was to be Cut down by the Help of This Handle; There Is
No Remedy, they cried, but Patience, when People are undone by their own Folly.

FAB. XLVII. A Tree and a Wedge.
A Workman was Cutting down a Tree to make Wedges of it. Well! says the Tree, I
cannot but be extremely Troubled at the Thought of what I Am now a doing; And I
do not so much Complain neither, of the Axe that does the Execution, as of the
Man that Guides it; but it is My Misery that I am to be Destroy d by the Fruit
of my own Body.

FAB. XLVIII. The Eagle and Arrow.
AN Eagle that was Watching upon a Rock once for a Hare, had the Ill Hap to be
Struck with an Arrow. This Arrow, it seems, was Feathered from her own Wing,
Which very Consideration went nearer her Heart, she said, than Death it self.

FAB. XLIX. A Thrush taken with Birdlime.
IT was the Fortune of a Poor Thrush, among other Birds, to be taken with a
Bush of Lime-Twigs, and the Miserable Creature Reflecting upon it, that the
Chief Ingredient in the Birdlime came out of her own Guts: I am not half so
much Troubled, says the Thrush, at the Thought of Dying, as at the Fatality of
Contributing to my Own Ruin.

The MORAL of the Four FABLES above.
Nothing goes nearer a Man in his Misfortunes, then to find himself Undone by
his Own Folly, or but any way Accessory to his own Ruin.

REFLECTION.
THE Fables of the Ax-Handle, and the Wedge, serve to Precaution us not to put
our selves Needlessly upon an After Game, but to Weigh before hand what we Say,
and Do. We should have a Care how we Arm our Enemies against our Selves; for
there is Nothing goes Nearer a Man than to be Undone by his Own Improvidence;
and Nothing afterward more Ridiculous, then to Blame Fortune for our own
Faults: Though we are so Framed by Nature, in respect of our Souls and Bodies,
that One Part of a Man is still Wounded by the Other. Nothing so much Troubled
the Eagle and the Thrush, as the Thought of assisting to their own Destruction.

There Is No living in This World without an Exchange of Civil Offices, and the
Need we have One of Another, goes a Great Way toward the Making of us Love One
Another. How is this Amity, and Communication to be entertained now, but by the
Commerce of Giving and Receiving? Reason, and Experience, are Sufficient to
convince us of the Necessity of such a Correspondence; And this Fiction of the
Axe and the Forest, and so of the Tree and the Wedge, shows us the Danger of
it too, if it be not Managed with a Provident Respect to All the Niceties of
Circumstance, and Contingency in the Case. People have got a Custom, it is true,
of Computing upon the Present Need, and Value of Things, without ever heeding
the Consequences of them: As if all our Askings, and our Grantings were to be
Governed by the Standard of the Market. It Is so pityful a Business, says One,
and it was so small a Thing, says Another; And yet this Pityful Business, and
this Small Thing proves at last to be as much as a Man's Life, Honor, and
Estate is Worth. Alas! What Is a Handle for an Axe, out of a whole Forest!
What Is the Writing of a Man's Name, or the saying Ay, or No to a Question? And
yet the very Safety and Honor of our Prince and Country, and the Sum of our
Well-being lies many a time at Stake upon the Issue of doing either the One or
the Other. Nay and let the People we have to do withal be never so Just and
Honest, it is yet a Temerity, and a Folly Inexcusable, to Deliver up our selves
Needlessly into Another Power: For He that does any thing Rashly, must be taken
in Equity of Construction to do it willingly: For he was Free to Deliberate or
Not: It Is Good Advice to Consider, First, what the Thing is that is Desired. 2.
The Character of the Person that Asks. 3. What use may be made on it to the
Detriment of him that Grants the Request, and so to Resolve how far in Duty,
Humanity, Prudence, Justice, and Respect, we are to Comply with it. Wheresoever
there is a Moral Right on the One Hand, No Secondary Interest can Discharge it
on the Other. A Prisoner upon Parole must surrender himself upon Demand, though
he Die for it. A Man may Contribute to his own Ruin Several Ways; but in Cases
not to be Foreseen, and so not to be Prevented, it may be his Misfortune, and
the Man not to blame. We are not to omit Precaution however, for fear an Ill
Use should be made of Those Things that we do, even with a Good Intention; but
we are still to Distinguish betwixt what may Possibly, and what will Probably
be done, according to the Best Measures we can take of the End of Asking; for
there would be No Place left for the Functions of Humane Society, if the
Possibility of Abusing a Kindness, should wholly Divert us from the Exercise of
Charity and Good Nature. There may be Great Mischief Wrought yet, without any
thing of a Previous Malice, and it may be Hazardous to Yield, even where the
Proposal is wholly Innocent. There may be other Propositions again, that were
Originally Designed for Snares, to the Short-sighted and Credulous, Now it is
the Art of Life, Critically to Discern the One Case from the Other.

There needs Little more to be said to the Emblems of the Eagle and the Thrush,
than to observe, that both by Chance, and by Nature, we are made Accessory to
our Own Ruins: and That Is enough to Trouble a Body, though not to Condemn him.

FAB. L. The Belly and Members.
THE Commoners of Rome were gone off once into a Direct Faction against the
Senate. They Would pay no Taxes, nor be forced to bear Arms, they said, and 'twas
against the Liberty of the Subject to pretend to Compel them to it. The
Sedition, in short, ran so High, that there was no Hope of Reclaiming them,
till Menenius Agrippa brought them to their Wits again by This Apologue:

The Hands and the Feet were in a Desperate Mutiny once against the Belly. They
knew No Reason, they said, why the One should lie Lazying, and Pampering it
self with the Fruit of the Others Labor; and if the Body would not Work for
Company, they would be no longer at the Charge of Maintaining it. Upon This Mutiny,
they kept the Body so long without Nourishment, that All the Parts Suffered
for it: Insomuch that the Hands and Feet came in the Conclusion to find their
Mistake, and would have been willing Then to have Done their Office; but it was
now too Late, for the Body was so Pined with Over-Fasting, that it was wholly
out of Condition to receive the Benefit of a Relief: which gave them to
Understand, that Body and Members are to Live and Die together.

The MORAL.
The Public is but One Body, and the Prince the Head on it; so that what Member
soever withdraws his Service from the Head, is no Better than a Negative
Traitor to his Country.

REFLECTION.
THIS Allegoty is a Political Reading upon the State and Condition of Civil
Communities, where the Members have their Several Offices, and Every Part
Contributes respectively to the Preservation and Service of the Whole. It Is
true, their Operations are More or Less Noble, but the Mechanical Faculties can
no more be Spared than the Intellectual, and those that Serve in Council under
an Appearance of Rest, are yet as Busy, and as Necessary, in their Functions,
as those that are Actually and Visibly in Motion. Here Is a Caution in fine, to
the Members, to have a care how they withdraw themselves from their Duties,
till it shall be too late for their Superiors to make use of them.

There is so Near an Analogy betwixt the State of a Body Natural, and and
Politic, that the Necessity of Government and Obedience cannot be better
Represented. The Motions of a Popular Faction are so Violent, and Unreasonable,
that neither Philosophy, Prudence, Experience, nay, nor the Holy Writ it self,
has the Power (ordinarily speaking) to Work upon them. If People would allow
themselves Time for Thought, and Consideration, they would find that the
Conservation of the Body depends upon the Proper Use and Service of the Several
Parts; and that the Interest of Every Distinct Member of it, is wrapped up in the
Support, and Maintenance of the whole, which obliges them all to Labor in
their Respective Offices and Functions for the Common Good. There are Degrees
of Dignity (no doubt on it) in Both Cases, and One Part is to be Subservient to
Another, in the Order of Civil Policy, as well as in the Frame of a Man's Body:
so that they are mightily out of the way, that take Eating and Drinking, and Un
Eating, and Un-Drinking, in a course of Vicissitude, with other Offices of
Nature that are common to Beasts with Men, to be the Great Business of Mankind,
without any further Regard to the Faculties, and Duties of our Reasonable
Being: For Every Member has its Proper, and Respective Function Assigned it,
and not a Finger suffers but the Whole Feels on it.

FAB. LI. An Ape and a Fox.
AN Ape that found Many Inconveniences by going Bare-Arse, went to a Fox that
had a Well-spread, Bushy Tail, and beggd of him only a little piece on it to
Cover his Nakedness: For (says he) you have enough for Both, and what needs
more than you have Occasion for? Well, John (says the Fox) be it More, or be it
Less, you get not one single Hair on it; for I would have ye know, Sirrah, that
the Tail of a Fox was never made for the Buttocks of an Ape.

The MORAL.
Providence has Assigned Every Creature its Station, Lot, Make and Figure; and
it is not for Us to stand Correcting the Works of an In comprehensible Wisdom,
and an Almighty Power.

REFLECTION.
THIS is to Reprove the Impertinent, Useless, and Unreasonable Demands of Those
that first Ask what Another cannot Part with, unless he be a Stark Fool, or a
Mad Man. And 2. That which if they could obtain would be of No Use, or Benefit
to them at all. The Old Moral carries it to Those also that will Part with
Nothing to the Poor, even out of their Superfluities: But it seems to be
Abominably Wrested, for neither did the One want, nor had the other Any Thing
to spare.

There are Cerrain Rules to be observed, as well in Asking, as Denying. Things
against Nature are unreasonable on Both Sides. Things Impossible are Ridiculous
in the very Proposal; and Things which the One cannot Spare, and the Other will
be never the Better for, fall naturally within the Compass of Exceptions. That
is to say, Those Things that we know not what to do withal if we Had them; and
Those Things again, which Another Cannot Part with but to his own Loss and
Shame. These Points are the very Conditions of This Fable. Here Is a General
Caution against Extravagant Desires, and yet let the Refusal be never so Just,
it is Possible however, that a Man may Oppose a most Unconscionable Request for
an Unjustifiable Reason; As in the Case for the purpose, of an Ill-natured
Denial, out of a Dislike of the Man, rather than of the Thing it self.

The Application of This Fable to Avarice, that will part with Nothing, seems
to be Wrested; for it strikes more properly upon the Folly of People's not
being satisfied with the Appointments of Nature. An Ape, with a Tail, would be
as scandalous, as a Fox without One. Why should not Any One Creature Envy the
Whole, as well as any One Part of Another? And why should not an Ape be as much
Troubled that he has no Wings, as that he has no Tail? This Grumbling Humor
has Envy in it, Avarice and Ingratitude, and sets up it self in fine against
All the Works of the Creation.

FAB. LII. A Lark and her Young Ones.
THere was a Brood of Young Larks in the Corn, and the Dam, when she went
abroad to Forage for them, laid a Strict Charge upon her Little Ones, to pick
up what News they could get against she came back again. They told her at her
Return, that the Owner of the Field had been there, and Ordered his Neigbours
to come and Reap the Corn. Well, says the Old One, there is no Danger yet then.
They told her the next Day that he had been there again, and Desired his
Friends to Do It. Well, well, says she, there is no Hurt in That neither, and so
she went out a Progging for Provisions again as before. But upon the Third Day,
when they told their Mother, that the Master and his Son appointed to come the
Next Morning about it Themselves: Nay then, says she, it is time to look about
us: As for the Neighbors and the Friends, I fear 'em not: but the Master
I'msure will be as good as his Word; for it is his own Business.

FAB. LIII. The Stag and the Oxen
A Stag that was hard set by the Huntsmen, betook himself to a Stall for
Sanctuary, and prevailed with the Oxen to Conceal him the best they could, so
they covered him with Straw, and by and by in comes the Keeper to Dress the
Cattle, and to Feed them; and when he had done his Work he went his Way without
any Discovery. The Stag reckoned himself by This Time to be out of All Danger;
but One of the Oxen that had more Brains than his Fellows, advised him not to
be too Confident neither; for the Servant, says he, is a Puzzling Fool that
heeds Nothing; but when my Master comes, he will have an Eye Here and There and
Every where, and will most certainly find ye out. Upon the very Speaking of the
Word, in comes the Master, and He spies out Twenty Faults, I warrant ye; This
was not Well, and That was not Well; till at last, as he was Prying and Groping
up and down, he felt the Horns of the Stag under the Straw, and so made Prize
of (...).

The MORAL to the Two Fables above.
He that would be sure to have his Business Well Done, must either Do it
Himself, or see the Doing of it; Beside that many a Good Servant is Spoiled by
a Careless Master.

REFLECTION.
INTEREST Does more in the World then Faith and Honesty; for Men are more
sensible in their own Case then in Another; which is all but according to the
Old Saying, Command your Man, and Do It Your Self. Neither, in Truth, is it
Reasonable, that Another should be more Careful of Me, than I am of my ^elf.
Every Man's Business is Best Done when he looks after it with his Own Eyes: And
in short, when Every Man looks to One, the Care is taken for All.

We are likewise given to understand, in the Misfortune, and Mistake of the
Stag, how Rare a Felicity it is for a Man in Distress, to find out such a
Patron as has the Will and the Resolution, the Skill, and the Power, to Relieve
him; and that it is not Every Man's Talent neither, to make the Best of a Bad
Game. The Morality of this Caution is as good a Lesson to Governments, as to
Private Families. For a Prince's Leaving his Business Wholly to his Ministers
without a Strict Eye over them in their Respective Offices and Functions, is as
Dangerous an Error in Politiques, as a Masters Committing All to his Servant
is in Oeconomicks. It is Effectually a Translation of the Authority, when a
Superior trusts himself Implicitly to the Faith, Care, Honesty and Discretion
of an Inferior. To say nothing of the Temptation to Bribery and False D^aling,
when so much may be Gotten by it with so Little Hazard, either of Discovery, or
Punishment. Beside the Desperate Inconvenience of Setting up a Wrong Interest,
by drawing Applications out of the Proper Channel; and Committing the Authority
and Duty of the Master to the Honesty and Discretion of the Servant. Men will
be True to Themselves how Faithless soever to One Another.

FAB. LIVE. A Fox and a Sick Lion.
A Certain Lion that had got a Politic Fit of Sickness, made it his
Observation, that of All the Beasts in the Forest, the Fox never came at him:
And so he wrote him Word how Ill he was, and how Mighty Glad he should be of
his Company, upon the Score of Ancient Friendship and Acquaintance. The Fox
returned the Complement with a Thousand Prayers for his Recovery; but as for
Waiting upon him, he desired to be Excused; For (says he) I find the Traces of
abundance of Feet Going In to Your Majesty's Palace, and not One that comes
Back again.

The MORAL.
The Kindnesses of Ill Natured and Designing People, should be thoroughly
Considered, and Examined, before we give Credit to them.

REFLECTION.
There Is but a Hair's Breadth here, betwixt an Office of Great Piety, Humanity
and Virtue; and an Action of Extreme Folly, Improvidence, and Hazard. But the
Fox saw thorough the Complement, and that it was, in Truth, but an Invitation
of him to his Own Funeral. We meet with many of These Dangerous Civilities in
the World, wherein it is a Hard Matter for a Man to Save, both his Skin, and his
Credit.

It Is a Difficult Point to Hit the True Medium, betwixt Trusting too Much, and
too Little, for fear of Incurring a Danger on the One Hand, or giving a Scandal
on the Other. Complements are only Words of Course, and though One External
Civility may be Current Payment for Another, yet a Man would be loath to Venture
his All upon a Figure of Speech, where the Meaning is so Nicely Divided betwixt
Jest and Earnest. It Is a Base Thing to suspect a Friend, or an Honest Man; Nay
it is a Base Thing to suspect any Man, that but Looks like One; so as to Wound
him; That is, either in a Word, or in a Thought. But then it is Death perhaps to
be Imposed upon by an Hypocrite under That Masque. So that the Character of a
Wise Man, lies at Stake upon Matter of Judgment, One Way, and of a Good Natured
Man, the Other Way. The Middle Course is to Hide our Distrust where we are
Doubtful, and to be Free, and Open, where we may be Secure. There Is No Living
without Trusting some body or Other, in some Cases, or at some Time or Other:
But then if People be not Cautious, Whom, When, and Wherein, the Mistake may be
Mortal; for there must be somewhat of a Trust to make way for a Treachery;
since No man can be Betrayed, that does not either Believe, or seem to Believe:
So that the Fox did well to Weigh All Circumstances before he came to a
Resolution. The Lion's Design was well enough Covered under the Disguise of a
Counterfeit Sickness, and a Dissembled Tenderness and Respect, for the Drawing
of the Fox into the Toil. For there was the Civility of an Invitation, on the
One hand, and some Color of a Right to a Visit, though but out of Compassion
and Good Manners, on the Other: But the Foxes Sagacity, and the Prints of the
Feet Spoiled All. This Fable in One Word more, bids us be Careful how we Trust
in Any Case without looking Well about us: for it is Half the Business of One
part of the World to put Tricks upon The Other. The Heart of Man is like a Bog,
it looks Fair to the Eye; but when we come to lay any Weight upon it, the Ground
is False under us. Nothing could be more Obliging and Respectful then the
Lyon's Letter was, in Terms and Appearance; but there was Death yet in the True
Intent and Meaning on it.

FAB. LV. A Fox and a Weazel.
A Slam, Thin-Gutted Fox made a Hard Shift to Wriggle his Body into a
Hen-Roost, and when he had stuffed his Guts well, he squeezed hard to get out
again; but the Hole was too Little for him. There was a Weazle a pretty way
off, that stood Learing at him all This While. Brother Reynard; (says he) Your
Belly was Empty when you went In, and you must even stay till Your Belly be
Empty again, before you come Out.

The MORAL
Temperance keeps the Whole Man in Order, and in a Good Disposition, either for
Thought or Action, but the Indulging of the Appetite brings a Clog, both upon
the Body and Mind.

REFLECTION.
IN a Middle State, both of Body, and of Fortune a man is better Disposed for
the Offices of Humane Society, and the Functions of Reasonable Nature; and the
Heart is also Freer from Cares and Troubles. There are Unwieldy Minds as well
as Unwieldy Bodies, and the Fumes of the One Obstruct the Operations of the
Other. The Head of a Philosopher will never do well upon the Shoulders of an
Epicure. The Body and the Soul are Inseparable Companions, and it is against
the Nature of This Reasonable Union, for the One to be a Clog to the Other. The
Foxe's here, is the Case of Many a Public Minister, that comes Empty In, but
when he has Crammed his Gutts well, he is fain to squeeze hard before he can get
off again; and glad to Compound with his very Skin for his Carcases.

FAB. LVI. A Boar and a Horse.
A Boar happened to be Wallowing in the Water where a Horse was going to Drink,
and there grew a Quarrel upon it. The Horse went presently to a Man, to Assist
him in his Revenge. They agreed upon the Conditions, and the Man immediately
Armed himself, and Mounted the Horse, who carried him to the Boar, and had the
satisfaction of seeing his Enemy Killed before his Face. The Horse Thanked the
Cavalier for his Kindness, but as he was just about to take leave, the Man
said he should have further Occasion for him, and so Ordered him to be Tied up
in the Stable. The Horse came by This Time, to Understand, that his Liberty was
gone, and No Help for it, and that he had paid Dear for his Revenge.

FAB. LVII. A Stag and a Horse.
UPon a Dispute betwixt a Stag and a Horse about a piece of Pasture, the Stag
got the Better on it, and beat the Other out of the Field. The Horse, upon This
Affront, Advised with a Man what Course to Take; who told him, that if he would
Submit to be Bridled, and Sadled, and take a Man upon his Back with a Lance in
his Hand, he would Undertake to give him the Satisfaction of a Revenge. The
Horse came to his Terms, and for the Gratifying of a Present Passion, made
himself a Slave all the days of his Life. Stesichorus made use of This Fable,
to Divert the Himerenses from Choosing Phalaris the Tyrant for their General.
This Horse's Case, says he, will be Yours, if you go on with your Proposals.
It Is true, You Will have your Revenge, but you will lose your Liberties; Upon which
Words the Motion fell.

The MORAL of the two FABLES above.
Let every man take a True Measure of Himself, what he is Able to do, and what
Not; before he comes to any Peremptory Resolution how to Proceed. He is a
Madman, that to Avoid a Present, and a Less Evil, runs Blindfolded into a
Greater; and for the Gratifying of a Froward Humor, makes himself a Slave All
the days of his Life.

REFLECTION.
THESE Fables lay Open to us the Folly of Those People that make themselves
Slaves to their Revenge; for no man should be so Angry with Another, as to Hurt
Himself for it. We should likewise Consider, that there is More Hazard in the
succor of a New Powerful Friend, then in the Hostility of an Old Dangerous
Enemy; and that the Greatest Empires upon the face of the Earth have had their
Rise from the Pretense of Taking up Quarrels, or Keeping the Peace.

These Fables tell us, that it is a Rule of Good Discretion in all Matters of
Quarrel, and Controversy, for Him that is Worsted to have a Great Care Whom he
calls to his Aid: Especially when there is more of Passion then Necessity in the
Case. The Horse might have Quenched his Thirst with Troubled Water; or he might
have stayed the Clearing of it; Or Changed his Wat'ring Place; Or when he was
forced out of One Pasture he might have taken-up in Another, which would have
Preserved his Liberty upon the Main, though not as to This Particular: But his
Stomach was too Great, it seems, to Digest the Affront, without having his
Enemy at his Feet: so that he gives up his Freedom to Gain his Revenge. He has
Fair Words however, Rich Trappings, and Large Promises; but Works only for his
Master; and if at any time he does but Slacken his Pace, or abate, either in
his Zeal, or in his Mettle, the Spurr is presently in the Flank of him: Or if
he be Unruly, the Bit's upon the Check to keep him to his Duty. The Stag was
too Hard for the Horse; and the Horse flies for Succor to One that is to Hard
for Him, and Rides the One to Death, and Outright Kills the Other? It were
Well, if Possible, to keep All Potent Enemies to the Behavior in such a Case
as This, Especially if they Appear under the Shape of Friends: But if People
will Venture Life, Liberty and All, for the Clawing of an Itch, and lay Violent
Hands upon Themselves, there is no Fence for it.

That which Men are to Horses, in the Scale of Creatures, Men in Power and
Authority, are in some Proportion to the Poor and Weak: That is to say in the
Analogy of Servitude, and Drudgery; and in the carrying of some sort of Burdens
that are a Shame to the Bearer. They Toil and Moyle for the Interest of their
Masters, that in requital, break the very Hearts of them for their Pleasure;
and the Freer they are of their Flesh, the more Scandalous is the Bondage. When
they have done All that Horses can do, they are Lashed, Spurred, Reviled, and
Ill Treated, for not being able to do More: They are Hurried on without either
Respite or Reason; And after they have carried their Riders safe over All
Leaps, and thorough All Dangers, and by All Ways and Means Contributed to the
Ease, Credit, and Security of their Masters, what comes of them in the End. but
to be Strained, Foundered or Broken Winded; Old Age Overtakes them, and they
are even Glad to take up in a Mill at last with Grains and Thistles, and there
spend the Remainder of a Wretched Life in a Circulation of Misery and Labor.
If any Man of War, or State shall find This Case to be his Own, and Himself
Touched in the Moral of This Fable, let him keep his Own Council, and learn to
be Wiser hereafter. And we may learn This Lesson of the Horse too, not to
Sacrifice our Honor, Liberty, and Conscience, to a Freak.

FAB. LVIII. Two Young Men and a Cook.
TWo Young Fellows Slipped into a Cooks Shop, and while the Master was Busy at
his Work, One of them Stole a piece of Flesh, and Conveyed it to the Other. The
Master Missed it immediately, and Challenged them with the Theft. He that Took
it, Swore He had None on it. And He that Had it, Swore as Desperately that He
did not Take it. The Cook Reflecting upon the Conceit: Well, My Masters, (says
he) These Frauds and Fallacies may pass upon men; but there is an Eye Above that
sees thorough them.

The MORAL.
There Is No Putting of Tricks upon an All-Seeing Power; as if He that Made our
Hearts, and knows Every Nook, and Corner of them, could not see thorough the
Childish Fallacy of a Double-Meaning.

REFLECTION.
THIS Fable concerns those that think to Deceive God with Fallacies of Words,
Equivocations, Mental Reservations, and Double Meanings; but though Frauds and
Perjuries may pass upon Men for a Season, they are as Open as the Light yet to
Him that Searches the Heart. A Man had Better be a Downright Atheist, then in
such a Case as This, an Equivocating Hypocrite: For He that Denies a
Providence, or Doubts whether there be any God at all, is much more Pardonable,
then Another that Acknowledges, and Confesses an All-Seeing, and an Almighty
Power; and yet at the Same Time, most Blasphemously Affronts it. It Is a Great
Unhappiness that Children should be so much Addicted (as we see they are) to
This Way and Humor of Shuffling: But it is a Greater Shame and Mischief, for
Parents, Governors, and Tutors, to Encourage, and Allow them in it, and so
(Effectually) to Train them up to One of the most Dangerous Corruptions they
are Capable of, in Countenancing the very Groundwork of a False and
Treacherous Life. There must be No Paradoxing or Playing Tricks with Things
Sacred. Truth is the Great Lesson of Reasonable Nature, both in Philosophy, and
in Religion. Now there is a Truth of Opinion; a Truth of Fact, and a Truth in
Simplicity and Sincerity of Thought, Word, and Deed. The Last of the Three is
the Truth that is here in question. The Knack of Fast and Loose passes with a
world of Foolish People for a Turn of Wit; but they are not aware all this
while, of the Desperate Consequences of an Ill Habit, and that the Practice of
Falsifying with Men, will lead us on Insensibly to a Double-Dealing even with
God Himself.

FAB. LIX. A Dog and a Butcher.
AS a Butcher was Busy about his Meat, a Dog runs away with a Sheeps Heart. The
Butcher saw him upon the Gallop with a piece of Flesh in's Mouth, and called
out after him, Hark ye Friend (says he) you may even make the Best of your
Purchase, so long as You Have made Me the Wiser for it.

The MORAL.
It may serve as a Comfort to us in All Our Calamities and Afflictions, that He
that Loses any thing and gets Wisdom by it, is a Gainer by the Loss.

REFLECTION.
NO man is to Account any thing a Loss, if he gets Wisdom by the bargain:
Beside, that Bought Wit is Best. It is in some Proportion, in the Business of
this World, as it is in that of the Next: In the Cases (I mean, of Losses,
Miscarriages and Disappointments: We are in Both Respects the Better for them
(Provided they be not Mortal, that is) for they are Monitory and Instructive.
Affliction makes a man both Honest and Wise; for the smart brings him to a
sense of his Error, and the Experiment to the Knowledge of it. We have I know
not how many Adages to back the Reason of This Moral, Hang a Dog upon a
Crab-Tree (we say) and He Will never love Verjuyce. And then we have it again in
That Common saying, The Burnt Child Dreads the Fire. It Is Wandering Many times,
whether it be in Opinion, or in Traveling, that sets a man Right in his
Judgment, and brings him into the way. The Dogs running away with the Flesh,
Does as good as bid the Cook look Better to it Another time.

A Dog and a Sheep. See Fable and Moral 29.

FAB. LX. A Wolf, a Lamb, and a Goat.
AS a Lamb was following a Goat, Up comes a Wolf, wheedling, to get him aside,
and make a Breakfast of him: Why what a Fool art thou, says the Wolf; that
may have thy Belly full of Sweet Milk at Home, to leave thy Mother for a
Nasty Stinking Goat! Well, says the Lamb, but my Mother has Placed me here for
my Security; and you would fain get me into a Corner, to Worry me. Pray'e, which of
the Two am I to Trust to Now?

The MORAL.
Where there is the Order of a Parent on the One side, and the Advice of an Ill
Man, and a Professed Enemy, on the Other, in Opposition to That Command;
Disobedience would be Undoubtedly the Ready Way to Destruction.

REFLECTION.
THIS Fable Preaches both Obedience and Caution; the One as a Matter of Duty,
the Other as a Point of Prudence. The Wolf sings directly the same Note here
with the Common Seducers and Incendiaries, that we Meet with in the World. And
to the same End too; for they are both Agreed upon it, that so soon as ever they
shall have withdrawn the Lambs, or the People, from their Religion and
Allegiance, and gotten them out of the Pale, and Protection of their Parents
and Governors, they will make a Prey of 'em Themselves. What Is the Wheedling of
the Lamb out of the Station where Authority had Placed him, to go home again
for a Belly full of Sweet Milk; but a State Trick of Inveigling the Multitude
into a Fools-Paradise, without Understanding One word of the Matter in
Question! But some Lambs are Wiser and Honester then some Men: And This very
Lamb's Answer might have become the Mouth of a Good Christian and a Good
Subject. For a Conclusion; The Wolves Preaching to the Sheep, and the Foxes
Preaching to the Geese, hold forth the same Moral.

FAB. LXI. A Cat and Uenus.
A Young Fellow that was Passionately in Love with a Cat, made it his Humble
Suit to Venus to turn Puss into a Woman. The Transformation was Wrought in the
Twinkling of an Eye, and Out she comes, a Very Bucksome Lass. The Doting Sot
took her home to his Bed; and bad Fair for a Litter of Kittens by her That
Night: But as the Loving Couple lay Snugging together, a Toy took Venus in the
Head, to try if the Cat had Changed her Manners with her Shape; and so for
Experiment, turned a Mouse loose into the Chamber. The Cat, upon This
Temptation, Started out of the Bed, and without any regard to the
Marriage-Joys, made a Leap at the Mouse, which Venus took for so High an
Affront, that she turned the Madam into a Puss again.

The MORAL.
The Extravagant Transports of Love, and the Wonderful Force of Nature, are
unaccountable; The One carries us Out of our Selves, and the Other brings us
Back again.

REFLECTION.
THIS is to lay before us the Charms and Extravagances of a Blind Love. It
Covers all Imperfections, and Considers neither Quality, nor Merit. How many
Noble Whores has it made, and how many Imperial Slaves! And let the Defects be
never so Gross, it either Palliates, or Excuses them. The Woman's Leaping at the
Mouse, tells us also how Impossible it is to make Nature Change her Biass, and
that if we shut her out at the Door, she will come in at the Window.

Here Is the Image of a Wild and Fantastical Love, under the Cover of as
Extravagant a Fable, and it is all but Fancy at last too; for men do not See,
or Taste, or Find the Thing they Love, but they Create it. They Fashion an Idol,
in what Figure or Shape they please; Set it up, Worship it, Dote upon it;
Pursue it; and in fine, run Mad for it. How many Passions have we seen in the
World, Ridiculous enough to Answer All the Follies of this Imagination! It was
much for Venus to turn a Cat into a Woman, and for that Cully again to take
That Cat for a Woman: What is it Less now, for a Fop to Form an Idea of the
Woman he Dies for, Every jot as Unlike That Woman, as the Cat is to the
Mistress? Let This Suffice for the Impostures, and Illusions of That Passion.

We are further given to Understand that No Counterfeit is so Steady, and so
Equally Drawn, but Nature by Starts will show her self thorough it; for Puss,
even when she is a Madam, will be a Mouser still. It Is the Same Thing with a
Hypocrite, which is only a Devil dressed up with a Ray about him, and
Transformed into an Angel of Light. Take him in the very Raptures of his
Devotion, and do but throw a parcel of Church Lands in his way, he shall Leap
at the Sacrilege from the very Throne of his Glory, as Puss did at the Mouse;
and Pick your Pocket, as a French Poet says of a Jesuit, in the Middle of his
Paternoster.

FAB. LXII. A Father and his Sons.
IT was the Hap of a very Honest Man to be the Father of a Contentious Brood of
Children. He called for a Rod, and bad 'em Take it, and Try One after. Another
with All their Force, if they could Break it. They Tried, and could not. Well
(says he) Unbind it now, and take Every Twig of it apart, and see what you can
do That Way. They Did so, and with Great Ease, by One and One, they snapt it
all to pieces. This (says he) is the, True Emblem of Your Condition. Keep
Together and You Are Safe, Divide, and You Are Undone.

The MORAL.
The Breach of Unity puts the World, and All that is in it, into a State of War,
and turns Every Man's Hand against his Brother; but so long as the Band holds,
it is the Strength of All the Several Parts of it Gathered into One.

REFLECTION.
THIS is to Intimate the Force of Union, and the Danger of Division. What has
it been but Division that has Exposed Christendom to the Enemies of the
Christian Faith? And it is as Ruinous in Private as it is in Public. A Divided
Family can no more Stand, than a Divided Common Wealth; for every Individual
Suffers in the Neglect of a Common Safety. It Is a Strange Thing that Men should
not do That under the Government of a Rational Spirit and a Natural Prudence,
which Wolves and Boares do by the Impulse of an Animal Instinct. For they, we
see, will make Head, One and All against a Common Enemy; whereas the Generality
of Mankind lie Pecking at One Another, till One by One, they are all Torn to
Pieces. Never considering (with the Father here) the Necessity and Strength of
Union.

FAB. LXIII. A Laden Ass and a Horse.
AS a Horse and an Ass were upon the Way together, the Ass cried out to his
Companion, to Ease him, of his Burden, though never so little, he should fall
down Dead else. The Horse would not; and so his Fellow Servants sunk under his
Load. The Master, upon This, had the Ass Flayed, and laid his Whole Pack, Skin
and All, upon the Horse. Well, (says he) This Judgment is befallen me for my
Ill Nature, in refusing to help my Brother in the Depth of his Distress.

The MORAL.
It is a Christian, a Natural, a Reasonable, and a Political Duty, for All
Members of the Same Body to Assist One Another.

REFLECTION.
THE Business of the World, is more or less, the Business of Every Man that
lives in it: And if the Great and the Small do not Join in One Common
Assistance, where the Matter requires it, they are in Danger to be Both Undone:
So that it is for the Good of the Whole, that the Several Parts take care One
for Another.

We have here set before us the Mischieves of Ill Nature, and Imprudence, both
in One; and the Folly of not Heeding the Duty, as well as the Common Necessity,
of Helping One Another. [ This is None of My Bus'ness] we Cry; never
considering, that in Things Requisite to be done, what One Cannot, Another
Must: Beside, that in the Case of a Fellow Servants, or an Honest Neighbor, I
am as much bound to save him from Sinking under a Heavy Burden, as I am to give
him a Cup of Drink, or a Morsel of Bread, to keep him from Choking or
Starving: It makes a Breach in a Community, when Particular Men shall take upon
them to Divide from the Common Service of the Body: And He that sets up a
Private Interest, Separate from the Public, Discontinues the Connection of the
Government, by Cutting off That Link of the Chain. But the Miseries and
Calamities that follow upon departing from the Known Rules and Measures of
Political Order, are sufficient to Enlighten us in the Reason of Political
Methods, and to Excite us to an Agreement in all Reciprocal Services, One with
Another. There Is the Duty of Charity in it, and the Foundations of Governing
Prudence; Beside, that we are likewise Moved to it, by a Sense of Tenderness,
Honor and Justice.

The Churlish Humor of this Horse, is too much the Humor of Mankind, even in
the Case of Subjects to the same Master; but such is the Vanity that many
People draw from their Titles, and their Trappings, that they look down upon
their Fellows, as if they were not All made of the same Clay. To speak the
Plain Truth of the Matter, It Is the Little People that support the Great; and
when the Foundation fails, the whole Fabric must either drop into Rubbish, or
otherwise Rest upon the Shoulders of their Superiors.

FAB. LXIV. A Collyer and a Fuller.
A Fuller had a very kind Invitation from a Collyer to come and Live in the
House with him. He gave him a Thousand Thanks for his Civility; but told him
that it would not Stand with his Convenience; for (says he) as fast as I make
any thing Clean, You Will be Smutting it again.

FAB. LXV. A Thrush and a Swallow.
AH my Dear Mother! says the Thrush, Never had any Creature such a Friend as I
have, of this same Swallow. No, says she, nor ever any Mother such a Fool to
her Son as I have, of this same Thrush: To talk of a Friendship betwixt People
that cannot so much as live together in the same Climate and Season. One is for
the Summer, The Other, for Winter; And that which keeps You Alive, Kills your
Companion.

The MORAL of the TWO FABLES above.
It Is a Necessary Rule in Allyances, Matches, Societies, Fraternities,
Friendships, Partnerships, Commerce, and All Manner of Civil Dealings and
Contracts, to have a Strict Regard to the Humor, the Nature, and the
Disposition of Those we have to do withal.

REFLECTION.
THIS is to bid us have a care what Friendships we Contract, and what Company
we keep; for Contrary Humors and Manners will never agree together. There can
be no Thought of Uniting Those that Nature it self has Divided. And this
Caution holds good in all the Business of a Sober Man's Life; as Marriage,
Studies, Pleasures, Society, Commerce, and the like: It Is in some sort, with
Friends (Pardon the Courseness of the Illustration) as it is with Dogs in
Couples. They should be of the same Size, and Humor; and That which Pleases
the One should Please the Other: But if they Draw Several Ways, and if One be
too Strong for The Other, they will be ready to Hang themselves upon Every Gate or
Style they come at. This is the Moral of the Friendship betwixt a Thrush and a
Swallow, that can never Live together.

FAB. LXVI. A Fowler and a Pigeon.
AS a Country Fellow was making a Shoot at a Pigeon, he trod upon a Snake that
bit him by the Leg. The Surprise Startled him, and away flew the Bird.

The MORAL.
We are to Distinguish betwixt the Benefits of Good Will, and those of
Providence: For the Latter are immediately from Heaven, where no Human
Intention Intervenes.

REFLECTION.
THE Mischief that we Meditate to Others, falls commonly upon our Own Heads,
and Ends in a Judgment, as well as a Disappointment. Take it Another Way, and
it may serve to Mind us how Happily People are Diverted Many Times from the
Execution of a Malicious Design, by the Grace and Goodness of a Preventing
Providence. A Pistol's not taking Fire may save the Life of a Good Man; and the
Innocent Pigeon had Died, if the Spiteful Snake had not Broken the Fowler's
Aim: That is to say; Good may be drawn out of Evil, and a Body's Life may be
Saved without having any Obligation to his Preserver.

FAB. LXVII. A Trumpeter taken Prisoner.
UPon the Rout of an Army there was a Trumpeter made a Prisoner, and as the
Soldiers were about to Cut his Throat; Gentlemen (says he) Why should You Kill
a Man that Kills No Body? You shall Die the rather for That, cries one of the
Company, for being so Mean a Rascal, as to set other People together by the
Ears, without Fighting your self.

The MORAL.
He that Provokes and Incites Mischief, is the Doer of it. It Is the Man that
Kills Me, the Bullet is only a Passive Iustrument to serve his End that Directs
it.

REFLECTION.
THIS is to Reprove Those (according to the old Moral) that Stir up Men in
Power to do Public Mischief; which is much Worse than any Man's Doing a
Private One Himself: And only a Safer Way of Committing greater Outrages.

The Trumpeter's Plea, is so Arrant a Shuffle here, that an Incendiary at the
Bar, or in the Pulpit, has as much to say for Himself. He that Countenances,
Encourages, or Abetts a Mischief, Does it. The Seditious Lawyer, or Divine,
Kills No Body with his own Hand, but by a False Gloss perhaps, upon a Law, or a
Text, he may cause Ten Thousand Swords to be Drawn, without Spilling One Drop
of Blood immediately Himself. Shall any Man now, that Wilfully, and
Maliciously, procures the Cutting of whole Armies to Pieces, set up for an
Innocent? As if the Lives that were taken away by his Instigation, were not to
be Charged upon his Account. He that Covers Murder, Oppression, Sacrilege,
Rebellion, with a Cloak of Statute and Scripture, makes God and Government,
Effectually, the Authors of the Wickedness: And Those are the Basest, and Worst
of Bravo's, that Employ Iourneymen-Mercenaries under them to do the Work. What
is This, but to Engage our Bibles, and our Law Books in a Conspiracy against
Themselves? Shall He that gives Fire to the Train, pretend to Wash his Hands of
the Hurt that is done by the Playing of the Mine? Humane Corruptions are as
Catching as Powder; as Easily Enflamed, and the Fire afterward as Hard to be
Quenched. That which a Man Causes to be Done, he Does Himself, and it is all a
case whether he does it by Practice, Precept, or Example. In One Word, He that
Kindles the Passions of the Mobile is Answerable for the Following
Conflagration. When the Men of the Long Robe have once Preached the People to
Tinder, the Least Spark sets them a Fire: so that they have no more to do then
to Inculcate the Doctrine of Disobedience, and so leave the Multitude to chew
upon it. A Trumpeter in the Pulpit is the very Emblem of a Trumpeter in the
Field; and the same Charge holds Good against Both. Only the Spiritual
Trumpeter is the more Pernicious Instrument of the Two; for the Latter serves
only to Rowze the Courage of the Soldies without any Doctrine of Application
upon the Text, whereas the other infuses Malice over and above, and Preaches
Death and Damnation, Both in One, and gives ye the very Chapter and Verse for it,

FAB. LXVIII. A Dog and a Wolf.
THere was a Hagged Carrion of a Wolf, and a Jolly Sort of a Gentile Dog, with
Good Flesh upon his Back, that fell into Company together upon the King's
Highway. The Wolf wonderfully pleased with his Companion, and as Inquisitive
to Learn how he brought himself to That Blessed State of Body. Why, says the
Dog, I keep my Master's House from Thieves, and I have very Good Meat, Drink,
and Lodging for my pains. Now if you will go along with Me, and do as I do, you
may fare as I fare. The Wolf Struck up the Bargain, and so away they Trotted
together: But as they were Jogging on, the Wolf spied a Bare Place about the
Dogs Neck, where the Hair was worn off. Brother (says he) how comes this I
prithee? Oh, That Is Nothing, says the Dog, but the Fretting of my Collar a
little. Nay, says The Other, if there be a Collar in the Case, I know Better
Things than to sell my Liberty for a Crust.

The MORAL.
We are so Dazzel'd with the Glare of a Splendid Appearance, that we can hardly
Discern the Inconveniences that Attend it. It Is a Comfort to have Good Meat
and Drink at Command, and Warm Lodging: But He that sells his Freedom for the
Cramming of his Gutt, has but a Hard Bargain of it.

REFLECTION.
IN This Emblem is set forth the Blessing of Liberty, and the Sordid Meanness
of those Wretches that sacrifice their Freedom to their Lusts, and their
Palates. What Man in his Right Senses, that has wherewithal to Live Free, would
make himself a Slave for Superfluities! The Wolf would have been well enough
Content to have Bartered away a Ragged Coat, and a Raw-Bond'd Carcass, for a
Smooth and a Fat One; but when they came to talk of a Collar once, away Marches
He to His Old Trade in the Woods again, and makes the Better Choice of the Two.

To speak to the First Point, we are liable to be Imposed upon by Outsides and
Appearances, for want of Searching things to the Bottom, and Examining what
Really they are, and what they Only seem to be. This Fiction of the Wolf, is a
Reproof to Eager Appetites, and Overhasty Judgments, that will not give
themselves time to Balance Accounts, and Compute Beforehand, whether they are
to get or Lose by the Bargain. It holds as well against Intemperate
Curiosities, and Rash Wishes, That is to say, against the Folly of the One, and
the Wickedness of the Other; for if we come once to take Evil for Good, our
very Prayers are turned into Sin: But what with a Certain Itch of Prying into,
and Meddling with Other Peoples Matters, and a Natural Levity that puts us upon
Shifting and Changing, we fall Insensibly into a Thousand Inconveniences: and
when it comes to That once, that we find our selves Uneasy at Home, and no
Resting Place in our Own Thoughts, (where Rest is Only to be had) we are even
glad to run away from our Selves, and Hunt abroad for it where it is never to be
found. This is the Common Root of all our Wanderings and Errors. We Spend our
Time, and our Peace, in Pursuit of Things wholly Foreign to our Business, and
which will Certainly Deceive us at last.

Thus it Is, and Thus it must be, so long as we take Every thing by a Wrong
Handle, and only Calculate upon our Own Misfortunes, without any Allowance for
the Comforts that we Enjoy. And so we reckon upon our Neighbors Enjoyments, on
the Other hand, without any Consideration for the hardships that They Endure.
Oh that I had but such a Palace! Says One; Such an Estate; Such a Retinue; This
Glorious Train; That Lovely Woman, etc. Nay the Envious Freak Descends to the
very Point, and Petticoat. Now These Idle Curiosities may be Specious Enough in
the Contemplation; but what if This House, at the Foot of the Account, should
Prove to be Haunted, That Gay Furniture Borrowed; The Other Fine Woman Clapped; The
Curse of Sacrilege cleaving to such an Inheritance, and all the rest of the
Gaudy Fooleries perhaps Unpay'd for? (as these Encumbrances are No New Things
in Nature) Who would not rather take up with the Wolf in the Woods again, then
make such a Clutter in the World upon These Scandalous Conditions.

For the Obviating of All Cases of this Quality, Children should be Early
Instructed, according to their Age and Capacity, in the True Estimate of
Things, by Opposing the Good to the Evil, and the Evil to the Good; and
Compensating, or Qualifying One Thing with Another. What Is Plenty without
Health? What Is Ease without Plenty? And what is Title and Greatness, with
Carking Thoughts, and a Troubled Mind to Attend it? What does That Man Want
that has Enough? Or What Is He the better for a Great deal, that can never be
Satisfied? By This Method of Setting what we Have against What we have Not, the
Equity of Providence will be made Manifest, and to All manner of purposes
Justified; When it shall appear upon the Balance, that Every man has his Share
in the Bounties of Heaven to Mankind.

As to the Freedom here that Aesop is so Tender of, it is to be Understood of
the Freedom of the Mind: A Freedom to Attend the Motions of Right Reason; and a
Freedom, in fine, not to be Parted with for All the Sensual Satisfactions under
the Sun. It is, I say, a Freedom under These Limits; for there is No such Thing
as Absolute Liberty: Neither is it possible that there should be any, without a
Violence to the Order of the Universe, and to the Dictates of Reasonable
Nature: For All men Living are in Some sort or Other, and upon some Penalty or
Other, Subjected to a Superior Power; That is to say, the Laws of Morality are
Above them: But the Case wherein All men are upon the Behavior is not here the
Question. To Wind up the Moral, in short; Liberty is a Jewel, and a Blessing.
The Wolf was well enough pleased here with the State of the Dogs Body, but he
had no fancy to his Collar.

FAB. LXIX. A Farmer and his Dogs.
A Certain Farmer was put to such a Pinch in a Hard Winter for Provisions, that
he was forced to Feed Himself and his Family upon the Main Stock. The Sheep
went First to Pot; the Goats Next; and after Them, the Oxen; and All Little
enough to keep Life and Soul together. The Dogs called a Council upon it. and
Resolved to show their Master a Fair pair of Heels for it, before it came to be
Their Turn; for, (said they) after he has Cut the Throats of our Fellow
Servants, that are so Necessary for his Business, it cannot be Expected that he
will ever Spare us.

The MORAL*
There Is No Contending with Necessity, and we should be very Tender how we
Censure Those that Submit to it. It Is One thing to be at Liberty to do what we
Would do, and Another Thing to be Tied up to do what we Must.

REFLECTION.
IT IS a Common Thing for a Master to Sacrifice a Servant to his Own Ease, and
Interest; but there is No Meddling with Men of That Inhospitable Humor, where
the Domestiques, how Faithful soever, can never be Secure.

This is according to the Old Moral; but not without some Force (in My Opinion
at least) to the Natural Biass of the Fable. The Farmer has no Liberty of
Choice before him, but either to do what he does, or to Perish: And in so
Doing, (with all respect to the Rules of Honesty) he does but his Duty; without
any way Incurring the Character of an Ill Natured Man, or a Cruel Master. But
there may be also Another Doctrine Raised from it; which is, That in Cases of
Extreme Difficulty, the Laws of Convenience, and Ordinary Practice must give
place to the Laws of Necessity. This was the Naked Truth of the Farmers Case.

FAB. LXX. A Camel at First Sight.
UPon the First Sight of a Camel, All people ran away from't, in Amazement at
so Monstrous a Bulk. Upon the Second Sight, finding that it did them No Hurt,
they took Heart upon it, went up to it, and Viewed it. But when they came, upon
Further Experience, to take notice, how Stupid a Beast it was, they Tied it up,
Bridled it, Loaded it with Packs and Burdens; Set Boys upon the Back on it, and
Treated it with the Last Degree of Contempt.

FAB. LXXI. A Fox and a Lion.
A Fox had the hap to fall into the Walk of a Lion; (the First of the Kind that
ever he saw) and he was ready to Drop down at the very sight of him. He came a
While after, to see Another, and was Frighted still; but Nothing to What he was
Before. It was his Chance, after This, to Meet a Third Lion; and he had the
Courage, Then, to Accost him, and to make a kind of an Acquaintance with him.

The MORAL of the TWO FABLES above.
Novelty Surprises us, and we have Naturally a Horror for Uncouth Misshapen
Monsters; but it is Our Ignorance that Staggers us, for upon Custom and
Experience, All These Buggs grow Familiar, and Easy to us.

REFLECTION.
THINGS that at first seem Terrible, become Easy to us when we are Wonted to
them; says the Old Moral; which holds, I confess, in the Case of the Camel, but
not in That of the Lion.

With leave of the Moralist, the Illustration does not come up to the Force and
Intent of the Two Last Fables: Neither, in truth, is the very Design of them
according to the True Reason of the Matter in Question. Things that seem
Terrible, and are Not so, become not only Familiar, but Ridiculous to us, when
we find that our Fears were Vain and Idle; as in the case of the Camel: But
things on the contrary, that only Seem Terrible, but are found upon Experience
to be more Dangerous then we took them for: (as in the Strength, the
Nimbleness, the Fierceness, and the Appetite of a Lion.) These are Things, I
say, that the Better we Know them, the More we Dread them: So that though we
have Apprehensions, as well where there is No Peril, as where there Is: Yet
Time teaches us to Distinguish the One from the Other. The Allusion would much
better have held in the case of a Battle, where the Soldier grows Every day
less apprehensive of the Hazard, by seeing so many People Escape; and by
Computing upon the Disproportion of Those that Outlive it, to Those that Fall
in it. We may however Learn from hence, that people may be Frighted as well
Without Reason as With it. Now, in Propriety of Speaking, and in a Right
Understanding of the Thing too, People were not so much Frighted, as they were
Surpised at the Bigness, and Uncouth Deformity of the Camel: But I could Wish,
the Fox had been More and More afraid of the Lion, the Oftener he Saw him; and
the Doctrine would then have been to Govern our Passions by the Truth and
Reason of Things, not by Appearances; but it holds however, that Custom goes a
Great Way in making Matters Indifferent to us. It Is much the same Case too,
betwixt the People, and Bugg-Laws, and Acts of State, that it is here betwixt
the Fox and the Lion. Men look, upon the First Opening of a Public Fast, as
if Heaven and Earth were going together; Not a Shop Open; The Streets Quiet,
and so Dismal a Countenance Every where, as if it were to Rain Fire and
Brimstone the Next Moment. The Second Day is a Little Uneasy too, but not half
so Frightful as the Former: and so in Two or Three days more, the Awe goes
quite off, and the People come to their Wits, and fall to their Trade again,
without any further Heed to the Matter.

FAB. LXXII. An Eagle and a Fox.
THere was a Bargain struck up betwixt an Eagle and a Fox, to be Wonderful Good
Neighbors and Friends. The One Took-up in a Thicket of Brushwood, and the
Other Timber'd upon a Tree hard by. The Eagle, One Day When the Fox was abroad
a Forraging, fell into his Quarters and carried away a Whole Litter of Cubbs at
a Swoop. The Fox came time enough back to see the Eagle upon Wing, with her
Prey in the Foot, and to send many a Heavy Curse after her; but there was No
overtaking her: It happened in a very Short time after This, upon the
Sacrificing of a Goat, that the same Eagle made a Stoop at a piece of Flesh
upon the Altar, and she took it away to her Young: But Some Live Coals it
seems, that Stuck to it, set the Nest a fire. The Birds were not as yet Fledge
enough to Shift for Themselves, but upon Sprawling and Struggling to get Clear
of the Flame, down they Tumbled, half Roasted into the very Mouth of the Fox,
that stood Gaping under the Tree to see the End on it: So that the Fox had the
satisfaction at last, of Devouring the Children of her Enemy in the very Sight
of the Damm.

The MORAL.
God Reserves to Himself the Punishment of Faithless, and Oppressing
Governors, and the Vindication of his Own Worship and Altars.

REFLECTION:
THIS is to give Great Men to Understand, that No Power upon Earth can Protect
them in the Exercise of Tyranny and Injustice; but that Sooner, or Later,
Vengeance will Overtake Oppressors. It does likewise Condemn Treachery, and
breach of Faith, even toward the most Perfidious*

The Morality of This Fiction looks several Ways. Here Is first a League betwixt
an Eagle and a Fox; which would be a most Incongruous Alliance, if it were not
in the case of That Princely Birds Departure from the Dignity of her Character,
and from the Obligation of Royal Justice: so that Aesop has aptly enough
Matched a Faith-Breaking Prince, with a Per^idious Subject, and Fancied a
Knavish Favorite, as the Fittest Minister for such a Governor. In the Eagles
Destroying the Foxes Cubbs, there is Power Exercised with Oppression, and the
Curses of the Fox that Pursued the Oppressor, were not sent in Vain neither, as
appears by the Sequel* We are likewise to take Notice that Justice is Sacred,
and that No Provocation, either of Insolent Language, or Behavior, can Warrant
the Violation of it.

And it is further Suggested to us, that when People are in a Train of
Wickedness, One Sin Treads upon the Heel of Another. The Eagle begins with an
Invasion upon the Rights of Hospitality, and Common Faith; and at the Next Step
Advances to Sacrilege, in Robbing the Altar. And what follows upon it now, but
a Divine Judgment, that sets fire to her Nest, and Avenges the Cause of the
very Fox, though One of the Falsest of Creatures! From hence we are to Gather
These Two Doctrines for our Instruction. First, That the Misdemeanors of
Temporal Sovereign Powers are subjected only to the Animadversion of the
supreme Lord of the Universe. And secondly, That in the Case of Tyranny it
self, it is not for Private Men to pretend to any Other Appeal.

FAB. LXXIII. A Husbandman and a Stork.
A Poor Innocent Stork had the Ill Hap to be taken in a Net that was laid for
Geese and Cranes. The Storks Plea for her self was Simplicity, and Piety: The
Love she bore to Mankind, and the Service she did in Picking up of Venomous
Creatures. This is all True, says the Husbandman; But They that Keep Ill
Company, if they be Caught with Ill Company, must Expect to suffer with Ill
Company.

The MORAL.
It Is as much as a man's Life, Fortune, and Reputation, are Worth, to keep Good
Company (over and above the Contagion of Lewd Examples) for as Birds of a
Feather will Flock together, so if the Good and the Bad be taken together, they
must Expect to go the Way of All Flesh together.

REFLECTION.
THIS is to bid men have a care What Company they keep; for when the Good and
Bad are Taken together, they must Go together. Not but that a man may lie under
some Obligation of Duty and Respect, to Visit, Eat and Correspond with Many
People that he does not Like. And This may be well enough Done too; provided it
be out of Decency, Discretion, or Good Manners, rather then upon Choice and
Inclination. We cannot Honestly let a Civil Enemy into a Town that is Besieged,
or hold any sort of Intelligence with him (though but in a Bare Curiosity)
about the Affairs of the Garrison. Let a man Consider now, how much more,
Dangerous, and Unwarrantable it is to take an Enemy into Our Souls, then into
our Forts. With all Honor yet to a Brave Adversary, apart from his Cause.

It Is the Fortune of many a Good Man to fall into Bad Company, and to be Undone
by it, and yet no way Guilty all this while, of the Iniquity* of his Companions.
The Letter of the Law Sweeps All in such a Case, without Distinction of
Persons: To say Nothing of the Shame and Dishonor of being taken up with
Rogues and Felons; over and above the Lash of Public Justice, and the
Contagion of a Lewd Conversation. Show me the Company (says the Adage) and I Will
tell ye the Man. What would a body think now of a Prime Minister that should
Conjobble Matters of State with Tumblers and Buffoons; Conferr Politiques with
Tinkers and Carr-men? would not any man Judge their Souls to be of the same
Standard and Allay? And that there were no more betwixt them then Cross or
Pile, which should be the Lord, and which the Scoundrel? Or, according to the
Fable, which the Stork and which the Goose? For it is not the Purple, but the
Virtue that makes a man of Honor; truly so called.

FAB. LXXIV. A Boy, and False Alarums.
A Shepherd Boy had gotten a Roguy Trick of crying [a Wolf, a Wolfe] when
there was No such Matter, and Fooling the Country People with False Alarums. He
had been at This Sport so many times in Jest, that they would not Believe him
at last when he was in Earnest: And so the Wolves Brake in upon the Flock, and
Worried the Sheep at Pleasure.

The MORAL.
He must be a very Wise Man that knows the True Bounds, and Measures of
Fooling, with a respect to Time, Place, Matters, Persons, etc. But Religion,
Business and Cases of Consequence must be Excepted out of That sort of Liberty.

REFLECTION.
A Common Liar (says the Old Moral) shall not be Believed, even when he speaks
True: But there is a Great deal more in it, of which hereafter.

There Is not One Man of a Thousand that Understands the Just, the Sa^e,
Warrantable, Decent, and Precise Limits of that which we call Bantering, or
Fooling: But it is either too Course, too Rude, too Childish, too Bitter, too
Much on it, too Pedantique; and in fine, out of Measure, or out of Season. Now
the Least Error or Mistake in the Manage of This Humor, lays People Open to
Great Censure, and Reproach. It is not Every man's Talent to know When and How
to Cast out a Pleasant Word, with such a Regard to Modesty and Respect, as not
to Transgress the True, and Fair Allowances of Wit, Good Nature, and Good
Breeding. The Skill and Faculty of Governing This Freedom within the Terms of
Sobriety and Discretion, goes a Great Way in the Character of an Agreeable
Conversation; for That which we call Raillery, in This Sense, is the very Sauce
of Civil Entertainment: And without some such Tincture of Urbanity, even in
Matters the most Serious, the Good Humor Flattens, for want of Refreshment and
Relief: But there is a Medium yet betwixt All-Fool, and All-Philosopher. I mean,
A Proper and a Discreet Mixture, that in some sort Partakes of Both, and
renders Wisdom it self the more Grateful, and Effectual for it. The Gravity, in
short, of the One, is Enlivened with the Spirit and Quickness of the Other; and
the Gayety of a Diverting Word serves as a Vehicle to Convey the Force of the
Intent, and Meaning of it: But the Main Drift at last of This Fable, is to show
us the Dangerous Consequences of an Improper, and an Unseasonable Fooling: With
All Respect however to the Ornament and Advantage of a Facetious Freedom of
Discourse, within the Compass of Sobriety and Honor. To Conclude; The
Shepherds Boy went too far upon a Topique that he did not Understand.

FAB. LXXV. An Eagle and a Daw.
AN Eagle made a Stoop at a Lamb; Trussed it, and took it Cleverly away with
her. A Mimical Daw, that saw This Exploit, would needs try the same Experiment
upon a Ram: But his Claws were so Shackled in the Fleece with Lugging to get
him up, that the Shepherd came in, and Caught him, before he could Clear
Himself; He Clipped his Wings, and carried him Home to his Children to Play
withal. They came Gaping about him, and asked their Father what Strange Bird
that Was? Why, says he, He Will tell you Himself that he is an Eagle; but if you will
take My Word for it; I know him to be a Daw.

The MORAL.
It Is a High Degree of Vanity and Folly, for men to take More upon them then
they are able to go thorough withal; And the End of Those Undertakings is only
Mockery and Disappointment in the Conclusion.

REFLECTION.
IT IS Vain and Dangerous to Enter into Competitions with our Superiors, in What
Kind soever, whether it be in Arms, Letters, Expense, Strength of Body, Arts
and Sciences, or the like. It Is Impossible for any man, in fine, to take a True
Measure of Another, without an Exact Knowledge and a True Judgment of Himself.
Nay the Attempt of any thing above our Force, with Vanity, and Presumption,
most certainly ends in a Miscarriage that makes the Pretender Ridiculous. The
Out-doing of a Great Man in his Own Way, Savours in some degree of Ill Manners,
as it is upon the Main, a High Point of Indiscretion. One man takes it for an
Affront to be Outwitted; Another to be Out-Fool'd, as Nero could not Endure to
be Out-Fiddled; But in short, be the Matter never so Great, or never so
Trivial, it is the same Case as to the Envy of the Competition.

FAB. LXXVI. A Dog in a Manger.
A Churlish Envious Curr was gotten into a Manger, and there lay Growling and
Snarling to keep the Horses from their Provender. The Dog Eat None himself, and
yet rather Ventured the Starving his Own Carcass then he would suffer any thing
else to be the Better for it.

The MORAL.
Envy pretends to No Other Happiness then what it derives from the Misery of
Other People, and will rather Eat Nothing it self then not Starve Those that
Would.

REFLECTION.
WE have but too many Men in the World of This Dogs Humor; that will rather
Punish Themselves, then not be Troublesome and Vexatious to Others. There Is an
Envy of Good Things too as well as of Good Men; but This Fable is so well known
that it is Moralliz'd in a Common Proverb.

If some men might have their Wills the very Sun in the Firmament should
withdraw his Light, and they would submit to Live in Perpetual Darkness
Themselves, upon Condition that the rest of the World might do so for Company.
Whatsoever their Neighbor Gets They Lose, and the very Bread that One Eats
makes The Other Meager: which is the Genuine Moral of the Fable. There is in this
Malevolence, somewhat of the Punishment, as well as of the Spite, of the
Damned: They take delight in Other Peoples Miseries, and at the same Time are
their Own Tormentors. This Diabolical Envy is Detestable even in Private
Persons; but whenever the Governing Part of a Nation comes to be Tainted with
it, there is Nothing so Sacred that a Corrupt Supercilious Ill Natured Minister
will not sacrifice to This Execrable Passion. No Man should Eat, Live, or
Breath Common Air if He could Hinder it. It Is the Business of his Life, and the
Delight of his Soul, to Blast all sorts of Honest Men, and not only to Lessen
their Characters, and their Services, but to Range them in the Number of
Public Enemies: And he had Twenty times rather see the Government Sink, then
have it thought that any hand but his Own should have a Part of the Honor of
Saving it. Now He that Betrays his Master for Envy, will never fail of doing it
for Money: For the Gratifying of This Cankered Malignity is but Another way of
selling him; Only the Spite is Antecedent and Subservient to the Corruption:
But This Court-Envy is not Altogether the Envy of the Dog in the Fable. For
there is a Mixture of Avarice and Interest in the Former, whereas the Other is a
Spiteful Malignity purely for Mischief-sake. The Dog will rather Starve
himself then the Ox shall Eat; but the Courtier will be sure to Look to One
whoever else goes to the Devil.

FAB. LXXVII. A Sheep and a Crow.
THere was a Crow sat Chattering upon the Back of a Sheep; Well! Sirrah says
the Sheep, You durst not ha 'done This to a Dog. Why I know that says the Crow
as well as You can tell me, for I have the Wit to Consider Whom I have to do
withal. I can be as Quiet as any body with Those that are Quarrelsome, and I
can be as Troublesome as Another too, when I Meet with Those that will Take it.

The MORAL.
It Is the Nature and the Practice of Drolls and Buffoons, to be Insolent toward
Those that will bear it, and as Slavish to Others that are more then their
Match.

REFLECTION.
IT IS No New Thing for an Innocent Simplicity to be made the Sport of Bantering
Drolls, and Buffoons. This is to tell Modest and Well-Meaning Men what they are
to Expect in this World, and what they are to Trust to where there is not a
Power sufficient to Repel Force by Force: And it serves further to keep This
Check upon the Insolent, that there are Others as much too Hard for Them, as
They are for Those that they Oppress. This Crow is much of the Humor of the
Mobile. They are Tongue-Valiant it is True, and as Bold as Hercules where they
know there is No Danger, but throw a Volly of Shot among them, and they have not
the Courage of so many Hares. And what is All This Now, but according to the
Guise of the World, God Threatens Kings, (as Dr. Done has it) Kings Lords, as
Lords do Us. He that is a Tyrant over One Man is a Slave to Another.

FAB. LXXVIII. A Camel Praying for Horns.
IT stuck filthily in the Camel's Stomach, that Bulls, Stags, Lions, Bears, and
the like, should be Armed with Horns, Teeth, and Claws, and that a Creature of
his Size should be left Naked and Defenseless. Upon This Thought he fell down
upon his Marybones, and begged of Jupiter to give him a pair of Horns, but the
Request was so Ridiculous, that Jupiter, instead of Horning him, Ordered him to
be Cropped, and so Punished him with the loss of his Ears which Nature had
Allowed him, for being so Unreasonable as to Ask for Horns, that Providence
never intended him.

FAB. LXXIX. A Fox and a Hare to Jupiter.
A Fox and a Hare Presented a Petition to Jupiter. The Fox prayed for the Hares
Swiftness of Foot, and the Hare for the Fox's Craft, and Wilyness of Address.
Jupiter told them, that since every Creature had some Advantage or Other
Peculiar to it self, it would not stand with Divine Justice, that had provided
so well for Every One in Particular, to Conferr All upon any One.

FAB. LXXX. A Peacock to Juno.
THE Peacock, they say, laid it Extremely to Heart, that being Juno's
Darling-Bird, he had not the Nightingale's Voice superadded to the Beauty of
his own Plumes. Upon This Subject he Petitioned his Patroness, who gave him for
Answer, that Providence had Assigned Every Bird its Proportion, and so bad him
Content himself with his Lot.

The MORAL of the Three FABLES above.
The Bounties of Heaven are in such manner Distributed, that Every Living
Creature has its Share; beside, that to Desire Things against Nature, is
Effectually to Blame the very Author of Nature it self.

REFLECTION.
IN These Three Fables, is set forth the Vanity of Unnatural Wishes, and
Foolish Prayers; which are not only to be Rejected, but they deserve also to be
Punished. Providence has made an Equal Distribution of Natural Gifts, whereof
each Creature severally has a share; and it is not for This or That Particular
to pretend to All: So that Considering the Equality of the Division, No
Creature has Cause, either to Boast, or to Complain. We are never Content with
the Bounty of Providence. One would have a Voice; The Other Gay Clothes; and
while Every Man would have All, we Charge Providence with Injustice for not
giving to Every Man Alike. Socrates was in the Right in Saying, That in a Case
a Man were to go where he should have the Choice before him, of All the Ill
Things and All the Good Things in Nature, he would come home again the same Man
that he went out.

It is to be Noted, upon the Distribution of the Matter of These Three Fables
that the Camel prays for Weapons Offensive, and Defensive, either for the
Encount'ring of Dangers, or the Repelling of them. The Fox and the Hare, for
the Means of Avoiding them. And the Peacock for a Voice, answerable to his
Beauty. And All their Prayers are to No Purpose, but to the Reproach of the
Petitioners, and to the Confusion of Vain Desires. What is All This but an
Appeal from Heaven to Heaven it self; and Petitioning Providenee against
Providence, in a Recourse from One Providence to Another? The Determinations
and Appointments of Heaven are no more to be Disputed and Controlled, then they
are to be made Better, and Improved; And we must not Presume to Judge of the
Goodness and Justice of Heaven, by the Frailties and Corruptions of Flesh and
Blood. We were not of Council with the Almighty, either in the Making, or in
the Regulating of the World, and we have no more Right to Advise him in the
Governing of it. The Power, in fine, that Rules in the Nature of Things is no
other then a Divine Influence.

Why should not the Nightingale Envy the Peacock's Train as well as the Peacock
Envy the Nightingale's Note? And why should not All the Works of the Creation
Expostulate at the same Rate, and upon the same Grounds? Why has not Man the
Wings of an Eagle to carry him from Danger, or to satisfy his Curiosity what
the World's a doing? Why has he not the Sagacity of a Dog, the Paw of a Lion;
The Teeth of a Leopard; The Heels of a Courser, and the like? And have not
Brute Animals the same Equity of Complaint on the Other Hand, for want of the
Faculties and Advantages, Intellectual, and Moral of Mankind? So that here is a
Civil War that runs thorough All the Parts of the Universe, where Nothing is
pleased with it is Own Lot; And no Remedy at last; but by New Moulding the World
over again. This Inordinate Appetite has been the Overthrow of many a Kingdom,
Family and Commonwealth.

To Ask Impossibilities, in fine, is Ridiculous, and to Ask Things Unnatural is
Impious; for to take upon us to Blame, or Mend the Works of Providence, is to
suppose the Divine Wisdom liable to Miscarriages and Mistakes. These Mutterings
are Foolish also, even to the Degree of Madness it self; for there is no Thought
or Possibility of Relief in the Case. Such as we Are God has made Us: our Post
and our Station is appointed us, and the Decree is not to be Reversed.

FAB. LXXXI. An Old Weazle and Mice.
AN Old Weazle that was now almost past Mousing, tried what she could do by her
Wits, when she found she could live no longer upon the Square, and so Conveys
her self into a Meal-Tub for the Mice to come to Her, since she could not go to
Them. They came thick and threefold for a time, as she expected they should,
till at last, One Experienced Stager that had Baffled Twenty Traps and Tricks
Before, Discovered the Plot, and quite Spoiled the Jest.

The MORAL.
The Want of Force, Strength, and Other Abilities to Compass our Ends must be
Supplied by Industry and Invention.

REFLECTION.
KNAVES live as Naturally upon Fools, as Spiders do upon Flies, and the Want of
Downright Force must be suppy'd by Art. But Time that Discovers the Truth of
Things, lays open Frauds too and Double Dealings; and after that Discovery,
there is No Passing the same Trick upon the Mice and Rats here over again. A
Body would think now that Reasonable Creatures should at least have the Wit of
Vermin, and not run their Necks over and over into the same Noose: But in
Despite of Claps and Surfeits, Men we see will be Whoring and Fuddling-on
still. And the same Bait of Liberty and Property will serve for the Common
People in saecula saeculorum, Even after they have been Choked, Beggered, and
Poisoned with it five Hundred times before.

FAB. LXXXII. An Old Tree Transplanted.
A Certain Farmer had One Choice Apple Tree in his Orchard that he Valued above
all the rest, and he made his Landlord Every Year a Present of the Fruit on it.
He liked the Apples so very well, that Nothing would serve Him but
Transplanting the Tree into his Own Grounds. It Witherd presently upon the
Removal, and so there was an end of both Fruit and Tree together. The News was
no sooner brought to the Landlord, but he brake out into This Reflection upon
it: This comes, says he, of Transplanting an Old Tree, to Gratify an
Extravagant Appetite: Whereas if I could have Contented my self with the Fruit,
and left my Tenant the Tree still, All had been Well.

The MORAL.
Nature has her Certain Methods and Seasons for the Doing of Every Thing, and
there must be no Trying of Experiments to put her out of her Course.

REFLECTION.
THERE IS No forcing Nature against her Biass, or Inverting the Methods of
Providence. Irregular Desires and Unreasonable Undertakings must expect to meet
with Disappointments. There Is a Proper Time for All Things, and Nothing
succeeds well, but what is done in Season. And This is not the Only Case
neither, where an Extravagant Appetite; or Humor makes People forget the
Methods of Decency and Reason. As in Unequal Matches for the Purpose: For
Marrying is but a kind of Transplanting, and an Old Fellow with a Young Wench,
may very well pass for a Counterpart of This Fable.

FAB. LXXXIII. A Fox and a Goat.
A Fox and a Goat went down by Consent into a Well to Drink, and when they had
Quenched their Thirst, the Goat fell to Hunting up and down which way to get
back again. Oh! says Reynard, Never Trouble your Head how to get back, but
leave That to Me. Do but You Raise your self upon your Hinder Legs with your
Fore-Feet Close to the Wall, and then stretch out your Head: I can Easily Whip
up to your Horns, and so out of the Well, and Draw you after me. The Goat puts
himself in Posture immediately as he was directed, gives the Fox a Lift, and so
Out he Springs; but Reynard's Business was now only to make Sport with his
Companion instead of Helping him. Some Hard Words the Goat gave him, but the
Fox puts off all with a Jest. If you had but half so much Brains as you have
Beard, says he, you would have bethought your self how to get up again before
you went down.

The MORAL.
A Wise Man will Debate Every Thing Pro and Con before he comes to Fix upon any
Resolution. He leaves Nothing to Chance more than Needs must. There must be No
Bantering out of Season.

REFLECTION.
IT is Wisdom to Consider the End of Things before we Embarque, and to Forecast
Consequences. It is also to be Expected that Men in Distress will look to
themselves in the First Place, and leave their Companions to Shift as well as
they can. When a Knave, and an Honest Man happen to be Embarked together in
the same Common Interest, the Sharper will be sure, if ever it comes to a
Pinch, to shift for Himself; and leave The Other in the Lurch. It is the way of
the World for Men to Abandon their Benefactors, and to make sport with Those
that Raised them. This was the Trick, that the Fox served the Goat here in the
Well; to show us that He that Helps Another out at a Plunge, runs the Risque of
being left in the Mire himself. No Matter for the Morality of the Thing, so
long as it is the Fashion; And that He that Advances himself upon the Ruin of
Another gets the Reputation of a Man of Art, and Address. The Facility, in
fine, and the Simplicity of the Goat, shows us what an Honest Man is to Trust
to that keeps a Knave company.

We find in This Fox, the Roguery, the Invention, and the Wilyness of the
Crafty People we meet with Abroad, and a Lively Image of the Faith, Friendship,
Good Nature, and Justice that we are to Expect from them. We cannot therefore
keep too strict an Eye upon the Life and Conversation of Those we have to do
withal. If they be Men of Fraud, they will never stick at bringing their Friends
and Companions into Dangers, Losses, and Inconveniences; Scour off themselves,
and leave Those that Trust them to pay the Reckoning. But, in a Word, This
Application extends to Men of Trick and Design of All Sorts; let it be in
Pleasure, Fortune, Pride, Envy, Vainglory, Trade, Law, Marriages, Quarrels,
Travels, Ambition, etc. Wherefore it Behooves us to Look before we Leap, and in
Case of the Worst that can befall us, to secure an After-Game. The Want of this
Foresight was the Goats Ruin.

FAB. LXXXIV. Cocks and a Partridge.
A Cock-Master bought a Partridge, and turned it among his Fighting Cocks, for
them to Feed together. The Cocks beat the Partridge away from their Meat, which
she laid the more to Heart, because it looked like an Aversion to her purely
as a Stranger. But the Partridge finding These very Cocks afterward, Cutting
one Another to pieces, she comforted her self with This Thought, that she had
no Reason to expect they should be Kinder to Her, than they were to One Another.

The MORAL.
It Is No Wonder to find Those People Troublesome to Strangers, that Cannot
Agree among Themselves. They Quarrel for the Love of Quarrelling; and provided
the Peace be broken, No matter upon What Ground, or with Whom.

REFLECTION.
THERE IS No Peace to be Expected among those that are Naturally Fierce and
Quarrelsome. But we are to Distinguish however, betwixt Injuries of Malice, and
of Evil Nature, as we do betwixt Violences in Hot Blood, and Those of
Deliberate Spite and Intention; which we find in the Common Cases of
Manslaughter, and Murder. The Doctrine may be briefly This, that so far as
Possible, we are to Avoid Ill Company: but where we are forced upon it, there is
No Remedy but Patience. The Cocks here Did but according to their Kind; And it
is the Same Thing with Wicked Men too, (as Birds of the same Feather) to be
Troublesome to Other People as well as to One Another.

FAB. LXXXV. A Bragging Traveller.
A Vain Fellow that had been abroad in the World, would still be Tiring All
Peoples Ears at his Return, with Stories of his Wonderful Actions and
Adventures in his Travels; and particularly, he told of a Leap he took at
Rhodes, that No Body there could come within Six Foot on it. Now This (says he)
I am able to Prove by several Witnesses upon the Place. If This be True (says
one of the Company) there is No Need of going to Rhodes for Witnesses: Do but
You fancy this to be Rhodes, and then show us the Leap.

The MORAL
Travelers have a kind of Privilege to Romance it; and to Tell Stories at
large. And for Those that Doubt the Truth of the Matter, they had even better
pass it over than go to Disprove it.

REFLECTION.
IT IS Foolish to Appeal to Witnesses for the Proof of any thing, when it is
not a Pin Matter, whether the Fact in Question be True or False; and so it is
also to talk of Proofs that are not within Call: But Vain Boasters are
Naturally Impertinent; for they Talk at Random, without any Regard to Truth and
Judgment. There may be a Double Use made of this Fable: First, as a Dissuasive
to Those that spend their Time in Idle Insipid Company. Secondly, As a Caution
to Those that are Tainted with this Levity, not to make Themselves Ridiculous
any longer. Nature has Written Fool upon the Tip of That Man's Tongue that will
always be telling Stories with an [ I did This,] and [ I said That.]
Travelers, they say, may lie by Authority; and yet our Travelers Privilege
here was not sufficient to Protect him in his Vanity from making Sport to the
Company.

FAB. LXXXVI. An Impostor to the Oracle.
THere was a certain Bantering Droll that took a Journey to Delphos, a purpose
to try if he could put a Trick upon Apollo. He carried a Sparrow in his Hand
under his Coat, and told the God, I have somewhat in my Hand, says he, Is it
Dead or Living? If the Oracle should say 'twas Dead, he could show it Alive; If
Living, 'twas but squeezing it, and then 'twas Dead. Now He that saw the Malice
of his Heart gave him this Answer: It shall even be which of the Two you
please; for it is in Your Choice to have it either the One or the Other.

The MORAL.
Presumption leads People to Infidelity in a Trice, and so by Insensible
Degrees to Atheism: for when Men have once cast off a Reverence for Religion,
they are come within One Step of Laughing at it.

REFLECTION.
THIS Points at the Folly and Wickedness of Those Men that think to play Fast
and Loose with God Almighty, who sees the very Thoughts of our Hearts. This way
of Fooling in Holy Things is much a Bolder sort of Impiety, then it is commonly
Taken for. He that pretends to Doubt of an All-knowing Power, has as much Right
to Doubt of an Allmighty Power too, and the bringing of One Attribute in
Question, Opens the Way to a Diffidence of all the Rest. It would prevent a
great Deal of Wickedness in the World, if Men would but Live and Act in
Religious Matters, so as to Own, and to Recognize the Force, and Awe of a Deity
in their Practices, as well as in their Words: But when they come to Querying
and Riddling upon it, with an [ If it be so and so;] The Scandal of the
Supposition is not to be Borne; for such a way of Seeming to Affirm a Thing, is
but one Remove from a Flat Denial of it. Such was the Impostors Question here
to the Oracle: which Implies both the Doubt of a Divine Omniscience, and a
Curiosity to Discover the Truth of the Matter, with a Banter at the End on it;
and so makes it a consummated Wickedness.

FAB. LXXXVII. A Woman and a Fat Hen.
A Good Woman had a Hen that laid her Every Day an Egg. Now she fancied to her
self, that upon a Larger Allowance of Corn, This Hen might be brought in time
to lay twice a day. She Tried the Experiment; but the Hen grew Fat upon it, and
gave quite over Laying.

The MORAL.
He that has a Great Deal already, and would have More, will never think he has
enough'till he has All; and That Is Impossible: wherefore we should set Bounds
to our Desires, and Content our Selves when we are Well, for fear of Losing
what we had.

REFLECTION.
HERE IS a Figure of the Folly, and the Mischief of Vain Desires, and an
Immoderate Love of Riches. Covetousness is enough to make the Master of the
World as Poor as He that has just Nothing; for a Man may be brought to a Morsel
of Bread, by Griping, as well as by Profusion. It Is a Madness for a Body that
has enough already, to Hazard All for the Getting of More, and then upon the
Miscarriage to leave himself Nothing. This was the Woman's Case and Fault here.
In Few Words, there is a Just Medium betwixt Eating too much, and too Little;
and this Dame had Undoubtedly Hit upon it, when the Matter was so Ordered, that
the Hen brought her Every Day an Egg. But when she came to Enlarge the Hens
Allowance for her own Profit, upon an Opinion that more Corn would Produce more
Eggs, her Avarice Misled her into a Disappointment, which was both a Judgment
upon the Sin in the Loss of what she had before, and an Error in the very Point
of Manage, and Good Huswiv'ry; for Repletion Obstructs the most Necessary
Offices of Nature,

FAB. LXXXVIII. A Man Bit by a Dog.
ONE that was Bitten by a Dog, was Advised, as the Best Remedy in the World, to
Dip a Piece of Bread in the Blood of the Wound, and give it the Dog to Eat.
[Pray hold Your Hand a little (says the Man) unless you have a mind to Draw All
the Dogs in the Town upon me; For That will Certainly be the End on it, when
they shall find themselves Rewarded instead of Punished.

The MORAL.
Good Nature is a Great Misfortune, where it is not Managed with Prudence.
Christian Charity, it is true, bids us return Good for Evil; but it does not
Oblige us yet to Reward where we should Punish.

REFLECTION.
THIS is to Enform us, that Wicked and Ill-natured Men are not to be Obliged by
Kindnesses, Especially when they find they may be the better for Insolence; for
at That Rate, he that Rewards Past Affronts, Draws On, and Encourages New Ones.
There are Churlish Currs in the Moral as well as in the Fable, and we are here
taught how to Behave our selves upon the Biting of All Manner of Dogs. Under
the Rule and Correction of This Allegory, we may reckon Calumny, Slander, and
Detraction in any Form or Figure whatsoever, and all Manner of Affronts and
Indignities upon our Good Names, or our Persons. There may be Place in All
These Cases for a Generous Charity to Forgive Offenses, even of the Highest
Ingratitude and Malice; But it is not Advisable to Reward where Men have the
Tenderness not to Punish. This way of Proceeding is Dangerous in All the
Affairs Public, as well as Private, of Humane Life; for it is a Temptation to
Villainy, when People. when a Man fares the Better for Evil Doing. Ill Nature,
in fine, is not to be Cured with a Sop; but on the contrary, Quarrelsome Men,
as well as Quarrelsome Currs are worse for fair Usage.

FAB. LXXXIX. A Hunted Bever.
THE Bever is a kind of an Amphibious Creature, but he lives Mostly in the
Water. His Stones, they say, are Med'cinal; and it is principally for Their
Sake he knows, that People seek his Life; and therefore when he finds himself
Hard Pinched, he Bites 'em off, and by leaving Them to his Pursuers, he Saves
Himself.

The MORAL.
When a greater Interest is at Stake, it is a Warrantable Point of Honor and
Discretion, to compound the Hazard, by parting with the Less; provided, that
while we Quit the One, we may save the Other.

REFLECTION.
WE find This Doctrine and Practice to be Verified in State-Chaces, as as well
as in Those of the Woods; That is to say, where it is made a Crime to be Rich,
and where Men are forced to lay Violent Hands on Themselves, to be Safe and
Quiet; and with the Bever here, to compound with their Nutmegs to save their
Lives.

FAB. XC. A Thunny and a Dolphin.
A Thunny gave Chase to a Dolphin; and when he was just ready to seize him, the
Thunny struck before he was aware, and the Dolphin, in the Eagerness of his
Pursuit, ran himself a ground with him. They were Both Lost; but the Thunny
kept his Eye still upon the Dolphin, and Observing him when he was Just at Last
Gasp: Well, says he, the Thought of Death is now Easy to me, so long as I see
my Enemy go for Company.

FAB. XCI. Two Enemies at Sea.
THere were Two Enemies at Sea in the same Vessel, the One at the Ships Head,
the Other at the Stern. It Blew a Dreadful Storm, and when the Vessel was just
ready to be swallowed up, One of 'em Asked the Master, which Part of the ship
would be First under Water; so he told him the The Other End would Sink first.
Why then, says he, I shall have the Comfort of seeing my Enemy go before me.

The MORAL of the TWO FABLES above.
It Is a Wretched Satisfaction, that a Revengeful Man takes, even in the Losing
of his Own Life, provided that his Enemy may go for Company.

REFLECTION.
THERE is some Comfort in Company, even in a State of Adversity. Society is so
Necessary and Agreeable to Mankind in All Cases, that Death is Certainly the
More Uneasy for a Man's going alone into Another World: But the Consolation
Pointed at in This Fable, is That which an Envious Man takes in the Ruin of
his Enemy. There is a Memorable Instance to This Purpose, of a Gentleman that
had an Estate for Lives, and Two of his Tenants in the Lease: One of them dies,
and the Other desires his Landlord to lay Both Farms into One, and Accept of
Him for his Tenant. The Gentleman fairly Excused Himself, and away goes the Man
in a Rage to his Wife; Told her how it was, and Swore a Great Oath, that he
would be Revenged of his Landlord. This was in Harvest Time, and he went out
next day to his Reapers, but stayed so long, that his Wife sent up and down to
look after him. To shorten the Story, they found him at last in a Ditch,
Vomiting his Heart out. The Man, it seems, had Poisoned himself, and the
Revenge upon his Landlord was the Defeating him of his Estate by Destroying the
Last Life in his Lease. In One Word, Revenge stops at Nothing that is Violent
and Wicked. It Divides the Dearest Friends; Embroils Governments, and Tears
Families to pieces. But to say no more on it, The Histories of All Ages are full
of the Tragical Outrages that have been Executed by this Diabolical Passion:
beside, that it hardens People into a Brutall Contempt of Death, (as in the
Fables above) where they may but see their Enemies fall for Company.

FAB. XCII. A Fortune Tellers.
THere was a kind of a Petty Conjurer, that made it his Profession to Resolve
Questions, and tell Fortunes, and he held forth in the Marketplace. Word was
brought him, in the very Middle of his Schemes and Calculations, that his House
was Robbed; and so away he scours immediately to learn the Truth on it. As he
was running home in All Haste, a Droll takes him up by the Way, with this short
Question. Friend (says he) How come You to be so Good at telling Other Peoples
Fortunes, and Know so little of your Own?

FAB. XCIII. A Cunning Woman.
A Certain Dame that passed in the World under the Name of a Cunning Woman,
took upon her to Avert Divine Judgments, and to Foretell Strange Things to
come. She played the Counterfeit Witch so long, till in the Conclusion, she was
Taken up, Arraigned, Tried, Convicted, Condemned to Dye, and at last Executed
for a Witch indeed. Do You hear, Good Woman (says one to her, as she was upon the
Way to her Execution) Are the Gods so much Easyer then the Judges, that you
should be Able to make Them do any Thing for ye, and yet could not Prevail with
the Bench for the Saving of your Own Life?

FAB. XCIV. An Astrologer and a Traveller.
A Certain Starr-Gazer had the Fortune, in the very Height of his Celestial
Observations, to stumble into a Ditch: A sober Fellow passing by, gave him a
piece of Wholesome Counsel. Friend, says he, Make a Right Use of Your Present
Misfortune; and pray, for the Future, let the Stars go on quietly in their
Courses, and do you look a little Better to the Ditches.

The MORAL of the Three FABLES above.
There needs no more than Impudence and Ignorance, on the One Side, and a
Superstitious Credulity on the Other, to the Setting up of a Fortune Teller.

REFLECTION.
THIS serves for a Reproof to the Ignorance and Confidence of Figure-Flingers,
Starr-Gazers, that pretend to Foretell the Fortunes of Kingdoms and States, and
yet have no Foresight at all in what concerns Themselves.

The Moral of these Fables strikes upon the Vanity and Arrogance of Empyricks
and Impostors Themselves, and upon the Folly of the Fond Believers of them. The
Caution holds also against Unlawful Curiosities; Sickly, and Superstitious
Fancyes and Dreams; Fore-bodings of Ill Luck; as the Crossing of a Hare, the
Spilling of Salt, etc. This Humor, let it look never so Little, and Silly, (as
it passes many times only for Frolique and Banter) is One yet of the most
Pernicious Snares in Humane Life; when it comes once to get Possession, and to
Gain Credit; Especially among Women and Children, where the Imagination is
strong in the One, and the Disposition as Plyant as Wax for any Impression, in
the other. Wherefore, of All Things in This World, Care is to be Taken, that
they get not a Hankering after These Iuggling Astrologers, Gypsies, Wizzards,
Fortune Tellers, Conjurers, Quacks, Cunning Women, etc. To say Nothing of the
Fooleries of Fortune-Books, and a Hundred other Vulgar Ways of Enquiry into
the Event of Amors, Marriages, Life and Death, Travel, Play, or the like;
which is all but a Tincture of the same Capital Infirmity. If these Pretenders
were not better Supported by the Simplicity, and Devotion of the Inquisitive
Fools that Consult Those Oracles, then they are by any Congruity of Premises
and Conclusion; or by the Ordinary Way of Tracing Causes into their Effects,
the Trade would not find 'em Bread; for there is No Proportion at all betwixt
the Means, and the End. Not but that the Things they seem to Predict, come
many times to pass; Yet still the nearer the Mark in their Conjectures, the
more suspicious is the Profession on the One Hand, and the more Dangerous is
the Credulity on the Other: For Those People that take upon them to Resolve
such Doubts, Scruples, and Difficulties, as are not to be known by any Natural
Process of Reasoning; and those Men that will be Prying by Unwarrantable, and
Forbidden Ways, into the Secret Councels of Almighty God, are Both Justly
Punished: The One in Telling the Truth, and the Other in Hearing it: for it
Hardens the One in his Confidence, and Presumption, and the Other in his
Curiosity, and Superstition: Over and above the Feats that are done by
Confederacy and Intelligence; for how shall any man pretend to tell Me my
Fortune that knows nothing of his Own?

There are Mountebanks, and Smatterers also in State as well as in Science; Nay
and perchance, the Vainer, the more Ignorant, and the more Mischievous of the
Two; for All These Fables are Moraliz'd in History, Practice, and Conversation;
and the Fiction, Matched, at least, if not Outdone, in Matter of Fact. And
These Ordinary Hocuses have been made use of in All Ages too, as Tools of
State; sometimes For the Government, Other-while Against it, as the Occasion
lay Fairest for the Game that was then a Playing. It goes a great Way, when
Natural Curiosity, Vulgar Prejudice, and an Artificial Application of Actives
to Passives, shall be Assisted with the Shams of Astrological Judgments and
Calculations over and above: though with our Conjurers here, their Ignorance
and Presumption lays them Open in the Conclusion to the Scorns and Contempt of
the Common People.

FAB. XCV. A Doctor and his Patient.
PRay Sir How d' ye Find your self? says the Dr. to his Patient Why truly, says
the Patient; I have had a Violent Sweat. Oh the Best Sign in the World quoth
the Dr. And then a little while after he is at it again, with a Pray How d' ye
find your Body? Alas, says the TO other, I have just now such a Terrible Fit of
Horror and Shaking upon me! Why this is all as it should be, says the
Physician,. It shows a Mighty Strength of Nature. And then he comes over him a
Third time with the same Question again; Why I am all swelled, says TO other,
as if I had a Dropsy; Best of All quoth the Doctor, and goes his Way. Soon
after This comes one of the Sick Man's Friends to him with the same Question,
how he felt himself; why truly so Well, says he, that I am even ready to Dye,
of I know not how many Good Signs and Tokens.

The MORAL.
A Death bed Flattery is the Worst of Treacheries

REFLECTION.
THIS gives us to Understand the Practice of the World, and that Flattery and
Time-serving Enters into the most Solemn Offices of Mankind To Flatter Foolish
Men into a Hope of Life where there is None at all, is much the same Thing with
Betraying people into an Opinion, that they are in a Virtuous, and a Happy
State, when they are Overrun with Passion, and Drowned in their Lusts. The One
has the same Pernicious Effect upon our Minds, that the Other has upon our
Bodies; for it makes us Careless of Both. There are Certain Decencies of Form,
and Civility, it is true, that purely regard Matters of Conversation, and Good
Manners; And These Respects ought to be Preserved; But Ceremonies of Mode and
Complement, are mightily out of Season, when Life and Salvation come to be at
Stake.

It falls under the Prospect of the same Topique, to Consider, that Kingdoms
and Commonwealths have their Distempers, Intermissions, and Paroxisms, as well
as Natural Bodies. And that a Glavering Council is as Dangerous on the One
hand, as a Wheedling Priest, or a Flattering Physician is on the Other. There
is hardly such Another Pest in a Community, as a Consort of Parasites, that
feed Governors with False Representations and Reports of Men and of Things.
They First Betray their Masters to Dishonor, and Ruin; and then when they
find the Vessel Sinking, Save themselves in the Long Boat. So much the Better,
quoth the Doctor: Ay, Ay, (says the Empirical Statesman) That Is as we'd have
it. When at the same time the Distemper is as Mortal to the Government, on the
One hand, as to the Patient on the Other.

FAB. XCVI. A Fowler and a Blackbird.
AS a Fowler was Bending his Net, a Blackbird called to him at a distance, and
Asked him what he was a doing. Why says he, I am laying the Foundations of a
City; and so the Birdman drew out of Sight. The Blackbird Mistrusting Nothing,
flew presently to the Bait in the Net, and was taken; and as the Man came
running to lay hold of her; Friend, says the Poor Blackbird, If This be Your
Way of Building, You Will have but Few Inhabitants.

The MORAL.
There is no Sham so Gross, but it will pass upon a Weak Man that is
Pragmatical, and Inquisitive.

REFLECTION.
THIS is to Intimate, that where Rulers lay Snares, deal Falsely, and Exercise
Cruelty, All goes to Wrack both Public and Private. All Frauds are Covered
and Gilded over with Specious Pretenses, and Men are Every jot as Easily
Imposed upon, as Birds, Beasts, or Fishes; while the Eagerness of our Appetites
Suspends the Exercise of our Reason. A Treat, a Woman, or a Bottle, is the same
Thing to Us, that a Worm, a Gudgeon, a Grain of Corn, or a piece of Raw Flesh
is to Those Animals. We Snap at the Bait without ever Dreaming of the Hook, the
Trap, or the Snare that goes Along with it. Now what is the Difference betwixt
Aesop's Pretext here for the Building of a City, and the Cheats that we have
heard of, the Saving of a City. The Design was Destruction in Both, and That
was for the Event on it too. Religion, Liberty and Property were the Bait: Nay
the very Sound of the Words did the Business. The Common People will Chop like
Trouts at an Artificial Fly, and Dare like Larks under the Awe of a Painted
Hobby. It Is with Men, just as it is with Birds and Fishes, There Is not a Mortal
of us that will not Bite at some Bait or other, and we are caught as Sillily
too, as the Bird was here in the Net.

FAB. XCVII. Mercury and a Traveller.
ONe that was just Entering upon a Long Journey, took up a Fancy of putting a
Trick upon Mercury. He said him a short Prayer for the Bon-Voyage, with a
Promise, that the God should go Half with him in whatever he found. Some body
had lost a Bag of Dates and Almonds, it seems, and it was His Fortune to Find
it. He fell to Work upon 'em Immediately, and when he had Eaten up the Kernels,
and All that was Good of them, Himself, he laid the Stones, and the Shells
upon an Altar; and desired Mercury to take Notice that he had Performed his
Vow. For, says he, Here are the Outsides of the One, and the Insides of the
Other, and there is the Moiety I Promised ye.

The MORAL.
Men Talk as if they Believed in God, but they Live as if they thought there
were None; for their very Prayers are Mockeries, and their Vows and Promises
are no more then Words of Course, which they never Intended to make Good.

REFLECTION.
THIS is to Reprehend the False and Covetous Humor of Those that for Money and
Profit, will not Stick at putting Shams even upon God Himself; Profaning his
Altars, and Ridiculing his very Omniscience and Power, Here Is the Wickedness of
a Libertine Naturally enough set forth, only the Punishment is Wanting that
should have Completed the Moral. What Opinion have These Religious Banterers,
of the Divine Power and Justice? Or what have they to say for themselves in
This Audacious Habit of Mockery and Contempt; but that they Believe in their
Hearts that there is No God? Not but that more or less, we are all Jugglers in
Secret betwixt Heaven, and our Own Souls: Only they Cover and Meditate Abuses
under the Masque and Pretense of Conscience, and Religion; and make God
Almighty Privy to a Thousand False and Cozening Contrivances, that we keep as
the Greatest Privacies in the World, from the Knowledge of our Neighbors. Nay,
when we are Most in Earnest, our Vows and Promises are more then Half Broken in
the very making of them; and if we can but secure our Selves a Retreat, by some
Cleanly Evasion, Distinction, or Mental Reservation, it serves our Purpose even
as Well as if it were a Casuistical Resolution. In One Word, we find the Moral
of Mercury and the Traveller in the very Secrets of our Hearts, betwixt Heaven,
and our own Souls.

FAB. CXVIII. A Boy and his Mother.
A Schoolboy brought his Mother a Book that he had Stoll'n from One of his
Fellows. She was so far from Correcting him for it, that she rather Encouraged
him. As he grew Bigger, he would be still keeping his hand in Ure with somewhat
of Greater Value, till he came at last to be Taken in the Matter, and brought
to Justice for it. His Mother went along with him to the Place of Execution,
Where he got leave of the Officers, to have a Word or Two in Private with her.
He put his Mouth to her Ear, and under Pretext of a Whisper, Bit it Clear off.
This Impious Unnatural Villainy turned Every Bodies Heart against him More and
More. [Well Good People (says the Boy) Here You see Me an Example, both upon
the Matter of Shame and of Punishment; And it is This Mother of mine that has
brought me to it; for if she had but Whipped me soundly for the Book I stole when
I was a Boy, I should never have come to the Gallows here now I Am a Man.]

The MORAL.
We are either Made or Marred, in our Education; and Governments, as well as
Private Families, are Concerned in the Consequences of it.

REFLECTION.
WICKED Dispositions should be Checked betimes; for when they come once to
Habits, they grow Incurable. More People go to the Gibbet for want of Timely
Instruction, Discipline, and Correction, then upon any Incurable Pravity of
Nature; And it is mightily the Fault of Parents, Guardians, Tutors and
Governors, that so many men Miscarry. They suffer 'em at first to Run-a head,
and when Perverse Inclinations are Advanced once into Habits, there is No
Dealing with 'em. It may seem somewhat a Hard Case for the Greater Thieves to
Punish the Less, and to see Public Purloyners and Oppressors sit in Triumph
upon the Lives of the Little Ones that go to the Gallows: For the Tie of
Morality is the same upon Both; and they Stand Both Accountable to the Same
Master. But Time, Power, and Corruption, give a Reputation to the Worst of
Practices, and it is no longer Oppression when it comes Gilded with the Name of
Authority. This Unequal, and Unreasonable Judgment of Things, brings many a
Great Man to the Stool of Repentance; for when he has Swallowed more then he
can Digest, it sticks upon his Conscience, and will neither Up, nor Down. Now
in the Sight of Heaven, the Greater the Temptation, the Less is the Sin; and
yet in the Vogue of the World, it passes for an Exploit of Honor, for Kings
and States to run away with Whole Countries that they have no Color, or
Pretense to; when many a poor Devil stands Condemned to a Halter, or a
Whipping-Post, for the Pilfering of a Silver-Spoon perhaps, or the Robbing of a
Hen-Roost: Though the Former, all this While, has No Better Title to what he
takes, then the Latter; and yet to see what a deal of Fulsome Flattery, and
Panegyrique we have, upon the Glorious Achievements of the One; and only some
Smithfield Ballad perchance, or a Sabbath-Breaking Speech, or Confession, to
Embalm the Memory of the Other. To be Short, and Plain; the Offense before God,
is at least as Great in a Prince, as in a Beggar, and the Morality of a Careful
Education holds alike in Both. 'Twas the Mothers sparing the Rod at first, that
brought the Child, at the Long Run, to the Halter.

FAB. XCIX. A Shepherd turned Merchant.
A Countryman was Feeding his Flock by the Seaside, and it was so Delicate a
Fine Day, that the Smoothness of the Water Tempted him to leave his Shepherds
Business, and set up for a Merchant. So that in All Have, he puts off his
Stock; Buys a Bargain of Figs; gets his Freight abord, and away presently to
Sea. It happened to be very Foul Weather: So that the Mariners were fain to
Cast their Whole Lading Over-bord, to save Themselves and the Vessel. Upon This
Miscarriage, our New Merchant-Adventurer betook himself to his Old Trade again;
And it happened One Day, as he was Tending his Sheep upon the very same Coast,
to be Just such a Flattering Tempting Sea again, as That which had Betrayed him
Before. Yes, yes, says he, When the Devil's Blind! You Would have some more Figs,
with a Vengeance, Would ye?

The MORAL.
Men may be happy in all Estates if they will but suit their Minds to their
Condition. A Shepherd may be as Easy in a Cottage, as a Prince in a Palace,
with a Mind Suited to his Station; but if they will be Launching out into
Trade, or Business that they do not understand, they have nothing left them to
trust to when they are once Bewildered, but the Hope of some Kind Providence to
put them in the Right Way Home again.

REFLECTION.
AFFLICTION makes People Honest and Wise. Every Man Living has his Weak Side,
and no Mortal was ever yet so much at Ease, but his Shoe Wrung him some where
or Other; or he Fancied so at least, and Then it did so. The Shepherd would
needs be a Merchant; and the Merchant, if he had succeeded would still have
been Hankering after something else. His Levity was a Fault, and his
Miscarriage was a Judgment upon him for it. The saving of his Person after the
Loss of his Goods was a Providential Mercy to him; and the bringing of Him home
to Himself again, was to Convince him of his Error, and to show him, that he
was well at First, if he could have kept so. He was in a State of Ease, Peace,
Innocence. and Safety: And he that will Sacrifice all Those Blessings to a
Restless Appetite, deserves to be Miserable. Our Shepherd's Case, in short
here, is every Man's Case that Quits a Moral Certainty for an Uncertainty, and
Leaps from the Honest Business he was brought up to, into a Trade he has no
Skill in.

FAB. C. An Old Man and a Lion.
A Person of Quality dreamed one Night that he saw a Lion Kill his only Son:
Who was, it seems, a Generous Cavalier, and a Great Lover of the Chase. This
Phansy ran in the Father's Head, to that Degree, that he Built his Son a House
of Pleasure, on purpose to keep him out of Harms Way; and spared neither Art
nor Cost to make it a Delicious Retreat. This House, in short, was to be the
Young Man's Prison, and the Father made himself his Keeper. There were a World
of Paintings Every where up and down, and among the Rest, there was the Picture
of a Lion; which stirred the Blood of the Young Man, for the Dream sake, and to
think that he should now be a Slave for the Phansy of such a Beast. In this
Indignation he made a Blow at the Picture; but Striking his Fist upon the Point
of a Nail in the Wall, His Hand Cancerated; he fell into a Fever, and soon
after Died on it: So that all the Father's Precaution could not Secure the Son
from the Fatality of Dying by a Lion.

The MORAL.
A Body may as well lay too Little as too much Stress upon a Dream; for some
Dreams are Monitory, as Others are only Complexional; but upon the Main, the
Less we Heed them the Better; for when that Freake has once taken Possession of
a Fantastical Head, the Distemper is Incurable.

REFLECTION.
IT IS to no Purpose to think of Preventing, or Diverting Fatalities: Especially
where the Event looks like the Punishment of a Superstition: as it fares with
Those that Govern their Lives by Forebodings and Dreams: or the Signs of Ill
Luck, as we use to say: They are still Anxious and Uneasy, History is full of
Examples to Illustrate the Doctrine of This Fable. The Father was to blame for
laying so much Stress upon a Foolish Dream, and the Son was Little less to
Blame, for being so much Transported at the Impression of That Fancy upon the
Father: But they were Both Justly Punished however, The One for his Passion,
and the Other for his Superstition.

FAB. CI. A Fox that lost his Tail.
THere was a Fox taken in a Trap, that was glad to Compound for his Neck by
leaving his Tail behind him. It was so Uncouth a Sight, for a Fox to appear
without a Tail, that the very Thought on it made him even Weary of his Life;
for 'twas a Loss never to be Repaired: But however for the Better Countenance
of the Scandal, he got the Master and Wardens of the Foxes Company to call a
Court of Assistants, where he himself appeared, and made a Learned Discourse
upon the Trouble, the Uselessness, and the Indecency of Foxes Wearing Tails.
He had no sooner said out his Say, but up rises a Cunning Snap, then at the
Board, who desired to be Enform'd, whether the Worthy Member that Moved against
the Wearing of Tails, gave his Advice for the Advantage of Those that Had
Tails, or to Palliate the Deformity and Disgrace of Those that had None.

The MORAL.
When a Man has any Notable Defect, or Infirmity about him, whether by Nature,
or by Chance, it is the Best of his Play, to try the humor, if he can turn it
into a Fashion.

REFLECTION.
IT IS the way of the World to give Other People Council for their Own Ends.
Paradoxing is of Great Use and Service in many Encounters and Accidents that we
meet withal in the World; but the Faculty must be so Tenderly Managed, as not
to Grate upon the Truth, and Reason of Things: And it is of Great Effect, if it
can but give some Color of Probability to the Matter in Question. Nay there is a
Pleasure in the very Trial of Wits; but when This Talent is Employed upon the
Topique of Convenience, and Profit; It is a wonderful Force that it has upon
the Affections of the Common People. The Fox carried it as far as 'twould go;
but he had too Hard a Task on it, to Overruled a Multitude to their Own Pain and
Loss.

We may Improve a Doctrine from This, that Every Man has his Weak Side, either
by Mischance, or by Nature; and that he makes it his Business to Cover it too,
the Best he can. In case of the Worst, it is some sort of Ease to have Company
in our Misfortunes. It puts a Body out of Countenance to be in a Fashion by
Himself, and therefore the Fox did well to Try if he could bring his Fellow
Foxes to put themselves into His Mode. When we have Carried a Point as far as
it will go, and can make no more on it, it is a Stroke of Art and Philosophy, to
look as if we did not so much as Wish for a Thing that is not to be Had. Every
Man's Present Condition has somewhat to be Said for it: If it be Uneasy, the
Skill will be, either how to Mend it, or how to Bear it: But then there must
be no Clashing with the Methods, the Decrees, and the Laws of Nature. A Man
that has Forfeited his Honor and his Conscience, seems to be much in the
Condition of the Fox here that had lost his Tail, and takes as much pains too,
to persuade All his Companions to follow his Fashion. He lays down his
Arguments, and gives his REASONS, Nay, and he endeavors to Prove it by
Scripture too, that Men, in such a Case, ought to go to Old Nick for Company.
We are to Consider here, that the Devils have their Traps as well as the
Woodmen, and that it is the Case of many a Lawyer and Divine, when they come
once to be Hampered, to rubb off as well as they can, though they Leave their
Consciences behind them, as the Fox did his Tail, and then Preach up the
Blessed Doctrine and Convenience of No Consciences, as well as No Tails.

FAB. CII. A Fox and a Bramble.
A Fox that was close Pursued, took a Hedge, The Bushes gave way, and in
Catching hold of a Bramble to break his Fall, the Prickles ran into his Feet.
Upon This, he laid himself down, and fell to Licking his Paws, with Bitter
Exclamations against the Bramble. Good Words, Reynard, says the Bramble, One
would have thought you had known Better Things, then to Expect a Kindness from
a Common Enemy, and to lay hold on That for Relief, that Catches at Every Thing
else for Mischief.

The MORAL.
There are some Malicious Natures that Place all their Delight in doing Ill
Turns, and That Man is hard put to it, that is first brought into a Distress,
and then forced to Fly to such People for Relief.

REFLECTION.
IT IS Great Folly to Fly for Protection to People that Naturally Delight in
Mischief. The Fox Blames the Bramble here, but he may Thank Himself. They that
make themselves the Common Enemies of Mankind, by Breaking All the Measures of
Good Faith, Truth, and Peace, and by lying in Wait for Innocent Blood, let
them Turn their Heads which way they will, they shall be sure of an Enemy in
the Face of them: Nay they meet with their Punishment, where they look for
Safety, and which way soever they go, Divine Justice either Meets them, or
Pursues them. The Foxes Charging his Misfortune here upon the Bramble, is the
very Case and Practice of Wicked Men, that Snarle at the Instruments, without
so much as Thinking of the Providence. But the Bramble did only according to
its Nature, and Consequently was not to Blame.

FAB. CIII. A Fox and a Crocodile.
THere happened a Contest betwixt a Fox and a Crocodile, upon the Point of
Blood and Extraction. The Crocodile Amplify'd Wonderfully upon his Family, for
the Credit of his Ancestors. Friend (says the Fox, smiling upon it) there will
need no Herald to Prove your Gentility; for you carry the Marks of Your
Original in Your very Skin.

The MORAL.
Great Boasters and Liars have the Fortune still some way or other to Disprove
themselves.

REFLECTION.
THERE are some Falsities so Bold and Notorious, that they carry their
Contradictions in the very Reason and Presumption of the Matter, without any
other Evidence.

FAB. CIV. A Fox and Huntsmen.
A Fox that had been Hard-run, begged of a Countryman that he saw at Work in a
Wood, to help him to some Hiding Place. The Man Directed him to his Cottage,
and thither he went. He was no sooner got in, but the Huntsmen were presently
at the Heels of him, and asked the Cottager if he did not see a Fox That Way?
No truly, says he, I saw None; but Pointed at the same time with his Finger to
the Place where he lay. The Huntsmen did not take the Hint, it seems; but the
Fox spied him, it seems, through a Peeping Hole he had found out to see what
News: so the Fox-Hunters went their Way, and then Out steals the Fox, without
One Word speaking. Why how now, says the Man, Have not ye the Manners to take
leave of your Host before you go? Yes, yes, says the Fox; If you had been as
Honest of your Fingers, as you were of your Tongue, I should not have gone
without bidding ye Farewell.

The MORAL.
A Man may tell a Lie by Signs, as well as in Words at length, and his
Conscience is as Answerable for his Fingers, as for his Tongue.

REFLECTION.
THERE IS No Trusting of Those that Say One Thing, and Do Another, Especially if
they follow Fair Words with Foul Deeds. Here Is a Case of Honor, and of
Conscience, Both in One, upon the Matter of Hospitality, and of Trust. The Laws
of Hospitality are Sacred on the One Side, and so are the Duties we Owe to our
Country on the Other. If we Consider the Trust, Faith must not be Broken; If
the Common Enemy, his Council is not to be kept. The Wood-Man did as good as
Tacitly promise the Fox a Sanctuary; but not being Sui Iuris, he promised more
then he could Warrantably Perform; for a Subsequent Promise to Conceal the Fox
could not Discharge him of a Prior Obligation to Destroy him. It Is true, it
would have been more Generous to have don't at first, and while he had as yet
No Color of any Tie of Honor upon him to Preserve him. The Fox begged for
Protection, which he had No Reason to Expect. First it was upon Force, and
Necessity, not Choice. Secondly, It was at his own Peril, without any
Conditions for his own Security. Thirdly, He Committed himself to the Mercy of
a Man that was bound to Kill him. Fourthly, The very Address was scandalous;
for he must needs have an Ill Opinion of the Countryman, so much as to Imagine
that He could be Wrought upon to Betray his Country for the sake of a Beast.
But let the Rest be as it will, there is no Excuse for the Woodman's Double
Dealing.

FAB. CV. A Man and a Wooden God.
A Man that had a Great Veneration for an Image he had in his House, found,
that the more he Prayed to it to Prosper him in the World, the More he went down
the Wind still. This put him into such a Rage, to lie Dogging at his Prayers so
much, and so Long, to so Little Purpose, that at last he Dashed the Head on it to
pieces against the Wall; and Out comes a Considerable Quantity of Gold. Why
This it is, says he, to Adore a Perverse and Insensible Deity, that will do More
for Blows than for Worship.

The MORAL.
Most People, Clergy as well as Laity, Accommodate their Religion to their
Profit, and reckon that to be the best Church that there is most to be got by.

REFLECTION.
THIS Fable runs better in the Humor, then it does in the Moral. It lays
before us the Unprofitable Vanity of a False Worship, and gives us to
Understand, that the more zealous we are in a Wrong Way, the Worse. An Idol is
an Abomination in the sight both of God, and of Good Men; and yet we are so to
Govern our Selves, even in the Transports of That Abhorrence, as still to
Preserve a Reverence for Religion it self, in the very Indignation we Express
for the Corruptions of it. So that the License of this Buffoon went a little
too far perhaps, for there must be No Playing with Things Sacred, nor Jesting,
as we say, with Edge Tools. We have the Moral of this Abandoned Libertine up
and down the World in a Thousand Several Shapes. All People that Worship for
Fear, Profit, or some other By End, fall More or Less within the Intendment of
this Emblem. It is a kind of a Conditional Devotion for Men to be Religious no
longer then they can Save, or Get by it. Put forth thy Hand now (says the Devil
to the Almighty in the Case of Job) and Touch All that he has, and he will
Curse thee to thy Face. This Good Man Lost All, and, for an Example of Patience
and Resignation to Future Ages. The Lord gave (says he) and the Lord has Taken
away, Blessed be the Name of the Lord. Here was No Dashing of the Two Tables
one against the Other, for an Office, or an Egg at Easter, as the Fellow served
his Idol here. The Whole Sum of the Moral is in short, Comprised in the Old
Saying: He that serves God for Money, will serve the Devil for Better Wages.

FAB? CVI. A Dog Invited to Supper.
A Gentleman Invited a Friend to Supper with him, and the Gentleman's Dog was
so well Bred as to Invite the Friends Dog to come for Company. The Dog came at
his Hour, and into the Kitchen he went, to see what Good Cheer was toward: But
as he was there, Wagging his Tail, and Licking his Lips, at the thought of
what a Meal he was like to make on it, the Roguy Cook got Slyly behind him, and
Spoiled the Jest. He took him up by the Tail at Unawares, and after a Turn or
Two in the Air, flung him out of the Window. So soon as ever the Poor Devil had
Recovered the Squelch, away he Scampers, Bawling like Mad, with I know not how
many Prick-Ear'd Currs at the Heels of him, to know how he liked his Welcome.
Why truly, says he, they have given me as much Drink, as my Skin will hold; and
it has made me so Lightheaded, I could not find the Right Way out of the House
again.

The MORAL.
Love Me, Love my Dog, says the old Proverb, and there is somewhat of Good
Manners, as well as of Good Nature in it; for there are certain Decencies of
Respect due to the Servant for the Master's sake.

REFLECTION.
IT looks well among Friends, when Masters and Servants are all of a piece. The
Dog invites his Guest, and the Cook throws him out of the Window, and in so
doing, the Man showed himself the Arranter Curr of the Two; for it was against
Hospitality and Good Manners so to do. There is a Duty of Tenderness and Good
Nature, even toward Those Animals: But when it came to the Worst at last, the
Dog had the Wit, we see, to make the Best of a Bad Game. Though 'twas an
unmannerly, and an Ill-natured Frolic of the Cook all this while; for the Ill
Usage of a Servant is some sort of Affront to his Master.

FAB. CVII. An Eagle and a Man.
A Man took an Eagle, Pelted her Wings, and put her among his Hens. Somebody
came and bought This Eagle, and presently New Feathered her. She made a Flight
at a Hare, Trussed it, and brought it to her Benefactor. A Fox perceiving This,
came and gave the Man a piece of Good Council. Have a care, says Reynard, of
putting too much Confidence in This Eagle; for she will go near, one time or
other else, to take You for a Hare. Upon This Advice the Man Plumed the Eagle
once again.

The MORAL.
Persons and Humors may be Iumbled and Disguised, but Nature is like
Quicksilver, that will never be Killed.

REFLECTION.
BIRDS of Prey will be Birds of Prey still, at what rate soever you Treat 'em.
So that there is no Trusting of them: For when they have no longer a Power to do
Mischief, the Will yet Remains. Here Is a Forced Moral for a Forced Fable: For
the Fancy of it is against Nature, and the Fiction does not consist with it
self. Now to My Thinking This Application of it lies the Fairer of the Two, i,
e. That the Gratitude of the Eagle, in bringing the Hare to her Master, may
serve to show us, that the Wildest and Fiercest of Creatures may be Sweetn'd,
and Reclaimed by Benefits.

FAB. CVIII. A Father and Sons.
A Countryman that lived Handsomely in the World Himself upon his Honest Labor
and Industry, was desirous his Sons should do so After Tim; and being now upon
his Deathbed: [My Dear Children (says he) I reckon my self Bound to tell you
before I depart, that there is a Considerable Treasure Hid in my Vineyard.
Wherefore pray be sure to Dig, and search Narrowly for it when I am gone. The
Father Dies, and the Sons fall immediately to Work upon the Vineyard. They
Turned it up over and over, and not one Penny of Money to be found there; but
the Profit of the Next Vintage Expounded the Riddle.

The MORAL.
Good Council is the Best Legacy a Father can leave to a Child, and it is
still the Better, when it is so wrapped up, as to Beget a Curiosity as well as an
Inclination to follow it.

REFLECTION.
THERE IS No Wealth like That which comes by the Blessing of God upon Honest
Labor and Warrantable Industry. Here Is an Incitement to an Industrious Course
of Life, by a Consideration of the Profit, the Innocence and the Virtue, of
such an Application. There is one Great Comfort in Hand, beside the Hope and
Assurance of more to come. The very Exercise procures us Health, and
Consequently All the Pleasures and Satisfactions that Attend it. We have the
Delight of Seeing and Reaping the Fruit of our own Labor, and the Inward Joy
of Contemplating the Benedictions of Another World, that shall be superadded to
the Advantages of This. Aesop very well understood, that Naked Lessons and
Precepts, have Nothing the Force that Images and Parables have, upon our Minds
and Affections: Beside, that the very Study to Unriddle a Mystery, furnishes
the Memory with more Tokens to Remember it by. A Tale in Emblem sinks Deeper,
where the Life and Spirit of it is Insinuated by a kind of Biass and Surprise.
It was a Touch of Art in the Father to Cover his Meaning in such a manner, as
to Create a Curiosity, and an Earnest Desire in his Sons to find it out. And it
was also a Treble Advantage to them besides; for there was, I say, Health in
the Exercise, Profit in the Discovery, and the Comfort of a Good Conscience in
Discharging the Duty of a Filial Obedience.

FAB. CIX. A Fisherman and his Pipe.
A Fisherman that understood Piping better than Netting, set himself down upon
the Side of a River, and Touched his Flute, but not a Fish came near him. Upon
This, he laid down his Pipe and Cast his Net, which brought him up a very Great
Draught. The Fish fell a Frisking in the Net, and the Fisherman observing it.
What Sotts, are These (says he) that would not Dance when I Played to 'em, and
will be Dancing now without Music!

The MORAL.
There are Certain Rules and Methods for the Doing of All Things in This World;
and therefore let Every Man stick to the Business he Understands, and was
brought up to, without making One Profession Interfere with Another.

REFLECTION.
THERE is a Proper Time and Season for Every Thing; and Nothing can be more
Ridiculous than the Doing of Things without a Due Regard to the Circumstances
of Persons, Proportion, Time and Place.

FAB. CX. A Fisherman's Good Luck.
A Fisherman had been a Long while at work without Catching any thing, and so
in Great Trouble and Despair, he resolved to take up his Tackle, and be gone:
But in That very Instant a Great Fish Leapt into the Boat, and by this
Providence he made a Tolerable Day on it.

The MORAL.
Patience, Constancy, and Perseverance, in an Honest Cause and Duty, can never
fail of a Happy End, One way or Other.

REFLECTION.
THAT which We commonly call Good Fortune, is properly, Providence, and when
Matters succeed Better with us by Accident, then we could pretend to, by Skill;
We ought to Ascribe it to the Divine Goodness, as a Blessing upon Industry. It
is Every man's Duty to Labor in his Calling, and not to Despond, for any
Miscarriages or Disappointments, that were not in his own Power to Prevent.
Faith, Hope, and Patience Overcome All things, and Virtue can never fail of a
Reward in the Conclusion. What was it but This Constancy and Resignation, that
Kept the Hearts of the Poor Cavaliers from Breaking, in the Tedious Interval of
that Bloody Revolution from Forty to Sixty; 'till at last, the Banished, and
the Persecuted Son of a Royal Martyr, was in Gods Good time brought back again,
and Placed upon the Throne of his Ancestors, which Crowned the Sufferings of
All his Loyal Subjects. The Fisherman's Waiting in his Calling, bids us
Persevere in our Duties, and the Lucky Hit he had in the Conclusion, tells us
that Honest Endeavors will not fail of a Reward.

FAB. CXI. Large Promises.
THere was a Poor Sick Man, that according to the Course of the World, when
Physicians had given him over, betook himself to his Prayers, and Vowed a
Sacrifice of a Thousand Oxen ready down upon the Nail, to either Apollo, or
Aesculapius, which of the Two would Deliver him from This Disease. Ah my Dear,
(says his Wife) Have a care what You Promise? for where would you have These
Oxen if you should Recover. Sweet Heart (says he) thou talkst like a Fool. Have
the Gods Nothing else to do, do think, then to leave their Business, and come
down to Sue me in an Action of Debt? They Restored him however for That Bout,
to make Trial of his Honesty and Good Faith. He was no sooner up, but for want
of Living Oxen, he made out his Number upon Past, and Offered them up in Form
upon an Altar. For this Mockery, Divine Vengeance Pursued him, and he had an
Apparition came to him in a Dream, that bad him go and Search in such a Place
near the Coast, and he should find a Considerable Treasure; Away he went, and
as he was looking for the Money fell into the Hands of Pirates. He begged hard
for his Liberty, and Offered a Thousand Talents of Gold for his Ransom; but
they would not Trust him, and so he was carried away, and sold afterward as a
Slave for as many Groats.

The MORAL.
The Dev'll was Sick, the Dev'll a Monk would be;
The Dev'll was Well, the Dev'll a Monk was He.
REFLECTION.
THIS Fable applies it self to Those that Promise more in their Adversity then
they either Intend, or are Able to make good in their Prosperity; but they must
not think to bring themselves off at last with a Conceit; for in the Sight of
God, an Equivocating Juggling Sham, is as much as a Gross, Downright Lie.

It Is the Practice of the World for People in Distress to serve God and Man, in
Several Respects, both Alike; That is to say, when they lie under any Heavy
Affliction, or Propose to themselves any Considerable Advantage, and find they
have Need of Another Help; how do they Beg, Vow, Promise, Solicit, Swear,
Sign and Seal and yet Conscious to Themselves all this while, that they neither
Intend nor are able to make One Article Good? Wickedness comes on by Degrees,
as well as Virtue; and Sudden Leaps from One Extreme to Another, are Unnatural
Motions in the Course of our Lives and Humors. Here Is first a Rash, and a
Knavish Promise; for the Promiser knew he was not able to make it Good. When he
has broken the Ice, he Advances, from Cozening of God, to making Sport with
him, and pays him with Past for Flesh: But Vengeance Overtook him in the
Conclusion, and gave him to Understand, that God will not be Mocked. The Moral
of This Sick Man is the Case of Every Soul of us in the Making, and the
Breaking of our Vows.

FAB. CXII. Fishermen Disappointed.
SOme Fishermen that had been Out a Whole Day with a Drag-Net, and Caught
Nothing, had a Draught toward the Evening, that came home very Heavy, which put
'em in hope of a Sturgeon at least, but upon bringing the Net ashore, it proved
to be Only One Great Stone, and a few Little Fishes. Upon This Disappointment
they were Down in the Mouth again; but says One of the Company that was a
Little Graver then the Rest, You are to Consider, my Masters, that Joy and
Sorrow are Two Sisters that follow One Another by Turns.

The MORAL.
All Our Purchases in This World are but the Catching of a Tartar, as we say,
but it is some Comfort yet to Consider, that when Things are at the Worst
they will Mend.

REFLECTION.
HOPES and Disappointments are the Entertainment of Humane Life: The One serves
to keep us from Presumption, the Other from Despair. The Fisherman's Case in
the Fable is many a man's Case in the World; as with a Wife for the Purpose,
with an Office, with an Estate, with a Court-Commission: He Is sayn to Tug Hard
for it before he can Catch it, and Measures the Blessing all the while by the
Difficulty of Obtaining it. And what is the Purchase at last when he comes to
Cast up his Account but Great Stones and Little Fishes? His only Comfort is,
That This World will not Last always; and that Good Luck, and Bad Luck take
their Turns.

FAB. CXIII. Death and an Old Man.
AN Old Man that had Traveled a Great Way under a Huge Burden of Sticks, found
himself so Weary, that he Cast it Down, and called upon Death to Deliver him
from a more Miserable Life. Death came presently at his Call, and Asked him his
Business. Pray Good Sir, says he, Do me but the favor to Help me up with my
Burden again.

The MORAL.
Men call upon Death, as they Do upon the Devil: When he comes they are afraid
of him.

REFLECTION.
IT IS Matter of Custom, and in Passion, rather then in Earnest, that Men in
Pain and Misery are so ready to call for Death: For when he comes, they are
afraid of him. It may be said to be the Motto of Humane Nature, rather to
Suffer then to Dye, though it is Good however to be always ready for That which
Must come at Last. The Doctrine is This, That Skin, and All that a man has will
he give for his Life. We are apt to Pick Quarrels with the World for Every
Little Foolery. Oh that I were even in in my Grave, cries my Lady. My Pretty
Pearl is Dead. Never did any thing go so near my Heart, I Praise the Lord
for it. Pray Madam Bethink your self; says a Good Woman to her upon a Condoling
Visit. Why you have Outlived the Loss of a most Excellent Husband. Ay Madam,
says the sorrowful Widow: But the Lord may send me such Another Husband; I
shall never have such Another Dog. Every Trivial Cross makes us think we are
Weary of the World; but our Tongues run quite to Another Tune when we come once
to parting with it in Earnest. Then, it is Call the Doctor, Pothecary, Surgeon;
Purge, Flux, Lance, Burn, Saw: I Will Endure Any thing in This World, if you can
but keep Life and Soul together. When it comes to That once, it is not Help me
Off with my Burden, but Help me Up with it.

FAB. CXIV. A Doctor and Patient with Sore Eyes.
A Physician Undertakes a Woman with Sore Eyes, upon the the Terms of No Cure
No Money. His Way was to Dawb 'em quite up with Ointments, and while she was in
That Pickle, to carry of a Spoon or a Porringer, or somewhat or Other at the
End of his Visit. The Woman's Eyes Mended, and still as she came More and More
to her self again, there was Every Day less and less left in the House to be
seen. The Doctor came to her at last, and told her; Mistress, says he, I have
Discharged my (...) Your Eyes are Perfectly Well again, and pray let me be Paid
now according to Our Agreement. Alas, Sir says she, I Am a Great deal Worse then
I was the First Minute you Undertook me; for I could see Plate, Hangings,
Paintings, and Other Goods of Value about my House, 'till You had the Ordering
of me; but I am now brought to such a Pass, that I can see nothing at all.

The MORAL.
There are Few Good Offices done for Other People, which the Benefactor does
not hope to be the Better for Himself.

REFLECTION.
THIS Fancy is Half Knavery, Half Humor, and the Doctors Part in it is no more
then according to the Common Practice of the World, in Law, as well as in
Physic, when People make the Remedy Worse then the Disease; as when a Man
spends the Fee Simple of an Estate in a Contest for the Title. The Barber that
Picked a Gentleman's Pocket while he was Washing of his Face, Wrote after This
Copy. The Moral holds forth This Matter of Advice to us, not to Contract any
Obligations Rashly; for Good Offices in course are rather Baits, and Snares,
then Benefits; and there are some Certain People, that a Sober Man would not
Venture the being Beholden to. The Poor Woman here, had her Jest for her
Household Stuff; and the Vain Satisfaction of Paying her Physician with a
Conceit for his Money. It Minds me of the Orator that was to Teach a Young Man
Rhetoric, on Condition of Double Pay upon the Perfecting of him in his
Profession, and not a Penny before; The Master followed his Scholar Close, and
came to him at last for his Money, according to the Bargain: The Young Fellow
begged him over and over to Forbear it a while, but could not Prevail. He told
him Then, that there was nothing Due to him; for if Rhetoric be (as you say)
the Art or Power of Persuasion; and if I cannot prevail with you to forbear
Your Money, I am not Master of my Trade yet. This was the Woman's Way of
Reasoning with the Physician. The Dr. would have his Money for the Curing of her
Eyes, and the Woman shuffl'd it off that she was not Cured, for she could see
Nothing at all, which was One Fallacy upon Another.

FAB. CXV. A Cat and Mice.
THere was a House Mightily troubled with Mice, and a Notable Cat there was,
that Time after Time had Picked up so Many of 'em, that they agreed among
themselves to keep above in the Cieling; for they found that upon the Plain
Floor there was No Living for 'em. This Spoiled Pusses Sport, unless she could
find a way to Trepan them Down again. So she Leapt up to a Pin that was driven
into the Wall, and there Hung like a Polcat in a Warren, to Amuse them. The
Mice took Notice of it, and One Wiser then the rest Stretched out his Neck to
learn the Truth of the Matter, and so soon as ever he found how 'twas. Ah, says
he, You may Hang there 'till Your Heart Aches; for if you were but a Dish-Clout,
as you are a Counterfeiting-Devil of a Cat, here is not a Creature will come
Near ye.

The MORAL.
Let no man lay himself at the Mercy of a known Enemy, under any Show, or
Pretense Whatsoever; for he forfeits his Discretion, even though he should
happen to Save his Carcass, and his Fortune.

REFLECTION.
WHAT we cannot Compass by Force, must be Attempted by Invention, and Address,
but then on the Other hand, in All Cases of Hazard, Things would be well
Weighed and Examined before we Trust. This Fable is the Fiction of a Case not
Altogether Incredible. It Is a Common Thing for an Old Jade to Counterfeit Lame,
for fear of Hard Riding: for a Duck to run Flapping and Fluttering away, as if
she were Maimed, to carry People from her Young: as there is a Story of a Fox
that was Hard Hunted, and Hung himself up by the Teeth in a Warren among the
Vermin to put the Dogs to a Loss. Without any more Words, Twenty Instances
might be given to show how near That which we call Impulse, or Instinct, comes
to Reason: For the Cats Policy was no Other in truth, then That we call
Sleeping Dog-Sleep: And there was the very same Forethought, and Design in it
too, which in a Construction of Law and Equity passes for Malice Prepense.

FAB. CXVI. An Ape and a Fox.
UPon the Decease of a Lion of Late Famous Memory, the Beasts Met in Council to
Choose a King. There were Several Put up; but One was not of a Make for a King,
Another Wanted either Brains, or Strength, or Stature, or Humor, or something
else; but in fine, the Buffoon-Ape with his Grimaces and Gamboles, carried it
from the Whole Field by I know not how many Voices. The Fox (being one of the
Pretenders) Stomach'd it Extremely to see the Choice go against him, and
presently Rounds the New-Elect in the Ear, with a piece of Secret Service that
he could do him. Sir, says he, I have Discovered some Hidden Treasure Yonder:
But it is a Royalty that belongs to Your Majesty, and I have nothing to do with
it. So he Carried the Ape to take Possession: And what should This Treasure be,
but a Bayte in a Ditch. The Ape lays his Hand upon it, and the Trap springs and
Catches him by the Fingers. Ah thou Perfidious Wretch, cries the Ape! Or thou
simple Prince, rather, replies the Fox. You a Governor of Others, with a
Vengeance, that han't Wit enough to look to your own Fingers.

The MORAL.
Governors should be Men of Business rather then Pleasure. There Is One Great
Folly in Making an Ill Choice of a Ruler, and Another in the Acceptance of it;
for it Exposes Authority to Scorn.

REFLECTION.
RASHNESS, and Want of Consideration, is ever Unfortunate. Men should not take
a Charge upon them that they are not Fit for; as if Singing, Dancing, and
Showing of Tricks, were Qualifications for a Governor. Baudoin says, that This
Fable, shows not only the Envy and Malignity of the Fox; but the Imprudence of
the Electors in the Choice of Ministers and Officers, that are not made for
Business. Here Is first an Ape made a King, for showing Tricks, and making Fools
Faces; And the Fox is then to put a Slurr upon him, in Exposing him for Sport,
to the Scorn of the People.

Here Is an Ape chosen King, in Succession to a Lion; which stands for a Short,
and a Plain Representation of the Best and the Worst of Governments under the
Dignity of the One, and the Indignity of the Other. It sets forth the Case and
Unhappiness of Elective Kingdoms, where Canvassing and Faction has commonly too
great a hand in the Election. Nor is there any Wonder, to see Drolls and
Tumblers Advanced to Charges of Honor and Profit, where Ignorance and
Popularity sways the Choice: And nothing so fit as an Ape, for a Commission of
State, where a Gambole, or a Grimace passes for a Qualifying Title to the
Exercise of Power.

It is no Wonder again, where People are so Mistaken in the Faculties and
Capacities of Government, that they depart also from the Veneration that is due
to it; and when the Main Ends of it shall come to be Disappointed. For every
Iack-Pudding, with Aesop's Fox here, will be Ridiculing Palpable Weaknesses,
and Exposing those (almost Sacred) Imperfections, and Defects which they ought
to Cover. What Is a Character of Honor upon the Shoulders of a Man that has
neither a Soul Answerable to it, nor a True Sense of the Dignity, but a Mark set
up for every Common Fool to shoot his Bolt at! When Apes are in Power, there
will never want Foxes to Play upon them.

FAB. CXVII. A Smith and his Dog.
A Blacksmith took Notice of a Cur he had, that would be perpetually Sleeping,
so long as his Master was at his Hammer; but whenever he went to Dinner, the
Dog would be sure to make One. So he Asked the Dog the Reason on it. What Is the
Meaning of it, says he, that so long as I Am at the Forge, you are still taking
your Nap; but so soon as my Chops begin to Walk, yours must be Walking too for
Company? There Is a time to Sleep (says the Dog) and a Time to Wake; and Every
thing is Well done that is done in Due Season.

The MORAL.
All Creatures do Naturally look to the Main Chance; that is to say, the
Business of Food and Propagation.

REFLECTION.
THAT which Men do by Reason, Beasts do by Instinct. There Is No Living without
Food and Rest; and Nature appoints the Season, both for the One, and for the
Other. A Dog Wakes to his Dinner, as a Man that is to Travel next day, does for
his Journey, and his Business. He lies down to Sleep with the Hour in's Head,
and when the Time comes, he needs neither Clock nor Cock to call him. Custom
puts Nature into a Method of Expecting, and Attending all the Offices of Life
at such and such Certain Hours and Seasons, as we are used to: And there needed
no more than This, to make the Master's Dining Time, the Dog's Waking Time.

FAB. CXVIII. A Boasting Mule.
THere was a Favourite-Mule, that was High Fed, and in the Pride of Flesh and
Mettle, would still be Bragging of his Family, and his Ancestors. My Father
(says he) was a Coarser, and though I say it that should not say it, I my self
take after him. He had no sooner spoke the Words, but he was put to the Trial
of his Heels, and did not only show himself a Jade; but in the very Heat of his
Ostentation, his Father fell a Braying, which Minded him of his Original, and
the Whole Field made Sport on it, when they found him to be the Son of an Ass.

The MORAL.
A Bragging Fool that is Raised out of a Dunghill, and sets up for a Man of
Quality, is Ashamed of Nothing in This World but of his Own Father.

REFLECTION.
THis touches the Case of Those Mean Upstarts, that when they come once to be
Preferred, forget their Fathers, and have not the Wit to Consider, how soon
Fortune may set them Down again where she took 'em up; but yet at last, when
they come to be minded of their Original, it makes many a Proud Fool sensible
of a Scandalous Extraction, that has no Shame at all for a Scandalous Life.

It Is hardly safe to Descant upon a Boasting Mule, in a Fable, when there are
so many of his Brethren in the World, that will Take it to Themselves. Nay and
Over and Above the Self-Conceited Vanity of These Brutes, there are None so
forward neither, to Bespatter Men of Blood and Quality, as those that have most
Reason to be Ashamed of their Descent. This Pride of Pedigree is Easily run
down, if there be not Power Joined to the Ostentation: But where there is
Authority given to the Folly, as well as to the Fool; the Indignation that it
raises makes the Insolence Insupportable. Nothing Dashed the Confidence of the
Mule like the Braying of the Ass in the very Interim, while he was Dilating
upon his Genealogy. As who should say, Remember your Father, Sirrah. This comes
to the Case of a Spaniard, that was Wonderfully upon the Huff about his
Extraction, and would needs Prove himself of such a Family by the Spelling of
his Name; a Cavalier in the Company, with whom he had the Controversy, very
Civilly Yielded him the Point; for (says he) I have Examined the Records of a
certain House of Correction, and I find your Grandfather was Whipped there by
That Name. We have in fine a World of Boasting Mules among us, that don't care
for being Minded of their Braying Fathers: But it is the Fate of These
Vainglorious Fops to be Thus Met withal, and your Counterfeit Men of Honor
seldom come off Better; Wherefore let every Man look well about him before he
Boasts of his Pedigree, to see if he had not an Ass to his Father.

FAB. CXIX. A Dog and a Wolf.
A Wolf took a Dog napping at his Masters Door, and when he was just about to
Worry him, the Poor Creature begged hard, only for a Reprieve. Alas (says he)
I Am as Lean at present as Carryon; but we have a Wedding at our House within
these Two or Three Days, that will Plump me up you shall see with Good Cheer.
Pray have but Patience 'till Then, and when I Am in a Little Better Case, Ill
throw my self in the very Mouth of ye. The Wolf took his Word, and so let him
go; but passing some Few Days after by the same House again, he spied the Dog
in the Hall, and bad him Remember his Promise. Hark ye, my Friend, says the
Dog; Whenever you Catch me Asleep again, on the Wrong side of the Door, never
Trouble your Head to Wait for a Wedding.

The MORAL.
Experience Works upon Many Brutes more then upon Some Men. They are not to be
Gulled twice with the same Trick; And at the Worst, a Bad Shift is Better than
None.

REFLECTION.
It Is good to Provide against All Chances both Sleeping and Waking; for a Man
cannot be too Circumspect, upon Condition on the other hand, that his Caution
do not make him Over-sollicitous. Past Dangers make us Wiser for the Future; As
the Dog, after he had been snapt at the Door, had the Wit to lie in the Hall;
which tells us that a Wise Body is not to be Caught Twice by the same Snare and
Trick. His Promise to the Wolf was a kind of a Dog-Case of Conscience, and the
Wolf played the Fool in Taking his Word, for That which he was obliged not to
Perform.

FAB. CXX. A Lion and a Bull.
IN the Days of Yore, when Bulls lived upon Mutton, there was a Lion had a
Design upon a Mighty Bull, and gave him a very Civil Invitation to come and Sup
with him; for, says he, I have gotten a Sheep, and you must needs take Part
on it. The Bull Promised, and Went; but so soon as ever he saw what a Clutter
there was with Huge, Overgrown Pots, Pans, and Spits, away he scowr'd
Immediately. The Lion presently called after him, and Asked him, Whither in
such Have? Oh, says the Bull, it is High Time for me to be Jogging, when I see
such Preparation: for This Provision looks as if you were to have a Bull for
your Supper, rather then a Mutton.

The MORAL.
When a Man has both an Interest and an Inclination to Betray us, there is No
Trusting him.

REFLECTION.
There Is No Trusting to the Fair Words and Countenances of Bloody Men: He Is
sure to be Ruined that lays himself at the Mercy of Those that Live upon the
Spoil. Their very Complements are Snares; as the Lions Invitation of the Bull
to Sup with him, was but the Cover of a Design he had to Supp upon the Bull
himself.

FAB. CXXI. A Lion in Love.
A Lion fell in Love with a Country Lass, and desired her Father's Consent to
have her in Marriage. The Answer he gave was Churlish enough. He Would never Agree
to it he said, upon any Terms, to Marry his Daughter to a Beast. The Lion gave
him a Sour Look upon it, which brought the Bumkin, upon Second Thoughts, to
strike up a Bargain with him, upon these Conditions; that his Teeth should be
Drawn, and his Nails Pared; for Those were Things, he said, that the Foolish
Girl was Terribly afraid of. The Lion sends for a Surgeon immediately to do
the Work; (as what will not Love make a Body do?) And so soon as ever the
Operation was Over, he goes and Challenges the Father upon his Promise. The
Countryman seeing the Lion Disarmed, Plucked up a Good Heart, and with a
Swindging Cudgel so Ordered the Matter, that he broke off the Match.

The MORAL.
An Extravagant Love Consults neither Life, Fortune, nor Reputation, but
Sacrifices All that can be Dear to a Man of Sense and Honor, to the Transports
of an Inconsiderate Passion.

REFLECTION.
THIS Fable will look well enough in the Moral, how Fantastical soever it may
appear at first Blush in the Lines and Traces of it. Here Is a Beast in Love
with a Virgin; which is but a Reverse of the Preposterous Passions we meet with
Frequently in the World, when Reasonable Creatures of Both Sexes fall in love
with Those, that in the Allusion may (almost without a Figure) pass for
Beasts. There Is Nothing so Fierce, or so Savage, but Love will Soften it;
Nothing so Generous but it will Debauche it; Nothing so sharp sighted in Other
Matters, but it throws a Mist before the Eyes on it. It puts the Philosopher
beside his Latin; and to sum up All in a Little, where This Passion Domineers,
neither Honor, nor Virtue, is able to stand before it. The Lyon's Parting with
his Teeth, and his Claws, in a Complement to his New Mistress, is no more then
what we see Every Day Exemplified in the case of making over Estates and
Joyntures, with the Malice Prepense all this While, of holding their Noses to
the Grindstone, and with the Girls Father here, of Jilting them at last.

FAB. CXXII. A Lyoness and a Fox.
A Numerous Issue passes in the World for a Blessing; and This Consideration
made a Fox cast it in the Teeth of a Lyoness, that she brought forth but One
Whelp at a time. Very Right, says the Other, but then That One is a Lion.

The MORAL.
It Is a Common Thing to Value things more by the Number, then by the Excellency
of them.

REFLECTION.
THERE are more Fools in the World then Wise Men, and more Knaves then Honest
Men; so that it is not Number, but Excellency, that Inhaunces the Value of Any
thing. The most copious Writers are commonly the Arrantest Scriblers; And so in
much Talking, the Tongue is apt to run before the Wit: In Many Words there is
Folly, but a Word in Season is like Apples of Gold in Pictures of Silver: Says
the Oracle of Truth it self. And we have it from the same Authority, that our
very Prayers, when they are Loud and Long, are in the Sight of Heaven no better
then so much Babbling; and that they have More in them of Hypocrisy and
Ostentation, then of Affection and Judgment. The Great Creator of the Universe,
whose single FIAT was sufficient to have made Ten Thousand Worlds in the
Twinkling of an Eye, Allowed himself Six Days yet for the Finishing of his
Purpose: Paused upon Every Days Work, Considered of it, Reviewed it, and
Pronounced it Good; and so Proceeded. Right Reason Moves, in some Proportion,
by the same Steps and Degrees with This Inimitable Example: It Deliberates,
Projects, Executes, Weighes, and Approves. Nature does Nothing in a Huddle, and
Human Prudence should Govern it self by the same Measures. A Plurality of
Voices, it is true, carries the Question in all our Debates, but rather as an
Expedient for Peace, then an Eviction of the Right; for there are Millions of
Errors to One Reason, and Truth; And a Point is not so Easy to be Hit: In a
Word, the Old Saying is a shrewd One; that Wise Men Propose, and Fools
Determine. Take the World to pieces, and there are a thousand Sots to one
Philosopher: and as many Swarms of Flies to One Eagle. Lions do not come into
the World by Litters.

FAB. CXXIII. Two Cocks Fighting.
TWO Cocks fought a Duel for the Mastery of a Dunghill. He that was Worsted,
slunk away into a Corner, and Hid himself; The Other takes his Flight up to the
Top of the House, and there with Crowing and Clapping of his Wings makes
Proclamation of his Victory. An Eagle made a Stoop at him in the Middle of his
Exultation, and carried him away. By This Accident, the Other Cock had a Good
Riddance of his Rival; took Possession of the Province they Contended for, and
had All his Mistresses to Himself again.

The MORAL.
A Wise, and a Generous Enemy will make a Modest Use of a Victory; for Fortune
is Variable.

REFLECTION.
THIS Combat of Two Cocks for a Dunghill, may be Moraliz'd by an Application of
it to the Competition of the Greatest Princes, for Empire and Dominion. For
what is the World more then a Mass of Dirt on the One hand, as to the Subject of
the Quarrel; and there is the same Thirst of Blood too, betwixt the Combatants,
on the Other. We have again, the Various Chance of War Exhibited on Both
Sides: For it is with Kings, as with These Cocks. He that is a Victor This
Moment, may be a Slave the Next: And this Volubility of Human Affairs, what is
it, but either the Sport, or the Judgment of Providence, in the Punishment of
Arrogance and Oppression! We are given finally to Understand, that as the
Levity of Fortune leaves us Nothing to Trust to, or to Presume upon, so at the
same Time there is Nothing to Despair of. The Conquering Cock was Cut off in the
very Song of his Triumph: and the Conquered, re-instated in the Possession of
his former Pretenses.

FAB. CXXIV. A Fawn and a Stag.
A Fawn was Reasoning the Matter with a Stag, why he should run away from the
Dogs still; for, says he, you are Bigger and Stronger then They. If you have a
Mind to stand, you are better Armed; And then you are Fleeter if you will Run for it.
I cannot Imagine what should make you so Fearful of a Company of Pityful Currs.
Nay, says the Stag, it is All True that you say, and it is no more then I say to
my self Many Times, and yet whatever the Matter is, let me take up what
Resolutions I please, when I hear the Hounds once, I cannot but betake my self
to my Heels.

The MORAL
It Is One thing to Know what we ought to do, and Another thing to Execute it;
and to bring up our Practice to our Philosophy: He that is naturally a Coward
is not to be made Valiant by Council.

REFLECTION.
NATURAL Infirmities are well nigh Insuperable; and Men that are Cowards by
Complexion, are hardly ever to be made Valiant by Discourse. But They are
Conscious yet of the Scandal of that Weakness, and may make a shift perhaps to
Reason themselves now and then into a kind of Temporary Resolution, which they
have not the Power afterward to go Thorough with. We find it to be much the
same Case in the Government of our Affections and Appetites, that it is in
These Bodyly Frailties of Temperament and Complexion. Providence has Armed us
with Powers and Faculties, sufficient for the Confounding of All the Enemies we
have to Encounter. We have Life and Death before us: That is to say, Good and
Evil; And we know which is which too: Beside that it is at our Choice to Take
or to Refuse. So that we understand what we ought to do; but when we come to
Deliberate, we play Booty against our selves: And while our Judgments and our
Consciences direct us One Way, our Corruptions Hurry us Another. This Stag, in
fine, is a Thorough Emblem of the State, and Infirmity of Mankind. We are both
of us Armed and Provided, either for the Combat, or for Flight. We see the
Danger; we Ponder upon it; and now and then by Fits, take up some Faint
Resolutions to Outbrave and break thorough it: But in the Conclusion, we shrink
upon the Trial; We betake our selves from our Heads to our Heels; from Reason
to Flesh and Blood; from our Strength to our Weaknesses, and suffer under One
Common Fate.

FAB. CXXV. Jupiter and a Be.
A Be made Jupiter a Present of a Pot of Honey, which was so kindly Taken, that
he bad her Ask what she would, and it should be Granted her. The Be desired,
that wherever she should set her Sting, it might be Mortal. Jupiter was loath
to leave Mankind at the Mercy of a Little Spiteful Insect, and so bad her have
a care how she Killed any Body; for what Person soever she Attacqu'd, if she
left her Sting behind her, it should cost her her Life.

The MORAL.
Spiteful Prayers are no better than Curses in a Disguise, and the Granting of
them turns commonly to the Mischief of the Petitioner.

REFLECTION:
CRUELTY and Revenge are directly contrary to the very Nature of the Divine
Goodness, and the Mischief that is Designed for Other People returns commonly
upon the Head of the Author.

How many Men are there in the World, that put up as Malicious Prayers in
Christian Assemblyes to the True God, as the Be does to Jupiter here in the
Fable! And Prayers too against their very Patrons and Masters; their
Benefactors that Entertain, Feed, and Protect them. Will Heaven Hear These
Prayers, shall we think, (or Curses rather) and not Punish them? This Be did
not Pray for a Power to Kill, without a Previous Disposition and Design, to put
that Venomous Power in Execution. She had Mischief in her Heart already, and
only wanted some Destructive Faculty, answerable to her Will: And so prayed to
Jupiter, as Men do in many Cases to the Jehovah, for the Blessing of an Ability
to Commit Murder.

FAB. CXXVI. Wasps in a Honey-Pot.
THere was a Whole Swarm of Wasps got into a Hony-Pot, and there they Cloyed
and Clamm'd themselves, till there was no getting Out again; which brought them
to Understand in the Conclusion, that they had paid too Dear for their
Sweetmeats.

The MORAL.
Loose Pleasures become Necessary to Us by the Frequent Use of them, and when
they come once to be Habitual, there is no getting Clear again.

REFLECTION.
THESE Wasps in a Hony-Pot are so many Sensual Men that are Plunged in their
Lusts and Pleasures; and when they are once Glu'd to them, it is a very Hard
Matter to Work themselves Out. We have an Emblem here of Those Foolish
Voluptuous Men, that Sacrifice the Peace, the Honor, the Comfort, and all
other Substantial Satisfactions of Life, to the Temptation of a Liquorish
Palate. And so for the Liberties of Wine, Women, Feasting, and Jolly Company;
The Pomp and Splendour of Courts and Parades, etc. It comes All to the same
Point; for when Men are once Dipped; what with the Engagements of Sense, Custom,
Facility; Nay and I might have said, with the very Shame of Departing from
what they have given themselves up to, they go on with Aesops Flies, 'till they
are Stifled in their very Pleasures.

FAB. CXXVII. A Young Man and a Swallow.
A Prodigal Young Fellow that had sold his Cloths to his very Shirt, upon the
Sight of a Swallow that came abroad before her Time, made Account that Summer
was now at Hand, and away went That too. There happened after This, a Fit of
Bitter Cold Weather, that almost starved both the Bird, and the Spendthrift.
Well (says the Fellow to Himself) This Sot of a Swallow has been the Ruin of
us Both.

The MORAL:
Extraordinary Cases are Excepted out of the General Rules of Life: So that
Irregular Accidents and Instances are not to be drawn into President.

REFLECTION.
EVERY Man Stands or Falls to his Own Reason; and it is No Excuse to say, that
I was Misled by Example, or Conjecture, when I had the Means before me of
Enforming my self Better. If this Prodigal had but Consulted the Almanac, or
his own Experience, it would have set him Right in the Course of the Seasons,
or the Old Proverb Methinks might have satisfied him, that One Swallow makes no
Summer, Unless the Fable perchance should fall out to be the Ancienter of the
Two, and the Occasion of That Proverb: But there are Certain Extravagants among
People of all Sizes and Professions, and there must be no Drawing of General
Rules from Particular Exceptions.

FAB. CXXVIII. Mercury and a Carpenter.
A Carpenter dropped his Axe into a River, and put up a Prayer to Mercury to help
him to it again. Mercury Dived for it, and brought him up a Golden One: but That
was not it the Fellow said: And so he Plunged a Second Time, and Fetched up
Another, of Silver. He said That was not it neither. He tried once again, and
then Up comes an Axe with a Wooden Handle, which the Carpenter, said was the
very Tool that he had Lost. Well! (says Mercury) thou art so Just a Poor
Wretch, that I Will give thee All Three now for thy Honesty. This Story was got
into Every bodies Mouth, and the Rumor being Spread, it came into a Knaves
Head to Try the Same Experiment over again. And so away goes He and Down he
Sits, Sniv'ling and Whelping upon the Bank of a River, that he had Dropped his
Axe into the Water there. Mercury, that was at hand it seems, heard his
Lamentation, and Dipping once again for his Axe, as he had done for the Other;
up he brings him a Golden Axe, and Asks the Fellow if That were it. Yes, Yes,
says he, This is it. Oh thou Impudent Sot, cries Mercury; to think of putting
Tricks upon Him that sees through the very Heart of thee.

The MORAL.
The Great Searcher of our Hearts is not to be Imposed upon, but he will take
his Own Time either to Reward or Punish.

REFLECTION.
HEAVEN Hates Dissemblers, and Hypocrites, as it Loves men of Truth and
Integrity. He that fan^yes he can Impose upon Jupiter takes him for a Cully.

Baudoin Morallizes the Matter thus; that Mercury's called upon, and Sent, as
the Patron of Artizans. The Practice of Truth and Justice can never fail of a
Reward in the Conclusion, and the bringing in of a God to the Relief of a Poor
Man, shows that it is from Heaven that the Needy are to Expect Redress.

Here are Two Men at their Prayers; The One a Downright Plain Dealer; and the
Other, a Trimming, Designing Hypocrite. The Former has a Reverence in his Heart
for the Power that he Invokes; He is not to be Corrupted with Gold, or Silver.
He stands in Awe of his Conscience, and makes good his Profession, with his
Practice: Receiving in the End, the Blessing of a Reward for his Integrity. The
Other Worships with his Eyes, his Hands, and his Voice; but All This is only to
Cover the Cheat of a Rotten-Heart. He acknowledges a Divine Power, but at the
Same Time he makes a Mock on it, and Provokes it. He stands Convinced that God
knows All the Secrets of his Heart, and yet tells him a Lie to his Face. There
is No such Masque, in fine, for the Greatest of Impietyes, as a Veil of
Religion. This Praying Carpenter here would have made Mercury a Broaker to his
Knavery: and we have a world of Praying Christians too, that write after his
Copy.

FAB. CXXIX. A Fox and Grapes.
THere was a Time, when a Fox would have Ventured as far for a Bunch of Grapes,
as for a Shoulder of Mutton, and it was a Fox of Those days, and of That
Palate, that stood Gaping under a Vine, and licking his Lips at a most
Delicious Cluster of Grapes that he had Spied out there; He fetched a Hundred
and a Hundred Leaps at it, 'till at last, when he was as Weary as a Dog, and
found that there was No Good to be done; Hang 'em (says He) they are as Sour as
Crabs; and so away he went, turning off the Disappointment with a Jest.

FAB. CXXX. A Wolf and a Lion.
AS a Wolf and a Lion were abroad upon Adventure together, Hark, (says the
Wolf) Don't you hear the Bleating of Sheep? My Life for Yours Sir, I Will go
fetch ye a Purchase. Away he goes, and follows his Ear, till he came just
under the Sheepfold: But it was so well fortify*d, and the Dogs asleep so Near
it, that back he comes Sneaking to the Lion again, and tells him, There are
Sheep Yonder (says he) it is true, but they are as Lean as Carrion, and we had
even as good let 'em alone 'till they have more Flesh on their Backs.

The MORAL of the TWO FABLES above.
It Is matter of Skill and Address, when a man cannot Honestly Compass what he
would be at, to Appear Easy and Indifferent upon All Repulses and
Disappointments.

REFLECTION.
IT IS a Point of Good Discretion to make a Virtue of a Necessity, and to
Content our selves with what we cannot get, though we have never so much a Mind
to it; for it is a Turn of Art to seem to Despise what we cannot Compass, and to
put off a Miscarriage with a Jest; Beside, that it is Better to have People
think a man could Gain Such or such a Point if he Would, then that he Would,
but cannot.

The Foxes Put off in This Fable, is a most Instructive Point of Philosophy
toward the Government of our Lives; Provided that his Fooling may be made our
Earnest; as it would be much for our Honor and Quiet so to be. No man can be
Miserable if he can but keep Clear of the Snare of Hopes and Fears; and
Antidote himself against the Flatteries of the One, and the Alarums of the
Other: It is a High Point of Christian, as well as of Civil Prudence; for a man
to say Thus to Himself beforehand, of a Thing that he has a Mind to [ If I
cannot get it, I shall be Better without it.] Or if he can but say after the
Missing of it, [ It was better Lost then found.] Now if we cannot Arrive at the
Pitch of making This Indifference a Virtue indeed, we may however so Disguise
it yet, (though in a case of Necessity) as to make it Look like One: Not but
that it would be much better if we could Attain to the Perfection it self, as
well as we may in Appearance Cover the Disgrace.

I knew a Fine Lady once, and she was a Woman of Sense, Quality, and a very
Generous Mind. She lay under Mortifications in abundance, and yet was never
Observed to be Peevish, or Angry, upon Any Provocation Whatsoever; and the
Reason she gave for it was This: [ It Will make Me Look Old,) So that it is not
so much the want of Ability to master our Affections, as the want of Resolution
to go thorough with the Experiment. This is a way to keep us Firm in All
Trials: or if He, that upon a True Principle, lives without any Disquiet of
Thought, may be said to be Happy. It Emproves All our Disappointments into
Providence, when we can let fall the Vain Desire of any thing without Feeling
the Loss of it. It comes All to a Case now, upon the force of the Moral,
whether we Quit, as the Fox did the Grapes, because he could not come at them,
or as the Wolf did the Sheep, because he durst not Venture, upon 'em. But be
it either the One or the Other, there is a Virtue, and a Blessing in it, Both
ways, in getting the Better of our Passions: which might certainly be done if
we had but Half the Tenderness for our Minds and Consciences, that we have for
our Carcasses, and our Fortunes.

FAB. CXXXI. A Boy and a Snake.
A Boy was Groping for Eles, and laid his hand upon a Snake, but the Snake,
finding it was Pure Simplicity, and not Malice, Admonished him of his Mistake;
Keep your self Well while you are Well, says the Snake; for if you Meddle with
Me, You Will Repent your Bargain.

The MORAL.
It Is the Intention, Morally Speaking, that makes the Action Good or Bad; and
even Brutes themselves will put a Difference betwixt Harms of Ill Will and
Mischance.

REFLECTION.
It Is Wisdom, as well as Justice, to Distinguish betwixt Actions of
Misadventure, and of Design. Every Thing has at least Two Handles to it, and
Both Parts should be well Examined, before a Man can make either a Warrantable
Judgment, or a Prudent Choice. The Boy's Mistake here is no more then what we
have Every day before our Eyes in common Practice: And That which the Snake
says to the Boy, Every Man's Reason says to Himself. What is his taking a Snake
for an Ele, but our taking Vice for Virtue? He did it Unwarily: And so do We
Many times too. He took the One for the Other, because they were so much Alike,
that at first View he could not Distinguish them. And are not Virtue and Vice
as Like, in several Instances, as One Egg is to Another? How shall a Man know,
at first Blush, Hypocrisy from Piety; True Charity from Ostentation; or the
Devil Himself with a Glory about him, from an Angel of Light? Time and
Examination may do Much, but the Boy was Groping, and in the Dark, and so might
Well be Mistaken. The Snake Told him of his Error, and the Danger of it, but
Passed it over, because there was no Ill Will in it. This is the very Case of
Our Reason to us, in all our Misdoings: It Checks us for what is Past, and
Advises us for the Future, to have a care of False Appearances: Just as the
Snake did to the Child here.

FAB. CXXXII. A Fowler and a Partridge.
A Fowler had taken a Partridge, and the Bird offered her self to Decoy as many
of her Companions into the Snare as she could, upon Condition that he would but
give her Quarter. No, says he, You shall Dye the rather for That very Reason,
because you would be so Base as to Betray your Friends to save your self.

The MORAL.
Of all Scandalous and Lewd Offices, That of a Traitor is Certainly the Basest;
for it Undermines the very Foundations of Society.

REFLECTION.
TREACHERY is a Sin against Common Faith, Honor, and Humane Society; A
Villainy, in short, that is never to be Approved, how Convenient soever in some
Cases to be made use of. The Fowler's here, was a Wise and a Generous
Resolution, upon the Partridges Proposal; for all Traitors are Mercenaries; and
Whoever Betrays One Master for Advantage, will Betray Another for a Better
Price. But as all manner of Treachery is Abominable in the Sight both of God
and Man, and stands Reprehended in this Fable: So there are Certain Kinds and
Degrees of it, that are yet more Execrable and Odious, One then Another. There
is first a Treachery by Complexion, which was the Partridges Case. Her Heart
Failed her, and she would fain have Compounded for her Own Life, by the
Betraying of her Fellows. This was an Unhappy Infirmity, but the Weakness all
this while, does not Excuse the Persidy, though it may seem in some Measure to
Extenuate the Crime, by the Poor Creatures lying under almost an Insuperable
Frailty. The Fowler however made an Example of her for a Terror to Others. Now
if a Treachery of this Quality be so Unpardonable, what shall we say to Those
Iudas'es, that Dip in the Dish with their Masters, and then for so many Pieces
of Silver, deliver them up to be Crucified? What shall we say to Those that
Sell their Country, their Souls, and their Religion, for Money, and Rate
Divinity at so much a Pound? And then to Consummate the Wickedness, Finish the
Work with Malice, that they began with Avarice.

FAB. CXXXIII. A Hare and a Tortoise.
WHat a Dull Heavy Creature (says a Hare) is This same Tortoise! And yet (says
the Tortoise) I Will run with you for a Wager. 'Twas Done and Done, and the Fox,
by Consent, was to be the Judge. They started together, and the Tortoise kept
Jogging on still, 'till he came to the End of the Course. The Hare laid
himself down about Midway, and took a Nap; for, says he, I can fetch up the
Tortoise when I please: But he Over-slept himself it seems, for when he came to
Wake, though he scudded away as fast as 'twas possible, the Tortoise got to the
Post before him, and Won the Wager.

The MORAL.
Up and be Doing, is an Edifying Text; for Action is the Business of Life, and
there is no Thought of ever coming to the End of our Journey in time, if we
Sleep by the Way.

REFLECTION.
UNNECESSARY Delays in All Pressing Affairs are but just so much time Lost,
beside the Hazard of Intervening Contingencies that may Endanger a Total
Disappointment. Let not the Work of to day be put off 'till to morrow; for the
Future is Uncertain; and he that lies down to Sleep in the Middle of Business
that requires Action, does not know whether he shall live to 'wake again: Or
with the Hare in the Fable here, Out-sleep his Opportunity. A Plodding
Diligence brings us sooner to our Journey's End, then a Fluttering Way of
Advancing by Starts and by Stops; for it is Perseverance Alone that can carry us
Thorough-Stitch.

FAB. CXXXIV. Apples and Horse-Turds.
UPon a very great Fall of Rain, the Current carried Away a Huge Heap of
Apples, together with a Dunghill that lay in the Watercourse. They Floated a
good while together like Brethren and Companions; and as they went thus Dancing
down the Stream, the Horse-Turds would be every foot crying out still, Alack a
day! How We Apples Swim!

FAB. CXXXV. A Peach, an Apple, and a Blackberry.
THere happened a Controversy once betwixt a Peach, and an Apple, which was
the Fairer Fruit of the Two. They were so Loud in their Discourse, that a
Blackberry from the next Hedge, Overheard them. Come (says the Blackberry) We
are All Friends, and pray let us have No Jangling among our selves?

The MORAL of the Two FABLES above,
Every Thing would be Thought Greater in the World then it is, and the Root of
it is This, that it first thinks it self so.

REFLECTION.
IT IS a Vanity Common in the World, for Every Pretending Coxcomb to make
himself One of the Party still with his Betters. They cry We to Every thing,
and make themselves Necessary upon All Occasions, and to All Purposes, and
People, when upon the Truth of the Matter, they are found to be good for Just
Nothing at all.

[ Wee] Apples cry the Horse-Turds [Wee] the Kings Officers, cries the Fellow
that carrys Guts to the Bears [Wee] cries the Scumm of the Nation to the Bench,
to the Court, to the City, to the Church, to Parliaments, and Councels. There Is
Nothing so Great, but the Little People cry [Wee] to it still. [Wee'l] do This,
and [Wee'l] do That, and [Wee'l] Undertake for This and The Other, This is in a
Familiar Way, the Common Style of the Licentious Multitude, to the Scandal of
all Honorable Commissions, and of Those that Manage them. And This Humor of [
Weeing] holds as well in Matters of State, and of Understanding, as in the
Point of Honor and Quality. It Was [Wee] in the Persons of the Fish Wives and
the Broom-Men [Wee] again in the Resolutions of Billingsgate, and Grub street,
that took upon them to Prescribe in Matters of Religion and Government. [Wee]
will not lose our Religion, was the Cry of Every Ignorant Atheist. [Wee'l] stand
up for our Properties was the Beggars Song that lived upon the Alms Basket. And
[Wee] for our Liberties, cry the Slaves of All Times and Interests; Nay and
None so straight Laced as Common Cheats upon the Topique of Conscience. And so
it was [Wee] again in the Name of the Multitude that did Every thing that was
thought Worth the Doing. Now if the Dregs of the People will be Opening, and
Crying [Wee] to Every thing; the Mobile has a Wide Mouth, and there is No
Stopping it. But the Arrogance of the Rabbles Assuming at This Rate, is Nothing
to the Meanness of their Superiors when they shall descend to keep such
Company; or to make use of such Tools or Engines. It Is not half so bad for the
Apples to cry [Wee] Horse-Turds, as it would be for Men of State, and Caball,
to cry [Wee] Tinkers and Carr-Men. But This is a Supposition, not to Enter so
much as into the Thought of any Man of Sense or Honor. This Fable will also
bear as Edifying, and as Pertinent a Moral, in the Inversion, as it does the
Other Way. We Rogues, on the One Hand, is Every jot as Emphatical, as We
Princes, on the Other.

FAB. CXXXVI. A Mole and her Dam.
MOther (says a Mole to her Damm) Here Is a Strange Smell Methinks. And then she
was at it again, There Is a Mulberry-Tree I perceive. And so a Third Time, What
a Clattering of Hammers do I hear. Daughter says the Old One, You have now
quite Betrayed your self; for I thought You had Wanted only One Sense, and now
I find you want Three; for you can neither Hear nor Smell any more then you can
See.

The MORAL.
Men Labor under Many Imperfections that No Body would take Notice of, if they
themselves were not Over-sollicitous to Conceal them.

REFLECTION.
BOASTERS are Naturally Falsifyers, and the People of All Others that put their
Shams the Worst together. Their Imperfections would not be Half so much taken
Notice of, if their Own Vanity did not make Proclamation of them; As a Blind
Lady that I knew, was never Well, but when she was Discoursing of Colors. It Is
a Strange Thing, the Impudence of some Women! Was a Word often in the Mouth of
a Precise Dame, who her self was as Common as the King's Highway. I knew
Another that was never without Lemmon Pill in her Mouth, to Correct an
Unfavoury Vapor of her Own, and yet would be Perpetually Inveighing against
Foul Breaths. Now This way of Covering Defects, Scandals or Inconveniences, is
the Only Way of Exposing them.

FAB. CXXXVII. Wasps, Partridges, and a Husbandman.
A Flight of Wasps, and a Covy of Partridges that were hard put to it for Water,
went to a Farmer, and begged a Soup of him to Quench their Thirst. The
Partridges offered to Dig his Vineyard for it, and the Wasps to secure him from
Thieves. Pray hold your Hand, says the Good Man; I have Oxen and Dogs that do
me These Offices already, without standing upon Terms. And therefore it will
become me to Provide for Them in the First Place.

The MORAL.
Charity begins at Home, but the Necessary Duty of it in One Place, does not
Discharge the Christian Exercise of it in Another.

REFLECTION.
CHARITY is a Humane, as well as a Christian Virtue, and there is a Place for
it, even upon Brutes, under the Duty of Tenderness and Good Nature, as well as
upon Men; but still with a Distinction by way of Preference, that it is to be
Employed in the First Place upon Those that have the Fairest Right to it: It Is
One thing I must Confess, to Condition for a Good Office, and Another thing to
do it Gratis; so that the Husbandman took the Proposal by the Right Handle in
That Respect: But his being provided of Servants already, to do his Work was no
Excuse for his Want of Charity to Relieve his Distressed Neighbor.

FAB. CXXXVIII. Jupiter and a Serpent.
JUpiter had Presents made him upon his Wedding Day, Greater, or Less, from All
Living Creatures. A Serpent brought him a Rose in his Mouth for an Offering.
The Thing was Acceptable enough, but not the Presenter; for (says Jupiter)
though Gifts are Welcome to me, of Themselves, I must not yet receive any from
a Serpent.

The MORAL.
He that receives a Present, Contracts an Obligation: which a Body would be
Ashamed of in the Case of an Ill Man; for it looks toward making a Friendship
with him.

REFLECTION.
A Good Man would not Willingly lie under any Obligation to a Person of a Lewd
Character and Conversation; for beside the Danger he Incurrs, it would not be
for his Credit neither, where Presents are Scandals, and rather Snares then
Benefits. It Is a kind of Encumbrance upon the freedom of a Generous Mind, to be
debt to an Ill Man, even upon any Score whatsoever, that does but carry the
face of Good Will, or Respect; for it is a Debt that a Man's both Ashamed and
Weary of 'till it is paid off. He lives uneasily under the Burden of it, and
Consequently, it is the Debt of All Others that ought first to be Answered. And
there is Something more in it yet too, which is, that when All Common Scores are
made even, the Morality of the Obligation still remains; for there is no
Cancelling the Bonds of Honor and Justice. Kindnesses are to be paid in specie,
as well as Money. That is to say, there must be Affection in the Return, as well
as Justice. Now as there can be No True Friendship betwixt a Good Man and a
Wicked Man, there should be no Intercourse betwixt them that looks like
Friendship, and therefore the Less Commerce the Better. As Jupiter, we see,
would have Nothing to do with the Serpent.

FAB. CXXXIX. A Flea and a Man.
A Fellow finding somewhat Prick him, Popt his Finger upon the Place, and it
proved to be a Flea. What art thou, says he, for an Animal, to Suck thy
Livelihood out of My Carcass? Why it is the Livelihood, (says the Flea) that
Nature has Allotted me, and My Stinging is not Mortal neither. Well, says the
Man, but it is Troublesome however; and now I Have ye, I ll secure ye for ever
Hurting me again, either Little or Much.

The MORAL.
Live and Let Live, is the Rule of Common Justice, but if People will be
Troublesome on the One hand, the Obligation is Discharged on the other.

REFLECTION.
IT is as Natural for a Man to Kill a Flea, as it is for a Flea to Bite a Man.
There Is a kind of self-Preservation on Both sides, and without Any Malice on
Either Hand. The Flea cannot Live without Nourishment, nor the Man without
Rest. So that here is only a Present Dispatch on the One Hand, to prevent a
Lingering Death on the Other (as a Restless Life is in Truth no Better) There
are in the World as many Illustrations of This Fable, as there are Instances of
Petulant, Pragmatical, and Impertinent People that Break in upon Men of
Government and Business. Distractions have much in them of Flea-Bitings; That
is to say, they keep us Waking, and Hinder our Repose. The Flea thought it hard
to suffer Death for an Importunity: But to a Man that knows how to Value his
Time and his Quiet, One Importunity upon the Neck of Another, is the Killing of
a Man Alive, and the very Worst of Deaths.

FAB. CXL. A Flea and Hercules.
THere was a Fellow, that upon a Flea-Biting called out to Hercules for Help.
The Flea gets away, and the Man Expostulates upon the Matter. Well! Hercules;
(says he) You that would not take My Part against a Sorry Flea, will never
stand by me in a Time of Need, against a more Powerful Enemy.

The MORAL.
We Neglect God in Greater Matters, and Petition him for Trifles, nay and Take
Pett at last if we cannot have our Askings.

REFLECTION.
It Is an Ill Habit to turn Offices and Duties of Piety into Matters and Words
only of Course; and to Squander away our Wishes and our Prayers upon Paltry
Fooleries, when the Great Concerns of Life and Death, Heaven and Hell, lie all
at stake. Who but a Mad man, that has so many Necessary and Capital Duties of
Christianity to Think of, would ever have made a Deliverance from a Flea-Biting
a Part of his Litany? It makes our Devotions Ridiculous, to be so Unfeeling on
the One side, and so Over-sensible, and Sollicitous on the Other. By this
Foolish and Impertinent Way of our Proceeding toward the Almighty, Men Slide by
little and little into some sort of Doubt, if not a Direct Disbelief and
Contempt of his Power. And then with the Country Fellow here, if we cannot
Obtain Every Vain Thing we Ask, our next Business is to take Pet at the
Refusal, and so in Revenge to give over Praying for Good and All; and so to
Renounce Heaven for a Flea-Biting.

FAB: CXLI. A Man and Two Wives.
IT was now Cuckow-Time, and a Certain Middle-Ag'd Man, that was Half-Gray,
Half-Brown, took a fancy to Marry Two Wives, of an Age One under Another, and
Happy was the Woman that could please him Best. They took Mighty Care of him to
All manner of Purposes, and still as they were Combing the Good Man's Head,
they would be Picking out here and there a Hair to make it all of a Color. The
Matronly Wife, she Plucked out All the Brown Hairs, and the Younger the White:
So that they left the Man in the Conclusion no better then a Bald Buzzard
betwixt them.

The MORAL.
It Is a much Harder Thing to Please Two Wives then Two Masters; and He Is a Bold
Man that offers at it.

REFLECTION.
MARRIAGES are Governed, rather by an Overruling Fatality, then by any
Solemnity of Choice and Judgment; though it is a Hard Matter to find out a
Woman, even at the Best, that is of a Just Scantling for her Age, Person,
Humor, and Fortune to make a Wife of. This Fable presents us with One single
Disparity that is of it self Sufficient, without a more then Ordinary Measure
of Virtue and Prudence, to make a Man Miserable and Ridiculous. I speak of a
Disparity of Years, which, in the Moral, takes-in all Other Disproportions. The
One's too Young, The Other too Old; to show us that Marriage is out of Season if
it does not Hit the very Critical Point betwixt them. It Is much with Wedlock,
as it is with our Sovereign Cordials and Antidotes. There go a Thousand
Ingredients to the making of the Composition: But then if they be not Timed,
Proportioned, and Prepared according to Art, it is a Clog to us rather then a
Relief. So that it would have been Well, if Nature had Prescribed the Dos of
Womans-Flesh, as she has Determined the Necessity of it.

FAB. CXLII. Two Frogs that wanted Water.
UPon the Drying up of a Lake, Two Frogs were forced to Quit, and to seek for
Water Elsewhere. As they were upon the Search, they Discovered a very Deep
Well. Come (says One to The Other) Let us even go down here, without Looking any
further. You say well, says her Companion; but what if the Water should fail us
Here too? How shall we get Out again?

The MORAL.
It Is Good Advice to Look before we Leap.

REFLECTION.
HASTY Resolutions are seldom Fortunate, and it is a piece of Necessary
Prudence, for a Man, before he resolves any thing, to Consider what may be the
Consequences of it.

We are taught by the Providence of These Frogs, to Consider the End of things
before we Resolve upon the Means; for when the Die is Cast, it is too late to
Wish for Another Chance. In our Deliberations what to do, we should Distinguish
betwixt Lawful and Unlawful, Prudential and Foolish, a Less Present Good, and a
Consequence of greater Evils, that we be not Betrayed by the Fair Appearances
of Things Specious; Frauds and Fallacies, Glittering Outsides, etc. into
Inconveniencyes and Mistakes.

When a Man wants any thing, let him look for it in Time, and Consider Well
beforehand what Occasion he has for it, and upon What Terms it is to be Had; for
there may be such Conditions that a Man would not Comply with, even for the
Saving, or Redeeming of his Life. There are Other Cases, where a Man must Part
with More for the Getting of a Thing, then That Thing is Worth. Some again,
where a Body runs the Risque of an Absolute Ruin, for the Gaining of a Present
Supply: Wherefore there is No Remedy either Way, without a Strict Calculation
upon the Profit or Loss on Both Sides. I want Money, but I will not make my self
a Slave for it. I want a Friend at Court, but I will not Forfeit the Character
of a Man of Honor, or the Conscience of a Christian, and an Honest Man, to
Purchase such a Friend: I am in Prison; but I will not play the Knave to set my
self at Liberty. These are All, Necessary Deliberations upon the Matter here in
Question. Let us see how we shall get Out again, says the Frog, before we go In.

FAB. CXLIII. A Dog and a Cock upon a Journey.
A Dog and a Cock took a Journey together. The Dog Kennell'd in the Body of a
Hollow Tree, and the Cock Roosted at night upon the Boughs. The Cock crow'd
about Midnight; (at his Usual Hour) which brought a Fox that was abroad upon
the Hunt, immediately to the Tree; and there he stood Licking of his Lips, at
the Cock, and Wheedling him to get him Down. He Protested he never heard so
Angelical a Voice since he was Born, and what would not He do now, to Hugg the
Creature that had given him so Admirable a Serenade! Pray, says the Cock, speak
to the Porter below to open the Door, and I ll come Down to ye: The Fox did as
he was Directed, and the Dog presently seized and Worried him.

The MORAL.
The Main Business of the World is Nothing but Sharping, and putting Tricks
upon One Another by Turns.

REFLECTION.
IT IS Good Discretion, when a Body has to do with an Adversary, that is either
too Crafty, or too Strong for him, to turn him off to his Match; but it would
be a Cleverer Way yet, to Encounter the Stratagem, and to Defeat One Sham with
Another, as the Simplicity of the Cock here was too hard for the Wilyness of
the Fox. Experience makes many a Wise Man of a Fool, and Security makes many a
Fool of a Wise Man. We have an Instance of the Former in the Cocks
Overreaching the Fox, and of the Other, in the Foxes Supine Confidence, that
made him so Intent upon his Prey, as to neglect his Safety. Now the Cock, that
upon Long Trial and Observation, knew the Fox to be the Common Enemy of all
Poultrey; had likewise a Dread and Suspicion of him by Instinct, which made him
Naturally Cautious upon the very Principle of Selfe-Preservation. Whereas the
Fox, that Trusted to his Address and Manage, without so much as Dreaming of a
Cross-Bite from so silly an Animal, fell Himself into the Pit that he had
Dug for Another. It is much the same Case in the World when Providence is
pleased to Confound the False, the Mighty, and the Bloodthirsty, by Judgments
of Lice and Frogs: That is to say, by the most Despicable of Instruments. To
put an End to This Moral, It is a wonderful Thing how the very Force of Nature
will Exert it self, in the Meanest and the Weakest of Creatures, in Cases of
Extreme Necessity and Danger: As it made the Cock here too hard for the Fox.

FAB. CXLIV. A Bat, Bramble and Cormorant.
A Bat, a Bramble, and a Cormorant Entered into Covenants with Articles, to
join Stocks, and Trade in Partnership together. The Bat's Adventure was Ready
Money that he took up at Interest; The Bramble's, was in Clothes; and the
Cormorant's, in Brass. They Put to Sea, and it so fell out, that Ship and Goods
were Both Lost by Stress of Weather: But the Three Merchants by Providence got
safe to Land. Since the Time of this Miscarriage, the Bat never Stirrs abroad
till Night, for fear of his Creditors. The Bramble lays hold of All the Clothes
he can come at in hope to Light upon his Own again: And the Cormorant is still
Sauntering by the Seaside, to see if he can find any of his Brass cast up.

The MORAL.
The Impression of any Notable Misfortune will commonly stick by a Man as long
as he Lives.

REFLECTION.
Things that a Man has once set his Heart upon, will hardly be ever got out of
his Head, but Every Hint and Occasion will be putting him in mind of 'em again.
Ill Habits are not Easyly Cured. It Is with almost All People in cases of
Fright or Distraction of Mind, as it was with our Merchant Adventures here. The
Last Impression sticks Closest to us. There was a Miserable Wretch in Bedlam
that had lost his Wits upon the Firing of a Ship at Sea, and His Head was still
running upon Fire and Water; insomuch that the very Sight of either of them
would put him into an Outrageous Fury. Another that was Mad for Love, would be
Beating, his Brains perpetually upon Anagrams and Sonnets. Oliver's
Enthusiastic Porter, was directly Bible-Mad, and up to the Ears still in the
Dark Prophets, and the Revelation. In the Year 1688, When the Original
Contracters were met in Council about Settling the Government, a very good Poor
Woman carried her Little Trunks and Boxes to Weld-House for Protection, for
fear of the Mobile. The House was R^fled, and her Trinkets went away with the
Rest. Upon this Loss she fell Idle-Headed; and to This very Day she stands like
the Bramble in the Fable, near the place still, (where the Innocent Creature
Lives) Catching of People by the Coats, and Asking them about her Trunks and
Boxes: Pray, says she, When shall I have my Things again? My Trunks are not
come home yet, etc. The Doctrine upon the Whole is no more then This, That we
are not to set our Hearts upon the Things of This World; for All Emotions of
the Mind have somewhat in them of the Freake; and the only Way to be Happy and
Quiet, is to make all Contingencies Indifferent to us.

FAB. CXLV. A Lark in a Net.
A Poor Lark Entered into a Miserable Expostulation with a Bird-Catcher, that
had Taken her in his Net, and was just about to put her to Death. Alas (says
she) What am I to Dye for now? I am no Thief; I have Stolen neither Gold, nor
Silver; but for Making Bold with One Pityful Grain of Corn am I now to Suffer.

The MORAL.
It Is to no Purpose to stand Reasoning where the Adversary is both Party and
Judge.

REFLECTION.
IT IS a Folly, says the Old Moral, for People to run Great Hazard for small
Advantage. And why may it not as well Reflect upon the Cruelty of taking away
the Life of a Poor Innocent Creature for making bold with One Miserable Grain
of Corn, when she was Hungry. But This is All Forced, and in Truth, it is a Dry
Fable with Little or Nothing in it.

Or to Turn it Another Way yet, Here Is the Life of a Poor Creature in Question,
and the Lark Expostulates, and Pleades Not Guilty, but the Belly has No Ears,
and the Bird-Catcher is so Intent upon his Interest, and Appetite, that he
gives no Heed at all to the Equity of the Plea, which is but according to the
Course of the World, when people Measure Right or Wrong by the Rule of their
Own Profit or Loss. It Is Passion and Partiality that Govern in All These Cases.

FAB. CXLVI. A Miller Burying his Gold.
A Certain Covetous, Rich Churl Sold his Whole Estate, and put it into Money,
and then Melted down That Money again into One Mass, which he Buried in the
ground, with his very Heart and Soul in the Pot for Company. He gave it a Visit
Every Morning, which it seems was taken Notice of, and Somebody that Observed
him, found out his Hoard one Night, and Carried it away. The Next day he missed
it, and ran almost out of his Wits for the Loss of his Gold. Well, (says a
Neighbor to him) And what is All This Rage for? Why you had no Gold at all, and
so you Lost None. You did but Fancy all this while that you Had it, and you may
even as well Fancy again that you have it st^* It Is but laying a Stone where
you laid your Money, and (...) That Stone to be your Treasure, and there is your
Gold ag^ You did not Use it when you Had it; and you do not W^ ^o long as you
Resolve not to Use it.

The MORAL.
Bett^ (...) ^ate at all, then the Cares and Vexations that Attend the Pos^ of
it, without the Use on it.

REFLECTION.
WE are never the better for the Possession of any thing, Barely for the
Propriety sake, but it is the Use and Application of it toward the Conveniences
of Life, and the Comforts of Humane Society, that gives Every thing it^ Valu^
The Divine Goodness we see is perpetually at Work; Nature ke^ her Course, and
the Heavens shed their Influences without Interm^* and what is the Doctrine now
of This Great Example, but that the Blessings of Providence, which are Common
and Diffusive, ought not to lie Idle; and that Whoever Buryes his Talent,
either of Understanding, or of Fortune, breaks a Sacred Trust, and Couzens
Those that stand in Need on it. But we have a sort of sordid Wretches among us
that had rather Cast their Silver and Gold into the very Mine again from whence
it was Taken, or leave it at the Mercy of Thieves, and Common Hazzards, then
that any Man Living should be the Better for it.

FAB. CXLVII. A Stag with One Eye.
A One-Eyed-Stag that was afraid of the Huntsmen at Land, kept a Watch That
Way with The Other Eye, and fed with his Blind Side still toward an Arm of the
Sea, where he thought there was no Danger. In this Prospect of Security, he was
Struck with an Arrow from a Boat, and so Ended his Days with This Lamentation:
Here am I destroyed, says he, where I reckoned my Self to be Safe on the One
Hand; and No Evil has befal^n me, where I most Dreaded it, on the Other.

The MORAL.
We are liable to Many Unlucky Accidents that no Care or Foresight can Prevent:
But we are to Provide however the Best we can against them, and leave the Rest
to Providence.

REFLECTION.
WE are many times Preserved or Destroyed, by Those Accidents or Counsels,
that in All Probability would have had quite Contrary Effects. But it is Our
Part yet to Act according to Reason, and commit our selves to Heaven for the
rest. We have our Blind Sides in the World, as well as the Stag had his by the
Seaside, and we have our Enemies too, that are still Watching to make
Advantage of that Weakness. One Man is Transported out of his Reason, and his
Honesty, by Sensual Pleasures: Another by Money, perhaps, or by Ambition. Every
Man, in short, by Somewhat or other: And it is but striking him in the Right
Vein, to do his Business. The Wisest of Men have their Follies; The Justest,
their Iniquities, and the most Temperate of Men have now and then by Fits,
their Excesses. Achilles himself (after all that his Mother could do for him)
was left Vulnerable yet in the Heel, and Paris'es Arrow found him Out there. We
are taught further also to look to our selves on the Blind Side, as the Place
that lies most Exposed to an Attacque. And finally; That it is not in the Power
of Humane Wisdom to secure us against Plots and Practices upon Humane Frailty:
Nay, and when we have done our Best to Prevent Mischief, the very Precaution it
self serves many times to Contribute to our Ruin. The Stag did All that was to
be done here; but the Ways and Workings of Providence are unsearchable; and it
is not in the Power of Humane Prudence to Obviate all the Accidents of Humane
Life.

FAB. CXLVIII. A Stag and a Lion.
A Stag that was close Pursued by Huntsmen, fled for Safety into a Lions Den;
and as he was just Expiring under the Paw of the Lion: Miserable Creature that
I am, says he, to Fly for Protection from Men, to the most Unmerciful of Beasts!

The MORAL.
There are Harder and Gentler Ways, even of Ruin it self; as it is Common we
see for Men under a Capital Sentence to Petition even for the Change of the
Death.

REFLECTION.
It Is a Common Case for People to be Reduced to This Miserable Choice; That is
to say, by what Hand or Means they will rather Perish; under the Certainty of an
Inevitable Destruction One Way or other. The Ancients have Moralliz'd it This
Way. But it seems to Me (under favor) that the Stag's was a Forced Put; and a
Chance rather then a Choice, he did not fly from the Huntsmen to the Lion for
Protection; but it so fell out, that while he fled to Avoid a Less Danger, he
ran into a Greater; We find This to be the Case of many Men, as well as Beasts,
that are Forced to Fly for Refuge, to Murderers and Oppressors, instead of
Patrons and Protectors.

FAB. CXLIX. A Goat and a Uine.
A Goat that was hard Pressed by the Huntsmen, took Sanctuary in a Vineyard,
and there he lay Close, under the Covert of a Vine. So soon as he thought the
Danger was Over, he fell presently to Browzing upon the Leaves; and whether it
was the Rusling, or the Motion of the Boughs, that gave the Huntsmen an
Occasion for a Stricter Search, is Uncertain: but a Search there was, and in
the End Discovered the Goat, and shot him. He died in fine, with this
Conviction upon him, that his Punishment was Just, for offering Violence to his
Protector.

The MORAL.
Ingratitude Perverts all the Measures of Religion and Society, by making it
Dangerous to be Charitable and Good Natured.

REFLECTION.
INGRATITUDE is Abhorred both by God and Man, and there is a Certain Vengeance
Attends those that Repay Evil for Good, and seek the Ruin of their Protectors.
This Fable Exposes the Baseness of That Horrid Vice, and it Preaches
Thankfulness and Justice. The Obligations of Hospitality and Protection are so
Sacred, that Nothing can Absolve us from the Discharge of Those Duties. It Is
True, that This particular Instance holds better in the Morality of the
Application, then it does in the Reason of the Thing: for the Question is not
what the Beast does in his Kind; but what Ought to be done, with a respect to
such a Benefit received. If a man should Launch into the History and Practice
of Humane Nature, we should find Nothing more Common there, then one Rebellion
Started upon the Pardoning of Another; and the very Minions of Princes Linck'd
in Conspiracies against their Master. But Those Things ever were, and ever will
be, so long as Men are Men, and carry their Corruptions about them. There will
be Goats, in fine, and there will be Vines, to answer This Moral, in Saeculae
Saeculorum.

FAB. CL. An Ass, a Lion, and a Cock.
AS a Cock and an Ass were Feeding-together, up comes a Lion Open-Mouth toward
the Ass: The Cock presently cries out; Away Scoures the Lion, and the Ass
after him: Now 'twas the Crowing of the Cock that Frighted the Lion, not the
Braying of the Ass, as That Stupid Animal Vainly Fancied to Himself, for so
soon as ever they were gotten out of the Hearing of the Cock, the Lion turned
short upon him, and tore him to pieces, with These Words in his Mouth: Let
never any Creature hereafter that has not the Courage of a Hare, Provoke a Lion.

The MORAL.
The Force of Unaccountable Aversions, is Insuparable. The Fool that is Wise
and Brave Only in his Own Conceit, runs on without Fear or Wit, but Noise does
no Business.

REFLECTION.
MANY a Bragging Coxcomb is Ruined by a Mistake of Fear in an Enemy, and a
Fancy of Courage in Himself. Baudoin Remarks upon the Lyons's Aversion to the
Cock, that there is Nothing so Great, but it has its Failings, and so he makes
the Pursuit of the Lion to be a Particular Mark of the Asses Weakness. Meslier
will have the Fear to be Counterfeited, with a Design to Surprise the Pursuer;
but This Fable seems still to look Another way.

It may appear a very Extravagant, Surprising Encounter, that Aesop has
Exhibited to us in This Fable. Here Is a Lion running away from a Cock, and an
Ass Pursuing a Lion: That is to say, here are Two of the most Unlikely Things
in Nature brought together, in the Semblance of Fear in the One, and of
Resolution in the Other: But the Moral is never the Worse yet for the Seeming
Disproportions of the Figure; and the Characters in the Fiction, are well
enough Suited to the Truth, and Life of the Case. The Flight of the Lion must
be Imputed here to the Natural Aversion that he has to the Crowing of a Cock.
This is the Tradition; but it shall break No Squares whether it be so or not:
For the Philosophy holds good in Other Instances No less Wonderful, whether it
be True or False in This. How many Insuperable Disagreements do we Meet with,
in the Business of Meats, Drinks, and Medicines; in Plants, Minerals, and
Living Creatures! Now These Impulses are no more to be Controlled, then the
Primary, and the Unchangeable Powers and Laws of Nature: And These Instincts,
after All, are no more to be Reasoned upon, then they are to be Resisted; and
therefore it is, that we call them Occult Qualities; which is All One with
Saying that we do not Understand how they Work, or What they Are. Now it is One
Thing to Submit to an Absolute Force, Another thing to Fly and Yield to a
Natural Infirmity: So that it is No Departure from the Dignity of a Lion to Fly,
when Nature Drives him: Neither is it at all to the Asses Reputation, to
Pursue, when Vanity, Folly and Rashness Transport him.

The Ass, we see, lies under Many Mistakes here, and the More, and the Grosser
they are, the more Suitable still to his Character. How many such Asses are
there in the World, that Huffe, Look Big, Stare, Dress, Cock, Swagger, at the
same Noise-Blustring Rate; and Nothing more Familiar then for a Whiffling Fop,
that has not so much as One Grain of the Sense, or Soul of a man of Honor in
him, to play the part of a Hero. Nay there are Fanfarons in the Trials of Wit
too, as well as in Feats of Arms, and none so forward to Engage in Argument,
or Discourse, as Those that are least able to go thorough with it. In One Word
for All, the whole Race of Bawling, Fluttering Noddyes, by what Name or Title
soever Dignified or Distinguished, are a kin to the Ass in This Fable.

FAB. CLI. A Gardener and his Dog.
A Gardner's Dog dropped into a Well, and his Master let himself down to Help him
Out again. He reached forth his Hand to take hold of the Dog, and the Curr
Snapt him by the Fingers: For he thought 'twas only to Duck him Deeper. The
Master went his Way upon it, and even Left him as he Found him. Nay (says he)
I Am well enough Served, to take so much pains for the Saving of One that is
Resolved to make away Himself.

The MORAL.
Obligations and Benefits are Cast away upon Two sorts of People; Those that do
not Understand them, and Those that are not sensible of them.

REFLECTION.
THERE IS No Fastening an Obligation upon Those that have neither Justice,
Gratitude, nor Good Faith; and it is the same Case in Effect, with Those that
do not Understand when they are Well-Us'd: From whence we may Infer This
Doctrine, that Fools and Knaves, are Not Company for Honest Men. The Course and
Violent Part of the Common People have much in them of This Currs Humor. They
Plunge themselves into Difficulties by Mistaking their Way, and then fly in the
face of Those that would Set them Right again. In This Opposition to Duty and
Discretion, they Pursue their Errors, 'till in the End, they are left to the
Fate of their Own Madness and Folly; and Consequently Perish without Any Hope,
or Means of Pity or Redress, The Gardener would have saved his Dog from
Drowning, and the Curr bit his Master by the fingers for his pains.

FAB. CLII. A Sow and a Dog.
THere passed some Hard Words betwixt a Sow and a Dog, and the Sow swore by
Venus, that she would Tear his Guts out, if he did not Mend his Manners. Ay, says
the Dog, You do well to call upon her for Your Patroness, that will not so much
as Endure any Creature about her that Eats Swines Flesh. Well (says the Sow)
and That Is a Token of her Love, to Hate Any thing that hurts me; but for Dogs
Flesh, it is good neither Dead, nor Living.

The MORAL.
Where the Matter in Controversy will not bear an Argument, it is a Turn of Art
to bring it off with a Paradox.

REFLECTION.
IT IS an Ordinary Thing for People to Boast of an Interest where they have
None, and then when they are Detected, it is a Stroke of Art to Divert the
Reproach, by Emproving a Spiteful Word, or Thing, to a bodies Own Advantage.
This way of Dialogue, is a kind of Tick-Tack; Where the One's Business is to
keep from making a Blot, and the Other's is to Hit it when it is made. It is a
Happy Presence of Mind, to Anticipate Another man's Thought, by Considering
Well beforehand what Construction, or Allusion his Own Words will bear; for
Otherwise, the Casting out an Inconsiderate Hint, is but the Setting of a Trap
to Catch Himself. As the Sow's Appealing to Venus here was as Good as an Answer
thrown into the very Mouth of the Dog, which she might Easily have foreseen
would be turned back upon her in the Bitterness of a Reproach: For the Reply
lay so Open, the Other could not Well Miss it: But when All is done, Both Parts
are to keep themselves upon their Guard; Or if either of 'em has Overshot
himself, it is some sort of Reputation still, to make the Best of a Bad Game:
As the Sow turned off the Scandal here with a Jest.

FAB. CLIII. A Sow and a Bitch.
A Sow and a Bitch had a Dispute once, which was the Fruitfuller of the Two.
The Sow Yielded it at last to the Bitch; but you are to take Notice at the Same
time says she, that your Puppies are All Blind.

The MORAL.
The Question among all sorts of Competitors is not Who does Most, but who does
Best.

REFLECTION.
WE are not to put an Estimate upon Things by the Quantity, or the Number of
them, but by their Quality and Virtue: Taking for Granted, that Aesops Bitch
was Fruitfuller then our Sows. See the Moral of A Lyoness and a Fox. Fab. 283.

FAB. CLIV. A Snake and a Crab.
THere was a Familiarity Contracted betwixt a Snake and a Crab. The Crab was a
Plain Dealing Creature that Advised his Companion to give over Shuffling and
Doubling, and to Practice Good Faith. The Snake went on in his Old Way: So that
the Crab finding that he would not Mend his Manners, set upon him in his Sleep,
and Strangled him; and then looking upon him as he lay Dead at his Length: This
had never befallen ye says he, if You had but Lived as Straight as You Died.

The MORAL.
'There's Nothing more Agreeable in Conversation, then a Frank Open way of
Dealing, and a Simplicity of Manners.

REFLECTION.
GOOD Council is lost upon an Habitual Hardness of Ill Nature: And in That
Case it must be a Diamond that Cutts a Diamond; for One Fraud is best
Undermined and Disappointed by Another. This Fable is a Figure upon a Figure,
in Opposing the Straitness of the Body of the Snake after he was Dead, to the
Crookedness of his Manners when he was Living. But the License of Mythology
will bear out the Hardness of the Allusion.

FAB. CLV. A Shepherd and a Wolves Whelp.
A Shepherd took a Sucking Whelp of a Wolf, and Trained it up with his Dogs.
This Whelp Fed with 'em; Grew up with 'em, and whenever they went out upon
the Chase of a Wolf, the Whelp would be sure to make One. It fell out
sometimes that the Wolf escaped, and the Dogs were forced to go Home again: But
This Domestique Wolf would be still Hunting on, 'till he came up to his
Brethren where he took part of the Prey with them; and so back again to his
Master. It happened now and then that the Wolves abroad were pretty Quiet for a
Fit: So that This Whelp of a Wolf was fain to make Bold ever and anon with a
Sheep in Private by the By; but in the Conclusion, the Shepherd came to find
out the Roguery, and Hanged him up for his Pains.

The MORAL.
False Men are no more to be Reclaimed then Wolves, and the Leven of the
Predecessors Sowres the Blood, in the very Veins of the Whole Family.

REFLECTION.
ILL Dispositions may be Suppressed, or Dissembled for a while, but Nature is
very hardly to be Altered, either by Council, or by Education. It may do well
enough, for Curiosity, and Experiment, to Try how far Ill Natured Men and Other
Creatures may be Wrought upon by Fair Usage, and Good Breeding; But the
Inclination and Cruelty of the Damm will never out of the Whelp. It may Suspend
peradventure, or Intermit, for want of Occasion to show it self; but Nature is
like Mercury, there is No Killing it Quite. The Wolf in the House has a
Kindness still for the Wolves in the Woods, and continues in the Interest of
the same Common Enemy. Cat will to Kind, as they say, and Wicked Men will be
True to their Principles, how False soever to their Masters.

We may read in the Moral of This Fable, the common Practice of the World, and
a Doctrine that we find Every day Verified, as well in Men, as in Beasts; for
there are Wolf-Whelps in Palaces, and Governments, as well as in Cottages, and
Forests. Do we not find in History, and Experience, Instances in abundance,
even of Public Ministers Themselves, that though taken up out of the very
Herds of the Common Enemy; Admitted into Special Trusts; Fed by the Hand, and
Treated with the Grace and Character of Particular Favorites, have their
Hearts in the Woods yet all this while among their Fellows. So that there is No
Reclayming of them. They go out however, as there is Occasion, and Hunt and
Growle for Company; but at the same time, they give the Sign out of their
Masters hand, hold Intelligence with the Enemy; and Make use of their Power and
Credit to Worry Honester Men then Themselves. It wants Nothing after This, but
that they may live to have their Due; and with the Dog here in the Fable, go to
Heaven in a String, according to the True Intent of the Allegory.

FAB. CLVI. A Lion, Fox, and a Wolf.
THe King of Beasts was now grown Old, and Sickly, and All his Subjects of the
Forest, (saving only the Fox) were to pay their Duties to him. The Wolf, and
the Fox like a Couple of Sly Knaves, were still putting Tricks One upon
Another, and the Wolf took This Occasion to do the Fox a Good Office. I can
Assure your Majesty, says the Wolf, that it is Nothing but Pride and Insolence
that keeps the Fox from showing himself at Court as well as his Companions. Now
the Fox had the Good Luck to be within Hearing, and so Presented himself before
the Lion, and finding him Extremely Enraged, begs his Majesty's Patience, and a
Little Time only for his Defense. Sir (says he) I must presume to Value my self
upon my Respect and Loyalty to your Majesty, Equal at least to any of your
other Subjects; and I will be bold to say, that put them all together, they
have not taken Half the pains for your Majesty's Service now upon This very
Occasion, that I have done. I have been Hunting up and down far and near, since
your Unhappy Indisposition, to find out a Remedy for ye, which with much ado I
have now Compassed at last, and it is that which I Promise my self will Prove
an Infallible Cure. Tell me immediately (says the Lion) what it is then:
Nothing in the World says the Fox, but to Flay a Wolf Alive, and Wrap your
Body up in the Warm Skin. The Wolf was By all This while; and the Fox in a
Snearing Way advised him for the Future, not to Irritate a Prince against his
Subjects, but rather to Sweeten him with Peaceable, and Healing Counsels.

The MORAL.
The Business of a Pickthank is the Basest of Offices, but yet Diverting enough
sometimes, when One Rascal happens to be Encountered with Another.

REFLECTION.
THERE IS Nothing more Common in the World then These Wolvish Back-Friends, in
all our Pretensions; whether it be in Law, in Government, or in a Hundred other
sorts of Claim and Competition; Especially for the running down of a Man
that is Declining in his Credit already. Calumny is Base at best; though
Pleasant enough sometimes, where it falls out, that One Rascal is Countermining
Another. But let the Reproach be never so True, it can hardly be Honest, Where
the Office is done in Hugger-Mugger; and Where the Intention is not Guided by a
Conscience of the Duty. It is a way to Confound the Good and the Bad, where
Knaves have Credit enough to be Believed, to the Wrong of Honest Men, and the
Innocent left without Means of Defense.

He that would live Clear of the Envy and Hatred, of Potent Calumniators,
must lay his Finger upon his Mouth, and keep his Hand out of the Ink-Pot; for
to do a Good Office upon the Point of Opinion, Intelligence, Brains, or
Conscience, where This Wolvish Humor prevayles, is little better then a
Scandala Magnatum, or a Libel upon his Superiors: But where it happens, that
there is a Fox and a Wolf in the Case; and One Sharper to Encounter Another,
the Scene is Diverting enough.

FAB. CLVII. A Wife and a Drunken Husband.
A Woman that lay under the Mortification of a Fuddling Husband, took him once
when he was Dead Drunk; and had his Body laid in a Charnel-House. By the time
that she thought he might be come to Himself again, away goes she, and Knocks
at the Door. Who Is There (says the Toper) One, says the Woman, that brings Meat
for the Dead. Friend, says he, Bring Me Drink rather. I wonder any body that
Knows me, should bring me One without 'Tother. Nay then, says she, the Humor I
perceive has taken Possession of him; He has gotten a Habit, and his Case is
Desperate.

The MORAL.
Inveterate Ill Habits become Another Nature to us, and we may almost as well
be Taken to Pieces, and New put together again, as Mended.

REFLECTION.
THE Intent of This Fable is to Work a Reformation of Manners, by showing that
Evil Habits are very hard to be Cured; for they take Root by Degrees, 'till
they come in the End to be past both Remedy and Shame. Habitual Debauches make
Excess of Drink as Necessary to a Man as Common Air, Especially when his Mind
comes to be Wholly taken up with the Contemplation of his Vice. There are Those
that can never Sleep without their Load, nor Enjoy One Easy Thought, 'till
they have laid All their Cares to Rest with a Bottle. It Is much the same Thing
with Other Sensual Pleasures, where Men's Bodies and Minds are given up to the
Entertainment of them. But the Extravagance is never so Desperate, as when the
Understanding is Taken up with the Study and Meditation of Those Pleasures,
which the Body is no longer in Condition to Practice, and that is the most
Deplorate, Hopeless, and Incurable State of an Evil Disposition; when Drink
upon Drink is made use of for a Remedy.

FAB. CLVIII. A Swan and a Goose.
THE Master of a House brought up a Swan and a Goose both together; The One for
his Ear, the Other for his Belly. He gave Orders for the Goose to be Taken up,
and Dressed for Dinner. But the Place was so Dark, that the Cook took One for
The Other. This Mistake had Cost the Swan her Life, if she had not Sung in That
very Instant, and Discovered her self; by which Means she both saved her Life,
and Expressed her Nature.

The MORAL.
A Man cannot be too Careful of what he does, where the Life of any Creature is
in Question.

REFLECTION.
THERE IS a Providence Attends Innocence and Virtue, the Power of Music apart.
It Is a Rule that goes a Great Way in the Government of a Sober Man's Life, not
to put any thing to Hazard that may be Secured by Industry, Consideration, or
Circumspection. And this Caution reaches to a Thousand Cases in the Ordinary
Course of Life. Men should Look before they Leap; Deliberate before they
Resolve; Try, Weigh, Examine, and Bethink themselves well of the Matter before
they Execute. We fall into some Inconveniences out of Pure Lazyness, and for
want of taking pains to Enform our selves Better: Into Others, out of Rashness;
by doing Things in a Hurry, and Hand over Head at a Venture. Now there is no
Excuse for a Blunder upon any of these Topiques where there was both Time and
Means to prevent it. What are we the better for the Faculty of Reason, without
the Exercise of it. If the Cook would but have been at the Trouble of Carrying
a Candle with him, he would have been in No Danger of taking a Swan for a Goose.

FAB. CLIX. The Washing of a Blackmore.
A Man gave Money for a Black, upon an Opinion that his Swarthy Color was
rather Flattery then Nature; and the Fault of his last Master, in a Great
Measure, that he kept him no Cleaner: He took him Home with him, and tried All
manner of Washes to bring him to a Better Complexion: But there was no Good to
be Done upon him; beside, that the very Tampering Cast him into a Disease

FAB. CLX. A Raven and a Swan.
A Raven had a Great Mind to be as White as a Swan, and fancied to Himself that
the Swan's Beauty proceeded in a High Degree, from his often Washing and Diet.
The Raven upon This Quitted his Former Course of Life and Food, and betook
himself to the Lakes and the Rivers: But as the Water did him no Good at all
for his Complexion, so the Experiment Cost him his Life too for want of
Sustenance.

The MORAL of the TWO FABLES above.
Natural Inclinations may be Molded and Wrought upon by Good Council and
Discipline; but there are Certain specific Properties and Impressions, that
are never to be Altered or Defaced.

REFLECTION.
IT IS a Vain Thing to Attempt the Forcing of Nature; for What Is Bred in the
Bone will never out of the Flesh: And there can be no Thought of Altering the
Qualities, the Color, or the Condition of Life, that Providence has Allotted
us.

It Is Labor in Vain, to all manner of Purposes, to Endeavor the Mending of
any of the Works of Nature; for she never did Any thing Amiss. And then it is as
Great a Madness to Attempt any Alteration upon them, because What Nature does,
God does; whose Decrees are Unchangeable, and All his Works are Perfection in
the Kind; but next to the Force of Natural Impressions, we may reckon That of
Customs and Habits.

FAB. CLXI. A Sallow and a Crow.
UPon a Dispute betwixt a Swallow and a Crow, which was the Greater Beauty of
the Two: Yours, says the Crow is only a Spring-Beauty, but mine lasts all the
Year round.

The MORAL.
Of Two Things Equally Good, that is the Best that lasts longest.

REFLECTION.
THE Greatest of Temporal Blessings, are Health, and Long Life; and the most
Durable of Good Things must Consequently be the Best. The Question here betwixt
the Crow and the Swallow, has somewhat in it of the Case betwixt Virtue and
Sensual Pleasures, as (for the purpose) of Youth, Wine, Women, and All other
Entertainments whatsoever, that may serve to Gratify a Carnal Appetite. Here Is
Temporary Opposed to Eternal; Joys that shall Endure for Ever, Fresh, and in
Vigor; to Satisfactions that are attended with Satiety and Surfeits, and
Flatten in the very Tasting.

FAB. CLXII. A Nightingale and a Bat.
AS a Nightingale was Singing in a Cage at a Window, up comes a Bat to her, and
Asks her why she did not sing in the Day, as well as in the Night. Why (says
the Nightingale) I was Caught Singing in the Day, and so I took it for a
Warning: You should have thought of This then says 'Tother, before you were
Taken; for as the Case stands now, You Are in no Danger to be Snapt Singing again.

The MORAL.
A Wrong Reason for the Doing of a Thing is worse then No Reason at all.

REFLECTION.
THERE IS No Recalling of what is Gone and Past; so that After-Wit comes too Late
when the Mischief is Done. That is to say, it comes too late for That Bout. But
it is not Amiss however, for a Man that has gone astray, to call to mind where
he went out of his Way, and to look back Step by Step into All his Miscarriages
and Mistakes. The Glass of Life is Behind us, and we must look into what is
Past, if we would take a View of what is to Come. A Fault Committed, or a
Misfortune Incurred, cannot be Recalled it is True; but yet the Meditating upon
One False Step may help to Prevent Another. Wherefore it is Good, upon the Point
of Common Prudence, to be Thoughtful, provided we be not more Sollicitous then
the Thing is worth, and that we make a Right Use of Those Reflections; that is
to say, an Use of Repentance, where we did Morally Amiss; an Use of Rectifying
our Judgments, where we did Foolishly; and an Use of Caution in Both Cases,
never to do the same Thing over again. This is no more then what in Conscience,
Equity, and Reason we are Bound to do. But we must have a care all this while,
not to run into False Consequences for want of laying Things and Things
together; and to Sham Fallacyes upon the World for Current Reason, as the
Nightingale was taken Singing in the Day when she was at Liberty. And what is
This to her Resolution of Singing only in the Night, now she is in the Cage.

FAB. CLXIII. A Boy and Cockles.
SOme People were Roasting of Cockles, and they Hissed in the Fire. Well (says
a block-headed Boy) These are Villainous Creatures sure, to Sing when their
Houses are a-fire over their Heads.

The MORAL.
Nothing can be Well that is out of Season.

REFLECTION.
There Is a Time for Jest, and a Time for Earnest, and it is a Dangerous
Mistake, not to Distinguish the One from the Other. The Fool's Conceit here had
both Clownery, and ill Nature in it, for there is Nothing more Brutal, or
Barbarous, then the Humor of Insulting over the Miserable; Nothing more
Contrary to Humanity, and Common Sense, then this Scandalous Way of Grinning
and Jeering out of Season. But a Childish Conceit does well enough out of the
Mouth of a Foolish Boy; for it is but Congruous, that Silly People should be
pleased with Silly Words, and Things.

FAB. CLXIV. Two Travelers and a Bag of Money.
AS Two Travelers were upon the Way together, One of 'em Stoops, and Takes up
Something. Look ye here (says he) I have found a Bag of Money: No says The Other,
When Two Friends are together, You must not say [ I] have found it, but [ WE]
have found it. The Word was no ^ooner Out, but immediately comes a Hue and Cry
after a Gang of Thieves that had taken a Purse upon the Road. Lord! Brother
(says He that had the Bag) We shall be Utterly Undone. Oh Phy, says The Other,
You must not say [ WE] shall be undone, but [ I] shall be undone; for if I Am to
have no Part in the Finding, you must not think I Will go Halves in the Hanging.

The MORAL.
They that will Enter into Leagues and Partnerships, must take the Good and the
Bad One with Another.

REFLECTION.
THE Doctrine of This Fable is according to Reason, and Nature. People that are
not Allowed to be Sharers with their Companions in Good Fortune, will hardly
ever agree to be Sharers in Bad. An Open, and an Honest Candor of Mind carries
a Body Safe and Dry through all Ways and Weathers; Whereas in shifting and
shuffling, a Man puts himself off his Guard; and the same Rule that serves him
at One time, will not serve him at Another, Men are willing enough to have
Part'ners in Loss, but not in Profit; and it is not the Traveller alone that
cries [ I] have found a Purse of Gold, and then Changes his Note upon the Hue
and Cry, and says [ WE] shall be Hanged for it; but it is the Course of All
People of Intrigue, to give Every thing two Faces, and to Deal with the World,
as the Spark did with the Oracle. The Bird shall be dead or living, which
himself Pleases.

To Improve the Moral yet a little farther, we have a Thousand Disappointments
in the Ordinary Course of Life to Answer This in the Fable. Many a Man finds
this Purse of Gold in a Mistress, in a Bottle, in an Office, and in All other
the vain Satisfactions of This World: And what is the End on it at last, but when
he has Compassed his Longing, Gratified his Appetite, or, as he fancies, made
his Fortune perhaps: He grows presently Sick of his Purchase; His Conscience is
the Hue and Cry That pursues him, and when he reckons upon it that he has
gotten a Booty, he has only caught a Tartar. The Bag of Money burnt the Poor
Fellow's Fingers in the very Taking of it up.

FAB. CLXV. Two Neighbor- Frogs.
THere were Two Neighbour-Frogs; One of them Lived in a Pond, and the Other in
the Highway hard-by. The Pond-Frog finding the Water begin to fail upon the
Road, would fain have gotten The Other Frog over to her in the Pool; where she
might have been Safe; but she was wonted to the Place, she said, and would not
Remove. And what was the End on it now, but the Wheel of a Cart drove over her a
while after, and Crushed her to pieces?

The MORAL.
Some People are so Listless and Slothful, that they will rather lie still and Die
in a Ditch, then stir one Finger to Help themselves out on it.

REFLECTION.
CUSTOM is Another Nature; and what betwixt Obstinacy, and Sloth, let it be
never so ill, and inconvenient, People are very Hard yet to Quit it. He that
does Nothing at all, does Worse then He, that upon the Account of Humane
Frailty, does Amiss; for Nothing can be more contrary to God Himself, who is a
Pure Act, then the Sleeping and Drowsing away of our Life and Reason, that was
given us for so many Better Purposes. The Frog in the Highway here, is the
Lively Figure of such a Man; for a Life of Sloth is the Life of a Log, rather
then the Life of a Reasonable Creature. It Is as much as a Body can well do,
even with the Uttermost of his Prudence and Industry, to Rub through the
Difficulties of the World, though he should keep himself perpetually a Doing.
There is not perchance a more Insupportable Misery in Nature, then it would be,
to put the Body into a Frame, that should keep it always in the same Posture.
What can be said Worse of Slothfulness now, when the very Vice is Equal to the
most Exquisite of Torments? It is odious to God and Man, Useless to the World,
Irksome to it Self, Miserable in All Estates, and utterly Incapable, either of
Tasting or Enjoying any thing of Comfort. The Frog was used to the Place, she
said, and rather then Stir to help her self, there she lay till her Guts were
pash'd out.

FAB. CLXVI. A Bee-master.
THere came a Thief into a Bee-Garden in the Absence of the Master, and Robbed
the Hives. The Owner Discovered it upon his Return, and stood Pausing a while
to Be-think himself, how This should come to pass. The Bees, in This Interim,
came Laden home out of the Fields from Feeding, and Missing their Combs, they
fell Powdering in Swarms upon their Master. Well (says he) you are a Company of
Senceless and Ungrateful Wretches, to let a Stranger go away Quietly that has
Rifled ye, and to bend All your Spite against your Master, that is at this
Instant Beating his Brains how he may Repair and Preserve ye.

The MORAL.
It Is the Course of the World for People to take their Friends for their Foes,
and to Use them accordingly.

REFLECTION.
THE Mistake of a Friend for an Enemy, or of an Enemy for a Friend, is one of
the most Pernicious Errors of a Rash Man's Life; for there is Judgment, good
Nature, Generosity, Justice, common Prudence, and All at Stake. Nothing can be
more Disobliging to a Friend on the One hand, or more Ruinous to my self on the
Other. Charity however bids me Hope and Think the Best, provided at the Same
Time, that I Secure the main Chance. Now this Caution holds as well in
Politiques, as in Morals; and in Public Cases* as well as in Private; for
there is Nothing more Frequent, then for People to take their Oppressors for
their Protectors, and their Protectors for Oppressors: As the Bees here Spared
the Thief and fell foul upon their Keeper. This is the very Humor of the
Mobile when they Mistake their Man.

FAB. CLXVII. A Kingsfisher.
THE Kingsfisher is a Solitary Bird, that Wonts commonly by the Waterside, and
Nestles in Hollow Banks to be out of reach of the Fowlers. One of These Birds
happened to be forraging abroad for her Young Ones, and in This Interim, comes
a Raging Torrent, that washes away Nest, Birds and all. Upon her Return,
finding how 'twas with her, she brake out into This Exclamation: Unhappy
Creature that I am! to fly from the bare Apprehension of One Enemy, into the
Mouth of Another.

The MORAL.
It Is many a wise Man's Hap, while he is providing against One Danger to fall
into Another: And for his very Providence to turn to his Destruction.

REFLECTION.
MANY People apprehend Danger Where there is None, and fancy themselves to be
Out of Danger where there is most of All. As the Fellow gave God Thanks at Sea
when the Ship Struck upon a Sand, for bringing him into Shallow Water again,
where he could feel the Bottom. This is to Mind us, That there is No State of
Life so Secure, as not to lie Open to a Thousand Difficulties and Dangers; and
that it is not Possible for the Wit of Man to Provide against All
Contingencies. There Is No Fence against Inundations, Earthquakes, Hurricanes,
Pestilential Vapors and the like; and therefore it is Our Part, and Duty, to
Hope, and Endeavor the Best, and at the Same Time to provide for the Worst that
can Befall Us. That which cannot be Helped, must be Born.

FAB. CLXVIII. Fishing in Troubled Waters.
A Fisherman had Ordered his Net, for a Draught, and still as he was Gathering
it up, he Dashed the Water, to Fright the Fish into the Bag. Some of the
Neighborhood that looked on, told him he did ill to muddle the Water so, and
Spoil their Drink. Well (says he) But I must either Spoil your Drink, or have
Nothing to Eat my self.

The MORAL.
There Is no Engaging the Mobile in a Sedition till their Heads are so muddled
first with Frights and Visions, That they can neither See, Hear, nor Understand.

REFLECTION.
THIS Allegory is frequently Applied to those that make Advantage to Themselves
by Embroyling the Public; and set their Country A-fire for the Roasting of
their Own Eggs. It Is the Only Trade that many People have to Live by, and the
most Profitable Trade too, when the Occasion lies Fair for their Purpose. It Is
with the Common People in this Case, just as it is with Fishes: Trouble the
Waters, so that they cannot see their Way before them, and you Have 'em Sure in
the Bag before they know where they are.

FAB. CLXIX. An Ape and a Dolphin.
PEople were used in the Days of Old, to carry Gamesome Puppies and Apes with
'em to Sea, to pass away the Time withal. Now there was One of these Apes, it
seems, aboard a Vessel that was cast away in a very great Storm. As the Men
were Paddling for their Lives, and the Ape for Company, a Certain Dolphin that
took him for a Man, got him upon his Back, and was making toward Land with
him. He had him into a Safe Road called the Pyraeus, and took occasion to Ask
the Ape, whether he was an Athenian or not? He told him Yes, and of a very
Ancient Family there. Why then (says the Dolphin) You know Pyraeus: Oh!
exceedingly well, says The Other. (taking it for the Name of a Man) Why Pyraeus
is my very Particular Good Friend. The Dolphin, upon This, had such an
Indignation for the Impudence of the Buffoon-Ape, that he gave him the Slip
from between his Legs, and there was an End of my very Good Friend, the
Athenian.

The MORAL.
Bragging, Lying, and Pretending, has Cost man^ a Man his Life and Estate.

REFLECTION.
THIS is the Humor of a great many Traveling Men, as well as Traveling Apes:
Men that will be Talking of Places that they never Saw, and of Persons that
they never Heard of. Their Whole Conversation is made up of Councels and
Intrigues, Reasons of State, Embassies, and Negotiations, that they never were
skilled in at all. Neither Men, Books, nor Sciences come Amiss to 'em: And
after All This Extravagant Bussle, a Gay Coat and a Grimace is the Upshot of
what they can Pretend to. These Phantomes however are Sometimes taken for Men,
and born up by the Wellmeaning Ignorant Common People, as the Ape was here by
the Dolphin; till in the Conclusion, their Sillyness lays them Open, Their
Supporters give them the Slip, and down they Drop, and Vanish. How many of
These Empty Chattering Fops have we daily put upon us, for Men of Sense and
Business; that with Balzack's Prime Minister, shall Spend ye Eight and Forty
Hours together Poring over a Map, to look for Aristocracy and Democracy,
instead of Croatia and Dalmatia, and take the Name of a Country for a Form of
Government; Without any more ado, we have Apes in History, as well as in
Fiction, and not a Rush matter whether they go on Four Legs, or on Two.

FAB. CLXX. Mercury and a Statuary.
MErcury had a Great Mind once to Learn what Credit he had in the World, and he
knew no Better Way, then to Put on the Shape of a Man, and take Occasion to
Discourse the Matter, as by the By, with a Statuary: So away he went to the
House of a Great Master, where, among Other Curious Figures, he saw several
Excellent Pieces of the Gods. The first he Cheapen'd was a Jupiter, which would
have come at a very Easy Rate. Well (says Mercury) and what is the Price of that
Juno There? The Carver set That a Little Higher. The next Figure was a Mercury,
with his Rod and his Wings, and All the Ensigns of his Commission. Why, This is
as it should be, says he, to Himself: For here am I in the Quality of Jupiter's
Messenger, and the Patron of Artizans, with all my Trade about me: And now will
This Fellow ask me Fifteen Times as much for This as he did for The Other: And so
he put it to him, what he Valued that Piece at: Why truly, says the Statuary,
you seem to be a Civil Gentleman, give me but my Price for the Other Two, and
you shall even have That into the Bargain.

The MORAL.
This is to put the Vanity of Those Men out of Countenance, that by Setting too
High a Value upon Themselves, appear by so much the more Despicable to Others.

REFLECTION.
IT IS an Old Saying, That Listners never hear Well of Themselves; and Mercury's
Curiosity Sped accordingly in This Fable. All Vain Men that Affect Popularity,
are apt to Fancy, that Other People have the same Opinion of Them, that they
have of Themselves; but Nothing goes Nearer the Heart of 'em, then to Meet with
Contempt, instead of Applause, Esteem, and Reputation. They Muster up All their
Commissions and Charters; as Mercury Values himself here, upon the Relation he
had to Jupiter; Whose Pimp he is, and What Is his Business. He gives to
Understand also what a Friend the Artizans had at Court, and All too Little, to
Gain him the Respect, but so much as of a Common Messenger.

FAB. CLXXI. Mercury and Tiresias.
MErcury had a Great Mind to try if Tiresias was so Famous a Diviner as the
World took him for, or not. So he went and Stole Tiresias's Oxen; and Ordered
the Matter, to be in the Company with Tiresias, as upon Business by the By,
when the News should be brought him of the Loss of his Oxen. Mercury went to
Tiresias in the Shape of a Man, and the Tidings came as Mercury had Contrived
it: Upon This, he took Mercury up to a High Tower, Hard by, and bad him look
Well about him, and tell him what Birds he saw. Why, says Mercury, I see an
Eagle upon Wing there, that takes her Course from the Right Hand to the Left.
That Eagle (says Tiresias) is nothing to Our Purpose; wherefore Pray look again
once. Mercury stood Gazing a while, and then told Tiresias of a Crow he had
Discovered upon a Tree, that was One while looking up into the Air, and Another
while Down toward the Ground: That Is enough; (says Tiresias) for This Motion
of the Crow, is as much as to say, I do Appeal to Heaven, and to Earth, that
the Man that is Now with Tiresias, can help him to his Oxen again if He Pleases.

The MORAL.
This Fable is of a General Application to All Bold and Crafty Thieves and
Impostors. It serves also to set forth the Vanity of Wizzards, Fortune Tellers,
and the like.

REFLECTION.
KNAVES Set up these Jugglers, and Fools Maintain them. There must be Forms
however, Characters, and Hard Words, Crabbed Looks, and Canting Calculations,
for the Color of the Pretense; but People should have a Care yet, not to take
a Confederacy for a Science.

FAB. CLXXII. A Hound and a Mastiffe.
THere was a Man had Two Dogs; One for the Chase, The Other to look to the House;
and whatever the Hound took Abroad, the House-Dog had his Part on it at Home.
The Other Grumbled at it, that when He took All the Pains, the Mastiffe should
Reap the Fruit of his Labors. Well, says the House-Dog, That Is None of my
Fault, but my Masters, that has not Trained me up to Work for my self, but to
Eat what others have Provided for me.

The MORAL.
Fathers and Masters have a Great deal to Answer for, if their Children and
Servants do not Do as they Should do.

REFLECTION.
MORE People are lost for want of a Good Education and Institution, then for
want of Honest and Honorable Inclinations; and These are Miscariages that
Parents and Tutors are in a Great Measure to Answer for. We are here given to
Understand, that there are Offices of Trust also, as well as Offices of Labor,
and the One as Necessary to the Common Good as the Other. The Mastiffe
Maintains the Hound, as well as the Hound the Mastiffe; and if the One did not
keep the House from being Robbed, the Other would have Nothing to Eat in it at
all. So that This Fable, upon the Whole Matter, will serve for a Political
Reading to Princes and Governors, as well as to Masters of Private Families,
upon the Reciprocal Use, Benefit, and Necessity of Industry and Protection
betwixt Rulers and Subjects, for the Preservation of a Commonwealth: The One
Supplies us with what we Want, and the Other Supports Us in the Defense of what
we Get, and neither would Signify any thing to us without the Other.

FAB. CLXXIII. An Unhappy Match.
THere was a Man, a Long time ago, that had got a Shrew to his Wife, and there
could be No Quiet in the House for her. The Husband was Willing however to make
the Best of a Bad Game, and so for Experiment Sake, he sent her away for a
While to her Fathers. When he came a little after to take her Home again,
Prithee Sweetheart (says he) How go Matters in the House where thou have been?
In Troth, says she, they go I know not How: But there is None of the Family, you
must know, can Endure Me: No not so much as the very Hinds and Plough-men; I
could Read it in the Faces of Them. Ah Wife! says the Husband, If People that
Rise Early and come Home Late, and are all Day out of your Sight, cannot be
Quiet for ye, what a Case is your Poor Husband in, that must Spend his Whole
Life in your Company.

The MORAL.
When Man and Wife cannot Agree, Prudence will Oblige the One, and Modesty the
Other, to put all their Little Controversies into their Pockets, and make the
Best of a Bad Game.

REFLECTION.
THERE are more Ways to come to a Right Understanding of Things, then by
Question and Answer. There are Certain Contentious Humors that are never to be
Pleased, and he that Troubles his Head because he cannot Please them, is Worse
then a Madman. Nay it falls out many times that the very Desire and Endeavor
to do it, makes it more Impossible, Especially where People are Imperious and
Insulting, as well as Peevish. Now in the Case of this Fable, it may be a
Question whether the Wife, or the Woman, was the more Freakish of the Two: For
she was still the same Uneasy Fop wherever she was; but the Poor Man however
had Enough on it, in Both Capacities; That is to say, as a Common Encumbrance,
and as a Particular Ciog.

The Moral is a Piece of Good Council to All Men that Labor under that Unhappy
Circumstance. First, in Prudence, to Try what Help for it: and then in Case of
the Last Necessity, to come to some Peremptory Resolution to Deliver Themselves.

FAB. CLXXIV. A Wolf and a Kid.
A Wolf spied out a Straggling Kid, and Pursued him. The Kid found that the
Wolf was too Nimble for him, and so turned and told him: I perceive I am to be
Eaten, and I would gladly Die as Pleasantly as I could: Wherefore, Pray give me
but One Touch of Your Pipe before I go to Pot. The Wolf Played, and the Kid
Danced, and the Noise of the Pipe brought in the Dogs upon him. Well (says the
Wolf) This it is when People will be Meddling out of their Profession. My
Business was to Play the Butcher, not the Piper.

The MORAL.
When a Crafty Knave is Infatuated, any Silly Wretch may put Tricks upon him.

REFLECTION.
LET Every Man stick to his Own Part, without Taking Another Man's Trade out of
his Hand. This is the Old Moral, but we may Read upon it Another way too. It Is a
very Unequal Encounter, when Malice, Craft, and Power, are United against the
Weak, and the Innocent: Saving where Providence Interposes to the Relief of the
one, and to the Infatuation of the Other: As the Wolf here, that had a Plot
upon the Kid, was Confounded by a Counter-Plot of the Kids upon the Wolf: And
such a Counter-Plot it was too, as the Wolf with All his Sagacity was not able
to Smell out. Wherefore let no Man Presume too much upon his Own Strength,
either of Body or of Mind; but Consider within himself, that Heaven takes Part
with the Oppressed; and that Tyrants Themselves are upon their Behavior to a
Superior Power.

FAB. CLXXV. A Fox and a Crab.
A Fox that was Sharp-set, Surpised a Crab, as he lay out of the Sea upon the
Sands, and Carried him away. The Crab, when he found that he was to be Eaten,
Well (says he) This comes of Meddling where we have Nothing to do; for My
Business lay at Sea, not upon the Land.

The MORAL.
No Body Pities a Man for any Misfortune that Befalls him, in Matters out of
his Way, Business, or Calling.

REFLECTION.
EVERY Man has his Post Assigned him, and in That Station he is Well, if he can
but Think himself so; and He that cannot keep himself Well, when he is Well,
may Thank Himself: But Men of Curiosity and Levity can never be at Rest; for
let their Present State be what it will, it never Pleases them. They have a
Sickly Uneasiness upon them, which Way soever they lie, or in what Condition
soever they are; no Place, no Posture, no State, either of Life or of Fortune
agrees with 'em, but they run-on, Shifting, and Changing, from One Error, and
from One Qualm, to Another; Hankering after Novelties, and Trying New
Experiments. We are Naturally given to be Peeping into Forbidden Secrets, and
Groping in the Dark after we know not what. We never Think of the Main Business
of Life, till a Vain Repentance Minds us of it at the Wrong End on it, and then,
with the Crab in the Fable, we find that we have been Doing of One thing All
this while, when we should have been Doing Another; and Abandoned the Station
that God and Nature Allotted us, to our Irreparable Ruin.

FAB. CLXXVI. A Musician.
A Man that had a very Course Voice, but an Excellent Musique-Room, would be
still Practicing in that Chamber, for the Advantage of the Echo. He took such
a Conceit upon it, that he must needs be showing his Parts upon a Public
Theater, where he Performed So very ill, that the Auditory Hissed him off the
Stage, and threw Stones at him.

The MORAL.
A Man may Like himself very Well in his Own Glass, and yet the World not Fall
in Love with him in Public. But the Truth on it is, We are Partial in our own
Case, and there is no Reading of Our Selves but with Other Men's Eyes.

REFLECTION.
There Is a Great Difference betwixt an Orator in the Schools, and a Man of
Business upon a Stage of Action. Many a Man that Passes for a Philosopher in
Private, behaves himself most Ridiculously in Public; as what is more Uncouth
(with Respect be it spoken) then a Pedant out of his Element? There are
Flattering Chambers, as well as Flattering Glasses, and the One Helps out a Bad
Voice, as the Other Countenances an ill Favored Face: That is to say, the One
Drowns the Harshness of the Pipe, as the Other Covers, or Disguises the
Coursness of the Complexion. But Men must not think to Walk upon These Stilts,
if they come to set up in Public once; The One, for an Italian Capon, the
Other, for an English Beauty: Wherefore it will become All People to Weigh and
Measure Themselves, before they Venture upon any Undertaking that may bring
their Lives, Honor, or Fortune in Question. Some Songsters can no more Sing in
any Chamber but their Own; then some Clarks can Read in any Book but their Own;
Put them out of their Road once, and they are Mere Cat-Pipes and Dunces.

FAB. CLXXVII. Thieves that Stole a Cock.
A Band of Thieves Brake into a House once, and found Nothing in it to Carry
away, but One Poor Cock. The Cock said as much for Himself as a Cock could say;
but Insisted Chiefly upon the Services of his Calling People up to their Work,
when 'twas time to Rise. Sirrah (says one of the Thieves) You had Better have
let That Argument Alone; for Your Waking the Family Spoils our Trade, and We
are to be Hanged forsooth for your Bawling.

The MORAL.
That which is One Body's Meat, is Another Body's Poison; as the Trussing up of
Thieves is the Security of Honest Men. One Foolish Word is Enough to Spoil a
Good Cause, and it is many a Man's Fortune to Cut his Own Throat with his Own
Argument.

REFLECTION.
IT IS a Hard Matter for a Man that Argues against the Truth, and the Reason of
a Thing, to Consist with Himself, for having no Rule to Walk by, it is Forty to
One but Some time or Other he will lose his Way: Especially when he is to
Accommodate his Story to the Various Circumstances of Times, Persons, and
Occasions. But it is One Thing to forget Matter of Fact, and Another Thing to
blunder upon the Reason of it. It is however, well Worthy of a Sober Man's
Care, not to let any thing fall that may be turned upon him out of his Own
Mouth. This Presence of Mind it is true, is not Every bodies Talent; neither
does This Consideration Enter into Every bodies Thought; but it were better if
it Were so, and so it Ought to be.

FAB. CLXXVIII. A Crow and a Raven.
YOur Raven has a Reputation in the World for a Bird of Omen, and a kind of
small Prophet. A Crow that had Observed the Raven's Manner and Way of
Delivering his Predictions, sets up for a Foreboder too; and so gets upon a
Tree, and there stands Nodding and Croaking, just over the Head of some People
that were Passing by. They were a little Surpised at first; but so soon as
they saw how 'twas. Come, my Masters (says One of the Company) let us even go
forward, for This is but the Chattering of a Foolish Crow, and it signifies
Nothing.

The MORAL.
How are Superstitious Men Hagg'd Out of their Wits and Senses, with the Fancy
of Omens, Forebodings, Old Wives Tales and Visions; and upon a Final
Examination of the Matter, Nothing at all in the Bottom on it!

REFLECTION.
THE Affectation of Powers and Faculties, that are Above us, is not only Vain,
and Unprofitable, but Ridiculous; for the Matter, upon Examination, will not
abide the Test. Your Empyricks, Piss-Pot-Prophets, Fortune Tellers, and
Buffoon-Pretenders to State and Government, fall under the Lash of This Moral.
And so do All your little Smatterers in Arts and Siences of what Kind, or
Quality soever: But there goes more to the Making of a Prophet, then Nodding,
and Croaking. It Is not the Gown and the Cap that Makes the Doctor; Neither is
it the Supercilious Gravity of Countenances and Forms, that presently Dubbs any
Man a Philosopher. Not but that a Fool may Put himself in the Garb, and so far
Imitate the Mien, and Motions of a Wiseman, as at first Blush to Put a Body to
a Stand what to Make of him: But upon further Consideration, the Original is as
Easily known from the Copy, as the Ass in his borrowed Skin was from the Lion:
Or I might have said, as the Crow here from the Raven: Their Ears and their
Tongues Betray them.

FAB. CLXXIX. A Crow and a Dog.
A Crow Invited a Dog to Join in a Sacrifice to Minerva. That will be to no
Purpose (says the Dog) for the Goddess has such an A version to ye, that you
are Particularly Excluded out of all Auguries. Ay, says the Crow, but I Will
Sacrifice the rather to her for That, to try if I can make her my Friend.

The MORAL.
We find it in the Practice of the World, that Men take up Religion more for
Fear, Reputation, and Interest, then for True Affection.

REFLECTION.
THIS Pagan Fable will bear a Christian Moral, for more People Worship for
Fear, and for Interest, then for Love and Devotion. As the Indians do the
Devils, That they may not Hurt 'em. It Teaches us farther, that we are not to
take Pet, or Despond, under any Cross or Calamity that the Almighty is pleased
to lay upon us. The Judgments of Heaven are Just, and let them fall never so
Heavy, they are yet less then we deserve. The Devil Himself, when he was let
loose upon Job, could not Transport That Patient, Good Man beyond his Temper,
or make him Quit his Hold. Resignation and Perseverance are All that a Man has
to Trust to in This Extremity. There Is no Good to be done by Struggling, nor
any way left us to make our Peace with, but to try by Faith, Prayer, and a New
Life, if we can make our Offended Master Once again our Friend. So that upon
the Upshot, Afflictions are but the Methods of a Merciful Providence, to Force
us upon the only Means of setting Matters Right, betwixt Divine Justice and
Humane Frailty.

FAB. CLXXX. A Raven and a Snake.
AS a Snake lay Lazing at his Length, in the Gleam of the Sun, a Raven Took him
up, and Flew away with him. The Snake kept a Twisting and Turning, till he Bit
the Raven, and made him Curse himself for being such a Fool, as to Meddle with
a Purchase that had cost him his Life.

The MORAL.
Nature has made All the Necessaries of Life, Safe and Easy to us, but if we
will be Hankering after Things that we Neither Want nor Understand, we must
take our Fortune, even if Death it Self should happen to be in the Case.

REFLECTION.
IF Men would but Balance the Good and the Evil of Things, the Profit and the
Loss, they would not Venture Soul, Body, and Reputation, for a Little Dirty
Interest. It Is much the same Thing betwixt Us, and our Sensual Acquisitions,
that it is betwixt the Raven and the Snake here. Men of Eager Appetites Chop at
what comes next, and the Purchase seldom fails of a Sting in the Tail on it. Nor
is it to be Expected, that Passion without Reason should Succeed better. Our
Senses are Sharp-set upon All Fleshly Pleasures, and if they be but Fair to the
Eye, Rellishing to the Palate, Harmonious to the Ear, Gentle to the Touch, and
Fragrant to the Smell, it is all we Look for, and all we Care for. It Is true,
all This while, that our very Nature Requires a Dose of These Enjoyments; nay,
and that Providence it self does not only Allow, but Prescribe it; for the
Common Comfort and Benefit of Humane Society, and of Mankind; for Life would be
no longer Life without it. But the Crime and the Danger lies in the Excess, and
in the Immoderate Love and Use of them. Was not the Apple in Paradise Fair to
the Eye, and Grateful to the Taste, and yet there was Death in it. What were the
Poets Sirens, but Figures of our Seducers, that Charm us by the Ear, and Tempt
us to leap Overboard: That is to say, by Debauching us into False Doctrines
and Opinions, which do but Answer, In the One side, the Moral of the Songs on
the Other. And so for the Touch, and the Smell, the Former it is true, has made
more Havoc in the World, but yet a Man may be Poisoned with a Perfume, as well
as with a Nauseous Potion. To Conclude, we have Snakes in our Beds, in our
Cups, in our Dishes, and whoever dips too deep, will find Death in the Pot.

FAB. CLXXXI. A Daw and Pigeons.
A Daw took Particular Notice of the Pigeons in such a Certain Dove-House, that
they were very Well Fed, and Provided for: So he Went and Painted himself of a
Dove-Colour, and took his Commons with the Pigeons. So long as he kept his Own
Counsel, he Passed for a Bird of the Same Feather; but it was his Hap once at
Unawares, to Cry [KAW,] upon which Discovery, they Beat him out of the House,
and when he came to his Old Companions again, They Would have None of him neither;
so that he Lost himself Both Ways by This Disguise.

The MORAL.
He that Trims betwixt Two Interests, loses himself with Both, when he comes to
be Detected, for being True to Neither.

REFLECTION.
This is to Caution us against All Superfluous and Dangerous Desires. Our Own
Lot is Best, and by Aiming at what we have Not, and what is Impossible to be
had, we lose what we have already. No Man goes out of Himself but to his Loss.
Imitation is Servile, let it be Where, How, and What it will. Nature Points out
to us which way Every Man's Talent and Genius lies; and He that keeps to his
Own Province, or Biass, speeds Best. The Painting of the Daw like a Pigeon, did
not make him One, neither can any Man do himself Right in Another bodies Shape:
Besides, that when he is once Out, it is Hard to find his Way Home again. The
Hypocrite is never so far from being a Good Christian, as when he looks Likest
One. It Is much a Case with a Faction in a Government, and a Daw in a
Pigeon-House. There Is a Fraud driven on, and they Assimilate themselves, as
much as may be, to the Interest they Propose to be the Better for. They put on
all Appearances in Matter of Opinion, Practice and Pretense, Suitable to the
Humor they are to Join withal: But still Some Unlucky Accident or Other
happens to Discover them in the End; and then, when they would go off again,
the People of their Own Plume and Color Beat 'em away, and Refuse to Entertain
them. This is no more then what we find to be True in All Turns of State.
Double-Dealers may Pass Muster for a While, but All Parties Wash their Hands of
them in the Conclusion.

FAB. CLXXXII. A Daw with a String at's Foot.
A Country Fellow took a Daw and tied a String to his Leg; and so gave him to a
Little Boy to Play withal. The Daw did not much like his Companion, and upon
the First Opportunity gave him the Slip, and away into the Woods again, where
he was Shackled and Starved. When he came to Die, he Reflected upon the Folly
of Exposing his Life in the Woods, rather then Live in an Easy Servitude among
Men.

The MORAL.
It Is Fancy, not the Reason of Things, that makes Life so Uneasy to us as we
Find it. It Is not the Place, nor the Condition; but the Mind Alone that can
make any Body Miserable or Happy.

REFLECTION.
MEN that are Impatient under Imaginary Afflictions, change commonly for Worse,
as the Daw did here in the Fable, that Threw himself into a Starving Necessity,
rather then he would Submit to the Tolerable Inconvenience of an Easy
Restraint. This was a Republican Daw, that Kaw'd for Liberty, not Understanding
that he that Lives under the Bondage of Laws, is in a State of Freedom: And
that Popular Liberty, when it passes Those Bounds, is the most Scandalous Sort
of Slavery. Nothing would serve him, but he must be at his Own Disposal, and so
away he goes, Carries his String along with him, and Shackles Himself. This is
just the Humor and the Fate of Froward Subjects. They Fancy themselves Uneasy
under the Errors of a Maladministration of Government, when their Quarrel
strikes, in truth, at the very Root and Conditions of Government it self. It is
as Impossible for a Government to be without Faults, as for a Man to be so. But
Faults or No Faults, It comes yet much to a Case; for where they cannot Find
'em, they can Create them; And there goes no more to it neither, then the
Calling of Necessary Justice by the Name of Oppression. And what is the End
on it, more then This now? They Run away from their Masters into the Woods, and
there with Esop's Daw, they either Starve, or Hang Themselves.

FAB. CLXXXIII. Jupiter and Fraud.
JUpiter Appointed Mercury to make him a Composition of Fraud and Hypocrisy,
and to give Every Artificer his Dose on it, The Medicine was Prepared according
to the Bill, and the Proportions duly Observed, and Divided: Only there was a
great deal too Much of it made, and the Overplus remained still in the Mortar.
Upon Examining the Whole Account, there was a Mistake it seems, in the
Reckoning; for the Tailors were forgott'n in the Catalogue: So that Mercury,
for Brevity sake, gave the Tailors the Whole Quantity that was Left; and from
hence comes the Old Saying; There Is Knavery in All Trades, but Most in Tailors.

The MORAL.
It is in some sort Natural to be a Knave. We were Made so, in the very
Composition of our Flesh and Blood; Only Fraud is called Wit in One Case, Good
Husbandry in Another, etc. while it is the Whole Business of the World for One
Man to Cousen Another.

REFLECTION.
LYING and Couzening is a General Practice in the World, though it appears in
some Men, and in some Trades, more then in other. Aesop is still Introducing
some or other of the Gods, to Countenance the Corruptions of Flesh and Blood:
And since Custom and Interest will have it so, that all Tradesmen must use
Fraud, more or less, even in their own Defense, the Practice being in some sort
so Necessary, it is not amiss to bring in Jupiter to justify it. But why is
this False and Double Dealing applied to Tradesmen only, when it is Common to
Mankind? And why among them, to Tailors above the Rest? when all the Business
that passes in this World betwixt Man and Man is Managed by Collusion and
Deceit, in as High a Measure: So that the Composition might have been as well
Prepared for Humane Nature. Are we not False, in Our Pretended Civilities,
Formal Complements, and Respects; in our Confidences, and in our Professions?
Are we not False, in Promising, and Breaking? Is not He that Robs me of my Good
Name, a more Abominable Cheat, then He that Couzens me of a Yard of Damask? Is
not He that Betrays me in his Arms, a more Detestable Wretch then He that
Contents Himself in the Way of his Trade, to Pick my Pocket? Without any more
Words, we are All Jugglers in some Kind, or in some Degree or Other. But
there is this to be said for it yet, that we Play Foul by Consent. We Cousen in
our Words, and in our Actions; only we are Agreed upon it, that such and such
Forms of Civility, like some Adulterate Quoins, shall pass Current for so Much.
A Fashionable Imposture, or Hypocrisy, shall be called Good Manners, and so we
make a shift in some sort to Legitimate the Abuse. In Jupiter's appointing
these Frauds, we read the Power of Humane Frailty that Disposes us to Entertain
them: For we are False enough by Nature without any need of Prescription.

FAB. CLXXXIV. Jupiter and Modesty.
MAN was made in such a Hurry (according to the Old Fable) that Jupiter had
forgotten to put Modesty into the Composition, among his other Affections; and
finding that there was no Way of Introducing it afterward, Man by Man, he
Proposed the turning of it Loose among the Multitude: Modesty took her self at
first to be a Little hardly Dealt withal, but in the End, came over to Agree
to it, upon Condition that Carnal Love might not be suffered to come into the
same Company; for wherever that comes, says she, I Am Gone.

The MORAL.
Sensual Love knows neither Bars nor Bounds. We are all Naturally Impudent;
only by Custom, and Fig Leaves, we have been taught to Disguise the Matter, and
Look Demurely; and that is it which we call Modesty.

REFLECTION.
THE Extravagant Heats and Transports of Lovers, and Voluptuaries, take away
all Shame. This Fable Hints to us the Wild Extravagances of an Unbridled
Appetite, and that till that Devil be laid, there can be no Thought of Lodging
Carnal Love and Modesty under the same Roof. Jupiter's forgetting Modesty in
the Composition of Man, Intimates the Difficulty of Admitting it, till Flesh
and Blood has done the Friendly Office toward the Peopling of the World; for
there is hardly any Place for Council, till these Heats are in some Measure
taken off; and it is no Wonder, that when Love comes to be without Reason, it
should be without Modesty too; for when it is once past Government, it is
consequently past Shame. When Our Corruptions, in fine, are Strong, and Our
Understandings Weak, we are apter to Hearken to the Motions of the Blood, and
to the Vain Imaginations of a Depraved Affection, then to the Dry Doctrines and
Precepts of Authority and Virtue.

This Difficulty of keeping Young and Hot Blood in Order, does mightily Enforce
the Necessity of an Early Care for the Training up of Children, and giving them
a Tincture, before it be too Late, of those Doctrines and Principles, by which
they are afterward to Govern the Whole Frame of their Lives. For in their
Tender Years they are more Susceptible of Profitable and Virtuous Impressions,
then afterward, when they come to be Solicited by the Impulse of Common, and
Vulgar Inclinations. They should in Truth, be kept out of Distance, of either
Seeing or Hearing Ill Examples: Especially in an Age that is Governed more by
President then by Reason.

FAB. CLXXXV. Jupiters Wedding.
WHen the Toy had once taken Jupiter in the Head to Enter into a State of
Matrimony, he Resolved for the Honor of his Celestial Lady, that the Whole
World should keep a Festival upon the Day of his Marriage, and so Invited all
Living Creatures, Tag-Rag and Bob-Tail, to the Solemnity of his Wedding. They
all came in very Good Time, saving only the Tortoise. Jupiter told him 'twas
Ill done to make the Company Stay, and Asked him, Why so Late? Why rruly says
the Tortoise, I was at Home, at my Own House, my Dearly Beloved House, and [
Home is Home, let it be never so Homely. Jupiter took it very Ill at his Hands,
that he should think himself Better in a Ditch, then in a Palace, and so he
passed this Judgment upon him; that since he would not be persuaded to come out
of his House upon that Occasion, he should never Stir abroad again from that
Day forward, without his House upon his Head.

The MORAL.
There Is a Retreat of Sloth and Affectation, as well as of Choice and Virtue;
and a Beggar may be as Proud and as Happy too in a Cottage, as a Prince in a
Palace.

REFLECTION.
WE are to Learn from hence (says the Old Moral) that there is no Trifling,
Dallying, or Delaying with Men in Power: And that Contentment in a Mean
Condition at Home, is beyond all the Luxurious Treats in the World, Abroad,
with Pomp and Envy. The Danger of Trifling with Great Men does not come up
methinks, to the Full Force, and Intent of this Fable, which seems rather to
set forth the Mistakes of Impotent Greatness, in Mis-judging the Test and
Standard of Humane Happiness. What Is a Voluptuous Dinner, and the Frothy Vanity
of Discourse that commonly attends these Pompous Entertainments? What is it but
a Mortification, to a Man of Sense and Virtue, to spend his time among People
that take Good for Evil, and Punish where they should Reward, and Reward where
they should Punish! The Tortoise was Forbidden the Court; That is to say, he
was Banished from the sight of Vain, Wicked, and Unprofitable Examples. Jupiter
gave the Tortoise the Honor of an Invitation, but that Honor was yet to the
Poor Tortoise's Loss; for He that is Transported out of his Nature, and out of
his Element, let the Change be what it will, is a Loser by the Bargain. A
Plain, and a Homely Home, with Competency and Content, is beyond all the
Palaces under the Heavens; The Pomp, the Plenty, and the Pleasures of them over
and above. To say nothing of the Surfeits that are gotten by Excesses of Eating
and Drinking; The Restless Nights, Factious Emulations, Fewds, and Disgusts
that Attend them: Beside the Slavery of being Tied up to other Peoples Hours,
Meals, and Fashions. He that has no Ambition, is Happy in a Cell, or in a
Cottage; whereas the Ambitious Man is Miserable, even upon a Throne. He that
thinks he has not Enough, Wants, and He that Wants is a Beggar.

The Tortoise came Late, for he came Unwillingly, which is the Case of many a
Worthy Man that Sacrifices his Peace to Formalities of Complement, and Good
Manners. Jupiter took Snuff at the Contempt, and Punished him for it. And what
was the Punishment? He sent him Home again. That is to say, He Remanded him to
his Lot, and to his Choice. Such, in Short, is the Felicity of a Moderate, and
a Steady Mind, that all Comforts are Wrapped up in it; for Providence turns the
very Punishment of a Good Man, into an Equivalence to a Reward, by Improving
that to his Advantage, which was intended for his Ruin; and making the
Tortoise's Banishment a Blessing to him.

FAB. CLXXXVI. A Wolf and a Sheep.
A Wolf that lay Licking of his Wounds, and Extremely Faint, and Ill, upon the
Biting of a Dog, called out to a Sheep that was Passing by, Hark ye Friend
(says he) if thou would but Help me to a Soup of Water out of that same Brook
there, I could make a Shift to get my self somewhat to Eat. Yes, says the
Sheep, I make no Doubt on it; but when I bring ye Drink, my Carcass shall serve
ye for Meat to it.

The MORAL.
It is a Charitable and a Christian Office to Relieve the Poor and the
Distressed; but this Duty does not Extend to Sturdy Beggars, that while they
are Receiving Alms with One Hand, are ready to Beat out a Man's Brains with the
Other.

REFLECTION.
THAT Sheep has a Blessed Time on it that runs on a Wolves Errand: But Aesop's
Sheep have more Wit, I perceive, then many of our Domestique Innocents. It Is a
Court-Master-Piece, to draw Chestnuts out of the Fire with other Peoples
Fingers; and to Complement a Man into a Post of Honor, a-purpose to have him
Knocked of the Head in it: Now the Sheep's Case in the Fable, is but an
Every-days Case in the World; when People are divided betwixt Charity and
Discretion, how far to go, and where to stop. In Offices of This Doubtful
Quality, We have only This General Rule to Walk by, that when we have to do
with Known Wolves, we Know likewise that they are not to be Consided in. But
this Wolf (I must Confess) with a Lambskin over his Shoulders, might have past
Muster for a Gospeller in Sheeps Clothing; which would have made it a more
Dangerous Imposture. We are to Gather from hence, that there is no Trusting to
the Fair Words and Appearances of a False, and a Malicious Enemy; for their
very Kindnesses are no better then Snares. Treachery is a kind of a
Lay-Hypocrisy, and they are Equally Odious both to God and Man: Over and above
the Corrupting of our Manners, the Hardening of our Hearts; the Dissolving of
all the Bonds of Faith, Confidence and Society, and the Extinguishing of Good
Nature it self: And all This in our own Defense too.

FAB. CLXXXVI. Hares, Foxes, and Eagles.
THere goes an Old Story of a Bloody War betwixt the Hares, and the Eagles; and
the Hares would fain have drawn the Foxes into their Alliance, but very
Franckly and Civilly, they gave them this Answer, That they would serve them
with all their Hearts, if they did not Perfectly Understand both the Hares
themselves, and the Enemy they were to Cope withal.

The MORAL.
There Is no Entering into any League, without well Examining the Faith, and
Strength of the Parties to it.

REFLECTION.
IT IS a Folly, to the Highest Degree, for Men to run the Risque of their Lives
and Fortunes, by Entering into Leagues with the Weak, against an Adversary that
is Manifestly too Strong for them Both. It Is Hazzardous to Contract Unequal
Friendships and Alliances, and there is an Inequality of Disposition and Humor,
as well as of Power. The False are as Dangerous as the Fearful: Only with this
Difference, that the One will do a Man Hurt, and the Other can do him no Good.
The End of Leagues is Common Assistance and Defense; And he that joins Interest
with those that cannot Help him, stands as single as he did before; which
destroys the End of Common Union; for where there is no Hope of a
Reciprocal-Aid, there can be no Reason for a Mutual Obligation: And it is the
same Thing in Business, Council, and Commerce, that it is in Arms and Force.
The Case of the Hares and Foxes in a Confederacy against the Eagles, is a
Common Case betwixt Kingdoms and Commonwealths.

FAB. CLXXXVIII. An Ant formerly a Man.
THE Ant, or Pismire, was formerly a Husbandman, that secretly Filch'd away
his Neighbor's Goods and Corn, and stored all up in his own Barn. He drew a
General Curse upon his Head for it, and Jupiter, as a Punishment, and for the
Credit of Mankind, turned him into a Pismire; but this Change of Shape wrought
no Alteration, either of Mind, or of Manners; for he keeps the same Humor and
Nature to This very Day.

The MORAL.
That which Some call Good Husbandry, Industry and Providence, Others call
Raking, Avarice, and Oppression: So that the Virtue and the Vice, in Many
Cases, are hardly Distinguishable but by the Name.

REFLECTION.
WHEN Vicious Inclinations are brought once, by Custom, and Practice, to be
Habitual, the Evil is Desperate, for Nature will be still True to her self,
through all Forms and Disguises. And Custom is a Second Nature. By the Poetical
Fictions of Men turned into the Shape of Beasts, and Insects, we are given to
Understand that they do effectually Make themselves so, when they Degenerate
from the Dignity of their Kind: So that the Metamorphosis is in their Manners,
not in their Figure. When a Reasonable Soul descends to keep Company in the
Dirt with Ants, and Beetles, and to Abandon the Whole Man to the Sensuality of
Brutal Satisfactions he forfeits his Peerage, and the very Privilege of his
Character and Creation; for he is no longer a Man that gives himself wholly up
to the Works of a Beast. Only one Word more now, upon the Judgment that Befell
the Husbandman, which bids us have a Care of Avarice, Rapine and Oppression;
for the Curse of Heaven Attends them.

FAB. CLXXXIX. Travelers by the Seaside.
A Company of People that were walking upon the Shore, saw somewhat come
Hulling toward them a great Way off at Sea. They took it at first for a Ship,
and as it came Nearer, for a Boat only; but it proved at last to be no more
then a Float of Weeds and Rushes: Whereupon they made this Reflection within
Themselves, We have been Waiting here for a Mighty Business that comes at last
to just Nothing.

The MORAL.
We Fancy things to be Greater or Less at a Distance, according to Our Interest
or Inclination to have them either the One or the Other.

REFLECTION.
THE Doctrine of this Fable is held forth to us in a Thousand Cases of
Curiosity, Novelty, etc. We make a Wonderful Matter of Things at a Distance,
that Signify Little or Nothing at all, nearer hand. And we are as much Imposed
upon in the Prospect of our Hopes and Fears: The Dangers, and the Blessings
that we either Dread, or Propose to our selves, look a great Deal Bigger afar
off, then in Effect they are. And what is the Mystery of All this now, but that
we judge of Things by False Images and Appearances, without Entering into the
True State and Reason of them? So that at this Rate, we divide our Lives
betwixt Flattering Illusions, and Restless Apprehensions: Never at Ease, either
on the One side, or on the Other. The Mischief is, that we are Over-solicitous
about Matters that are out of our Power, and Star-gazing after Futurities; when
in truth, our Business lies just under our Noses; That is to say, in the
Attending, and Emproving of Present Opportunities. In few Words, a Wise Man
Counts his very Minutes: He lets no Time slip him; for Time is Life: which he
makes Long, by the Good Husbandry of a Right Use and Application of it, from
One Moment to Another. This is not yet to Exclude the Providence of Tracings
Premises into Consequences, or Causes into their Effects; but to Caution us
not to look at the Wrong End of the Glass; and so Invert the Prospect. We see
Thing at hand, as they really are, but at a Distance, only as they seem to be
Patience and Consideration will set us Right in our Judgments and in our
Measures. It is much thereabouts with the Common People too, in the Matter of
Remote Grievances. They Represent, and Fancy to Themselves, Hell, Slavery and
Damnation, at a Distance, in many a Case, which at hand signifies not so much
as a Flea-biting.

FAB. CLXXXX. A Wild Ass and a Tame.
AS a Tame Ass was Airing himself in a Pleasant Meadow, with a Coat and Carcass
in very Good Plight, up comes a Wild one to him from the next Wood, with this
short Greeting. Brother (says he) I Envy your Happiness; and so he left him; It
was his Hap some short time after this Encounter, to see his Tame Brother,
Groaning under a Unmerciful Pack, and a Fellow at his Heels Goading him
forward. He Rounds him in the Ear upon it, and Whispers him, My Friend (says he)
your Condition is not I Perceive, what I took it to be, for a body may buy Gold
too Dear: And I am not for Purchasing Good Looks and Provender at this Rate.

The MORAL.
Betwixt Envy and Ingratitude, we make Our Selves twice Miserable; out of an
Opinion, First, that our Neighbor has too Much; and Secondly, that We our
Selves have too Little.

REFLECTION.
THIS is to Caution us against running the Risque of Disappointments that are
greater then the Present Inconveniences; and where the Misery, and Hazard,
does more then Countervail the Benefit.

In the Fable of the Horse and the Ass, (Numb. 38.) The Ass finds himself
Mistaken in his Opinion, both of the Foundation of Happiness, and of the
Stability of it. His Mistake in This, looks another way; for he took his
Brother to be Happy when he was not so; Even according to his own Standard: But
we are too too apt to think other People more Happy, and our selves Less, then
in Truth, They, or We are: Which Savours of a Malevolence on the One hand, and
an Ingratitude on the Other. Nay it falls out many times, that the Envious
Persons are rather to be Envied of the Two. What had the Wild Ass here to
Complain of, or the Tame One to be Envied for? The Former was but in the Plight
that Wild Asses usually are; and in truth ought to be. When they are in the
Woods they are at Home, and a Forrest-Life, to them, is but according to
Nature. As to the State and Rudeness of his Body, it is but Answerable to the
Condition of his Lot. The Tame Ass, it is true, was Better Fed, but then he was
Harder Wrought, and in the Carrying of Packs, he did but serve Mankind in the
Trade that Providence had Assigned him; for he was made for Burdens. It Is a
Fine Thing to be Fat and Smooth; but it is a Finer Thing to Live at Liberty and
Ease.

To speak Properly, and to the Point, there is no such Thing as Happiness or
Misery in this World (commonly so Reputed) but by Comparison; neither is there
any Man so Miserable, as not to be Happy, or so Happy as not to be Miserable,
in some Respect or Other: Only we are apt to Envy our Neigbours the Possession
of Those Advantages that we Want, without ever giving Thanks for the Blessings
that They Want, and We our selves Enjoy. Now This Mixture in the Distributions
of Providence, duly Considered, serves to make us Easy, as well as Necessary
One to Another; and so to Unite us in a Consistence both of Friendship, and of
Civil Convenience: For it is no less Requisite to Maintain a Truck in the
Matter of Moral Offices, and Natural Faculties, then in the Common Business of
Negotiation, and Commerce; and Humane Society can no more Subsist without the
One, then without the Other. One Man furnishes Brains, Another Money, a Third,
Power, Credit, Mediation, Intelligence, Advice, Labor, Industry: (to say
Nothing of a Thousand other Instances Reducible to This Head) so that the Rule
of Communication holds as well betwixt Man and Man; as betwixt Country and
Country; What One has Not, Another Has, and there is not That Man Living, but
in some Case, or Other, stands in Need of his Neighbor. Take away This
Correspondence, and the very Frame of all Political Bodies drops to pieces.
Every thing is Best in fine, As God has Made it, and where God has Placed it.
The Tame Ass Wrought Hard, for his Fine Coat, and the Wild one Fared Hard, to
Balance the Comfort of his Freedom.

FAB. CXCI. Asses to Jupiter.
THE Asses found themselves once so Intolerably Oppressed, with Cruel Masters,
and Heavy Burdens, that they sent their Ambassadors to Jupiter with a Petition
for Redress. Jupiter found the Request Unreasonable, and so gave them This
Answer, That Humane Society could not be Preserved without Carrying Burdens
some way or other: So that if they would but Join, and Piss up a River, that
the Burdens which they now Carried by Land might be carried by Water, they
should be Eased of That Grievance. This set them All a Pissing Immediately, and
the Humor is kept up to This very Day, that whenever One Ass Pisses, the Rest
Piss for Company.

The MORAL.
It Is the Uttermost Degree of Madness and Folly, to Appeal from Providence and
Nature.

REFLECTION.
THE Decrees and Appointments of Heaven are Unchangeable, and there is no
Contending. How many Popular Counter-parts of the Asses Petition to Jupiter for
Redress of Grievances, have we lived to see within our own Memory, and all, for
Things, not only Unreasonable, but utterly Impossible. We read however in the
Answer, the Quality, and the Reproach of the Prayer, which is Granted upon
Conditions as Impracticable, as the Thing desired is Ridiculous.

The Asses are here Complaining (after the Way of the Mobile) for being put to
the very Use and Business they were Made for; as if it were Cruelty and
Oppression to Employ the Necessary Means, which God and Nature has given us,
for the Attaining of Necessary Ends. If we Confound Higher and Lower, the World
is a Chaos again, and a Level. Is not a Labourer as much a Tool of Providence
as the Master Builder? Are not the Meanest Artisans, of the same Institution
with Ministers of Counsel and State? The Head can no more be without the Body,
then the Body without the Head; and neither of them without Hands and Feet to
Defend, and Provide, both for the One, and for the Other. Government can no
more Subsist without Subjection, then the Multitude can Agree without
Government: And the Duty of Obeying, is no less of Divine Appointment, then the
Authority of Commanding.

Here Is a Petition to Jupiter, in Truth, against Himself; and in the Moral, a
Complaint to God against Providence; as if the Harmony of Nature, and of the
World; The Order of Men, Things, and Business, were to be Embroiled, Dissolved,
or Altered, for the sake of so many Asses. What would become of the Universe if
there were not Servants as well as Masters? Beasts to Draw, and Carry Burdens,
as well as Burdens to be Drawn and Carried? If there were not Instruments for
Drudgery, as well as Offices of Drudgery: If there were not People to Receive
and Execute Orders, as well as others to Give and Authorize them? The Demand,
in fine, is Unnatural, and Consequently both Weak and Wicked; And it is
likewise as Vain, and Unreasonable, to Ask a Thing that is wholly Impossible.
But it is the Petition of an Ass at last, which keeps up the Congruity of the
Moral to the Fable.

The Ground of the Request, is the Fiction of a Complaint, by reason of
Intolerable Burdens. Now we have Grievances to the Life, as well as in Fancy;
and Asses in Flesh and Blood too, and in Practice, as well as in Emblem. We
have Herds in Society, as well as in the Fields, and in the Forests; And we
have English too, as well as Arcadian Grievances. What? (Cries the Multitude)
are not our Bodies of the same Clay; and our Souls of the same Divine
Inspiration with our Masters? Under These Amusements, the Common People put up
so many Appeals to Heaven, from the Powers and Commands of their Lawful
Superiors, under the Obloquy of Oppressors; and what Better Answer can be
returned to All their Clamorous Importunities, then This of Jupiter? Which most
Emphatically sets forth the Necessity of Discharging the Asses Part; and the
Vanity of Proposing to have it done any Other Way. As who should say, the
Business of Humane Nature must be done. Lay your Heads together, and if you can
find any way for the doing it, without one sort of People under Another. You
shall have Your Asking. But for a Conclusion, He that is born to Work, is out of
his Place and Element when he is Idle.

FAB. CXCII. An Ass and the Frogs.
AN Ass Sunk down into a Bog among a Shoale of Frogs, with a Burden of Wood
upon his Back, and there he lay, Sighing and Groaning, as his Heart would
Break: Hark ye Friend (says one of the Frogs to him) if you make such a
Business of Lying in a Quagmire, when you are but just fallen into it, what
would you do I Wonder, if You had been here as long as we have been?

The MORAL.
Custom makes things Familiar and Easy to us; but every thing is Best yet in
it is own Element.

REFLECTION.
NATURE has Assigned Every Creature it is Proper Place and Station; and an Ass
in a Bog is out of his Element, and out of his Province. The Fable it self has
not Much in it; but it may serve to Teach us in the Moral, that it is a High
Point of Honor, and Christianity, to bear Misfortunes, with Resolution, and
Constancy of Mind: And that Steadiness, is a Point of Prudence, as well as of
Courage; for People are the Lighter, and the Easier for it. But it was an Ass,
we see, that Complained, and (if a Body may play the Fool with him) he was but
an Ass for Complaining: First, of what he could not Help; and 2ly, to be never
the Better for it. It Is with a Man in Goal, much at the Rate as it was with this
Ass in the Bog. He Is Sullen and out of Humor at his first coming In; the
Prisoners Gather about him, and there He tells 'em his Case Over and Over I
warrant ye. Some make Sport with him; Others Pity him, and this is the Trade
they drive for the First Four or Five Days perhaps; but so soon as the Qualm is
over, the Man comes to himself again; makes merry with his Companions, and
since he cannot be in his Own House, he reckons Himself as good as at Home in
the very Prison. It Is the same Thing with a Bird in a Cage; when she has
Fluttered her self a Weary, she sits down and Sings. This it is to be Wonted to
a Things. And were it not a Scandal now, if Philosophy should not do as much
with us as Custom, without leaving it to Necessity to do the Office of Virtue.
It might be added to this Moral, that what is Natural to One may be Grievous to
Another. The Frogs would have been as much at a Loss in the Stable, as the Ass
was in the Bog.

FAB. CXCIII. A Galled Ass and a Raven.
AS an Ass with a Galled Back was Feeding in a Meadow, a Raven Pitched upon
him, and there Sat, Jobbing of the Sore. The Ass fell a Frisking and Braying
upon it; which set a Groom that saw it at a Distance, a Laughing at it. Well!
(says a Wolf that was Passing by) to see the Injustice of the World now! A
Poor Wolf in that Ravens Place, would have been Persecuted, and Hunted to
Death presently; and it is made only a Laughing-Matter, for a Raven to do the
Same Thing that would have Cost a Wolf his Life.

The MORAL.
One Man may better Steal a Horse, then Another Look over the Hedge.

REFLECTION.
THE Same Thing in One Person or Respect, is not always the Same Thing in
Another? The Grooms Grinning at the Gambols of the Ass, tells us that there are
Many Cases that may make People Laugh without Pleasing them, as when the
Surprise, or Caprice of some Fantastical Accident happens to strike the Fancy:
Nay a Body cannot forbear Laughing Sometimes, when he is yet Heartily Sorry for
the Thing he Laughs at; which is, in Truth, but an Extravagant Motion, that
never comes near the Heart: Wherefore the Wolf was Out in his Philosophy, when
he called it a Laughing-Matter; Besides, that he should have Distinguished upon
the Disproportion betwixt the Worrying of a Wolf, and the Pecking of a Raven;
That is to say, betwixt a Certain Death on the One Hand, and only a Vexatious
Importunity on the Other. The Raven understood what sort of Spark he had to do
withal, and the Silly Ass stood Preaching to Himself upon the Text of No Remedy
but Patience.

FAB. CXCIV. A Lion, Ass and Fox.
AS an Ass and a Fox were together upon the Ramble, a Lion Meets them by the
Way. The Foxes Heart went Pit-a-Pat; but however, to make the Best of a Bad
Game, he sets a Good Face on it, and up he goes to the Lion. Sir, says he; I am
come to Offer Your Majesty a Piece of Service, and I Will Cast my self upon Your
Honor for my Own Security. If you have a Mind to my Companion, the Ass here,
it is but a Word Speaking, and You shall have him Immediately. Let it be Done
then says the Lion. So the Fox Trepanned the Ass into the Toil, and the Lion,
when he found he had Him sure, began with the Fox Himself, and after that, for
his Second Course, made up his Meal with the Other.

The MORAL.
We Love the Treason, but we hate the Traitor.

REFLECTION.
THIS Fable Advises Every Man in Prudence to be sure of Knowing his Company
before he Embarque with them in any Great Matter; Tho He that Betrays his
Companion, has the Fortune commonly to be Betrayed Himself.

Here Is the Folly of the Ass in Trusting the Fox that he knew to be a
Treacherous Companion; and here is the Knavery of the Fox in Betraying the Ass,
which was but according to his Nature. Now this does not Hinder yet, but that
the Lion Forfeited a Point of Honor in the Worrying of him; And this Fiction
throughout is but the Emblem of Things that are Familiar to us in the World.
The I yon might have been Allowed an Aversion to the Fox, as a Perfidious
Creature, but the Devouring of him upon these Terms, was Another Treachery in
Himself. There may be this said at last for the Congruity of the Fancy, that a
Just and a Generous Lion, would not have Sunk so Low as to hold any
Communication with a Fox, much less to Concett with him in his False Dealing.
But this Lion was meant for the Figure of a Wicked Governor, Conferring upon
Frauds with Wicked Ministers. Now if he had spared the Ass, for his Simplicity,
and Pinched the Fox for his Perfidy, the Proceeding might have had some
Semblance of a Generous Equity: But an Honorable Mind will scorn to make
Advantage of a Treacherous Instrument. That is to say, by Assenting to the
Treachery: So that the Moral seems to carry more Force with this Biass. Upon
the Whole Matter, here is the Silly Ass pays Dear for the Credulity and Folly of
Keeping Ill Company. The Fox is Met withal in his Own Way, for Breaking the
Faith of Society; but still there wants some Judgment Methinks, to Attend the
Lion; for He that Encourages once Treason, does not only Practice, but Promote
Another; and lays the Foundation of a Doctrine, that will come Home to Himself
in the Conclusion. When a Prince fails in Point of Honor and Common Justice,
it is enough to Stagger his People in their Faith, and Allegance. But the Lion
here in the Fable, came off better then our Political Lions usually do in the
World.

FAB. CXCV. A Hen and a Swallow.
THere was a Foolish Hen that sat Brooding upon a Nest of Snakes Eggs. A
Swallow, that Observed it, went and told her the Danger on it. Little do you
think, says she, what you are at this instant a Doing, and that You are just
now Hatching Your Own Destruction; for This Good Office will be your Ruin.

The MORAL.
It Is the Hard Fortune of many a Good Natured Man to breed up a Bird to Peck
out his Own Eyes, in despite of All Cautions to the Contrary.

REFLECTION.
THIS is the Case of Many People in the World, that spend their Time in Good
Offices for Others, to the Utter Ruin of Themselves: And there is No Better to
be Expected from a Wicked Age, and an Ill Natured People. They that want
Foresight, should do well to Hearken to Good Council. He that thinks to Oblige
Hard-Hearted People by an Officious Tenderness, and to fare the Better Himself
for putting it into Their Power to Hurt him, will find only so much Time,
Pains, and Good Will, utterly cast away, at the Foot of his Account. It Is Good
however, to Hope, and to Presume the Best, provided that a Man be Prepared for
the Worst: Not forgetting the Old Proverb, That many a Man brings up a Bird to
Peck out his Own Eyes. The Mistake lies in This, that the Charity begins Abroad
that Ought to begin at Home. They that cannot see into the End of Things, may
well be at a Loss in the Reason of them; and a Well-Meaning Piety is the
Destruction of many an Honest Man, that sits Innocently Brooding upon the
Political Projects of Other People, though with the Heart all the While, of a
Patriot, and a True Friend to the Public. Tell him the Consequences of
Matters, and that he is now Hatching of Serpents, not of Chickens: A Misguided
Zeal makes him Deaf and Blind to the True State, and Issue of Things. He sits
his Time out, and what is the End on it; but the Plot Naturally Discloses it self
in a Common Ruin? It is a Great Infelicity to make a Wrong Choice of a Friend:
But when Men are Advertised of the Danger beforehand, it is as Great a Fault if
they will take No Warning. The Hen was told on it, but the Swallow had the Fate,
as well as the Gift of Cassandra; to speak Truth, and not to be believed: Which
has been the Misfortune of many an Honest Man in All Times, and particularly in
the very Age we live in.

FAB. CXCVI. A Pigeon and a Picture.
A Pigeon saw the Picture of a Glass with Water in it, and taking it to be Water
indeed, flew Rashly and Eagerly up to it, for a Soup to Quench her Thirst. She
broke her Feathers against the Frame of the Picture, and falling to the Ground
upon it, was taken up by the Bystanders.

The MORAL.
Rash Men do many things in Have that they Repent of at Leisure.

REFLECTION.
IT IS not Good to be Over-Fierce upon any Thing, for fear of Mistaking, or
Misunderstanding the Matter in Question. Moderation is a High Point of Wisdom,
and Temerity on the Other Hand, is ever Dangerous: For Men are Subject to be
Cozened with Outward Appearances, and so take the Vain Images, and Shadows of
Things, for the Substance. All Violent Passions have somewhat in them of the
Rashness of This Pigeon; and if That Rashness be not as Fatal in the One Case,
as This was in the Other, it is a Deliverance that we are more Indebted for,
either to the Special Grace of an Overruling Providence, or to the Mediation
of That which we call Chance, then to any thing of our own Government and
Direction. One Man may have the Advantage of Another in the Benefit of a
Presence of Mind, which may serve in a Great Measure, to Fortify us against
Surprises, and Difficulties not to be foreseen: But a sound Judgment is the
Result of second Thoughts, upon Due Time and Consideration, which way to bring
Matters to a Fair Issue. This Precipitate Temper is little better then a
Physical Madness; for there is somewhat of an Alienation in it, when People
proceed, not only Without, but Contrary to Reason. How many Instances do we see
daily, of People that are Hurried on, without either Fear or Wit, by Love,
Hatred, Envy, Ambition, Revenge, etc. to their Own Ruin: which comes to the
very Case of the Pigeons breaking her Wing against the Picture; and the
Miscarriage is Every jot as Ridiculous.

FAB. CXCVII. A Pigeon and a Crow.
A Pigeon that was brought up in a Dove-House, was Bragging to a Crow how
Fruitful she was. Never Value Your self says the Crow upon That Vanity; for the
More Children, the more Sorrow.

The MORAL.
Many Children are a Great Blessing; but a Few Good Ones are a Greater; All
Hazzards Considered.

REFLECTION.
THE Care, Charge, and Hazard of a Brood of many Children, in the Education
and Proof of them, does, in a Great Measure, Countervail the Blessing:
Especially where they are gotten in a State of Slavery. Sorrow and Vexation is
Entailed upon the whole Race of Mankind. We are Begotten to it We are Born to it;
and as it has Descended to us, so it is by us to be Handed down to Those that
come after us. The Stress of the Fable lies upon the Hazard of having a
Numerous Stock of Children, which must of Necessity, whether they Live or Dye,
furnish Matter of Great Anxiety to the Parents. The Loss of them is Grievous to
us. The Miscarriage of them, by falling into Lewd and Vicious Courses, is much
Worse: And one such Disappointment is sufficient to Blast the Comfort of All
the Rest. Nay the very Possibility, or rather the Likelihood and Odds, that
some out of such a Number will Prove Ungracious and Rebellious, makes our Beds
Uneasy to us; Fills our Heads and our Hearts with Carking Thoughts, and keeps
us in Anxiety Night and Day for fear they should be so, and prove like Vipers,
to Eat out the Belly of their Own Mothers.

FAB. CXCVIII. A Woman and her Two Daughters.
A Woman that had Two Daughters, Buried one of them, and Mourners were Provided
to Attend the Funeral. The Surviving Daughter Wondered to see Strangers so Much
concerned at the Loss of her Sister, and her Nearest Relations so Little. Pray
Mother, says she, What Is the Reason of This? Oh, says the Mother, We that are
Akin to her, are never the Better for Crying, but the Strangers have Money
for it.

The MORAL.
Mourners are as Mercenary as Common Prostitutes; They are at His Service that
bids Most for them.

REFLECTION.
FUNERAL Tears are only Civilities of Course, but there must be Wringing of
Hands yet, and Ejulations, some where or Other; and where the Relations are not
in humor for it, it is the Fashion to Provide Mercenaries to do the Office. The
Moral of This will reach to All the Pompous Solemnities of our Mourning
Processions, which upon the Whole, Amount to no more then Dress and Pageantry,
to make the Show look Dismal, and so many Sour Faces that are Hired to Adorn
the Hypocrisy. This was the Widows Case, that Cried her self Half Mad and
Blind with a Thousand Passionate Interjections, for the Loss of her Dear
Husband. [ Never so Dear, so Dear a Man!] This Woman, I say (when she had done
All This, and Renounced the World, the Flesh and the Devil, with as much
Solemnity as ever she did in her Baptism) was at the Long-Last prevailed upon
to hear the Will read: But when she found in the Conclusion, that the Dear Man
she so often called upon, had left her Nothing that he could keep from her, but
her Wedding-Ring and her Apron-Strings, Up she started, Wiped her Eyes, Raised
her Voice, [ And is This all with a P^x] she cried; and with Those Words in her
Mouth, she came to her self again. Now This Widow, in the Pure Strength of
Flesh and Blood; cried as Arrantly for Money as the Mercenaries in the Fable.

FAB. CXCIX. A Shepherd and his Sheep.
IN Old time when Sheep fed like Hogs upon Acorns, a Shepherd drove his Flock
into a Little Oak-Wood, spread his Coat under a Tree, and up he went to shake
'em down some Mast. The Sheep were so Keen upon the Acorns, that they Gobbled
up now and then a Piece of the Coat along with 'em. When the Shepherd took
Notice of it: What a Company of Ungrateful Wretches are you, says he, that
Cloth all Other People that have No Relation to you, and yet Strip Your
Master, that gives ye both Food and Protection!

The MORAL.
The Belly has no Ears; and a Ravenous Appetite Guttles up whatever is Before
it, without any regard either to Things or Persons.

REFLECTION.
IT IS a Freak mightily in Fashion among some People to Affect a Singularity in
their Lives and Manners, and to Live in a Direct Opposition to the Ordinary
Rules of Prudence and Good Nature, As in returning Evil for Good for the
Purpose; Nay, and in some Cases, Good for Evil too; where it is done more to be
seen of Men then for God sake, and where the Vanity of Doing it Destroys the
Merit of the Virtue. The Fable will also bear This Moral, That Eager Appetites
have not a Right Taste of Things; for the Coat goes down as well as the Acorns:
But the main Stress of it falls upon Those that Rob Peter, as we say, to Pay
Paul, and take the Bread out of their Masters Mouths to give it to Strangers.
And the Kindness of the Master is yet a Further Aggravation of the Crime. We
have abundance of Cases in Practice, as well as in Story, that strike upon This
Topique. Have we never read of a Sacrilegious Convocation of Divines, that at
the same Time that they lived upon the Altar, Betrayed it; and while they
Robbed God himself of his Due, Divided the Spoils of the Church among the
Rabble. Have we never heard of Men that Gobbled the Privileges and Revenues of
the Crown, and then Squandered them away in Donatives upon the Common People?
Or, What shall we say of the Scoffing Atheist, that turns all the Powers and
Faculties of his Soul, as much as in him lies, to the Reproach of his Maker,
and yet at the same time too as Pleasant Company to the World as the Wit of a
Libertine can make him. What is all This now but a Sheep Stripping his Master,
and Clothing Strangers.

FAB. CC. Jupiter and a Herds-man.
A Herds-man that had lost a Calf out of his Grounds, sent up and down after
it; and when he could get No Tidings on it, he betook himself at last to his
Prayers, according to the Custom of the World, when People are brought to a
Forc'd-Put. Great Jupiter (says he) Do but show me the Thief that stole my
Calf, and I Will give thee a Kid for a Sacrifice. The Word was no sooner passed;
but the Thief appeared; which was indeed a Lion. This Discovery put him to his
Prayers once again. I have not forgotten my Vow, says he, but now thou have
brought me to the Thief, I Will make That Kid a Bull, if thou wilt but set me Quit
of him again.

The MORAL.
We cannot be too Careful, and Considerate what Vows, and Promises we make; for
the very Granting of our Prayers turns many times to our Utter Ruin.

REFLECTION.
THIS Fable Condemns All Rash Vows and Promises, and the Unsteadyness of Those
Men that are first mad to have a Thing, and as soon Weary of it. Men should
Consider well before hand what they Promise, what they Vow; nay, and what they
Wish for, least they should be Taken at their Words, and afterward Repent. We
make it Half our Business to Learn out, Gain, and Compass those Things, which
when we come to Understand, and to have in our Possession, we'd give the whole
Earth to be Rid of again: Wherefore he that Moderates his Desires without
laying any Stress upon Things Curious, or Uncertain; and Resigns himself in All
Events to the Good Pleasure of Providence, succeeds Best in the Government of
his Fortune, Life, and Manners. The Herds-man was in a State of Freedom, we
see, till he made himself a Voluntary Slave, by Entering into a Dangerous, and
Unnecessary Vow; which he could neither Contract without Folly, nor Keep
without Loss and Shame; For Heaven is neither to be Wheedled, nor Bribed. Men
should so Pray as not to Repent of their Prayers, and turn the most Christian
and Necessary Office of our Lives into a Sin. We must not Pray in One Breath to
Find a Thief, and in the Next to get shut of him.

FAB. CCI. A Gnat Challenges a Lion.
AS a Lion was Blustering in the Forest, up comes a Gnat to his very Beard,
and Enters into an Expostulation with him upon the Points of Honor and
Courage. What do I Value your Teeth, or your Claws, says the Gnat, that are but
the Arms of Every Bedlam Slut? As to the Matter of Resolution; I defy ye to put
That Point immediately to an Issue. So the Trumpet Sounded and the Combatants
Entered the Lists. The Gnat Charged into the Nostrils of the Lion, and there
Twing'd him, till he made him Tear himself with his Own Paws. And in the
Conclusion he Mastered the Lion. Upon This, a Retreat was Sounded, and the Gnat
flew his way: But by Ill-hap afterward, in his Flight, he struck into a Cobweb,
where the Victor fell a Prey to a Spider. This Disgrace went to the Heart of
him, after he had got the Better of a Lion to be Worsted by an Insect.

The MORAL.
It Is in the Power of Fortune to Humble the Pride of the Mighty, even by the
most Despicable Means, and to make a Gnat Triumph over a Lion: Wherefore let no
Creature, how Great or how Little soever, Presume on the One side, or Despair
on the Other.

REFLECTION.
THERE is Nothing either so Great, or so Little, as not to be Liable to the
Vicissitudes of Fortune, whether for Good or for Evil. A Miserable Fly is
sufficient we see, to take down the Stomach of a Lion: And then to Correct the
Insulting Vanity of That Fly, it falls the next Moment into the Toil of a
Spider. It Is Highly Improvident not to Obviate small Things; and as Ridiculous
to be Baffled by them; and it is not the Force neither, but the Importunity
that is so Vexatious and Troublesome to us. The very Teizing of the Lion Galled
him more then an Arrow at his Heart would have done. The Doctrine is This, That
no Man is to Presume upon his Power and Greatness, when Every Pityful Insect
may find out a Way to Discompose him. But That Pityful Insect again is not to
Value himself upon his Victory neither; for the Gnat that had the Better of the
Lion, in the very next Breath was Worsted by a Spider.

THE FABLES OF BARLANDUS, etc.
FAB. CCII. A Lion and a Frog.
A Lion that was Ranging about for his Prey, made a Stop all on a Sudden at a
Hideous Yelling Noise he heard, which not a little Startled him. The Surprise
put him at first into a Shaking Fit; but as he was looking about, and Preparing
for the Encounter of some Terrible Monster, what should he see but a Pityful
Frog come Crawling out from the Side of a Pond. And is This All? (says the
Lion) and so betwixt Shame and Indignation he put forth his Paw, and Pash'd out
the Guts on it.

The MORAL.
There Is no Resisting of First Motions; but upon Second Thoughts we come
Immediately to our selves again.

REFLECTION.
THE Surprise of the Lion is to teach us that no Man living can be so Present
to Himself, as not to be put beside his Ordinary Temper upon some Accidents or
Occasions; but then his Philosophy brings him to a Right Understanding of
Things, and his Resolution carries him thorough All Difficulties. It is Another
Emphatical Branch of This Emblem, that as the Lion Himself was not
Thorough-Proof against This Fantastical Alarm; so it was but a Poor Wretched
Frog all this while, that Discomposed him, to show the Vain Opinion and False
Images of Things, and how apt we are to be Transported with Those Fooleries,
which, if we did but Understand, we should Despise. Wherefore it is the Part of
a Brave, and a Wiseman to Weigh, and Examine Matters without Delivering up
himself to the Illusion of Idle Fears, and Panick Terrors. It was in truth.
below the Dignity of a Lion to Kill the Poor Creature, but This, however may be
said in Plea for it, that he was ashamed to leave behind him a Witness of his
Weakness.

FAB. CCIII. An Ant and a Pigeon.
AN Ant drop Unluckily into the Water as she was Drinking at the Side of a
Brook. A Wood-Pigeon took Pity of her, and threw her a little Bough to lay hold
on. The Ant saved her self by that Bough, and in That very Instant, spies a
Fellow with a Birding-Piece, making a Shoot at The Pigeon. Upon This Discovery,
she presently runs up to him and Stings him. The Fowler starts, and breaks his
Aim, and away flies the Pigeon.

The MORAL.
All Creatures have a Sense of Good Offices, and Providence it self takes Care,
where Other Means fail, that they may not Pass Unrewarded.

REFLECTION.
THE Practice of Requiting Good Offices is a Great Encouragement to the Doing
of them; and in truth, without Gratitude there would be Little Good Nature; for
there is not One Good Man in the World that has not need of Another. This Fable
of the Ant is not All-together a Fiction, for we have many Instances of the
Force of Kindness; even upon Animals and Insects: To pass over the Tradition of
Androdus's Lion, the Gratitude of Elephants, Dogs and Horses is too Notorious
to be Denied. Are not Hawks brought to the Hand, and to the Lure? And in like
manner, are not Lions, Tigers, Bears, Wolves, Foxes, and other Beasts of Prey
Reclaimed by Good Usage? Nay, I have seen a Tame Spider, and it is a Common
Thing to have a Lizzard come to Hand. Man only is the Creature, that to his
Shame, no Benefits can Oblige, no nor Secure, even from seeking the Ruin of
his Benefactor: So that This P^smire sets us a Lesson here in her Thankfulness
to her Preserver.

FAB. CCIV. A Peacock and a Pie.
IN the Days of Old, the Birds lived at Random in a Lawless State of Anarchy;
but in time they began to be Weary on it, and Moved for the Setting up of a
King. The Peacock Valued himself upon his Gay Feathers, and put in for the
Office: The Pretenders were heard, the Question Debated; and the Choice fell
upon the Poll to King Peacock: The Vote was no sooner passed but up stands a
Pie with a Speech in his Mouth to This Effect: May it please your Majesty, says
he, We should be glad to Know, in Case the Eagle should fall upon us in your
Reign, as she has formerly done, how will you be able to Defend us?

The MORAL.
In the Business of either Erecting, or Changing a Government, it ought to be
very well Considered before hand, what may be the Consequences, in case of such
a Form, or such a Person.

REFLECTION.
KINGS are not to be Chosen for the Beauty or the Gracefulness of their
Persons, but for the Reputation they have in the World, and the Endowments of
their Minds. This Fable shows likewise the Necessity of Civil Order, and the
Danger of Popular Elections, where a Factious Majority commonly Governs the
Choice. Take the Plurality of the World, and they are neither Wise, nor Good;
and if they be left to Themselves, they will Undoubtedly Choose such as They
Themselves Are. It Is the Misery of Elective Governments, that there will be
Eternally Corruption and Partiality in the Choice; for there is a Kind of a
Tacit Covenant in the Case, that the King of their Own making shall make his
Makers Princes too: So that they Work for Themselves all this while not for the
Public: But the Pyes Question stopped all their Mouths, and it was Wisely let
fall too without a Reply, to Intimate that it was Unanswerable.

FAB. CCV. An Impertinent Dr. and his Patient.
A Physician was told One Morning that a Certain Patient of his was Dead, why
then the Lord's Will be Done, says he: We are All Mortal; but if This Man would
have forborne Wines, and Used Clysters, I Would have Warranted his Life This Bout
for God-a-Mercy. Well, says one, but why did you not rather give him This
Advice when it might have done him Good, then stand Talking of it to no manner
of Purpose Now the Man is Dead?

The MORAL.
It Is to no Purpose to think of Recalling Yesterday; and when the Steed is
Stoll'n, of Shutting the Stable Door.

REFLECTION.
THIS Fable Recommends to us the Doing of Every thing in its Due Season, for
either too Soon or too Late signifies Nothing. It is but making Almana^ks for
the Last Year, to stand Talking what Might have been done; when the Time of
Doing it is past. When a Battle is Lost, This or That, we say, might have
Prevented it. When a Tumult is Improved into a Rebellion, and a Government
Over-turn'd by it, it is just to as much purpose to say, This or That might have
Saved All; As for our Dr. here to say, when his Patient was Dead, that it was
for want of going such or such a way to Work. We have abundance of These
Wisemen in the World that are still looking backward without seeing One Inch
of the way before them. Not but that the Experience of Things Past, may be very
Instructive to us toward the Making of a Right Judgment upon Things to come,
but in such a Case as This, it is wholly Vain and Unprofitable to all manner of
Intents. It Is the Business of a Substantial and Well-Grounded Wisdom, to be
still looking forward from the First Indispositions into the Growth and
Progress of the Disease. It Traces the Advance of Dangers step by step, and
shows us the Rise and Gradations of the Evil, and gives us Light, either toward
the Preventing, or the Suppressing of it. We have in such an Instance as This,
the means before us of a True and an Useful Perception of Things, whereas
Judgments that are made on the Wrong-side of the Danger, Amount to no more then
an Affectation of Skill, without either Credit or Effect. Let Things be done
when they May be done, and When, and As they Ought to be done: As for the
Doctor's Iffing upon the Business, when his Patient was Dead, it was just to as
much purpose as if he had Blown Wind in's Breech.

FAB. CCVI. A Lion, Ass and Fox.
THere was a Hunting-Match agreed upon betwixt a Lion, an Ass, and a Fox, and
they were to go Equal Shares in the Booty. They ran down a Brave Stag, and the
Ass was to Divide the Prey; which he did very Honestly and Innocently into
Three Equal Parts, and left the Lion to take his Choice: Who never Minded the
Dividend; but in a Rage Worried the Ass, and then bad the Fox Divide; who had
the Wit to make Only One Share of the Whole, saving a Miserable Pittance that
he Reserved for Himself. The Lion highly approved of his Way of Distribution;
but Prithee Reynard, says he, who taught thee to Carve? Why truly says the Fox,
I had an Ass to my Master; and it was His Folly made me Wise.

The MORAL.
There must be no Sharers in Sovereignty. Court-Conscience is Policy. The Folly
of One Man makes Another Man Wise; as one Man Grows Rich upon the Ruins of
Another.

REFLECTION.
THIS Fable is sufficiently Moralliz'd Elsewhere; but it gives us further to
Understand, that Experience is the Mistress of Knaves as well as of Fools. Here
was the Innocence of the Ass, and the Craft of the Fox, Both in One. He saved
his Skin by the Modesty of the Division, and left enough for himself too, over
and above! For Asses are No great Venson Eaters.

FAB. CCVII. A Wolf and a Kid.
AS a Wolf was passing by a Poor Country Cottage, a Kid spied him through a
Peeping-Hole in the Door; and sent a Hundred Curses along with him. Sirrah
(says the Wolf) if I had ye out of your Castle, I Would make ye give Better
Language.

The MORAL.
A Coward in his Castle, makes a Great Deal more Bluster then a Man of Honor.

REFLECTION.
THE Advantages of Time and Place are enough to make a Poultron Valiant.
There Is Nothing so Courageous as a Coward if you put him out of Danger. This
way of Brawl and Clamor, is so Arrant a Mark of a Dastardly Wretch, that he
does as good as Call himself so that Uses it The Kid behind the Door has the
Privilege of a Lord Mayors Fool. He Is under Protection: he One is Scurrilous,
and the Other Saucy; and yet These are the Two Qualities that pass but too
frequently in the lord for Wit and Valor.

FAB. CCVIII. An Ass to Jupiter.
A Certain Ass that served a Gardener, and did a great deal of Work for a very
Little Meat, fell to his Prayers for Another Master. Jupiter Granted his
Request, and turned him over to a Potter, where he found Clay and Tile so much
a Heavyer Burden then Roots and Cabbage, that he went to his Prayers once again
for Another Change. His next Master was a Tanner; and there, over and above the
Increase of his Work, the very Trade went against his Stomach: For (says he) I
have been only Pinched in my Flesh, and Well Rib-Roasted sometimes under my
Former Masters; but I Am In now for Skin and All.

The MORAL.
A Man that is ever Shifting and Changing, is not, in truth, so Weary of his
Condition, as of Himself; And He that still Carries about him the Plague of a
Restless Mind, can never be pleased.

REFLECTION.
IT IS a High Point of Prudence for any Man to be Content with his Lot. For it is
Forty to One that he that Changes his Condition out of a Present Impatience and
Dissatisfaction, when he has tried a New one, Wishes for his Old One again; and
Briefly, the more we shift the Worse Commonly we Are. This Arises from the
Inconstancy of our Minds, and One Prayer does but make way for Another. Those
People, in fine, that are Destined to Drudgery may well Change their Masters;
but never their Condition.

He that finds himself in any Distress either of Carcass or of Fortune, should
do well to Deliberate upon the Matter, before he Prays for, or Resolves upon a
Change. As for Example now, what is it that Troubles me? Is there any Help
for it or no? What do I want? Is it Matter of Necessity or Superfluity? Where am
I to look for it? How shall I come at it? etc.

Now All our Grievances are either of Body or of Mind, or (in Complication) of
Both, and either the Remedy is in our Own Power, or it is not. There are some
Things that we cannot do for our selves without the Help of Others: There are
some Things again that Other People Cannot do for Us, nor are they any way else
to be done but by Our selves. In the One Case we are to seek abroad for Relief,
and in the Other, Whoever Consults his Reason, and his Duty, will find a
Certain Cure at Home: So that it goes a Great way in the Philosophy of Humane
Life, to Understand the Just Measures of what we are Able to do, and what we
are Obliged to do, in Distinction from the Contrary; for Otherwise we shall
spend our Days with Aesop's Ass in Hunting after Happiness where it is not to
be found, without ever Looking for it where it is. It Is allowed us, to be
sensible of Broken Limbs, and Diseased Bodies: And Common Prudence sends us to
Surgeons and Physicians, to Piece, and Patch them up again. But in These Cases
we Examine the Why, the What, and the How of Things, and Propose Means
Accommodate to the End. It Is Natural to be Moved with Pain, and as Natural to
Seek Relief; And it is well done at last, to do That which Nature bids us do;
But for Imaginary Evils, Every Man may be his Own Doctor. They are Bred in our
Affections, and we may Ease our selves. If the Question had been a Spavin, or a
Galled Back, and the Ass had Petitioned to Jupiter for Another Farryer, it
might have been a very Reasonable Request. Now if he had but Pitched upon such
or such a Particular Master, it might have done well enough too: But to grow
Weary of One Master, or of One Condition, and then to be presently Wishing in
General Terms for Another: This is only an Inconsiderate Ejaculation thrown off
at Random, without either Aim or Reason. Upon the Whole Matter, it is but
laying our own Faults at the Door of Nature and Providence, while we Impute the
Infirmities of our Minds to the Hardship of our Lot.

To proceed according to the Distribution of my Matter; it is much with Us in
This Case, as it was with the Man that fell from his Horse and could not get up
again. He was sure he was Hurt, he said, but could not tell Where. That is to
say, first our Grievances are Fantastical where they are not Corporal. 2ly. It
is Another Error in us, that in All our Fantastical Disappointments, we have
Recourse to Fantastical Remedies. 3ly. Providience has Allotted Every Man a
Competency for his State and Business. All beyond it is Superfluous, and there
will be Grumbling without End, if we come to reckon upon it, that we want This
or That because we Have it Not, instead of Acknowledging that we Have This or
That, and that we want Nothing. These Things duly Weighed, what can be more
Providential then the Blessing of having an Antidote within our selves against
all the Strokes of Fortune! That is to say, in the Worst of Extremities, we
have yet the Comfort left us of Constancy, Patience, and Resignation.

It Is not for a Wise and an Honest Man, to stand Expostulating with the Nature
of Things. As for Instance* Why should not I be This or That, or be so or so,
as well as He or The Other? But I should rather say to my self after This manner.
Am not I the Creature of an Almighty Power; and is it not the Same Power and
Wisdom that Made and Ordered The World, that has Assigned me this Place, Rank
or Station, in it? This Body, This Soul, This every Thing? What I am, I must be,
and there is no Contending with Invincible Necessity; No Disputing with an
Incomprehensible Wisdom: To say Nothing of the Impiety of Appealing from an
Inexplicable Goodness. If I can Mend my Condition by any Warrantable Industry
and Virtue, the Way is Fair and Open; And That Is a Privilege that Every
Reasonable Creature has in his Commission: But without Fixing upon some Certain
Scope, and Prescribing Just and Honorable Ways to it, there is Nothing to be
done. It Is a Wicked Thing to Repine; and it is as Bootless, and Uneasy too; for
One Restless Thought, Begets, and Punishes Another. We are not so Miserable in
our Own Wants, as in what Others Enjoy: And then our Levity is as Great a
Plague to us as our Envy, so that we need Nothing more then we have, but
Thankfulness, and Submission, to make us Happy. It was not the Ground of the
Asses Complaint, that it was Worse with Him then with Other Asses; but because
he was an Ass: And he was not so Sick of his Master, as of his Work. His
Fortune was well enough for such an Animal, so long as he kept himself within
his Proper Sphere and Business: But if the Stones in the Wall will be taking
upon them to Reproach the Builder; and if Nothing will please People unless
they be Greater then Nature ever Intended them; What can they Expect, but the
Asses Round of Vexatious Changes, and Experiments; and at last, when they have
made Themselves Weary and Ridiculous, even glad to set up their Rest upon the
very Spot were they Started.

FAB. CCIX. A Woman and her Maids.
IT was the Way of a Good Housewifely Old Woman, to call up her Maids Every
Morning just at the Cock-Crowing. The Wenches were loath to Rise so soon, and so
they laid their Heads together, and Killed the Poor Cock: for, say they, if it
were not for his Waking our Dame, she would not Wake us: But when the Good
Woman's Clock was gone, she would Mistake the Hour many times, and call 'em up at
Midnight: So that instead of Mending the Matter, they found themselves in a
Worse Condition Now then Before.

The MORAL.
One Error makes way for Another. First, we Complain of small things: Then we
Shift, and instead of Mending the Matter, we find it Worse, till it comes at
last to the Tinker's Work of Stopping One Hole, and making Ten.

REFLECTION.
IT IS a Common Thing for People that are Uneasy, to fly to Remedies that are
Worse then the Disease; Wherefore Men should Deliberate before they Resolve;
and say to Themselves, This we suffer at Present, and This or That we Propose
to Get by such and such a Change; and so set the One against the Other. The
Wenches were called up too Early, they thought, and so for fear of having too
Little Sleep, they ran the Risque of having no Sleep at all. And it fares much
at the same Rate in Public Grievances that it does in Private; When rather
then bear the Importunity of a Flea-biting, we are apt to run our selves Hand
over Head into a Bed of Scorpions; which is such another kind of an Expedient,
as if a Body should Beat out his Brains to Cure the Headache. Flesh and Blood
is Naturally Impatient of Restraint; beside the Itch and Curiosity that we
have, to be Prying and Searching into Forbidden Secrets; and to see (as one
says) What Good is in Evil. It Is Natural to us to be Weary of what we have, and
still to be Hankering after something or other that we have Not: And so our
Levity Pushes us on from One Vain Desire to Another, in a Regular Vicissitude,
and Succession of Cravings and Satiety. We want (as I say) what we have not,
and grow Sick on it when we have it. Now the Wise Man Clears the Whole Matter to
us, in Pronouncing All things under the Sun (That is to say, the Pomp, the
Pleasures, and the Enjoyments of This World) to be Vanity of Vanities, and All,
Vanity. The Truth of it is, we Govern our Lives by Fancy, rather then by
Judgment. We Mistake the Reasons of Things, and Impute the Issue of them to
Wrong Causes. So that the Lesson given us here, is Preceptive to us, not to do
any thing but upon due Consideration. The Wenches Killed the Cock for calling
them up so soon, whereas the Crowing of the Cock was the Cause, in Truth, that
they were called up no sooner.

FAB. CCX. A Lion and a Goat.
A Lion spied a Goat upon the Crag of a High Rock, and so called out to him
after this Manner: Had not thou better come Down now, says the Lion, into
This Delicate Fine Meadow? Well, says the Goat, and so perhaps I would, if it
were not for the Lion that is there Before me: But I Am for a Life of Safety,
rather then for a Life of Pleasure. Your Pretense is the Filling of My Belly
with Good Grass; but your Business is the Cramming of your Own Guts with Good
Goats-Flesh: So that it is for your Own Sake, not Mine, that you would have me come
down.

The MORAL.
There Is no Trusting to the Formal Civilities and Invitations of an Enemy, and
his Reasonings are but Snares when he pretends to Advise us for our Good.

REFLECTION.
HE that Advises Another to his Own Advantage, may be very Reasonably Suspected
to give Council for his Own Ends. It may so fall Out, it is True, as to be
Profitable for Both: But all Circumstances would be Well Examined in such a
Case before we Trust. This is the Song of your Men of Prey, as well as of your
Beasts of Prey, when they Set up for the Good of the Goats and the Common
People. How many Fine Things have we had told us in the Memory of Man, upon the
Subject of our Liberties, Properties, and Religion, and the Delivering of us
from the Fears and Iealousies of Idolatry, and Arbitrary Power! And what was
the Fruit of All This in the End, but Vision and Romance on the Promising Hand,
and an Exchange of Imaginary Chains, for Real Locks and Bolts, on the Other:
But Aesop's Beasts saw further into a Millstone then our Mobile: And that the
Lyon's Invitation of the Goat from the Rocks into the Fool's Paradise of a
Delicate Sweet Meadow, signified no more in Plain English, then Come down that
I may Eat ye.

FAB. CCXI. A Uultur's Invitation.
THE Vultur took up a Fit of very Good Humor once, and Invited the Whole
Nation of the Birds to make Merry with him, upon the Anniversary of his
Birthday. The Company came; The Vultur shuts the Doors upon them, and Devours
his Guests instead of Treating them.

The MORAL.
There Is no Meddling with any Man that has neither Faith, Honor, nor Good
Nature in him.

REFLECTION.
IT IS Dangerous Trusting to specious Pretexts of Civility and Kindness, where
People are not well assured of the Faith and Good Nature of Those they have to
do withal; In which case, the Butchery, and the Breach of Hospitality
Represented in This Fable, under a Masque of Friendship, was no more, then what
might Reasonably enough be Expected under such Circumstances. There are Men of
Prey as well as Beasts and Birds of Prey, and for Those that Live upon, and
Delight in Blood, there is no Trusting of them: for let them pretend what they
will, they Govern themselves, and take their Measures according to their
Interests, and Appetites. It Is a Hard Case yet, for Men to be forced upon Ill
Nature, in their Own Defense, and to suspect the Good Faith of Those, that give
us All the Protestations and Assurance of Friendship, and Fair Dealing that One
Man can give Another. Nay the very Suspicion is an Affront, and almost
sufficient to Authorize some sort of Revenge. He that Violates the Necessary
Trust and Confidence that One Man ought to Repose in Another, does what in Him
lies, to Dissolve the very Bond of Humane Society; for there is no Treachery so
Close, so Sure, and so Pernicious, as That which Works under a Veil of
Kindness. We set Toyls, Nets, Gins, Snares, and Traps for Beasts and Birds it is
True; and we Bait Hooks for Fishes; But All This is done in their Own Haunts,
and Walks, and without any Seal of Faith and Confidence in the Matter: but to
break the Laws of Hospitality, and Tenderness; To Betray our Guests under our
Own Roofs, and to Murder them at our Own Tables; This is a Practice only for
Men and Vulturs to be Guilty of.

FAB. CCXII. Bustards and Cranes.
SOme Sports-men that were abroad upon Game, spied a Company of Bustards and
Cranes a Feeding together, and so made in upon 'em as fast their Horses could
carry them. The Cranes that were Light, took Wing immediately, and saved
themselves, but the Bustards were Taken; for they were Fat, and Heavy, and
could not Shift so well as the Other.

The MORAL.
Light of Body and Light of Purse, comes much to a Case in Troublesome Times;
Only the One saves himself by his Activity, and the Other scapes because he is
not worth the Taking.

REFLECTION.
CAMERARIUS makes This to be an Emblem of the Taking of a Town, where the Poor
escape better then the Rich; for the One is let go, and the Other is Plundered
and Cooped up. But with Favor of the Moralists, it was not at the Fowler's
Choice, which to Take, and which to Let go; for the Cranes were too Nimble, and
got away inspite of him: So that This Fancy seems rather to Point at the
Advantages that some have over Others, to make Better shift in the World then
their Fellows, by a Felicity of Make, and Constitution, whether of Body or of
Mind: Provided always, that they Play Fair, and Manage all Those Faculties with
a Strict Regard to Common Honesty and Justice.

FAB. CCXIII. Jupiter and an Ape.
JUpiter took a Fancy once to Summon All the Birds and Beasts under the Canopy
of Heaven to appear before him with their Brats, and their Little ones, to see
which of 'em had the prettiest Children: And who but the Ape to put her self
Foremost, with a Brace of her Cubbs in her Arms, for the Greatest Beauties in
the Company.

FAB. CCXIV. An Eagle and an Owl.
A Certain Eagle that had a mind to be well served, took up a Resolution of
Preferring Those that she found most agreeable, for Person and Address; and so
there past an Order of Council for All Her Majesty's Subjects to bring their
Children to Court. They came accordingly, and Every One in their Turn was for
Advancing their Own: Till at last the Owl fell a Mopping, and Twinkling, and
told her Majesty, that if a Gracious Mien and Countenance might Entitle any of
her Subjects to a Preference, she Doubted not but her Brood would be looked
upon in the First Place; for they were as like the Mother, as if they had been
spit out of her Mouth. Upon This, the Board fell all into a Fit of Laughing, and
called Another Cause.

The Moral of the Two Fables above.
No body ever saw an Ill-savour'd (...) in the World yet, Man, or Woman, that
had not a Good Opinion of it is Own Wit and Beauty.

REFLECTION.
SELF Love is the Root of All the Vanities that are struck at in These Two
Fables, and it is so Natural an Infirmity, that it makes us Partial even to
Those that come of us, as well as to our selves: And then it is so Nicely
Divided, betwixt Piety, Pride, and Weakness, that in Many Cases it is a hard
Matter to Distinguish the One from the Other. It Is a Frailty for a Man to Think
Better of his Children then they Deserve: But then there is an Impulse of
Tenderness, and of Duty, that goes along with it, and there must be some sort
of an Esteem in the Case too, for the setting of That Inbred Affection at
Work. The Difficulty lies in the Moderating of the Matter, and in getting the
True Medium betwixt being Wanting to our Own Flesh and Blood, once Removed, and
Assuming too much to our selves. Let the Attachment be what it will, we must
not suffer our Judgments to be either Perverted, Blinded, or Corrupted by any
Partiality of Prepossessions whatsoever.

The Moral here before us, Extends to the Fruits and Productions of the Brain,
as well as of the Body; and to Deformities in the matter as well of
Understanding, as of Shape. We are Taught here Principally, Two Things; First,
how Ridiculous it is for a Man to Dote upon Fops and Buffoons, though never so
much the Issue of his Own Head and Loins; And yet 2ly. How Prone we are to
Indulge our Own Errors, Follies and Miscarriages, in Thought, Word, and Deed.
The World has Abundance of These Apes and Owls in it: So that Whoever does but
look about him, will find so many Living Illustrations of This Emblem, that
more Words upon the Subject would be needless.

THE FABLES OF ANIANUS, etc.
FAB. CCXV. An Oak and a Willow.
THere happened a Controversy betwixt an Oak and a Willow, upon the Subject of
Strength, Constancy and Patience, and which of the Two should have the
Preference. The Oak Upbraided the Willow, that it was Weak and Wavering, and
gave way to Every Blast. The Willow made no Other Reply, then that the next
Tempest should Resolve That Question. Some very little while after This
Dispute, it Blew a Violent Storm. The Willow Plied, and gave way to the Gust,
and still recovered it self again, without receiving any Damage: But the Oak
was Stubborn, and chose rather to Break then Bend.

The MORAL.
A Stiff and a Stubborn Obstinacy, is not so much Firmness, and Resolution, as
Willfullness. A Wise and a Steady Man bends only in the Prospect of Rising
again.

REFLECTION.
THERE are Many Cases, and Many Seasons, wherein, Men must either Bend or
Break: But Conscience, Honor, and Good Manners, are first to be Consulted.
When a Tree is Pressed with a strong Wind, the Branches may Yield, and yet the
Root remain Firm. But Discretion is to Govern us, where and when we may be
Allowed to Temporize, and where, and when not. When Bending or Breaking is the
Question, and Men have No Other Choice before them, then either of Complying,
or of being Undone; it is No Easy Matter to Distinguish, Where, When, How, or
to What Degree, to Yield to the Importunity of the Occasion, or the Difficulty
of the Times. It is a Certain Rule, it is true (but a General One) That No Ill
is to be done that Good may come of it: Now the Point will be at last. what is
Simply Good or Evil; What in the Contemplation; and how far the Intention, or
the Probable Consequences of such, or such an Action, may Qualify the Case:
Taking This Consideration along with us too, that we are under a Great
Temptation to be Partial in favor of our selves, in the Matter of Ease,
Profit, or Safety.

The First Point to be Preserved Sacred, and from whence a Man is never to
Depart, though for the Saving of his Life, Liberty, Popular Credit, or Estate;
That First Point, I say, is Conscience. Now All Duties are Matter of
Conscience, respectively to the Subject that they are Exercised upon; Only with
This Restriction, that a Superior Obligation Discharges, or at least Suspends
the Force of an Inferior: As to such a Circumstance for the Purpose, such a
Degree, or such a Season. Now there are other Niceties also, as of Honor,
Decency, and Discretion, Humanity, Modesty, Respect, etc. that Border even upon
the Indispensable Ties of Religion it self; and though they are Not Matter of
Conscience, Simply, and Apart, they are yet so Reductively, with a Regard to
Other Considerations: That is to say, though they are Not so in the Abstract,
they Become so by Affinity and Connection: And such Civil Matters they are, as
fall within the Purlews of Religion. There are Trials of Men, as well as Trials
of Trees. Storms or Inundations are the same Thing to the One, that the
Iniquity of such or such an Age, or Conjuncture, is to the Other. Now'tis not
Courage but Stomach, that makes many People Break, rather then they will Bend;
even though a Yielding upon That Puntillo (and with a Good Conscience too)
might perhaps have saved a State. Fractures Undoubtedly are Dangerous, where
the Public is to be Crushed under the Ruin: But yet after All This
Descanting, and Modifying upon the Matter, there is no less Hazard on the
Yielding-side too, then there is on the other. Men may be Stiff and Obstinate,
upon a Wrong Ground, and Men may Ply, and Truckle too, upon as False a
Foundation. Our Bodies may be forced, but our Minds Cannot: So that Humane
Frailty is No Excuse for a Criminal Immorality. Where the Law of God and Nature
Obliges me, the Plea of Humane Frailty can Never Discharge me. There Is as much
Difference betwixt Bending and Sinking, as there is betwixt Breaking and
Bending. There must be no Contending with Insuperable Powers on the One Hand,
and no Departing from Indispensable Duties on the Other: Nor is it the Part,
either of a Christian, or of a Man, to Abandon his Post. Now the Just Medium of
This Case lies betwixt the Pride, and the Abjection of the Two Extremes. As the
Willow, for the Purpose, Bows, and Recovers, and the Resignation is Crowned and
Rewarded in the Success. The Oak is Stubborn, and Inflexible, and the
Punishment of That Stiffness, is One Branch of the Allegory of This Fable.

FAB. CCXVI. A Fisherman and a Little Fish.
AS an Angler was at his Sport, he had the Hap to Draw up a very Little Fish
from among the Fry. The Poor Wretch begged heartily to be thrown in again; for
says he, I Am not come to my Growth yet, and if you will let me alone till I am
Bigger, Your Purchase will turn to a Better Account. Well! says the Man, but
I Would rather have a Little Fish in Possession, then a Great One in Reversion.

The MORAL.
It Is Wisdom to take what we May, while it is to be Had, even if it were but for
Mortality sake.

REFLECTION.
There Is no Parting with a Certainty for an Uncertainty. But This Fable is
abundantly Moraliz'd Elsewhere.

FAB. CCXVII. An Ant and a Grasshopper.
AS the Ants were Airing their Provisions One Winter, Up comes a Hungry
Grasshopper to 'em, and begs a Charity. They told him that he should have
Wrought in Summer, if he would not have Wanted in Winter. Well says the
Grasshopper, but I was not Idle neither; for I Sung out the Whole Season. Nay
then, said they, You shall even do Well to make a Merry Year on it, and Dance in
Winter to the Tune that You Sung in Summer.

The MORAL.
A Life of Sloth is the Life of a Brute; but Action and Industry is the
Business of a Great, a Wise, and a Good Man.

REFLECTION.
Here Is a Reproof to Men of Sensuality, and Pleasure. The Moral Preaches
Industry, and Beats down Sloth, and Shows that After-wit is Nothing Worth. It
must be an Industrious Youth that provides against the Inconveniences, and
Necessities of Old Age; And He that Fools away the One, must either Beg or
Starve in the Other. Go to the Ant thou Sluggard; (says the Wiseman) which in
Few Words Sums up the Moral of This Fable. It Is Hard to say of Laziness, or
Luxury, whether it be the more Scandalous, or the more Dangerous Evil. The very
Soul of the Slothful, does Effectually but lie Drowzing in his Body, and the
Whole Man is Totally given up to his Senses: Whereas the Profit and the Comfort
of Industry, is Substantial, Firm, and Lasting; The Blessings of Security and
Plenty go along with it, and it is never out of Season. What Is the Grasshoppers
Entertainment now, but a Summers Song? A Vain. and an Empty Pleasure? Let it be
Understood however, that we are not to Pass Avarice upon the World under the
Title of Good Husbandry, and Thrift: and under That Cover to Extinguish Charity
by not Distributing the Fruits of it. We are in the First Place, to Consult our
Own Necessities, but we are Then to Consider in the Second Place, that the
Necessities of our Neighbors have a Christian Right to a Part of what we have
to Spare. For the Common Offices of Humanity, are as much Duties of
Self-Preservation, as what Every Individual Contributes to it is Own Well-Being.
It is in short, the Great Interest and Obligation of Particulars, to Advance
the Good of the Community.

The Stress of This Moral lies upon the Preference of Honest Labor to
Idleness; and the Refusal of Relief on the One Hand, is intended only for a
Reproof to the Inconsiderate Loss of Opportunity on the Other. This does not
Hinder yet, but that the Ants, out of their Abundance, ought to have Relieved
the Grasshopper in her Distress, though 'twas her Own Fault that brought her
to it: For if One Man's Faults could Discharge Another Man of his Duty, there
would be no longer any Place left for the Common Offices of Society. To
Conclude, We have our Failings, Every Mothers Child of us, and the Improvidence
of my Neighbor must not make Me Inhumane. The Ant did well to Reprove the
Grasshopper for her Slothfulness; but she did Ill then to refuse her a Charity
in her Distress.

FAB. CCXVIII. A Bull and a Goat.
A Bull that was Hard Pressed by a Lion, ran directly toward a Goat-Stall, to
Save Himself. The Goat made Good the Door, and Head to Head Disputed the
Passage with him. Well! says the Bull, with Indignation, If I had not a more
Dangerous Enemy at my Heels, then I have Before me, I should soon Teach you the
Difference betwixt the Force of a Bull, and of a Goat.

The MORAL.
It Is no Time to Stand Quarrelling with Every Little Fellow, when Men of Power
are Pursuing us upon the Heel to the very Death.

REFLECTION.
IT is Matter of Prudence, and Necessity; for People in many Cases to put up
the Injuries of a Weaker Enemy, for fear of Incurring the Displeasure of a
Stronger. Baudoin fancies the Bull to be the Emblem of a Man in Distress, and
the Goat Insulting over him; and Moralizes upon it after This Manner. [ There Is
Nothing that a Courtier more Dreads and Abhors, then a Man in Disgrace; and he
is presently made All the Fools and Knaves in Nature upon it: For He that is
Unfortunate is Consequently Guilty of All manner of Crimes.] He Applies This
Character to those that Persecute Widows and Orphans, and Trample upon the
Afflicted; though not without some Violence Methinks, to the Genuine Intent of
This Figure; for the Goat was only Passive; and his Business was, without any
Insolence, or Injustice, to Defend his Freehold

FAB. CCXIX. A Nurse and a Wolf.
AS a Wolf was Hunting up and down for his Supper, he passed by a Door where a
Little Child was Bawling, and an Old Woman Chiding it. Leave your Vixen-Tricks,
says the Woman, or I Will throw ye to the Wolf. The Wolf Overheard her, and
Waited a pretty While, in hope the Woman would be as good as her Word; but No
Child coming, away goes the Wolf for That Bout. He took his Walk the Same Way
again toward the Evening, and the Nurse he found had Changed her Note; for she
was Then Muzzling, and Cokesing of it. That Is a Good Dear, says she, If the
Wolf comes for My Child, We'll even Beat his Brains out. The Wolf went
Muttering away upon it. There Is No Meddling with People, says he, that say One
Thing and Mean Another.

The MORAL.
It Is Fear more then Love that makes Good Men, as well as Good Children, and
when Fair Words, and Good Council will not Prevail upon us, we must be Frighted
into our Duty.

REFLECTION.
THE Heart and Tongue of a Woman are commonly a Great way asunder. And it may
bear Another Moral; which is, that it is with Froward Men, and Froward Factions
too, as it is with Froward Children, They Will be sooner Quieted by Fear, and
Rough Dealing, then by any Sense of Duty or Good Nature. There would be no
Living in This World without Penal Laws, and Conditions. And Do or Do not, This
or That at your Peril, is as Reasonable, and Necessary in Families as it is in
Governments. It is a Truth Imprinted in the Hearts of All Mankind, that the
Gibbets, Pillories, and the Whipping-Posts make more Converts then the Pulpits:
As the Child did more here for fear of the Wolf, then for the Love of the
Nurse.

FAB. CCXX. An Eagle and a Tortoise.
A Tortoise was thinking with himself, how Irksom a sort of Life it was, to
spend All his Days in a Hole, with a a House upon his Head, when so many Other
Creatures had the Liberty to Divert Themselves in the Free, Fresh Air, and to
Ramble about at Pleasure. So that the Humor took him One Day, and he must needs
get an Eagle to Teach him to Fly. The Eagle would fain have put him off, and
told him 'twas a Thing against Nature, and Common Sense; but (according to the
Freak of the Wilful Part of the World) the More the One was Against it, the
More the Other was For it: And when the Eagle saw that the Tortoise would not
be said Nay, she took him up a matter of Steeple-high into the Air, and there
turned him Loose to shift for Himself. That is to say; she dropped him down,
Squab upon a Rock, that Dashed him to Pieces.

The MORAL.
Nothing can be either Safe, or Easy that is Unnatural.

REFLECTION.
THIS shows us, how Unnatural a Vanity it is, for a Creature that was Made for
One Condition, to Aspire to Another. The Tortoise's Place was upon the Sands,
not among the Stars; and if he had kept to his Station, he would have been in
No Danger of Falling. Many a Fool has Good Council Offered him, that has not
either the Wit, or the Grace to Take it; and his Willfulness commonly Ends in
his Ruin.

Every thing in Nature has it is Appointed Place, and Condition, and there is No
putting a Force upon any thing, contrary to the Biass and Intent of it is
Institution. What Business has a Tortoise among the Clouds? Or why may not the
Earth it self as well Covet a Higher Place, as any Creature that is Confined
to it? It is, in short, a Silly, an Extravagant, and in Truth, so Impious a
Fancy, that there can hardly be a Greater Folly then to Wish, or but so much as
to Suppose it: But there is an Ambition in Mean Creatures, as well as in Mean
Souls. So many Ridiculous Upstarts as we find Promoted in the World, we may
Imagine to be so many Tortoises in the Air; and when they have Fluttered there
a While, like Paper-Kites, for the Boys to stare at, He that took them up,
grows either Ashamed, or Weary of them, and so lets them Drop again; and, with
the Devil Himself, even leaves them where he found them. This may serve to put
a Check to the Vanity and Folly of an Unruly Ambition; that is Deaf, not only to
the Advice of Friends, but to the Councels and Monitions of the very Spirit of
Reason it self: For Flying without Wings is All one with Working without Means.
We see a Thousand Instances in the World, Every jot as Ridiculous as This in
the Fable. That is to say of Men that are Made for One Condition, and yet
Affect Another. What Signifies the Fiction of Phaeton in the Chariot of the
Sun? The Frog vying Bulk with an Ox; or the Tortoise Riding upon the Wings of
the Wind; but to Prescribe Bounds and Measures to our Exorbitant Passions; and
at the same time, to show us upon the Issue that All Unnatural Pretensions are
Attended with a Certain Ruin?

FAB. CCXXI. An Old Crab and a Young.
CHild, (says the Mother) You must Use your self to Walk Straight, without
Skewing, and Shailing so Every step you set: Pray Mother (says the Young Crab)
do but set the Example your self, and I Will follow ye.

FAB. CCXXII. The Goose and Gosselin.
WHY do you go Nodding, and Waggling so like a Fool, as if you were Hipshot?
says the Goose to her Gosselin. The Young One tried to Mend it, but Could not;
and so the Mother tied Little Sticks to her Legs, to keep her Upright: But the
Little One Complained then, that she could neither Swim, nor Dabble with 'em.
Well, says the Mother, Do but hold up your Head at least. The Gosselin
Endeavored to do That too; but upon the Stretching out of her Long Neck, she
complained that she could not see the Way before her: Nay then, says the Goose,
if it will be no Better, even carry your Head and your Feet, as your Elders
have done before ye.

The Moral of the Two Fables above.
Ill Examples Corrupt even the Best Dispositions, but we must Distinguish
betwixt Natural and Moral Actions.

REFLECTION.
IT is Time Lost to Advise Others to do what we either Do not, or Cannot do Our
Selves. There Is no Crossing of Nature; but the Best way is to rest Contented
with the Ordinary Condition of Things. It Is but so much Labor thrown away, to
Attempt the Altering of Instincts, or the Curing of Ill Habits.

Example Works a great Deal more then Precept; for Words without Practice, are
but Councels without Effect. When we Do as we say, it is a Confirmation of the
Rule; but when our Lives and Doctrines do not Agree, it looks as if the Lesson
were either too Hard for us, or the Advice, not worth the While to Follow. We
should see to Mend our Own Manners, before we Meddle to Reform our Neighbors,
and not Condemn Others for what we do our Selves: Especially where they follow
the Nature of their Kind, and in so doing, Do as they Ought to do. Let Every
thing Move, March, and Govern it self, according to the Proper Disposition of
the Creature; for it would be Every Jot as Incongruous, for a Crab to Walk like
a Man, as for a Man to Walk like a Crab. This may be applied to the Lessons
that are given us for the Ordering of our Lives and Families. But above All
Things, Children should not be Betrayed into the Love and Practice of any thing
that is Amiss, by Setting Evil Examples before them; for their Talent is only
Imitation; and it is Ill Trusting Mimicks in such a Case, without a Judgment to
Distinguish.

This Allegory may pass for a very Good Lecture to Governors, Parents, and
Tutors, to behave themselves Reverently both in Word and Deed, before their
Pupils, with a kind of Awful Tenderness for the Innocence and Simplicity of
Youth. For Examples of Vices, or Weaknesses, have the same Effect upon
Children, with Examples of Virtue; Nay it holds in Public too as well as in
Private, that the Words and Actions of our Superiors have the Authority and
Force of a Recommendation. Regis ad Exemplum, is so True, that it is Morally
Impossible to have a Sober People under a Mad Government. For where Lewdness is
the Way to Preferment, Men are Wicked by Interest, as well by Imitation: But to
Return to the Stress of the Fable, Let a Goose Walk like a Goose, and leave
Nature to do her Own Business her Own Way.

FAB. CCXXIII. The Sun and the Wind.
THere happened a Controversy betwixt the Sun and the Wind, which was the
Stronger of the Two; and they put the Point upon This Issue: There was a
Traveller upon the Way, and which of the Two could make That Fellow Quit his
Cloak should carry the Cause. The Wind fell presently a Storming, and threw
Hail-Shot over and above in the very Teeth of him. The Man Wraps himself up,
and keeps Advancing still in spite of the Weather: But This Gust in a short
Time Blew over; and then the Sun Brake out, and fell to Work upon him with his
Beams; but still he Pushes forward, Sweating, and Panting, till in the End he
was forced to Quit his Cloak, and lay himself down upon the Ground in a Cool
Shade for his Relief: So that the Sun, in the Conclusion, carried the Point.

The MORAL.
Reason and Resolution will Support a Man against All the Violences of Malice
and Fortune; but in a Wallowing Qualm, a Man's Heart and Resolution fails him,
for want of Fit Matter to Work upon.

REFLECTION.
IT IS a Part of Good Discretion in All Contests, to Consider over and over, the
Power, the Strength, and the Interest of our Adversary; and likewise again,
that though One Man may be more Robust then Another, That Force may be Baffled
yet by Skill and Address. It is in the Business of Life as it is in a Storm, or
a Calm at Sea: The Blast may be Impetuous; but seldom lasts long; and though
the Vessel be Pressed never so Hard, a Skilful Steers-man will yet bear up
against it: But in a Dead Calm, a Man loses his Spirits, and lies in a Manner
Exposed, as the Scorn and Spectacle of Ill Fortune.

FAB. CCXXIV. An Ass in a Lyon's Skin.
THere was a Freak took an Ass in the Head, to Scour abroad upon the Ramble;
and away he goes into the Woods, Masquerading up and down in a Lyon's Skin. The
World was his Own for a while, and wherever he went, Man and Beast Fled before
him: But he had the Hap in the Conclusion, partly by his Voice, and partly by
his Ears, to be Discovered, and consequently Uncas'd, well Laughed at, and well
Cudgelled for his Pains.

The MORAL.
The World abounds in Terrible Fansarons, in the Masque of Men of Honor: But
These Braggadocio's are Easy to be Detected; for no Counterfeit of any Good
Quality or Virtue whatsoever, will abide the Test.

REFLECTION.
There Is Nothing more Frequent, or more Ridiculous in the World, then for an
Ass to Dress himself up like a Lion: A Dunce sets up for a Doctor; a Beggar for
a Man of Estate; a Scoundrel for a Cavalier; a Polrcon for a Sword-man: But
Every Fool still has some Mark or other to be Known by, thorough All Disguises;
and the More he takes upon him, the Arranter Sot he makes Himself, when he
comes to be Unmasqu'd.

Every Fool, or Fools Fellow, carries More or Less, in his Face, the Signature
of his Manners, though the Character may be much more Legible in some, then in
Others; As the Ass was found out by his Voice and by his Ears. Let him keep his
Words betwixt his Teeth, and he may pass Muster perhaps for a Man of some
Sense; but if he comes to Open once, he is Lost: For Nature never put the Tongue
of a Philosopher into the Mouth of a Coxcomb: But however, let him be, in
truth, what he Will, he is yet so Conscious of what he Ought to be, that he
makes it his Business to pass for what he is not: And in the Matter of
Counterfeits, it is with Men, as it is with False Money: One Piece is more or
less Passable then Another, as it happens to have more or less Sense, or
Sterling in the Mixture. One General Mark of an Impostor is This; That he
Out-does the Original; As the Ass here in the Lyon-skin, made Fifty times more
Clutter then the Lion would have done in his Own; And Himself Fifty times the
more Ridiculous for the Disguise.

If a Man turn his Thoughts now from This Fancy in the Forest, to the Sober
Truth of Daily Experience in the World, he shall find Asses in the Skins of
Men, Infinitely more Contemptible then This Ass in the Skin of a Lion. How many
Terrible Asses have we seen in the Garb of Men of Honor! How many Insipid, and
Illiterate Fops, that take upon them to Retail Politiques, and sit for the
Picture of Men of State! How many Iudas's with Hail Master in their Mouths! How
many Church-Robbers that Write themselves Reformers! In One Word, Men do
Naturally love to bethought Greater, Wiser, Holier, Braver, and Juster then
they Are; and in fine, Better Qualified in All Those Faculties that may give
them Reputation among the People, then we find 'em to be.

The Moral of This Fable Hits all sorts of Arrogant Pretenders, and runs
Effectually into the Whole Business of Humane Life. We have it in the very
Cabinets, and Councels of State, the Bar, the Bench, the Change, the Schools,
the Pulpits; All Places, in short, are full of Quacks, Jugglers and Plagiaries,
that set up for Men of Quality, Conscience, Philosophy, and Religion. So that
there are Asses with Short Ears, as well as with Long, and in Robes of Silk and
Dignity, as well as in Skins of Hair. In Conclusion, An Ass of the Long Robe,
when he comes once to be Detected, looks Infinitely Sillier, then he would have
done in his own Shape: Neither is Aesop's Ass Laughed at here for his Ears, or
for his Voice, but for his Vanity, and Pretense; for The Other is but according
to his own Kind and Nature; and Every thing is Well and Best, while it
Continues to be as God made it.

FAB. CCXXV. A Fox and a Worm.
A Worm put forth his Head out of a Dunghill, and made Proclamation of his Skill
in Physic. Pray, says the Fox, Begin with your Own Infirmities before you
Meddle with other Peoples.

The MORAL.
Physician Cure thy Self.

REFLECTION.
SAYING and Doing are Two Things. Physician Cure thy self, Preaches to us upon
This Fable. Every Man does Best in his own Trade, and the Cobbler is not to go
beyond his Last. We have of These Dunghil-Pretenders, in All Professions, and
but too many of them that Thrive upon their Arrogance. If This Worm had met
with an Ass to Encourage his Vanity, instead of a Fox to Correct it, he might
have been Advanced to a Doctor of the College perhaps: Or to some more
Considerable Post of Honor, either in Church or State.

FAB. CCXXVI. A Cursed Dog.
THere was a very Good House-Dog, but so Dangerous a Cur to Strangers, that his
Master put a Bell about his Neck, to give People Notice beforehand when he was
a Coming. The Dog took this Bell for a Particular Mark of his Master's Favor,
till One of his Companions showed him his Mistake. You are Mightily Out (says
he) to take This for an Ornament, or a Token of Esteem, which is in truth, no
Other then a Note of Infamy set upon you for your Ill Manners.

The MORAL.
This may serve for an Admonition to Those that make a Glory of the Marks of
their Shame, and Value themselves upon the Reputation of an Ill-Character.

REFLECTION.
IT IS a Bad World, when the Rules and Measures of Good and Evil, are either
Inverted, or Mistaken; and when a Brand of Infamy passes for a Badge of Honor.
But the Common People do not Judge of Vice or Virtue, by the Morality, or the
Immorality of the Matter, so much as by the Stamp that is set upon it by Men of
President and Figure. What Is more Familiar then an Ostentation of Wickedness,
where Impiety has the Reputation of Virtue? As in the Excesses of Wine, and
Women, and the Vanity of bearing up against all the Laws of God and Man. When
Lewdness comes once to be a Fashion, it has the Credit in the World that other
Fashions have; as we see Many times an Affectation even of Deformity it self,
where some Exemplary Defect has brought that Deformity to be a Mode. The Fancy
of This Dog was somewhat like the French Woman's Freak, that stood up for the
Honor of her Family: Her Coat was Quartered, she said, with the Arms of
France; which was so far True, that she had the Flower-de-Luce Stamped, we must
not say Branded upon her Shoulder.

FAB. CCXXVII. Two Friends and a Bear.
TWO Friends that were Traveling together, had the Fortune to Meet a Bear upon
the Way. They found there was no Running for it. So the One Whips up a Tree, and
the Other throws himself Flat with his Face upon the Ground. The Bear comes
directly up to Him, Muzzles, and Smells to him, puts his Nose to his Mouth, and
to his Ears, and at last, taking for Granted that 'twas only a Carcass, there
he leaves him. The Bear was no sooner gone, but Down comes his Companion, and
asked him, what it was the Bear Whispered him in the Ear. He bad me have a
Care, says he, how I keep Company with those, that when they find themselves
upon a Pinch, will leave their Friends in the Lurch.

The MORAL.
Every Man for Himself, and God for us All.

REFLECTION.
THIS Fable has in a Few Words a Great many Useful, and Instructive Morals. The
Man upon the Tree Preaches to us upon the Text of [ Charity begins at Home]
According to the False and Perverse Practice of the World when their Companions
are in Distress. The Bear passes a Judgment upon the Abandoning of a Friend in
a Time of Need, as an Offense both to Honor and Virtue; And moreover, Cautions
us, above All Things, to have a Care what Company we keep. There Is no Living in
This World without Friendship; No Society; No Security without it; Beside that
the Only Trial of it is in Adversity. And yet nothing Commoner in times of
Danger, then for Statesmen, Swordmen, Churchmen, Law-men, and intruth, all
sorts of Men, more or less, to leave their Masters, Leaders, or Friends, to
Bears and Tigers; Show them a Fair pair of Heels for it, and cry, The Devil Take
the Hindmost.

FAB. CCXXVIII. A Horse-man's Whig Blown off.
THere was a Horseman had a Cap on with a False Head of Hair Tacked to it.
There comes a Puff of Wind, and Blows off Cap and Whig together. The People
made sport he saw with his Bald Crown, and so very fairly he put In with them
to Laugh for Company. Why Gentlemen (says he) would you have me keep other
Peoples Hair Better then I did my Own?

The MORAL.
Many a Man would be Extremely Ridiculous, if he did not Spoil the Jest by
Playing upon Himself first.

REFLECTION.
IT IS a Turn of Art, in many Cases, either of Deformity, or Mischance, where a
Man lies open to a Reproach to Anticipate an Abuse, and to make Sport with
Himself first. A Man may be Shame-Fac'd, and a Woman, Modest, to the Degree of
Scandalous. I knew a Lady had one of the most Bashful, Scrupulous Persons to
her Daughter that ever was Born. Well, says she, I am mightily afraid, This
Girl will prove a Whore; for she is so Infinitely Modest, that in my Conscience
if any Man should ever Ask her the Question, she would not have the Face to
Deny him. A Frank Easy way of Openness and Candor agrees Best with All Humors;
and He that is Over-solicitous to Conceal a Thing, does as good as make
Proclamation of it. Wherefore the Horseman here Laughed first; and so
Prevented the Jest.

FAB. CCXXIX. Two Pots.
THere were Two Pots that stood near One Another by the Side of a River, the
One of Brass, and the other of Clay. The Water overflowed the Banks, and
Carried them Both away: The Earthen Vessel kept Aloof from The Other as much as
Possible. Fear Nothing, says the Brass Pot, I Will do you No Hurt: No, No, says
The Other, not willingly; but if we should happen to Knock by Chance, 'twould be
the same Thing to Me: So that You and I shall never do well together.

The MORAL.
Unequal Fellowships and Alliances are Dangerous. Not but that Great and Small,
Hard, and Brittle, Rich and Poor, may sort Well enough together so long as the
Good Humor Lasts; but wherever there are Men there will be Clashing some time
or other, and a Knock, or a Contest spoils All.

REFLECTION.
THERE can be no True Friendship, properly so Called but betwixt Equals. The
Rich and the Poor, the Strong and the Weak will never agree together: For
there is Danger on the One side, and None on the Other, and it is the Common
Interest of All Leagues and Societies, to have the Respective Parties Necessary
to One Another. And there needs no Ill Will, or Malice neither, to do the
Mischief, but the Disparity, or Disproportion Alone is enough to do the Work.
The same Quantity of Wine that makes One Man Drunk, will not Quench Another
Man's Thirst. The same Expense that breaks One Man's Back is not a Flea-biting
to Another: Wherefore, Men should sort themselves with their Equals; for a Rich
Man that Converses upon the Square with a Poor Man, shall as certainly Undo
him, as a Brass Pot shall break an Earthen One, if they Meet and Knock together.

FAB. CCXXX. Good Luck and Bad Luck.
THere was a Middling sort of a Man that was left well enough to pass by his
Father, but could never think he had enough, so long as any Man had more. He
took Notice what Huge Estates many Merchants got in a very short Time; and so
Sold his Inheritance, and betook himself to a way of Traffic and Commerce.
Matters succeeded so Wonderfully well with him, that Every body was in
Admiration to see how Mighty Rich he was grown all on a Sudden. Why Ay, says
he, This it is for a Man to Understand his Business; for I have done All This by
my Industry. It would have been well if he had stopped there: But Avarice is
Insatiable, and so he went Pushing on still for More; till, what by Wrecks,
Bankrupts, Pirates, and I know not how many other Disappointments, One upon the
Neck of Another, he was reduced in Half the Time that he was a Rising, to a
Morsel of Bread. Upon These Miscarriages, People were at him over, and over
again, to know how This came About. Why says he, My Damned Fortune would have
it so. Fortune happened to be at That Time within Hearing, and told him in his
Ear, that he was an Arrogant, Ungrateful Clown; to Charge Her with All the Evil
that Befell him, and to take the Good to Himself.

FAB. CCXXXI. A Countryman and Fortune.
AS a Labourer was at his Work a Digging, he Chops his Spade upon a Pot of
Money; Takes it up, Blesses the Place where he found it, and away he goes with
his Treasure. It so fell out, that Fortune Saw and Heard All that Past, and so
she called out to him upon the Way. Hark ye Friend, says she; You are very
Thankful, I perceive, to the Place where you found This Money; but it is the
Jade Fortune, I warrant ye, that is to be Clawed away for it: if you should
happen to Lose it again. Pray tell me now why should not you Thank Fortune for
the One, as well as Curse her for the Other.

FAB. CCXXXII. An Old UUoman and the Devil.
IT IS a Common Practice, when People draw Mischiefs upon their Own Heads, to
cry, the Devil's in it, and the Devil's in it. Now the Devil happened to spy an
Old Woman upon an Apple Tree. Look ye (says he) You shall see that Beldam Catch
a Fall there by and by, and Break her Bones, and then say 'twas all long of me.
Pray Good People will you bear me Witness, that I was None of her Adviser. The
Woman got a Tumble, as the Devil said she would, and there was she at it. The
Devil Ought her a Shame, and the Devil put her upon it: But the Devil Cleared
himself by sufficient Evidence that he had no Hand in it at all.

FAB. CCXXXIII. A Boy and Fortune.
THere was a Boy fast asleep upon the very Brink of a River. Fortune came to
him, and waked him. Child, says she, prithee get up, and go thy ways, thou't
Tumble in and be Drowned else, and then the Fault will be laid upon Me.

The Moral of the Four Fables Above.
We are apt to Ascribe our Successes in This World, and to Impute our
Misfortunes, to Wrong Causes. We Assume the One to our Selves, and Charge the
Other upon Providence.

REFLECTION.
THESE Four Fables run upon the same Biass; That is to say, the Moral is a Lash
at the Vanity of Arrogating That to our selves, which succeeds Well, and the
Ingratitude of making Providence the Author of Evil, which seldom scapes
without a Judgment in the Tail on it. But our Hearts are so much set upon the
Value of the Benefits we receive, that we never Think of the Bestower of them,
and so our Acknowledgments are commonly paid to the Second Hand, without any
Regard to the Principal. We run into Mistakes, and Misfortunes, of our Own
Accord; and then when we are once Hampered, we lay the Blame of our Own Faults
and Corruptions upon Others. This is much the Humor of the World too in Common
Business. If any thing Hits, we take it to our Selves; if it Miscarries, we
shuffle it off to our Neighbors. This Arises, partly from Pride, and in part
from a Certain Cankered Malignity of Nature. Nay rather then Impute our
Miscarriages and Disappointments to our Own Corruptions, or Frailties, we do
not Stick to Arraign Providence it self, though under Another Name, in all our
Exclamations against the Rigor, and the Iniquity of Fortune. Now This Fortune
in the Fable, is Effectually, God Himself, in the Moral. We are apt to Value
our selves upon our Own Strength and Abilities, and to Entitle Carnal Reason to
the very Works of Grace: And where any thing goes Wrong with us, we lay our
Faults, as we do our Bastards, at Other Peoples Doors. This or That was not
well done, we say, but alas it was none of our Fault. We did it by Constraint,
Advice, Importunity, or the Authority perhaps of Great Examples, and the Like.
At This rate do we Palliate our Own Weaknesses and Corruptions, and at the same
Rate do We likewise Assume to our selves Other Peoples Merits. The Thing to be
done, in fine, is to Correct the Arrogance of Claiming to our selves the Good
that does not belong to us on the One Hand, and of Imputing to our Neighbors
the Ill that they are not Guilty of, on the Other. This is the Sum of the
Doctrine that is Pointed at in the Case and Custom of Dividing our Miscarriages
betwixt Fortune and the Devil.

FAB. CCXXXIV. A Peacock and a Crane.
AS a Peacock and a Crane were in Company together, the Peacock spreads his
Tail, and Challenges the Other, to show him such a Fan of Feathers. The Crane,
upon This, Springs up into the Air, and calls to the Peacock to Follow him if
he could. You Brag of your Plumes, says he, that are Fair indeed to the Eye,
but no way Useful or Fit for any manner of Service.

The MORAL.
Heaven has provided not only for our Necessities, but for our Delights and
Pleasures too; but still the Blessings that are most Useful to us, must be
preferred before the Ornaments of Beauty.

REFLECTION.
NO Man is to be Despised for any Natural Infirmity, or Defect; for Every Man
has something or other in him of Good too, and That which One Man Wants,
Another Has. And it is all according to the Good Pleasure of Providence. Nature
is pleased to Entertain her self with Variety. Some of her Works are for
Ornament, others for the Use and Service of Mankind. But they have All
Respectively, their Proprieties, and their Virtues; for she does nothing in
Vain. The Peacock Values himself upon the Gracefulness of his Train. The
Crane's Pride is in the Rankness of her Wing: Which are only Two Excellencies
in several Kinds. Take them apart, and they are Both Equally Perfect: but Good
Things Themselves have their Degrees, and That which is most Necessary and
Useful, must be Allowed a Preference to the Other.

FAB. CCXXXV. A Tiger and a Fox.
AS a Huntsman was upon the Chase, and the Beasts flying before him; Let Me
alone, says a Tiger, and I Will put an end to This War my self: At which Word, he
Advanced toward the Enemy in his Single Person. The Resolution was no sooner
Taken, but he found himself Struck through the Body with an Arrow. He Fastened
upon it presently with his Teeth, and while he was Trying to Draw it out, a Fox
Asked him, from what Bold Hand it was that he Received This Wound. I know
Nothing of That, says the Tiger, but by the Circumstances, it should be a Man.

The MORAL.
There Is No Opposing Brutal Force to the Stratagems of Humane Reason.

REFLECTION.
BOLDNESS without Counsel, is no better then an Impetus, which is commonly
Worsted by Conduct and Design. There Is No Man so Daring but some time or Other
he Meets with his Match. The Moral, in short, holds forth This Doctrine, that
Reason is too Hard for Force; and that Temerity puts a Man off his Guard. It Is
a High Point of Honor, Philosophy and Virtue, for a Man to be so Present to
Himself as to be always Provided against All Encounters, and Accidents
whatsoever; but This will not Hinder him from Enquiring Diligently into the
Character, the Strength, Motions, and Designs of an Enemy. The Tiger lost his
Life for want of This Circumspection.

FAB. CCXXXVI. A Lion and Bulls.
THere was a Party of Bulls that Struck up a League to Keep and Feed together,
and to be One and All in case of a Common Enemy. If the Lion could have Met
with any of them Single, he would have done His Work, but so long as they Stuck
to This Confederacy, there was No Dealing with them. They fell to Variance at
last among Themselves: The Lion made his Advantage of it, and then with Great
Ease he Gained his End.

The MORAL.
This is to tell us the Advantage, the Necessity, and the Force of Union; And
that Division brings Ruin.

REFLECTION.
There Is No Resisting of a Common Enemy; No Maintaining of a Civil Community,
without an Union for a Mutual Defense; and there may be also, on the Other
Hand, a Conspiracy of Common Enmity and Aggression. There are Cases indeed of
Great Nicety that fall under the Topique of the Right and Lawfulness of Joining
in such Leagues. He that is not Sui Iuris, must not Enter into any Covenants or
Contracts to the Wrong of his Master: But there are Certain Rules of Honesty,
and Methods of Government, to Direct us in all Agreements of This Quality. A
Thing simply Good in it self, may become Unjust and Unrighteous, under such and
such Circumstances. In a Word, the Main Bond of All Bodies and Interests is
Union, which is No Other in Effect then a Common Stock of Strength and Counsel
Joined in One. While the Bulls kept together, they were Safe; but so soon as
ever they separated, they became a Prey to the Lion.

FAB. CCXXXVII. A Fir and a Bramble.
THere goes a Story of a Fir Tree, that in a Vain spiteful Humor, was mightily
upon the Pin of Commending it self, and Despising the Bramble. My Head (says
the Fir) is advanced among the Stars. I furnish Beams for Palaces. Masts for
Shipping: The very Sweat of my Body is a Sovereign Remedy for the Sick and
Wounded: Whereas the Rascally Bramble runs creeping in the Dirt, and serves for
No Purpose in the World but Mischief. Well, says the Bramble (that Overheard
all This) You might have said somewhat of your Own Misfortune, and to My
Advantage too, if Your Pride and Envy would have suffered you to do it. But
pray will you tell me however, when the Carpenter comes next with his Axe into
the Wood to Fell Timber, whether you had not rather be a Bramble then a
Fir Tree.

The MORAL.
Poverty Secures a Man from Thieves, Great and Small: Whereas the Rich, and the
Mighty are the Mark of Malice, and Cross Fortune, and still the Higher they
Are, the Nearer the Thunder.

REFLECTION.
THERE is no State of Life without a Mixture in it of Good and Evil; and the
Highest Pitch of Fortune is not without Dangers, Cares, and Fears. This
Doctrine is Verified by Examples Innumerable, thorough the Whole History of the
World, and that the Mean is Best, both for Body, Mind, and Estate. Pride is not
only Uneasy, but Unsafe too, for it has the Power and Justice of Heaven, and
the Malicious Envy of Men to Encounter at the same Time; and the Axe that Cuts
down the Fir, is Rightly Moralliz'd in the Stroke of Divine Vengeance, that
brings down the Arrogant, while the Bramble Contents it self in its Station:
That is to say; Humility is a Virtue, that never goes without a Blessing.

FAB. CCXXXVIII. A Covetous Man and an Envious.
THere was a Covetous, and an Envious Man, that Joined in a Petition to
Jupiter, who very Graciously Ordered Apollo to tell them that their Desire
should be Granted at a Venture; provided only, that whatever the One Asked,
should be Doubled to the Other. The Covetous Man, that thought he could never
have enough, was a good While at a Stand: Considering, that let him Ask Never
so much, the Other should have Twice as much: But he came however by Degrees,
to Pitch upon One Thing after Another, and his Companion had it Double. It was
now the Envious Man's turn to Offer up His Request, which was, that One of his
Own Eyes might be put out, for his Companion was then to lose Both.

The MORAL.
Avarice and Envy are Two of the most Diabolical, and Insociable Vices under
Heaven. The One Assumes All to it self, and the Other Wishes Every bit it is
Neighbor Eats may Choke him.

REFLECTION.
THERE are some Pestilent Humors and Froward Natures, that Heaven it self has
much ado to please. Envy Places it is Happiness in the Misery and Misfortune of
Others; and Avarice is never to be Pleased, unless it can get All to it self.
They may seem to be nearer Akin then in truth they Are, though the One is
seldom or never to be found without the Other. The Best Use of This
Application, is to Possess us with a True Sense of the Restlesness of these Two
Passions; and Consequently to make Those Weaknesses Odious to our selves, that
are so Troublesome to the World; and in truth, no Better then the Common Pest
of Mankind.

FAB. CCXXXIX. A Crow and a Pitcher.
A Crow that was Extreme Thirsty, found a Pitcher with a Little Water in it, but
it lay so Low he could not come at it. He tried first to Break the Pot, and
then to Over-turn it, but it was both too Strong, and too Heavy for him. He
Bethought Himself However of a Device at last that did his Business; which was,
by Dropping a great many Little Pebbles into the Water, and Raising it That
Way, till he had it within Reach.

The MORAL.
There is a Natural Logic in Animals, over and above the Instinct of their
Kinds.

REFLECTION.
IT IS a Kind of a School Question that we find started in This Fable, upon the
Subject of Reason and Instinct: And whether This Deliberative Proceeding of the
Crow was not rather a Logical Agitation of the Matter, then the Bare Analogy,
as we call it, of a Simple Impulse. It will be Objected, that we are not to
Draw Conclusions from the Fictions of a Case, but whoever Consults his
Experience, may satisfy Himself in many Instances that come up to This
Supposition. We are also taught, that what we cannot Compass Directly, by the
Force of Natural Faculties, may be brought to pass many times by Art and
Invention.

FAB. CCXL. A Lion and a Man.
THere was a Gontroversie Started betwixt a Lion and a Man, which was the
Braver, and the Stronger Creature of the Two. Why look ye, says the Man (after
a Long Dispute) we'll Appeal to That Statue there, and so he showed him the
Figure of a Man Cut in Stone, with a Lion under his Feet. Well! says the Lion,
if We had been brought up to Painting and Carving, as You are, where you have
One Lion under the Feet of a Man, you should have had Twenty Men under the Paw
of a Lion.

The MORAL.
It Is against the Rules of Common Justice for Men to be Judges in their Own
Case.

REFLECTION.
THE Fancies of Poets, Painters, and Gravers, are No Evidences of Truth; for
People are Partial in their Own Cases, and Every Man will make the Best of his
Own Tale. It Is against Common Equity for the same People to be both Parties and
Judges, and That Is the Case here betwixt the Man and the Lion. Now the Lion is
much in the Right, that Characters, Pictures, and Images, are All as the
Painter, the Carver, or the Statuary pleases; and that there is a Great
Difference betwixt a Flight of Fancy, and the History of Nature. It Is much
Easier for a Man to make an Ass of a Lion upon a Pedestal, then in a Forest;
and where it lies at his Choice, whether the Giant shall Kill the Squire, or
the Squire the Giant. Argument is not the Work of the Chissel; neither does the
Design of the Artist conclude the Truth of the Fact: But there is somewhat
Heroical yet in the Imagination, though the Piece was never Drawn from the Life.

FAB. CCXLI. A Boy and a Thief.
A Thief came to a Boy, that was Blubbering by the Side of a Well, and Asked
him what he cried for. Why, says he, the String's Broke here, and I Have dropped a
Silver Cup into the Well. The Fellow presently Strips, and down he goes to
search for it. After a while, he comes up again, with his Labor for his Pains,
and the Roguy Boy, in the Mean time, was run away with his Clothes.

The MORAL.
Some Thieves are Ripe for the Gallows sooner then Others.

REFLECTION.
IT must be a Diamond that Cuts a Diamond, and there is No Pleasanter Encounter
then a Trial of Skill betwixt a Couple of Sharpers to Overreach one Another.
The Boy's beginning so Early, tells us that there are Cheats by a Natural
Propensity of Inclination as well as by a Corruption of Manners. It was Nature
that taught This Boy to Shark; not Discipline, or Experience. And so it was
with Two Ladies that I have known (and Women of Plentiful Fortunes too) they
could not for their Bloods keep themselves Honest of their Fingers, but would
still be Nimming something or other for the very Love of Thieving. It Is an
Unhappy Thing, that the Temperament of the Body should have such an Influence
upon our Manners, according to the Instance of the Boy in This Fable: For the
Morality, or Immorality of the Matter, is not the Whole of the Case.

FAB. CCXLII. A Countryman and an Ox.
A Countryman had got a Stubborn Ox, that would still be Pushing and
Flinging, whenever they went to Yoke, or to Tie him up. The Man Cuts off his
Horns, and puts him to the Plough, and by That Means Secures Himself, both
against his Head and his Heels; and in the Mean time, He Himself Guids the
Plough: But though the Ox, when he was thus Shackled and Disarmed, could not
either Strike, or Gore him, he made a shift yet to throw Dust enough into his
Eyes, and his Mouth, almost to Blind, and to Choke him.

The MORAL.
A Malicious Man may be Bound Hand and Foot, and put out of Condition of doing
Mischief, but a Malicious Will is never to be Mastered.

REFLECTION.
THERE are some Natures so Untractable, that there is No Good to be done upon
them by Generosity, Kindness, Artifice, or Council, nay the more pains a man
takes to Reclaim them, the Worse they are; and when they are put out of
Condition to do Mischief by Violence, they will find a Way yet to Teize and
Plague People with Restless, and Vexatious Importunities. They Love to be
Troublesome, and with the Shrew upon the Cucking-stool, when their Mouths are
Stopped, they will call Pricklouse still with their very Thumbs.

FAB. CCXLIII. A Man and a Satyr.
THere was a Man and a Satyr that kept much together. The Man Clapped his Fingers
one day to his Mouth, and Blew upon 'em. What Is That for? (says the Satyr) why
says he, My Hands are Extreme Cold, and I do it to VVarm 'em. The Satyr, at
Another time, found This Man Blowing his Porridge: And pray, says he, What Is
the Meaning of That now? Oh! says the Man, My Porridge are Hot, and I do it to
Cool 'em. Nay, says the Satyr, if you have gotten a Trick of Blowing Hot and
Cold out of the same Mouth, I have even Done with ye.

The MORAL.
There Is No Conversing with any Man that Carries Two Faces under One Hood.

REFLECTION.
THE Moral of this Fable must be Abstracted from the Philosophy of it, and
taken in the Sense of carrying Two Faces under One hood. It sets forth,
however, the Simplicity of the Satyr in Not Understanding how Two such Contrary
Effects should come from the same Lips: But it was Honestly done in him yet, to
Renounce the Conversation of One that he tool for a Double-Dealer; and that
could Accommodate himself to make Fair with All Companies, and Occasions,
without any regard to Truth, or Justice. It was This Fable that gave Rise to
the Old Adage of Blowing Hot and Cold; which is taken for the Mark and
Character of a Dissembler.

FAB. CCXLIV. A Countryman and a Boar.
A Countryman took a Boar in his Corn once, and Cut off One of his Ears. He
took him a Second Time, and cut off The Other. He took him a Third Time, and made
a Present of him to his Landlord. Upon the Opening of his Head, they found he
had no Brains, and Every body fell a Wondering, and Discoursing upon it. Sir,
says the Clown, If This Boar had had any Brains, he would have taken the Loss
of Both his Ears for a Warning never to come into My Corn again. These Words of
the Silly Bumpkin set the whole Company a Laughing.

The MORAL.
An Incorrigible Fool that will take no Warning; there is no Hope of him.

REFLECTION.
THE Life and Conversation of some Men is so Brutal, as if they had only the
Shape, without the Faculties of Reasonable Creatures. What Is He better then the
Boar in This Fable now, that Abandons himself wholly to his Appetites, and
Pleasures; and after so many Repeated Poxes, and Qualms, One upon the Neck of
Another, Drinks and Whores on still, in Despite of all Punishments, and
Warnings. The Boar's Intemperance, and the Note upon him afterward, on the
Cutting of him up, that he had no Brains in's Head, may be Moraliz'd into the
Figure of a Sensual Man, that has neither Grace, nor Knowledge, but runs
headlong on to his Ruin, without either Conscience, or Consideration.

FAB. CCXLV. A Bull and a Mouse.
A Mouse Pinched a Bull by the Foot, and then slunk into her Hole. The Bull
Tears up the Ground upon it, and Tosses his Head in the Air, looking about, in a
Rage, for his Enemy, but sees None. As he was in the Height of his Fury, the
Mouse puts out her Head, and Laughs at him. Your Pride (says she) may be
brought down I see, for all Your Blustering, and your Horns; for here is a Poor
Mouse has got the Better of ye, and You do not know how to Help your self.

The MORAL.
There Is no such way of Revenging an Affront upon a Creature that is below an
Honest Man's Anger, as Neglect and Contempt.

REFLECTION.
NO Man lives without Enemies, and no Enemy is so Despicable, but some time or
other he may do a Body a shrewd Turn. It Is Prudence to pass over Those
Indignities, which are either too Little for our Consideration, or out of our
Power to Reach, and Punish. For there is Nothing more Ridiculous, then an
Impotent Anger, that spends it self to no manner of Purpose: and there is no
Better way of Dealing with it, then to Laugh it Out of Countenance. All Men in
the World that we see Transported into Outrages, for small Trivial Matters,
fall under the Innuendo of This Bull in the Fable, that ran Tearing Mad for the
Pinching of a Mouse.

FAB. CCXLVI. A Countryman and Hercules.
A Carter that had laid his Wagon Fast in a Slough, stood Gaping and Bawling to
as many of the Gods and Goddesses as he could Muster-up, and to Hercules
Especially, to Help him out of the Mire. Why ye Lazy Puppy you, says Hercules,
lay your Shoulder to the Wheel, and Prick your Oxen first, and Then Is your Time
to Pray. Are the Gods to do your Drudgery, do you think, and you lie Bellowing
with Your Finger in Your Mouth.

The MORAL.
Men in Distress must Work as well as Pray, they shall be never the Better else.

REFLECTION.
THIS is but after the Common Guise of the World, for people when they are put
to a Plunge, to cry out to Heaven for Help, without Helping Themselves; whereas
Providence Assists No Body that does not put his Own Shoulders to the Work.
Prayers without Works, are Nothing Worth, either for Other People, or for our
selves [ For Other People] I say, because there is a Double Duty Incumbent upon
us in the Exercise of Those Powers, and Abilities, which Providence has given
us for the Common Good of Both. There must be the Penny as well as the
Paternoster. It Is not a Bare Lord have Mercy upon us, that will help the Cart
out of the Mire, or our Neighbor out of the Ditch, without putting our Hands
to the Work. What signifies the Sound of Words in Prayer, without the Affection
of the Heart, and a sedulous Application of the Proper Means that may Naturally
lead to such an End. This is to say, Body and Soul must go together, in All the
Offices of a Christian, as well as of a Civil Life, where there is place for
the Exercise of the Faculties of Both.

There is also a Pompous, and a Noisie Devotion, that cries aloud to be heard
of Men; which is by so much the more Odious in the sight of God then the Other,
as an Hypocritical Affectation of Religion, is Worse then a Drowsy
Heartlessness of Duty, The Moral of This Fable may be Understood to look Both
Ways, but Care must be Taken however, not to let the Scandals of Theatrical
Appearances, Divert, or Deter us from the Practice of Holy Offices, within the
Bounds of Piety and Good Conscience: after the Example of Those, that set up
for Atheists, for fear they should be taken for Enthusiasts. He, in fine, that
Made Body and Soul will be Served and Glorified by Both. Beside that Hercules
helps no Body that will not Help himself.

FAB. CCXLVII. A Hen and Golden Eggs.
A Certain Good Woman had a Hen, that Laid her Golden Eggs, which could not
be, she thought, without a Mine in the Belly of her. Upon This Presumption she
Cut her up to Search for Hidden Treasure: But upon the Dissection found her
just like Other Hens, and that the Hope of Getting more had betrayed her to the
Loss of what she had in Possession.

The MORAL.
This is the Fate, Folly and Mischief of Vain Desires, and of an Immoderate
Love of Riches. Content wants Nothing, and Covetousness brings Beggary.

REFLECTION.
THEY that would still have more and more, can never have Enough; No, Not if a
Miracle should Interpose to Gratify their Avarice; for it makes Men Unthankful
to the Highest Degree, not only in General, for the Benefits they Receive, but
in particular also to the very Benefactors Themselves. If the Nearest Friend a
Covetous Man has in the World, had really a Mine in his Guts, he would Rip him up
to Find it: For his Business is to make the Most of what he has, and of what he
can get, without any regard to the Course of Providence, or of Nature: And
what is the End of All These Unreasonable Desires, but Loss, Sorrow, and
Disappointment? The True Intent of This Fable is to Possess us with a Just
Sense of the Vanity and Folly of these Craving Appetites. If the Woman could
have been Contented with Golden Eggs, she might have kept That Revenue on
still; but when Nothing less then the Mine it self would serve her, she lost
Hen, Eggs and all.

FAB. CCXLVIII. An Ape and her Two Brats.
THERE was an Ape that had Two Twins. She Doted upon One of them, and did not
much Care for The Other. She took a sudden Fright once, and in a Hurry whips up
her Darling under her Arm, and carries the Other a Pick-a-Pack upon her
Shoulders. In This Haste and Maze, Down she comes, and beats out her Favorites
Brains against a Stone; but That which she had at her Back came off Safe and
Sound.

The MORAL.
Fondlings are Commonly Unfortunate.

REFLECTION.
PARTIALITY in a Parent is commonly Unlucky, if not a little Unnatural, for
Fondlings are in danger to be made Fools, by the very Error of their Education,
and we find it Experimentally that the Children that are least Cocker'd make
the Best, and Wisest Men. It Is well to be Tender, but to set the Heart too much
upon any thing, is what we cannot Justify, either in Religion, or in Reason. I
was Saying that Partiality was a little Unnatural too. I do not mean a
Partiality of Inclination; for we cannot Command our Likings, or our Aversions;
but I speak of a Partiality that shows it self in a Distinguishing Preference
of One to the Other, and therefore what Hankering Dispositions soever we may
have, That Fondness should not Ttansport us beyond the Bounds of a Discreet
Affection: And Other Circumstances apart, we should no more be Kinder to One
Child then to Another, then we are Tender of One Eye more then of the Other;
for they are Both our Own Flesh and Blood alike. Children are Naturally
Jealous, and Envious, and the Quenching of their Spirits so Early, Hazzards the
Damping of them for ever. Beside, that there is no such Fop in Fine, as my
Young Master that has the Honor to be a Fool of his Lady Mothers Making. She
Blows him up with a Conceit of Himself. and there he Stops without ever
Advancing One Step further. In short, she makes a Man of him at Sixteen, and a
Boy all the Days of his Life after. And what is All This now, but the True
Moral of the Ape with her Brats here in the Fable? The Cub that she carried at
her Back had the Wit to Shift for it self; but the Other, that she Hugged as
the Devil did the Witch, Perished in her very Arms.

FAB. CCXLIX. An Ox and a Heifer.
A Wanton Heifer that had little Else to do then to Frisk up and down in a
Meadow, at Ease and Pleasure, came up to a Working Ox with a Thousand
Reproaches in her Mouth; Bless me, says the Heifer, what a Difference there is
betwixt your Coat and Condition, and Mine! Why, What a Galled Nasty Neck have
we here! Look ye, Mines as Clean as a Penny, and as smooth as Silk I warrant
ye. It Is a Slavish Life to be Yoked thus, and in Perpetual Labor. What would
you give to be as Free and as Easy now as I am? The Ox kept These Things in
his Thought, without One Word in Answer at present; but seeing the Heifer taken
up a While after for a Sacrifice: Well Sister, says he, and have not you
Frisk'd fair now, when the Ease and Liberty you Valued your self upon, has
brought you to This End?

The MORAL.
It Is No New Thing for Men of Liberty and Pleasure, to make Sport with the
Plain, Honest Servants of their Prince and Country: But Mark the End on it, and
while the One Labors in his Duty with a Good Conscience, the Other, like a
Beast, is but Fatting up for the Shambles.

REFLECTION.
THERE was never any thing gotten by Sensuality and Sloth, either in Matter of
Profit or of Reputation, whereas an Active, Industrious Life, carries not only
Credit and Advantage, but a Good Conscience also along with it. The Lazy, the
Voluptuous, the Proud, and the Delicate are Struck at in This Fable: Men that
Set their Hearts only upon the Present, without either Entering into the Reason,
or looking forward into the End of Things: Little Dreaming that all this Pomp
of Vanity, Plenty, and Pleasure, is but a Fattening of them for the Slaughter.
It Is the Case of Great and Rich Men in the World; the very Advantages they
Glory in are the Cause of their Ruin. The Heifer that Valued it self upon a
Smooth Coat, and a Plump Habit of Body was taken up for a Sacrifice; but the
Ox that was Despised for his Drudgery, and his Raw-Bones, went on with his
Work still in the Way of a Safe and an Honest Labor.

FAB. CCL. A Dog and a Lion.
WHat a Miserable Life do thou lead, says a Dog to a Lion, to run Starving up
and down thus in Woods and Deserts, without either Meat, or Ease. I am Fat and
Fair you see, and it Costs me neither Labor, nor Pains. Nay, says the Lion,
you have many a Good Bit no Doubt on it; but then like a Fool you subject your
self to the Clogs and Chains that go along with it: But for my Own Part, let
him serve that serve Can, and serve Will, I Will Live and Die Free.

The MORAL.
That Man deserves to be a Slave, that Sacrifices his Liberty to his Appetite.

REFLECTION.
THE Moral of This is the Same with That of Dog and Wolf, Fab. 69.

FAB. CCLI. A River-Fish and a Seafish.
THere was a Large Overgrown Pike that had the Fortune to be Carried out to
Sea by a Strong Current, and he had there the Vanity to Value himself above All
the Fish in the Ocean. We Will refer That (says a Sturgeon) to the Judgment of the
Market, and see which of the Two Yields the Better Price.

The MORAL.
Every Man has his Province Assigned him, and none but a Madman will pretend
to Impose; and to give Laws where he has Nothing to do.

REFLECTION.
There Is no Folly like That of Vain Glory, nor any thing more Ridiculous then
for a Vain Man to be still Boasting of Himself: For it is against All Law and
Equity, for a Body to be admitted a Judge in ones Own Case. A second Doctrine
may be This (and we find it True by Experience) that Money Governs the World;
and that the Market Price is the Measure of the Worth of Men as well as of
Fishes: As the Sturgeon left it to the Fish-monger to Determine the Controversy
betwixt Him and the Pike.

FAB. CCLII. A Fox and a Leopard.
AS a Leopard was Valuing himself upon the Luster of his Party-colour'd-Skin, a
Fox gave him a Jog, and Whispered him, that the Beauty of the Mind was an
Excellence, Infinitely to be Preferred above That of a Painted Outside.

The MORAL.
A Good Understanding is a Blessing Infinitely beyond All External Beauties.

REFLECTION.
THERE are Degrees in Good Things. There are Blessings of Fortune, and Those
are of the Lowest Rate. The Next above Those Blessings are the Bodily
Advantages of Strength, Gracefulness and Health; but the Superlative Blessings,
in fine, are the Blessings of the Mind: Fools it is true may be allowed to Brag
of Foolish Things; but the Leopard's Beauty without the Foxes Wit is no better
then a Fop in a Gay Coat.

THE FABLES OF ABSTEMIUS, etc.
FAB. CCLIII. Demades the Orator.
THIS Demades was a very Famous Orator, and taking Notice as he was in the
Middle of a Discourse to the People upon a Subject of Great Importance, that
their Thoughts were Wandering upon Something else, he slipped from his Text into
This Digression. Ceres, (says he) a Swallow, and an Eele, were Traveling
together upon the Way: They came to a River, it seems, and the Swallow flew
over it; The Eele made a shift to Swim thorough it; -- And there he stopped. Well
(says some of the Company) and what became of Ceres? Why (says Demades) The
Goddess was mightily Offended, to find so many People in the World that are
Deaf to any thing they may be the Better for, and yet have their Ears Open to
Fooleries.

The MORAL.
People are sooner Reclaimed by the Side-Wind of a Surprise, then by Downright
Admonition and Council; for they will lend an Ear to a Parable when Nothing else
will Down with them.

REFLECTION.
MEN Mind the Pleasure, and the Satisfaction of a Fancy, or a Loose Appetite
more then they do Better Things; and they are sooner brought to Themselves, and
set Right by the Innuendo of a Parable, then by the Dint of direct Reason.
There are many Men that are Infinitely Tender in Point of Honor, and have very
little Regard yet upon the Main, to Truth and Equity. Now such People as These
are sooner Wrought upon by Shame then by Conscience, when they find themselves
Fooled and Shamm'd (as we say) into a Conviction. This Fable tells us what we
Ought to do in the Case of Attending to Instructive and Profitable Counsels. It
tells us also what we are apt to do, in Heark'ning after Fooleries: and losing
the Opportunity of Hearing and Learning Better Things. And it shows us in fine,
the force of an Allegory betwixt Jest and Earnest; which in such a Case as
This, is certainly the most Artificial, Civil, and Effectual Manner of
Reproach. I call it a Reproach; for it is an Affront to Good Manners as well as
to Ordinary Prudence, not to Hearken to a Man of Authority; That is to say, to
the Voice of Wisdom, when she speaks to us out of the Mouth of a Philosopher.
Men that have Wandering Thoughts at such a Lecture, deserve as well to be
Whipped, as Boys for Playing at Push-Pin, when they should be Learning their
Lesson: Beside, that it is only Another way of calling a Man Fool, when no Heed
is given to what he says. Now Demades that Understood both his Business, and
the Weak side of Humane Nature perfectly Well, never troubled his Head to bring
his Auditory to their Wits again by the Force of Dry and Sober Reason; but
Circumvented them by a Delicate Figure, into a Curiosity that led them
Naturally to a Better Sense of their Interest, and their Duty.

FAB. CCLIV. A Fox and a Hedgehog.
AESop brought the Samians to their Wits again out of a most Desperate Sedition
with This Fable.

A Fox, upon the Crossing of a River, was forced away by the Current into an
Eddy, and there he lay with Whole Swarms of Flies, Sucking and Galling of him.
There was a Water Hedgehog (we must Imagine) at hand, that in Pure Pity
Offered to Beat away the Flies from him. No, No, says the Fox, Pray let 'em
Alone, for the Flies that are upon me now are even Burstingfull already, and
can do me little more Hurt then they have done: But when These are gone once,
there will be a Company you shall see of Starved Hungry Wretches to take their
Places, that will not leave so much as One Drop of Blood in the Whole Body of
me.

Tiberius Caesar made a very Pertinent Application of This Fancy to a Case of
his Own. The Question was, whether or no he should Casheir some of his Corrupt
Governors of Provinces, for Oppressing the People? He gave the World to
Understand his Mind by This Fable.

There was a Man lay Miserably Wounded upon the Highway, and Swarms of Flies
upon him, Sucking his Sores. A Traveller that was passing by, Pitied his
Condition, and Offered him his Service, in Pure Charity to Drive them away. No,
No, says The Other, pray let them alone; for when These are gone, I shall have
Worse in Their Places. This will be the Case of My Subjects if I Change their
Governors.

The MORAL.
The Force of a Fable.

REFLECTION.
IF (says Aesop) You shall once Destroy your Present Governor, that is Full and
Wealthy, you must of Necessity Choose Others when he is gone, who will be sure
to Fill their own Coffers out of What the Other has left ye. This Fable upon
the Whole is very Instructive how People should Behave themselves in the Case
of Maladministration, or Oppression; where there is any Color to Complain of
Cruelty, or Injustice under the Cover of Sovereign Power. The Foxes Resolution
here is mightily to the Purpose: That is to say, where the Grievance is only
the Unrighteous Exercise of a Lawful Authority. The Removal of Blood-suckers
that are already as Full as their Skins will hold, serves only to make way for
Others that are Greedy and Empty. This is no Redress of the Evil, No, nor so
much as a Change; but in Truth an Augmentation of it.

It is again to be Considered, that as Government is Necessary, Sacred, and
Unaccountable, so it is but Equal for us to bear the Infelicities of a
Male-Exercise of it, as we Enjoy the Blessings of Authority and Public Order.
There Is Nothing Pure that is Sublunary, but somewhat still of Good Blended with
the Bad, and of Bad with the Good: And This Natural Mixture runs thorough the
Whole Course and Condition of Humane Affairs. We are not to be either our Own
Carvers, or our Own Chusers, and the Man puts out his Own Eyes that does not
see the Folly, and the Iniquity of Struggling with Insuperable Powers, which is
Impious in the Practice, and Miserable in the Conclusion. Where Government is
Accounted a Bondage, the Exercise of it shall never fail of being called
Persecution or Opprssion: But to put Matters at Worst, Let us for Arguments
sake, suppose Pilling and Polling Officers, as Busy upon the People as These
Flies were upon the Fox: Better bear a Tolerable Present Calamity then Exchange
it for a Worse; and the Fox had the Wit rather to suffer the Galling of a
Parcel of Flies that were Full already, then by Beating them off, to make way
for a New set of Hungry Sharpers that would do him Fifty times the Mischief.

FAB. CCLV. A Mouse in a Chest.
A Mouse that was bred in a Chest, and had lived all her days there upon what
the Dame of the House laid up in it, happened one time to drop out over the
Side, and to Stumble upon a very Delicious Morsel, as she was Hunting up and
down to find her way In again. She had no sooner the Taste of it in her Mouth,
but she brake out into Exclamations, what a Fool she had been thus Long, to
Persuade her self that there was No Happiness in the World but in That Box.

The MORAL.
A Contented Mind and a Good Conscience will make a Body Happy wherever he is.

REFLECTION.
IT IS well to be Content in what Place and Condition soever we are; without
being yet so Fond of it as not to be prepared for any Change or Chance that may
Befall us. A Good Patriot loves his Own Country Best, but yet in case of
Necessity, or a Fair Convenience, the Whole Globe of the Earth is an Honest
Man's Country, and he reckons himself at home wherever he is. The Mouse was
Well in the Chest; but she found her self Better afterward in the World, which
serves to tell us that we may be Happy in a Private Life, as well as in a
Public, and that by the Benefit either of a Christian, or a Philosophical
Resignation to our Lot, whatever it is, we may be so wherever we are.

FAB. CCLVI. A Husbandman and Ceres.
A Certain Farmer complained that the Beards of his Corn Cut the Reapers and
the Thrashers Fingers sometimes, and therefore he desired Ceres that his Corn
might grow hereafter without Beards. The Request was Granted, and the Little
Birds Eat up all his Grain. Fool that I was (says he) rather to lose the
Support of my Life, then venture the Pricking of my Servants Fingers.

The MORAL.
There must be no Resining upon the Works of Providence; for He that thinks to
Mend them, Forfeits his Right to the Blessing and Benefit of them.

REFLECTION.
NO Man can be perfectly Happy; but if he be either Curious, or Unsteady, he
shall Live and Die Craving, and in a Restless Want of something or other that
is never to be had. Wherefore we should do well to Weigh our Present
Inconveniences against Those that may probably arise in the Future, and not so
much as to think of Changing our Condition till we have Balanced the Accounts.
We may lay down This, in short, for a Rule without any Exception that Nothing
but a Fool or a Madman will Wish any thing to be Other then as God has Made it.
Let us Reform our Lives, and Mend our Manners, and set Every thing Right at
Home first, before we Take upon us to Correct the Works of Providence and
Nature. The Husbandman thought Corn would do better without Beards, 'till he
found that according to the Way he went to Work, he should have neither One nor
The Other.

FAB. CCLVII. A Countryman and a Hawk.
A Country Fellow had the Fortune to take a Hawk in the Hot Pursuit of a
Pigeon. The Hawk Pleaded for her self, that she never did the Countryman any
Harm, and therefore I hope, says she, that You Will do Me None. Well! says the
Countryman, and pray what Wrong did the Pigeon ever do you? Now by the Reason
of Your own Argument, you must even Expect to be Treated Your self, as You your
self would have Treated This Pigeon.

The MORAL.
It Is good to Think before we Speak, for fear of Condemning our selves out of
our Own Mouths.

REFLECTION.
THIS Fable holds forth to us several Morals. Rapine and Injustice, Meet in the
End with Violence. One Murderer is Killed by Another. Adulterers are paid in
kind; and One Wicked Man Punishes Another. It is but according to the Course of
the World for the Stronger to Oppress the Weaker, and for Thieves Themselves to
Rob one Another: But the more Mighty do well however in Avenging Those that are
Oppressed by the Less Mighty. And the Fable has This Prospect too, that Princes
are as much Tied to Vindicate their Subjects Cause as if it were their Own.

It Is no News for the Weak and the Poor to be a Prey to the Strong, and the
Rich, and the Vindication of the Innocent is no Ill Plea, or Masque for the
Oppressing of the Guilty. Birds of Prey are an Emblem of Rapacious Officers. A
Superior Power takes away by Violence from Them, That which by Violence they
took away from Others: But it falls out too often that the Equity of
Restitution is forgotten, after the Execution of the Punishment. Now what is
This way of Proceeding, but Drinking the Blood of the Widow and the Orphan at
second hand? For He that takes away from a Thief, That which the Thief, to his
Knowledge, took from an Honest Man, and Keeps it to Himself, is the Wickeder
Thief of the Two, by how much the Rapine is made yet Blacker by the pretense of
Piety and Justice, Here Is a Countryman takes a Hawk in the Chase of a Pigeon,
The Hawk Reasons the Case with him; The Countryman Pleads the Pigeons Cause,
and upon a Fair Hearing; The Hawk stands Condemned out of her own Mouth, and
the Innocent is consequently delivered from her Oppressor. Now here is One
Violence Disappointed by Another; A Poor Harmless Wretch Protected against a
Powerful Adversary; Justice done upon a Notorious Persecutor; and yet after All
This Glorious semblance of a Public Spirited Generosity, and Tenderness of
Nature, the Man only saved the Pigeon from the Hawk, that he might Eat it
Himself: And if we look Well about us we shall find This to be the Case of Most
Mediations, we meet with in the Name of Public Justice.

FAB. CCLVIII. A Swallow and a Spider.
A Spider that Observed a Swallow Catching of Flies, fell Immediately to Work
upon a Net to Catch Swallows, for she looked upon it as an Encroachment upon Her
Right: But the Birds without any Difficulty, brake through the Work, and flew
away with the very Net it self. Well, says the Spider, Bird-Catching is none of
My Talent I perceive; and so she returned to her Old Trade of Catching Flies
again.

The MORAL.
A Wise Man will not Undertake any thing without Means Answerable to the End.

REFLECTION.
LET Every Man Examine his Own Strength, and the Force of the Enemy he is to
Cope withal before he comes to Close, and Grapple with him: For he is sure to go
by the Worst that Contends with an Adversary that is too Mighty for him. It Is
Good Advice not to Contend with Those that are too Strong for us, but still
with a saving to Honesty and Justice, for the Integrity of the Mind must be
supported against All Violence and Hazzards whatsoever. This of the Spider was
a very Foolish Undertaking, and as Unjust a Pretense; for the Equity of the
Case is Clearly Mistaken. The Intent of the Fable is to set us Right in the
Understanding, and Interpreting of Injuries. It Is an Unhappy Error to take
things for Injuries that are Not so: And then supposing an Injury done, it is a
Nice Point to Proportion the Reparation to the Degree of the Indignity; and to
take a True Measure of our Own Force. It was a Ridiculous Project to think of
Catching a Swallow in a Cobweb; and the Spider was as much Out too in thinking
to Restrain the Common Air to its own Particular Use. The Swallow was a
Fly-Catcher as well as the Spider, and no more an Inter-loper upon the Spider's
Right, then the Spider was upon the Swallows; for the Flies were in Common to
Both. Those People, in short, deserve to be Doubly Laughed at, that are Pevish,
and Angry; First for Nothing, and 2ly. to no manner of Purpose.

This Envious Injustice is Frequent in the World, for why should People think
to Engrose and Appropriate the Common Benefits of Fire, Air, and Water to
Themselves; Not but that there are Swarms and Swarms of This sort of
State-Spiders in the World, that Reckon Every Fly that is taken out of the
Common-Stock, as a Penny out of their Own Pockets. The Bounties of God and of
Princes ought to be Free, both Alike, without making Every Morsel of Bread that
an Honest Man puts in his Mouth to be the Robbing of a Minion. Wherefore let
Every Man Compute, first what he ought to do. 2ly. What he is Able to do.
Provided 3ly. That he Govern himself by the Rules of Virtue and Discretion.
This Consideration before hand, would have saved the Foolish Spider the Trouble
of Setting Nets for Swallows.

FAB. CCLIX. A Countryman and a River.
A Countryman that was to Pass a River, Sounded it up and down to try where it
was most Fordable; and upon Trial he made This Observation on it: Where the
Water ran Smooth, he found it Deepest; and on the contrary, Shallowest where it
made most Noise.

The MORAL.
There Is More Danger in a Reserved and Silent, then in a Noisy, Babbling Enemy.

REFLECTION.
GREAT Talkers are not always the Greatest Doers, and the Danger is Greatest,
where there is least Blustering and Clamor.

Much Tongue, and much Judgment seldom go together, for Talking and Thinking
are Two Quite Differing Faculties, and there is commonly more Depth where
there is Less Noise. We find it to be Thus betwixt your superficial Men, and Men
that are well Founded in Any Art, Science, or Profession. As in Philosophy,
Divinity, Arms, History, Manners. The very Practice of Babbling is a Great
Weakness, and not only the Humor, but the Matter shows it so: though upon the
Main, it is not Capable either of Much Good, or of Much Evil; for as there is No
Trusting in the Case, so there is No Great Danger from them, in the Manage of
any Design; for Many and Rash Words Betray the Speaker of them. As to the Man
of Silence and Reserve, that keeps himself Close, and his Thoughts Private, He
Weighs, and Compares Things, and Proceeds upon Deliberation. It is good to see
and sound however, before a Man Plunges; for a Body may as well be Overborn by
the Violence of a Shallow, Rapid Stream, as Swallowed up in the Gulf of a
smooth Water. It Is in This Case with Men, as it is with Rivers.

FAB. CCLX. A Pigeon and a Pie.
A Pie was Wondering once to a Pigeon, why she would Breed still in the same
Hole, when her Young Ones were constantly taken away from her before they were
able to fly. Why That Is my Simplicity, says the Pigeon. I mean no Harm, and I
suspect None.

The MORAL.
Do as You would be done by, is a Better Rule in the Doctrine, then in the
Practice: For Trust as you would be Trusted, will not hold betwixt a Knave and
an Honest Man. There Is no Dealing with a Sharper but at his Own Play.

REFLECTION.
THE Truer Hearted any Man is, the more Liable is he to be Imposed upon: And
then the World calls it Out-witting of a Man; when, in truth, he is only
Out-knav'd: And obliged, even in Charity and Good Nature, to Believe till he be
Cozened. And we find the Country-man's Observation Confirmed by Daily
Experience. This does not yet Hinder a sincere Singleness of Heart from being a
Virtue so necessary for the Comfort and Security of Mankind, that Humane
Society cannot subsist without it. And therefore it is a Thousand Pities it
should be so Discountenanced, and Abused, as in the Common Practice of the
World we find it is. But it stands Firm however to the same Tenor of Life, As
the Pigeon kept still to the same Hole to lay her Eggs in what'ere she Lost
by it.

FAB. CCLXI. A Cuckoo and a Hawk.
BY the Beak, and the Claws of a Cuckoo, one would take her for a kind of Hawk;
only the One Lives upon Worms, and the Other upon Flesh: Insomuch that a Hawk
Twitted a Cuckoo One day with her Course Way of Feeding. If you will Look like a
Hawk, Why don't you Live like a Hawk? The Cuckoo took This a little in Dudgeon;
but passing by a Pigeon-House some short time after, what should she see but
the Skin of This very Hawk upon a Pole, on the Top of the Dove. House: Well!
says the Cuckoo (in Conceit) to the Hawk, and had not you as good have been
Eating Worms now, as Pigeons?

The MORAL.
Pride is an Abomination in the Sight of God, and the Judgment is Just upon us,
when the Subject of our Vanity becomes the Occasion of our Ruin.

REFLECTION.
A Safe Mediocrity is much better then an Envied, and a Dangerous Excellency.
They that in their Prosperity Despise Others, shall be sure in their Adversity
to be Despised Themselves. It is much the same Case with Men of Prey, that it
is with Birds of Prey. They take it for a Disparagement to Sort themselves with
any Other then the Enemies of the Public Peace: But Men that Live upon
Rapine, are set up for a Marque, as the Common Enemy; and all Heads and Hands
are at Work to Destroy them.

FAB. CCLXII. A Countryman and an Ass.
AS a Countryman was Grazing his Ass in a Meadow, comes a Hot Alarm that the
Enemy was just falling into their Quarters. The Poor Man calls presently to his
Ass, in a Terrible Fright, to Scour away as fast as he could Scamper: for,
says he, we shall be Taken else. Well, quoth the Ass, and what if we should be
Taken? I have One Pack-Saddle upon my Back already, will they Clap Another a
top of that do you Think? I can but be a Slave wherever I am: So that Taken, or
not Taken, it is all a Case to Me.

The MORAL.
It Is some Comfort for a Body to be so Low that he cannot fall: And in such a
Condition already that cannot well be Worse. If a Man be Born to be a Slave, no
matter to what Master.

REFLECTION.
Here Is a Fiction of an Alarm, and we'll suppose it to be a False One too; for
the Inventer has not Determined the Point. Now the Fancy will have more Force
and Quickness in it that Way, then The Other; and the Asses Reasoning upon the
Case, will hold good both Ways alike: Only the Asses in the Moral are more
Frightful then the Asses in the Fable* We shall be Taken else, is the Song of
All Popular Malcontents, when they design a Change of Government: And so they
Hurry the Mobile Headlong, upon the very Dread of Imaginary Chains and
Shackles, into the Slavery they Feared: But some Asses are Wiser then Others;
for the Multitude would Answer their Masters else in the One Instance, as the
Animal here in the Emblem Answered His, in the Other: Here was no Scampering
away at a Venture, without Fear, or Wit; No Sollicitous Enquiry whether the
News was True or No: But the Mythologist has prudently, and for our
Instruction, Cast those Two Circumstances out of the Question, and laid the
Stress of it upon This single Issue. As who should say; In all Governments
there must be Burdens to be Born, and People to Bear them: And who so Proper to
bear Those Burdens, as Those that Providence and Policy have Appointed and
Designed for that Office and Station? So that it is all one to the Common People
who is Uppermost (That is to say, upon the Matter of Ease and Liberty) for Asses
must be Asses still whoever Rides them; And Providence will keep the World in
Order still, whoever Grumbles at it.

FAB. CCLXIII. A Fox and a Knot of Gossips.
A Fox that was taking a Walk one Night Cross a Village spied a Bevy of Jolly,
Gossipping Wenches, making Merry over a Dish of Pullets. Why Ay, says he; Is
not this a Brave World now? A Poor Innocent Fox cannot so much as Peep into a
Hen-Roost, though but to Keep Life and Soul together, and what a Bawling do you
make on it presently with your Dogs, and your Bastards! And yet You your selves
can lie Stuffing your Guts here with your Hens, and your Capons, and not a Word
of the Pudding. How now Bold-Face, cries an Old Trot. Sirrah, we Eat our Own
Hens, I Would have you know; and what you Eat, you Steal.

The MORAL.
There are Men of Prey as well as Beasts of Prey, that Account Rapine as good a
Title as Propriety.

REFLECTION.
THIS gives us to Understand, first, that a Man may do what he will with his
Own; but he has Nothing to do with the Propriety of Another Body. 2dly, That
People may do any Thing with Impunity where there is No body to call 'em to
Account for it; And that which is Death for One to do is Lawful for Another.

There are several Starts of Fancy, that Off-hand look well enough; but bring
them to the Test, and there is Nothing in 'em. The Foxes Reproach here upon the
Gossips, was a Frolique Pleasant enough; but without any Color, or Congruity
of Reason; and the Fallacy lies, from the same Thing done by several Persons,
to the same Right of Doing it; though under Circumstances so Different, that
there is no Parity at all betwixt them upon the Collation. This Freak has
somewhat of the Air in it of the Young Fellow's Conceit to his Father, when he
took him Ruffling his Grandmother. Why may not I lie with your Mother, says
he, as well as You lie with Mine? These Foxes should do well to Consider, that
High-Way-Men, and Other Criminals have as much to say for themselves, where
there is a Breach of Law, and Common Justice in the Case. This Instance of the
Fox and the Gossips, comes to the Old Proverb; that One may better Steal a
Horse then Another look over the Hedge.

FAB. CCLXIV. Capons Fat and Lean.
THere were a Great many Crammed Capons together in a Coop; some of 'em very
Fair and Fat, and Others again that did not Thrive upon Feeding. The Fat ones
would be ever and anon making sport with the Lean, and calling them
Starvelings; till in the End, the Cook was Ordered to Dress so many Capons for
Supper, and to be sure to take the Best in the Pen: when it came to That once,
they that had most Flesh upon their Backs, wished they had had Less, and
'twould have been Better for 'em.

The MORAL.
Prosperity makes People Proud, Fat, and Wanton; but when a Day of Reck-ning
comes, They are the First still that go to Pot.

REFLECTION.
THE Fat Capons in This Fable, are the Rich, the Great, and the (Externally)
Happy Men in the World. People Weigh Virtue, in Common Reputation, as they do
Flesh in the Market, at so much a Pound. They Agree too in the Contempt of Men
of a Less Size and Quality, and they Meet with the Same Fate in the End too, by
a Just Judgment upon them for their Insulting Vanity. They are made the very
Mark for Envy, and Avarice to shoot at: and Equally in danger of being
Sacrificed, either to Tyranny, or to Faction. The Poor, in fine, have This
Consolation, that their Condition is safer, and Easier, then That of the Rich:
And All People in the World will agree with Those Capons in the Fable, that it
is better to Live Leaner then to Dye Fat.

FAB. CCLXV. Oxen and a Piece of Timber.
THE Timber was Complaining of the Ingratitude of the Oxen. How often, says the
Timber, have I fed ye with my Leaves, and Relieved ye under My Shadow? and for
You to Drag me now at This rate, over Dirt and Stones! Alas! cried the Oxen: Do
not you see how we Pant and Groan, and how we are Goaded on, to do what we Do?
The Timber Considered how Unwillingly they did it, and so Forgave them.

The MORAL.
What we are forced to do by an Overruling Power and Necessity, is not
properly our Own Act.

REFLECTION.
IT IS not the Thing that is Done, but the Intention in the Doing of it, that
makes the Action Good, or Evil. There Is a Great Difference betwixt what we do
upon Force, and what upon Inclination; and the Good Will is never the less
Obliging, though by some Unlucky Accident it should be Diverted to my Ruin.
Where there is neither Privity, nor Consent, there can be no Malice, and
Consequently No Crime, or Disobligation. For All other Misadventures Amount to
no more in Truth, then That which we call Ill Luck, in the Common Accidents of
Life, wherefore the Timber was in the Right to Forgive the Oxen here, and so
shall We be too, if after the Doctrine, and Example of This Fable, we forgive
one Another.

FAB. CCLXVI. Trees Straight and Crook'd.
THere was a Delicate Plantation of Trees that were All Well-grown, Fair and
Smooth, save only One Dwarf among them that was Knotty, and Crooked, and the
Rest had it in Derision. The Master of the Wood, it seems, was to Build a
House, and Appointed his Workman to supply the Timber out of That Grove, and to
Cut down Every Stick on it that they found fit for Service. They did as they
were Ordered, and This Ill-favored Piece was left Alone.

The MORAL.
Celebrated Beauties are seldom Fortunate.

REFLECTION.
IT IS a Felicity to be Plain, and Inconsiderable, where it is Dangerous to be
Otherwise. There are a Thousand Inconveniences that Attend Great Beauties and
Fortunes, which the Poor and Deformed are Free from; Not but that it is Better
to fall Honorable in the Service of the Public, then to Survive, in the
Scandal of an Unprofitable, and an Inglorious Life. The Moral gives us also to
Understand, that Pride will have a Fall, and that No Personal Advantages can
either Justify, or Protect Great Men in their Insolence over their Inferiors.
The Beautiful Trees go all to Wrack here, and only the Misshapen, and
Despicable Dwarf is left Standing.

FAB. CCLXVII. A Swan and a Stork.
A Stork that was Present at the Song of a Dying Swan, told her 'twas contrary
to Nature to Sing so much out of Season; and Asked her the Reason of it? Why,
says the Swan, I am now Entering into a State where I shall be no longer in
Danger of either Snares, Guns, or Hunger: and who would not joy at such a
deliverance.

The MORAL.
Death is but the Last Farewell to All the Difficulties, Pains, and Hazzards of
Life.

REFLECTION.
IT IS a Great Folly to Fear that which it is Impossible to Avoid; and it is yet
a Greater Folly to Fear the Remedy of All Evils: For Death Cures All Diseases,
and Frees us from All Cares. It is as Great a Folly again, not to Prepare our
selves, and Provide for the Entertainment of an Inevitable fate. We are as sure
to go Out of the World, as we are that ever we came In to it; and Nothing but
the Conscience of a Good Life can Support us in That Last Extremity. The
Fiction of a Swan's Singing at her Death, does, in the Moral, but Advise, and
Recommend it to us, to make ready for the Cheerful Entertainment of our Last
Hour, and to Consider with our Selves, that if Death be so Welcome a Relief
even to Animals, barely as a Deliverance from the Cares, Miseries, and Dangers
of a Troublesome Life, how much a Greater Blessing, ought All Good Men to
Account it then, that are not only Freed by it from the Snares, Difficulties
and Distractions of a Wicked World, but put into Possession (over and above) of
an Everlasting Peace and the Fruition of Joys that shall never have an End!

FAB. CCLXVIII. The Inconsolable Widow.
THere was a Poor Young Woman that had brought her self even to Death's door
with Grief for her Sick Husband, but the Good Man, her Father, did All he could
to Comfort her. Come, Child, says he, We are, all Mortal: Pluck up a Good Heart
my Girl; for let the Worst come to the Worst, I have a Better Husband in store
for thee, when This is gone. Alas Sir, says she, what do you talk of Another
Husband for? why you had as good have Struck a Dagger to my Heart. No, No; If
ever I think of Another Husband may -- Without any more ado the Man dies, and
the Woman Immediately breaks out into such Transports of Tearing her Hair, and
Beating her Breast, that Every body thought she would have run Stark-Mad upon it:
But upon second Thoughts, she Wipes her Eyes; Lifts 'em up, and cries Heaven's
Will be done; and then turns to her Father, Pray Sir, says she, About The Other
Husband you were speaking of, Is he here in the House?

The MORAL.
This Fable gives us to Understand, that a Widows Tears are quickly Dried up,
and that it is not Impossible for a Woman to Outlive the Death of her Husband;
And after All the Outrages of her Funeral Sorrow, to Propose to her self many a
Merry Hour in the Arms of a Second Spouse.

REFLECTION.
Here Is the Figure of a Worldly Sorrow, and of a Worldly Love, drawn to the
Life, from the Heart and Humor of a Right, Worldly Woman. Hypocrisy Out-does
the Truth, in Grief, as well as in Religion. It Is too Fierce and Noisie, to be
Natural; but the Ostentation supplies the Place of the Duty. If the Wives
Transports had not been Counterfeit, they would have been as Certain Death as
the Husbands Disease: For Flesh and Blood is not able to Bear up under so
Intolerable a Weight. It is in short, only the Acting a Part, not the Discharge
of a Flowing Passion; she takes the Hint; Plays her Roll; Cries out her
Set-Time, and when the Farce is over, betakes herself from her Infirmity to her
Philosophy; not forgetting the Politic Part all this while, of making her
Mourning for One Husband, Prologue to the Drawing-on of Another.

And This is not the Poor Woman's Case Alone, but many a Poor Man's too; for
the Extravagance holds for a Sick Wife, as well as for a Sick Husband. It Is
Custom, Practice and Good Manners, in fine, that in a Great Measure Rules This
Affair. People Proportion their Griefs to their Hopes, and their Tears to their
Legacies. There is as much a Fashion in the Mourning Face, as in the Mourning
Dress; and our very Looks must be in Mode, as well as Our Clothes. This Hint
Minds me of a Pleasant Droll of a Painter, to an Honorable Lady of My
Acquaintance that was sitting for her Picture. Madam (says he) will your
Ladyship be pleased to have your Lip drawn as they Wear 'em now? It is a
Notable Part of Good Breeding, to know When, and How, and how Much, and how
Long to Cry; and Every Thing must be done too as they do it Now. I speak This,
as to the Method of a Widows Lamentations: But when the Husband's Dead, the
Play is Done; and then it comes to the Old Bear-Garden Case, when the Bull had
Tossed a Poor Fellow that went to save his Dog: There was a mighty Bussle about
him, with Brandy and Other Cordials to bring him to Himself again; but when the
College found there was no Good to be done on it. Well Go thy ways Iacques, says
a Jolly Member of That Society, There Is the Best Backsword-Man in the Field
gone, Come Play Another Dog. The Sick Husband here wanted for neither Slops nor
Doctors, and Every Thing was in a Hurry too in Both Places Alike. The Man Dies
and the Woman Bethinks her self. Well, says she, There Is the Best Husband Gone
that ever Woman had to do withal: But, Pray Sir, is The Other Husband in the
House that you were speaking of? What is all This now, but directly to the Tune
of the Butcher's Backsword-Man, and Playing Another Dog?

FAB. CCLXIX. A Wench Parting with her Sweetheart.
A Common Wench was Wringing her Hands, and Crying her self to death almost;
and what was the Business forsooth, but she had Newly Parted with her
Sweetheart. Away, ye Fool you (says One of her Neighbors) to Torment your self
out of your Life for such a Fellow as This! Nay, says the Lass, I am not so
much Troubled at Parting with the Man; but he has Carried away his Coat too;
and truly, when he had given me All he had in the World beside, methinks I
might even have had That too as well as All the Rest.

The MORAL.
Here Is a Mercenary Prostitute Drawn to the very quick, that lays her Profit
more to Heart then her Love.

REFLECTION.
IT seldom falls out that a Common Mistress troubles her Head much with
Particular Inclinations, though there are some Mercenaries so Generous yet, in
the Way of their Profession, that rather then not Trade at all, they will Trade
to Loss. But This was not the Case of the Sorrowful Wight here in the Fable:
Her Trouble was the Loss of the Coat, not the Loss of the Man. It Is the same
Thing with Cheats and Sharpers, that it is with Whores; and the same Humor, in
short, that we find in All Humane Beasts of Prey. There can be No Friendship
where there is Treachery; but there are Degrees in Treachery it self; As the
Betraying of an Honorable Confidence, and of a sacred Trust, is the Basest of
All Perfidies. This Shuffling Inclination shows it self in us Betimes; and
Children do Naturally Apply themselves to their Little Shifts and Frauds. Now
it is not much Amiss to let them Understand so much of the Roguery of the World,
as to secure them from being Wheedled, and Imposed upon: Provided that under
Color of Teaching them to Discover Abuses, they be not Encouraged to Practice
them: For He that perfectly Understands False Play, lies under a Dangerous
Temptation, at some time or Other, to make Use on it. And when he is Once In,
it is no Easy Matter to get him Out again. Never was any Whore yet so Impudent
as not to feel some Touch of Modesty and Remorse, upon the First False Step she
made: But Wicked People Harden by Little and Little, and so go on by Degrees,
till they are past all Sense either of Shame: or of Conscience. Cheating and
Bawdry go together in the World, as well as in the Fable, and the Professors of
the Trade are as Insatiable in the One way as they are in the Other. When they
have left a Poor Devil no Flesh on's back, they will Quarrel for his very Skin
too, as the Iilting-Iade here did for her Cully's Coat, when she had left him
Nothing else.

FAB. CCLXX. A Fly upon a Wheel.
WHat a Dust do I Raise! says the Fly, upon the Coach-Wheel? and what a Rate do
I Drive at, says the same Fly again, upon the Horses Buttock?

The MORAL.
This Fly in the Fable, is Every Trifling Arrogant Fop in Nature, by what Name
or Title soever Dignified, or Distinguished.

REFLECTION.
THIS may be Applied to well-nigh All sorts of Vain Persons and Humors: As
Those that Assume to Themselves the Merit of Other Men's Services. Those that
Talk, and Think, and Bussle, as if Nothing were done without them. All
Meddlers, Boasters, and Impertinents, that Steal away* the Reputation of Better
Men for their Own Use. The World is Full, in fine, of These Pragmatical Flies,
that Value themselves for being In at Every thing, and are found Effectually,
at last to be just good for Nothing.

It is the Fortune, and it is the Humor of Weak and Trifling Men to Value
themselves upon Idle and Trivial Matters; and many times, in Truth, upon Just
Nothing at all: That is to say, upon a False Persuasion that they Do Things,
which they do Not do, and Govern Affairs wherein they have No Manner of
Interest. They Place a Reputation also upon Things that a Sober Man would be
out of Countenance to Own, and Contend for the Credit of being the Authors of
Fooleries. What a Dust do I Raise, says the silly Fly? And have we not Millions
of Vain, Empty Pretenders in the World, that Talk at the same Rate, and with as
Little Color, either of Truth, or of Reason? 'Twas [I] carried such a Cause;
such a Debate, such a Question. 'Twas [I] that Advised, Brought about, or
Prevented This and That; when yet upon the Upshot, This same [I] was no more
then the Fool, that fancied he played upon the Organ, when he only Drew the
Bellow. Whence comes it now that Men Arrogate to Themselves thus, where they
have Nothing to do, and Claim a Title, as Matter of Credit, to the Weakest
Things in the World; but for want of Understanding the True Measures of Honor
and Virtue: The Moral of This Vanity runs through All Degrees of Men, and All
Functions. There Is Nothing so Great; There Is Nothing so Little, as not to
Afford Subject for This Busy and Overweening Conceit to Work upon? No not
from the Modelling of Commonwealths; The Winning of Battles; The Saving, or the
Recovering of Kingdoms, to the very Flies Raising the Dust here in the Fable.

FAB. CCLXXI. An Eele and a Snake.
YOU and I are so Alike, says the Eele to the Snake, that Methinks we should be
somewhat Akin; and yet They that Persecute Me are afraid of You. What should
be the Reason of This? Oh (says the Snake) because No body does Me an Injury
but I make him smart for it.

The MORAL.
In All Controversies They come off Best that keep their Adversaries in fear of
a Revenge.

REFLECTION.
PATIENCE and Impunity, is an Encouragement to an Affront. The Divine Wisdom
has appointed a Hell as well as a Heaven, to the End that Dread and Terror on
the One Hand, may supply the want of Gratitude, Affection, and Good Nature on
the Other: What is it but the Fear of Punishment that keeps the World in Order?
And what but the Awe we stand in, of Majesty, and Power, that Supports the
Dignity of Government. This Moral runs through the whole History of our Lives,
for it is Every Man's Case from Top to Bottom. Princes Themselves, without
Stings, are no Better then Drones; and when the Sacred Character is Disarmed,
there is no longer any Reverence to be Expected for the Person. When People find
it Dangerous to Offend their Superiors, they will take care to Please them: And
there is as much Difference, upon This Point, between One Governor and Another
(the Resemblance notwithstanding) as there is betwixt an Eele and a Snake.

FAB. CCLXXII. Seamen Praying to Saints.
IT Blew a Terrible Tempest at Sea once, and there was one Seaman took Notice
that the Rest of his Fellows were Praying severally to so many Saints. Have a
care my Masters, says he, what you do; for what if we should All be Drowned now
before the Messenger can deliver his Errand: Would it not be Better, without
going so far about, to Pray to Him that can Save us without Help? Upon This,
they turned their Prayers to God Himself, and the Wind presently fell.

The MORAL.
The Shortest, and the Surest Way of Doing Business is Best.

REFLECTION.
IT IS Good to be sure, where our Salvation is at Stake; and to run no more
Risque of the Main Chance, then of Necessity Must. What needs any Man make his
Court to the Servant when his Access is Open to the Master? And especially when
that Master is as ready to Give, as the Petitioners to Ask. A Wise Man will
take the Nearest and the Surest Way to his Journy's End; and Commit no Business
of Importance to a Proxy, where he may do it Himself.

FAB. CCLXXIII. The Fishes and the Drying Pan.
A Cook was Frying a Dish of Live Fish, and so soon as ever they felt the Heat
of the Pan. There Is no Enduring of This, cried one, and so they all Leapt into
the Fire; and instead of Mending the Matter, they were Worse now then Before.

The MORAL.
The Remedy is many times Worse then the Disease.

REFLECTION.
LET a Man's Present State be never so Uneasy, he should do well however to
Bethink himself before he Changes, for fear his Next Remove should be Worse.
This is according to the Common Understanding of the Allusion, though not so
Agreeable perhaps to the True Reason of the Case: For it was not either Levity,
or Impatience; but intolerable Pain, and Absolute Necessity, that made the Fish
shift their Condition: So that the Moral would have born This Doctrine rather:
That where we have Certain Death before us, and only This Choice, whether it
shall be a Speedy or a Lingering Death, That which puts us soonest out of our
Pain (though never so Sharp) is the more Eligible of the Two. But to take it
according to the Old Proverb now; we Understand by [ Out of the Drying Pan into
the Fire] That things go from Bad to Worse.

FAB. CCLXXIV. A League of Beasts and Fishes.
THE Beasts Entered into a League with the Fishes against the Birds. The War
was Declared; but the Fishes, instead of their Quota, sent their Excuse, that
they were not able to March by Land.

The MORAL.
The Vanity of a Helpless Alliance.

REFLECTION.
There Is No Contracting of Alliances with Those that are out of Distance of
Assisting in a Time of Need, in all Contracts, whether of Public Alliance,
and Commerce, or Particular Friendship, there must a Regard be had to
Reciprocal Aid and Assistance, in case of any Distress; So that All the
Circumstances of Ability, Disposition, Situation, Interest, etc. must be Taken
into Thought, and Rightly Understood, before the Bargain be Struck; for it is a
Scandalous Oversight to Err in any of the Essentials to a Prudential, and a
Beneficial Agreement: By which is Intended, any sort of Defect, or Incapacity
that may Obstruct, or Frustrate the End of the League. Those Contracts are
Ridiculous, and Void in Themselves, that shall pretend to Oblige us against
Nature. For it is a Banter, not a Confederacy, to talk of Fishes Marching by
Land, and Living out of their Element.

FAB. CCLXXV. A Covetous Ambassador.
A Certain Ambassador that was still Pestered with Drums and Trumpets every
where upon the Way of his Embassy, was willing to save his Money, and so had
them put off still with This Answer: That his Excellence was in Deep M^urning
for his Mother, and in no Humor for Music. The Drums and Trumpets were at
least as much Troubled at the Tidings, as the Ambassador Himself. This News
came to the Ear of a Person of Honor, who presently made him a Condoling
Visit. Pray, my Lord (says the Nobleman) how long may your Mother have been
Dead? Why, says the Ambassador, it is now a Matter of Forty Years, which
Expounded the Riddle, and put an End to That Controversy.

The MORAL.
There is a Certain Agreeable Way of Fooling betwixt Jest and Earnest, that
carries both Pleasure and Profit along with it; for it saves a Man's Money One
way, and his Credit Another.

REFLECTION.
ACCORDING to the Old Moral, Covetous Men will make any shift to save Money:
But this Allusion is the least Part of the Business. It Is no Easy Matter for
People in many Cases to save their Money, and their Credit Both: But the Best
Thing to be done, in the Disguise of a Base, and Sordid Humor, is the Managing
of the Imposture with a Good Grace, and in such a Manner, that if a Man carries
it off, there is so much Money saved; and if he be Detected, there will be
something Pleasant in the Frolique to Atone for a Secret Narrowness of Heart.

At this Rate of a Pretended Freak, or Whimsy, a Great many other Corruptions,
and Imperfections may be so Palliated, as to take off much of the Scandal of
them; for many a Wicked Thought is so Varnished over in the Practice, as to
pass Muster among the Gay Arts of Gallantry and Conversation. The Thing above
all Others to be Wished, Studied, and Endeavored, is to have a Clear Mind, and
to Lead a Life in so Conscientious a Probity of Manners, as in Thought, Word,
and Deed, to make Good the Character of an Untainted Honest Man: But where This
Discipline shall be found too Strict for Flesh and Blood, (and there is no
Living up to the Rigorous Exactness of Purity, and Justice) it will in such a
Case, be the Best of a Bad Game to keep Clear of Open Offense, and to give the
Infirmity the Best Face that the Matter will bear. As the Ambassador, betwixt
Jest and Earnest, Cast a Cloak of Raillery over his Avarice.

FAB. CCLXXVI. An Old Friend and a Cardinal.
AN Ingenious Cavalier, hearing that an Old Friend of his was Advanced to a
Cardinalate, went to Congratulate his Emmence upon his New Honor. Pray Sir,
says the Cardinal, looking strangely upon him, Give me the Favor of your Name,
and of your Business. I am come, says the Cavalier to Condole with your
Eminence, and to tell you how Heartily I Pity Men that are Over-charg'd with
Dignity and Preferment; for it turns Peoples Brains to that Degree, that they
can neither See, nor Hear, nor Understand, like Other Men; and makes them as
Absolutely to Forget their Old Friends, as if they had never seen them before
in their Lives.

The MORAL.
Honors Change Manners.

REFLECTION.
THIS is a Reproof to the Pride and Vanity of Those Men, that when they come to
be Advanced Themselves, forget all their Old Friends and Acquaintance, even
Those that Raised them. This Fable is Humane Nature to the very Quick, only it
has Two Handles to it, and it would not be Fair to take it in the Worst Sense,
without somewhat of an Apology, or an Excuse for it, where 'twill bear a Better.

It is almost as True in Philosophy as it is in Fact, and Common Practice, that
Honors Change Manners. Men Assume other Thoughts; Other Opinions of
Themselves; Nay, and almost Another Nature, when they Contract other Interests.
The Stamp of Dignity Defaces, in some People the very Character of Humanity;
and Transports them to such a Degree of Haughtiness, that they reckon it below
the Quality of a Great Man to Exercise either Good Nature, or Good Manners: As
if Dignified Flesh and Blood were not of the same Composition with other Men.
Now what does all This Arrogance Amount to, more, then the Pride of an Ass in
his Trappings; when it is but his Masters taking away the Top-Knot, to make an
Ass of him again.

But we are yet to Distinguish betwixt Those that take State and Distance upon
them, purely out of Pride and Humor, and Those that seem to do the same Thing,
*tho in a Compliance with the Necessity of their Affairs. It is Impossible for
a Public Minister to be so Open and Easy to All his Old Friends and
Acquaintance, as he was in the State of his Private Condition; and at the same
Time, to Attend the Necessary Functions of his Office: But This may be All
helped out yet, by an Affability of Address, without any Offense, either to his
Business, or to his Duty. A Word, an Action, a Countenance, Managed with Honor
and Discretion, is sufficient to Uphold the Reputation of his Character; for
there are Articificial Ways of telling People what a Man Would do if he Could,
without a Surly Ostentation of an Unwillingness to do the Things, that
Effectually are not in his Power. A Good Word, they say, Costs no more than a
Bad: Beside that in the Cardinals Forgetting his Old Friend here, he did more
Forget Himself.

FAB. CCLXXVII. A Young Droll and a Crooked Old Man.
A Gibing Young Knave happened to meet an Old Man, whose Age and Infirmity had
brought his Body to the Shape of a Bent Bow. Pray Father (says he) will you
sell your Bow? Save your Money ye Fool you, says The Other; for when you come to
my Years, you shall have such a Bow for Nothing.

The MORAL.
He that would not live to be Old, had best be Hanged when he is Young.

REFLECTION.
IT IS Irreverent, and Unnatural, to Scoff at the Infirmities of Old Age, since
there is no Avoiding them but by Dying Betimes. We are all Born to Die, and
Every jot as Certain that we shall go Out of This World, as that we are already
come into it; but whether by a Natural, or a Violent Death, we know not. Time
and Humane Frailty will bring us to our End without the Help of any
Contingencies, or Distempers by the By; So that our Decays are as much the Work
of Nature, as the First Principles of our Being: And the Boy's Conceit of the
Crooked Bow here, is no better then a Blasphemous Way, of making sport with the
Course of Providence: Beside the Folly of Scoffing at That in Another, which we
our selves are sure to come to at Last, or Worse.

FAB. CCLXXVIII. An Old Fellow, and a Young Wench.
THere was a formal Piece of Gravity that had lived to about Threescore and
Ten, without ever so much as knowing a Woman from a Weathercock. The Devil
Ought him a Shame, and paid him both Interest and Principal, in making the Old
Doting Fop Marry a Young Girl. He would be often Complaining afterward, how
Unluckily he had Disspos'd of his Time. When I was a Young Man, says he, I
wanted a Wife, and now I Am an Old Man, my Wife wants a Husband.

The MORAL.
The Common Fate of Unequal Matches, Especially in the Case of an Old Fellow,
and a young Wench, where the Humor is as Contrary as Summer and Winter, Light
and Darkness, or Day and Night.

REFLECTION.
There Is Nothing Good, or Natural, that is out of Season. Nay the most Obliging
Offices in Nature, and the Greatest Blessings under the Sun, lose much, both of
their Value, and of their Relish, when they are Mistim'd.

FAB. CCLXXIX. An Eagle and a Pie.
THere was a Pert-Dapper Spark of a Mag-Pye; that fancied the Birds would never
be well Governed, till he Himself (...) come to sit at the Helm. In This Freak
he Petitioned (...) Eagle to take him into the Cabinet; For, says he, I have
(...) Turn of a Body for it. I have my Tongue, and my Heels at Command; and can
make as much Noise and Bussle, to as little purpose, as any He perhaps that
flies between a Pair of VVings. He was going on in the History of his
Qualifications, when the Eagle Graciously told him, how sensible he was of the
Volubility both of his Tongue, and of his Manners, and so of his Faculties and
Good Breeding; but, says he, you are so Confoundedly given to Squirting up and
down, and Chattering, that the World would be apt to say. I had Chosen a
Iack-Pudding for a Prime Minister.

The MORAL.
Great Babblers, or Talkers are a sort of People not fit either for Trust,
Business, or Conversation.

REFLECTION.
THE World is like to be well Governed, when Pyes and Daws shall take upon them
to set up for Philosophers, Doctors of the Chair, and Men of State and
Government. Things are Mightily out of Order in That Quarter, especially when
Vain Fools come to be admitted into Business upon the Credit of their Own Word.

The Importunity of such a Fop is Excellently set forth in the Qualifications
of This Pie; for he Enforces the Reason of his Pretense, by the Clearest
Arguments in the World against Himself. He would be a Statesman, because he is
a Buffoon, as if there went no more to the Making of a Councellor, then the
Faculties of a Merry-Andrew, or a Tumbler. Here Is the Confident Ambition of a
Foolish Twattling Pretender, on the One Hand, and a Just Reproof of him, in a
most Reasonable Refusal, on the Other; to Teach us, that the Want of Shame,
Brains, or Good Manners, does not presently Entitle Every little Skip-Iack to
the Boards-End in the Cabinet. But Our Eagle here was not a Prince to Advance
the Ministers of his Pleasures, to be Ministers of State, and to make his Sport
his Business.

FAB. CCLXXX. A Countryman and a Mouse.
THere was a Pleasant sort of a Poor Fellow had his House a fire; but his
Misfortune did not make him lose his Good Humor. As it was all in a Flame, out
Bolts a Mouse from the Ruins, to save her self: The Man Catches her, and
throws her back again. Why thou Ungrateful Wretch (says he) to leave thy
Friend now in Adversity, that gave thee thy Bread in his Prosperity.

The MORAL.
' It Is a Barbarous Faculty, an Ill Natured Wit; that will rather Expose the
very Life and Reputation of a Friend, then lose the Opportunity of a Jest.

REFLECTION.
IT IS the Practice, but it is the Baseness of the World too, for Men to Govern
themselves Wholly by their Interest, and to Abandon All that is Sacred and
Honorable, for the saving of their Own Skins. Thus, says the Moral; but the
Conceit was not worth the Life of the Poor Creature, and therefore the
Allegory not to be Recommended; because it sets up a False Principle. There was
place for Honor, Dignity of Mind, and Humanity to show it self, in the Case,
though but to a Poor Mouse: And there is Nothing to be said in Defense of the
Wanton Cruelty of Sacrificing a Life to a Jest: But to come now to the
Ungrateful Point, the Bare Innuendo of it would stare so many People in the
Face, that it were better passed over in silence; for the Moral drawn out at
length, would be a Satyr against Mankind. And Millions of Men that carry their
Heads High in the World, would fall under the Lash of the Countryman's
Exclamation here.

FAB. CCLXXXI. A Sick Hermit.
THere was a very Good Man, that in the Five and Twentieth Year of his Age,
fell into a Desperate Fit of Sickness, the Doctors sat upon him, and the Whole
College were of Opinion, that there was no saving of his Life without the Use
of a Woman. The Poor Man lay Humming and Hawing a good While, betwixt the Sin
and the Remedy; but in the End, he gave up himself wholly to the Physicians, to
do with him as they thought fit. Upon this, the Doctors, by Consent, put a Good
Armful of Warm Woman's Flesh into the Bed to him, by way of a Recipe, and so
laid him to Rest, till about some Two Hours after: When they came to see how
the Prescription had Wrought; and there did they find the Poor Religious,
Tearing his Hair, Beating his Breast, and Groaning as if his very Heart would
break. So they fell presently to Reasoning, and Casing upon the Matter with
him, and laying Comfortable Distinctions before him betwixt the Morality, and
the Necessity of what was done. No, No, Gentlemen, says he, My Grief is not
thereabouts; but it goes to the Heart of me to think how long I have lived in
Ignorance; and that This Fit of Sickness should never take me sooner.

The MORAL.
Flesh is Frail: When a Strong Appetite, and a Troublesome Virtue Meet in
Competition, it is a Hard Matter for a Man to Resist the Temptation.

REFLECTION.
WE may gather from hence, first, that People are Flesh and Blood in a Cell, as
well as in a Palace. 2ly. That it is a very great Mastery, for a Man to stand
Firm, in a Case, where Humane Frailty, Violent Inclinations, and the
Preservation of Life it self, are in a Conspiracy against his Virtue. 3ly. That
a very Pious Good Man may think himself Better then he Is, for want of an
Occasion to try the Force of his Goodness and Resolution. 4ly. That when the
Flesh and the Devil have once got the Better of a Scrupulous Conscience, it
puts a Man past All Sense of Shame, as well as of the Sin; to the Degree of
Glorying in his Wickedness. The Holy Man was not so much Troubled, it seems, at
the Use of the Remedy, as that he had not tried the Experiment sooner. You may
Talk what you will (says Lais) of your Philosophers and Learned Men; but I have
as many Visits from Those Sparks as from Other People. And she was much in the
Right on it.

FAB. CCLXXXII. A Rich Man and a Foolish Servant.
A Rich Man had a Certain Block-headed Fellow to his Servant, and the Master
would be saying to him at Every Turn, Well! Thou art the very Prince of Fools!
I would I were, says the Man, in a Saucy Huff once, for I should be the
Greatest Emperor upon the Face of the Earth then, and You Yourself should be
One of My Subjects.

The MORAL.
The Only Universal Monarch is the King of Fools; for the Whole Race of Mankind
are his Subjects.

REFLECTION.
THE Whole World is full of Fools, only He that is the Least One is the Wisest
Man. This would have been Well, if the Moralist had not given the Block-headed
Servant too much Privilege: But the Ill Manners is suitable enough however, to
the Character. It was such a kind of a Course Complement that Scotus put upon
Charles the Bald, as they were Sitting together at a Table. The Emperor asked
him Quid Interest (says he) inter Scotum and Sotum, Playing upon the Conceit of
Scot and Sot [ Mensa] says he. That is to say, the Table is between the Scot
and the Sot: And so with the Liberty of a Buffoon, the School-man turned the
Sot upon the Emperor, in Law-Latin: This Booby's Answer in the Fable, as
Unmannerly as it was, had yet a Great deal of Truth in it; for He that can
Advance himself to be King of Fools, may be Honestly Reputed within a Hairs
Breadth of an Universal Monarch.

FAB. CCLXXXIII. A Widow had a mind to Marry.
WELL! says a Widow in Confidence to a Friend of here is. I am Utterly Undone for
want of a Sober, Provident Husband, to look after my Estate, and there is No
bodies Advice that I had rather have than Yours. But pray, will you take This
Along with ye too; that for the Course, Common Business of Matrimony, as I am
an Honest Woman, the very Thought on it turns my Stomach; Very well, says the
Confident, and now I know Your Mind, it shall go Hard but I Will Fit ye. The Good
Woman went her way for the Present, and the Next Day came to her again, quite
Overjoyed that she had found out a Man so Absolutely for her Turn. I have
Provided ye a Man (says she) of Industry and Integrity; and one that Perfectly
Understands all sorts of Business; and then for Turning Your Stomach, My Life
for Yours Madam, he is not in Condition to Trouble with any Qualms That way.
Away, Ye Fool You, says she; I Hate the Infirmity, though I Love the Virtue.

The MORAL.
Women are All of a Make, and in some Things, most of them in a Mind. One Woman
feels Another Woman's Pulse in her Own Veins; and there is no Halting before
Cripples.

REFLECTION.
There Is No Disputing with a Man that denies Principles, and there are Certain
Precognita in the Motions of Flesh and Blood, as well as in the Philosophy of
the Schools: In which Cases, we Understand our Duty without a Teacher, and
Acquit our selves as we Ought to do, without a Prompter. That is to say, there
are some Certain Fundamentals of Natural Justice, that we take for Granted, and
Trust One Another for; as in the Proposition of our Widow here in the Fable,
without any Need of Articles for the Performance of Covenants. The Widow, in
short, played the Gypsy, and so did her Consident too in pretending to Believe
her: But there is No Catching Old Birds with Chafe, for One Woman reads the
Heart of Womankind in her Own Breast. She was a Fool to be Mealy-mouthed,
where Nature speaks so Plain. There may be Exceptions it is True, to a General
Rule, but None to an Universal. It was No Ill shift however, to come off
withal, that in dispite of All her Aversions, she was not yet for making a
Virtue of a Necessity. The Publisher of Mr. Seldens Table Talk, Tells of a Girl
that was worth Forty of Our Widow here, and an Honest Downright, Plain Dealing
Lass it was. The Wench was just newly Married, and so soon as ever the Job was
over, Pray Mother, says she, must not I go to Bed now? No, No, Child, says
Mamma, You must take Your Dinner first; Oh says the Girl, and Then go to Bed I
warrant ye. No, my Dear, not yet says the Mother, You must Dance after Dinner.
Ay, Ay, says the Girl again, and Then to Bed. No, No, says The Other, You must
Sup first, and then Dance again. Ay, Ay, and Then to Bed, says the Bride. This
Girl did but speak the Widows Mind; for let Flesh and Blood pretend what it
will, to Bed, to Bed, will be the Bob of the Song.

FAB. CCLXXXIV. Town-Dogs and Country-Dogs.
IT IS a Common Thing upon the Passing of a Strange Dog through a Town, to have
a Hundred Curs Bawling at his Breech, and Every Yap gets a Snap at him. There
was One Particular Dog, that when he saw there was No saving his Skin by
Running away, Turned upon his Pursuers, and then found upon the Trial, that One
set of Teeth was worth Two pair of Heels; for upon That Resolution, they All
fell off, and Sneaked their Way. A Captain took Occasion once to Apply This
Instance to his People. Fellow Soldiers (says he) take This for a Rule, Those
that run away are in more Danger than the Others that stand the Shock.

FAB. CCLXXXV. A Snake to Jupiter.
A Snake that found himself Persecuted by Men, appealed to Jupiter for Relief;
who told him that it was his Own Fault; for (says he) if you had but Bit the
First Man that Affronted ye; the second would have taken Warning by it.

The Moral of the Two Fables above.
The putting up of One Affront draws on Another.

REFLECTION.
THIS is No Ill Emblem of the Common People; that are Insolent so long as they
are Feared, and Shrink, where they find Danger; for their Courage is Calculated
to the Opinion they have of the Enemy. It is the Nature of All sorts of Mungril
Curs, to Bawl, Snarle, and Snap, where the Foe flies before them; and to Clap
their Tails between their Legs when an Adversary makes Head against them.
There Is Nothing, in short, but Resolution, to carry a Man through All
Difficulties: And since it is so Absolutely Necessary, the sooner it is Taken
up, the Better it succeeds. It Is a Matter of very Evil Consequence, to let the
Rabble offer Public Affronts Gratis. A seditious Word leads to a Broyl, and a
Riot Unpunished, is but next door to a Tumult: So that the Bearing of One
Indignity draws on Another. Bite the First Man that Affronts ye, and you are safe
for ever after.

FAB. CCLXXXVI. The Frogs and Tortoises.
AS a Company of Frogs were Trifling and Playing up and down in a Meadow, some
Tortoises, that looked on, were Mightily Troubled that they could not do so
too, but taking Notice a while after how These Frogs were Picked up, and
Destroyed, by Birds and Fishes: Well (says One of 'em) it is better to Live
Dull, and Heavy, then to Dye Light and Nimble.

The MORAL.
Every Part and Creature of the Universe has it is proper Place, Station, and
Faculties Assigned, and to Wish it Otherwise were to find fault with Providence.

REFLECTION.
THAT which Nature has Allotted us is best for us, and it is Great Folly and
Wickedness for People not to be Content, and Thankful for the Great Creator of
All Things.

No Man knows Himself, or Understands his Own Condition, but by Comparison, and
upon Experience. Our Wishes, many times, are Mortal to us: and the very
Granting of our Prayers would but serve to make us still more and more
Miserable. The Tortoises Shell was a Clog and a Burden, till they found it
Necessary for the Defense of their Lives; and they Envied the Easiness and the
Lightness of the Frogs, till they saw them Joll'd to pieces, and Devoured for
want of a Buckler to Cover, and Protect them. But they came then to be of the
Beggar's Mind, that stood Gaping at my Lady Devonshires Funeral: Here Is a Brave
Sight, says she, and yet I Gad Bess, for all That, I had rather be a
Live-Begger then a Dead Countess. The Moral Concludes in this, that there can
be No Thought of Security, or Quiet in This World, but in a Resignation to the
Allotments of God and Nature. If the Tortoises had had their Wish, they had
been Picked up among the Frogs.

FAB. CCLXXXVII. The Mice and the Ox.
THE Mice found it so Troublesome to be still Climbing the Oak for Every Bit
they put in their Bellies, that they were once about to set their Teeth to it,
and bring the Acorns down to them; But some Wiser then some; and a Grave
Experienced Mouse, bad them have a care what they did; for if we Destroy our
Nurse at present, Who shall Feed us hereafter?

The MORAL.
Resolution without Foresight is but a Temerarious Folly: And the Consequences
of Things are the First Point to be taken into Consideration.

REFLECTION.
IT IS Ill done for any Man to Consult his Present Ease and Profit, without
Computing upon the Trouble and Loss that may Ensue. It Is not safe to make any
Present Resolutions without a Considerate Prospect into the Future. This is
abundantly Moraliz'd in several Other Places. But the Mouses Question of Who
shall Feed us hereafter? goes a great way in the Resolution of All These Cases.

FAB. CCLXXXVIII. A Runaway Dog and his Master.
THere was a Bob-Tayl'd Cur, cried in a Gazette, and One that found him out by
his Marks, brought him home to his Master; who fell presently to Reasoning the
Matter with him, how Insensible, and Thankless a Wretch he was, to run away
from One that was so Extreme Kind to him. Did I ever give you a Blow in my
Life, says he, or so much as One Angry Word, in all the time that ever you
served me? No, says the Dog, not with Your Own Hands, nor with Your Own Lips;
but you have given me a Thousand and a Thousand by your Deputy; and when I Am
Beaten by my Master's Order, it is my Master Himself, I reckon, that Beats me.

The MORAL.
In Benefits as well as Injuries it is the Principal that we are to Consider,
not the Instrument. That which a Man does by Another, is in Truth and Equity
his own Act.

REFLECTION.
THE Master here deals with the Dog, as Great Officers deal many times with
Honest, Well-Meaning Men at Court. They speak 'em Fair Themselves, and Murder
'em by their Deputies: But still, That which is done by the Principals Order,
or with his Privity, or Approbation, is the Principals Act. The Servant is but
the Master's Instrument in the Case, as the Cudgel is the Servants; and they
are Both under the same Command. When a Man happens to be Killed, we do not
Impute the Murder to the Weapon that did the Execution, but to Him that Managed
it. This is much after the way of Treating Elephants. When an Elephant is taken
in a Pit-fall, He that is designed for the Master and Keeper of him, sets Other
People to Prick and Teize him, and Then In comes He Himself, and under Pretense
of taking his Part, falls foul upon his Enemies, and Rescues him. The Elephant
takes This Man now for his Friend; Whereas, upon the Whole Matter, it was by
His Order that he was both Taken and Beaten.

There Is Nothing more Frequent then This Shamming Way of Confederacy, betwixt
Two Men in Power; when an Honest Patriot, for the Purpose, or a Loyal Subject
is to be made an Owl of; by Consent of them Both. The One Affronts him, while
the Other Cajoles, and Pities him; Takes up his Quarrel, shakes his Head at it;
Claps his Hand upon his Breast, and then Protests, and Protests, he Wonders at
his Heart that any Lord should have so Little Honor as to Treat an Honest
Gentleman at This rate. A Friend of mine has been at This sport many and many a
time: And now upon the Whole Matter, This is no more at last then a Concerted
Intrigue betwixt a Brace of Sharpers, that Laugh all the while at the Whole
Roguery in their Sleeves. The Masters Good Words are a Greater Mortification to
the Dog, then the Servants Blows.

FAB. CCLXXXIX. The Birds and Beetles.
THE Birds were in a Terrible Fright once, for fear of Gunshot from the
Beetles. And what was the Business but the little Balls of Ordure that the
Beetles had Raked together, the Birds took for Bullets: But a Sparrow in that
Company, that had more Wit then his Fellows, bad 'em have a Good Heart yet, for
how shall they reach us in the Air, says he, with Those Pellets, that they can
hardly Roll upon the Ground.

The MORAL.
Many People apprehend Danger where there is None, and reckon themselves sure
where there Is, for want of taking the True Measure of Things, and laying
Matters Rightly together.

REFLECTION.
VAIN Fears and Imaginations Cast a Mist before our Eyes, and not only
Represent Real Dangers Greater then they Are, but Create Fantastical
Difficulties, where in Truth there are None at all. The Birds were in a Mortal
Apprehension of the Beetles, till the Sparrow Reasoned them into a Better
Understanding of the Matter. How should they Hurt us in the Air, says the
Sparrow, with Those Pellets, that they can hardly Move upon the Ground, which
brought the Point to an Issue upon a very Logical Conclusion.

FAB. CCXC. A Bear and Bees.
A Bear was so Engaged once at the Stinging of a Be, that he ran like Mad into
the Bee-Garden, and Over-turn'd All the Hives, in Revenge. This Outrage brought
them Out in Whole Troops upon him; and he came afterward to Bethink himself,
how much more Advisable it had been to Pass over One Injury, then by an
Unprofitable Passion to Provoke a Thousand.

The MORAL.
Better pass over an Affront from One Scoundrel, then draw the Whole Herd of
the Mobile about a Man's Ears.

REFLECTION.
WE are to learn from hence, the Folly of an Impotent, and Inconsiderate
Anger.;, and that there is no Creature so Contemptible, but by the Help of
Resolution, and of Numbers, it may Gain its Point. The Heat and Thirst of
Revenge does but Hurry People from Less Mischieves to Greater; As One Hasty
Word, or Blow, brings on a Thousand. There Is no Opposing the Torrent of a
Headstrong Multitude; for Rage and Despair give Courage to the most
Inconsiderable, and the most Fearful of Creatures. Had it not been Better now
to have passed over the Affront of one Spiteful Creature, than to Provoke and
draw on upon Himself the Outrage of a Thousand?

FAB. CCXCI. A Fowler and a Chaffinch.
A Fowler that had Bent his Net, and laid his Bait, Planted himself in the
Bird-Catcher's Place, to Watch for a Draught. There came a Great Many Birds One
after Another, that Lighted, and Peck'd a While, and so away again. At This
rate they kept Coming and Going all the Day long; but so few at a time, that
the Man did not think 'em worth a Pluck. At last, when he had Slipped All his
Opportunities in hope of a Better Hit, the Evening came on, and the Birds were
gone to Bed, so that he must either Draw then or not at all; and in the
Conclusion, he was even fain to content himself with one Single Chaffinch, that
had the Misfortune to be Later abroad then her Fellows.

The MORAL.
Men are so Greedy after what is to Come, which is Uncertain, that they Slip
present Opportunities, which are never to be Recovered.

REFLECTION.
DELAYS are Dangerous. The very Instant is All that we can call our Own, The
Rest, is either Chance, or Fate. The Case of the Fowler and the Chaffinch,
reaches to All the Pretensions of Humane Life. Every Man Living has a Design in
his Head upon something or other, and Applies himself accordingly toward the
Attaining of his End; whether it be Honor, Wealth, Power, or any other sort of
Advantage, or Settlement in the World. Now he that would take a True Measure
how to Proceed, should say to himself, This is the Thing I would be at. This or
That in such a Proportion will do my Business; And This Nick of time is the
Critical Occasion for the Gaining of such, or such a Point. I Will take it while
it is to be had. He that may be Well, and Will not, in hope of being Better,
runs the Risque of getting Nothing at all; and so Parts with a Moral Certainty
in Possession, for a Wild, and a Remote Possibility in Reversion. Lost
Opportunities are never to be Recovered. It Is Good Discretion, when we cannot
Command what we would have, to Compound for what we May, and not to call any
thing Ill Luck, which is in Truth Ill Manage. It Is a Weakness to be Sollicitous
for more then enough, and to Hazard All by Grasping at too much. All Covet,
All Lose; for Avarice, whether it Succeeds or not, is but a kind of Beggary;
and he that Wants More, has as Good as Nothing at all. The Bird-Catcher slipped
his Time here, and makes Good the Old Vulgar Saying; He that will not when he
May, When he Would he shall have Nay.

FAB. CCXCII. A Soldier and Two Horses.
A Soldier that had One Excellent Horse already, bought Another that was not
Half so Good, and yet he took more Care of That, then of the Former. Every body
Wondered at the Humor of it, considering that for Beauty, or Service, the
Latter was not Comparable to the Other. Ay, but says One, it is Natural to be
Kind to the Last Commer.

The MORAL.
Our Likings or Dislikes are Founded rather upon Humor and Fancy then upon
Reason. Every thing pleases us at First; and Nothing Pleases us Long; and we
shift only to Try if we can Mend our selves in the Next Choice.

REFLECTION.
WE are apt to put a Value upon Things for their Novelty, rather then for their
Virtue: and the same Levity holds toward Women, Friends and Acquaintances: Nay,
and Governments too; for People seldom Change for a Better. All Civil
Constitutions have their Failings, and the Unhinging, even of the Worst of
Governments brings on an Anarchy, which is yet Worse; for it lays All in
Rubbish: And we have no Better Security for the Next State of Things, then we
had for the Former, but still for Variety sake, we go on Chopping and Changing
our Friends, and our Masters, as well as our Horses; and with the Soldier, out
of a Sickly Levity, like the Last Best whatever it be.

FAB. CCXCIII. A Spaniel and a Sow.
I Wonder (says a Sow to a Spaniel) how you can Fawn thus upon a Master that
gives you so many Blows, and Twinges by the Ears. Well (says the Dog) but then
set the Good Bits, and the Good Words he gives me, against Those Blows and
Twinges, and I Am a Gainer by the Bargain.

The MORAL.
He that will Live Happily in This World must Resolve to take the Good and the
Bad Thankfully and Contentedly One with Another.

REFLECTION.
WITHOUT a Strict Hand over us in the Institution of our Youth, we are in
danger to be Lost for ever. He that Spares the Rod, Hates the Child; and the
Severity of an Early Discipline is One of the Greatest Obligations that a Son
can have to a Tender Parent. This we shall find to be True, if we do but set
the Good against the Bad, as the Dog did, the Bits against the Knocks, and then
Balance the Account.

FAB. CCXCIV. Oxen and Timber.
WHY don't you Run and Make Have? cried the Timber in the Cart, to the Oxen
that Drew it? The Burden is not so Heavy sure. Well! (said the Oxen) if You did
but know Your Own Fortune, you would never be so Merry at Ours. We shall be
Discharged of our Load so soon as we come to our Journies End, but You that are
Designed for Beams and Supporters, shall be made to bear till your Hearts
break. This Hint brought the Timber to a Better Understanding of the Case.

The MORAL.
It Is matter of Humanity, Honor, Prudence, and Piety, to be Tender One of
Another; for no Man Living knows his End, and it is the Evening Crowns the Day.

REFLECTION.
IT is both Base, and Foolish, to Insult over People in Distress, for the Wheel
of Fortune is Perpetually in Motion, and He that is Uppermost to day, may be
Under it to Morrow. No Man knows what End he is Born to; and it is Only Death
that can Pronounce upon a Happy or a Miserable Life. When the Timber, made
sport with the Oxen for the Drudgery they Labored under, Little did they Dream
of the Greater Oppression they were to Undergo Themselves.

FAB. CCXCV. A Goldfinch and a Boy.
A Goldfinch gave his Master the slip out of the Cage, and he did what he could
to get him Back again, but he would not come. Well! says the Boy, You Will live
to Repent it; for you will never be so well Looked to in any Other Place. That
may very Well be, says the Bird; but however, I had rather be at my Own Keeping
then at Yours.

The MORAL.
Never Well; Full nor Fasting.

REFLECTION.
MEAT, Drink, and Ease can never make any Man Happy that wants his Liberty. No,
nor any Man that Has it neither; for we are never Well, either with much or
Little. Whatever we Have, we Want something else, and so go on Wanting and
Craving, till Death takes us off in the Middle of our Longings. He that is a
Prisoner, is Troubled that he cannot go whither he Would; And He that is at
Large, is as much Troubled that he does not know whether to Go. The One Stands
still; and the Other Loses his Way. Now it is not Necessity, but Opinion, that
makes People Miserable, and when we come once to be Fancy-Sick, there is No Cure
for it. A Man may have his Heels at Liberty, and yet be a Slave to Impotent
Affections, and Troubled Thoughts. But This is not, upon any Terms, to
Undervalue the Blessing of a Natural Freedom; and the Goldfinch was Undoubtedly
in the Right, when he was once out of the Cage, not to be Whistled back again,
if it had not been that he carried his Snare along with him.

FAB. CCXCVI. A Droll and a Bishop.
THere was a Roguy Wag of a Droll that had a Mind once to put a Trick upon a
Hard, Close-Fisted Bishop: so he went to him upon the First of January to Wish
him a Merry New-Year on it, and begged a Five Guinea Piece of him for a
New-Years-Gift. Why, the Man's Mad (says the Prelate) and I believe he takes Me
to be so too. Do think I have so Little Wit, as to Part with such a Gob of
Money for God-a-Mercy? Nay, my Lord (says the Fellow) if That be too much, let
it be but a Single George, and I Will be Thankful for it; But That would not do
Neither. He fell next Bout to a Copper Farthing, and was Denied That too. When
the Fellow saw that there was no Money to be got, Pray (My Lord, says he) let
me beg your Blessing then. With all my Heart (says the Bishop) Down on your
Knees, and You shall have it, No, My Lord (says The Other) it is My Turn now to
Deny; for if You Your self had thought That Blessing worth a Copper Farthing,
you would never have Parted with it.

The MORAL.
No Penny, No Pater Noster, does not hold in All Cases; for the Penny and the
Pater Noster do not go always together.

REFLECTION.
There Is No Corruption like Ecclesiastical Avarice; No Cruelty so Merciless as
That of a Debauched Churchman. It Is the Devil's Masterpiece to begin There;
for he knows very Well, that the Scandalous Examples of a Perfidious, and an
Apostate Clergy, are the Ready Way to bring the Holy Order of Priesthood it
self into Odium, and Disgrace. Here Is Your Church, they cry presently; as if
the very Function were Unhallowed by the Mercenary Practices of some
Backsliding Members of That Communion. Let them Live as they Preach, and Preach
as they Ought, and let there be No Moralizing in the Pulpit upon the Fable of
the Man, and the Satyr, by Blowing Hot and Cold out of the same Mouth. There
are Symoniacal Contracts on the Buying-side, as well as on the selling, when
People shall Preach One Doctrine to get Into a Living, and the Contrary to Keep
it. What is This, but the Selling of the Truth, and of Souls, for Money; and
the Prostituting of All that is Sacred, for the saving of their Skins and their
Stakes?

Not but that Charity is Free, and much at the Discretion of Him that is to
Exercise it. It is Free, I say, to All Intents and Purposes, as to any Legal
Coercion upon it, though at the same time, in Point of Conscience, a Man may
lie under the Obligation of an Indispensable Duty. So that without forcing the
Drift of this Fable, the Bishop is not to Blame here, the Matter simply
Considered; for the First, Second, or Third Denial, or for All together; for
such Circumstances may be Supposed, with a regard to the Manner, Time, and
Person, as might not only Acquit him for the Refusal, but have Reflected upon
his Conduct, and Prudence, if he had Granted the Request: So that (with
Veneration to the Divine Institution it self, and to Those that Live up to it)
we are to take This for the Figure of a Loose and a Covetous Prelate, that
Disgraces his Character by his Conversation, and sets a Higher Rate upon a
Copper Farthing then upon an Apostolical Benediction. Now if This Bishop could
have said, Silver and Gold have I None, the Author of This Fable would have
Absolved him.

FAB. CCXCVII. A Lapwing Preferred.
UPon a General Invitation to the Eagles Wedding, there were several Birds of
Quality among the Rest, that took it in Heavy Dudgeon to see a Lapwing Placed
at the Upper End of the Table. It Is true, they cried, he has a kind of a
Coxcomb upon the Crown of him, and a Few Tawdry Feathers; but Alas, he never
Eat a Good Meals Meat in his Life, till he came to This Preferment.

The MORAL.
It Is a Scandal to a Government, and there goes Envy along with it, where
Honors are Conferred upon Men for Address, Beauty, and External Advantages,
rather then for their Qualities and Virtues.

REFLECTION.
IT IS a Necessary Caution in All Preferments that they be Placed upon Fit Men;
for the Right Motives; and for the Right Ends. The Advancing of a Fantastical
Fool, or Lapwing, Reflects upon the Raiser of him; for it is an Ill sign, the
very Liking of an Ill Man, and Implies, at least, a Tacit Approbation of the
Officers Defects. The Preferring of People indeed to Honorable Charges and
Commissions, without either Brains, Blood, Fortune, or Merit, may be so far
Reputed a Great Work, as the making of Something out of Nothing, seems to be
next door to a Creation: But the Character at last will not Excuse the Person
so Dignified, from Open Envy and Secret Contempt, Where it so falls out that
the True Reason of the Choice, is either Fancy without Judgment, or Credulity
without Enquiry, Enformation, or Trial, the Latter is the more Harmless Mistake
of the Two; for there is somewhat of Generous in the Confidence, Nowithstanding
the Error of the Facility; And as He that Trusts to This Degree, does deserve
not to be Deceived; so He that Betrays such a Trust, on the Other Hand, is not
Worthy to Live. An Ill Reason, in fine, for an Ill Choice, is Worse then No
Reason at all; for to proceed upon a Wrong Reason is to Build upon a False
Foundation. Will and Pleasure is the Only Plea This Case will bear; for the
Authority of the Eagle her self we see was not sufficient to Vindicate a
Worthless Minion from Reproach and Scorn.

FAB. CCXCVIII. A Priest and Pears.
A Jolly Gutling Priest, that was Invited to a Wedding-Dinner, Stumbled upon a
parcel of Pears by the Way. The Man was sharp enough set to have made a
Breakfast of them, but so taken up with the thought of the Wedding Cheer, that
he only Pist upon the Pears in Contempt, and so went his Way. He was to Cross a
River it seems, but finding the Waters so High, that there was No Passing, he
was even glad to Trudge back again as Wise as he Came, and to make a Meal of
Those very Pears that he had Pist upon and Despised.

The MORAL.
Hunger's the Best Sauce.

REFLECTION.
THIS Fable shows us, that Delicate and Squeamish Humors in the Matter of
Meats and Drinks, are Freak, and Phansy, rather then upon any Account of
Nature, or Reason. (Some Few Insuperable Aversions only Excepted) There is a
Pride, and an Affectation of Singularity, that is never to be pleased with any
thing that is Cheap and Common; and there is also a Sensual Intemperance for the
Gratifying of the Palate; but Necessity, and no Choice cures either of These
Evils. The Priest did Ill in Vilifying These Pears; for All the Fruits of the
Earth are the Gifts of Providence, which we ought to have a Reverence for: And
he did Foolishly too in not Considering, that he Himself might come to stand in
Need of them. But he was forced, in the Conclusion, to Eat That Himself, which
he had made Unfit for any body else, and There was his Punishment. A Squeamish
Fastidious Niceness in Meats and Drinks, must be Cured as we Cure Agues, by
Starving.

FAB. CCXCIX. A Horse and a Hog.
A Hog took Notice of a Horse in the Height of his Courage, that was Just
advancing to Charge an Enemy. Why what a Fool art thou, says the Hog to him, to
make such Haste to be Destroyed? That Consideration, says the Horse, may do
well enough in the Mouth of a Wretched Creature that is only Fatted up to be
Killed by a Knife, but whenever I Am Taken off, I Will leave the Memory of a Good
Name Behind me.

The MORAL.
It Is the Cause makes the Martyr.

REFLECTION.
HE that Consults the Interest of his Carcass, before That of his Reputation,
or his Country, is Effectually but a Brute, under the Figure of a Man. An
Honorable Death is to be Preferred much before an Infamous Life. This Hog in
the Fable has but taken up the Words and Humor of a Bestial sort of People in
the World: Men that lie Wallowing in their Lusts, their Debauches, and their
Pleasures, and spending their Censures upon Men of Honor, and Public
Spirits, without any Regard to the Conscience of either Christian, Moral, or
Political Duties. They are more Solicitous for the Pampering of their Bodies,
then for the Saving of their Souls, or the Embalming of their Memories: And
fall justly under the Reproof of the Horse to the Hog in This Emblem.

FAB. CCC. A Hunts-man and a Currier.
A Currier bought a Bear-skin of a Hunts-man, and laid him down ready Money
for it. The Hunts-man told him that he would Kill a Bear next day, and he should
have the Skin. The Currier, for his Curiosity, went out with the Hunts-man to
the Chase, and Mounted a Tree, where he might see the Sport. The Hunts-man
Advanced very Bravely up to the Den where the Bear lay, and threw in his Dogs
upon him. He Rustled out Immediately, and the Man Missing his Aim, the Bear
Overturned him. So the Fellow held his Breath, and lay Stone still, as if he
were Dead. The Bear Snuffled, and smelt to him; Took him for a Carcass, and so
left him. When the Bear was gone, and the Danger over, Down comes the Currier
from the Tree, and bad the Hunts-man Rise. Hark ye, my Friend, says the
Currier, The Bear Whispher'd somewhat in your Ear, What was it, I prithee? Oh
(says the Hunts-man) he bad me have a Care for the Future to make sure of the
Bear, before I Sell his Skin.

The MORAL.
Let no Man Undertake for more then he is able to make Good.

REFLECTION.
THIS is to bid us secure our selves Before hand of what we Undertake for, and
not depend upon Uncertainties. Tho with the Moralist's Leave, the Uncertainty
was on the Other Hand, and he that Bought the Skin ran a Greater Risque then
The Other that Sold it; and had the Worse End of the Staff. It Is Good Council
however, not to make our selves Answerable for Things out of our Power:
Especially where there are Dangerous Contingencies in the Way, as we find in
This Fable: For the Bear was within a Hairs Breadth of Spoiling the Jest; It is
much at this Rate that we make All our Bargains; We give our Time, Study,
Interest, Liberty, and, in short, part with all that is Precious, not only upon
Uncertainties, but for Things we can never Obtain. There Is no depending upon
Tomorrow.

FAB. CCCI. A Hermit, and a Soldier.
THere was a Holy-man that took a Soldier to Task, upon the Subject of his
Profession, and laid before him the Hazzards, the Sins, and the Troubles that
Attend People of that Trade; Wherefore, says he, for your Souls sake, Sir, Pray
give it over. Well! Father, says the Soldier; I Will do as you bid me; for really
we are so I Will paid, and there is so little to be Gotten by Pillage, that I
Phansy, I had even as good Betake my self to a Godly Life.

The MORAL.
When People can Live no longer by their Sins, it is High Time for them to Mend
their Manners.

REFLECTION.
NATURE it self speaks in These Lively Images of Truth. Here Is a Good Man, and
his Penitent Preaching upon Two several Texts. The Holy Father Enforces the
Necessity of the Soldier's Repentance, from the Wicked Course of Life that he
Leads, and the Trade that he drives. The Soldier, on the Other hand, is willing
to be Converted, for the Times are Dead, he says, and there is Neither Pay, nor
Plunder to be got. The World has abundance of These Proselytes, that when they
can be no longer Wicked to Advantage, take up an Outward Change of Profession,
and pass presently for Babes of Grace, without the Least Symptoms, all this
while, of any Inward Change of Mind. This was the Case of One of our Modern
Confessors, and Martyrs, who took a Formal Leave of Jesus Christ, and told his
Ghostly Father, that he was now fully Resolved not to Starve for his Religion.
Now there are Millions and Millions in the World, of This Man's Kidney, that
have the Wit yet to keep their Tongues betwixt their Teeth, and to take up the
same Resolution without Noise. How many Instances of the Power of Pay and
Pillage, does Every day Produce in all manner of Dealings and Professions: For
Religigion and Property still March Hand in Hand, and Men will do Tricks like
Dogs, for Crusts, and Change their Masters both Heavenly, and Earthly for
Better Wages. Where Is That Law, or Text that has not been Overruled some time
or other, and Distorted, by a False Gloss to make the Application Profitable,
and Easy to the Good People? How often have we heard as Arrant Jangling in the
Pulpits, as ever we did in tho Steeples: And Professors Ringing as Awk as the
Bells, to give notice of the Conflagration which They Themselves were Raising;
for we have found it to our Cost, that the Multitude will sooner Kindle with a
Pernicious Doctrine then with a Pudding-Lane Fire-Ball. It Is not Conscience,
but Interest that Governs the World; and the Incomparable Hudibras has hit the
Point to a Hair.

What Is Orthodox, and True Believing
Against a Conscience? A Good Living.
What makes All Doctrines Plain and Clear?
About Two Hundred Pound a Year.
And That which was Proved True Before,
Prove False again? Two Hundred More.
What makes the Breaking of all Oaths,
A Holy Duty? Food and Clothes.
This it is, in sine, that makes the Devil of a Saint, and a Saint of a Devil;
for your Holy Apostate is the Blackest of Hypocrites. The Soldier turns
Religious, and he shall do more Mischief in That Shape then ever he did in the
Other. For a Corrupted Zeal draws more Blood then a Mercenary Malice.

FAB. CCCII. A Husband and Wife twice Married.
THere happened a Match betwixt a Widower, and a Widow. The Woman would be
perpetually Twitting of her second Husband, what a Man her First was; and her
Husband did not forget the Ringing of it in her Ears as often, what an
Admirable Woman he had to his First Wife. As the Woman was One day upon the
Peevish Pin, a Poor Body comes to the Door, while the Froward Fit was upon her,
to beg a Charity. Come in Poor Man (says the Woman) Here Is even the Leg of a
Capon for thee to pray for the Soul of my First Husband. Nay, faith, says the
Husband, and when thy Hand is In, even take the Body and the Rest on it, to pray
for the Soul of My First Wife. This was Their way of Teizing One Another, and
of Starving the Living to the Honor of the Dead; for they had but That One
Capon betwixt them to Supper.

The MORAL.
Sauce for a Goose is Sauce for a Gander. There Is no Contending with the Laws
of God and Man, Especially against Those that have Power, and Right on their
Sides.

REFLECTION.
WE may learn from This Fable, that it is Common Duty and Discretion, for Men
and their Wives, when they are once Hampered, to make the Best of a Doubtful
Game; for they are One to All Manner of Purposes, by which it is Possible for
Two Persons to be United. Their Interest is One and the same, and there is No
Touching the Peace, or the Honor of the One, without Wounding That of the
Other; but if there happens to be Any Absolute Necessity of Jangling, One of
the Civillest ways of Reproach is That here before us; and it is but according
to the Ordinary Guise and Freak of the World, when any thing comes Cross
betwixt the Second Husband and Wife, to be still Celebrating the Memory of the
Former. My First Husband (Heaven Rest his Soul) and My First Wife, they Cry,
was So and So, and would have done This and That. The Two Main Topiques to Chop
Logic upon in These Domestique Disagreements, are commonly the Upbraiding One
Another with what I Was, and what I Might have been; and what a Match I might
have had (with a Pox) never considering what they Are, and that what they Are
they Must be, which is the Only Point. It Is Forty to One that Controversies
will Arise one time or Other in That State of Life, when it will be the
Husbands Part, upon the Matter of Dignity, Preference, and Commission, to
Moderate Matters, both by his Authority, and his Prudence; Which is but
Consonant to Equity and Right Nature. Wherefore the Woman is Worse then
Frantic, that, upon These Disputes, will be trying Conclusions with her
Husband, for a Better, or a Worse. If he Truckles, she makes him a Coxcomb: If
he keeps his Ground, she shows her self to be One, so that she lays all at
stake upon the Contest, that a Sober Woman has to Lose. It is much better to
give Way betimes to the Stronger, even upon the Matter of Prudence, as well as
of Respect, then it would be to Contend at first, and then, either to Cross the
Cudgells, or to be (...) in the Conclusion. The Man and the Woman here never
Considered that they gave away their Own Meat, and both Robbed, and Discredited
One Another in the Contest.

FAB. CCCIII. A Lion and a Mouse.
A Lion that found himself Hampered in a Net, called to a Mouse that was
passing by, to help him out of the Snare, and he would never forget the Kindness,
he said. The Mouse Gnawed the Threads to pieces, and when he had set the Lion
at Liberty, desired him in Requital to give him his Daughter. The Lion was too
Generous to Deny him Any thing, but most Unluckily, as the New Bride was just
about to Step into the Marriage Bed, she happened to set her Foot upon her
Husband at Unawares, and Crushed him to Death.

The MORAL.
The Folly of an Inconsiderate Love. The Force of Gratitude, and Good Nature,
and the Misery that Accompanies Unequal Matches.

REFLECTION.
ALL Matches, Friendships, and Societies are Dangerous and Inconvenient, where
the Contractors are Not Equals: And the Mouse under the Paw of the Lion, does
well enough set forth the Danger of such a Marriage.

FAB. CCCIV. Wax and Brick.
THere was a Question started once about Wax, and Brick, why the One should be
so Brittle, and liable to be Broken with Every Knock, and the Other bear up
again All injuries and Weathers, so Durable and Firm. The Wax Philosophiz'd
upon the Matter, and finding it Out at last, that it was Burning made the Brick
so Hard, Cast it self into the Fire, upon an Opinion that Heat would Harden the
Wax too; but That which Consolidated the One, Dissolved the Other.

The MORAL.
It Is a Folly to try Conclusions without Understanding the Nature of the Matter
in Question.

REFLECTION.
There Is No Trying of Experiments, without laying Things and Things together:
For That which is agreeable to the Nature of One Thing, is Many times Contrary
to the Nature of Another. Several Humors are to be Wrought upon several Ways,
and the Case betwixt Wax and Brick, is the very same Case too betwixt One Man
and Another. Some are to be dealt withal by Fair Means; Other by Foul; and That
which Hardens the One softens the Other.

FAB. CCCV. A Husbandman turned Soldier and Merchant.
OH the Endless Misery of the Life I Lead! cries the Moiling Husbandman, to
spend all my Days in Ploughing, Sowing, Digging, and Dunging, and to make
Nothing on it at last! Why now in a Soldiers Life, there is Honor to be got, and
One Lucky Hit sets up a Man for Ever. Faith, I Will even put off my Stock, Get me
a Horse and Arms, and Try the Fortune of the War. Away he goes; Makes his Push;
Stands the Shock of a Battle, and Compounds at last for the Leaving of a Leg or
(...) behind him, to go Home again. By This Time, he has had his Bellyful of
Knight-Errantry, and a New Freak takes him in the Crown. He might do better, he
fancies, in the Way of a Merchant. This Maggot has no sooner set him agog; but
he gets him a Ship Immediately; Frights her, and so away to Sea upon Adventure:
Builds Castles in the Air, and Conceits Both the Indies in his Coffers, before
he gets so much as Clear of the Port. Well! And what is the End of All This at
last? He falls into Foul Weather, among Flats and Rocks, where Merchant,
Vessel, Goods and All are lost in One Common Wreck.

The MORAL.
A Rambling I evity of Mind is commonly Fatal to us.

REFLECTION.
THIS Doctrine concerns those that Rashly Change their Condition and Fortune,
and commonly fall into the Inconveniences that they thought to Avoid. He
that is Well, already, and, upon a Levity of Mind, Quits his Station, in hope to
be Better, it is Forty to One, he loses by the Change; for This Lightness is
both a Vice, and a Disease, and rather the Wallowing of a Sickly Qualm, then
any Reasonable Agitation of Council and Debate. The Fault is not in the Place,
or Business, but in the Stomach; and the Quitting of such a Course of Life, is
but shifting Posture in a Fit of Sickness: Let a Man turn which Way he will, he
is still as Restless and Uneasy One way as Another. Not but that it is
Reasonable for a Man, under any Calaimity, to use the Best Means he can,
Honestly, to get Clear on it. Let it be Pain of Body, Distress of Mind, Loss of
Liberty, Pinching Necessity of Fortune; Nay let it be Gout, Stone, or Torments,
there is Matter yet left for Industry, Council, Generosity, or when All fails,
for Philosophy, and Constancy of Mind to Work upon; and to Improve All the
Methods of Providence to our Advantage. Now All This is only an Honorable and
Warrantable Conflict, with such Accidents and Circumstances as Providence is
pleased to make use of, for the Trial of our Faith and Virtue. So that These
Strivings are not to be taken for a Contending with superior Powers; but they
are Cases Excepted from the Uneasiness here in the Fable; which arises from a
Disatisfaction in such a Lot, as might make us abundantly Happy if we would but
keep our Desires within Those Bounds which God and Nature have Prescribed us.
But Men under These Irregular Appetites, can never think themselves Well, so
long as they fancy they Might be Better: And then from Better, they must Rise
to be Best; and when That Best it self falls short of what they Expected from
it, they are still as Poor and Miserable as if they had just Nothing at all.
The Husbandman Envies the Soldier; The Soldier Envies the Merchant, and when he
has tried All Turns, and Projects, what with the Chance of War, Storms, and
Pirates, he sees his (...) Late, and in Vain Wishes himself with his Hinds and
his Flocks again. To say All in a Word, This Levity is both Attended, and
Punished, with an Impossibllity of Mending our Condition; for we Apply to our
Bodies, and our Fortunes, when the Distemper lies in our Minds.

FAB. CCCVI. An Ass puts in for an Office.
THere was a Bantering Droll got himself into a very Good Equipage and
Employment, by an Admirable Faculty he had in Farting. The success of This
Buffoon Encouraged an Ass to put in for a Place too; for, says he, I Will Fart
with That Puppy for his Commission, and leave it to the Judgment of Those that
Preferred him, which has the Clearer, and the Better Scented Pipe of the Two.

The MORAL.
Where Public Ministers Encourage Buffonnery, it is no wonder if Buffons set
up for Public Ministers.

REFLECTION.
THIS Fable, according to Abstemins, and Others, Touches the Humor of Those
that Squander away their Money upon Vanity and Trifles: But it seems to Me to
look quite Another Way. With Abstemius's Favor, I should rather take This
Fable to Strike at the Natural Consequences of Evil Examples, when the
Unreasonableness of One Act shall be made use of as an Argument for Another, no
less Unreasonable: For it is President, Effectually that Governs the World. Why
should not One Fool be Preferred for ^arting as well as Another? For in Cases
of Competition, he that does Best, even in an Ill, or in a Weak Thing, has a
kind of Claim, and Right to a Preference, and the Grosser the Foppery, or the
Iniquity, the Fairer the Pretense.

This Asses putting up for an Office, Taxes the Perverting of Policy and
Justice, in Conferring Those Honors, Charges, and Benefits, upon Parasites,
Drolls, Buffoons, and other Servile Instruments of Lust and Ambition, that are
Due only to Men of Honor and Virtue. The Ministers of Government, and of
Pleasure, should be carefully Distinguished; for it Corrupts both the Morals,
and the Understandings of a Nation, when they find the Precepts of Common
Honesty, and the Practices of State, to run so directly Counter, as to leave no
Hope of Advancement, Credit, or Security, but by living in a Defiance to Nature
and Reason: That is to say, by Playing the Fools, and Farting for Preferment.

FAB. CCCVII. A River and a Fountain.
THere Happened a Dispute betwixt a River, and a Fountain, which of the Two
should have the Preference. The River Valued it self upon the Plenty and
Variety of Fish that it Produced; The Advantages of Navigation; The Many Brave
Towns and Palaces that were Built upon the Banks of it; purely for the Pleasure
of the Situation: And then for the General Satisfaction, in fine, that it
Yielded to Mankind, in the Matter both of Convenience and Delight: Whereas
(says the River) the Fountain passes Obscurely through the Caverns of the
Earth; lies Buried up in Moss, and comes Creeping into the World, as if it were
ashamed to show the Head. The Fountain took the Insolence and the Vanity of
This Reproach so Heinously, that it presently Choak'd-up the Spring, and Stopped
the Course of its Waters: Insomuch that the Channel was immediately dried up,
and the Fish left Dead and Stinking in the Mud; as a Just Judgment upon the
Stream, for Derogating from the Original and Author of All the Blessings it
Enjoyed.

The MORAL.
He that Arrogates any Good to Himself, detracts from the Author of all the
Good he Enjoys.

REFLECTION.
THERE are too many People in the World of the Humor of This River, that
Assume to Themselves what they receive from others, without ever so much as
Thinking of the Heavenly Goodness that is the Author of Life it self, and of
all the Blessings that Crown the Comfort of it.

This Fable is a kind of an Expostulatory Debate bewixt Bounty and Ingratitude;
betwixt the Divine Goodness, and the Vain Glorious Pride of Corrupt Nature. And
the Iniquity of our Proceeding is much the Same, both toward God and Man. We
are readier to Claim to ourselves, then to Ascribe to Others, and most
Dangerously given to Mistake the Gratuitous Blessings of Heaven, for the Fruits
of our Own Industry and Virtue. The Fountain of all Goodness, and of all Good
Things is God Blessed for ever: But in the Dispensation of his Mercies to the
World, some things he does by Himself, others by the Intervention of Natural
Means, and by the Mediation of such Instruments as he has appointed for the
Conveying of Those Benefits to us. According to this Order, Kings are, by
Deputation, the Fountains of Honor and Preferment: And we find Men as Backward
every Jot to Acknowledge Temporal, as they are to Acknowledge Spiritual Gifts
and Bounties: So that we have Thankless Favorites as well as Graceless
Christians. What a Babel do they make now of the Nature of Things, rather then
Own the Course of Providence in the Distribution of them! Insomuch that the
Faculties that were given us for the Glory and Service of our Master, as well
as for the Comfort of our Lives, and the Salvation of our Souls, are turned
Point Blank against the very Reason and Intention of them. Sharpness of Wit is
Improved to the Dishonor of Him that Gave it. Atheism and Blasphemy Dressed up
like a Science, and the Understanding that was given us for the Finding out of
the Truth, is Employed upon Paradoxing, and Ridiculing it. They Value
themselves with the River, upon a Conceit, that the Fish, the Beauty, the
Convenience, is All their Own: And what is All This now, but either to Disclaim
the Original, or to Defame it? That Is Obscure, they say, Neglected, Overgrown,
and either Not taken Notice of, or not Found: And what is the Is^ue now of This
Vanity, and Distraction? A Judgment Treads upon the Heel on it; for Providence
stops the Current, lays the Channel Open, and Exposes it to Detestation and
Scorn, in all its Filthiness.

FAB. CCCVIII. A Wicked Man and the Devil.
A Notorious Malefactor that had Committed I know not how many Villainies, and
run through the Discipline of as many Goals, made a Friend of the Devil, to
help him out in all his Distresses. This Friend of his, brought him off many
and many a time, and still as he was Taken up, again and again, he had his
Recourse, over and over, to the same Devil for succor. But upon his Last
Summons, the Devil came to him with a Great Bag of Old Shoes at his Back, and
told him Plainly. Friend (says he) I Am at the End of my Line, and can Help ye
No longer. I have beat the Hoof till I have Worn out all These Shoes in Your
Service, and not One Penny left me to Buy more: So that you must even Excuse Me
if I drop ye here.

The MORAL.
The Devil helps his Servants, for a Season; but when they come once to a
Pinch, he leaves 'em in the Lurch.

REFLECTION.
WICKEDNESS may Prosper for a while; but at the Long Run, He that sets All
Knaves at Work, will most certainly Pay them their Wages. The Man pays Dear for
his Protection that Pawns his Soul for it: And it may be Another Observation,
that the Devil Himself will not Work without Money.

FAB. CCCIX. A Counsel of Birds for Choosing more Kings.
THE Birds were Mightily Possessed with an Opinion, that it was utterly
Impossible for the Eagle alone to Administer Equal Justice to All her Subjects;
And upon This Ground, there was a Motion put up, for Changing the Monarchy into
a Republique: But an Old Cunning Crow, that saw further into a Millstone then
his Neighbors, with One Word of his Mouth Dashed the Project. The More Kings
you Have, says he, the more Sacks there are to be Filled: And so the Debate
fell.

The MORAL.
The Common People Hate All Government, and when they are Sick of it in One
Form, they Fly to Another, but still they rather Incline to That, which they
Phansy Easiest to Themselves.

REFLECTION.
THIS Emblem Insinuates a Government by One to be less Burdensome, then a
Government by Many. And it is well enough Adapted to a Profitable Allegory. The
Multitude of Birds are Imposed upon, that One Monarch is not sufficient for the
Discharge of the Office, and therefore there is a Motion put up for the Erecting
of More Kings: for Why, say they, should so many Millions of Men be Subjected
to the Power and Will of One single Person? This Error was begotten betwixt
Faction, and Interest. The One Manages by Design, and the Other falls in upon
an Implicit Resignation; or else Yields, upon Facility, and Weakness. In the
Conclusion, some Man of Observation, and Experience (as the Crow for the
purpose) carries them off Clear from the Reasoning Part, and Applies to the
Mobile in their Own Way: That is to say, in a Way of Pocket-Arguments. He never
Troubled Himself about the Original of Power, or the Analogy betwixt Monarchy
in Heaven, and upon Earth; but gives them a short Stroke upon the Subject of
Profit and Loss. You will find it easier, says he, to Fill One Sack then Many:
And That Allusion carried the Point.

FAB. CCCX. A Woman that would needs Die for her Husband.
A Poor Woman was put out of her Wits in a manner, for fear of losing her
Husband. The Good Man was Sick and Given Over, and Nothing would serve the
Turn, but Death must needs take Her instead of Him. She Called, and Prayed, and
Prayed and Called, till at last, Death Presented himself in a Horrible Shape at
her Elbow. She very Civilly dropped him a Cursie; And Pray Sir, says she, Do not
Mistake your self; for the Person that You come for lies in the Bed there.

The MORAL.
It Is a Common Thing to Talk of Dying for a Friend; but when it comes to the
Push once, it is no more then Talk at last.

REFLECTION.
THIS Confirms the Proverb, that Charity begins at Home, and when All is done,
there is No Man loves a Friend so Well, but he Loves Himself Better. There are
No People more Startled at Death, then Those that have gotten a Custom of
Calling for it. Oh that Death would Deliver Me! (says One) Oh, that Death would
take Me in the Place of my Dear Husband! says The Other. But when Death comes to
Present Himself indeed, and to take them at their Words, the Good Wife very
Civilly puts the Change upon him, and tells him, that the Person he comes for
lies in the Bed there. In Few Words, to call for Death in Jest, is Vain, and
Unprofitable; To call for it in Earnest, is Impious: And to call for it at all,
is both Foolish and Needless; for Death will most certainly come at his
appointed time, whether he be called for or No.

FAB. CCCXI. A Son Singing at his Mothers Funeral.
THere was a Good Man that followed his Wives Body to the Grave, Weeping, and
Wayling all the Way he went, while his Son followed the Corpse, Singing. Why
Sirrah, says the Father; You should Howl, and Wring your Hands, and do as I
do, ye Rogue You; and not go Sol-Fa-ing it about like a Madman. Why Father,
says he, You give the Priests Money to Sing, and will you be Angry with Me for
giving ye a Song Gratis? Well, says the Father, but That which may become the
Priests will not always become You. It Is their Office to Sing; but it is Your
Part to Cry.

The MORAL.
Funeral Tears are as Arrantly (...)-out as Mourning Cloaks: and so are the
very Offices: And whether we go to our Graves Sniveling or Singing, it is all
but according to the Fashion of the Country, and Mere Form.

REFLECTION.
THE Methods of Government and of Humane Society, must be Preserved, where
Every Man has his Roll, and his Station Assigned him; and it is not for One Man
to break in upon the Province of Another. This Moral tells us also, that when
One Man Condoles for the Distresses of Another, it is more for Money, or for
Company, then for Kindness.

It Is a slavish sort of Ceremony, and Imposition, that People must be Trained
up, by Certain Rules of Art, and Prescription, to the very Manage and
Government of the most Free and Natural of our Affections; for we are Taught
and Appointed the very Methods, and Degrees, of Grieving, and Rejoicing; and to
do Honor to the Dead, by the Counterfeit Lamentations of the Living. But This
way of Mourning by Rule, is rarher an Ostentation of Sorrow, then an Indication
of it. Now to say the Truth of the Matter, Terms and Modes have Corrupted the
Sincerity of our Manners, as well toward our Living Friends, as to the Memory
of Those Departed. We have hardly any thing left in our Conversation that is
Pure and Genuine: But the way of Civility in Fashion, casts a Blind over the
Duty, under some Certain Customary Presidents of Empty Words: So that at This
rate, we Impose One upon Another, without any regard to Faith, Truth, or
Virtue. But we must Sing in some Cases, and Cry in Others, and there is an End
on it.

FAB. CCCXII. A Jealous Husband.
A Jealous Husband Committed his Wife in Confidence to the Care and Custody of
a Particular Friend; with the Promise of a Considerable Reward if he could but
keep her Honest. After some Few Days, the Friend grew Weary of his Charge, and
desired her Husband to take his Wife Home again, and Release him of his
Bargain; for, says he, I find it utterly Impossible to Hinder a Woman from any
thing she has a Mind to. If it were to turn a Bag of Fleas Loose into a Meadow
every Morning a Grazing, and Fetch them home again at Night, I durst be
answerable with my Life for the Doing of it, to a single Flea, but The Other is a
Commission I dare go no further in.

The MORAL.
It Is enough to Make a Woman a Whore, but so much as to Phansy her One, and
then it is no Boot to be Jealous neither; for if the Humor takes her to be
Iadish, it is not All the Locks, Bolts and Spies in Nature that can keep her
Honest.

REFLECTION.
IEALOUST, betwixt Man and Wife, does but Provoke, and Inflame the Appetite, as
it sets the Invention at Work upon Ways and Means of giving One Another the
Slip: And when it comes to a Trial of Skill once, it is a Carrying of the Cause
to gain the Point, and there is a kind of Perverse Reputation in getting the
Better on it. Briefly, it is Labor Lost on Both sides, while the One is never to
be Restrained, nor the Other to be satisfied: For Jealousy Rages as well
without Reason as with it. Nay the very Will to do a Thing is as Good as the
Thing Done; And his Head is as Sick, that but fancies the Thing Done, as if he
saw the very Doing of it with his Own Eyes. The Ways of a Woman that has a mind
to play Fast and Loose, are as Unsearchable as the very Thoughts of her Heart;
and therefore the Friend here was in the Right to Discharge Himself of his
Trust, and throw up his Commission.

FAB. CCCXIII. A Man that would not take a Glister.
WHen the Patient is Rich, there is No Fear of Physicians about him, as Thick as
Wasps to a Honey-Pot; and there was a Whole College of them called to a
Consultation upon a Purse-Proud Dutchman, that was Troubled with a Megrim. The
Doctors prescribed him a Clyster; The Patient fell into a Rage upon it. Why
Certainly These People are All Mad, says he, to talk of Curing a Man's Head at
his Tail.

The MORAL.
He that Consults his Physician, and will not Follow his Advice, must be his
Own Doctor: But let him take the Old Adage along with him. He that Teaches
Himself has a Fool to his Master.

REFLECTION.
IT IS a Miserable Thing, when Men that Understand Nothing at all, shall take
upon them to Censure, and to Pre-judge every thing that they do not Understand.
What Is the Use of a College, if every Particular Man shall set up to be his Own
Doctor. And it is the same Case where Subjects tske upon them to Correct
Magnificat, and to Prescribe to their Superiors. Let every Man be Trusted in
his Own Way, and let the Doctor Prescribe to the Patient, not the Patient to
the Doctor. For at the Rate of This Thick-skull'd Blunder-head, every
Plow-jobber shall take upon him to Read upon Divinity, Law, and Politiques, as
well as Physic.

FAB. CCCXIV. A Wolf and a Sick Ass.
THere was a certain Wolf, that in a Qualm of Wonderful Charity, made a Visit
to an Ass, that lay Ill of a Violent Fever. He felt his Pulse very Gingerly,
and, pray, my Good Friend, says he, Whereabouts is your Greatest Pain. Oh,
Gently, says the Ass; for it Pricks me just there still where you lay your
Finger.

FAB. CCCXV. A Fox and a Sick Cock.
A Cock took his Bed upon a Fit of Sickness, and a Fox of his Old Acquaintance,
gave him the Complement of a Visit, and Asked him how he felt himself. Alas!
says the Cock, I Am even ready to smother for want of Breath; and if you would be
pleased but to stand off, and give me a Little Fresh Air, I fancy I should be
somewhat more at Ease.

The Moral of the Two Fables above.
The Charity of our Deathbed Visits from One to Another, is much at a Rate
(generally Speaking) with That of a Carrion Crow to a Sheep; we smell a Carcass.

REFLECTION.
THERE are no Visits so Officious, and Importune, as those that People think to
get by; Especially when our Thoughts are taken up with Matters of Greater
Moment. Beside, that there is a Design upon us in the very Complement. These
Fables may serve to Point out to us, that there are Men, as well as Wolves and
Foxes, that Wait for the Carcass; That is to say, for an Office, an Estate, a
Commission, Lands, Money, Jewels, or whatever else People lie Gaping for in
Reversion, according to the Practice of the World: So that there is Little Trust
to These Deathbed Ceremonies; which, for the Greater Part, have more in them
of Avarice, and Interest, then of Piety and Good Will: So that Effectually, a
Wolves Visiting a Sick Ass, is but Saying Grace to a Dead One.

FAB. CCCXVI. Three Things are the Better for Beating.
A Good Woman happened to pass by as a Company of Young Fellows were Cudgelling
a Wallnut-Tree, and asked them what they did That for? This is only by the Way
of Discipline, says one of the Lads; for it is Natural for Asses, Women, and
Wallnut-Trees to Mend upon Beating.

The MORAL.
Spur a Jade a Question and he will Kick ye an Answer.

REFLECTION.
PEOPLE should not be too Inquisitive, without Considering how far They
Themselves may be concerned in the Answer to the Question.

FAB. CCCXVII. The Asses Wish.
AN Ass was Wishing in a Hard Winter, for a Little Warm Weather, and a Mouthful
of Fresh Grass to Knab upon, in Exchange for a Heartless Truss of Straw, and a
Cold Lodging. In Good Time, the Warm Weather, and the Fresh Grass comes on; but
so much Toil and Business along with it, that the Ass grows quickly as Sick of
the Spring as he was of the Winter. His next Longing is for Summer; but what
with Harvest Work, and other Drudgeries of That Season, he is Worse now then he
was in the Spring; and then he fancies he shall never be Well till Autumn
comes; But There again, what with Carrying Apples, Grapes, Fuel,
Winter-Provisions, etc. he finds himself in a Greater Hurry then ever. In fine,
when he has trod the Circle of the Year in a Course of Restless Labor, his
Last Prayer is for Winter again, and that he may but take up his Rest where he
began his Complaint.

The MORAL.
The Life of an Unsteady Man runs away in a Course of Vain Wishes, and
Unprofitable Repentance: An Unsettled Mind can never be at Rest. There Is No
Season without it is Business.

REFLECTION.
THE Asses Wish here, is the Lively Image of a Foolish, and a Miserable Levity
of Mind; and, in truth, there is but too much in it of the Figure, and the
Business of Humane Life; for we spend our days in a kind of Lazy, Restless
Indisposition, that looks as if we would fain be doing something, and yet never
goes further, then to a Shifting from One Proposition to Another. Wishing and
Woulding, (as they say) has somewhat in it of an Analogy to Stretching, and
Yawning; We only Drowse when we think we Live, and our time runs away in
Fancying Castles in the Air, and in putting of Cases. The Inference that we are
to draw from hence is This; If an Unsettled Head and Heart be so Grievous a
Calamity, the Squaring of a Man's Thoughts, Wishes and Desires, to the Lot that
Providence has set Out for him, is both a Blessing, and a Duty.

He that is still Weary of the Present, shall be most certainly Sollicitous for
the Future. For the Present is only the Course of so many Moments into time to
Come. He that Gapes after he knows not what, shall be sure to Lose his Longing.
He Changes, out of Restlesness, not Choice, and so long as he carries the same
Mind about him, the Circumstances of his Condition will never Alter the Case.
His Present Thoughts are Uneasy, because his Present State does not Please him,
and so he goes on at a Venture. Shifting and Casting about for somewhat else
that may better Agree with him. The Batchellor wants a Wife; The Married Man
wants his Liberty; The Statesman has a Mind to be Private. The Countryman lives
out of the World: The Man of Business is a Slave to it; And he that is out of
Employment, makes it his Excuse, that he is forced to Drink or Whore for want
of somewhat else to do. There Is no Measure to be taken of an Unsteady Mind; but
still it is either too Much, or too Little; too Soon, or too Late. The Love of
Novelty begets, and Increases the Love of Novelty; and the oft'ner we Change,
the more Dangerous and Troublesome do we find This Itch of Variety to be. The
Ass was Sick of the Spring; Sicker yet of the Summer; more Sick still of (...);
and Sickest of All, of the Winter; till he is brought, in the End, to Compound
for his First Condition again, and so take up with That for his Satisfaction,
which he reckoned upon before as his Misfortune.

This it is, when Fickle and Foolish People will be Prescribing To, and
Refining upon the Wise and Gracious Appointments of the Maker of the World.
They know not what they Are, and they know not what they Would be, any further,
then that they would not be what they are. Let their Present State in the World
be what it will, there is still something or other in it that makes their Life
Wearysome: And they are as Peevish Company to Themselves too, as they are to
their Neighbors; for there is not One Circumstance in Nature, but they shall
find Matter to Pick a Quarrel at: Let it be Health, Fortune, Conversation,
Kindred, Friends, it will be all a Case, so long as Weak, and Wayward Men shall
go on Grumbling, and Cavilling at the Works and Dispensations of Heaven. Were
it not better now for People to be Quiet at first; and to sit down Contentedly
in the Post where Providence has Placed them? Were it not better to do the
Great Work of Life Betimes, by the Help of a Seasonable Prudence and Virtue,
then to Deliver up our selves to the Torments of Hopes and Fears, and be forced
to do it at last, by the Dear-bought Experience of our Follies, and the
Necessity of giving over what we can do no Longer?

This is not yet to bar Honest Industry, or a Sober Application to those Ways,
Studies, or Means that may probably Contribute to the Mending of a Man's
Fortune: Provided that he set up his Resolution beforehand, not to let himself
down below the Dignity of a Wise Man, be the Issue of his Endeavors what it
will. He that is not Content at Present, carries the same Weakness along with
him to his next Remove; for whoever either Passionately Covets any thing that
he has Not, or feels himself Glutted with a Satiety of what he Possesses, has
already lost his Hold: So that if we would be Happy, we must Fix upon some
Foundation that can never Deceive us; and Govern our selves by the Measures of
Sobriety and Justice. All the rest is but the Asses Circulation of more and
more Anxiety, and Trouble.

FAB. CCCXVIII. A Cat and Mice.
AS a Company of Mice were Peeping out of their Holes for Discovery, they spied
a Cat upon a Shelf; that lay and looked so Demurely, as if there had been
neither Life nor Soul in her. Well (says one of the Mice) That Is a Good Natured
Creature, I Will Warrant her; One may read it in her very Looks; and truly I have
the Greatest Mind in the World to make an Acquaintance with her. So said, and
so done; but so soon as ever Puss had her within Reach, she gave her to
Understand, that the Face is not always the Index of the Mind.

The MORAL.
It Is a Hard Matter for a Man to be Honest and Safe; for his very Charity and
Good Nature Exposes, if it does not Betray him.

REFLECTION.
NO Treachery so Mortal, as That which Covers it self under the Masque of
Sanctity. A Wolf does a Great deal more Mischief in a Sheeps-Skin, then in his
Own Shape and Color. The Mouse that took this Cat for a Saint, has very Good
Company, not only in her Mistake, but in her Misfortune too: For we have seen a
whole Assembly of These Mousing Saints, that under the Masque of Zeal,
Conscience, and Good Nature, have made a Shift to lay I know not how many
Kingdoms in Blood and Ashes.

FAB. CCCXIX. A Boar and a Fox.
AS a Boar was Whetting his Teeth against a Tree, up comes a Fox to him. Pray
what do you Mean by That? (says he) for I see no Occasion for it. Well, says the
Boar, but I do; for when I come once to be Set upon, 'twill be too Late for me
to be Whetting, when I should be Fighting.

FAB. CCCXX. A Wolf and a Porcupine.
YOUR Porcupine, and your Hedgehog, are somewhat Alike, only the Former has
longer and sharper Prickles then the Other; And these Prickles he can Shoot,
and Dart at an Enemy. There was a Wolf had a Mind to be Dealing with him, if
he could but get him Disarmed first; and so he told the Porcupine in a friendly
Way, that it did not look Well for People in a Time of Peace, to go Armed, as
if they were in a State of War; and so Advised him to lay his Bristles aside;
for (says he) You may Take them up again at pleasure. Do you talk of a State of
War? says the Porcupine, Why That Is my Present Case, and the very Reason of my
Standing to my Arms, so long as a Wolfes in the Company.

The Moral of the Two Fables above.
No Man, or State can be Safe in Peace that is not always in readiness to
Encounter an Enemy in case of a War.

REFLECTION.
ALL Business that is Necessary to be done should be done Betimes: And there is
as little Trouble of doing it In Season too, as Out of Season: Neither is it
Effectually done at all, but in the Proper time of Doing it: So that it is Good
Discretion, and Good Advice, to provide against Danger beforehand; for he
that is always Ready can never be taken with a Why-not.

It Is a piece of Good Council, in All the Affairs of Humane Life, to take care
of Securing our Selves that we be not either Betrayed, or Surpised: But as it
is Wisdom to keep our Selves upon a Guard; so it is Matter of Good Manners
also, and Respect; neither to do, nor to say any thing, that may Import a
Jealousy, or a Distrust. All the Duties of Government, and Society; Nay, All
Offices, Civil and Religious, where Prudence, Conscience, or Common Faith are
concerned, have their Proper Seasons. It Is too Late to Hinder Mischief when the
Opportunity is once past, and therefore the Timing of Things is a Main Point in
the Dispatch of All Affairs. There can be no Safe. or Sure Peace, where People
are not always in readiness for War; for the Common Well-being of Mankind, does
not so much Depend upon the Faith of Men, and of Governments, as upon the
Temporary and Contingent Occasions of breaking the Peace with Advantage. It Is
not Public Justice Alone, that can Uphold a Government, without the Aid of
Policy and Council. Men do Naturally Indulge Those Opinions and Practices, that
favor their Pretensions; and it is too much to Superadd Powerful Temptations to
do Wrong, to the Force of Vicious Inclinations to do it. The Boar's Whetting
his Teeth, was only an Act of Necessary Precaution, for fear of the Worst: And
the Porcupine did Wisely too, in keeping himself upon his Guard when the Enemy
was in View.

FAB. CCCXXI. A Mouse and a Kite.
A Simple Mouse had the Fortune to be near at hand, when a Kite was taken in a
Net. The Kite begged of her to try if she could help her out. The Mouse Gnawed
a Hole in it, and set her at Liberty; and the Kite Eat up the Mouse for her
Pains.

The MORAL.
Save a Thief from the Gallows and he will Cut your Throat.

REFLECTION.
IT IS No New Thing in the World to Return Evil for Good. Nay, there are some
Natures so sour, and so Ungrateful, that they are never to be Obliged. All
Kites of This Humor do not Wear Feathers: Neither do All such Mice wear Long
Tayls. There are Cases, wherein our Very Tenderness, and Charity, becomes a
Snare to us, and there are People too, that fancy No Blood so sweet, as That of
the Person to whom they stand Indebted for their Lives and Fortunes: But then
if One Man should Cease to be Generous, and Charitable, because Another Man is
Sordid, and Ungrateful. It would be much in the Power of the Basest of Vices to
Extinguish the most Christian, and Humane of Virtues. These Lewd Examples May
however, and Ought to Recommend Prudence and Caution to us; but without
Killing, or Quenching Good Nature. There are, it is true, some People so
Hardened in Wickedness, as to have No Sense at all of the most Friendly
Offices, or the Highest Benefits. Now in These Desperate Cases, a Man is little
Better then Felo-de-se, that for the Helping of Another Ventures the Undoing of
Himself. Nay, and it is somewhat more then a Venture too, when a Mouse lays it
self at the Mercy of a Kite.

FAB. CCCXXII. A Cockle and Jupiter.
IN Old Time, when Jupiter was in the Humor of Granting Petitions, a Cockle
made it his Request, that his House and his Body might be All of a Piece.
Jupiter made him Answer, that it would be a Burden to him, instead of a Favor.
Yes says the Cockle, but it will be such a Burden as I had rather Bear, then
lie Exposed to Ill Neighbors.

The MORAL.
Impertinent Visits are the Plague of a Sober Man's Life, and therefore it is a
Happy thing when a Body may be at Home, or Not at Home, as He Pleases.

REFLECTION.
GOOD, or Bad Company, is either the Greatest Blessing, or the Greatest Plague
of Humane Life; and therefore the Cockles was a very Reasonable, and a
Pertinent Request. There Is No Liberty like the Freedom of being Public or
Private as a Body pleases; And having it at my own Choice, whether I will live
to the World, or to my self.

FAB. CCCXXIII. A Bitch ready to Puppy.
A Big-Belly'd Bitch borrowed Another Bitches Kennel to lay her Burden in. The
Proprietress, after some time, Demanded Possession again, but the Other begged
her Excuse and Patience, only till her Whelps might be able to shift for
Themselves. This was Agreed upon for so many Days longer: But the Time being
Expired, the Bitch that was Out, grew More and More Pressing for her Own again.
Why then says the Other, if you can force Me and My Puppies Out of the Kennel,
You shall have Free Liberty to come In.

FAB. CCCXXIV. A Hedgehog and a Snake.
A Snake was prevailed upon in a Cold Winter, to take a Hedgehog into his
Cell; but when he was Once in, the Place was so Narrow, that the Prickles of
the Hedgehog were very Troublesome to his Companion: so that the Snake told
him, he must needs Provide for Himself somewhere else, for the Hole was not Big
enough to Hold them Both. Why then, says the Hedgehog, He that Cannot Stay
shall do Well to Go: But for my Own Part, I am even Content where I am, and if
You be not so too, You Are Free to Remove.

The MORAL.
Possession is Eleven Points of the Law.

REFLECTION.
EVERY Man is to provide against Fraud and Treachery, where the Person he deals
with may be the Better for it. Fore-warned, Fore-arm'd. It Is not Safe to Join
Interests with Strangers, upon such Terms, as to lay our selves at Mercy. In
All Offices of Christian Charity, and of Prudent Conversation, People should
have a Strict Regard to the Humor and Character of the Persons they deal
withal; to the Degrees and Measures of Things; and to the Consequences upon the
Whole Matter, in case of the Worst. It is not Every Man's Talent to Distinguish
Aright upon All the Necessities of Affairs of This Nature. That is to say, how
far our Prudence, may Warrant our Charity, and how far our Charity may Comport
with our Prudence. It Is Dangerous on the One hand to pass the Rules of
Discretion; and it is Inhumane on the Other, not to Acquit our selves in All
the Functions of Tenderness, and Good Nature; for Piety and Wisdom are Both
Wrapped up in the Question. The very same Good Office may be a Virtue toward One
Man, and a Folly toward Another. One may Justify the running of a Risque, in
favor of a Man of Integrity and Good Fame: But where there is an Habitual
Ingratitude on the One side, and a Considerable Hazard on the Other, there is
No Trusting. I shall not need to Enlarge upon This Topique, in a World that
makes Good the Allegory by so many Instances of Daily Practice and
Conversation. How many Fresh Examples may we find in our Own Memory, of Men
that after All the Obligations Imaginable, and in Contradiction to All the Ties
of Honor, Justice, and Hospitality have served their Masters, Patrons, and
Benefactors, as the Hedgehog served the Snake here!

FAB. CCCXXV. A Fox and a Hare.
A Fox and a Hare were in a Warm Contest once, which of the Two could make the
Best Shift in the World. When I am Pursued, says the Hare, I can show the Dogs
a Fair pair of Heels, and run away from 'em at pleasure: And yet for All That,
says the Fox, I have Baffled more of them with My VViles and my Shifts, then ever
You did with your Footmanship.

The MORAL.
Wisdom is as much beyond Force, as Men are beyond Brutes.

REFLECTION.
A Good Bodily Strength and Disposition is a Felicity of Nature, but nothing
Comparable yet to the Advantages of a Large Understanding, and a Ready Presence
of Mind. Wisdom does more then Force; but they do Best together, for a sound
Mind in a sound Body, is the Perfection of Humane Bliss. A Fox, it is true, may
be some time Outwitted, and a Hare Out-stript; but This does not hinder yet the
Excellency of One Faculty above the Other.

FAB. CCCXXVI. An Old Man resolved to give over Whoring.
THere was an Old Tossed, that in the very State of Impotence, had still a Whore
in the Head of him. His Ghostly Father took Notice of it, and Plied him Hard
with Wholesome Advice, upon the Subject of the Lusts of the Flesh. This
Reverend Fornicator thanked him most Heartily for his Kind and Christian
Council, and by the Grace of Heaven, says he, I Will Follow it; For to tell ye
the Plain Truth on it, I am told that it is Naught for me; and really, my Body is
quite out of Tune for Those Gambols.

The MORAL.
When Things are at the Worst they will Mend.

REFLECTION.
MORE Men Reclaim out of Shame, Fear, or Pure Necessity, then for the Love of
Honor, or Virtue. They that are Honest upon These Terms would be Arrant Kanves
if the Tables were Turned. They go along with the Devil, while there is either
Pleasure, or Profit to be had on That side; but when they come once to lose the
Taste of the One, and the Means of the Other, they are presently Registered in
the Calender of New Converts. The Countenance of This Fable looks a little
betwixt Jest and Earnest; but This Mixture of Appearance does not Hinder it
from being a most Edifying Satyr upon the Corruptions, and False Semblances of
Humane Life. Lord! How Sober, and Temperate do People grow, when they can Drink
and Whore no longer!

FAB. CCCXXVII. An Impertinent and a Philosopher.
A Certain Pragmatical, Senceless Companion would make a Visit to a
Philosopher. He found him Alone in his Study, and fell a VVond'ring how he
could Endure to Lead so Solitary a Life, The Learned Man told him; Sir, says
he, You are Exceedingly Mistaken; for I was in very Good Company till You came
In.

The MORAL.
Good Thoughts and Good Books are very Good Company.

REFLECTION.
A Wise Book is much better than a Foolish Companion; And the Dead, in such a
case, are much Better then the Living. It is one of the most vexatious
Mortifications perhaps, of a Sober, and a Studious Man's Life, to have his
Thoughts Disordered, and the very Chain of his Reason Discomposed, by the
Importunity of a Tedious, and an Impertinent Visit. Especially, if it be from a
Fool of Quality, where the very Figure of the Man Entitles him to All Returns
of Good Manners and Respect. And the Affliction is yet more Grievous, where
That Prerogative of Quality, is further Backed and Corroborated, with a Real
Kindness, and Good Will: For a Man must be Inhumane, and Ungrateful, as well as
Rude, if he does but so much as Offer, at the Easing, or the Relieving of
Himself. The Drist of This Fable at last, is to tell us, that Good Books and
Good Thoughts are the Best Company, and that they are Mistaken that think a
Wise Man can ever be Alone. It prepares us also to Expect Interruptions, and
Disappointments, and to Provide for 'em; but withal, to take the Best Care we
can to Prevent the Plague of Ill Company, by avoiding the Occasions of it. The
Linking of a Man of Brains and Honesty into a Lewd Insipid Conversation, is
Effectually but the Moral of That Tyrant, that Bound the Living, and the Dead
together, and yet This is it which the Impertinent takes for the Relief of
Solitude, and the Blessing of That which he calls Company.

FAB. CCCXXVIII. A Wolf in a Sheeps-skin.
THere goes a Story of a Wolf, that Wrapped himself up in a Sheep-skin, and
Worried Lambs for a Good while under That Disguise; but the Shepherd Met with
him at last, and Trust him up, Sheeps-skin and all, upon an Eminent Gibbet, for
a Spectacle, and an Example. The Neighbors made a Wonderment of it, and Asked
him what he meant to Hang up his Sheep? Oh, says he, That Is only the Skin of a
Sheep, that was made use of to Cover the Heart, Malice, and Body of a Wolf
that Shrouded himself Under it.

The Moral of the Two Fables above.
Hypocrisy is only the Devils Stalking Horse, under an Affectation of
Simplicity and Religion. People are not to be Judged by their Looks, Habits,
and Appearances; but by the Character of their Lives and Conversations, and by
their Works.

REFLECTION.
THIS Fable is Moraliz'd in the Holy Gospel it self. It Is with all Men that are
Notoriously Wicked, of what Degree or State, or in what point of Iniquity
soever, much after the Rate of the Wolf in This Fiction. Tyranny Marches under
the Masque of Care, Piety, and Protection. Injustice sets up the Rigorous
Letter of the Law to Weigh against the Improbity of the Witness: The
Pawn-Broker pretends Charity, and the Oppressor Flays the Widow and the Orphan:
And at the same Time, Preaches Mercy and Compassion, with the very same Breath.
Treachery Covers it self under a Cloak of Kindness and Friendship; and Nothing
more Frequent then Wolves in Lambs-Skins, even in the most Solemn Offices of
Church and State. This Fable Extends to All the Lewd Practices of Hypocrites
and Impostors, under the Color of Pious, and Charitable Works and Duties. Now
if All our Moral Wolves in Sheeps-Cloathing, were but Served as This
Hypocritical Wolf was in the Fiction, and Hung-up Indeed, with their Crimes in
Capital Letters on their Foreheads, Common Truth and Honesty among Men would be
more Sacred.

FAB. CCCXXIX. An Incouragable Son.
IT was the Hard Lot of a very Good Man to have a Vicious Young Fellow to his
Son; and he did what he could to Reclaim him: But Sir (says he) for Brevities
sake, it is only so much Time and Council thrown away; for all the Parsons a^
the Town have been Baiting me I know not how long now, upon the same Subject,
and I Am not One Jot the Better for it.

The MORAL.
Some Men Live as if they had made a Covenant with Hell; Let Divines, Fathers,
Friends say what they will, they Stop their Ears against them: And Good Counsel
is wholly Cast away upon them.

REFLECTION.
THIS Fable would go a Great way, if it were wrought up to the Height. As for
the Purpose; to all Manner of Graceless, and Hopeless Characters. Some People
are lost for want of Good Advice; Others for want of giving Good Heed to it; And
some again take up Resolutions beforehand never to Mend. Nay there are Those
that Value themselves upon the very Contempt of All that. is Sacred and Honest,
and make it a Point of Bravery to bid Defiance to the Oracles of Divine
Revelation, the Motions of Reasonable Nature, and the Laws of Government. This
Contradiction to the Duty of a Sober Man is yet farther Heightened, by the
Disobedience of a Son to a Parent: and farther yet, by a Spiteful Opposition to
All the Precepts of Morality and Religion. There Is somewhat of a Droll-Mixture
in This Bantering way of Liberty, to make a body Laugh where he should Cry: But
it is past a Sporting Matter, when the most Necessary Duties of Christianity
come to be the Question. There Is No Room for Trifling in Those Cases.

FAB. CCCXXX. A Sheep-Biter Hanged.
A Certain Shepherd had One Favourite-Dog, that he had a Particular Confidence
in above all the rest. He fed him with his Own hand, and took more Care of him,
in short, then of any of his Fellows. This Kindness went on a Long Time, 'till
in Conclusion, upon the Missing of some Sheep, he fancied This Cur to be False
to him: After This Jealousy, he kept a Strict Eye upon him, and in fine, found
it out, that This Trusty Servant of his was the Felon. Upon the Discovery, he
had him presently taken up, and bad him prepare for Execution. Alas! Master,
says the Dog, I am One of your Family, and 'twould be hard to put a Domestique
to Extremities: Turn your Displeasure upon the Wolves rather, that make a Daily
Practice on it to Worry your Sheep. No, no, says the Shepherd, I Would sooner Spare
Forty Wolves that make it their Profession to Kill Sheep, then One Sheep-biting
Cur that is Trusted with the Care of them. There Is somewhat of Franckness and
Generosity in the One; but the Other is the Basest of Treacheries.

The MORAL.
No Perfidy like Breach of Faith and Trust, under the Seal of Friendship: For
an Adversary under That Masque, is much more Unpardonable then a Barefaced
Enemy.

REFLECTION.
THERE are Political Sheep-biters as well as Pastoral; Betrayers of Public
Trusts, as well as of Private; And Humane Curs that are as Wolvish as the
Other. This Maxim however, holds in All Cases; that Breach of Faith, and Trust,
is the most Odious, Inhospitable and Inhumane of Civil, as well as of Moral
Offenses. A special Confidence in One more then in Another, though from a King
to a Subject, or from a Master to a Servant, has some Analogy in it of
Friendship, but the Matter should be thoroughly Weighed and Examined, before we
put it to the Utmost Trial and Test. A Man may be too Hard, or too Easy; too
Adventurous or too Wary, in passing a Judgment upon the Character of the
Person*: But above all things, it will concern us perfectly to Understand the
Honor, the Practice, and the Conversation of the Man we Propose for a Friend,
before we lay any Stress upon his Faith; Not but that we may believe Well of a
Man, and yet not think fit to Trust him: So that a Charity on the One hand does
not Authorize a Confidence on the Other: It is not Amiss however, to lay Baits
for a Man in such a Case, and to try him on the Blind-side. As if a Man be
Covetous, Profit, or Bribes may put him to the Test, and so Answerably in Other
Cases. Powerful Temptations Articificially Disposed, are the Best Essay, and
Assurance of a Man's Faith and Honesty that the Matter will bear. This Dog here
would perhaps have Fought for his Master in any Other Case, though he Betrayed
him in This: But the Love of Mutton was his Weak side: Which in some sort
Answers to That which we call Peccatum in Delicijs in Mankind. This Infirmity
however did not Excuse the Treachery, and the Kinder the Master the more
Unpardonable is the Traitor.

FAB. CCCXXXI. A Bull and a Ram.
THere was One Master-Ram that Beat All his Fellows out of the Field, and was
so Puffed up with the Glory of his Exploits, that Nothing would serve him but
he must Challenge a Bull to the Combat. They Met, and upon the First Encounter,
there lay the Ram for Dead; but coming to himself again; Well (says he) This is
the Fruit of my Insolence, and Folly, in Provoking an Enemy, that Nature has
made my Superior.

The MORAL.
Where People will be Provoking and Challenging their Superiors, either in
Strength, or Power, it is not so much a Bravery of Spirit, as a Rude and Brutal
Rashness; and they pay Dear for it at last.

REFLECTION.
IT IS not Courage, but Temerity, for Men to Venture their Lives, Reputations
and Fortunes upon Unequal Encounters; Unless where they are Obliged by an
Overruling Impulse of Honor, Conscience, and Duty, to stand All Hazzards.
That which the World Accounts Brave, is in Truth, no Better than Brutal, where
there is not Reason, Justice, and Prudence to Direct and Govern it. It Is One
thing for a Man to be Firm, and Fearless, against Honest Dangers, let them
appear never so Terrible, when his Honor for the Purpose, his Country, or his
Conscience, calls upon him to Encounter them: But to run his Head against
Stone-Walls, or to put his Shoulders to a Sea-Breach, to Attempt Insuperable
Difficulties, and Needlessly to Provoke Invincible Enemies, purely out of a Vain
Opinion of his Own Strength; This would be just the Moral of the Ram here in
the Fable.

FAB. CCCXXXI. A Widow and a Green Ass.
THere was a Widow that had a Twittering toward a second Husband, and she took
a Gossipping Companion of hers to her Assistance, how to Manage the Job. The
Truth of it is, says she, I have a Dear Mind to Another Bedfellow; but the
Devilish People would keep such a Snearing, and Pointing at me, they would make me
even Weary of my Life. You are a Fine Widow in faith, says The Other, to Trouble
your Head for the Talk of the People. Pray will ye Mind what I say to ye now.
You have an Ass here in your Grounds; go your ways and get That Ass Painted
Green, and then let him be carried up and down the Country for a Show. Do This,
I say, without any more Words, for Talk does but Burn Daylight. The Thing was
done accordingly; and for the first Four or Five Days, the Green Ass had the
Whole Country at his Heels; Man, Woman, and Child, Staring and Hooting after
him. In four or five Days More, the Humor was quite Spent, and the Ass might
Travel from Morning to Night, and not One Creature to take Notice of him. Now
(says the friendly Adviser) A New Married Widow is a kind of a Green Ass: Every
bodies Mouth will be Full on it for the first four or five Days, and in four or
five More, the Story will even Talk it self Asleep.

The MORAL.
Common Fame is as False and Impudent as a Common Strumpet. Let Every Man live
to his Conscience, and never Trouble his Head with the Talk of the People.

REFLECTION.
There is no Mystery in telling us that a Widow may be Prevailed upon to Think
of a Second Husband; but the Weight of This Emblem lies upon Those Cases where
there Occur a Thousand Scruples, and Difficulties, that may startle People at
first, and yet in the Conclusion, prove but a Nine-Day's Wonder. The Foolery of
the Widow and the Green Ass, shows pleasantly enough, how Easy a Matter it is
for a Bold Face, a Good Assurance, and a Reasonable Stock of Wit and Address,
to put Common Fame it self out of Countenance: And it is a part of Prudence
beside, not to sink under the Impression of an Ill Report: Provided there be
Integrity and Innocence to Support That Firmness of Mind. A Wise Man will not
make his Happiness Precarious: He looks to his Conscience, and leaves the World
to take its Course. It Is the Novelty, not the Quality of Things, that sets
People a Gaping and a Gazing at them: But when they come once to be Familiar,
the Wonder goes off, and Men return to their Wits again. The Main Consideration
is This, whether the Matter in Question be Good or Evil; Honorable or
Dishonorable; Not according to a Vulgar Estimate, but in the Genuine Truth,
and Nature of it. It Is Foolish, either to Fear, or to Mind what the People say
of a Man, in cases where he stands or falls to his Own Conscience.

FAB. CCCXXXIII. An Eagle and Rabbets.
THere was an Eagle that drew a Nest of Rabbets, and carried them away to her
Young. The Mother-Cony followed her with Tears in her Eyes, Adjuring her in the
Name of All Those Powers that take care of the Innocent and Oppressed, to have
Compassion upon her Miserable Children: But she, in an Outrage of Pride and
Indignation, Tears them presently to pieces. The Cony, upon This, Convenes a
Whole Warren; Tells her Story and Advises upon a Revenge: For Divine Justice
(says she) will never suffer so Barbarous a Cruelty to escape Unpunished. They
Debated the Matter, and came to an Unanimous Resolve upon the Question, that
there was no Way of paying the Eagle in her Kind, but by Undermining the Tree
where she Timber'd. So they all fell to Work at the Roots of the Tree, and
left it so little Foot-hold, that the first Blast of Wind laid it Flat upon the
Ground, Nest, Eagles and All. Some of 'em were Killed with the Fall; Others
were Eaten up by Birds and Beasts of Prey, and the Cony had the Comfort at
last, of Destroying the Eagles Children, in Revenge for her Own.

The MORAL.
It Is Highly Imprudent, even in the Greatest of Men, Unnecessarily to Provoke
the Meanest: When the Pride of Pharaoh Himself was brought down by Miserable
Frogs and Lice.

REFLECTION.
There Is Nothing so Little as to be Wholly Despised; for the most
Inconsiderable of Creatures may at Some time or Other, by some Means or Other,
come to Revenge it self upon the Greatest; Not by it is Own Force so much, as by
the Working of Divine Justice, that will not Suffer Oppression to pass
Unpunished. In cases of Powerful Injustice, the Greatest are not to Presume,
nor the Meanest to Despair.

We are to Distinguish upon This Fable, what the Eagle did as a Tyrant, and
what she did as a Bird of Prey: And likewise betwixt a Passion which is purely
Vindictive, and Those Counsels where Divine Justice Interposes toward the
Avenging of the Innocent. Here is Power Triumphing over Weakness; a Criminal
Cruelty over Helpless Innocence, and That Cruelty Inexorable too, and Deaf to
the Tears, Supplications, and Importunities of a Tender Mother, on the Behalf
of her Children. Now for the Humbling of This Unmerciful Pride in the Eagle,
Providence has found out a Way, even by the most Despicable of Means and
Creatures, to the Wreaking of a Revenge; which shows likewise that Heaven takes
the Cause of the Weak and the Guiltless into a Particular Care.

This Council of the Rabbets has somewhat in it of the Debates of Popular
Meetings, where the Number and the Agreement Supplies the want of Other Means:
And we are taught from hence too, that States are not so much in danger of Open
Force, as of Secret Mines: For when the Foundation is once Loosened; The Least
Breath of a Commotion lays the Whole Building in Rubish. We are taught also,
that the Only, or at least the Main Support of Power is Justice, in the Due
Distribution of Reward and Punishment. Where These Two Principles are
Perverted, the Government is off the Balance, and the Worse Part of it
Out-Weighs the Other. But the Judgments of Heaven Supply the defects of Common
Justice, and Avenge the Cause of the Poor and Innocent upon the Heads of the
Mighty. Vengeance, in fine Treads upon the Heel of Oppression, according to the
Doctrine of This Fable of the Eagle and the Rabbets here.

FAB. CCCXXXIV. A Pike sets up for Sovereignty.
THere was a Master-Pike, that for his Bulk, Beauty, and Strength, was looked
upon to be the Prince of the River, but the Sovereignty of the Fresh Water
would not Content him, it seems, unless he might Engross to himself the Empire
of the Sea too. Upon This Ambitious Design, he Launched out into the Ocean, and
put up his Claim to it; But a Prodigious Dolphin took This Encroachment upon his
Right, in such Dudgeon, that he set upon the Pike; Gave him Chase, and Pursued
him to the very Borders of his Own Stream, Insomuch that the Pike had enough to
do to Save Himself; and from That Time forward, he had the Wit to keep within
the Compass of his Own Dominions.

The MORAL.
Ambition has no Other Bounds then what Providence has Prescribed to it, for
the Good of Mankind. Here shall thy Proud Waves Stay: And there must be No
Passing Those Limits.

REFLECTION.
PROVIDENCE has Assigned Every Man his Post and Station, and He that either
Relinquishes his Own Natural Right, or Invades Another, seldom fails of a
Disappointment in the Conclusion. Or however, in case of the most Successful
Injustice, Oppression, and Usurpation, there follows a Restless Anxiety in the
keeping of what is Injuriously Gotten; an Insatiable Thirst after More and More
still, and Nothing but Shame and Confusion in the End, when he comes to Cast up
Profit and Loss at the Foot of the Reckoning. This Ambitious Pike is but the
Figure of some Petty Prince, that sets himself up to be Troublesome, and to
give Laws to a more Powerful Neighbor. The Dolphin Represents such a Power
that is more then is Match, and Beats him Home again. The Case of the Fishes in
the Fable, is much the same with That of Kings and States in Common Practice.
And to carry the Allegory yet further; As the Ocean, on the One hand, so the
Whole World, on the Other, is made the Field of Battle. Now All This in the
Moral, serves only to bid us Moderate our Desires; Keep our Affections within
Bounds, and Live Contented with our Lot.

FAB. CCCXXXV. A Sheep picks a Quarrel with a Shepherd.
A Sheep that was to be Shorn, took it very Ill of the Shepherd that he should
not satisfy himself with the Milk she gave him, without Stripping her of her
Wool too. The Shepherd, upon This, without any more Words, took one of her
Lambs in a Rage, and put it to Death. Well, says the Sheep, and now you have done
Your Worst I hope: No, says the Shepherd, when That Is done I can Cut your
Throat too, if I have a Mind to it, and throw ye to the Dogs, or to the Wolves
at pleasure. The Sheep said not One Word more, for fear of a Worse Mischief to
come.

The MORAL.
When People Will not Submit to Reason by Fair Means, they must be brought to it
by Foul.

REFLECTION.
HE that is not Master of Himself, or in his Own Power, has no Other Game to
play then to submit himself Contentedly to the Will of Another. Struggling is
so far from setting him at Liberty, that it only ties the Knot the Harder.
There must be no Muttering at Heaven for the Loss of Fortune, Children, or
whatever else can be Dear to us; for there are Greater Afflictions in store for
Those that shall Dare to Prescribe Rules and Measures to the Divine Providence.
Wherefore we should All set our Hearts at rest, upon These Two Considerations,
First, that whatsoever comes from above, is for the Best, and 2ly. That there is
No Contending with it. The Pot must not chop Logic, and Expostulate with the
Potter: And so for a Sheep to tell the Shepherd when he has Killed her Lamb,
that now he has done his Worst; it is such Another kind of Defiance, as that of
Job's Wife was, when she bad her Husband Curse God and Die. We are not the
Carvers of our Own Fortunes, and This way of Proceeding is an Affront to all
the Dictates, Lights, and Duties of Religion, Nature and Reason.

FAB. CCCXXXVI. A Creaking Wheel.
A Wagoner took Notice upon the Creaking of a Wheel, that it was the Worst
Wheel of the Four, that made the most Noise, and was Wondering at the Reason of
it. Oh, says the Wagon, They that are Sickly are ever the most Piping and
Troublesome.

The MORAL.
It Is with Creaking Wheels as it is with Courtiers, Physicians, Lawyers (and
with whom not?) They want Greazing.

REFLECTION.
WHEN People are Crazy, and in Disorder, it is but Natural for them to Groan,
and to Complain. This is a Far-fetched Allusion, but it must serve for want of
a Better. The Uneasiness of a sickly habit of Body, is some sort of Excuse for
being Troublesome and Importune.

FAB. CCCXXXVII. A Man had a Mind to try His Friends.
THere was a Generous Rich Man that kept a Splendid and an Open Table, and
Consequently never Wanted Guests. This Person found All People came to him
Promiscuously, and a Curiosity took him in the Head to try, which of 'em were
Friends, and which, only Trencher-Flies, and Spungers. So he took an Occasion
One Day at a Full Table, to tell them of a Quarrel he had, and that he was just
then a going to Demand Satisfaction. There must be so many to so many, and he
made no doubt, but they would stand by him with their Swords in their Hands. They
All Excused themselves save only Two; which Two he reckoned upon as his
Friends, and All the rest no Better then Hangers-on.

The MORAL.
We may Talk of Many Friends; but not One Man of a Thousand will stand the Test.

REFLECTION.
There Is No Trial of a True Friend, but in cases of Difficulty; as Loss,
Trouble, or Danger; for That Is the Time of Distinguishing what a Man does for
My sake, and what for his Own.

It is an Unhappy Thing that Princes and Great Men, who seem to have the least
need of Friends, should in truth have the Greatest, and yet at the same time
the Greatest Difficulty of Knowing them too, for want of Occasions to put them
to the Trial. There is No Proof of Friendship like Frequent Experiment. Now
Princes are above the want of Those Common Offices that pass for Friendship
betwixt Man an Man, as in Matter of Money, Liberty, Protection, and the like.
People do not Flock to Courts so much for their Masters service, as for the
making of their Own Fortunes. How shall any Man distinguish now betwixt a
Parasite, and a Man of Honor; where they are All on the Receiving Hand, and
where Hypocrisy, and Interest looks so like Duty and Affection? He that well
Considers the Practice of the World, will find the Fiction of the Rich Man in
This Fable to be in some Proportion the Common case of Mankind. An
Undistinguishable Facility shall never fail of Meeting with an
Undistinguishable Infidelity; which is no Other then a Just Judgment upon an
Inconsiderate Bounty, It Is the Benefactors Fate in fine, to be either Deserted
or Betrayed by those that he has fed, and with Acteon, to be Worried by his Own
Curs. He that keeps an Open House for All Comers, should do well to Consider
that there are Oglios of Guests as well as of Dishes, and that the Liberty of a
Common Table is as Good as a Tacit Invitation to All sorts of Intruders; As
Buffoon, Spies, Tale-Bearers, Flatterers, Epicures, Indigents, etc. Now These
are All but so many Flies that Come and Go with the Meat. And whereas the
Mythologist lays the Stress upon This Point, That the Master of the House could
find but Two Friends in such a Crowd of People, it is my Admiration on the Other
hand rather, that he should find so Many, in the License of a Conversation that
was made so Scandalous by the Company.

FAB. CCCXXXVIII. A Fox Praising Hares Flesh.
AS a Dog was Pressing hard upon the very Breech of a Fox, Up starts a Hare.
Pray Hold a Little, says the Fox, and take That Hare there while she is to be
had: You never Tasted such a Morsel since you were Born; But I am all over
Tainted and Rotten, and a Mouthful of My Flesh would be enough to Poison ye.
The Dog immediately left the Fox; and took a Course at the Hare; but she was
too Nimble for him, it seems, and when he saw he could not Catch her, he very
Discreetly let her go. The Hare had heard what passed; and Meeting the Fox Two
or Three Days after, she told him how Basely he had served her. Nay, says the
Fox, if You take it so Heavily that I spoke Well of ye, what would you have
done if I had Spoken Ill?

The MORAL.
A Designing Back-Friend is the Worst of Enemies.

REFLECTION.
THERE are some sorts of Commendation, and some Cases and Seasons of Applying
it, that are more Malicious, and Mischievous, then the Worst of Calumnies.
Here Is a Fox at a Pinch; and what is His Business now, but to Stop the Dogs
Mouth with a piece of Hares Flesh, for the Saving of his Own Skin! A Puss, says
he, is much Better Meat then a Fox, and This Good Office over the Last
Shoulder, is the Civility that he Values himself upon. He gives her his Good
Word, (as we call it) to the very End that she may be Eaten. How many Thousands
of These Foxes Complements do we meet with in Our Daily Practice and
Conversation. But a Crafty Knave is never without somewhat or Other to say for
Himself, and a Bad Excuse is Better then None. The Foxes Civility, in fine, was
Roguery all over; and his Praising the Hares-Flesh to the Dog, was Effectually
no more then a Letter of Recommendation to the Common Hangman.

FAB. CCCXXXIX. A Plain Horse Wins the Prize.
THere were a Great many Brave, Sightly Horses with Rich Trappings that were
brought out One day to the Course, and Only One Plain Nag in the Company that
made sport for All the rest. But when they came at last to the Trial, This was
the Horse that ran the Whole Field out of Distance, and VVon the Race.

The MORAL.
Our Senses are No Competent Judges of the Excellencies of the Mind.

REFLECTION.
HE that Judges by the Outside, and Pronounces upon the Bare Appearance of
Things, runs a great many Mistakes in One; for there is Temerity, Folly, Pride,
and Ill Nature in it; Especially where the Censure is accompanied with Mockery
and Scorn. It Is Inhumane, at the Best, to make Sport with one Another's
Infirmities; which in Honor, and Christianity, we are bound to Cover. But it
is Pleasant enough then, if People will be putting themselves upon a Trial of
skill, to see a Bantering Pretender made an Ass of by the very Man that He
Himself has Marked out for a Coxcomb: which is no Other, in Plain English, then
a Fair Appeal to the Company, which is the Arranter Fool of the Two. In One
Word, there is Nothing lays a Man more Open, then Laughing, out of Measure, and
out of Season. To Instance in a Cavalier of My Acquaintance that was up to the
Ears in Love with a very Fine Lady, that wanted neither Air, Shape, Dress,
Quality, nor any Other of Those Charming Circumstances to Recommend her to any
Honest Man to Play the Fool withal. He had his Mistress to a Comedy once, where
she was wonderfully pleased, but had, the Ill Hap to Laugh still in the Wrong
Place: The Poor Man Observed it, and his Fancy fell so Sick upon it, that the
Fit went off immediately, and he was his own Man for ever after. This comes of
Judging by the Eye without Consulting the Reason of the Matter; and of setting
our Hearts upon the Shape, Color, and External Beauty of Things, without any
Regard to the Internal Excellence and Virtue of them. The Plain Nag here was
like to have been Laughed out of the Field, as well as out of Countenance, till
he came upon the Trial to Prove Those to be Iades Themselves that made Sport
with him.

FAB. CCCXL. A Countryman and a Kid.
A Countryman that was Hampered in a Lawsuit, had a near Friend and Kinsman,
it seems, that was a Lawyer, and to Him he went again and again, for Advice
upon the Point; but he was Still so Busy, and Busy, that he must come Another
Time. The Poor Fellow took a Delicate Fat Kid with him, Next Bout, and the
Lawyers Clark, upon hearing the Voice of it at the Door; let the Man in, and
carried him to his Master, where he laid Open his Case, Took his Opinion; made
Two Legs, One to the Counsel for Receiving of him; The Other to the Kid for
Introducing him, and so went his Way.

The MORAL.
Money is a Passe-par-Tout.

REFLECTION.
IT IS with Money as it is with Majesty; All Other Powers and Authorities Cease
while That Is in Place. It Is That which makes the Pot Boil (as the Proverb says)
though the Devil Piss in the Fire. Fathers, Mothers, Brothers, Sisters,
Relations, Friendships, are but Empty Names of Things, and Words Butter No
Parsnips. It Is Interest that Governs the World; and the Rulers of it;
Ecclesiastical, as well as Civil; for it Works in All Degrees and Qualities of
Men; and we have learnt by Experience, that the Pulpit may be made to have a
Feeling in the Case as well as the Bar. Money, in fine, is an Universal
Pasport, and All Doors Fly Open to it. It Answers All Objections, Resolves All
Scruples, and turns up what Religion Trump, it pleases. In One Word, Quid
Dabitis and Tradam? may be the Motto of Corrupt Nature. This Fable was
Excellently well Moraliz'd by a Famous Council of our Times. One gave him a Fee
of Forty Broad Pieces: He took 'em, and Counted 'em (as a Man may Count Money
after his Father they say) Well, says he, Here are Forty Pieces, Pugnabo
FORTITER Make them Ten more and Pugnabo FIFTITER, In forma Pauperis is no good
Lawyers Latin. Kin'red are no Welcome Clients, where the Nearness of the
Relation gives them a kind of Title to have Advice Gratis, but where the Cousin
cannot Prevail, the Kid must.

FAB. CCCXLI. A Weak Young Man and a Wolf.
A Creeping Young Fellow that had Committed Matrimony with a Brisk Gamesome
Lass, was so Altered upon it in a Few Days, that he was liker a Sceleton then a
Living Man. He was Basking himself One time in the Gleam of the Sun, and some
Huntsmen passed by him upon the Chase of a Wolf that led 'em That Way. Why
how comes it (says he) that you don't Catch That Wolf? They told him that he
was too Nimble for 'em. Well (says he) If My Wife had the Ordering of him
she would Spoil his Footmanship.

The MORAL.
Marriage they say Breeds Cares and Cuckolds.

REFLECTION.
FLESH and Blood is but Flesh and Blood; and the Indulging of Inordinate
Appetites is the Ruin of Body, Soul, and Estate. This Fellow should have
Consulted the Circumstances of his Constitution, before he made That Desperate
Leap; for when a Man is Plunged into an Irrevocable State of Misery, he has but
a Cold business on it to Comfort himself with a Jest. And 'twas but a Measuring
Cast at Last neither, whether he meant his Wife should have to do with the
Wolf, in One Sense, or the Wolf with his Wife in Another.

FAB. CCCXLII. A Lad Robbing an Orchard.
AN Old Fellow took a Boy Robbing his Orchard. Sirrah, (says he) come down the
Tree, and don't Steal my Apples. The Lad never Minded him, but went on with his
Work. Well (says the Master of the Grounds) they say there are Charms in Herbs,
as well as in Words, and so he threw a Handful of Grass at him, which was so
Ridiculous, that the Young Thief took the Old Man to be Mop'd. But in
Conclusion, if Neither Words, nor Herbs will do, says he, I Will try what may be
done with Stones; for they say there is Virtue in Them too; And that Way he did
his Work.

The MORAL.
Those that will not be Reclaimed by Instruction, must be brought to a Sense of
their Duty by Feeling.

REFLECTION.
A Wise Man, in All Controversies, will try what may be done by Fair Means
before he comes to Foul: And where the One fails, the Other will Certainly do
the Work. The Fear of Hell does a great deal toward the Keeping of us in our
way to Heaven; and if it were not for the Penalty, the Laws neither of God, nor
of Man, would be Obeyed. There would have been a Charm in Wood as well as in
Stones, if the Little Thief had but been soundly Drubb'd with a Good Honest
Cudgel: For where Conscience and Argument will do no Good, Punishment must: But
as it is the Surest, so the Good Man here made it the Last Remedy.

FAB. CCCXLII. A Nightingale and a Hawk.
AS a Nightingale was Singing in a Bush, down comes a Rascally Kite of a
Sparrow-Hawk, and Whips her off the Bough: The Poor Wretch Pleaded for her
self, that alas! her Little Carcass was not worth the While, and that there
were Bigger Birds enough to be found. Well, says the Hawk, but am I so Mad do you
think, as to Part with a Little Bird that I have, for a Great One that I have
Not? Why then, says she, I Will give ye a Delicate Song for my Life: No, no, says
the Hawk, I want for my Belly, not for my Ears.

The MORAL.
A Bird in the Hand is Worth Two in the Bush.

REFLECTION.
THIS Fable carries Three Morals. 1st. That we are not to Part with a Certainty
for an Uncertainty. 2dly, That Men of Appetite are not Moved by any
Consideration of Virtue. 3dly, That Things of Use and Necessity, are to be
preferred before Matters merely of Delight and Pleasure.

The Nightingale in the Foot of the Hawk, is the Case of many an Innocent
Creature in the Hands of Justice, when the very Equity of the Law Bends under
the Weight of an Overruling Rigor. The Belly has no Ears, and so there is no
Charming of it. Arguments against Power, are but Wind, when Reason draws One
way, and Appetite Another. There Is no Moving of any Creature contrary to the
Nature of it. Hang 'em All up (says a Pleasant Droll, upon Venners Rising) they
are not Worth the Begging. It Is a piece of State Policy sometimes, to let the
Poor and the Friendless go to Pot; Nay, and to reckon the Execution of them
among the Triumphs of Justice too. There is This further in it besides; that the
Uttermost Severity upon Those that have not where-withal to Bid for their
Lives, raises the Price of the Market upon Those that Have; and Enhances the
Value of the Deliverance, or, in Plain English, of the Pardon. The Poor
Nightingale had Nothing to give that the Hawk cared for, and so she Died, in
truth, because she was not worth nhe Begging.

FAB. CCCXLIV. A Lion and a Hog.
A Lion that found it Extreme Irksome to Live Alone, gave the Beasts of the
Forest to Understand, that he was Resolved to make Choice of Some or Other of
his Subjects for a Friend, and Companion. There was a Mighty Busle, who should
be the Favorite, and to the VVonder of All the rest, the Lion Pitched upon a
Hog; for, says the Lion, he is True and Faithful to his Friend, and will stand
by him in All Times, and Hazzards.

The MORAL.
A True Friend can never fail of being a Loyal Subject: And That Is the Man that
a Brave Prince will make Choice of for a Particular Favorite.

REFLECTION.
SOLITUDE is against Nature, but Ill Company is Worse then None. So that Life
is not Life without the Blessing of a Friendly and an Edifying Conversation.
The Difficulty only rests in the Choice; wherein the Lion here has taken his
Right Measures: That is to say, he has made a True Judgment of the Matter: For
he only Deserves the Character of a Friend, that is Proof against All Trials and
Temptations, either of Profit, or of Loss.

FAB. CCCXLV. A Gnat and a Be.
A Gnat that was Half Starved with Cold and Hunger, went out one Frosty Morning
to a Bee-Hive, to beg a Charity; and offered to Teach Music in the Bees
Family, for her Diet and Lodging. The Be very Civilly desired to be Excused;
for, says she, I bring up all my Children to my Own Trade, that they may be
able to get their Living Another Day by their Industry.

The MORAL.
Lazy Beggars that Can Work, and Will not, have scarce a Right to a Common
Charity: And This Misery befalls them for want of an Industrious Education.

REFLECTION.
IT IS a Necessary piece of Providence, in the Institution of our Children, to
Train them up to somewhat in their Youth, that may Honestly Maintain them in
their Age. If the Be had taken the Necessities of the Gnat into her
Consideration, as she did the Profession, she would have thought her self bound
in Tenderness and Good Nature, according to the Moral of the Fable, to have
Contributed to her Relief: But the Stress is rather to be laid upon a
Preference of an Education of Industry, to That of Pleasure, and to show, that
we are in the First Place to Consult the Necessities of Life, rather then
Matters of Ornament and Delight.

FAB. CCCXLVI. A Lion, Ass and Hare.
UPon the Breaking out of a War betwixt the Birds and the Beasts, the Lion
Summoned All his Subjects from Sixteen to Sixty, to appear in Arms, at such a
Certain Time, and Place, upon pain of his High Displeasure; and there were a
World of Asses and Hares at the Rendezvous among the rest. Several of the
Commanders were for turning 'em off, and Discharging 'em, as Creatures utterly
Unfit for Service. Do not Mistake your self (says the Lion.) The Asses will do
very well for Trumpeters, and the Hares will make Excellent Letter-Carriers.

The MORAL.
God and Nature, made Nothing in Vain. There is No Member of a Political Body
so Mean, and Inconsiderable, but it may be Useful to the Public in some
Station or Other.

REFLECTION.
There Is Nothing so Great as not to stand in Need of many things, in Common
Appearance, the most Contemptible: And there is Nothing again so Despicable;
but that at some Time, or in some Case or other, it may be of Use and Service
to us. It Is True, That one Thing is Preferible to another, in some Sort, or in
some Respect; but it is True withal, that every Distinct Being has somewhat
Peculiar to it self, to make Good in one Circumstance what it Wants in Another.
It is the Ignorance of the Nature of Things, that makes us Despise, even the
Meanest of Creatures. All Things are Created Good in their several Kinds, as
All things severally are Subservient, in some Degree or other, to the Beauty,
the Order, and the Well-being of the Whole. That which we find in the Course of
Nature, holds likewise in Government, where the Lowest has its Post Allotted it
as well as the Highest. All Created Beings, in fine, are the Works of
Providence and Nature, that never did any thing in Vain. And the Moral of This
Parable of the Lion, the Ass, and the Hare, runs through the Universe; for
there are Hares, Lions, and Asses, in Kingdoms, and Commonwealths, as well as
in Fields and in Forests: And the Drift of This Figure holds good in All the
Parts of the Creation.

FAB. CCCXLVII. Pigeons Reconcile the Hawks.
THere Happened a Bloody Civil War once among the Hawks, and what did the Poor,
Peaceable, Innocent Pigeons, but in Pure Pity, and Good Nature, send their
Deputies and Mediators to do the Best they could to make 'em Friends again, so
long as This Feud Lasted; they were so Intent upon Killing one another, that
they Minded nothing else; but no sooner was the Quarrel taken up among
Themselves, then they fell to their Old sport again of Destroying the Pigeons.
This brought them to a Sight of their Error, and to Understand the Danger of
Uniting a Common Enemy to their Own Ruin.

The MORAL.
Good Men are never Safe but when Wicked Men are at Odds. So that the Divisions
of the One are the Security of the Other.

REFLECTION.
IT IS a Hard Matter in This Case to Reconcile Policy, and Good Nature; or to
bring a Plain-dealing Innocence into a Consistency with Necessary Prudence; For
Singleness of Mind passes in the World for want of Brains, and where Knavery is
in Credit, Honesty is sure to be a Drug: But Every Man must stand or fall to
his Own Conscience, and so Divide the Matter as neither to Offend Christian
Charity, nor Civil Discretion. The Blessing that is Pronounced upon the
Peacemakers does not Extend to Those Cases, where the Effect of the Peace
shall be the Ruin of the Reconcilers. It Is Dangerous Parting a Fray, whether
it be Jest or Earnest; for there are Sham Quarrels as well as Bloody Ones: In
the One, a Man runs the risque of his Hat, or his Cloak; In the Other, of his
Life. We have lived to see This Fable remarkably Moraliz'd among our selves
upon the like Occasion; for still as the Common-Enemy were at Variance, we had
a sort of Peacemaking Pigeons that would needs be Reconciling them, though the
Only Security they had under the Sun was Their Divisions.

FAB. CCCXLVIII. A Woman that brought Fire into the House.
THE Question was put to an Honest Man Newly Married, What might be the Meaning
of his New Brides bringing a Torch out of her Fathers House into her Husbands.
Why This, says he; I have Eased my Father-in-Law of a Firebrand to set my Own
House in a Flame.

The MORAL.
A Contentious Woman puts all into a Flame, wherever she comes.

REFLECTION.
THIS Torch may be an Allusion either to Strife, and Contention, or to the
Profusion and Consumption of the Husbands Estate. It Is to be hoped that there
are Shrews, and Wasteful Women enough in the World, to Answer This Moral Both
Ways.

FAB. CCCXLIX. A Corrupt Officer.
A Certain Governor of a Province that had a long time Pill'd, and Oppressed
the People under his Charge was called to Account in the Conclusion for the
Receiving of Bribes; and sentenced to Refund what he had Wrongfully Taken. He
came as Unwillingly to the Point, as a Bear to the Stake, which gave Occasion
to somebodies saying, that it was with This Man and his Money, as it is with
Women, and their Children. He was well enough pleased in the Getting of it; but
it went to the very Heart of him when he Parted with it.

The MORAL.
Great Officers are but like Spunges; they Suck till they are Full, and when
they come once to be Squez'd, the very Hearts Blood of them comes away with
their Money.

REFLECTION.
IF Men could but Separate the Profit, and the Pleasure of their Sins, from the
Sin it self, and keep the Former, when they Renounce the Other, what a Number
of Penitents should we have in This Wicked World! But the Doctrine of
Satisfaction and Restitution lies so Cursedly hard upon the Gizzards of our
Publicans, that the Blood in their Veins is not Half so Dear to 'em as the
Treasure they have in their Coffers. The Man and the Money are in This Case as
good as Incorporated, and Fining him is little less then Flaying him: But
Justice however finds him Out; And This, in Few Words is the Sum of the Moral.
Avarice is as hard to Part with any thing, as it was Eager to Get it. When a
Man is once in Possession of an Ill Gotten Estate De Facto, he never Trouble
his Head with the De Iure of the Question; but looks upon the Propriety of what
he has Gotten by Rapine, to be Transferred to him by Providence: The Money in
short had Changed the Master, and he would rather part with an Eye out of his Head,
then with a Penny out of his Coffers.

FAB. CCCL. An Old Man that was willing to put off Death.
THere goes a Story that Death called upon an Old Man, and bad him come along
with him. The Man Excused himself, that The Other World was a Great Journey to
take upon so short a Warning, and begged a Little time only to make his Will
before he Died. Why (says Death) You have had Warning enough One would think,
to have made Ready before This. In truth, says the Old Man, This is the First
Time that ever I saw ye in my whole Life. That Is False, says Death; for you
have had Daily Examples of Mortality before Your Eyes, in People of All Sorts,
Ages, and Degrees; And is not the Frequent Spectacle of Other Peoples Deaths, a
Memento sufficient to make You think of Your Own? Your Dim and Hollow Eyes
methinks, the Loss of your Hearing, and the Faltering of the rest of your
Senses, should Mind ye, without more ado, that Death has laid hold of ye
already: And is This a time of day do you think to stand Shuffling it off still?
Your Peremptory Hour, I tell ye, is now come, and there is No Thought of a
Reprieve in the Case of Fate.

The MORAL.
Want of Warning is No Excuse in the Case of Death: For Every Moment of our
Lives, either Is, or Ought to be a Time of Preparation for it.

REFLECTION.
IT IS the Great Business of Life to fit our selves for our End; and no Man can
Live Well that has not Death always in his Eye.

It Is a Strange Mixture of Madness and Folly in One Solecism, for People to Say
or Imagine that ever any Man was Taken out of This World without time to
Prepare himself for Death: But the Delay of Fitting our selves is our Own
Fault, and we turn the very Sin into an Excuse: Every Breath we draw is not
only a Step toward Death, but a Part of it. It was Born with us, It goes along
with us: It is the Only Constant Companion that we have in This World, and yet
we never think of it any more then if we knew Nothing on it. The Text is True to
the very Letter, that we Die Daily, and yet we Feel it not. Every thing under
the Sun reads a Lecture of Mortality to us. Our Neighbors, our Friends, our
Relations, that fall Every where round about us, Admonish us of our Last Hour;
and yet here is an Old Man on the Wrong-side of Fourscore perhaps, Complaining
that he is surpised.

FAB. CCCLI. A Miser and his Bags.
A Covetous Rich Churl finding himself at the Point of Death, caused his
Coffers to be brought up, and his Bags laid before him. You and I, says he,
must Part, and I would willingly Bequeath ye to Those that will take most
Delight in ye. Why then say the Bags, you must devide us betwixt your Heirs,
and the Devils. Your Heirs will have Drink and Whores for your Money, and the
Devils will be as well pleased on the Other hand, that they are to have your
Soul for it.

The MORAL.
The Money of a Miser is the Last Friend he takes his leave of in This World.

REFLECTION.
IT IS a Great deal of Pains that some People take to give Others Satisfaction,
and to Torment Themselves. But This Verifies the Old Proverb, Happy is the Son,
whose Father goes to the Devil; for Ill Gotten Goods and Estates are commonly
Squandered away with as Little Conscience as they were Raked together. There
goes a Canker along with them, when over and above the Iniquity of the
Extortion and Oppression, the Blood of so many Widows and Orphans cries to
Heaven for Vengeance. Now a Less Generous Chuff then This in the Fable, would
have Hugged his Bags to the Last, and have Envied That Satisfaction to his
Heirs, which he Himself could Enjoy no longer. But it was his Care to Transmit
to his Posterity a Curse with his Money, and to Bequeath them the Sin in the
Inordinate Love of Riches, together with his Treasure.

THE FABLES OF POGGIUS.
FAB. CCCLII. Industry and Sloth.
ONe was asking a Lazy Young Fellow what made him lie in Bed so long? Why (says
he,) I am hearing of Causes every Morning; that is to say, I have Two Lasses at
my Bedside so soon as ever I wake. Their Names are Industry and Sloth; One
bids me get up; 'tother bids me lie still; and so they give me Twenty Reasons
why I should Rise, and why I should not. It Is the part in the mean time of a
Just Judge to hear what can be said on Both sides; and before the Cause is
over, it is time to go to dinner.

The MORAL.
We spend our Days in Deliberating what to do, and we end them without coming
to any Resolution.

REFLECTION.
THIS Fable does naturally enough set forth an Expostulation betwixt Reason and
Appetite, and the Danger of running out our Lives in Dilatory Deliberations,
when we should rather be Up and Doing. In all these Cases, it is odds that the
Paradox carries it against the true Reason of the Thing; for we are as Partial
to our Corruptions, as if our Understanding were of Council for our Frailties,
and manage Disputes of this kind, as if we had a Mind to be overcome. The
Sluggard's Case in this Fable is the Case of Mankind in all the Duties of a
Virtuous and a Well-governed Life, where Judgment and Conscience calls us one
Way, and our Lusts hurry us another. We spend All our Days upon Frivolus
Preliminaries, without ever coming to a Resolution upon the Main Points of our
Business. We will, and we will not, and then we will not again, we will. At
this rate we run our Lives out in Adjournments from Time to Time, out of a
Fantastical Levity that holds us off and on, betwixt Hawk and Buzzard, as we
say, to keep us from bringing the Matter in question to a Final Issue. And yet
we know well enough what we ought to do, and what not, if we would but take the
Light of Reasonable Nature for our Guide, and hearken to the Councellor that
every Man carries in his own Breast. But Men in the General, are either too
Lazy to Search out the Truth, or too Partial, in favor of a Sensual Appetite,
to take notice of it when they have found it. They had rather be Tasting the
Ease and the Pleasures of Life, than Reforming the Errors and the Vices of it.
Does not the Voluptuary understand in all the Liberties of a Loose and a Lewd
Conversation, that he runs the risque both of Body and Soul on the one Hand,
and Opposes all the Blessings that Attend the Duties of Virtue and Sobriety on
the other? Does not the Ambitious, the Envious, and the Revengeful Man know
very well, that the Thirst of Blood, and the Affectation of Dominion by
Violence and Oppression, is a most Diabolical Outrage upon the Laws of God and
Nature, and upon the common Well-being of Mankind? But these People are Hearing
Causes too, with our Slug-a bed in the Apologue; that is to say, Deliberating
betwixt Passion and Conscience, till in the End, they are called away, whether
to Dinner or to Death, it makes no Matter, for the Moral is still the same.

FAB. CCCLIII. A Cock and a Fox.
A Fox spied a Cock at Roost with his Hens about him. Why how now my Friend,
says Reynard, What make you upon a Tree there? Your Business lies upon the
Terra Firma, and a Cock in the Air is out of his Element Methinks. But you
don't hear the News perhaps, and it is certainly true: there is a general Peace
concluded among all Living Creatures, and not One of them to presume upon pain
of Life and Limb, Directly or Indirectly, to Hurt another. The Blessedest
Tidings in the World says the Cock; and at the same time he stretches out his
Neck, as if he were looking at somewhat a Great way off. What are you Peering
at? says the Fox. Nothing says 'tother, but a Couple of Great Dogs yonder that
are coming this Way, Open-Mouth, as hard as they can drive. Why then says
Reynard, I fancy I Would even best be Jogging. No, No, says the Cock, the General
Peace will Secure you: Ay quoth the Fox so it will; but if these Roguy Currs
should not have heard of the Proclamation, my Coat may come to be Pink'd yet
for all that. And so away he Scamper'd.

The MORAL.
In all the Liberties of Sharping and Tricking One upon Another, there must
still a Regard be had to the Puntillos of Honor and Justice.

REFLECTION.
THIS is to tell us, that in some Cases one Nail must be Driven out with
another; and the Deceiving of the Deceiver doubles the Pleasure. It Is a Hard
Matter to make a False Man and a False Tale consist with themselves, and when
they come to Interfere, the Reason and the Argument of the Case returns upon
the Head of the Impostor: So that it requires Great Care and Skill for a Man
that has a Dark and a Double Design upon Another, to keep Clear of Clashing
with his own Reasonings. Wherefore Para^ites and Liars had need of Good
Memories. A General Peace would have Secured the Fox as well as the Cock: But
if the Fox would not stand the Dogs, the Cock had no Reason to Venture himself
with the Fox. All People that are Perfidious, either in their Conversation, or
in their Kind, are Naturally to be Suspected in Reports that favor their Own
Interest; and when they can make nothing else on it, they find it the Best of
their Play to put it off with a Jest.

It Is a common Thing for Captious People, and Double-Dealers, to be taken in
their Own Snares; as for the Purpose in the Matter of Power, Policy, the
Fundamentals, and the Maxims of Government, etc. How many are there that Limit
Sovereignty in One Case to strain it in Another, and so Handle the same
Question Pro and Con, at the same Time? Government is to be Bounded when it may
serve One Turn, and Absolute when it may serve Another. Insomuch that for want
of Presence of Thought, Men affirm what they Deny, and Deny what they Affirm,
and run Counter to Themselves. If Sovereign Power cannot Dispense, it is Tied up
they cry; and if it may be Tied up, it is no longer Sovereign Power; for that
which Ties it up, is Above it. At this Rate, One Doctrine Interferes with
Another, and the very Foundations of Reason and Government sink at last into a
Paradox. When the Fox brings Tidings of a peace, and Preaches upon the Subject
to the Poultry, Beware the Geese. Your Foxes Acts of Amnesty are no Other than
the Old Stale Politics I know not how many Years ago. They Pardon all in
General; in the Beginning; those that ought to be Hanged, in the Middle; and
not one Honest Man in the Conclusion. So that it is Ten to One the Cock was
Excepted in the Proclamation; and that though the Dogs were not allowed so much
as to lick their Lips at a Fox upon their Uttermost Peril, Reynard had gotten a
Proviso for Himself yet to carry on his Old Trade among the Lambs and the
Poultry still. This is the Method of all Popular Shams, when the Multitude are
to be led by the Noses into a Fool's Paradise. The State-Foxes tell 'em what
Golden-Days are now a coming, When Every Man shall sit under his own Vine, and
Eat the Fruit of his own Fig Tree: How Trade and Religion shall Flourish and
the People in short keep Holy Day all the Year long. These are Fine Words, but
the Foxes Business upon the Upshot, is only the Cramming his own Gut, without
any respect to the Public.

FAB. CCCLIV. A Tailor and his Wife.
THere happened a Grievous Quarrel once betwixt a Tailor and his Wife. The
Woman in Contempt of his Trade, called her Husband Pricklouse; he gave her a
Box of the Ear for it, which served only to make her more Outrageous. When this
would do no good, he set her up to the Chin in a Horse-Pond; but so long as her
Tongue was at Liberty, there was not a Word to be got from her but the same
Nickname in Derision over and over again. Well (says he to himself,) there is
no way I perceive to Quiet this Woman but by stopping of her Mouth, and so he
had her Duck'd next bout over Head and Ears. When she was under Water, and
could call him Pricklouse no longer with her Lips, she held up her Hands over
her Head, and did it with her Thumbs by the Knicking of her Nails; and when he
saw that once; he was even glad to give her over.

The MORAL.
The last Two Things that dye in an Impetuous Woman, are her Tongue and her
Stomach, when she cannot have her Will.

RELEXION.
IT IS the Fortune of many an Honest Harmless Man, to have this Fable Moralliz'd
to him under his own Roof; but the Better any thing is in it is Perfection, the
Worse is the Corruption of it; as there is nothing more Foetid than a Rotten
Egg. It Is the same thing betwixt a Temperate and an Impetuous Woman. Tempests
and Sea-Breaches are nothing to her. There Is no Place for Reasoning with her,
neither is there any thought of Curing her Will, by Applying to her Body. But
now for the Honor, and (in some sort) the Comfort of that Fair Sex, they do
not suffer alone under the Scandal of this Figure; for Men have their Violent
Passions and Transports as well as Women, and Passions much more Dangerous too
than the other. The Taylor's Wife was only a Good Hearty Shrew, under the
Impotency of an Unruly Waspish Humor; She would have her Will, ay marry would
she, and that was all the Harm in it. But it is another manner of Business when
Men come once to be Transported out of the Government of Themselves, and beyond
the Use of their Reason. Their Violences are Mortal and Outrageous, even to the
Ruin of Kingdoms, Commonwealths, Families, Persons, etc. and like a Torrent,
they bear down all before them, Friends, Relations, the common Principles of
Religion and Nature, or whatever else stands in their Way. Nay, they make it a
point of Honor to be Firm to their Wickedness, and with the Old Covenant in
their Mouths to Live and Dye Impenitent. They Will do all the Mischief in fine
that they can, and when they can do no more, they will be Troubled at it, and
call Prick-louse with their Thumbs still, when they can do it no longer with
their Tongues.

FAB. CCCLV. A Woman Drowned.
AN Unfortunate Woman happened to be Drowned, and her Poor Husband was mightily
in Pain to find out the Body; so away he goes along the Bank up the Course of
the River, asking all he met still, if they could tell him any* Tidings of the
Body of his Dear Wife, that was overturned in a Boat at such a Place Below.
Why, if you would find your Wife, they cried, You must look for her down the
Stream. No, No, says the Man, my Wives Will carried her against Wind and Tide
all the Days of her Life; and now she is Dead, which way soever the Current
runs, she will be sure to be against it.

The MORAL.
The Spirit of Contradiction in a Cross Grained Woman is Incurable.

REFLECTION.
THIS falls hard upon the desperate Obstinacy of some Women; and the Freak of
the Conceit does not yet derogate from the usefulness of the Fable. The Analogy
is Pleasant and Pertinent enough, betwixt a Living Crossness of Humor, and
Opposition to the ordinary Course and Reason of Things, and the Fancy of a Dead
Body swimming against the Stream. And the License of Couching the Matter under
that Figure, and of Wording it after that Manner, carries no Offense with it,
either to Congruity, or Good Manners. Beside, that the very Turn and Point of
the Illustration set's a Mark upon it to be Remembered by: So that the Moral
sticks by us, and takes a Deeper Root, when we can call it to Mind afterward by
such or such a Token.

There are some People that Value themselves upon being a kind of Antipodes to
all Mankind, and in making other Men's Rules their Exceptions: Opposition and
Contradiction is their Study and Delight. Now there is (...) much Pride and
Vanity in setting up for the Ringleader of a (...) Practice, as in the
Affectation of being the First Broacher of an (...) Opinion. Hence it comes
that Half the Wit of the World is (...) Paradox; and that which we call Good
Humor, is in Truth (...) of Slight of Hand in Discourse, or a Faculty of
making Truths (...) Appearances, or Appearances like Truths. Now this Gift of
(...) Pocusing, and of Disguising Matters, is so Surprising and Agreeable on
the one hand, that it must of Necessity be a very strong Temptation to the
Quitting of the Beaten Road on the other. Mankind was all cast in the same
Mould, made liable to the same Affections, Enlightened with the same
Principles, and we have all of us the same Rule to Walk by; the same Duties
incumbent upon us in this World, and the same Pretensions to our Part in the
next; insomuch that whoever affects a Fantastical Singularity of Crossness to
all his Fellows, he puts himself in some degree out of the Pale of a common
Providence and Protection: Beside, that the Evil is as incurable in the Man to
whom it is become Habitual, as it was with the Woman here in the Fable.

FAB. CCCLVI. A Bishop and a Curate.
A Certain Country Curate had a Dog that he had a Mighty Kindness for; the Poor
Cur Sickens and Dies, and his Master in Honor of his Memory gave him Christian
Burial. This came to the Bishop's Ear, who presently sent for the Curate,
Rattled him to some Tune, with Menaces to the Highest Degree for bringing such
a Scandal upon the Function. My Lord, (says the Curate,) If your Lordship had
but known the Understanding of this Dog, both Living and Dying, (and especially
how Charitable an End he made,) You would not have Grudged him a Place in the
Churchyard among the rest of his Fellow-Parishoners. How so, says the Bishop?
Why my Lord, says the Curate, when he found he was Drawing Home, he sent for a
Notarius, and made his Testament. There Is my Poor Lord Bishop in Want, says he,
and it is my Will to leave him a Hundred Crowns for a Legacy. He charged me to
see it performed, and I have it here in a Purse for your Lordship ready
Counted. The Bishop upon the Receipt of the Money, gave the Priest Absolution,
and found it a very Good Will, and a very Canonical Burial.

The MORAL.
Money Corrupts both Church and State.

REFLECTION.
THERE may be Ill Men in Holy Orders, and the Lewdness of the Person does not
at all derogate from the Sacredness of the Function. Avarice on the one hand,
is an Encouragement as well as a Protection to Licentiousness on the other,
when People know beforehand, that Money will Compound all Differences. Nay, and
Money is a Protestant Reconciler too as well as a Popish, when Passion and
Corruption come once to be Authorized under the Venerable Cover of a Sacred
Character; only the Bishop Absolves Himself in the one Case, as he does the
Curate in the other. So that Money upon the Main, serves for the Touchstone of
Common Honesty, Faith, Law and Religion: The Devil holds the Scale, and Profit
or Loss is made the Standard of Gospel or Heresy. It Pleads all Causes, Defends
all Titles, and turns Christianity it self into a Moot Point. It sets Texts
together by the Ears, as well as Divines, and makes the Voice of God to be of
more Authority in the Mouths of the Multitude, than in the Oracles of Holy
Writ. It Is the Idol that Men of all Ranks and Professions Bow to; Statesmen,
Swordmen, Lawyers, Ecclesiastics, etc. there is hardly any thing in Nature
that has the Heart to withstand it; bating here and there some singular
Exception perhaps from a General Rule. What are Courts more than Common
Markets, where Men are Bought and Sold in the one, as Beasts are in the other?
The Captain Fights for his Pay; the Lawyer Pleads for his Fee, no Matter for
the Conscience of the Cause; the one's a Soldier of Fortune he tells ye, the
other is a Lawyer of Fortune; and for the Business of Right or Wrong, it is not
one Scruple of the Question. It Is Money in fine, that like the Devil, makes Men
Sail with all Winds, and sets all Wheels a going. Nay the very Altar it self
scapes not the Almighty Power of so Irresistible a Temptation; for we are
taught in this Fable, that an Episcopal Habit is not one jot better Proof
against Corruption, than a Colonels Buff-Coat. It Is not a Sanctimonious
Pretense, under a Pomp of Form and Title, without the Grace of an Inward
Affection and Integrity that will serve the Turn: The Articles of the Christian
Faith, and the Doctrine of our Blessed Lord and his Apostles, are to Day, and to
Morrow and the same for ever; not to be Molded and Accommodated to every turn
of State, but to be held and kept Inviolate as a standing Rule to all Ages.
There are no such Worshippers of the Devil, as the Buyers and Sellers of Souls;
there is nothing they will stick at, but Shuffle, Cant, Juggle, Swear back and
forward like so many Spiritual Knights of the Post; serve all Times, and all
God's, even though Paganism it self should turn up Trump; for this sort of
Prostitutes steer all their Actions by the Compass of Viderit Utilitas, and for
the Dogs Legacy Absolve the Devil himself, and with this Beastly Avaricious
Bishop, Pronounce the Blackest Soul in Hell to be as White as Snow.

FAB. CCCLVII. A Husband, Wife, and Ghostly Father.
A Man of Quality had gotten a Peevish Contentious Woman to his Wife, that was
observed to go every Day to Confession, and her Business was not so much to
Discharge her Conscience of her own Sins, as to tell Tales of her Husband. The
Holy Father would be ever and anon Chiding and Admonishing the Cavalier,
telling him, that if he would but come to Confession, he doubted not but to
make Him and his Wife Friends again. The Gentleman said, Yes, he would, and he
went accordingly. The Good Man then bad the Penitent be sure to Examine himself
thoroughly, and leave nothing out: Alas, Father, says he, for that Matter there
will be no need on it; for you have had all my Sins in Confession from my Wife
already, and a Thousand times more perhaps than ever I Committed.

The MORAL.
Calumny is half the Business of a Bigot: Bitterness passes for Zeal, and our
very Devotions are in Effect but Libels against our Superiors.

REFLECTION.
THERE IS no such Cloak as Religion for all manner of Wickedness, and the Man is
a stark Fool that cannot Impose upon his Neighbor, when he has once got the
Mastery of his own Conscience: There Is no Evidence of our Thoughts, but our
Works; and if an Hypocrite can but Conceal himself from the Eyes of his
Companions, he never troubles his Head to Consider how Open he lies to the
Searcher of his Heart. What was the Penitent's Confession here, but a Cover for
her Calumny? And her Husband's way after that of giving the Holy Father to
Understand the Truth of the Matter, was a Turn Pleasant enough.

It Is a Field of a Huge Latitude that the Devil has to Dance, and to Play his
Gambols in, when he sets himself to Preach upon the Text of Religion and
Conscience. In the Troubles of King Charles the First, what with Humiliations
and Thanksgivings, Seditious Lectures, and Pulpit-Invectives, the People had
hardly any other Business at Church than to tell God Almighty Tales of their
Sovereign: So that this Unhappy Prince might have Answered his Confessarius
upon the shrift of an Auricular Confession, as our Husband Answered his here in
the Fable, That Others had done it for him, and told more then All beforehand.
This was the Method of their Proceedings toward him through the whole Course of
his Distresses, from the First Odious Remonstance, to the Last Execrable Stroke
upon the Scaffold. They began with Blasting him in his Reputation; they took up
Arms against him, Hunted and Pursued him; Seized his Revenues and his Person,
Deposed him from his Royal Dignity, Usurped the Government to Themselves, and
under the Color of a Formality of Law, put him upon a Judicial Trial, and took
away his Life. And not One Step did they set all this while in the whole Tract
of this Iniquity, without Seeking the Lord first, and going up to Enquire of
the Lord, according to the Cant of those Days. Which was no other than to make
God the Author of Sin, and to Impute the Blackest Practices of Hell to the
Inspiration of the Holy Ghost.

FAB. CCCLVIII. An Old Man and an* Ass.
AN Old Man and a Little Boy were driving an Ass before them to the Next Market
to Sell. Why have you no more Wit, (says one to the Man upon the Way,) than You
and your Son to Trudge it afoot, and let the Ass go Light? So the Man set the
Boy upon the Ass, and Footed it Himself. Why Sirrah, says Another after this,
to the Boy, Ye Lazy Rogue you, must you Ride, and let your Ancient Father go
afoot? The Man upon this, took down his Boy, and got up Himself. Do You see (says
a Third) how the Lazy Old Knave Rides Himself, and the Poor Little Child has
much ado to Creep after him! The Father, upon this, took up his Son Behind him.
The next they met, asked the Old Man whether his Ass were his Own or no? He
said Yes. Troth, there is little sign on it says the other, by your Loading him
thus. Well says the Fellow to Himself, and what am I to do now? for I am
Laughed at, if either the Ass be Empty, or if One of us Rides, or Both; and so
in the Conclusion he Bound the Asses Legs together with a Cord, and they tried
to carry him to Market with a Pole upon their Shoulders betwixt them. This was
Sport to every Body that saw it, insomuch that the Old Fellow in great Wrath
threw down the Ass into a River, and so went his way Home again. The Good Man,
in fine, was willing to Please Every body, but had the Ill Fortune to Please No
body, and lost his Ass into the Bargain.

The MORAL.
He that resolves not to go to Bed till all the World is Pleased, shall be
troubled with the Head Ach.

REFLECTION.
So many Men, so many Minds; and this Diversity of Thought must necessarily be
attended with Folly, Vanity, and Error: For Truth is one and the same for Ever,
and the Sentence of Reason stands as Firm as the Foundations of the Earth. So
that no Man can be either Happy or Secure that governs himself by the Humor
and Opinion of the Common People. It Is a Thing utterly impossible to Please
All, and none but a Mad Man will endeavor to Please those that are Divided
among themselves, and can never Please one another. A Wise, and an Honest Man
lives by Rule, and Consults the Conscience of his Actions, without any Regard
to Popular Applause. Did ever any Mortal yet in his Right Wits, Advise with the
Mobile about the Government of his Life and Manners? (Or which is all one, with
the Common and Professed Enemies of Reason and Virtue,) Did ever any Creature
make a Friend or Confident of them? Why should we be sollicitous then to be
thought well of by those that no Prudent Good Man ever thought well of? They
are all Passion and Fancy, without either Judgment or Moderation: They neither
understand what they do, nor why; but act with a kind of Impetus, that knows
neither Consideration nor Conduct. So that it is in truth, a Scandal, and an
Ill Sign to Please them; but a worse yet, for a Man to Value himself upon the
Reputation of a Popular Favor. What are their Affections but Violent
Transports that are carried on by Ignorance and Rage? What are their Thoughts
of Things, but variety of Incorrigible Error? And what are they themselves in
their own Nature, but a Herd rather than a Society? Their Humor is very
Happily set forth in this Fable; and so is the Vanity of the Old Man's
endeavoring to keep Fair with them; for they are still unsatisfied with the
Present State of Things, and consequently never to be Pleased. Now if a Man had
nothing else to do but to Fool away his Days in the Pursuit of Phantomes and
Shadows, and then at last lie down in the Dust like a Brute, without any Fear
or Danger of an after-Reckoning, the Care were taken; but for a Reasonable Soul
to Post-pone the most Necessary Offices and Duties of Life, and to Hazard the
very loss even of Heaven it self, in favor of a Depraved Appetite? What has he
to Answer for, that shall be found Guilty of so Impious a Madness? The very
Dog's not worth the Hanging, that runs out at Check, and lets every Cackling
Crow or Daw Divert him from his Game and Business. To Conclude; a due
Consideration of the Vanities of the World, will Naturally bring us to the
Contempt of it; and that Contempt of the World will as certainly bring us Home
to our Selves. This was the Case of the Poor Man here, when he had Tried this,
and that, and the other Experiment, he threw all his Care and Follies together
with his Ass into the River: And then he was at Rest.

FAB. CCCLIX. A Man Dreamt he found Gold.
A Man fancied in his Sleep once, that he was carried by the Devil into a Field
to Dig for Gold, where he found a Great Treasure; so the Devil advised him not
to take it away with him at present, but rather to leave some particular Mark
upon the Place, that he might find it another time. What Mark? says the
Dreamer. Even down with your Breeches quoth the Devil, and lay your Tail there;
my Life for yours, do but keep your own Council, and no Body will look for Gold
in that Place. The Fellow did as he was bid, and when he Waked, he found that
his Dream was out.

The MORAL.
He that Consents to deal with the Devil for Money in his Sleep, it is to be
feared he would do it Waking too, if it lay fair for his Hand.

REFLECTION.
IT is a School-Question how far a Man is Answerable in many Cases for his
Dreams: Now here was Deliberation, Discourse, and Consent; So that both the
Understanding and the Will had their Parts in the Story: Where Avarice was at
One End on it, 'twas no wonder that the Devil should be at the Other. But Men go
to the Devil for Money Waking as well as Sleeping: Nay and Men of all Sorts and
Qualities too, from the Prince to the Beggar. Churchmen, Statesmen, Tradesmen,
Lawyers, and who not? And if all that go to Hell upon that Errand, should
beshit the Sheets, there would be a World of Work for the Wash-Women.

FAB. CCCLX. A Country Fellow and a Hog.
IN a Certain Country, where it was the Custom for any Man that Killed a Hog,
to Invite the Neighborhood to Supper with him; a Curmudgeonly Fellow that had
a Hog to Kill, advised with One of his Companions how he might save the Charge
of that Supper. Why (says he) do but give it out to Morrow Morning, that the
Hog was Stolen the Night before; set a Good Face on it, and your Work is done.
Away goes this Man Open-Mouth, next Morning, Bawling it about, that his Hog was
Stolen. Right, Right, says his Camarade, Roar it out as I bad you. Ay, but
says the Hog-Merchant, with Damned Oaths and Imprecations, My Hog is Stoll'n in
Good Earnest. Upon my Life, says the other, thou do it Rarely. So the one Swore
on, and the other Fooled on, till in the Conclusion the Churl found he was
Banter'd out of his Hog; for the Hog was Stolen indeed.

The MORAL.
Penny Wise, and Pound Foolish.

REFLECTION.
IT IS a Point of Decency and Discretion for a Man to Comply with the Common
Customs of the Place, where he Lives, over and above the Rules of Good
Neighborhood and Society. So that the Old Hunks here was well enough served to
be Tricked out of a Whole Hog for the Saving of his Puddings: And it was so
much the Better too, that he was of the Plot to the Fooling of Himself, and had
his own Jest turned upon him in Earnest: For he was caught in his own Snare,
and met withal as we say, in his own Kind. And we may make this further Use
on it, That an Ill Natured Thrift, is next Door to Squandring: He was Cheated,
and he was Laughed at, and he Deserved both; for he made himself a Party to the
Picking of his own Pocket, and the very Sham that he designed upon his
Neighbors was turned upon Himself. The Frolic was Pleasant and Pertinent
enough, but the Conscience of the Case is another Question; though there is this
to be said for it, that it was but one Fraud paid with another, and that he
Himself went half way in it by his own Consent. 'Twas with the Man and the Hog,
as with the Boy and the Wolf; he would be Crying a Wolf, a Wolf, when there was
none, and then could not be Believed when there was.

FAB. CCCLXI. A Florentine and a Horse-Courser.
A Florentine bought a Horse for so many Crowns; upon condition to pay one Half
down upon the Nail, and be a Debtor for the rest. The Horse-Courser comes to
the Florentine next Morning for the Remainder of the Money. Soft, says the
Florentine, A Bargain's a Bargain: My Contract was to be your Debtor for the
Rest, and if I Pay it, I Am no longer your Debtor.

The MORAL.
Conceits and Witticisms pay no Scores.

REFLECTION.
THIS Fable is only a Silly Tale told for the Tale's sake, without any further
Mystery or Meaning that I can perceive in it. If the Florentine had been
Drubb'd, or laid by the Heels for the Fallacy, or but Laughed at for the
Conceit, it would have served for a Caution to People how they Trifle, and play
the Tonies betwixt Jest and Earnest, in Matters of Common Honesty, Good Faith
and Business. Or it would have born a Moral, to Discountenance the Levity of
Punning and Iingling; and the Childish Humor of Fooling with Mental
Reservations and Double Meanings. But as it is, I can find nothing more in it
than a Frothy, Empty Story. It may serve however as a Buoy to keep People at a
Distance, and give Notice of a Shelf or a Flat. For the Silliness of taking
Delight in this Vulgar way of Sophism, is to me as arrant an Indication of an
Innocent, as a Bib and a Bauble. So that the Doctrine of a Thing done here,
teaches us what we are not to do; that is to say, we are neither to Meditate
Fraudulent Contracts, nor to take Childish Collusions in Conversation for
Current Payment.

FAB. CCCLXII. A Christian and a Pagan.
A Christian and a Pagan, that had been Old Acquaintances and
Fellow-Travellers, had several Discourses upon the way together about Religion;
and coming into Italy, the Christian advised the Infidel for his better
Satisfaction, only to go to Mass once, and then tell him what he thought on it.
The Pagan accordingly went to Church, and being afterward asked his Opinion of
the Ceremonies and Solemnity of the Office, his Answer was, That he saw but one
Thing there that he Disliked; which was, that it looked a little Uncharitable
for one Man to Eat and Drink by Himself, and all the rest to look on.

The MORAL.
It Is much with Opinions as it is with Tastes, we can no more Command our
Judgments than our Palates.

REFLECTION.
THE Poison of this Fable in the Liberty of Jesting with Holy Matters, would
need an Antidote to go along with it, if it were not that it is a Pagan's
Conceit, and consequently suitable enough to the Character and Humor of an
Infidel, to have the Offices of Christianity in Derision. If we take it by that
Handle, it may serve for a Reproof to those among our selves, (as we have but
too many of them,) that take the same Freedom of Scoffing at Religion, and
Religious Rites and Ceremonies. These People pass in the World under the Name
of Christians, but in their Hearts and Manners they are little better than
Pagans: The Frolic of a Merry Word goes further with them, than the Conscience
of their Profession, and if they can but Elude the Dint of a Pinching
Conviction by some Trivial Jest, the Conceit they think Attones for the
Wickedness.

FAB. CCCLXIII. An Ass taught Grammar.
THere was a Bold Undertaking Pedant, Wager'd his Neck against a certain Sum of
Money, that in Ten Years time he would Teach an Ass to Write, Read, and Chop
Logic. His Friends called him a Thousand Madmen for casting away his Life
upon so Absolute an Impossibility. Pray Gentlemen (says the Undertaker,) have
but a little Patience; for it is odds, that before the Term's out, either the
Prince Dies, (that is a a Party to the Contract,) or the Ass Dies, or the
Adventurer Dies, and then the Danger's over.

The MORAL.
Collusion without Malice, is in many Cases, not only Laudable but Necessary.

REFLECTION.
THERE are some Cases wherein a Man may Justify some sort of Shuffling and
Evading, without any Offense to Honor or Good Faith; as in a case for the
Purpose, where the gaining of Time, may be as much as a Man's Life or Estate is
worth. Some Men are but one Remove from some Asses, and the difficulty of
Teaching the one, is next door to the impossibility of Teaching the other. The
very Proposition is a Whimsy Pleasant enough, to show the Vanity of attempting
to make a Philosopher of a Blockhead: Neither is it of a Quality to be
understood according to the Letter. So that in such a case, if a Man can but
save himself by a Shift, or a Figure, it is all that can be desired; and the
Conditions naturally implied, fall within the fair Equity of the Question.
There are certain Bounds and Terms of Raillery that may very well stand with
the Rules of Honesty and Good Manners; that is to say, Where the Liberty
carries neither Malice, Sauciness, nor Ill Nature along with it: And the
discreet manage of such a sort of Freedom, betwixt Jest and Earnest, Seasons
the Entertainment of an Agreeable Conversation. We should say to our selves in
all our Distresses upon the apprehension of Temporal Difficulties to come, as
this Pedant in the Fable did to his Relations and Companions; Let it be
Bondage, Loss of Friends, Beggary, Banishment, nay Death it self, [ This or
that may Intervene.] It is an Unaccountable weakness for a Man to put himself
upon the Torture at present, for fear somebody else should Torment him Seven
Years hence. Is it not enough for us to be Miserable when the time comes,
unless we make our selves so Beforehand, and by Anticipation? When we have gone
as far as Conscience, Honor, Industry, and Human Prudence can carry us, toward
the preventing, or the averting of the Danger that threatens us, we are to
remit the rest to Providence, and wait the good Pleasure of Heaven with
Patience, Humility and Resignation. This Man was to dye at Seven Years end,
unless he could bring to pass a thing Impossible. Now sooner or later, (and
which of the Two is uncertain,) we are all of us to dye. Why are we not as
Sollicitous now for the Certainty of the Thing, as for the Appointment of the
Time, when a Thousand Accidents may interpose to divert the one, and the other
is wholly inevitable?

FAB. CCCLXIV. A Priest and Epiphany.
TO Morrow (says the Curate) is to be Celebrated the Feast of Epiphany: I do
not know whether the Saint be a Man or a Woman; but the Day however is to be
observed with Great Solemnity.

The MORAL.
The Silliness of the Person does not at all Derogate from the Dignity of his
Character and Commission.

REFLECTION.
THIS is a Dry Fable, and there is nothing to be gotten out of it but by
Squeezing. It may pass however with a little Force, for a Reproach upon the
Ignorance of many People in their own Trade, provided always that there be no
Reflection upon the Profession it self, which is but too much the Practice of
Loose Men, and of Troublesome Times; as if the Commission were to Blame for the
Person's sake that Abuses it. There are Men of all sorts, Good and Bad, in all
Functions and Societies; and the Order, or the Office, is never the worse for
the Failings of an Ill, or a Weak Man that has the Execution of it. It was well
turned by Mr. Seldom upon an Alderman in the Long-Long Parliament, on the
Subject of Episcopacy. Mr. Speaker, says the Alderman, there are so many
Clamours against such and such of the Prelates, that we shall never be Quiet
till we have no more Bishops. Mr. Seldom upon this, Informs the House, what
Grievous Complaints there were for high Misdemeanors against such and such
Aldermen, and therefore, says he, by a Parity of Reason, it is my Humble Motion
that we may have no more Aldermen. Here was the Fault transferred to the
Office, which is a Dangerous Error; for not only Government, but Human Society
it self may be dissolved by the same Argument, if the Frailties or Corruptions
of Particular Men shall be Revenged upon the whole.

FAB. CCCLXV. A Lavern Reckoning paid with a Song.
A Hungry Traveller stepped into an Eating House for his Dinner, and when he had
filled his Belly, mine Host brought him his Reckoning. Well, says the
Traveller, I must even pay you with a Song now; for I have not one Penny of
Money. 'Tother told him in short, that his Business was Money, not Music. But
what if I should give you a Song yet that shall content you? (says the Man
again,) will you not take that for Satisfaction? Yes says the Victualler, if I
like it. So he fell to Singing I know not how many Songs, one ofter another;
but the Master told him in one Word, that Songs would pay no Scores where he
had to do. Well (says the Songster,) let me try but once more now, and I shall
go near to fit ye. So he took out his Purse as if he would Open it, and at the
same time sung him a Song with this Bob to it, Out with your Purse, and Pay your
Host. How dy'e like this now? says the Traveller! Oh very well says mine Host.
Why I thought I should fit you at last with a Song that would Please you, quoth
the other, and so he went away.

The MORAL.
There are some ways of Fooling that do the Business of Skill and Address.

REFLECTION.
THE Conceited Sharper here in the Fable, sets forth the Humor and Character
of the Spunging Buffoons that a Man meets every Day in his Porridge Dish: That
is to say, in Courts and at Great Men's Tables, as well as elsewhere. These same
Jack-Pudding Smell-Feasts are certainly the most Despicable Creatures under the
Sun, unless perhaps their Patrons that Protect and Encourage them may be the
more Contemptible Wretches of the Two. They make Fooling their Business and
their Livelihood, and live like Izeland Shocks, by showing Tricks for Bread.
They turn Conversation into a direct Farce: Their Wit is either Scurrilous or
Frothy, which they manage at such a Rate as if Human Reason were a Faculty only
to make Sport with all.

FAB. CCCLXVI. A Friar, a Laique and a Wolf.
A Certain Mendicant (one of those that beg in the Name of St. Anthony,)
contracted with a Country Fellow for such a quantity of Corn to Ensure his
Sheep, and his Husbandry for that Year. The Man depended so absolutely upon
this Security, that he even left his Sheep to look to themselves; and the Wolf
picked up I know not how many of them. This past on, till the Holy Brother came
for his next Years Provision. Yes, says the Clown, Your'e a Trusty Spark
indeed, to take Charge of my Sheep, and then let the Wolf Eat them all; your
Promises are not worth a Fart, and I Will have no more to do with you. Ah! that
same Villainous Wolf, says the Religious! Indeed you must have a care of him,
for he is even so wicked a Beast, that he shall not only Deceive St. Anthony,
but St. Anthony's Master himself too, if he had it in his Power.

The MORAL.
All Promises are either broken or kept.

REFLECTION.
HERE IS a Reproof to all Religious Cheats and Impostors that Promise more than
they are able to Perform, and Preach those Doctrins to their Disciples, which
they do not Believe themselves. When Churchmen come once to be Mercenary, and
to Prostitute the Truth for Money, no wonder, after their Example, if the Laity
Govern their Consciences too by the same Measure. It makes Religion look liker
a Trade; or a Contrivance of State, than a Divine Inspiration: Nay, it staggers
People in the very Foundations of their Faith, to see Ministers at Variance
with themselves, and the Pulpits changing with the Times, and paradoxing upon
the Gospel. Holy Men Teach in their Lives as well as with their Lips, and it
draws an Irreverence upon the Function, where the one bears a Contradiction to
the other. There must be no Preaching of Salvation one Day, and Damnation
another, upon one and the same Text. There are Quacks in Divinity, as well as
in Physic, and Pretenders to the Absolving of all Sins, as well as to Remedies
for all Diseases. But the Curate went beyond his Province, when he stretched
his Patent for the Cure of Souls, to a kind of Tutelary Guardianship over Goods
and Chattels. When such an Impostor has once forfeited the Credit of his
Doctrine, it is a shrewd Temptation to his Disciples to question the very (...)
of his Commission, and to take the Stories he tells 'em of the next World, to
be no better than a Trick of Spiriting Men away into a Fool's Paradise: But
when he comes once to be Detected, he has either the Wolf or the Devil to bring
him off again.

FAB. CCCLXVII. A Priest and a Sick Man.
A Priest that was willing to give a Sick Man a Word of Comfort in his Extreme
Misery, told him, That whom the Lord loves he Chastens. It Is no wonder he has
so few Faithful Servants then, says the Poor Man; and I Am afraid he will even
have Fewer if he goes this way to work.

The MORAL.
Ignorance is some sort of Excuse, for a Man that Speaks or does an Ill thing,
with a good Intention, or without Understanding that he does or says Amiss.

REFLECTION.
A Man should no more commit such a Freak as this is, to the Public, without
somewhat of a Caution or Control upon it, than he would throw Rats-bane up and
down a House where Children and Fools might come at it: For there are Liquorish
and Inconsiderate Readers, as well as Children, and the one in as much danger
of Mistaking Evil for Good, as the other of taking a Dose of Mercury, for a
Sweetmeat. As for Example, here is a Lewd, Atheistical Fancy exposed at Random,
which some People will be forward enough to take, as it stands Uncorrected, for
a very fine thing said, and by that means give some sort of Reputation to a
Liberty that is not upon any terms to be endured. Now we are in Charity to
presume, that the Author never intended this Extravagant Instance for a
President, and therefore the Imperfection of the Fable, must be helped out by
some Pertinent Application of it in an Instructive Moral.

The Doctrine that arises from this Text, will fall under the Topic of the
Government of the Tongue, and reach, in the Latitude, to all the Transports and
Excesses of that Unruly Member: as Blasphemy, Calumny, Scurrility,
Profaneness, False, Vain, and Evil-Speaking and the like; which are all
naturally enough reducible to the same Head, as they do effectually proceed
from the same Root. He that has gotten a Habit of letting his Tongue run before
his Wit, will rather lose his Honor or his Friend, than his Jest; nay, and
venture his Salvation over and above too, into the bargain. As in the Case here
before us, where we have a Libertine Fooling even in his Last Agonies, with a
Witticism betwixt his Teeth, without any regard to the Circumstances of
Sobriety and Conscience. But this is a Wickedness only for Profligates and
Madmen, to make Sport with, and Men of better Sense to Tremble at; for there
must be no Quibling and Trifling with the Majesty and Judgments of the Almighty.

FAB. CCCLXVIII. A Physician that Cured Madmen.
THere was a Physician in Milan that took upon him to Cure Madmen; and his way
was this: They were Tied Naked to a Stake, and then set up right in a Nasty
Puddle, Deeper or Shallower, according to the degree of the Distemper; and
there to continue, till betwixt Cold and Hunger they might be brought to their
Wits again. There was one among the rest, that after Fifteen Days Soking, began
to show some signs of Amendment; and so got leave of the Keeper for the Liberty
of the Court, and the House, upon condition not to set Foot over the Threshold
of the Street-Doors. He past his Promise, and was as good as his Word.

As he was standing one Day at the Outer-Gate, there came a Falkner Riding by,
with his Kites and his Curs, and all his Hawking Trade about him. Hark ye Sir,
says the Madman, a word with you: And so he fell to asking him Twenty Idle
Questions, What was this, and what was that, and 'tother? And what was all this
good for? and the like. The Gentleman gave him an Answer to every thing in
Form. As for Example, This that I Ride upon, (says he) is a Horse, that I keep
for my Sport; this Bird upon my Fist is a Hawk that Catches me Quails and
Partridges; and those Dogs are Spaniels to spring my Game. That Is well, says
the Fool, and what may all the Birds be worth now, that you catch in a Twelve
Month? Why it may be some Ten or Fifteen Pound perhaps, says 'tother. Ay but
(says the Mad Fellow again,) what may all your Hawks, Dogs, and Horses cost you
in a Year? Some Fifteen times as much perchance, says the Falkner. Get you out
of the way then immediately (cries the Fool,) before our Doctor gets sight of
you; for if he sow^'d me up to the Middle in the Pond, you will be in as sure as
a Gun up to the Ears if he can but set Eye on ye.

The MORAL.
Every Man living is Mad in some respect or other, and the Doctors themselves
as Mad as the Patients.

REFLECTION.
THIS Story gives us to understand in the Application of it, that there are
more Madmen out of Bedlam than in it; and that according to Horace, We are all
Mad, every Mother's Child of us, more or less; and therefore it is but
Neighbourly Justice for One Madman to bear with another. 'Twas well enough
said of a Fellow in a Mad-House that was asked in the Interval of his
Distemper, how he came to be there? Why, says he, The Mad Folks abroad are too
many for us, and so they have Mastered all the Sober People, and Cooped 'em up
here. There Is an Alienation of Mind in the Moral, as well as in the Physical
Acceptance of the Expression; and he is as Mad a Man that abuses his Reason, as
he that has lost the Exercise of it: Beside, that there is as great a Diversity
of Freak and Extravagancy in the one Sense as in the other; and they have their
Paroxisms and their Intermissions both alike. Every Man Living in fine, has his
weak side, and it is but striking the right Vein to set the Humor a Working.

The General Doctrine of this Parable, we find summed up in a very few Words
here; that is to say, he that eagerly pursues any thing, and gives more for it
than it is worth, is no better than a Madman. Now the way to make a true
estimate, both of the Price and of the Purchase, is only to set the one against
the other, and so to Balance the Account. One Man's Head runs Riot upon Hawks,
Hounds, Dice, Drabs, Drinking, Revelling, and for Brevity sake, we may even
take in the whole Roll of Good Natured Sins and Pleasures, (if I may call them
so,) that may serve to Gratify a Sensual Appetite. Let but a Man consider now
the Time, Money, Care, Labor, and Vexation that this Wild-Goose-Chase has cost
him, and then say to himself on the other hand, what have I gotten to answer
all this Expense, but the Loose, Giddy Frolic of a few Mad Hours, attended
with Claps, Gouts, Palsies, Infamy, Beggary, Nauseous Qualms, Surfeiting
Satieties, Anxiety of Thought and Conscience, and all attended with the Anguish
of a Late and an Unprofitable Repentance in the Conclusion? And it is the same
thing too with the Diabolical Transports of Ambition, Pride, Envy, Revenge, and
the like; over and above the Irreparable Loss of a Thousand Blessed
Opportunities, to the extreme Hazard of Eternity it self. When it is come to
this once, there is no way but the Doctor's Discipline; that is to say,
Mortification and Affliction to bring us to our selves again.

FAB. CCCLXIX. A Country Fellow Climbing a Tree.
A Country Fellow got an Unlucky Tumble from a Tree: Why this it is, (says a
Passenger,) when People will be doing things Hand over Head, without either
Fear or Wit: Now could I have taught you a way to climb a Thousand Trees, and
never hurt your self with a Fall. Alas, says 'tother, the Advice comes too late
for this Bout, but let us have it however; for a body may be the better for it
another time. Why then (says the Traveller,) You must take care for the future,
whenever you Climb another Tree, that you come no faster down than you went up.

The MORAL.
Do nothing Rashly.

REFLECTION.
IT IS Good Counsel rather to take Time and Leisure in matters that will bear
it, then to venture Neck and All with overmuch Have.

All Rash and Aspiring Humors, fall under the Reproof of this Moral; for there
are Climbers in State, as well as in Woods and Orchards; and Favorites run as
great a Risque in Mounting to Honors, Charges and Preferments, as the Fellow
did here in Climbing an Apple Tree. Their Rise is commonly Gentle and Step by
Step; but when they are once up, they are in danger of falling down again by
their own Weight: Wherefore Slow and Sure in these Cases, is good Counsel. It Is
a Roguy kind of a Saying, that He that will be Rich before Night, may be Hanged
before Noon. High Places are Slippery, and it turns the very Brain of a Man to
look down from 'em. He that first called Experience the Mistress of Fools,
might at the same time have told us upon the Opposition, that Nature is the
Mistress of Wise Men: Only the one looks forward from the Causes into the
Effects, and the other traces the Truth, and the Reason of Things backward,
from the Effects up to their Causes. That is to say, the one Teaches us Wit, by
showing us where we played the Fool, and the other Teaches us Wit, by keeping
us beforehand from Playing the Fool at all. To apply this Moral to the Fable
now, the stress of it rests upon the matter of Foresight, and After-Wit, and
the Doctrine tells us, that he that wants the one, must make his Best of the
other: This was the very Case of the Man in the Orchard here, before and after
his Fall. Now Nature does nothing by Starts and Leaps, or in a Hurry, as we
say; but all her Motions are Gradual, Regular, and without Noise, which may
serve us for a Lesson, and a President, not to do any thing Rashly.

FAB. CCCLXX. One that had Lost his Money and Clothes at Play.
A Fellow that had lost his Money and Clothes at Play, stood sniv'ling at a
Tavern Door, to think what would become of him. One of his Acquaintance came to
him, and asked him what he Cried for? For Nothing, says he. How come you to Cry
then, says 'tother, if you have nothing to Trouble you? Why for that very
Reason, says he, because I have Nothing. Now the one took it that he had no
Reason to Cry, and the other meant that he Cried because he had nothing left
him.

The MORAL.
Cautions are as Instructive as Precepts; the one shows us what we are not to
do, and the other what we are.

REFLECTION.
THIS Quirk is little better than the Childrens Play of Riddle me, Riddle me;
though the Conceit I know is Celebrated among the Apothegms of the Ancients.
The Money and the Clothes were Lost on purpose to make way for the Jest; as the
Gentleman dropped his Book into the River, off of Maudlin Bridge in Cambridge:
What Is that, says one of his Acquaintance that was passing by? Alas, says
the other, it is Just In; now the Book was Justin. We may observe from hence, what
Pains some Men take to make themselves Ridiculous, and that Study may improve a
Coxcomb as well as a Philosopher. We may learn further, that Men do not know
when they are well, or when they have enough; but shift and squander till they
would half Hang themselves at last, to be where they were again. It may be
another Note too, the Unreasonableness of Jesting in Cases of Distress: So that
the Figure at last is Fool all over. Upon the whole, the Fellow Plays, and
loses his very Backside, and then Cries: And what is all this more now, then
the laying of a Train for bringing in by Head and Shoulders the miserable
Conceit of Nothing upon Nothing.

FAB. CCCLXXI. A Blinkard Buying of Wheat.
UPon a time when there was an Extreme Scarcity of Corn in Florence, a Poor
Wretch with One Eye, was sent to the Market with a Great Sack, to Buy such a
Provision of Wheat: He goes to his Corn-Merchant, and asks him the Price of so
many Measures. Why, says he, one of these Measures is as much as one of your
Eyes is worth; (meaning, that Wheat was very Dear.) Why then cries an Unlucky
Wag, that stood by there, A less Bag methinks might have served your Turn, for
One of those Measures is as much as you are able to Pay for.

The MORAL.
A Ieering Buffoon is the common Enemy of Mankind.

REFLECTION.
IT is a high Point of Ill Nature, and Ill Manners, to make Sport with any Man's
Imperfections that he cannot help; and it holds as well too in the case of our
Misfortunes, if we have not brought them upon our selves by our own Fault. It Is
enough, where any thing of this falls out one way or the other, that Providence
and Nature will have it so: But Intemperate Wits will spare neither Friend nor
Foe; and make themselves the common Enemies of Mankind. Men that are given to
this Licentious Humor of Scoffing at Personal Blemishes and Defects, should do
well methinks to look into themselves a little, and begin their Animadversions
at Home; for which is the Greater Scandal, the want of Charity, Modesty,
Humanity; or the want of an Eye? It Is the Reasonable Soul that makes the Man,
not the Body; and a Deformity in the Nobler Part is Ten Thousand Times more
liable to Reproach, than an Imperfection in the other. We are not answerable
for our Persons, but for our Manners we are. The Scorner should do well also to
consider upon the Sight of a Cripple, or a Monster, that it was only the
Distinguishing Mercy of Heaven that kept him from being one too; and not render
himself by his Ingratitude the more Abominable Monster of the Two. The Boy in
fine, did very Ill, and if he had but been soundly Whipped for it, it would have
Perfected the Morality of the Fable.

FAB. CCCLXXII. A Countryman with his Asses.
A Countryman that had been at Market with his Corn, and was Driving his
Asses Home again, Mounted one of the Best of them to Ease himself: When he was
up, he fell to Counting, and so kept Telling them over and over, all the way he
went, but still wanted one of his Number. Upon this, away he goes to the Market
Town, whence he came, (a matter of Seven Miles off, back again,) Enquiring of
all he met, if any Body had seen his Ass. He could learn no Tidings of him, and
so Home he went, Late at Night, as arrant a Fool, as he set out. The Loss went
to the Heart of him, but upon Alighting, and his Wives giving him the Hint, he
found his Beast again, and that the Ass he rode upon was forgot in the
Reckoning.

The MORAL.
The Butcher looked for his Knife when he had it in his Mouth.

REFLECTION.
IT IS many a Man's Case, to fancy that he wants what in Truth he has; and then
to Tire himself out with Hunting after it Abroad, when he carries it about him
all this while, and may have it better Cheap at Home. The Bare Supposal of one
Petty Loss, makes us unthankful for all that is left. We are naturally apt to
think our Selves Miserable, and the very thinking so makes us so. This Conceit
puts us upon the Ramble up and down for Relief, (and all in vain too,) 'till
very Weariness brings us at last to our selves again, where we find the Ass we
sought for, and the Cure of all our Misfortunes in our own Breasts. A Man may
be so intent upon one thing, as to heed nothing else, as he that spent half a
day to look for his Odd Stocking, when he had them both upon a Leg.

FAB. CCCLXXIII. A Man that Carried his Plough to Ease his Oxen.
A Peasant that had Plowed himself and his Oxen quite a Weary, Mounted an Ass,
with the Plough before him, and sent the Oxen to Dinner: The Poor Ass, he
found, was ready to Sink under the Load, and so he took up the Plough, and
laid it upon his own Shoulders. Now, says he to the Ass, Thou may carry Me
well enough, when I carry the Plough.

The MORAL.
Some Brute Animals, have more understanding then some Men.

REFLECTION.
MAN and Wife are in many Cases the Plough-man here, and his Ass; they think to
Ease one another, not considering that what either of them bears, is a common
Burden to both. There was a Fuddling Couple that sold Ale, and their Humor was
to Drink Drunk Hand to Fist, upon their own Liquor: They laid down their Club
still for what they had, and this they called Forcing a Trade. Now so long as
the Tipple was paid for, all went merrily on they thought, without ever so much
as Dreaming that 'twas at their own Cost. It Is much thereabouts betwixt Rulers
and Subjects: The Prince may carry the Plough perhaps, but the weight of both
Plow and Prince lies upon the Peoples Shoulders.

Miscellany Fables.
FAB. CCCLXXIV. A Fox and a Cat.
THere was a Question started betwixt a Fox and a Cat, which of the Two could
make the best Shift in the World, if they were put to a Pinch. For my own part,
(says Reynard,) when the worst comes to the worst, I have a whole Budget of
Tricks to come off with at last. At that very instant, up comes a Pack of Dogs
full-Cry toward them. The Cat presently takes a Tree, and sees the Poor Fox
torn to Pieces upon the very Spot. Well, (says Puss to her self,) One Sure
Trick I find is better than a Hundred Slippery ones.

The MORAL.
Nature has provided better for us, then we could have done for our selves.

REFLECTION.
ONE Double Practice may be disappointed by another; but the Gifts of Nature
are beyond all the Shams and Shuffles in the World. There Is as much difference
betwixt Craft and Wisdom, as there is betwixt Philosophy and Slight of Hand.
Shifting and Shuffling may serve for a Time, but Truth and Simplicity will most
certainly carry it at the long run. When a Man of Trick comes once to be
Detected, he is Lost, even to all Intents and Purposes: Not but that one
Invention may in some Cases be Honestly Countermin'd with another. But this is
to be said upon the whole matter, That Nature provides better for us, then we
can do for our selves; and instructs every Creature more or less, how to shift
for it self in cases of Ordinary Danger. Some bring themselves off by their
Wings, others by their Heels, Craft or Strength. Some have their Cells or
Hiding Places; and upon the Upshot, they do more by Virtue of a Common Instinct
toward their own Preservation, then if they had the whole College of the
Virtuosi for their Advisers. It was Nature in fine, that brought off the Cat,
when the Foxes whole Budget of Inventions failed him.

FAB. CCCLXXV. The Dancing Apes.
A Certain Egyptian King Endowed a Dancing-School for the Institution of Apes
of Quality; and when they came to be Perfect in their Lessons, they were
Dressed up after the best manner, and so brought forth for a Spectacle upon the
Stage. As they were in the Middle of their Gamboles, somebody threw a Handful
of Apples among them, that set them presently together by the Ears upon the
Scramble, without any regard in the World to the Business in Hand, or to the
Dignity of their Education.

The MORAL.
The Force of Nature is infinitely beyond that of Discipline and Imitation.

REFLECTION.
MEN have their weak Sides as well as Apes, and it is not in the Power of Study
and Discipline to extinguish Natural Inclinations; no not so much as to Conceal
them for any long time, but they will be breaking out now and then by Starts and
Surprises, and discover themselves. The Apes were taught their Apes Tricks by a
Dancing Master; but it was Nature that taught them to Eat Apples, and the
natural Institution was much the stronger of the Two.

FAB. CCCLXXVI. An Ass and Two Travelers.
A Couple of Travelers that took up an Ass in a Forest, fell downright to
Loggerheads, which of the Two should be his Master: So the Ass was to stand by,
to see those Two Boobies try their Title to him by a Rubber at Cuffs. The Ass
very fairly looked on, 'till they had Box'd themselves a Weary, and then left
them both in the Lurch.

The MORAL.
It Is a common thing, both in Love, Law and Arms, for Plaintiff and Defendant
to lie Battering one another for a Prize that gives them both the slip.

REFLECTION.
MANY People have fair Opportunities put into their Hands, and want Wit to make
Use of them. Here was a silly Controversy, as sillily Managed, and Two
Quarrelsom Fools outwitted by an Ass. Why did they not keep him when they had
him sure? Or why did they not Compound the matter, and Divide, when the one had
no more right to him than the other? But this of the Travelers and the Ass is
a common Case, and a Frivolous Contentious Lawsuit is the Moral of it; when
Plaintiff and Defendant are Worrying one another about the Title, till they
have spent the Estate. So the Travelers fought here for an Ass, and the Ass
ran away with the Stakes.

FAB. CCCLXXVII. Mercury and Fishermen.
SOme Fishermen that had caught more Fish then they knew what to do withal,
Invited Mercury to take part with them; but finding that the Invitation was not
so much matter of Respect, as to get rid of the Glut they had taken, he very
fairly left them to Eat by themselves.

The MORAL.
In all the Good Offices of Human Society, it is the Will and the Affection that
Creates the Obligation.

REFLECTION.
IT IS the ordinary Practice of the World, for Men to be kind to other People
for their own Sakes; or at least to be frank of Civilities that cost them
nothing: Wherefore we are to Distinguish betwixt Kindnesses that are only
matter of Course, and Friendly Offices that are done out of Choice and Good
Will. Where Is the Obligation, the Friendship, or the Respect of any Man's
making me a Present of what he neither cares for himself, nor knows what to do
withal? And of that which I am to be never the better for neither? The Fellow
here had taken more Fish then he could spend while they were Sweet, and so
rather then they should lie by to stink him out of the House, he Invited
Mercury to the Eating of them; that is to say, to the Helping him off with 'em.

FAB. CCCLXXVIII. An Eagle and a Beetle.
A Hare that was hard put to it by an Eagle, took Sanctuary in a Ditch with a
Beetle. The Beetle Interceded for the Hare: The Eagle Flapt off the former, and
Devoured the other. The Beetle took this for an Affront to Hospitality, as well
as to her Self, and so Meditated a Revenge, watched the Eagle up to her Nest,
followed her, and took her Time when the Eagle was Abroad, and so made a shift
to Roll out the Eggs, and Destroy the Brood. The Eagle upon this
Disappointment, Timber'd a great deal higher next Bout; the Beetle watched her
still, and showed her the same Trick once again. Whereupon the Eagle made her
Appeal to Jupiter, who gave her leave to lay her next Course of Eggs in his own
Lap. But the Beetle found out a way to make Jupiter rise up from his Throne; so
that upon the Loosning of his Mantle, the Eggs fell from him at Unawares, and
the Eagle was a Third time Defeated. Jupiter stomach'd the Indignity, but upon
Hearing the Cause, he found the Eagle to be the Aggressor, and so Acquitted the
Beetle.

The MORAL.
It Is not for a Generous Prince to Countenance Oppression and Injustice, even
in his most Darling Favorites.

REFLECTION.
THE Rights and Privileges of Hospitality are so Sacred, that Jupiter himself
would not Countenance the Violation of them, even in his own Minion, the Eagle.
Nor is there any thing so despicable, (as we see in the case of the Beetle,)
but Access is open for the Cries of Distressed Innocence, to Divine Justice.
Let no Man presume because he is Great and Powerful, nor Despair because he is
Low and Poor; for the one may Rise and the other may Fall, and the meanest
Enemy may find a way to a Revenge. Tyranny may prosper for a while, it is true,
and under the Countenance of a Divine Permission too, as the Eagle got leave
here to Deposite her Eggs (or her Cause) in Heaven: But Jupiter's Lap it self,
we see, is no Final Sanctuary for an Oppressor. Though nothing is more common
in the World then to mistake Providence and Judgments, and to call the
Wickedest and the worst of Men and of Things by Good Names.

FAB. CCCLXXIX. An Owl and Little Birds.
THere goes a Story of an Owl that was advised by the Little Birds to Build
rather among the Boughs and Leaves as they did, then in Walls and Hollow Trees;
and so they showed her a Young Tender Plant for her Purpose. No, No, says the
Owl, those Twigs in time will come to be Lim'd, and then your'e all Lost if you
do but touch 'em. The Birds gave little Heed to it, and so went on Playing and
Chirping among the Leaves still, and passing their Time there in Flocks as
formerly; till in the conclusion the Sprigs were all Daubed with Lime, and the
Poor Wretches clamm'd and taken. Their Repentance came now too Late; but in
Memory of this Notable Instance of the Owls Foresight, the Birds never see an
Owl to this very Day, but they Flock about her and Follow her, as if it were
for a New Lesson. But our Modern Owls have only the Eyes, the Beak and the
Plume of the Owls of Athens, without the Wisdom.

The MORAL.
Good Counsel is lost upon those that have not the Grace to Hearken to it; or do
not Understand it, or will not Embrace and Follow it in the proper Season.

REFLECTION.
Wholesome Advice is worth nothing, unless it be (in Truth,) Given as well as
taken in Season. This Fable shows the Danger and the Mischief of either
Rejecting, not Heeding, or not Entertaining it; and likewise at the same time,
sets forth how hard a thing it is to fasten Profitable Advice upon Men that
Indulge themselves in Ease and Pleasure. They look upon it as so much time
lost, to employ the Present upon the thought of the Future; and so by one Delay
after another, they spin out their whole Lives, 'till there is no more Future
left before 'em. This Dilatory Humor proceeds partly from a Sloathful Laziness
of Temper; as I knew a Man that would not be got out of his Bed when the House
was afire over his Head. Action is Death to some sort of People, and they would as
live Hang as Work. It arises in a great measure too from an Habitual Heedless
Inadvertency, when Men are so intent upon the Present, that they mind nothing
else; and Counsel is but cast away upon them. Birds of Pleasure, and Men of
Pleasure are too Merry to be Wise; and the case of this Fable is but the common
case of the World. Wholesome Advice comes in at one Ear, and goes out at 'tother.
Men, in short, of Blood and Appetite, have no Foresight (...) and so Postpone
Prudence as a Virtue of another Season.

FAB. CCCLXXX. A Gourd and a Pine.
THere was a Gourd Planted close by a Large Well-spread Pine: The Season was
Kindly, and the Gourd shot it self up in a short time, climbing by the Bows,
and twining about 'em, 'till it topp'd and covered the Tree it self. The Leaves
were Large, and the Flowers and the Fruit fair; insomuch that the Gourd had the
confidence to value it self above the Pine, upon the comparison. Why says the
Gourd, you have been more Years a Growing to this Stature then I have been
Days. Well, says the Pine again, but after so many Winters and Summers as I
have endured, after so many Blasting Colds, and Parching Heats, you see me the
very same thing still that I was so long ago. But when you come to the Proof
once, the First Blight or Frost shall most infallibly bring down that Stomach
of yours, and strip ye of all your Glory.

The MORAL.
Nothing so Insolent and Intolerable as a Proud Upstart that is raised from a
Dunghill; he forgets both his Master and his Maker.

REFLECTION.
THE Gourd here is an Emblem of Vain Pride and Ingratitude; and the Pine bids
Princes and Great Men have a care what Favorites they prefer* and what
Friendships they Entertain; and this for their own sakes, as well as for the
sake of the Public. He Is a Fool that takes himself to be Greater, Richer,
Fairer or Better then he is; or that reckons any thing his own, which is either
but Borrowed, or may be taken away next Moment. He that lives barely upon
Borrowing, is effectually but a Beggar when his Debts are paid. This Gourd in
short, is a Proud Upstart; his Growth is quick, but his Continuance short: He
values himself upon the Feather in his Cap; and in a word, upon those Fooleries
that a Man of Honor and Substance would blush at. And nothing else will serve
him neither, but to (...) Excellencies with those that took him out of the
Dirt; nay, and to elevate himself (when a'lls done) to the Dishonor of his
Supporters. And what is the Issue at last of Encouraging these Minions, but the
bringing of a Scandal upon Common Justice, by a most Permcious Example, that
ends in the very starving as well as the (...) of their* Benefactors; for it is
impossible but they must Pine and Wither, that entertain such Hangers-on. This
Gourd in fine, is the true Emblem of a Court-Leech; he Fastens and Sucks,
without either Mercy or Measure, and when he has drawn his Master Dry, he very
fairly drops off, Changes his Party, and so leaves him.

FAB. CCCLXXXI* A Raven and Wolves.
A Raven that had waited upon a Herd of Wolves a whole Days Ramble, came to 'em
at Night for a share of the Prey they had got. The Wolves answered him, that if
he had gone along with 'em for Pure Love, and not for his Gut, he should have
had his Part: But (said they) a Dead Wolf if it had so fallen out, would have
served a Ravens turn as well as a Dead Sheep.

The MORAL.
Most People Worship for the Loaves, from the very Plough-Tayl to the Crosier
and Scepter; and the World bows to that that is uppermost.

REFLECTION.
IT IS the Intention that qualifies the Action; neither is it for any Man to
pretend Merit, or to challenge a Reward for attending his own Business. The
Raven Dogged the Wolves for his Supper: Now if these Wolves themselves had been
Hounded by a Herd of Tigers, that should have Worried Them, one sort of Carrion
would have been as good to the Raven, as another. This is the Case, as well
betwixt Man and Man, as of Wolves and Ravens, that suck the Blood of those they
Follow and Depend upon, under a Pretext of Service and Kindness. How many
Examples have we seen of this, among those that follow Courts, and the Leaders
of those Followers? If the Master gets the Better on it, they come in for their
Snack; and if he happens to fall in the Chase, his Temporising Friends are the
Foremost to break in upon the Quarry. Whether the Wolves Took or were Taken,
was all a case to the Raven.

FAB. CCCLXXXII. Arion and a Dolphin.
THis Famous Arion was a Great Favorite of Periander the King of Corinth; he
Traveled from thence into Sicily and Italy, where he gathered a great Mass of
Treasure, and gained over and above the Good Will and Esteem of all People
wherever he came. From thence he put himself Abord a Corinthian Vessel, to go
back again, where he got an inkling among the Ships Crew of a Conspiracy to
take away his Life. He Discoursed the Mariners about it, and came in the end to
this composition; that if he would cast himself presently into the Sea, and let
the Conspirators have his Money, there should be no further Violence offered to
his Person. Upon this Agreement he obtained Liberty to give them only one Song
before he Leaped Overbord; which he did, and then Plunged into the Sea. The
Seamen had no thought of his ever coming up again; but by a Wonderful
Providence, a Dolphin took him upon his Back, and carried him off safe to an
Island, from whence he went immediately to Corinth, and presented himself
before Periander, just in the condition the Dolphin left him, and so told the
Story. The King ordered him to be taken into Custody as an Impostor; but at the
same time caused Enquiry to be made after the Ship, and the Seamen that he
spoke of, and to know if they had heard any thing of one Arion where they had
been? They said Yes, and that he was a Man of Great Reputation in Italy, and of
a Vast Estate. Upon these Words, Arion was Produced before them, with the very
Harp and Clothes he had when he Leapt into the Sea. The Men were so confounded
at the Spectacle, that they had not the Face to deny the Truth of the Story.

The MORAL.
Money is the Universal Idol. Profit Governs the World, and Quid Dabitis and
Tradam may be the Motto: But Providence yet in the Conclusion makes all things
work for the Best.

REFLECTION.
SOME Men are worse than some Brutes, and little other than Beasts in the shape
of Reasonable Creatures. This Fable shows us, that Men of Blood will stick at
no Profitable Villainy, but they are Blind, Deaf, and Inexorable where Mony's in
the case. The Charms of Reason, Art and Innocence are Lost upon 'em, and the
Sea it self we see, had more Pity for Arion then the Men. The Dolphin
represents the Instrument of an Overruling Providence that interposes
Miraculously to our Deliverance, when ordinary Means fail us. The Wonderful
Discovery in the Conclusion, serves to show us that Murder will out.

FAB. CCCLXXXIII. A Spider and the Gout.
A Spider that had been at Work a Spinning, went Abroad once for a little
Country Air to Refresh her self, and fell into Company with the Gout, that (by
the way) had much ado to keep Pace with her. When they came at Night to take up
their Lodging, very Inquisitive they were into the Character and Condition of
their Host: But the Spider without any more Ceremony, went into the House of a
Rich Burgher, and fell presently to her Network of Drawing Cobwebs up and down
from one side of the Room to the other; but there were so many Brooms, and
Devilish House-wenches still at hand, that whatever she set up this Moment,
was swept away the next: So that this miserable Insect was the only Creature
within those Walls that felt either Want or Trouble. But the Gout all this
while, was fain to Kennel in the very Rendezvous of common Beggars, where she
was as uneasy, as Hard Lodging, Course Bread, and Puddle-Water could make her.
After a tedious and a restless Night on it, they met again next Morning by
Sunrise, and gave one another the History of their Adventure. The Spider tells
tells first how Barbarously she had been used; how cursedly Nice and Cleanly
the Master of the House was; how impertinently Diligent his Servants were, etc.
And then the Gout Requited the Spider with the Story of her Mortifications too.
They were in short, so unsatisfied with their Treatment, that they resolved to
take quite contrary Measures the next Night. The Spider to get into a Cottage,
and the Gout to look out for a Palace. They did what they Proposed, and never
were Creatures better pleased with their Entertainment. The Gout had her Rich
Furniture, Down-Beds, Beccafica's, Pheasants, Partridges, Generous Wines; the
best in fine, of every thing that was to be had for Money, and all with Pure
Heart, and Good will as we say. The Spider was as much at Ease on the other
hand; for she was got into a House where she might draw her Lines, Work, Spin,
Mend what was Amiss, Perfect what she had Begun, and no Brooms, Snares or Plots
to Interrupt or disturb her. The Two Travelers after this met once again, and
upon conferring Notes; they were both so well satisfied, that the Gout took up
a Resolution for ever after to keep Company with the Rich, the Noble, and the
Voluptuous; and the Spider with the Poor and Needy. What Wise Man I say, upon
these Terms; would not rather take up his Lodging with the Spider in the Fable
here, then with the Gout?

The MORAL.
An Industrious Poverty in a Cell, with Quiet Thoughts, and Sound Sleeps, is
infinitely to be Preferred before a Lazy Life of Pomp and Pleasure: For Courts
are but Nurseries of Diseases and Cares.

REFLECTION.
ONE may be very Uneasy with a Plentiful Fortune, and as Happy in a Mean
Condition; for it is the Mind that makes us either the one or the other. A
Luxurious Court is the Nursery of Diseases; it Breeds 'em, it Encourages,
Nourishes and Entertains them. A Plain, an Honest, and a Temperate Industry,
contents it self with a little; and who would not rather Sleep Quietly upon a
Hammock, without either Cares in his Head, or Crudities in his Stomach, then
lie Carking upon a Bed of State, with the Qualms and Twinges that accompany
Surfeits and Excess?

The End of the Fables in the Common School-Book.
A SUPPLEMENT OF FABLES, OUT OF Phaedrus; Avienus, Camerarius, Neveletus,
Apththonius, Gabrias, Babrias, Abstemius, Alciatus, Boccalini, Baudoin, De la
Fontaine, Aesope en Belle Humeur, Meslier, etc.
FAB. CCCLXXXIV. A Lamb, a Wolf and a Goat.
A Wolf overheard a Lamb Bleating among the Goats. Do You hear Little One, (says
the Wolf,) if it be your Dam you want, she is yonder in the Field. Ay (says the
Lamb,) but I am not looking for her that was my Mother for her Own sake, but
for her that Nurses me up, and Suckles me out of Pure Charity, and Good Nature.
Can any thing be Dearer to you, says the Wolf, then she that brought you forth?
Very Right, says the Lamb; and without knowing or caring what she did: And
pray, what did she bring me forth for too; but to Ease her self of a Burden,
and to deliver me out of her own Belly, into the Hands of the Butcher? I am
more Beholden to her that took Pity of me when I was in the World already,
then to her that brought me into it, I know not how. It Is Charity, not Nature,
or Necessity that does the Office of a Tender Mother.

The MORAL.
There Is a difference betwixt Reverence and Affection; the one goes to the
Character, and the other to the Person, and so distinguishes Duty from
Inclination. Our Mothers brought us into the World; a Stranger takes us up, and
Preserves us in it. So that here is both a Friend and a Parent in the case, and
the Obligation of the one, must not destroy the Respect I owe to the other; nor
the Respect the Obligation: And none but an Enemy will advise us to quit either.

REFLECTION.
MEN are not so sensible of Laws and Duty, as they are of Kindness and Good
Nature; beside, that the Wolf's Pretense of Care for the Poor Lamb, was a
Charity that began at Home.

There is an Affection of Nature, and that which we call a Filial Duty; and
there is an Affection that is grounded upon the Moral Considerations of
Benevolence and Friendship. In the one, we lie under an Obligation of Reverence
and Respect to a Parent, be the Father or Mother what they will; in the other,
we pay a Regard to Civil Acknowledgments and Virtue. Nature, and the Principles
of Nature must be kept Sacred; but Men cannot Love to what degree, or whom, or
what they please: So that in many Cases, we pay a Veneration upon One Score,
and an Affection upon Another; and this Fable does very well distinguish the
Gratitude from the Respect. The Wolves Preaching to the Lamb, is no Ill Emblem
of a Scandalous Minister, that Discredits a very Good Sermon with an Ill Life,
and gives the Lie to his Doctrine, in his Practice. The Wolf took the same Care
of the Lamb, that the Keepers of our Liberties in former days did of the
Innocent People of England. They pretended to put us out of Harms way from
others, that they might Devour us themselves.

FAB. CCCLXXXV. Jupiter's Altar Robbed.
A Thief Kindled his Torch at Jupiter's Altar, and then Robbed the Temple by
the Light on it. As he was Packing away with his Sacrilegious Burden, a Voice,
either of Heaven, or of Conscience, Pursued him. The Time will come (says that
Voice) when this Impious Villainy of Yours shall cost ye Dear; not for the Value
of what you have Stoll'n, but for the Contempt of Heaven and Religion, that you
ought to have a Veneration for. Jupiter has taken care however to prevent these
Insolent Affronts for the Time to come, by an Express Prohibition of any
Communication for the future, betwixt the Fire upon his Altars, and that of
Common Use.

The MORAL.
Nothing more Familiar then to cover Sacrilege, Murder, Treason, etc. with a
Text. And we are also to learn from hence, that we have no greater Enemies many
times, then those we have Nursed and Bred up; and that Divine Vengeance comes
sure at Last, though it may be long first.

REFLECTION.
THE Kindling of a Torch at the Altar, and then Robbing the Church by the Light
on it, is an Old Invention contrived betwixt the World, the Flesh and the Devil;
and will never be out of Date, so long as we hold any Intelligence with the
Common Enemies of Mankind. There Is nothing cuts Religion, like Religion it
self: Texts are put up against Texts, and one Scripture made to fight against
another; insomuch, that the Rule of Faith is Perverted into a Doctrine of Heresy
and Schism; and the Gospel of Peace is made a Voucher for Sedition and
Rebellion. There Is nothing commoner then to cite Holy Writ for the Overturning
of Religion, and to Overruled one Divine Authority with another; nay, and when
all is done, to Justify the Sacrilege of Seizing and Employing the Revenues of
the Church to Profane Uses. And whence comes this Confusion and
Self-Contradiction all this while? but that the Manage of Holy Matters falls
many times into the Hands of Men of more Polite Curiosity and Skill, then
Evangelical Zeal and Affection. The Schoolmen have spun the Thread too fine,
and made Christianity look liker a Course of Philosophy, then a System of
Faith, and Supernatural Revelation: So that the Spirit of it Evaporates into
Niceties and Exercises of the Brain; and the Contention is not for Truth, but
Victory. The whole Business in fine, is sour'd into Altercation and Cavil; but
all must be Remitted to the Judgment of the Great Day, when every Man shall
receive according to his Works: And Woe be then to the Church-Robbers that shall
be found among them that serve at the Altar. But it is no New Thing for Men that
call themselves Professors and Disciples, to Sell and to Betray their Lord and
Master; For Men that wear the Livery of the Church, and Eat the Bread on it, to
offer Sacrilegious Violence to their Holy Mother. And this is the case of
Jupiter's Altar Robbed by the Light of his own Torch: When the House of God is
Rifl'd and Dishonored by his own Domestics; that is to say, when the
Sacrilege is Countenanced by the Authority of a Holy Character, and the
Violence supported by a Text.

FAB. CCCLXXXVI. The Crows and the Pigeons.
THere happened a Suit in Law betwixt the Two Families of the Crows and the
Pigeons; but for Quietness sake, they agreed upon an Order of Reference, and
the Kite was to be Arbitrator. The Cause was Heard, and Judgment given for the
Crows.

The MORAL.
Ask my Brother if I Am a Thief. One Criminal upon the Bench, will be sure to
bring off another at the Bar.

REFLECTION.
INNOCENCE is almost sure to be worsted, wherever it may be Abused with
Security and Advantage. Guilty or not Guilty, is not so much the Point in the
Case here of the Crows and the Pigeons; for the matter in question, is the
Person or Party, not the Fact. The One's in the Plot, let him be never so
Innocent; and the other is as white as the Driven Snow, let him be never so
Criminal. There are Cabals, Ignoramus's, False Witnesses, among Men, as well as
among Birds, with all the Pompous Formalities of Countenancing Fraud and
Corruption, with the Sacred Name of Justice. Set a Kite upon the Bench, and
it is Forty to one he will bring off a Crow at the Bar. Briefly, there is nothing
more in the Iniquity of this Fiction, then what we see every day made good in
common Business and Practice. It Is but dressing up a Bird of Prey in his Cap
and Furrs, to make a Judge of him; and so for a Knight of the Post, it is but
dubbing him with the Title of a King's Evidence, and the Work is done: For in
these Cases, Judge, Jury and Witnesses are all of a Piece.

FAB. CCCLXXXVII. A Gardener and his Landlord
A Man that had made himself a very Fine Garden, was so Pestered with a Hare,
among his Roots, his Plants, and his Flowers, that away goes he immediately to
his Landlord, (a great Huntsman it seems,) and tells him a Lamentable Story of
the Havoc that this poor Hare had made in his Grounds. The Gentleman takes
Pity of his Tenant, and early the next Morning goes over to him with all his
People and his Dogs about him: They call in the First Place for Breakfast, Eat
up his Victuals, Drink him Dry, and Kiss his Pretty Daughter into the Bargain.
So soon as they have done all the Mischief they can within Doors, out they
march into the Gardens to Beat for the Hare: and there down with the Hedges;
the Garden-Stuff goes all to Wreck, and not so much as a Leaf scapes 'em toward
the Picking of a Sallad. Well, (says the Gardener) this is the way of the
World, when the Poor sue for Relief to the Great. My Noble Friend here has done
me more Damage in the Civility and Respect of these Two Hours, than the
uttermost Spite of the Hare could have done me in twice as many Ages.

The MORAL.
Appeals are Dangerous from the Weaker to the Stronger, where the Remedy proves
many times worse then the Disease.

REFLECTION.
HE that finds himself Uneasy, and proposes to mend his Condition in what case
or in what manner soever, should do well to sit down and Compute within
himself; What do I suffer by this Grievance? Can I Remove it or no? What will
it Cost me? Shall I get or Lose by the Change? Will it be worth my while, or
not? Now this is all matter of Course in our ordinary Dealings upon the Truck,
and in common Bargains; and yet where the Peace and Liberty of the Mind, or the
Character of a Wise or a Good Man lies at Stake, we take up Resolutions Hand
over Head, without Calculating upon the Profit or Loss of the Thing in
Question; as in the Instance of the Poor Gardener here. He might have Treated a
Brace of Hares sure, much Cheaper than a Troup of Horsemen, with so many Packs
of Dogs, and such a Gang of Ruffians at the Heels of 'em. Had not he better
have born Wat's Nibling of his Plants and Roots now, than the Huntsman's
Fooling with his Daughter, and the Eating him out of House and Home? The
Breaking down of his Fences; the Laying of his Garden Wast, and taking his
Childrens Meat out of their Mouths, over and above? But all this Befell him for
want of Deliberating beforehand, and setting one thing against another. Now if
the Allusion of this Fable be so Instructive to us, and so necessary to be well
attended and applied, even in the common Affairs and Dealings of this World,
what shall that Man say for himself, that is Guilty of the same Temerity and
Imprudence over and over, in the case of Temporal and Eternal! Is it that we do
not Believe the Doctrine of a Future State, or that we do not think on it; or
(which is worst of all,) that we do not Mind it? for we Live as if we were more
sensible of the Hares, then of the Devils.

FAB. CCCLXXXVIII. Jupiter's Two Wallets.
WHen Jupiter made Man, he gave him Two Satchels; one for his Neighbors
Faults, 'tother for his Own. These Bags he threw over his Shoulders, and the
Former he carried Before him, the Other Behind. So that this Fashion came up a
great while ago it seems, and it has continued in the World ever since.

The MORAL.
Every Man Living is Partial in his own Case; but it is the Humor of Mankind
to have our Neighbors Faults always in our Eye, and to cast our own over our
Shoulders, out of Sight.

REFLECTION.
THAT which Jupiter does in the Fable, Nature does in the Life. We are here
admonished of a Double Fault; want of Charity and Justice toward others, and
want of a Christian Scrutiny and Examination into our Selves: So that here is
the Sin of Detraction in making other People Worse then they are, and the Sin
of Pride and Hypocrisy, in Boasting our selves to be Better. It were well if we
could Place our Transgressions out of the Ken, as well of our Consciences as of
our Eyes: But these are only Amusements to put off the Evil Day a little
longer, that will certainly overtake us at last. The Mythologist does well
enough however, in Assigning that to Jupiter, which we our selves are but too
prone to do, upon a Propension of Nature; that is to say, of Nature Corrupted;
for there is both a Sin and a Frailty in it, to be over Censorious of our
Neighbors, and as Partial to our selves.

Out of Sight, Out of Mind, they say; and at this rate one Fault is made use of
to Excuse another. We do not Repent, because we do not Think on it; and so the
Neglect is made an Excuse for the Impenitence. We live like Spendthrifts, that
know themselves to be desperately in Debt, and dare not look into their
Accounts to see how the Reckoning stands. Nay it is the case of too many of us,
that we keep no Books neither; or at the Best, do not know where to find them.
Self-Love is still attended with a Contempt of others, and a Common Mistake of
Matters at Home as well as Abroad; for we keep Registers of our Neighbors
Faults and none of their Good Deeds, and no Memorials all this while of what we
do Amiss our Selves. But [ I am not as this Publican] is the very Top of our
Righteousness.

Thus goes the World, and a Lewd Practice it is, for one Man to value himself
upon the Wickedness of another: But the Worst of all is yet behind; that is to
say, to think our selves safe, so long as we keep our Iniquities from the
Knowledge of Men, and out of our own View and Memory, without any Awe of that
Justice that never Sleeps, and of that All-seeing Eye and Wisdom that Observes
all our Mis-doings, and has them perpetually in his Sight.

FAB. CCCLXXXIX. A King and a Rich Subject.
A Certain Prince that had a very Wealthy, Overgrown Subject, found it
convenient to make a Traitor of him, provided it could but Handsomely be brought
about: So the Man was taken into Custody, and the Kings Evidence produced
against him for Consults at this Place, and at that, against the Life of the
King, and the Peace of the Government; and for Receiving, Comforting, and
Abetting the Enemies of the Crown. The Man had the Character of a very Loyal
Person, and People were almost at their Wits end, to hear of so Horrid an
Accusation against him. But the Witnesses Swore Home, and one of them Extreme
Positive, that if his House at that very instant were but narrowly Searched for
Men and Arms, they would find such a Provision, that the Modern Discoveries at
Tichbourn and Flixham, were Nothing to it. The Pretended Criminal began now to
Moralize upon the Story, and so away goes he to his Majesty; casts himself at
his Feet, and promises that if he might but have as Ample a Pardon, as other
Witnesses to Consults have had before him, he would show him the very Bottom of
the Plot. I cannot deny, says he, but I have a great many of the Enemies of
your Royal Crown and Dignity at this time Concealed in my House; and if your
Majesty shall be pleased to appoint any Person to make Seizure of them, they
shall be immediately Delivered up. So the Prince Ordered a Squadron of his
Guards, and a Trusty Officer in the Head of 'em, to go along with him. The
Gentleman led them very Frankly to his Coffers, and showed them his Treasure.
These are the Traitors, says he, that you are to take care of, and pray be
pleased to see that they may be kept in safe Custody till they shall be
Delivered by Due Course of Law.

The MORAL.
We may gather from hence, that Riches are many times but a Snare to us; and
that Money makes many a Man a Traitor: But if a Body will Compound at last with
his Estate to save his Life, when he has nothing left him, he may be at Rest.
For a Certificate of Poverty is as good as a Protection.

REFLECTION.
THE Story of Ahab and Naboth comes directly to the Point of this Fable; that
is to say, as to the King and Subject, with the Iniquity of the Subornation and
Practice: Only the one was a Poor Subject, and the other a Rich, which does not
one jot alter the Morality of the Case. The Old Saying, that [ Money does all
things,] is not much wide of the Truth; for it gives, and it takes away; it
makes Honest Men and Knaves; Fools and Philosophers; and so forward Mutatis
Mutandis, to the End of the Chapter. There Is not any Corruption in Nature, but
Money is at one end on it; The whole World is under the Dominion of it; for all
things under the Sun are Bought and Sold. But as it gives Men Reputation, so it
brings People into Snares and Dangers too; It exposes them to Factions,
Robbers, Cheats, Knights of the Post, and the like: It fills their Heads and
their Hearts with Cares and Disquiets. And what at last are all the Baggs and
Possessions that Rich Men take so much Pride and Pleasure in, but Spunges
Deposited in their own Hands, 'till there shall be occasion to Squeeze them for
the Public Use!

FAB. CCCXC. A Merchant and a Seaman.
A Merchant at Sea, was asking the Ships-Master, what Death his Father Died? He
told him that his Father, his Grandfather, and his Great Grandfather were all
Drowned. Well, says the Merchant, and are not you your self afraid of being
Drowned too? No, not I, says the Skipper. But Pray, says the other again, what
Death did Your Father, Grandfather, and Great Grandfather Dye? Why they Died
all in their Beds, says the Merchant. Very good, says the Skipper, and why
should I be any more afraid of going to Sea, then you are of going to Bed?

The MORAL.
He that troubles his Head with drawing Consequences from mere Contingencies,
shall never be at rest: And this is further to mind us, that in an Honest
Course of Life, we are not to fear Death.

REFLECTION.
It Is much in our own Power how to Live, but not at all when or how to Dye: So
that our part is only to Submit to Fate, and to bid Death Welcome at what Time,
and in what Place or Manner soever it shall please God to send it The Reason
and the Doctrine of this Fable is Clear, Strong and Edifying: We are either not
to Fear Death at all, or to Fear it every moment of our Lives; nay, and in all
the Forms that ever it appeared in, which will put us to such a stand, that we
shall not dare even to Live for fear of Dying. We must neither Eat, nor Drink,
nor Breathe, nor Sleep, if we come once to Boggle at Presidents, and at the
doing of those things over again, that ever any Man died of before. There is
not one instant of Life in fine, but may be our Last. Beside, that we Live, not
only in the daily Danger of Death, but in a continual Certainty of it: So that
the Question is not how, or of what this or that Man Died, but the Inevitable
Fate and Mortality of Mankind. One Man dies in his Bed, another at Sea, a Third
in the Field; this Man of one Accident, or Distemper, that of another: And what
is there more in all this now, then so many several ways to the same Journeys
End? There is no such Preservative against the Fear of Death, as the Conscience
of a Good Life; and if we would have it Easy, we must make the Thought of it
Familiar to us.

FAB. CCCXCI. Mice, Cat and a Bell.
THere was a Devilish Sly Cat it seems, in a certain House, and the Mice were
so Plagued with her at every turn, that they called a Court to Advise upon some
way to prevent being surpised. If you will be Ruled by me, (says a Member of the
Board,) there is nothing like Hanging a Bell about the Cats Neck, to give
Warning beforehand, when Puss is a coming. They all looked upon it as the best
Contrivance that the Case would bear. Well (says another) and now we are agreed
upon the Bell, say who shall put it about the Cats Neck. There was no body in
fine that would Undertake it, and so the Expedient fell to the Ground.

The MORAL.
The Boldest Talkers are not always the Greatest Doers.

REFLECTION.
THIS is the course of the World, to the very Life, we can never want Advisers
and Counselors in Matters of the Greatest Hazard: But let the Reason be never
so clear, we are still at a Loss for an Instrument to put Dangerous Projects in
Execution.

Desperate Cases require Desperate Remedies; but let the Hazard of this or
that Part of a Body be what it will, it is matter of Duty, Justice and Policy
to consult the Good of the whole. It was the Interest of the Mice to have a
Bell put about the Cats Neck, and they all agreed upon it to be a very good
Expedient: But when it came to the Issue, the Counsel fell to the Ground for
want of one to put it in Execution. This is no more then what we see frequently
in difficulties of State; but the true Reason of failing in that Case, proceeds
rather from some Failings in the Administration, then from any want of
necessary Instruments. As for the purpose, where Reward and Punishment are
Inverted, and where Men of Faith and Zeal for the Honor and Service of the
Commonwealth are only made Sacrifices to the Passions and Interests of the
Corrupt and Fearful. Where Matters are thus Managed, I say, every Man is not of
a Constitution to Leap a Gulf for the Saving of his Country: Especially, when
over and above the certainty of Ruin, Men are no less sure of having their very
Names and Memories abandoned to Infamy and Contempt for their Pains: But on the
other Hand, where Christian as well as Political Justice has its Course, every
part of the Community suffers by Consent with the whole: And such a Government
in the uttermost of Extremities, shall never fail of Devotes.

FAB. CCCXCII. Usurers and Curriers.
A Parcel of Curriers fell into Company with a Gang of Usurers, and past this
Complement upon 'em; what a Blessing they accounted it to meet with so many
Worthy Men of their own Trade. One of the Usurers was a Head Man of the City,
it seems, and took it a little in Dudgeon to be Ranked Cheek by Joul with a
Scab of a Currier; and so asked one of 'em what he meant, by saying they were
all of a Trade? Nay, I must confess, says the Fell-monger, there is some
Difference yet betwixt your Trade and ours; for we deal but in Flaying of Dead
Horses, and Asses, and the People of your Trade Flay Living Men.

The MORAL.
A Reproof has more Effect when it comes by a side Wind, then if it were
Levelled directly at the very Vice or Person.

REFLECTION.
IT IS a very great Mistake in the World, to give Reputation to many
Unconscionable and notorious Practices, that ought rather to be Punished. One
would try all ways of setting People Right in their Wits and Manners: Authority
and Friendship works upon some; Dry and Sober Reason works upon others: But
these Means are only effectual, where there is Place for Modesty and Conscience.
Some are reclaimed by Punishment; some by Example, and some again are set Right
by Good Nature, or upon Second Thoughts: But there are a sort of Men that will
not be Reasoned into their Senses, and may yet be Laughed or Droll'd into them.
A Jest works more many times then a Text. Every Man, in fine, has a Yielding
Side, if a Body could but hit upon it: The Figure of a Currier applied to an
Usurer, sinks deeper with him, then all the Woes in Holy Scripture, upon the
Topic of Grinding the Faces of the Poor. Men must Angle for Converts as they
do for Fishes. There Is no good to be done, without fitting the Bait to the
liking of the Fish, and to the Course of the Season: As the Currier here struck
the Usurer upon the Right Vein.

FAB. CCCXCIII. Two Travelers of Differing Humors.
THere were Two Men together upon a Journey, of very Differing Humors; one of
them went Slugging on, with a Thousand Cares and Troubles in his Head,
Exclaiming over and over, Lord, what shall I do to Live! 'Tother Jogged Merrily
away, and left his Matters to Providence and Good Fortune. Well Brother (says
the Sorrowful Wight,) How can you be so Frolic now? As I am a Sinner, my
Heart's even ready to break for fear I should want Bread. Come, come, says
the other, Fall Back, Fall Edge, the Resolution's taken, and my Mind's at Rest.
What Resolution, says his Companion? why a Resolution, says he, to make the
best Shift I can, and commit my self to Heaven for the Rest. Ay, but for all
that, says 'tother again, I have known as Resolute People as your self, that
their Confidence has Deceived them in the Conclusion; and so the Poor Man fell
into another Fit of Doubting, and Musing, 'till he started out of it all on a
sudden: Good Lord, says he, what if I should fall Blind! and so he walked a
good way before his Companion with his Eyes shut, to try how 'twould be, if
that Misfortune should befall him. In this Interim his Fellow-Traveller that
followed him, found a Purse of Money upon the way, which made good his Doctrine
of leaving things to Providence; whereas the other missed that Encounter, as a
Punishment of his Distrust; for the Purse had been His, if he had not put
himself out of condition of Seeing it.

The MORAL.
He that commits himself to Providence, is sure of a Friend in time of need;
while an Anxious Distrust of the Divine Goodness, makes a Man more and more
Unworthy of it; and Miserable beforehand, for fear of being so afterward.

REFLECTION.
THE Two opposite Humors of a Cheerful Trust in Providence, and a Suspicious
Diffidence of it, with the ordinary Effects and Consequences of the one and the
other, are very well set forth here for our Instruction and Comfort. The Divine
Goodness never fails those that Depend upon it, provided that according to the
Advice of Hercules to the Carter, they put their own Shoulders to the Work.

The most Wretched sort of People under the Sun, are your Dreamers upon Events;
your Foreboders, Supposers, and Putters of Cases: They are still Calculating
within Themselves, What if this, or that Calamity, Judgment or Disaster should
befall them; and so they form it in their own Imagination, for fear it should
come another way. It is most certain, that what we Fear, we Feel; beside that
Fancy breeds Misery as Naturally as it does the Small Pox. Set a Whimsical Head
agog once upon Sprights and Goblins, and he will be ready to Squirt his Wits at
his own Shadow. I Will suppose my self Blind,) says one of the Travelers,) and
try what will come on it: And what is this more then the Experiment many and
many a Man makes in the World? Well, I shut my Eyes, I stumble, I Lose my Way,
Break a Leg or an Arm perhaps; step over a Bag of Money, for him to find that
comes after me with his Eyes open: In one Word, I slip my Fortune in a
Fantastical Freak, to no manner of Purpose but for my own Ruin. There is no
surer Remedy for this Superstitious and Desponding Weakness, then first to
Govern our selves by the best Improvement of that Reason which Providence has
given us for a Guide; and then when we have done our own Parts, to commit all
Cheerfully for the rest, to the good Pleasure of Heaven, with Trust and
Resignation. Why should not I as well Comfort my self with the Hope of what may
be, as Torment my self with the Fear on it? He that Distrusts God's Providence,
does effectually put himself out of his Protection.

FAB. CCCXCIV. An Agreement between the Wolves and the Dogs.
THe Wolves found themselves in a great Straight once how to deal with the
Dogs; they could do well enough with 'em one by one they saw, but were still
worsted and overborn by Numbers. They took the Matter into Debate, and came at
last to this conclusion, That unless they could make a Party among them, and by
a Parcel of Fair Words and Pretenses, engage them in a Confederacy against
their Masters and Themselves, there was no good to be done in the matter. Upon
this, they sent out their Spies among the Dogs, with Instructions to go to
those among them that were nearest their own Make, Size and Color, and to
reason the matter with them, after this or the like manner. [ Why should not we
that are all of a Color, and in a manner all of a Kind, be all of a Party too,
and all of an Interest? You Will say perhaps, that your Masters, and your Fellows
may take it Ill, and pick a Quarrel with ye. Well, and what will they be able
to make on it then, against You and Us together? If it comes to that once,
'twill be but One Push for all, and the Work is done.] This Discourse wrought
as well as Heart could wish; for a great many of the Wolf-Colour'd-Dogs cried
out, Well Moved upon it, and so went over to the other side: And what came on it
at last, but that after the Dogs had Deserted, the Wolves Worried one Part of
their Enemies by the help of the Currs that went over to them; and they were
then strong enough to destroy the Revolters themselves.

The MORAL.
A House divided against itself, cannot stand.

REFLECTION.
THIS Fiction may be matched with a Thousand common Cases, where Parties are
divided with Factions from Abroad, into Feuds and Animosities among themselves.
It Is an easy matter to form and to invent Specious Colors and Arguments to
all manner of Purposes, and to Paradox the Multitude into what Opinion any Man
pleases, that is but a Master of Art, and Address, and in any sort of Credit
with the Mobile; for it is not the Reason of the thing in Question, but Passion
and Prejudice that Governs in the Case. What will not Ignorance and Credulity
swallow, if they can be but once prevailed upon to Believe, that it is the
common Interest of all the Dogs, for one part of them to enter into an Alliance
with the Wolves against the other; and to draw Inferences from the Complexion
of the Ministers, to the Reason of the Government; as the Wolf-Colour of the
Dog is made an Argument for a Resemblance in the Nature of them: But the very
Proposition points out the ready way to Destruction: and the dividing of the
Guards, leads manifestly, First to the Worrying of one another; and Secondly to
the utter Ruin of the whole: Only the Dogs of the Conspiracy are to be Last
Eaten. The Wolves Proposal was Practicable and Natural enough, and a Perfect
Emblem of the Confusions and Politics abroad in the World. The Wolves sit in
Counsel, and so does the Cabal; and the Subject matter of Both their Debates is
Division. The one sends out their Spies and their Agents, to Tamper and Seduce
the Dogs from their Faith and Duty: The other have their Instruments at work
too, in their Clubs and Pulpits, and to stagger the People in their Allegiance.
The Dogs are to be Debauched; that is to say, the Guards are to be Corrupted:
The Wolf-Colour'd Curs to be dealt with in the First Place; that is to say,
those Courtiers, Officers, Soldiers, and others that have somewhat of Agreement
in Principle and Persuasion with the Common Enemy. Nay, and the very same
Argument is put in their Mouths too, We are all of a Color: And what is the
Issue of all this at last, but the same Fate to the People where these
Liberties are taken, that attended the Dogs and the Sheep here in the Fable?

FAB. CCCXCV. A Wolf turned Shepherd.
THere was a Crafty Wolf that Dressed himself up like a Shepherd, with his
Crook, and all his Trade about him, to the very Pipe and Posture. This
Masquerade succeeded so well with him, that in the Dead of the Night once, when
the Men and their Dogs were all fast Asleep, he would be offering at the
Shepherd's Voice and Call too: But there was somewhat of a Howl in the Tone,
that the Country presently took an Alarm at; and so they fell in upon him in
his Disguise; when he was so Shackled and Hampered, that he could neither Fight
nor Fly.

The MORAL.
It Is the highest Pitch of a Public Calamity, when the People are Worried and
Seduced by those that should Protect and Instruct them. No Impostor is so
Exquisite, as not to lie open some way or other to a Discovery.

REFLECTION.
'THIS is in some sort the Reverse of Boccalini's Advice from the West Indies;
that the Spaniards Dogs there that were sent to Preserve their Flocks from
Wolves, were grown Wolves themselves. Now here is a Wolf turned Shepherd, with
the same Design, only better Dressed up: For there is no Treachery so
Plausible, as that which is covered with the Robe of a Guide or Governor.
Nothing like a Mercenary Bar-Gown to make a Sedition Warrantable; nothing like
an Assembly of Pye-Bal'd Divines, to make it a Point of Conscience; and nothing
again like a Popular Ordinance, to make it both Law and Gospel. There are
hardly any more Dangerous Instruments of Mischief, then Corrupt Officers and
Ministers, that Abuse their Authority, commit Public Violence in their Masters
Name, and do Wrong under a color of Right and Justice. But this does not come
up yet to the Force and Point of the Fiction; for it is one thing to abuse a
Lawful Authority, to the Degree of Tyranny and Oppression; and it is another
thing to exercise a worse Tyranny and Oppression, without any Authority at all.
The Wolf turned Shepherd, is only an Usurper in the Shape of a Protector; a
Persecutor under the Cloak of a Governor; a Creature that is Cruel and False by
Nature, in Opposition to all the Methods of Piety and good Manners: So that
here is all summed up in a few Words, to make the case Miserable and Shameful.
The Morality in fine, of this Fable, may be fairly enough applied to the Errors
on Both Hands: That is to say, of those that put a Lawful Authority upon the
Stretch, to the Abuse of that Power, under the Color of Prerogative; and of
those that take upon them to Exercise the Offices of Power, without any Right
to it at all. But the Sheep however are well Guarded in the mean time, that have
a Wolf for their Keeper.

FAB. CCCXCVI. An Ass and a Lion.
IN Old Time, when a Generous Beast made more Conscience of his Word then many
a Modern Christian has done of an Oath; a Lion shook Hands with an Ass, and so
they agreed upon it to Jog on up and down in the Woods, Lovingly and Peaceably
together. As they were upon this Adventure, they discovered a Herd of Wolves;
the Ass immediately sets up a Hideous Bray; and fetches a Run at them Open
Mouth, as if he would have Eaten 'em. The Wolves only Snear'd at him for his
Pains, but Scamper'd away however as hard as they could drive. By and by comes
the Ass back again, Puffing and Blowing from the Chase. Well, says the Lion,
and what was that Horrid Scream for, I prithee? Why (says 'tother,) I
frightened 'em all away, you see. And did they run away from you, says the
Lion, or from me, do you think?

The MORAL.
Noise and Bluster is so far from doing Business, that instead of Awing and
Frighting People, it serves only to make them Sport, when the Vanity of it
comes to be Discovered.

REFLECTION.
THERE are Braying Men in the World, as well as Braying Asses; for what is Loud
and Senseless Talking, Huffing, Damming and Blaspheming, any other then a more
fashionable way of Braying? Only the one is that to the Ear, which the other is
to the Mind, and a Man may better endure the Shocking of his Sense, then the
Affronting of his Reason. The Lion, it is true, might have kept better Company;
but so long as it was only for his Diversion, it gives us to Understand how far
Great Men may be allowed to make themselves Merry with Buffoons. The Wolves
running away from the Ass, while the Lion was looking on, tells us in the
Allegory, that Favorite Asses have the Privilege of Favorite Dogs; they may
Snap and Snarl where they please, Gratis: But it is for their Master's sake at
last, that they come off with a whole Skin. And what is the Issue now of all
this Noise in the Conclusion, but the making of the Noise-Maker still the more
Ridiculous?

FAB. CCCXCVII. An Ape and a Mountebank.
THere was a Mountebank Tricked up as Fine as a Lord; a certain Ape, that had a
Mind to set up for a Beau, spies him out, and nothing would serve him, but he
must have a Suit and Dress after the same Pattern; he pressed the Quack so hard
for it, that at last he told him plainly, Upon condition, says he, that you
shall wear a Silver Chain about your Neck, I Will give ye the very Fellow on it;
for you will be running away with your Livery else. Jack agrees to it, and is
presently rigged out in his Gold and Silver Lace, with a Feather in's Cap, and
as Figures go now adays, a very pretty Figure he made in the World, I can
assure ye; though upon Second Thoughts, when the heat of the Vanity was over,
he grew Sick of his Bargain; for he found that he had sold hs Liberty for a
Fools Coat.

The MORAL.
It Is with us in our Lives, as with the Indians in their Trade, that truck Gold
and Pearl, for Beads and Glasses. We part with the Blessings of Both Worlds for
Pleasures, Court-Favours, and Commissions; and at last, when we have sold our
selves to our Lusts, we grow Sick of our Bargain.

REFLECTION.
A Vain Fool can hardly be more Miserable then the Granting of his own Prayers
and Wishes would make him. How many Spectacles does every Day afford us, of
Apes and Mountebanks in Gay-Coats, that pass in the World for Philosophers, and
Men of Honor; and it is no wonder for one Fool to value himself upon the same
Vanity, for which he esteems another. He that Judges of Men and of things by
Sense, Governs himself by Sense too; and he that well considers the Practices
and Opinions of the Age he lives in, will find, that Folly and Passion have
more Disciples then Wisdom and Virtue. The Feather in a Fools Cap, is a Fools
Inclination; nay, it is his Ambition too; for he that measures the Character of
another Man by his Outside, seldom looks further then the Business of Dress and
Appearance in himself. Beside, that Ill Examples work more upon us then Good,
and that we are Forwarder to imitate the one, then to Emulate the other. This
now is the Highest Pitch of Infelicity, when we do not only square our Lives in
General, according to Vicious Presidents, but set our Hearts in particular
(with the Fantastical Ape here,) upon this or that Extravagance. No other Sort
of Fool would please him, then the very Counter-part of this Quack. His Mistake
was double; First, he placed an Opinion of Happiness where there was no Ground
at all to expect it. Secondly, he parted with his Liberty in Exchange for it;
which is the same thing with Trucking the Greatest Blessing of Human Nature for
the Handiwork of a Tailor.

FAB. CCCXCVIII. Boys and Frogs.
A Company of Waggish Boys were Watching of Frogs at the side of a Pond, and
still as any of 'em put up their Heads, they would be Pelting them down again with
Stones. Children, (says one of the Frogs,) you never Consider, that though this
may be Play to you, it is Death to us.

The MORAL.
Hard-heartedness and Cruelty is not only an Inhuman Vice, but worse then
Brutal: For such Men take Delight in Blood, which Beasts spill only in
Self-Defence, or in case of Necessity to satisfy Hunger.

REFLECTION.
IT IS a Dangerous and an Ill Natured Liberty, the Wonting or the Suffering of
Children to play with Birds and Flies. The Cudgelling of Shroving-Cocks is a
Barbarous Custom; and so is the common License that Roguy Boys take in the
Streets, of Tearing and Tormenting of Puppies and Kitlings. The very Sport is
Cruelty; for it is no longer a Laughing Matter, when the Life of a Creature
comes to be concerned. This is a Freedom not to be endured, so much as in the
Spectacle, but much less to be Approved or Practiced, especially by those that
are Born and Trained up to any considerable Figure in a Government: For
Hard-heartedness in Boys, will be Brutality and Tyranny in Men. Softness and
Tenderness of Nature, are the Seeds of a Generous Humanity: Provided always
that Children be taught to distinguish betwixt a Benignity and a Facility of
Disposition, and that they may not confound Gracious with Effeminate. By this
means there may be a Foundation laid of worthy Thoughts, which will ripen in
due time into Glorious Actions and Habits, to qualify Men for the Honor and
Service of their Country. This Foundation, I say, of a Pious and a Virtuous
Compassion, will Dispose Men afterward, instead of adding Affliction to
Affliction, and of Grinding the Faces of the Weak and Innocent, to Minister
Protection to those that are Oppressed.

FAB. CCCXCIX. A Council of Beasts.
THe Beasts (a great while ago,) were so harassed out with Perpetual Feuds and
Factions, that they called a General Council, in the nature of a Committee of
Grievances, to Advice upon some way for the Adjusting of Differences, in order
to a Public Peace. After a great many Notable things said upon the Debate, Pro
and Con, the Hares at last, (according to the Printed Votes of those Days,)
Delivered their Sense to this Effect: There can never be any Quiet in this
World, so long as one Beast shall be Allowed Nails, Teeth, or Horns, more then
Another; but the Weaker will be still a Prey to the Stronger: Wherefore we
humbly propose an Universal Parity, and that we may be all upon the same Level,
both for Dignity and Power; for we may then, and not till then, promise our
selves a Blessed State of Agreement, when no one Creature shall be able to Hurt
another.

The MORAL.
The Mobile are still for Levelling; that is to say, for Advancing themselves:
For it is as Broad as it is long, whether they Rise to others, or bring others
down to them. Beside, that the Doctrine of Levelling strikes at the very Order
of Providence.

REFLECTION.
IT IS a Foolish thing for People to talk Boldly, without a Power to Execute;
for upon the Upshot, they serve only for sport to their Superiors. The World is
like to be well Governed, where those that have neither Resolution nor Courage,
shall take upon them to give Laws to it: When Fools shall correct the Works of
the Heavenly Wisdom, and pass Reviews upon the Order of the Universe. It might
be every jot as Cheap, New-made as Mended; and the whole Creation taken to
Pieces and Rebuilt, as any part of the Work of Providence Improved. If God
Pronounced upon every thing that he made, that it was Good, who shall presume
to think he can make it Better?

The Question is the Procuring of an Universal Peace; and the Hares are of
Opinion that the Disarming of Lions, Tigers, etc. and the bringing of Matters
to a Level, would do the Work. Let it be now considered, that there is an
Ambition in the very Affectation of that Equality; for it is as Broad as it is
long, whether the other shall be brought down, or they themselves Advan'd. It Is
Sottish, I say, to offer at things that cannot be brought about; it is Wicked
to meddle toward the Altering or Unsetling of Things Sacred; and it is a
Madness for the Weaker to talk of Binding the Hands of the Stronger. The Simple
are not to direct the Wise, nor the Inferiors to impose upon those that are
Above them. It Is Nonsense to suppose a Level in the several Parts of the
Universe, when the very Frame of it is only an Orderly Pile, or Scale of one
thing above another.

Now there are Hares in Councils and in Commissions of State, as well as in
Fields, and in Fables, where the Multitude are for Levelling too, and for
Paring the Claws, and Drawing the Teeth of Governors, as well as of Beasts. The
True English of leaving no Power to do Hurt, is the leaving no Power to do Good
neither; and to make short Work on it, the leaving no Power at all. It Is a
Iuggle of the Levellers, (says Mr. Seldom,) They would have no body Above them,
they say, but they do not tell ye they would have no body Under them.

FAB. CCCC. A Cock and a Fox-Case.
THere was a Fox-Case set up near a Hen-Roost, to hold forth the Doctrine of
Terror and Example. A Cock spied it, and scoured away from't, as fast as his
Legs and his Wings could carry him, and the Birds hooted at him for it. Hark ye
my Masters, (says he,) there are Live-Foxes as well as Dead Ones, by the Token
one of 'em had me by the Back but the other day, and a Thousand Pound to a
Nut-shell I had never got off again. And pray tell me now, if any of you had
but been in my condition, whether the very Print of a Foxes Foot would not have
started ye; and much more the Image of him in his Skin.

The MORAL.
The Burnt Child Dreads the Fire.

REFLECTION.
WE find this to be true upon daily Experience, that narrow Escapes out of
great Dangers, make People take Alarums at less; especially of the same Kind.
One had better be Laughed at for taking a Fox-Case for a Fox, then be Destroyed
by taking a Live-Fox only for a Case. The very Fancy has somewhat of Reason
in it, for it is but a Measuring Cast, upon such a Supposition as this, whether
it proves the one or the other. A Lark we see will Dare at a Painted Hobby. I
singed the Toes of an Ape through a Burning Glass my self once, and he would
never be brought to Endure the sight of a Burning-Glass after. I knew another
Ape that was Shot behind his Master in the Long Rebellion here, and would never
after that, Endure the sight of a Pistol. Now there is no more in all this, then
what is Natural, Reasonable and Familiar.

FAB. CCCCI. A Cobbler turned Doctor.
A Bungling Cobbler that was ready to Starve at his own Trade, changes his
Quarter, and sets up for a Doctor; and by the Force of Sour Looks, and Hard
Words, Conjures himself into some sort of Reputation with the Common People.
His Masterpiece was a Composition that he Bill'd about, under the Name of a
Sovereign Antidote. This Physician came in time to fall Sick himself, and the
Governor of the Place gave him a Visit. He calls for a Cup, and a Dose of his
Antidote, puts a little Fair Water in it, under a Pretense of so much Poison;
stirs it together, and gives it his Patient. This (says he) is only to try the
Force of your Medicine, and if you outlive it, I Will give ye a considerable Sum
of Money for your Receipt. The poor Quack had more care of his Life then of his
Credit, and so for fear of being Poisoned, told the whole Truth of the Matter,
and how he came to be a Physician. The Governor upon this Discovery, called
the People together, and bad them consider the Folly and Madness of their
Confidence, that would venture the Patching up of their Carcases, upon the
Skill of an Ignorant Fellow, that no body that knew him would trust so much as
with the Mending of a pair of Old Shoes.

The MORAL.
There Is Quacking in all Trades: Bold Ignorance passes upon the Multitude for
Science; and it is with Men as it is with Brutes, some are to Eat, and others to
be Eaten. Confident Knaves, live upon Credulous Fools.

REFLECTION.
No Fable can be Pleasant, Profitable or Instructive in Emblem, that is not
drawn to the very Life of Nature; and we have a Horror for the Monstrous
Productions of the Brain, as well as for those of the Body. Wherefore the Test
of an Edifying Parable, is a Congruity of the Moral to the Lines of Practice,
and to the Image of Truth. The Resemblance must be Touching, and a Man must
have a Feeling of it to be Moved with it. It Is never right, 'till I can say to
my self, How many Instances have I seen in the World of this Cobbler turned
Doctor? How many Underlayers, that when they could not live upon their Trade,
have rai'sd themselves from Cobbling to Fluxing, and taken upon them to cast
the Water of a Body Politic, as well as of a Body Natural? This minds me of a
Cobbling Colonel of Famous Memory, (and he was a Statesman too of the Long
Parliament Edition,) to a Lady of Quality in Ireland. She had been so terribly
Plundered, that the Poor Woman went almost Barefoot: And as she was Warming her
Feet once in the Chimny Corner, the Colonel took notice that her Shoes wanted
Capping; Lord, Madam, (says he,) Why do you wear no Better Shoes? Why truly Sir,
says she, all the Cobblers are turned Colonels, and I can get no body to Mend
'em. Now to do Right to the Apologue; there are several Remarkable Innuendo's
in it: Here Is First a Coxcomb that Commences Doctor. Secondly, A kind of an
Individuum Vagum, dressed up in the Character of a Man of Quality. Thirdly,
From being ready to Starve, Himself, he makes a very good Living out of the
Privilege of Poisoning and Destroying other People. Fourthly, It gives us to
Understand the Force of Impudence on the one hand, and of Ignorance on the
other; for what was it but the Brazen Face of the Quack, assisted by the
Silliness of the Mobile, that Advanced this Upstart from the Stall to the
Stage? It is not to be Imagined the Power of Tumor and Pretense, Bold Looks,
Hard Words, and a Supercilious Brow, upon the Passions of the Multitude. To say
the Truth on it, we are imposed upon by Botchers, and Men of Forehead, without
Common Sense, in all Trades and Professions, even to the Venturing of Soul,
Body, Life and Estate upon their Skill, Honesty and Credit. Can any Man look
about him in the World now, and cast his Eye and Thought upon Every-days
Instances of some of these wonderful Improvements and Conversions, without
Saying to Himself, The Mythologist Pointed at all these Men in this Fable? For
it holds as well from Foppery to Policy; from Baseness to Honor, and from
Beggary to Superfluity, as from Patching to Purging, and from the Stall to the
Urinal. But a Trial of Skill at last puts him past his Latin; and when it comes
to that once, he will have more Wit then to Venture his Life upon his Antidote.

FAB. CCCCII. A Cobbler and a Financier.
THere was a Droll of a Cobbler that led a Life as Merry as the Day was Long,
and Singing and Joking was his Delight. But it was not altogether so well with
a Neighbor of his, though a Great Officer in the Treasury; for there was no
Singing, nor hardly any Sleeping under his Roof: Or if he happened to Doze a
little now and then in a Morning, 'twas Forty to One the Jolly Cobbler Waked
him. How often would he be Wishing to Himself that Sleep were to be bought in
the Market as well as Meat and Drink! While his Head was working upon this
Thought, the Toy took him in the Crown to send for the Songster. Come
Neighbor, says he, thou liv'st like a Prince here, How much a Year can thou
get by thy Trade? Nay, Faith Master, says the Cobbler, I keep no 'Count-Books;
but if I can get Bread from Hand to Mouth, and make Even at the Years End; I
never trouble my self for to Morrow. Well, says the Officer, but if you know
what you can Earn by the Day, you may easily cast up what that comes to a Year:
Ay, says he, but that is more or less as it falls out; for we have such a World
of Holy Days, Festivals, and New Saints, that it is a Woundy Hindrance to a Poor
Man that Lives by his Labor. This Dry, Blunt Way, took with the Officer, and
so he went on with him: Come my Friend, says he, You came into my House a
Cobbler, what will you say now, if I send you out on it an Emperor? and so he put
a Purse of a Hundred Crowns into his Hand. Go your ways, says he, there is an
Estate for ye, and be a Good Husband of it. Away goes the Cobbler with his Gold,
and in Conceit as Rich as if the Mines of Peru had been emptied into his Lap.
Up he Locks it immediately, and all the Comforts of his Life together with his
Crowns in the same Chest. From the time that he was Master of this Treasure,
there was no more Singing or Sleeping at our House; not a Cat stirred in the
Garret, but an Outcry of Thieves; and his Cottage was so haunted with Cares,
Jealousies, and Wild Alarums, that his very Life was become a Burden to him. So
that after a short time, away trudges he to the Officer again; Ah Sir says he,
if you have any Charity for a Miserable Creature, do but let me have my Songs
and my Sleep again, and do you take back your Hundred Crowns, with a Hundred
Thousand Thanks into the Bargain.

The MORAL.
The Poor Man that has but from Hand to Mouth, passes his Time Merrily, and
without any Fear or Danger of Thieves, Public or Private; but the House that
has Money In It, is as good as Haunted.

REFLECTION.
THIS Fable makes Riches to be a great Enemy to our Repose, and tells us that
the Cares of Money lie heavier upon a Good Man, then the Inconveniences of an
Honest Poverty. He that sets the Anxiety, Fears and Dangers that accompany
Riches, against the Cheerful and the Easy Security of a Private Fortune and
Condition, may very well be Thankful for the One, without Repining at the
other. He that sets his Heart upon any thing in this World, makes himself a
Slave to his Hopes and Fears, and is as sure of being Disappointed, as he is of
the Uncertainty of Human Affairs. Let it be Love, Preferment, Court-Favours,
Popularity, or what else it will, some Rival or other he must expect to meet
with in all his Pretensions. The Proud Man's Inclination is Glory, High Place
in the World, and the Applause of the People. The Envious Man's Heart is set
upon doing Shrewd Turns, Defamatory Calumnies and Revenge. In few Words,
Violent Affections never fail of being Uneasy and Importune: But of all
Extravagant Passions, the Love of Money is the most Dangerous, in regard of the
greatest Variety of Difficulties that attend it. There may be some few
Pretenders to a Beautiful Lady; some few Candidates for the favor of a Popular
Choice. But these are Competitions that Intermit, and go off and on as it
happens, upon this or that Occasion. But Money is an Universal Mistress; Men are
always Watching, Spying, and Designing upon it; and all the Engines of Worldly
Wisdom are perpetually at Work about it: So that whosoever is Possessed of, and
Sollicitous for that Interest, shall never Close his Eyes, so long as Craft,
Violence, or Conspiracy, shall be able to keep them Waking.

FAB. CCCCIII. The Eagle, Cat and Sow.
THere was an Eagle, a Cat and a Sow that bred in a Wood together. The Eagle
Timber'd upon the top of a High Oak; the Cat Kitten'd in the Hollow Trunck of
it, and the Sow lay Pigging at the Bottom. The Cat's Heart was set upon
Mischief, and so she went with her Tale to the Eagle. Your Majesty had best
look to your self, says Puss; for there is most certainly a Plot upon ye, and
perchance upon Poor me too; for yonder is a Sow lies Grubbing Every Day at the
Root of this Tree; She Will bring it down at last, and then your Little Ones and
mine are all at Mercy. So soon as ever she had Hammered a Jealousy into the
head of the Eagle, away to the Sow she goes, and Figs her in the Crown with
another Story; Little do you think what a Danger your Litter is in; there is an
Eagle Watching constantly upon this Tree to make a Prey of your Pigs, and so
soon as ever you are but out of the way, she will certainly Execute her Design.
The Cat upon this, goes presently to her Kittens again, keeping her self upon
her Guard all Day, as if she were afraid; and steals out still at Night to
Provide for her Family. In one Word, the Eagle durst not stir for fear of the
Sow; and the Sow durst not budge for fear of the Eagle: So that they kept
themselves upon their Guard till they were both Starved, and left the Care of
their Children to Puss and her Kittens.

The MORAL.
There can be no Peace in any State or Family, where Whisperers and Talebearers
are Encouraged.

REFLECTION.
Busybodies and Intermedlers, are a Dangerous sort of People to have to do
withal; for there is no Mischief that may not be wrought by the Craft and Manage
of a Double Tongue, with a Foolish Credulity to work upon. There Is hardly a
Greater Pest to Government, Conversation, the Peace of Societies, Relations and
Families, then Officious Tale-bearers, and Bufie-Intermedlers. These
Pick-thanks are enough to set Mankind together by the Ears; they live upon
Calumny and Slander, and cover themselves too under the Seal of Secresy and
Friendship: These are the People that set their Neighbors Houses afire to
Roast their own Eggs. The Sin of Traducing is Diabolical, according to the very
Letter; and if the Office be Artificially Managed, it is enough to put the whole
World into a Flame, and no body the Wiser which way it came. The Mischief may
be Promoted, by Misrepresenting, Misunderstanding, or Misinterpreting our
Neighbors Thoughts, Words and Deeds; and no Wound so Mortal as that where the
Poison works under a Pretense of Kindness. Nay, there are ways of Commendation
and Insinuations, of Affection and Esteem, that Kill a Man as sure as a Gun.
This Practice is the Bane of all Trust and Confidence; and it is as frequent in
the Intrigues of Courts and States, as in the most Ordinary Accidents of Life.
It Is enough to break the Neck of all Honest Purposes, to Kill all Generous and
Publick-Spirited Motions, and to stifle all Honorable Inclinations in the very
Conception. But next to the Practice of these Lewd Offices, Deliver all Honest
Men from lying at the Mercy of those that Encourage and Entertain them.

FAB. CCCCIV. The Frogs and the Bulls.
THere happened a Desperate Duel betwixt a Couple of Bulls, upon a Point of
Honor; for the Quarrel was about a Mistress. There was a Frog at the same time
upon the Bank of a Lake, looking on to see the Combat. Ah, says the Frog, what
will become of Us now? Why prithee, says one of his Companions, what are the
Bulls to the Frogs, or the Lakes to the Meadows? Very much I can assure ye,
says the Frog again, for he that is Worsted, will be sure to take Sanctuary in
the Fens, and then are we to be trod to Pieces.

The MORAL.
Delirant Reges, Plectuntur Achivi. When Princes fall out, the Commonalty
Suffers, and the Little go to Wreck for the Quarrels of the Great.

REFLECTION.
LET Ill Consequences be never so Remote, it is good however, with the Frogs
here in the Fable, to have the Reason of Things at Hand. The Design of many
Actions looks one way, and the Event works another; as a Young Gamester's
Cozened with a Bricole at Tennis. But Mischiefs, whether meant or not, are to
be Provided against and Prevented, with as much Care and Industry as if they
had been designed from the Beginning; and the Application of Foresight in the
one Case, must supply the want of Foresight in the other. It Is the Fool that
lives ex Tempore, and from Hand to Mouth, as we say, without carrying his
Thoughts into the Future. But a Wise Man looks forward, thorough the proper and
natural Course and Connection of Causes and Effects; and in so doing, he
Fortifies Himself against the Worst that can Befall him. The Frogs Case, in
some Respect, is that of a Civil War; where the People must expect to be
Crushed and Squeezed in the Consequence, toward the Charge and Burden on it. The
Lords make Merry, but it is the Commons must pay the Piper.

FAB. CCCCV. The Frogs and the Sun.
IN the Innocent Age of the World, when there were no Children in Nature, but
those that were begot in Lawful Wedlock, it was in every Bodies Mouth, that the
Sun was about to Marry. The Frogs in General were ready to Leap out of their
Skins for Joy at it; 'till one Crafty Old Slut in the Company, advised 'em to
Consider a little Better on it, before they appointed a Day of Thanksgiving for
the Blessing. For (says she) if we are almost Scorched to Death already, with
One Sun, what will become of us when that Sun shall have Children, and the Heat
Increase upon us with the Family!

The MORAL.
We take many things at First Blush, for Blessings, that upon Second Thoughts
we find would be most Pernicious to us.

REFLECTION.
IT requires Great Care and Circumspection, that we Weigh and Balance things
before we pronounce them to be either Good or Evil: For Men are Thankful many
times for direct Maledictions, and Mortify themselves upon the Mistake of
Imaginary Blessings. 'Twas a Wise Frog that Advised her Fellows to think well
on it, before they rung the Bells for the Sun's Wedding. This Fancy looks toward
the Case of a Republican Humor that has got ahead in a Monarchial State, Now
Empire is not to be shared in Consort; and when Sovereignty Marries, it is no
longer Single but Popular; and still the Greater the Number of Governors, the
Heavier is the Height of the Government. Now though the Order of Superiority
and Subjection be of Absolute Necessity for the good of Mankind, this does not
yet hinder it in many respects, from being Grievous to those that live under
it; every common Man would be Free, and thinks himself Wronged if he be not so.
Now this is for want of Understanding the True and Natural Reason of the
Matter; which is, that when One Government comes to be Dissolved, the First
thing to be done is to fall to Cutting of Throats toward the setting up of
Another.

FAB. CCCCVI. The Fox Condemned.
THere was a Fox (as the Story has it) of a very Lewd Life and Conversation,
that happened at last to be Caught in his Roguery, and called to Account for
the Innocent Blood he had spilt of Lambs, Pullets and Geese without Number, and
without any Sense either of Shame or of Conscience. While he was in the hands
of Justice, and on his way to the Gibbet, a Freak took him in the Head to go
off with a Conceit. You Gentlemen, the King's Officers, says he, I have no Mind
in the World to go to the Gallows by the Common Road; but if you will carry me
through the Little Wood there on the Right Hand, I should take it very kindly.
The People fancied a Trick in it at First, and that there might be some Thought
of a Rescue, or an Escape in the Case; till Reynard Assured them upon his
Honor, that he had no such Design: Only he was a great Lover of Music, and he
had rather have one Chirping Madrigal in the Woods, then Forty from Turks and
Popes upon the Ladder.

The MORAL.
Many People are so Hardened in an Habitual Defiance of Heaven and Hell, that
they will sport with them at the very Gallows; and value themselves upon Living
and Dying all of a piece.

REFLECTION.
THIS Fable hits the Humor of a great many loose People in the World, that are
so Wicked as to value themselves upon their Ill Manners, and the contempt of
all Goodness; nay, to the degree even of taking a Pride in their Iniquity, and
affecting a Reputation by it, in proportion to the Measure of the Extravagance.
Some Men are so Hardened in Lewdness, that they make it a Point of Honor to be
True to it, and to go to the Devil with a Frolic betwixt their Teeth. They have
gotten a Habit of Laughing Honesty and Good Manners out of Countenance, and a
Reprobated Hardness of Heart, does them the Office of Philosophy toward a
Contempt of Death. Our common Executions yield but too many Instances of this
Kind; and it helps mightily to keep up the Humor, that instead of Owning and
Professing an Abhorrence for these Affronts upon God and Nature, the Impiety is
celebrated for a Jest. And whence comes it now, that Men should be so
Insensible, either of a Present Calamity, or of a Future Judgment, but stom the
Custom of a Scoffing Atheistical Life; where Licentiousness has so long passed
for Sharpness of Wit, and Greatness of Mind, that the Conscience is grown
Callous; and after this, it is but a Natural Congruity for Men to Dye as they
have Lived. Now a Liberty in this Latitude is not more Execrable, then the
Example is Pernicious; especially where it is attended with the Pleasure of a
Frothy and a Surprising Wit to Recommend the Wickedness.

FAB. CCCCVII. A Man at a Fish-Dinner.
A Certain Prince took a Learned Man to Dinner with him: It was a Fasting-Day
it seems, and a great deal of Large Grown Fish there was at the Table; only at
the Lower End, where the Philosopher sat, there were none but Little Ones. He
took out several of them One by One, and first put his Mouth to the Fishes Ear,
and then the Fishes Mouth to his own Ear, and so laid 'em in whole again,
without so much as Tasting one Bit of 'em. Come Sir, says the Master of the
Feast, You have some Pleasant Thought or other in your Head now, Pray let the
Company take part with ye. Why Sir, says he, My Father had the Ill-Fortune
about Two Years ago to be Cast away upon this Coast; and I was asking these
Little Fishes if they could tell me what became of his Body: They said No, they
could not, for 'twas before their Time: But if I Examined the Great Ones, it is
possible they might be able to say somewhat to it. The Prince was so well
pleased with the Fancy, that he Ordered his Mess to be Changed, and from that
Time forward, no body Welcomer to the Table then this Man.

The MORAL.
It is a Masterpiece in Conversation, to intermix Wit and Liberty so
Discreetly, that there may be nothing in it that is Bitter, Course, or out of
Season.

REFLECTION.
THIS is to tell us, that Good Humor goes further many times in the Reputation
of the World, then Profound Learning; though Undoubtedly both together are
Best. There is a certain Knack in the Art of Conversation, that gives a good
Grace to many things, by the Manner and Address of Handling 'em, which in the
ordinary way of bringing Matters about, would give great Offense to the Common
Rules, even of Civility and Discretion. The Skill on it lies in the Nicety of
Distinguishing, First, What Liberty is necessary in such and such a Case. And
Secondly, How to Temper and Accommodate that Freedom to a Consistence with Good
Manners: And this must be done too without Formality and Affectation; for a
Studied and a Labored Forecast toward the Setting of such a Humor Abroach, is
Putid and Nauseous to the Highest Degree; and better Fifty such Conceits were
Lost, then that any thing of Contrivance or Premeditation should appear in it.
There are a sort of People, that when they have once hit upon a Thought that
Tickles them, will be still bringing it in by Head and Shoulders, over and over
in several Companies, and upon several Occasions; but it is below the Dignity of
a Man of Weight, to value himself upon such a Levity; for it makes him look as
if Trifling were his Masterpiece. Now these Turns of Fancy and Entertainment,
should pass off as they came on, Carelessly and Easily, without laying any
stress upon them; for they are then only Happy and Agreeable, when they are
Played off at Volly, and pro Re Nata, and only made use of, in fine, as a Sauce
to the Conversation. The Philosopher in this Instance, was not without some
Difficulty how to gain his Point: There were better Fish at the Table, and the
Question was how to come at them, without being either Rude or Importune; and
yet if he were not clear enough to be Understood, he was in danger still to
lose his Longing. So that he found out such a way of Asking, as to Provoke a
Question without Speaking a Word to it; and he did it in such a Fashion of
Respect too, that it might not look like Begging on the one Hand, or
Reproaching on the other. And he was much in the Right once again too, when the
Riddle was already set afoot, rather to wait till the Explanation should be
Desired, then to Prompt the Master of the Feast to Call for it.

FAB. CCCCVIII. Two Laden-Asses.
AS Two Asses were Fording a River, the one Laden with Salt, the other with
Sponge: The Salt-Ass fell down under his Burden, but quickly got up again, and
went-on the Merrier for it. The Sponge-Ass found it agreed so well with his
Companion, that down lies he too, upon the same Experiment; but the Water that
Dissolved the Salt, made the Sponge Forty times Heavier then it was before; and
that which Eased the One, Drowned the Other.

The MORAL.
The Deceiver may be Deceived: Many People take false Measures for their own
Relies, without considering that what is Good in One Case, may be Bad in Another.

REFLECTION.
A Wise Man lives by Reason, not by Example; or if he does, it is odds, he goes
out of his Way. We have a Common Saying that holds in a Thousand Ordinary
Cases, where the same thing Ruins one, that Saves another. It is the part also
of an Honest Man to deal Above-Board, and without Tricks. The Ass with the
Sponge failed in both; for First, he would be trying Conclusions, without
Examining either the Nature of the thing in Question, or what the Matter would
bear. Secondly, He was false to his Master too, in Abusing a Trust for the
Easing of his own Carcass; and then it cost him his Life Over and Above, which
was both his Mishap and his Punishment.

FAB. CCCCIX. A Blackbird afraid of a Kyte.
A Poor Simple Blackbird was Frighted almost to Death with a Huge Flopping
Kyte that she saw over her Head, Screaming and Scouring about for her Prey.
Come Sister, says a Thrush to her, Pluck up a Good Heart; for all this
Fluttering and Scrieking is but Fooling; and you shall see this Lazy Buzzard at
last, even take up with some Pitiful Frog or Mouse to her Supper, and be Glad
on it too. No, no, the Hawks are the Dangerous Birds Child, that Bite, as they
say, without Barking, and do Execution in Silence.

The MORAL.
The more Noise and Flutter, the less Danger.

REFLECTION.
THERE IS no great Danger in Men of Huff and Bluster: Noise and Pretense without
Execution, is only much ado about Nothing; and yet this way of Trifling, is the
very Business and Practice of many that pass in the World for Great Men, though
they are much Mistaken that think them so. But there are Reverend Appearers in
all manner of Glorious Professions and Adventures, as in Arms, Letters,
Religion Law, Policy, etc. There are Quacks, in short, of all sorts, as
Bullies, Pedants, Hypocrites, Empyricks, Law-Jobbers, Politicasters, and the
like; and there are Men as well as Black-Birds that are Silly enough not to
Distinguish betwixt a Hawk and a Buzzard.

FAB. CCCCX. A Fox and Wolf.
AN Unlucky Fox dropped into a Well, and cried out for Help: A Wolf overheard
him, and looks down to see what the Matter was. Ah, (says Reynard,) Pray lend
me your Hand Friend, or I Am lost else. Poor Creature! says the Wolf, Why comes
this about? Prithee how long have thou been here? Thou can not but be mighty
Cold sure. Come, come, this is no Time for Fooling, says the Fox; set me upon
Terra Firma first, and then I Will tell ye the History.

The MORAL.
When a Man is in Misery, there must be no Trifling in the Case. It Is a
Barbarous Humor to stand Bantering out of Season. It Is no Time or Place for
Raillery, when a Life's at Stake.

REFLECTION.
HERE are Three Calamities in One: First, The Foxes falling into a Pit, and not
being able to get out again. Secondly, The Misery of being put to beg Relief of
an Enemy, for want of a Friend. Thirdly, The Affront of the Refusal, as it was
accompanied with Raillery and Scorn. 'Twere well if we had not too many of
these Brutal Mockeries in our Daily Conversations; for we have Banterers in
Religion, in Point of Honor, and upon all the Distresses of Human Life. He
that has no Pity or Compassion for the Miserable, is not in Truth of a
Reasonable Make; for Tenderness of Nature is but a kind of Lay-Charity; and a
Body can be no more a Good Man without the One, then a Good Christian without
the Other. Let a Man be never so Wicked, it is a Base and an Unmanly thing to
Insult upon him in his Calamity. His Punishment may be Just; and when he
suffers Justice, it is all that a Good and a Generous Man can wish for in the
Case.

The S^omms of Great Men, or Buffoons of Quality, are every jot as Wolvish in
Conversation, as they are here in the Fable; though it is looked upon, I know,
as ^ Mark of Breeding, and the Indication of a Man that has Notable Skill in
the World, to turn the Earnest of all Things and Duties, Sacred and Civil, into
a Jest, and to put the Common Principles of Faith, Truth, Justice and Respect,
out of Countenance. Now in all these Cases, the President is as Dangerous, as
the Practice is Odious, where the Quality of the Droll serves to Authorize the
Indignity: But from a Fox, that is made up of Trick and Treachery, there is no
better to be Expected.

FAB. CCCCXI. Two Travelers find an Oyster.
AS Two Men were Walking by the Seaside, at a Lowwater, they saw an Oyster,
and they both Pointed at it together: The One Stoops to take it up; the other
gives him a Push, and tells him, it is not yet Decided whether it shall be Yours
or Mine. In the Interim, while they were Disputing their Title to it, comes a
Passenger that way, and to him they referred the Matter by Consent, which of
the Two had the Better Right to the Oyster. The Arbitrator very Gravely takes
out his Knife, and Opens it; the Plaintiff and Defendant at the same time
Gaping at the Man, to see what would come on it. He Loosens the Fish, Gulps it
down, and so soon as ever the Morsel was gone the way of all Flesh, wipes his
Mouth, and Pronounces Judgment. My Masters, (says he, with the Voice of
Authority,) The Court has Ordered each of ye a Shell, without Costs; and so
pray go Home again, and Live Peaceably among your Neighbors.

The MORAL
Referrees and Arbitrators seldom forget Themselves.

REFLECTION.
THE Scope of this Fable, is to divert People from Contentious, Expensive and
Vain Law Suits. Agree, Agree, (says the Old Saw,) the Law is Costly: The whole
Business of the World is about Meum and Tuum; either by Right, in Good Earnest,
or by Wrong, under the color of Right: And while the Clients are Contending
about the Title, the Council runs away with the Estate. This Litigious Humor,
where Men are as well Stubborn and Wilful, as Captious and Quarrelsome, burns
like the Fire of Hell; for it is never to be Quenched: Beside, that whoever is
given to Wrangling, can never want Matter or Occasion for it. And this is not
only the Case in Matters of Propriety, and in Legal Claims before a Bench of
Justice, but it works in a Thousand Instances of Vain Disputations,
Competitions, and other Trials of Mastery and Skill, where there is little more
then Pride, Stomach, Will and Vanity, to uphold the Contest. Nay, and he that
has the better on it at last, is only the more Fortunate Fool of the Two. Let
but any Man set before him the Vexatious Delays, Quirks and Expenses of most of
our Barretry Suits at Law, and it is odds he finds at the Foot of the Account,
the Play not worth the Candle.

FAB. CCCCXII. A Raging Lion*
THere was a Lion ran Stark Mad, and the very Fright on it put all the Beasts of
the Forest out of their Wits for Company. Why what a Condition are we in, they
cried, to fall under the Power of a Mad Lion; when a Lion at the very Soberest,
is little better then Frantic?

The MORAL.
Rage upon Rage is a Double Madness.

REFLECTION.
Governors had need be very well Principled, and good Natured, to keep their
Passions in Order and Obedience: But when an Absolute Power shall come to be
put upon the Stretch by an Outrageous Humor, there is no Living under it. By a
Raging Lion, is meant an Unruly and a Cruel Governor, which is a sad Calamity,
but not without somewhat of Dignity yet in the Misfortune; for it is a Lion
still, how Mad soever. Now if it had been a Raging Ape, the Fancy had been
Ridiculous and Scandalous to the Last Degree; and therefore the Moral is
Restrained to the True and Genuine Character of Sovereignty, without Descending
to the Counterfeit.

The Moralists that make this Raging of a Lion to be a Surcharge of One Madness
upon another, must not be Understood Simply, as if they took Government for a
Burden and an Oppression; but it refers to the Infelicity of that State where
an Impotent Will puts an Unbounded Power upon the Tenter. But let the
Oppression be never so Sanguinary, there is no Appeal left from the Tyranny; for
if a General Insurrection had been thought Lawful, the Fable would not have
made the Case so Desperate: So that this is only to Insinuate the Sacredness of
Power, let the Administration of it be what it will: And the Reason of it is so
plain, that it is impossible for Human Frailty to be better Secured then it is
by the Determinations of Providence in this Particular. An Unlimited Power it is
true is a strong Temptation, and where it is Screwed up to the Highest Pitch,
it is a great Unhappiness; but it is not for Men that have their Fortunes and
their Stations in this World Assigned them, to take upon themselves to be their
own Carvers, and to Grumble at the Orders and Resolutions of their Masters and
Rulers. It Is a Great Unhappiness to lie at the Mercy of a Raging Lion; but it
is a Christian Duty nevertheless to suffer Patiently under the Justice of such
a Judgment.

FAB. CCCCXIII. The Kingdom of Apes.
TWo Men took a Voyage together into the Kingdom of Apes; the one a Trimmer,
the other a Plain Dealer. They were taken into Custody, and carried to the
Prince of the Country, as he sat in State, and a Mighty Court about him. Well,
says the King to the Trimmer, Look me in the Face now, and say, what do you
take me to be? A Great Emperor, Undoubtedly, says the Trimmer. Well, says his
Majesty once again, and what do you take all these People about me for? Why Sir,
says he, I take them for your Majesty's Nobility and Great Officers. The Prince
was wonderfully pleased with the Civility and Respect of the Man, and Ordered
him a Bushel of Pippins, as a singular Mark of his Royal Favor. His Majesty
after this, put the same Questions to the Plain Dealer, who fell to computing
with Himself, that if his Companion had gotten a Reward for a Damned Lie,
certainly he should have twice as much for a Plain Honest Truth; and so he told
the King Bluntly, that he took him for a very Extraordinary Ape, and all those
People about him for his Trusty and Well-beloved Counselors and Cozens: But
the Poor Man Paid dearly for his Simplicity; for upon a Signal from the
Emperor, the whole Band of Apes fell Tooth and Nail upon him, and tore him one
Limb from another.

The MORAL*
Where the Rules and Measures of Policy are Perverted, there must needs Ensue a
Failure of Justice, and a Corruption of Manners: And in a Kingdom of Apes,
Buffoons may well put in for Commission-Officers.

REFLECTION.
THIS (says Camerarius,) is to reprove the Practices of perverse Courts, and
Extravagant Princes.

It is the proper Business of Mythology to Point out, and Represent the Images
of Good and Evil, and under those Shadows to Teach us what we ought to do, and
what not, either Severally and Apart, or as Members of a Society; that is to
say, Simply, as Men in a State of Right Nature, or as Parents, or Children,
Masters, or Servants, Husbands or Wives, Rulers or Subjects, Friends,
Countrymen, Relations, and the like. Now as there are Good and Bad of all
sorts; so their Virtues and their Vices, their good Behavior and their
Misdemeanors are to be set forth, Circumstanc'd and Distinguished in such sort,
as by Rewards or Punishments, to Encourage the One, and to Discountenance the
Other, in proportion to the Dignity of the Action, or the Degree of the
Offense; by Conferring Marks and Characters of Honor, Offices of Trust, or
Beneficial Commissions on the one hand, and by inflicting Sentences of Shame,
Infamy, Pains Corporal, or Pecuniary on the other. Without this Distribution,
one main end of Emblem is lost; neither is it the true Figure of Life. For
Wicked Men, False Brethren, Unnatural Parents, Disobedient Children, Barbarous
Husbands, Undutiful Wives, Tyrannical, Weak or Fantastical Governors;
Rebellious Subjects, Cruel Masters, Faithless Servants, Perfidious Kindred and
Acquaintance: All these Lewd Characters are as Absolutely necessary to the
Perfecting of the Design, as the most Laudable Excellencies in Nature.

In this Fable of the Kingdom of Apes, the Author according to Camerarius,
intended the Picture of an Extravagant Government, where he gives Flattery and
Corruption the Advantages that in Policy and Justice belong to Services of
Honor and of Truth: And at the same time Delivers up a Man of Honesty, Justice
and Plain Dealing to be torn to Pieces. This Kingdom of Apes has been
Moralliz'd a Thousand and a Thousand times over in the Practice of the World,
and such as the Fountain is, such will be the Stream. Let Government it self be
never so Sacred, Governors are still but Men; and how necessary and Beneficial
soever the Order is at all Hands Confessed to be, the Officers yet, and the
Administrators are but Flesh and Blood, and liable to the Passions and
Frailties of other Mortals.

There are in fine, many Distempers, Errors, and Extravagances, that show
themselves in the Exercise of Political Powers; as an inexorable Rigor for the
Purpose, or as Lasche a Demission of Sovereign Authority. There are Cases of
Sensuality, Pleasure, and Appetite, where Governors have only the Name of
Rulers, while some overgrown Subject perhaps Usurps upon the Prerogative in
effect, and does the worst things imaginable in the Name of the Public. But
this rarely happens, save where the Master wants Resolution to check the
License and Presumption of a Daring Servant.

There is also a certain Manage that leaves all at Six and Seven, and thinks to
support Greatness without either Rule, Weight or Measure; and that is a
dangerous Point, when Prudence and Fidelity shall turn to Loss, and Wickedness
be supported by the Reputation of Favor and Applause. The Misery of these
false Measures is excellently well Pointed out to us in this Fable; and
consequently the Blessings of a steady Administration, where the Ends of
Government are Conscientiously observed, and the Divine Privileges of Power
maintained; and where Truth and Justice are impartially Asserted and
Administered, and as resolutely Defended.

FAB. CCCCXIV. An Als made a Judge of Music.
THere was a Question started betwixt a Cuckoo and a Nightingale, which of the
Two had the Better Voice, and the better way of Singing. It came at last to a
Trial of Skill, and an Ass was to be the Judge; who upon Hearing both Sides,
gave it clearly for the Cuckoo.

The MORAL.
It Is a Hard Case for Philosophers to be Tried by Fools, and the Multitude to
sit Judges upon the Niceties of Honor and Government.

REFLECTION.
THE Old Adage of Asinus ad Lyram, answers this Figure to the very Letter. The
Fable extends to all Incompetent Judges, Umpires, or Arbitrators, in what Case
or Matter, or under what Incapacity or Disability soever. It Points at the
Folly and Scandal of the Choice too, as well as the Iniquity of the Sentence;
for the Honor of the Governor, and the Well being of the Government, depend in
a great Measure upon the Fitness of the Officer, let his Commission be
Ecclesiastical, Civil, Military, or what else it will. Here Is an Ass made a
Judge of Music; a Faculty that he neither Loves nor Understands; for there is
no Song to One Ass, like the Braying of Another. Let any Man fancy to Himself,
how it would look to put a Law-Case to a Iack-Pudding; a Question of State to a
Corn-Cutter; a Point of Conscience to a Knight of the Post. In short, let every
Man be Consulted and Credited in his own Way and Trade. Neither can it be
Expected that a Fool should judge according to Wisdom, Truth, Reason and
Justice. There may be very proper Exceptions too upon the Matter, as well of
Morals, as of Abilities. One would not Trust a Covetous Man in Money Matters,
where there is any thing to be Gotten, either by Fraud or Corruption; nor a Vain
Man, where there is a Temptation to Popularity. False Men are not to be taken
into Confidence; nor Fearful Men into a Post that requires Resolution; nor
Cruel, Insolent Men, into a Station where Power may be Abused to Oppression.
All these Absurdities fall within the Dint of this Fable; for want of Honesty
makes a Judge as Incompetent, as want of Understanding.

FAB. CCCCXV. An Ape Judge betwixt a Fox and a Wolf.
A Wolf charges a Fox with a piece of Pilfery. The Fox Denies it. The Ape tryes
the Cause, and upon a fair Hearing, Pronounces them both to be Guilty. You
(says the Judge to the Wolf,) have the Face to Challenge that which you never
Lost; and you (says he to the Fox,) have the Confidence to Deny that which you
have certainly Stoll'n.

The MORAL.
When both Plaintiff and Defendant happen to be a Couple of Crafty Knaves,
there is Equity against them Both.

REFLECTION.
'THIS Fable tells us what Credit is to be given to Witnesses of a False and
Lewd Conversation, and that a known Liar is of no Authority in a Judgment of
Law, even when he speaks Truth. Where a Brace of Sharpers will be going to Law,
none so fit as an Ape to try the Cause; and it was a Sentence worthy of such a
Judge, to pronounce them both Guilty; which in Equity they were, with a respect
to their Character and Reputation; though in Law they could not be so, upon the
Fact in Question. If the Ape in this Fable had too little regard to the Letter
of the Law, we have seen some Cases where more stress has been laid upon the
rigor and strictness of it, then Conscientiously did belong to it: For when one
Man of an Exemplary Improbity, Charges another of the same Stamp, in a Court of
a Justice, he lies under the Disadvantage of a strong Suspicion, even before he
is Heard; and People are Prepared to Believe the Worst of him by Anticipation,
and before his Case is Known. So that the Bare Prejudice is sufficient to turn
the Scale, where it was Gold-weight before; unless we Balance the Improbity of
the one, with the Improbity of the other, as the Ape did here in the Fable.

We are to understand upon the whole matter, that it is more Advisable to give
too Little Credit in a Court of Judicature to Men of Profligate Lives, then too
Much: For it is a Scandal to Public Justice, to make use of such Instruments
for the Supporters of a State.

FAB. CCCCXVI. An Ape and a Lion in his Kingdom.
WE are told of a Lion, that (after the Laudable Example of other Princes,)
passed an Act of Grace upon his Accession to the Crown, wherein he was pleased
to Declare himself wonderfully in favor of the Liberties and Properties of his
Subjects. He did not hold in this Mind long; and yet he could not think it
convenient neither, to make any Attempts upon the Beasts by open Force; so that
he chose rather to take them One by One in Private to him, and to sift them all
upon this General Question; Put your Nose just to my Mouth, says he, when I
Gape, and then tell me truly, is my Breath Sweet or no? Some told him that it
was not Sweet, others that it was; and so he picked a Quarrel with them Both:
The one Sort went to Pot for their Hypocrisy; and the other for their
Insolence. It came to the Ape at last, to deliver his Opinion upon the Matter;
the Ape Smelt and Snuffled, and considered on it: Why certainly Sir, says he,
You have some Rich Perfume in Your Mouth, for I never smelt any thing so
fragrant since I was Born. The Roguy Ape in fine, Wheedled him so Artificially,
that the Lion had not the Face to Chop him up immediately upon the Spot, and
yet he was Resolved he should not Escape neither: So the Lion Counterfeited
Sick, and there was notable Puzzling among the Doctors I warrant ye, about his
Pulse and his Water: But they told him however upon due consideration, that
they found no Mortal Symptoms about him, only a kind of Heavy Indisposition,
that might be easily Rectified by a Careful Diet; and so they Desired him by
all means to bethink himself what Flesh he loved best, and even make a Hearty
Meal on it. Why then (says the Lion) I have a strange Fancy for a Mouthful of
Good Sound Apes-Flesh, if you find it proper for me: Nothing like it, they
cried; and so the Poor Flattering Ape was presently Taken up, Dressed and Eaten
by way of Prescription.

The MORAL.
There Is no Hope for an Honest Man, where Flattery is Encouraged and Rewarded,
and Plain-Dealing Punished.

REFLECTION.
THIS Fable gives to Understand, that where Men of Power happen to be Unjust
and Cruel, all the Prudence and Innocence in the World will not save a Man: He
that would Thrive in such a Court, must Govern himself betwixt Sincerity and
Adulation. The Art of Pleasing is not every Man's Talent, neither will the same
way of Manage work upon all Humors alike. The Art of Pleasing, is in Truth but
the Art of Living; and the Skill of Cutting to a Third, betwixt Flattery and
Ill Manners; but so as to Accommodate the Method and the Application, to the
Genius of the Man, or of the People, and to the Quality of the Business in
Hand: Not but that there are some Cases and Natures that a Man cannot so much
as Touch, without Burning his Fingers, and where Truth, Flattery, and Trimming
are all Mortal.

We may learn from hence also, that Justice is so Awfully Sacred, that the most
Faithless of Men have a secret Veneration for it; for their Uttermost Cruelties
are covered with the semblance of it; and in the very Exercise of the Vice,
they Affect the Reputation of the Virtue. It Is neither Prudent nor safe, in
fine, to Provoke great Men, or indeed to have any thing to do with them, if
they be not Men of Honor, as well as of Power; for though their Hands seem to
be Bound, they can yet Untye themselves, by Virtue of a Certain Prerogative
they have to Play Fast or Loose at Pleasure.

FAB. CCCCXVII. Two Laden Asses.
There Is an Old Story of Two Asses Traveling upon the Road, the One Laden with
Oats, the other with Money: The Mony-Merchant I Warrant ye, was so Proud of his
Trust, and of his Bell, that he went Juking and Tossing of his Head, and
Tabring with his Feet all the way, as if no Ground would hold him. The other
Plodding on with his Nose in the Breech of his Leader, as Gravely as One Foot
could follow another. While they were Jogging on thus upon the Way, out comes a
Band of Highway-Men from the next Wood, and falls upon the Ass that carried the
Treasure. They Beat, Wound and Rifle him, and so leave him, without so much as
taking the least Notice of his Fellow. Well, (says the King's Ass,) and for all
this Mischief I may even thank my Money. Right, says the other; and it has been
my Happiness that I was not thought worth the Robbing.

The MORAL.
Poverty is both Safe and Easy; and Riches a Great Snare to People in many
Cases: As it fared worse here with the State-Ass then with the Muletiers.

REFLECTION.
THE Poor Peaceable Man has nothing to Fear, but does his Business, and takes
his Rest, without the Trouble either of Thieves or of Alarums. It Is the Booty,
not the Man, (save only for the Booty's Sake,) that is in Danger. There Is
either Money or Monys-worth, in all the Controversies of Life; for we live in a
Mercenary World, and it is the Price, in some sort or other, of all things that
are in it; but as it certainly draws Envy and Hazard after it, so there are
great Advantages go along with it, and great Blessings that attend the right
use of it. And so for Poverty too; a narrow Fortune is undoubtedly a Cramp to a
great Mind, and lays a Man under a Thousand Incapacities of serving either his
Country or his Friend; but it has the Comforts yet of being free from the Cares
and Perils that accompany great Masses of Treasure and Plentiful Estates.
Beside, that the Virtue of a Generous and a Charitable Tenderness of Nature, is
never the less Acceptable to him that takes the Will for the Deed, for want of
Ability to put those good Inclinations in Execution. This Fable in short, makes
good the old Saying,

No Man Sings a Merrier Note
Then he that cannot change a Groat.
FAB. CCCCXVIII. A Boar Challenges an Ass.
THere passed some Hard Words betwixt a Boar and an Ass, and a Challenge
followed upon it. The Boar depended upon his Tusks, and computed within himself,
that Head to Head the 'tother could never be able to Encounter him. So he
Advanced upon his Adversary: And the Ass, so soon as ever he had him within
Distance, turned Tail upon him, and gave him such a Lash over the Chops with
his Iron Hoof, that he made him stagger again. The Boar after a little Pause;
Recovered himself. Well, (says he) I was not aware of such an Attack from that
End.

The MORAL.
No great Enterprise should be Undertaken without considering beforehand the
Good or the Ill that may come of it.

REFLECTION.
THIS Fable shows the great Oversight of Engaging in Quarrels, without
Considering from what Quarter the Danger may come. Where Adversaries are
unequally Matched, it will behove the Weaker to supply the want of Force and
Courage, by Invention and Address. Presumption can never Justify either
Temerity or Carelessness; for every Creature has its Weak Side, and lies open
to be Imposed upon by Craft or Surprise. There Is an Infamy in the very
Challenge of so Base and Timorous a Creature; but then to be Worsted by an
Animal that is the Scorn of all the Rest, is Shameful and Ridiculous to the
Highest Degree.

FAB. CCCCXIX. A Cuckoo and Little Birds.
A Cuckoo was asking several Little Birds, what made them so Shy of coming into
her Company. They told her, that she was so like a Hawk, they did not care to
have any thing to do with her.

The MORAL.
A Wise Man Searches into the Nature of Things, and does not Govern himself by
outward Semblances and Appearances.

REFLECTION.
THERE should a Regard be had in all our Actions and Counsels, to the Nicety of
the matter in Question. This is to tell us, that the very Appearances of Evil
are to be Avoided, and all the Semblances of Danger to be well Examined and
Considered. Why should not a Bird as well trust a Hawk that is like a Cuckoo, as
trust a Cuckoo that is like a Hawk? Two Likes may be Mistaken, and a Man cannot
be too wary where the Error is Mortal. There may be a Disguise it is true, in
the one case, and a misapprehension in the other; but it is safer yet to stand
upon our Guard against an Enemy in the likeness of a Friend, then to Embrace
any Man for a Friend in the likeness of an Enemy. T^ere's no Snare like
Credulity, when the Bait that is laid for us is covered with the pretense of a
Good Office. Neither are there any Impostures so Pernicious, as those that are
put upon us by Fair Resemblances. He that is not certain, (in such an Instance
as this,) is in danger; and it is ill Venturing (Neck and all especially,) where
a Body is not very sure, whether it be a Hawk or a Cuckoo.

FAB. CCCCXX. Hungry Dogs, and a Raw-Hide.
A Company of Hungry Curs Discovered a Raw-Hide in the Bottom of a River, and
laid their Heads together how to come at it: They Canvass'd the matter one way
and 'tother, and brought it to this Issue in the Conclusion, that the only way
to get it, was to Drink their way to it. So they fell to Lapping and Guzzling,
'till in one Word, they Burst themselves, and never the nearer.

The MORAL.
He that sets his Heart upon Things Impossible, shall be sure to Lose his
Longing.

REFLECTION.
Foolish Counsel is not only Vain and Unprofitable in General, but in many
particular Cases most Destructive and Deadly. This Fable lays open the Folly,
the Vanity, and the Danger of Pressing too eagerly for any thing that is out of
our Reach. We spend our Strength, and our Credit in clearing the way to it, and
it flies before us like a Shadow, which we may well Pursue, but can never
Overtake. It is much the (...) of (...), and a Thousand (...) sorts of
Projectors, that propose to themselves things utterly Impracticable, a^do
consume their Lives in Hopeless and Fruitless Undertakings. This falls out for
want of Computing upon the Proportion betwixt the Means, and the End; and for
want of Examining and Considering what is Practicable, and what (...) for want
again of Measuring our Force and Capacity with our Designs.

FAB. CCCCXXI. An Ass and a Shadow.
ONe Hired an Ass in the Dog Days to carry certain Bails of Goods to such a
Town: 'Twas Extreme Hot, so that he lay down upon the Way to Refresh himself
under the Shade of the Ass. The Muletier bad him Rise, and go on according to
his Bargain. 'Tother said that the Ass was His for the time he had Hired him.
Right, says the other, You have Hired the Ass, but not the Shadow.

The MORAL.
Work for the Lawyers.

REFLECTION.
'THIS Fable Plays upon the Contentious Humor of People that go to Law for
Trifles. De Asini Umbra, is effectully but this Fancy in an Adage. There needs
no more to the setting of the whole World in a Flame, then a Quarrelsom
Plaintiff and Defendent, and a Brace of Chicaneurs to Blow the Coals. Wrangling
is Instructed as an Art or a Science on the one side, and made use of as an
Exercise on the other. Some People can no more Live without Law, then without
Air, and they reckon it better Husbandry to spend a Thousand Pound upon
Counsel, to Defend a Trivial or an Unwarrantable Cause, then to part with one
single Six Pence for the Payment of an Honest Debt. This Fable in short, is
Moralliz'd in Westminster Hall, Forty times over every Term.

FAB. CCCCXXII. A Country-Fellow and a River.
A Blockheaded-Boy that was sent to Market with Butter and Cheese by the Good
Old Woman his Mother, made a stop at a Quick River in the way, and laid himself
down upon the Bank there, till it should run out. About Midnight, Home he goes
to his Mother, with all his Market-Trade back again. Why how now Son, says She,
what have we here to do! Why Mother, says this Booby, yonder is a Scurvy River
that has been running all this Day, and I staid till just now for the Running
of it out, and there it is Running still. The Lord help thee Son, says the Good
Woman, for thy Head and mine will be laid many a Fair Day before this River
runs Dry.

The MORAL.
We are not to Expect that Nature will Change her Course, to Gratify the Sickly
Freak of every Fantastical Humor.

REFLECTION.
THIS is to show us the Mischief and the Danger of Procrastination. The
Sloathful and Irresolute slip their Opportunities in the very Expectation of
them. Some People are so unreasonably Lazy, as to expect that Nature should
rather go out of her Course and Way for their Sakes, then they put themselves
to the trouble of Moving One Step out of their own way for the sake of Business
and Nature. They Will rather wait the Running of a River Dry, then take the Pains
to look about for a Bridge or a Ford. They never consider that Nature is a
Perpetual Motion, and that the Work of the Universe Circulates, without any
Interval or Repose. Why should not the Sun sleep in the Firmament, or stand
still to Attend our Affairs, as well as the Rivers stop their Courses to give
us Passage?

Nay, the Madness of this Folly is yet more Impious then any thing else in it;
for what Man in his Right Wits can pretend to Wish, to Hope, or to wait for
such Events, for the Gratifying of a Sickly Fancy, as would be enough to put
People quite beside their Senses, if they should come to pass? So Ridiculous
are Intemperate Curiosities, and Impotent Affections, that nothing less then
Portents, and the Confounding of Nature in her Course and Causes, can Content
us. How can any thing succeed well to People that are to be pleased with
Nothing, unless the very Ball of the Universe may be Unravel'd, and the Laws of
Providence Reversed?

FAB. CCCCXXIII. A Bladder with Beans in it.
IN the Days of Adam, when (as the Story says,) the World had here and there a
Shrew in it, it fell to the Lot of a certain Philosopher to have one of those
Smart Lasses to his Wife: The Evil Spirit was often up with her; and never had
any Quack or Operator so many Receipts for the Toothache, or a Quartan Ague, as
he had Spells offered him for the Laying of it again: But when he found that
neither Saying Much, Little, or nothing; neither Choler, nor Patience; neither
Going nor Staying would do any Good upon her, he Betook himself to a Bladder of
Beans, and the shaking of that Bladder when the Fit was upon her, without One
Syllable speaking, was at any time a Present Cure.

The MORAL.
There Is no way like Raising of One Devil to Cast out Another: For there must
be no Answering of Noise, Folly, and Reviling, in the same Kind.

REFLECTION.
THE Husband here in the Fable found no Charm to lay the Devil in a Petticoat,
but the Rattling of a Bladder with Beans in it; and I my self have known a
Cat-Pipe used in the like Case with very good Success. There Is no Contending
with an Impetuous Woman, by Authority or Reason. The Banging of it out in a
Dispute at length, would be a Loss both of Time and of Honor, and to no manner
of purpose neither; for what should a Man do, Reasoning upon a Point where
Reason does not so much as enter into the Question? So that it is the Best of a
Brave Man's Game to make a Drawn Battle on it, where there is no Possibility of a
Victory. He in fine, that contemns a Shrew to the Degree of not Descending to
Word it with her, does worse then Beat her. But we live in an Age, when Women,
we hope, are better Instructed, then to fly in the face of Religion it self,
Law, and Nature: And these Desperate Encounters can never fall out betwixt a
Man and his Wife, but where the Woman is lost to all sense of Shame, Prudence,
Modesty and Common Respect.

FAB. CCCCXXIV. A Fox and a Divining Cock.
A Fox that had spied out a Cock at Roost upon a Tree; and out of his Reach,
fell all of a sudden into an Extravagant Fit of Kindness for him; and to
Enlarge upon the Wonderful Esteem he had for the Faculties and good Graces of
the Bird, but more particularly for his Skill in Divination, and the
Foreknowledge of Things to come. Oh (says he) that I were but Worthy the
Friendship of so great a Prophet! This Flattery brought the Cock down from the
Tree into the very Mouth of the Fox, and so away he Trudges with him into the
Woods; reflecting still as he went, upon the strange Force that Fair Words have
upon vain Fools: For this Sot of a Cock (says he) to take himself for a
Diviner, and yet not foresee at the same time, that if he fell into my
Clutches, I should certainly make a Supper of him.

The MORAL.
A Fool that will Swallow Flattery, shall never want a Knave to give it him.

REFLECTION.
THE Power of Flattery, where it is once Entertained, is well nigh
Irresistible; for it carries the Countenance of Friendship and Respect; and
Foolish Natures are easily wrought upon, and Perverted, under that Semblance.
When Pride, Vanity, and Weakness of Judgment meet in the same Person, there is
no Resisting the Temptations of a fair Tongue, and consequently no avoiding the
Secret and Malicious Designs of a False Heart. Here Is a Credulous Cock already
prepared for the Entertainment of the Grossest of Flatteries: Nothing so
Ridiculous, nothing so Impossible, but it goes down whole with him, for Truth
and Earnest: Nay, and the Folly is so Unaccountable, and the Madness so
Notorious, that in this Humor the most Spiteful Enemies we have in the World
pass upon us for Friends. The Cock takes the Council of a Fox, and like the
Squirrel to the Rattle-Snake, puts himself into the Mouth of his Mortal
Adversary. How many such Diviners do we meet with in our Daily Conversation,
that lay their Lives, Fortunes and Reputation at the Mercy of Parasites? How
many Sots that Commence Philosophers upon the Credit of these Fawning Slaves!
There Is no Fool to the great Fool that is Fooled by a little Fool; nor any thing
so Scandalous as to be the Fool Of a Fool.

FAB. CCCCXXV. The Moon Begs a New Gown.
THe Moon was in a heavy Twitter once, that her Clothes never Fitted her:
Wherefore, Pray Mother, says she, let the Tailor take Measure of me for a
New-Gown. Alas Child, says the Mother, how is it possible to make any one
Garment to Fit a Body that appears every Day in a several Shape?

The MORAL.
It Is the Humor of many People, to be perpetually Longing for something or
other that is not to be had.

REFLECTION.
THIS shows us the Vanity of Impracticable Propositions, and that there is no
Measure to be taken of an Unsteady Mind. There Is no Quieting of Unsettled
Affections; no satisfying of Unbounded Desires; no possibility in short, of
either Fixing or Pleasing them. Let a Man but say What he would have, When, and
how Much, or how Little, and the Moons Tailor may take Measure of him; but to
be Longing for this thing to Day, and for that thing to Morrow; to change
Likings for Loathings, and to stand Wishing and Hankering at a Venture, how is
it possible for any Man to be at Rest in this Fluctuant Wandering Humor and
Opinion? There Is no fitting of a Gown to a Body that is of One Size when you
take Measure of it, and of another when you come to put it on. It Is the very
same Case with a Heart that is not True to it self. And upon the whole Matter,
Men of this Levity are Condemned to the Misery of Living and Dying Uneasy.

FAB. CCCCXXVI. A Young Fellow about to Marry.
MArrying and Hanging, they say, go by Destiny, and the Blade had this Thought
in his Head perhaps, that Desired the Prayers of the Congregation, when he was
upon the very Point of Matrimony. His Friends gave him no Answer it seems,
which put him upon Reasoning the Matter with them. Why Gentlemen, (says he) if
there had been but a Snick-up in the Case, you would have cried the Lord Bless ye
Sir; and there is more Danger in Marrying I hope, then there is in Sneezing.

The MORAL.
The Parson was much in the Right sure, that like the Hangman, asked all
People Forgiveness that he was to Marry, before he did Execution upon them.

REFLECTION.
MANY a Man runs a greater Risque in a Wise, then the World is aware of. The
Whimsical Freak of this Young Bantering Spark, would have made no Ill
Ingredient into a Wise and a Sober Man's Litany; and though it looks like a
Jest, there is somewhat in it yet that may be worth a thinking Man's Earnest.
But there will need no more then the Experience of those that have Tried the
Circumstances of this Blessed State, to Recommend the Morality of the Allusion,
to the Thought of others, that are not yet Entered into the Matrimonial Noose.

FAB. CCCCXXVII. A Woman trusted with a Secret.
THere was a Good Woman (in the Days when Good Women were in Fashion) that
valued her self Wonderfully upon the Faculty of Retention, or (for the sake of
Good Manners) upon the Admirable Gift she had in the Keeping of a Secret. The
Toy took her Husband in the Head once, to make Trial of her Virtue that way;
and so he told her One Morning upon Waking, in the greatest Confidence
Imaginable, one of the Strangest Things perhaps that ever was heard of, which
had that Night Befallen him: But my Dear, says he, if you should Speak on it
again, I Am utterly Ruined; and Women are generally so Leaky, that in the whole
Course of my Life, I have hardly met with any one of the Sex that could not
hold her Breath longer then she should keep a Secret. Ah, my Life (says she)
but your Woman I assure ye, is none of that Number? What? Betray my Husbands
Secrets, I Would Dye a Thousand Deaths first. No my Heart, if ever I do, may -- Her
Husband at that word, stopped her Mouth, for fear of some Bloody Imprecation,
and so told her. Come Wife, says he, They that will Swear will Lie, and so I Will
rather tell you upon Honor. Look ye here what has befallen me; I have laid an
Egg to Night; and so he took the Egg from his Backside, and bad her Feel on it;
but if this should ever come to Light now, People would say that I was
Hen-Trod, and the Disgrace of it would make me a Scandal to Mankind. This
Secret lay Burning in the Breast of the Poor Woman, and kept her Waking, till
she had Daylight enough to Rise by; and then softly out of the Bed she steals,
for fear of Waking her Husband, and so away Post-hast to a Gossipping Neighbor
of her Acquaintance; Hurries her out of her Bed; Charms and Swears her to
Privacy; and then out comes the Secret, That her Husband had laid Two Eggs that
very Night. This Confident had another Confident; and there 'twas Three Eggs.
The next made it Four; and so it went on (Increasing still,) from one Gossip to
another, 'till by Six a Clock in the Afternoon they had made it Forty Eggs.

The MORAL.
Three may Keep Counsel, when Two are away.

REFLECTION.
There Is no such way of Publishing or Proclaiming any thing, as by Enjoining a
Woman under the Seal of Confession to keep it Secret. They that are Curious to
know Forbidden Secrets, are as Frank of Telling them again, and of Enlarging
them: So that whoever shows me a very Inquisitive Body, I Will show him a Blab,
and one that shall make a Privacy as Public as a Proclamation. But if your
Wife will have it so, and calls for a Categorical Answer, [ Will ye tell me, or
will ye not?] If you tell the Secret, it is odds but in Twelve Hours it shall be
Town-Talk, and be made Thirteen times more then it is. If you Refuse to tell it,
there is no enduring the Exclamations, for want of Trust and Confidence, and the
Unaccountable Jealousies that Follow upon it. For there are a sort of People
that never consider the many separate Privacies of Trust and Honor, that a
Husband cannot honestly Communicate to a Wife, nor a Wife to a Husband: That is
to say, where there is a Third Party or Matter concerned, apart from any thing
in the Question that is Conjugal betwixt them.

He that can doubt of the Reason and the Necessity of this Guard and Caution,
must be much a Stranger to the History of the Great Rebellion under Charles the
First of Blessed Memory; when so many State-Intrigues passed through the Hands
of Women, who are without Dispute the best of Spies, and the most proper
Instruments for Discovery and Intelligence: Especially if they be Women of
Address, Wit, and Beauty; for the very Sex has certain Privileges upon the
Point of a Cavalier-Gallantry and Good Breeding, to cover them from the
strictnesses of Search and Examination that other Agents are commonly Subjected
to.

Now to Reconcile a seeming Contradiction here, in making Women at the same
time to be both Fit and Unfit to be Trusted; this Fable does not strike so much
at the Futility of Women in General, as at the Incontinent Levity of a Prying
Inquisitive Humor; and it falls-in over and above, by way of a Short and
Pertinent Digression, to show that State-Matters are Morally Excepted out of
the Articles of Marriage.

FAB. CCCCXXVIII. A Woman and Thrushes.
IN the Days of Yore, when Men and their Wives agreed like Dog and Cat in a
House together, the Good Man had been a Shooting it seems, and brought his Dame
Home a Dozen of Black-Birds with him. Come, Sweet Heart, says he, Prithee let us
have these Black-Birds to Supper. Blackbirds? says she, the Lord Bless us, why
certainly the Man's a Changeling. Come, come, you shall have your Thrushes for
Supper then. Well, says he, but I tell you again, I Will have these Blackbirds to
Supper. That Is well, quoth the Woman; and I tell you Again and Again, that you
shall have these Thrushes for Supper. Prithee my Dear, says the Man, If I say
they are Blackbirds, let 'em be Blackbirds: I Will allow you to think they may be
Thrushes, but don't Contradict me. Prithee my Dear, says she, if I have a Fool
to my Husband, is my Husband's Wife bound to be a Fool for Company? Hussy,
don't Provoke me, says the Man, but let the Blackbirds be Dressed, and do as I
bid ye; Obey your Husband y'ad best. Lifelikins, says she, I know no more
Reason I have to Obey my Husband, then my Husband has to Obey me; and Sirrah in
the Teeth of ye, since you are Hussying of me; no other Woman would have the
Patience to be Abused thus. From these Family-Words they fell to Blows, and
there was the Wig in one Corner, and the Head-Gear in another, upon the
Question whether they were Blackbirds or Thrushes. When the Bickering was over,
they went very comfortably to Bed together, and so rubbed on in a kind of
Catterwalling Life, 'till just that Day Twelve Month: And then came the History
of the Blackbirds and the Thrushes upon the Carpet again. Ah ye Beast you, says
the Woman, how did you Beat your Poor Wife Sirrah, this day Twelve Month about
those Damned Thrushes. Blackbirds ye Jade, says the One; Thrushes ye Rogue,
says the other: And so in One word, they Played the same Farce over again;
insomuch, that for the time they Lived together, the Woman had an Anniversary
Beating, as duly as the Day of the Month came about every Year after.

The MORAL.
-- Coelum licet and Mare Terris Confundas, Homo sum. -- What must be must be.

REFLECTION.
IT IS a Folly next to Madness for Women to be Trying Masteries with their
Husbands; to say nothing of the Scandal they bring upon themselves and their
Families, by such a Forfeiture of Honor, Discretion, Modesty and Good Manners.
Nay, and it is well too, if from some Men, and upon some Provocations, they
escape the Discipline of a good Drubbing into the Bargain.

There are Diverse Important Doctrins Couched under this Fable; First, the
Insuperable Obstinacy of a Violent Woman. Secondly, The Scandal of the Example,
as well as the Folly of the Competition. Thirdly, The Natural Issue of the
Controversy, where the Weakest must expect to go to the Wall. The World, Heaven
be Thanked, does not want instances to illustrate this Figure. So that there
will be less need of Amplifying upon it. We are not here upon the Philosophy of
the Freak, but upon the Shameful Lewdness of the Practice. Sirrah, (says a
Woman to a Friend of mine, that took her off from Beating her Husband,) I Am a
Wor'stershire Woman, and I will not be Abused. Iuvenal's Homo sum, says all in Two
Words. When the Devil of this Passion is Raised, there is no Abiding the Storm,
and there is no Laying on it. One such Woman's Tongue (says the Poet) is beyond
all the Pans and Kettles in the Country, to bring the Moon out of an Eclipse.
Keep up the Dialogue, and she Kills you; let it fall, and you Kill her. This
was the very Case of a Certain Divine that Chid a Woman for striking and
Reviling her Husband. She left her Husband immediately, and fell upon the
Jacket of the Parson, who stood Gaping at her a full Hour and a Half together,
without one word of Reply. The Passion put her at last into Fits, and the first
Word she said upon coming to her self again, was no more then this, Ah Sir,
says she, Ever while you live Answer a Woman.

To come now to the Doctrine that is wrapped up in the Example. It Is Scandalous
with a Respect to the Ordinances both of God and Man; it is a high Offense to
Common Decency, in regard of the Sex, the Duty, and the Relation: And then it is
most abominably Indiscreet, because if the Man be not a Coxcomb, the Woman is
sure to be Worsted; and if he be one, it is as good as a Noverint Universi, that
there is a Fool and a Shrew well met. The Word Yoak-Fellow, goes a great way
with a Thrush-Woman. And so does the Text, that says, They shall be both One
Flesh. From whence she infers an Equality at least, if not a Right of Dominion;
for the Rib ought to have some Preference above the Clay.

This is not to be taken for a General Character of Women, but for a Reproof
only of some Eager-Spirited Gypsies of the Sex; and for the Honor also of
those Angelical Perfections, which render them both the Joy and the Blessing of
Mankind, when they live Suitably in all Points to the Intent of their Creation.

FAB. CCCCXXIX. Two Soldiers go Halves.
THe Humor took Two Country Fellows in the Head to turn Soldiers, and so away
they went to try the Chance of War, upon an Agreement to go Halves in the
Adventure. The One fell Sick upon the way; The Other went forward to the Army,
where he got himself both Money and Credit. At his Return a while after, he
found his Friend upon the Mending hand, and told him how and how, which he was
Extremely Glad to hear, because of the Snip that he himself Expected upon the
Dividend. As they were Talking of this and that by the By; he took his time to
put in a hint about Sharing the Booty according to their Agreement. That Is all
the Reason in the World says the other; but then there are other things to be
Divided too, which I ha'nt told you of, and when we come to Reckon, we had even
as good make one work on it, and count all together. This, says the other to
himself, must be something of Plate, Jewels or Precious Plunder; and so he came
Bluntly to the Question, what it was that his Camerade had gotten besides? Why
look ye, says the Soldier, (showing him his Naked Body) Here are Bruises,
Wounds, Maims and Scars, that are to be Divided as well as the Money. Nay, says
the other, you may even keep all you have got to your own use then; for I Will have
no Dividing upon those Terms.

The MORAL.
Partners must go Half-Profit, Half-Loss, it is no Bargain else.

REFLECTION.
IT IS Wisdom not to give more for a Thing then it is Worth; and in Common
Equity, Partners should take the Good and the Bad one with another, or let both
alone. People should not enter Hand over Head into Partnerships or Adventures,
either in War or in Bus^ness; they should consider that the Blows and the Scars
are to be Divided, as well as the Pistoles and the Ducats, and the Loss as well
as the Profit. The Two Parties are as good as Man and Wife, where the Bargain
is for Better for Worse. Nay, there is Brawling as well as Kissing in the very
State of Matrimony it self; and when People come to be Used to Both at Once,
let them set one against the other, and then put the Gain in their Eyes. If
Life be a Journey, Men must expect Foul way as well as Fair, and content
themselves to Travel in All Weathers, and through All Difficulties; which is no
more then the same Mixture that we meet with in All our Undertakings: Wherefore
let no Man Brag of his Bargain, till he has cast up his Account, and set the
Scars against the Booty.

FAB. CCCCXXX. A Lion and a Man.
AMong other good Counsels that an Old Experienced Lion gave to his VVhelp,
this was One; that he should never Contend with a Man; for says he, if ever you
do, you will be Worsted. The Little Lion gave his Father the Hearing, and kept
the Advice in his Thought, but it never went near his Heart. When he came to be
grown up afterward, and in the Flower of his Strength and Vigor, About and
About he Ranges to look for a Man to Grapple with: In his Ramble he chances to
Spy a Yoke of Oxen; so up to 'em he goes presently; Hark ye Friends, says he,
are you MEN? They told him No; but their Master was a Man. Upon leaving the
Oxen, he went to a Horse, that he saw Bridled, and Tied to a Tree, and asked
him the same Question; No, says the Horse, I am no Man my Self, but he that
Bridled and Saddled me, and tied me up here, He Is a Man. He goes after this, to
one that was Cleaving of Blocks. Do You hear, says the Lion, You seem to be a
Man. And a Man I am, says the Fellow. That Is well, quoth the Lion, and dare you
Fight with Me? Yes, says the Man, I dare Fight with ye: Why I can Tear all
these Blocks to Pieces ye see. Put your Feet now into this Gap, where you see
an Iron Thing there, and try what you can do. The Lion presently put his Claws
into the Gaping of the Wood, and with One Lusty Pluck, made it give way, and
out drops the Wedge, the Wood immediately Closing upon it; and there was the
Lion caught by the Toes. The Woodman presently upon this, Raises the Country,
and the Lion finding what a Straight he was in, gave one Hearty Twitch, and got
his Feet out of the Trap, but left his Claws Behind him. So away he goes back
to his Father, all Lame and Bloody, with this Confession in his Mouth; Alas, my
Dear Father, says he, This had never been, if I had followed your Advice.

The MORAL.
Disobedience to Parents is against the Laws of Nature and of Nations; Common
Justice, Prudence and Good Manners; and the Vengeance of Heaven, Sooner or
Later, Treads upon the Heels on it.

REFLECTION.
People are not to Reason upon Obedience to Parents, and Submission to
Governors, provided there be nothing in the Command, or in the Imposition that
is simply Evil. Reason in Man, does abundantly supply the Defect of other
Faculties wherein we are Inferior to Beasts; and what we cannot compass by
Force, we bring about by Stratagem. The Intent of this Fable, is to set forth
the Excellency of Man above all Creatures upon the Earth; and to show that he
is Lord and Ruler over all the rest; their Teeth, Claws, Stings, and other
means of Offense, notwithstanding. The Young Lion himself is Charged by his
Sire not to Contend with him; so that consequently no Creature of less Force is
upon any Terms to Encounter him. Not but that there are some special Instances
to the contrary, in Exception to the General Rule. The Moralist makes the Event
to confirm the Reason, and to support the Authority of the Lions Council. It
may pass likewise in some sort, for a Punishment of Disobedience to a Parent;
but there is the Voice of Providence and Wisdom in it, as well as the Voice of a
Father; which is intimated in showing us, that the Yoke of Oxen, and the Horse
that stood Bridled and Sadled, had a Man still to their Master.

FAB. CCCCXXXI. A Hare and a Sparrow.
A Sparrow happened to take a Bush just as an Eagle made a Stoop at a Hare, and
when she had got her in the Foot, Poor Wat cried out for Help. Well, (says the
Sparrow) and why don't ye Run for it now? I thought your Footmanship would have
Saved ye. In this very Moment comes a Hawk, and whips away the Sparrow; which
gave the Dying Hare this Consolation in her last Distress, that she saw her
Insolent Enemy overtaken with a just Vengeance, and that the Hard-Hearted
Creature that had no Pity for Another, could obtain none for her self neither,
when she stood most in need on it.

The MORAL.
It Is with Men, and Governments, as it is with Birds and Beasts. The Weaker are
a Prey to the Stronger, and so one under another, through the whole Scale of
the Creation. We ought therefore to have a Fellowfeeling of one another
Afflictions; for no Body knows whose Turn may be next.

REFLECTION.
HERE IS a Just Judgment upon Ill Nature, wherefore let no Man make Sport with
the Miserable, that is in danger to be Miserable Himself, as Every Man may be;
and in Truth every Man deserves so to be, that has no Tenderness for his
Neighbor. It is a High Degree of Inhumanity not to have a Fellow feeling of
the Misfortune of my Brother; but to take Pleasure in my Neighbors Misery, and
to make Merry with it, is not only a Brutal, but a Diabolical Barbarity and
Folly.

FAB. CCCCXXXII. A Fox and a Cock.
A Hungry Fox that had got a Cock in his Eye, and could not tell how to come at
him; cast himself at his Length upon the Ground, and there he lay winking and
pinking as if he had Sore Eyes. Ah, (says he to the Cock) I have gotten a Thorn
here, with Creeping through a Hedge the other Day; 'twould be the greatest
Charity in the World, if you would but help me out with it. Why truly, says
the Cock, I am no Ocul^st, and if I should go to Help One Eye, and put Out
The Other with my Spur, we should have but an Untoward Busness on it; but if you
are not in very great Have, I can fly Home in a Trice, and bring ye One that
shall certainly Cure ye. The Fox finding 'twas all but Banter: Well, says he)
it is no Great Matter then; for the more Physicians, the more Danger, they say.

The MORAL.
Shuffling and Fencing, is in many Cases both Allowable and Necessary:
Especially where Craft is to be Encountered with Craft.

REFLECTION.
THERE IS no Trusting to a Known Hypocrite and an Enemy Both in One, and
therefore the Cock was too Crafty for the Fox here, and kept himself upon his
Guard. There is this Mischief in False Dealing, that it forces People to be
Hard Natured and Suspicious in their own Defense; for Credulity is Mortal. Not
but that many Men are Imposed upon to their Ruin by a Mistaken Charity and
Compassion. It is a Nice Point however, for a Man to take upon him to Assign
the Many and Various Cases that occur upon this Topic, and so as to allot them
their Just and Proper Limits, with such a Regard to Good Nature and Discretion,
as neither to be Wanting to Our Selves, nor to Others: But yet the Possible
Danger of Relieving a Miserable Person, for fear he should be a Counterfeit,
will not Excuse a Man from doing Acts of Humanity, notwithstanding that
Pretense. But there is a Double Hazard in it, for we may Miscarry either by too
Little Caution, One way, or by too Much Presumption the other. Now the Smelling
out of a Trick, and the Defeating of it, does not come so Home, as Repaying of
it in kind; for the Contempt in the manner of doing it, gives a kind of Sting
to the Disappointment. But the Fox however has the Grace of other Bantering
Buffoo^s: That is to say, he is never to be put out of Countenance; and when he
finds himself Pinched, he shifts it off with a Droll.

FAB. CCCCXXXIII. Joy and Sorrow are near Akin.
THere passed a great many Bitter Words once upon a time betwixt Joy and
Sorrow; insomuch that they Moved the Court upon it by Consent, and made a
Chancery Cause on it. Upon a Fair and a Full Hearing, the Judge found some
color of Equity on Both Sides, and would fain have made 'em Friends again. You
should consider, says he, how near you are akin, and what a Scandal, it is to
have these Heats and Squabbles among Relations: But all this went in at One
Ear, and out at The Other: So that when he saw there was no Good to be done, he
passed this Sentence upon them, that since they would not go Hand in Hand
Amicably of Themselves, they should be Linked together in a Chain; and Each of
them in his Turn should be perpetually Treading upon the Heel of the Other; and
not a Pin Matter then which went Foremost.

The MORAL.
No Man is to Presume in Prosperity, or to Despair in Adversity; for Good and
Ill Fortune do as naturally succeed one another, as Day and Night.

REFLECTION.
IT is the lot of Mankind to be Happy and Miserable by Turns. The Wisdom of
Nature will have it so; and it is exceedingly for our Advantage that so it
should be. There Is nothing Pure under the Heavens, and the Rule holds in the
Chances of Life, as well as in the Elements: Beside, that such an Abstracted
Simplicity, (if any such thing there were,) would be neither Nourishing to us,
nor Profitable. By the Mediation of this Mixture, we have the Comfort of Hope
to support us in our Distresses, and the Apprehensions of a Change, to keep a
Check upon us in the very Huff of our Greatness and Glory: So that by this
Vicissitude of Good and Evil, we are kept steady in our Philosophy, and in our
Religion. The One Minds us of God's Omnipotence and Justice; the Other of his
Goodness and Mercy: The One tells us, that there is No Trusting to our own
Strength; the Other Preaches Faith and Resignation in the Prospect of an
Overruling Providence that takes Care of us. What is it but Sickness that
gives us a Taste of Health? Bondage the Relish of Liberty? And what but the
Experience of Want that Enhances the Value of Plenty? That which we call Ease
is only an Indolency or a Freedom from Pain; and there is no such thing as
Felicity or Misery, but by the Comparison. It Is very true that Hopes and Fears
are the Snares of Life in some Respects; but then they are the Relief of it in
others. Now for fear of the worst however on either hand, every Man has it in
his own Power by the Force of Natural Reason, to Master the Temptation of
falling either into Presumption or Despair.

FAB. CCCCXXXIV. The Owl and the Sun.
THere was a Pinking Owl once upon a very Bright and a Glorious Morning, that
sat Sputtering at the Sun; and asked him what he meant to stand Staring her in
the Eyes at that Rate. Well, says the Sun, but if your Eyes will not bear the
Light, what is your Quarrel to my Beams that Shed it? Do you think it a
Reasonable Thing that the whole World should be Deprived of the Greatest
Blessing in Nature, to Gratify the Folly, the Arrogance and the Infirmity of
One Sot?

The MORAL.
There is nothing so Excellent, or so Faultless, but Envy and Detraction will
find somewhat to say against it.

REFLECTION.
IT is no more in the Power of Calumny and Envy to Blast the Dignity of a Wise
and of an Honest Man, then it was in the Power of the Blear-eyed Owl here, to
cast a Scandal upon the Glory and Greatness of the Sun. The Principles of Good
and Evil are as Firm, as the Foundations of the Earth, and never had any Man
Living the Face yet to make an Open Profession of Wickedness in its own Name.
Not but that Men of Vicious Lives and Conversations, have found out ways of
Imposing their Corruptions and Infirmities upon the World for Virtues, under
false Semblances and Colors. But there is no Man all this while, that sets up
for a Knave or a Coxcomb in Direct Terms. Now the Mystery of the Cheat lies in
the Artificial Disguising of One thing for Another, and in making Evil pass for
Good, and Good for Evil: As every Virtue has its Bordering Vice, and every Vice
its Bordering Virtue. So that the Pretense is Fair still, let the Practice be
never so Foul, and Men will be trying to bring down the Rule to the Error,
where they cannot Reconcile the Error to the Rule. When People have once
Inverted the Measures of Moral Equity, and Natural Reason, and brought the
Question of Right or Wrong, so far as in them lies, to a False Standard, there
follows in course, an Envious Malevolence upon the Opposition. As for Example;
A Fool Naturally Hates a Philosopher: A Debauchee does as Naturally Hate a Man
of good Government, and Moderation. A Man of Conscience and Religion is as much
an Eyesore to a Profligate Atheist: And a Mercenary Knight of the Post has
just as much Kindness for a Man of Probity and Virtue. To Conclude the Moral,
There are of these Owls in Palaces and Assemblies, as well as in Barns and
Groves; but a Man of Honor and Integrity Shines on, like the Sun in the
Firmament, Unconcerned, and continues his Course.

FAB. CCCCXXXV. Jupiter and a Farmer.
Jupiter had a Farm a long time upon his hand, for want of a Tenant to come up
to his Price, 'till a Bold Fellow at last was content to Take it, upon
Condition that he Himself might have the Ordering of the Air and the Seasons,
as he thought fit. So Jupiter Covenanted with him, that it should be Hot or
Cold, Wet or Dry, Calm or Windy, as the Tenant should Direct. In conclusion,
this Man had effectually a Climate of his own, that his very next Neighbors
felt nothing of: And it was well they did not; for when they had a Plentiful
Harvest and Vintage, the Farmer himself had hardly any Corn or Grass upon his
Ground. He took other Measures the Year following, which (as it fell out)
proved the more Unkindly of the Two. He held on however, till he was upon the
very Point of Breaking; and when it came to that once, he was e'n glad to
Petition Jupiter to Release him of his Bargain; for he was now Convinced, that
Providence knows Better what is good for us, then we know what is good for our
Selves.

The MORAL.
We should do well to make it One Petition in our Litany, that in many Cases
Heaven would be so Gracious to us, as not to hear our Prayers; for we are
otherwise in Danger to be Undone by our own Wishes.

REFLECTION.
WHAT work would Malevolents and Malcontents make in the World, if they might
but have the Governing of it; and if Heaven were not more Merciful to us, then
to grant us our own Wishes? Wherefore there must be no Prescribing of Rules to
the Divine Wisdom. What a Confusion would it bring upon Mankind, if all those
People that are Unsatisfied with the Motions, Revolutions and Influences of the
Celestial Orbs; the Course of the Seasons, and the Providential Distribution
of Heats and Colds, Rain, Frosts and Sunshine, might be Allowed to take the
Government into their own Hands? There needs nothing more to Convince us of the
Vanity, the Malice and the Folly of these Intermedlers with the Works and
Orders of an Overruling Power; and yet we must be making Articles and
Conditions forsooth, in Matters where we have neither Authority nor Skill: And
where, in spite of our Hearts, we must Submit, as in Duty and Reverence we are
Obliged to Resign, and to Obey.

FAB. CCCCXXXVI. A Wolf turns Religious.
A Wolf that was past Labor, had the Wit in his Old Age, yet to make the best
of a bad Game: He borrows a Habit, and so about he goes Begging a Charity from
Door to Door under the Disguise of a Pilgrim: And for ought we know, this may
be one of the Pilgrims that were to have Landed at Melford Haven, in the Year
1677 / 8. One of his Relations that had the Fortune to Meet him in this Holy
Garb and Pretense, took him up Roundly, for stooping so much below the Dignity
of his Family and Profession. Why what would you have me do? says the Pilgrim
Wolf. My Teeth and my Heels are gone, so that I can neither Run, nor Worry, and
I must either Cant, and turn Religious, or Starve.

The MORAL.
When People can live no longer by Downright Rapine and Villainy, for want of
Strength, Means or Ability to go on at the Old Rate, it is a common thing for
'em to Drive on the Old Trade still under a Semblance of Religion and Virtue:
So that Impotency goes a great way toward the Conversion of an Old Sinner.

REFLECTION.
A Proselyte-Wolf is a very Saint yet to a Proselyte-Christian, that makes his
Belly his God, and Renounces his Faith for Bread. Now over and above the Lively
Image of the Practice of the World in this Wonderful Conversion, it is Pleasant
enough to consider how Gravely the New-Convert is taken up by one of his Fellow
Wolves, for bringing such a Disgrace upon his Character and Function, as to
submit to the Picking up of a Livelihood in that Strolling way of Canting and
Begging; which in the Moral, gives us to Understand, that the Hypocrite is the
Fouler and the Baser Beast of the Two. The Doctrine of this Fable, if the Matter
were well Examined, would more or less run thorough the whole Race of Mankind;
for Repentance and a New Life, is naturally the Discourse and Retreat of Old
Sinners, when they find they can Live by Barefaced Wickedness no longer: What a
Hideous Roll would it make, if the Names of all the People that are Pointed at
under this Emblem of the Pilgrim-Wolf were written in their Foreheads!

FAB. CCCCXXXVII. The Asses Skin.
A Miserable Ass that was ready to sink under Blows and Burdens, called upon
Death to Deliver him from that Intolerable Oppression. Death was within Hearing
it seems, and took him at his Word; but told him withal for his Comfort, that
whereas other Creatures end their Misfortunes and their Lives together, You
must not expect that it will be so with you; for (says Death,) they will make
Drums of your Skin, when your Carcass shall be Carrion, and never leave
Drubbing of ye so long as one Piece will hold to another.

The MORAL.
Some People are Miserable beyond the Relief even of Death it self: That is to
say, there are Men that lead Restless Lives in this World, under a Dreadful
Apprehension at the same time, of being more Wretched in the next.

REFLECTION.
THIS Moral does not lie so square, as to bear any great weight upon it. It Is
true, that our Fame and Memory shall outlive our Bodies; and that in that Sense
a Man may be said to be Miserable after his Death; even in a Pagan way of
Understanding it, as well as with a Regard to the Immortality of the Soul in a
Christian Application. It holds forth to us the Pertinacy of Ill Fortune, in
Pursuing some People into their very Graves: But they that are born to a
Fatality of Endless Misfortunes, must submit to go thorough with them.

FAB. CCCCXXXVIII. A Fool and a Hot Iron.
A Smith threw down a Horse-Shoe in his Shop that was but just come out of the
Fire: A Fool took it up; it burnt his Fingers, and he cast it down again. Why
ye Blockhead you says the Workman, could not you have tried whether 'twas Hot
or no before you Meddled with it? How try? says the Fool. Why a Hot Iron would
have Hissed if you had but Spit upon it. The Fool carried this Philosophy away
with him, and took an Occasion afterward to Spit in his Porridge, to try if
they would Hiss. They did not Hiss it seems, and so he Guttled 'em up, and Scalt
his Chops. Well, says one that was by, and could not you have stayed 'till they
were Cold? Why I thought they had been Cold, says the Fool. You might have
known they were Hot says the other by their Smoking. The Fool carried this in
his Mind too; and going a while after to a Springhead to quench his Thirst, he
fancied that the Fountain Smoked too; and there he staid 'till he was almost
Choked, for fear of Burning his Chops once again.

The MORAL.
This very Innocent may serve to Teach Wise Men Caution, that they Examine
Matters before they pass a Judgment upon them; for otherwise we live at a kind
of Hap Hazard, and without any Insight into Causes and Effects.

REFLECTION.
IT IS a Great Folly not to Distinguish betwixt things Extremely Differing in
their Qualities and Nature; it is no wonder to find one Simplicity of this Kind
followed with more; for Weak Men will be still applying the last Rule to the
next Case, for want of Reasoning and Connecting upon the whole. It Is an Odd
Thing now, that a Mountebank should get Reputation by the same Error that makes
an Idiot yet more Ridiculous; that is to say, by Prescribing the same Remedy to
all Diseases. There was just such another Innocent as this, in my Fathers
Family: He did the Course Work in the Kitchen, and was bid at his first Coming
to take off the Range, and let down the Cynders before he went to Bed. The Poor
Silly Wretch laid Hands of the Irons, when they were next to Red Hot yet, and
they stuck to his Fingers, A Vengeance on ye, says he, Y' are as Warm as Wool;
and so shook 'em off again. Now this Innocent, I dare Answer for him, had never
read Camerarius, so that he did not Burn his Fingers by that Copy.

FAB. CCCCXXXIX. A Cock and Horses.
A Cock was got into a Stable, and there was he Nestling in the Straw among the
Horses; and still as the Fit took 'em, they would be Stamping and Flinging, and
laying about 'em with their Heels. So the Cock very gravely Admonished them;
Pray my Good Friends, let us have a Care, says he, that we don't Tread upon One
Another.

The MORAL.
Unequal Conversations are Dangerous and Inconvenient to the Weaker Side in
many Respects, whether it be in Regard of Quality, Fortune, or the like; where
the weight of the One, sinks the Other: And no matter whether we Embark out of
Vanity or Folly; for it is Hazzardous both ways.

REFLECTION.
So says many a Vain Fool in the World, as this Cock does in the Like Case, and
Exposes himself to Scorn, as well as Destruction. It Is a necessary Point of
Wisdom for People to sort themselves with fit Company, and to make a Right
Judgment of their Conversation. I do not mean in the matter of Morals only,
where Vicious and Ill Habits are Contagious; but there should a Regard be had
to the very Size, Quality and Degree of the Men that we Frequent: For where the
Disproportion is very great, a Man may be Ruined without Malice, and Crushed to
Pieces by the Weight even of One that has a Kindness for him. Now where we
Misjudge the Matter, a Miscarriage draws Pity after it, but when we are
Transported by Pride and Vanity into so Dangerous an Af^, our Ruin lies at our
own Door.

FAB. CCCCXL. A Gardener and a Mole.
A Gardener took a Mole in his Grounds, and the Question was, whether he should
put her to Death or no. The Mole Pleaded that she was one of his Family, and
Dug his Garden for Nothing: Nay, she Insisted upon it, what Pity 'twas to
Destroy a Creature that had so smooth a Skin, and Twenty other Little
Pretenses. Come, come, says the Gardener, I am not to be Fooled with a Parcel
of Fair Words: You have Nothing for Digging it is True; but pray who set you at
Work? Is it for my Service do you think, to have my Plants and my Herbs torn up
by the Roots? And what is your business at last, but by doing all you can for
the filling of your own Belly, to leave me nothing to Eat?

FAB. CCCCXLI. A Man and a Weazle.
THere was a Weazle taken in a Trapp, and whether she should Dye or not, was
the Point: The Master of the House Charged her with heavy Misdemeanors, and the
Poor Vermin stood much upon her Innocence and Merit. Why says she, I keep your
House clear of Mice. Well, says the Man, but you do it for your Own sake, not
for Mine. What work would they make in the Pantry and the Larder, (says she) if
it were not for me? And in the mean time (says the Master of the House) You
your Self devour the same things that they would have Eaten, Mice and All: But
you would fain sham it upon me, that you do me a Service, when in Truth you do
me an Injury; and therefore you deserve a double Death; First, For the Fault it
self, and then for the Justification of it.

The Moral of the Two Fables above.
It Is according to the Course of those Kind Offices in the World, which we call
Friendship, to do one another Good for our Own Sakes.

REFLECTION.
THERE IS nothing Commoner in this World then the Case of the Mole here and the
Weazle: That is to say, the Case of People that Value themselves mightily upon
Merit; when in the mean time they do only their own Business. What Virtue is it
for me to do another Man good by Chance; or where is the Obligation of doing it
for my own Profit? It Is the Will of a Man that qualifies the Action. A Body may
do me Good, and yet Deserve to be Punished for it. He may save my Life for the
purpose, with an Intention to take it away. There is however some Regard to be
had to the very Instrument that Providence makes use of for our Advantage. But
this is out of a Respect to the Providence, not to the Man: And we are not yet
come up to the Force of the Fable neither; for many People have the Confidence
to Plead Merit, when Effectually they do us Mischief.

FAB. CCCCXLII. A Woman, Cat and Mice.
A Good Woman that was willing to keep her Cheeses from the Mice, thought to
Mend the Matter by getting her a Cat. Now Puss Answered the Woman's Intent and
Expectation, in keeping the Mice from Nibbling the Cheeses; but she her self at
the same time devoured the Mice, Cheese and all.

The MORAL.
This has been our Case within the Memory of Man: There were a matter of Half a
Dozen Little Roguy Political Mice lay Nibbling at our Liberties and Properties,
and all Peoples Mouths Opened for the Providing of some 500 Cats to Destroy
them. The End on it was this, they Killed the Vermin; but then they Gobbled up
Privileges and All: And was not the World well Amended?

REFLECTION.
THE Present State of Things is best, unless we may be very well Assured that
the Danger of the Remedy is not Greater then that of the Disease: Nay it so
falls out many times, that a Thing may be Good for the Distemper, and yet
Mortal to the Patient: Wherefore Men should never Trouble their Heads about
Innovations for slight Matters, without a strict Calculation, upon the Profit
or Loss of the Exchange. The Fancy of the Cat and Mice, Points very naturally
at the Case of Monarchy and Episcopacy in the Days of King Charles the First.
There were Grievances of all sorts Complained of, and Popular Disputes Raised
about Prerogative and Arbitrary Power, in the pretended Favor of Liberty and
Property. Every thing was amiss they cried, and nothing would serve the Turn
but a General Reformation; and what was the Issue at last, but the Cat that
should have Killed the Mice, Eat up, as the Fable says, Mice, Cheese and All.

FAB. CCCCXLIII. A Man in Tears for the Loss of his Wife.
NEver had any Man such a Loss in a Woman certainly as I have had! cries a
VViddower in the Flush of his Extravagancies for a Dead Wife: Never so dear a
Creature! Never so Miserable a Wretch! And so he runs Raving on, how he should
Abhor the Sex it self now she is gone. As he was in the Transport of his
Lamentations, and about half thorough the Farce, he started all on a sudden,
and called out to the Woman about the Body, (who it seems, had gotten the best
Piece of Linen in the House for a Winding Sheet;) Pray, says he, will you take
another Cloth for the Present, and let this be laid by for my next Wife, if it
should be the Lords will to have me Bury another. This set the Company a
Laughing, for all their Sorrow, to see the Good Man so soon brought to his Wits
again.

The MORAL.
Funeral Tears are but Matter of Form; and it is a Distinguishing Mark of
Hypocrisy, to take upon us to be Kind as well as to be Righteous, beyond
Measure. But Time and Nature will bolt out the Truth of Things, thorough all
Disguises.

REFLECTION.
IT is Morally Impossible for an Hypocrite to keep himself long upon his Guard;
for the Force is Unnatural, and the least Slip or Surprise, either of Word,
Look, or Action, Discovers the Cheat. 'Twas well enough put to a Fellow under
the same Circumstances, by a Friend of his, when he saw nothing else would
Comfort him: Come, says he, after all this Roaring and Tearing, what Boot at
last betwixt my Warm Wife, and thy Cold one? Which may serve for a Notable
Moral of Consolation in some Cases; Witness the Gentleman that tried both
Fortunes in one and the same Woman. His Wife was given over, and himself
waiting in the next Room, with the Rage and Impatience of a Madman, for fear
of Ill News; when at last, in comes one of the Nurses to him with the Dismal
Tidings, that my Poor Lady was Dead, and had been now Stone Cold for at least a
Quarter of an Hour. My Dear Wife Dead? says he. Nay we'll never part sure; and
so with a Thousand Frantic Exclamations, he strips immediately, and to Bed to
her he goes, takes her into his Arms, and there Treats her with all the Tender
Passionate Things that a Well-acted Love and Desparation could put into his
Mouth: Winding up all in fine, with this Resolution, that he would never
forsake her, but they must Live and Dye together. Let this Instance serve for a
Caution to People how they Play with Edge Tools; for this Fooling brought the
Woman to Life (...), and turned the Jest into Earnest. Nay, the Man Himself
took it for a Warning too; for from that time to the Hour of her Death, which
was near Seven Year after, he never came betwixt a pair of Sheets with her. But
to conclude all in a Word; happy is the Man, (considering the Hazzards of
Conjugal Disagreements, Ungracious Children, None at all, or the Loss of them,
and Twenty other common Circumstances,) that in a Married State, has the good
Fortune to make a Saving Game on it.

FAB. CCCCXLIV. A Rich Man that would be no Richer.
THere was a Huge Rich Man, that could neither Eat nor Sleep for fear of Losing
his Money: The whole Entertainment of his Life was Vision and Phantome; Thieves,
Earthquakes, Inundations; nothing in short came amiss to him, that was
Possible, Dangerous, and Terrible. In this Torment of a Restless Imagination,
he called a Beggar to him, told him his Case; and now says he I must send you
presently of an Errand to Fortune. Go your ways to her immediately, (you will
find her in Iapan,) and desire her from me, that for the future she will never
Trouble her self further upon any Account of mine; for I am absolutely resolved
never to touch Penny of her Money more. Be gone this very Moment, and I Will give
you a Hundred Crowns for your Pains. Why truly Sir, says the Poor Fellow, it is
a great way; but yet (after a little Humming and Hawing upon it,) he agreed to
undertake the Jobb. Do so then, says the Rich Chuff, and you shall have your
Ninety Crowns down upon the Nail. The poor Creature stuck a while upon the
other Ten that he promised; but at last came to his Price, and for Ninety he
was to go. Well then, says the Miserable Churl, A Bargain's a Bargain, and
Fourscore Crowns you shall certainly have. At this Rate he went Chaffering on,
till by Bating Ten and Ten still upon every New Demand, the Man was even fain
to Content himself with Ten Crowns at last for the whole Journey. And so away
he goes to Fortune; finds her out, and delivers his Errand: And says he, since
that Rich Man will have no more, pray be so good as to give Me that am ready to
Starve, what you would otherwise have given to a Man that does not want it. No,
says Fortune, as for his Part, I am Resolved to Plague him with thrice as much
more as he has already, in spite of his very Teeth; and then for your part,
I Will even keep ye in a Starving Condition as I found ye, to the last Minute of
your Life, and make good the Old Saying to ye; That he that is Born under a
Three-penny Plannet, shall never be worth a Groat. It Is true, you have gotten Ten
Crowns in Hand, and you should never have had that neither, if I had not been
Fast Asleep when they were Delivered ye.

The MORAL.
Not One Man of a Thousand knows his own Mind. Some Men shall be Rich in spite
of their Teeth. And then on the Other Hand, All the Carking and Caring in the
World, shall not keep a Man above Water.

REFLECTION.
The Covetous Man is never well (as we say) either Full or Fasting: Avarice has
a great deal in it of the Dog-Appetite. It is Greedy, Ravenous and Insatiable;
Raving Mad after what it has not, and Sick of what it has; for it Digests
nothing, and the very Success of the Wickedness, is the Plague on it. Nay, and
the Two Extremes of Want and Abundance are so near a kin too, that the Misery
of both these Opposite States, takes its Rise in a great Measure from the same
Root. Only Men are Sollicitous in the One Case how to Get, that which they are
as Sollicitous in the other Case how to Keep; and the Pain of the
Disappointment, whether in Missing or in Losing, is much the same. For what is
the Difference betwixt having Nothing at all Originally, and after such or such
an Acquisition, having Nothing at all Left? It Is but Nothing against Nothing
both ways: And the Case has much in it of what we find in an Extreme Drought,
or a Nauseous Surfeit. Men are ready to Choke for want of Drink, and when they
have Overcharged themselves with more then Nature will bear, they are ready to
Dye on that Hand too, 'till they have it up again. Now to carry on the
Allusion, here is a Covetous Man Deliberating betwixt the Qualms of a Wambling
Stomach, and an Unsettled Mind. Here is he Defying Fortune and all her Works;
he will have no more to do with her, he says, and so he Talks and does on at the
rate of Almost Half a Christian. But he does not yet know his own Mind it
seems, for while he is Renouncing the World and the Devil on the One Hand, he
strikes a League with them on the other, and in the same Breath Practices what
he pretends to Disclaim, and Couzens the Labourer of his Hire. We are not
therefore to value our Selves upon the Merit of Ejaculatory Repentances, that
take us by Fits and Starts, and look liker Confessions upon the Torture, then
Acts of Piety and Conscience. It Is not for a Desultory Thought, to atone for a
Lewd Course of Life; nor for any thing but the Super-inducing of a Virtuous
Habit upon a Vicious One, to qualify an Effectual Conversion. We are to
Distinguish betwixt this Miser's being Weary of the Anxious Condition he was
in, and his Repenting the Iniquity of his Oppression and Extortion: But Fortune
will have him Richer and Richer still, in spite of his Heart: That is to say,
for his Greater Condemnation and Punishment. And the last Touch is to show us,
in the Churlishness of Fortune, what a Poor Honest Man has to Trust to in this
World.

FAB. CCCCXLV. An Eagle sets up for a Beauty.
IT was once put to the Question among the Birds, which of the whole Tribe or
sort of 'em was the Greatest Beauty. The Eagle gave her Voice for her self, and
Carried it. Yes, says a Peacock in a soft Voice by the by, You are a great
Beauty indeed; but it lies in your Beak, and in your Talons, that make it Death
to Dispute it.

The MORAL.
The Veneration that is paid to Great and Powerful Men, is but from the Teeth
outward, not from the Heart; and more out of Fear then Love.

REFLECTION.
THIS Beauty in the Fable, Extends in the Moral to all the Advantages in Human
Nature that One Man can pretend to have over Another: Let it be matter of
Honor, Title, Justice, Good Faith, Conscience, etc. for the Longer Sword can
do no Wrong; and rather then fail, the Laws of God and Man shall take up Arms
against themselves in defense of the most Extravagant of Conquests. Religion is
a kind of a Two Edged-Sword in the Hands of a Man of Might, that Cuts both ways
alike; and it is either Right or Wrong, or Wrong or Right, as Occasion serves.
Take it by One Light, it is an Angel; by Another, it is a Devil: And so it is Pro
and Con at the same time. The whole World and the Business of it is Managed by
Flattery and Paradox; the one sets up False Gods, and the other Maintains them.
Power in short, is Beauty, Wit, Courage, and all Good Things in One, where
Slaves and Parasites are Judges.

FAB. CCCCXLVI. An Image Exposed to Sale.
A Certain Carver, that had a Mercury lay a great while upon his Hands,
bethought himself at last of Billing it about in Coffee-Houses, that at such a
place there was a God to be Sold, a Merry Penn'orth, and such a Deity as would
make any Man Rich that Bought him. Well (says One) And why do you Sell him then?
For he will make you Rich, if you Keep him, as well as he will make me Rich if
I Buy him. You say very Right says the other; but it is Ready Money that I want,
and the Purchaser will have only an Estate in Reversion.

The MORAL.
Ready Money goes as far in Religion as in Trade: People are willing to Keep
what they Have, and to get what they Can, without Launching out into Lives, and
Uncertainties. They are well enough Content to deal in the Sale of Reversions,
but they do not much care for Buying them.

REFLECTION.
THE Old Saying, A Bird in the Hand is worth Two in the Bush, holds with most
People in Religious Matters, as well as in Civil. A Sum of Money down upon the
Nail, goes further with them, then Heaven it self in the Reversion. Where we
are in the Dark, we are but too apt to be Doubtful, and to reckon upon it in
the common Acceptance of Flesh and Blood, as the Parting with a Certainty for
an Uncertainty. Now the Moral of this Fable must be Understood to Tax the
Vanity and Error of the Common Practice and Opinion of the World in this
Matter. The Fiction methinks has somewhat in it of the French Libertines Conceit
to a Severe Religious upon the Point of Mortification: Father (says he) What Is
the Meaning of all these Austerities of Hard Living, Hair Shirts, Watching,
Fastings, and I know not what? Oh Brother (says the Holy Man) it is all for
Paradise. Well (says the Licentious Droll again) but what if there should be no
Paradise at last, are not you finely brought to Bed then? The Mockery of this
Fable is somewhat akin to the Freak of this Story, and by no means to be
Allowed of but in Reprehension of so Irreverend a Freedom.

FAB. CCCCXLVII. Demetrius and Menander.
WHen Demetrius Phalaraeus (a Tyrant and an Usurper,) took Possession of
Athens, how was he Beset and Pursued with the Huzza's and Acclamations of the
People! Nay, and the Leading Men of the City too, with Joy in their Looks, and
Gall in their Hearts, striving who should be Foremost in the Solemnity, to cry
Vive Demetrius, and Kiss the Hand that Enslaved them. After them followed the
Men of Ease, Luxury and Pleasure, for fear of being thought Wanting in point of
Affection and Respect. Maenander the Famous Comical Poet was one of the Number,
but in so Loose a Garb and Dress, and with so Unmanly a kind of March and
Motion, that Demetrius had his Eye upon him presently, and called Aloud to know
how such an Effeminate Sot durst presume to Appear in his Presence. Somebody
gave the Tyrant immediately a Whisper, and told him, Sir says he, This is the
Poet Maenander that you your self have been pleased to own so Great an
Admiration and Esteem for. Demetrius recollects himself, and changes his Humor
in the very instant; calls Maenander to him, and Treats him with all the
Instances imaginable of a singular Liking and Respect.

The MORAL.
This Fable sets forth the Slavish Humor and Practice of the World, upon all
Violent Changes, let them be never so Impious and Unjust: And it shows us
again, that no Tyrants Heart can be so Hardened, but it may be Softened, and
wrought upon by the Force of Wit and Good Letters.

REFLECTION.
IT IS no Wonder, where there is Power on the One Side, to find Flattery and
Slavery on the Other: Nor is there any Inference to be drawn from the Outward
Pomp of Popular Addresses and Applause, to an Inward Congruity of Affections in
the Heart: For Blessings and Cursings come out of the same Mouth. These Noisy
Acclamations are rather made of Mode and Ceremony, then of Zeal and good Will;
and the Huzza's of the Rabble are the same to a Bear that they are to a Prince,
and signify no more to the One, then they do to the Other. The Tyrants Reproof
here of Maenander for his Mien and Garb, and his Recollection then, upon being
better Informed, are First, to the Honor of his Character, in being so
Generous as upon so solemn an Occasion, to own his Mistake: And Secondly,
Instructive to us, that we are not to Judge of the Man by his Outside.

FAB. CCCCXLVIII. A Consultation about Securing a Town.
THere was a Council of Mechanics called to Advise about the Fortifying of a
City; A Bricklayer was for Walling it with Stone; a Carpenter was of Opinion,
that Timber would be worth Forty on it: And after them, up starts a Currier,
Gentlemen, says he, when you have said all that can be said, there is nothing in
the World like Leather.

The MORAL.
Charity begins at Home, they say, and it is every Man's Business in the First
Place to look to his own Mothers Child.

REFLECTION.
HERE was a Debate set afoot, but the Board came to no Resolution we see; and
it could not be expected they should, where the Advisers were Every Man
Interessed for himself, and consequently both Parties and Judges. This is the
Fate and the Issue of all Mixed Councils, where the Members that are Entrusted
with the Protection, the Care, and the Treasure of the Public, lie under the
Temptation of Voting Honorable Charges to themselves, and putting Money in
their own Pockets. These Men in some Cases are called Pensioners, in others
Patriots; and in some again Committee Men, according to the Humor of the Age
they Live in. Now where a Sharper is allowed both to Shuffle and Cut, the
Devil's in him if he does not deal himself a Good Game. The Disposers of other
Peoples Fortunes seldom forget themselves; and all this is no more then the
Common Liberty that every Cook has of Licking his own Fingers.

FAB. CCCCXLIX. A Hedge Destroyed for Bearing no Fruit.
A Foolish Heir that was now come to the Possession of a Wise Man's Estate,
caused all the Bushes and Hedges about his Vineyard to be Grubb'd up, because
they brought him no Grapes. The Throwing down of this Hedge, laid his Ground
open to Man and Beast, and all his Plants were presently Destroyed. My Simple
Young Master came now to be Convinced of his Folly, in taking away the Guard
that Preserved his Vines, and in expecting Grapes from Brambles.

The MORAL.
There needs as much Care and Industry to the Preserving of things, as there
does to the Acquiring of them, and the Sentinel is as necessary to the common
Safety, as he that Fights the Battle.

REFLECTION.
THIS Parable of the Hedge and the Vineyard may be aptly enough expounded of
the Laws that secure a Civil Community. So long as the Enclosure is kept up,
and maintained, the Peace and the Order of the Public is Provided for; but if
it be suffered by neglect, either to fall to Decay, or to be overborn by
Violence, and all laid in common, the Beasts of the Forest break into it, and
of a Vineyard it becomes a Wilderness. This Fable marks out to us also the
double Folly of those that First Disappoint the Intent, Use and Benefit of
Things, for want of Understanding the Reason of them. And Secondly, ground all
this upon as gross a Mistake of 'em: For what is his Quarrel to the Hedge, but
that his Thorns and his Brambles did not bring forth Raisins rather then Haws
and Blackberries?

FAB. CCCCL. A Bull and a Gnat.
A Gnat that had Planted himself upon the Horn of a Bull, very Civilly begged
the Bull's Pardon for his Importunity; but rather then Incommode ye, says he,
I Will Remove. Oh never Trouble your Head for that, says the Bull; for it is all
One to me whether you go or stay. I never felt ye when you sat down, and I
shall take as Little Notice of ye when you Rise.

The MORAL.
The Vanity of this Fly, strikes at a Humor that we meet with every Day in the
World, in a Hundred Trifling, Nonsensical People, that will be still making
Themselves more Considerable then they are.

REFLECTION.
There are a Thousand Frivolous and Impertinent Pretensions of Civility that
are struck at in this Fable; and they well deserve to be Corrected; for it is
certainly one of the most Nauseous, Mawmish Mortifications under the Sun, for a
Man of Sense and Business to have to do with a Punctual, Finical Fop, that is
too too Mannerly, and does every thing forfooth by Rule and Compass: Especially
where his Quality, Relation, or Authority Entitles him to a Respect.

FAB. CCCCLI. Rats that Eat Copper.
A Merchant that had gotten a Friend of his to lay up a considerable Quantity
of Copper for him, comes afterward to have Occasion for it, and so desires he
may have his Copper again. Alas, says his Friend, my House is so Pestered with
Rats, that they have gotten to your Copper, and Eat it all up. The First Rats
of that Diet, says the Merchant, that ever I heard of. O Good Sir, says the
Man, it is a common thing with 'em here in this Island. So away goes the
Merchant, and the next Morning comes his Friend to him, Wringing his Hands, and
Exclaiming, Oh what should he do! The Kidnappers had stoll'n away his only
Child. Bless me, says the Master, this minds me of a Raven I saw Yesterday
Steeple-high, just over your House with a Child in's Foot: My Life for it, that
was your Child. No, no, says the other, a Raven Fly away with a Child! that is
Impossible. Pardon me, says the Merchant, it is a common thing where Rats Eat
Copper, for Ravens to Fly away with Children. The Man found himself Beaten at
his own Play, and so Compounded with the Merchant to give him Satisfaction for
his Copper, upon condition that he might have his Child again; for he had smelt
it out by this time that the Merchant himself was the Kidnapper.

The MORAL.
It Is a Dextrous Turn of Address, to Bafflle One Banter with Another; and the
Nearer the Resemblance of the Humor, the Hit is so much the Better.

REFLECTION.
ONE Nail must be driven out with Another. Bantering is only an old way of
Fooling, under a new Name; but the License of the Age has perhaps given it more
Credit in the World, in this Nation and Conjuncture then ever it had. It is a
turn of Wit next to Slight of Hand; and the Play of Jest or Earnest is as
arrant a Iugglers Trick, as little Hocus's Fast or Loose. It is a stroke of Wit
Pleasant and Agreeable enough, if it be kept within the Bounds of Sobriety,
Candor and Respect: But when it comes to Lash out once at a venture, into
matters Holy as well as Profane; when it comes once I say to be Intemperate,
Ill-natured, Scoptical, Scandalous and Bitter, it is a way of Conversation for a
Merry-Andrew or a Buffoon, rather then for a Man of Honor, or of Common Sense.
It is not one jot better then Boys Play, when they cry, I made 'em Believe so;
and that is the very Point at last that they drive at. The Rats have Eat your
Copper, says the Trustee here to the Merchant. What was there more in this,
then to try whether the Merchant was a Fool or not, and so to Cousen him if he
had found him one? Nay, and to make him a Fool upon Record too by his own
Confession, both in one. Now if he had but put a Dammee to the Truth on it,
according to the Modish Humor of the Times, some Soft-headed, Conscientious
Fop might have Swallowed it perhaps; but the Merchant very Dexterously turned
the Conceit upon him, and saved his Copper and his Credit both at once.

FAB. CCCCLII. A Woman Revived with Beating.
THere was an Untoward Perverse Piece of Woman's Flesh that fell now and then
under the Discipline of a little Family Correction; and she had got a trick of
throwing her self down upon her Back, holding her Breath, and there lying at
her Length for Stone-Dead. Her Husband it seems had been wonted to these
Gamboles, and so in a Grave Serious way, as she lay in a Fit once, calls for a
Knife. Come, says he, when the Beast is Dead, we must even make the best of his
Skin, and so he fell to work, and began to flay her at the Heel. The Woman did
not like that way of Fooling, but started up, and came to her self immediately.

The MORAL.
This in the Fable, is One of those Cases wherein People that are to be
Believed in Nothing else, ought to be taken at their Words. My Heart's too Big
to bear this, (says a Blustering Fellow,) By the Lord, I Will Destroy my self.
Sir, says the Gentleman, here is a Dagger at your Service; and so the Humor
went off.

REFLECTION.
Here Is Fooling against Fooling, and one Counterfeit Answered with another. The
Woman would needs persuade the Good Man that she was Dead; and the Husband in
Requital, gives her to understand, that she must be Flayed then; which was the
only way the Poor Man had of making the best of a Bad Game. 'Twas a Sham both
ways, and so they Compounded the Quarrel upon it; and the Good Woman never Died
after this, 'till she came to Dye for Good and all. There are some Peevish
Cases that will bear no other way of Conviction.

FAB. CCCCLIII. Two Friends and Fortune.
THere goes a Story of Two Familiar Friends that were often together, and had a
great many Words upon the Subject of that which we call Fortune. They were both
well enough to pass, but of very Differing Humors; the one a Man of Project
and Bussle in the World, the other altogether for Ease and Quiet. The one had a
Roving, Rambling Head; the other was a Man of Privacy and Reserve. The one in
Fine, was for making his Court to Fortune; the other for Lying by, 'till
Fortune should make her Court to Him. (According to the Freak of the rest of
the Sex.) Come, come, says the Ranger, we shall never make any thing on it at
this rate of Living; here is neither Honor nor Money to be got by staying where
we are, and for my own part, I Am even for a Pilgrimage to the Temple of
Fortune. Ay, but where is that? says 'tother. Why says the Rambler, we must even
beat it out the best we can. Pray'e, says his Companion, Advise well with your
Pillow before you Embark in this Adventure. You are going you know not whither,
to find out you know not what, or whom: A Phantome, that slips out of your Arms
in the very Grasping at it; a common Prostitute to Fools and Footmen. You must
be a Knave to be a Favorite, and abandon all the Substantial Comforts of
Humane Nature for a Jilt, and a Shadow. In one word, if you will needs be
wandering, Pray'e, when we meet next, remember what I told ye: And in the mean
time, I Will even lie down in Peace, and keep my Self just as I am, and where I
am; and if ever you live to come back again, do but look for me where you left
me, and there, if I Am Alive, you shall be sure to Find me.

Upon these Terms they parted, and away Posts the Cavalier in Quest of his new
Mistress. His First Jaunt is to Court, where he Enquires for Madam Fortunes
Lodgings: But she shifted so often, they told him, that there was no certainty
of Finding her. He never failed to make One at the Princes Levee and Couche,
where he heard over and over, how she had been at this Place and at that Place,
but never could get sight of her. They told him indeed, that at such or such a
Time, he might be sure of her at this Minions, or at that Buffoons Apartment;
but she was still so Busy, and so Private, that there was no coming to the
Speech of her. In fine, when he had Hunted and waited like a Dog, Early and
Late, I know not how long, one told him for a certain, that she had newly taken
Wing, and was gone a Progress to a Temple she had in Terra Australis Incognita.
Upon this, he takes his leave of the Court, and away immediately to Sea, where
he meets with Pirates, Rocks and Shelves, and in short, so many Dreadful
Encounters; as made him cast many a heavy Look and Thought upon the Quiet
Cottage and Companion that he had left behind him: But he goes pressing forward
still for all this, 'till in the conclusion, he was Fobb'd again with another
Story: That Fortune it is true, had been there; but she was called away by an
Express, not above Two Minutes before, to the Nor'ward. These Fantastical
Amusements and Miscarriages, brought him by little and little to his Wits
again, and to a contempt of all the vain Promises and Pretenses of Avarice and
Ambition. With these Thoughts about him, he makes all the have he can back
again, to his poor Blessed Home; where he finds his old Friend and
Acquaintance, without any Cares in his Head, Fast Asleep; and that very Fortune
that had led him this Wild-Goose Chase over the whole World, waiting like a
Spaniel at the Door, and Begging to be let in.

The MORAL.
It is with Fortune as it is with other Fantastical Mistresses; she makes sport
with those that are ready to Dye for her, and throws her self at the Feet of
others that Despise her.

REFLECTION.
IT IS Great Virtue and Happiness for a Man to set his Heart wholly upon that
Lot and Station which Providence has Assigned him, and to Content himself with
what he has, without Wandering after Imaginary Satisfactions in what he has
not. Fancy and Curiosity have no Bounds. Their Motto may be [ SOMEWHAT ELSE.]
And how should it be otherwise with People that are never Pleased with the
Present? They want they know not what, and they look for it they know not where.
We have had so many Occasions already to handle this Moral, that it would be
Time lost to say any more upon it in this Place.

FAB. CCCCLIV. A Boy that would not Learn his Book.
THere was a Stomachful Boy put to School, and the whole World could not bring
him to Pronounce the First Letter of his Alphabet. Open your Mouth says the
Master, and cry [ A.] The Boy Gapes, without so much as offering at the Vowel.
When the Master could do no good upon him, his School-Fellows took him to Task
among Themselves. Why it is not so hard a Thing methinks, says one of 'em to cry
[ A:] No, says the Boy, it is not so hard neither; but if I should cry [ A]
once, they would make me cry [ B] too, and I Will never do that, I Am Resolved.

The MORAL.
There Is no Contending with Obstinacy and Ill Nature; especially were there is a
Perverseness of Affection that goes along with it.

REFLECTION.
THE Spaniards will have it, that Apes can speak if they would, but they are
afraid they shall be put to Work then. The Boys Reason here, and the Apes are
much at one; and it is the case of Counterfeit Cripples too, that pretend they
cannot do this or that, when in truth, they are Lazy, and have no mind to be
put to it. The same Humor Governs in a World of Cases, where a Pretext of
Disability is made use of, either out of Crossness or Sloth. This Restiff
Stubbornness is never to be Excused, under any Pretense whatsoever; but where
the thing to be done is that which we are Bound in Honor and in Duty to do,
there is no Enduring of it. As in Cases of Law, Conscience, Church-Ceremonies,
Civil or Natural Obedience to Princes, Parents, Husbands, Masters, etc. If I
should do This, you would make me do That, they cry; which is only a short
Resolution that puts all the Functions and Offices of Order and Authority to a
stand. He that says I cannot do this or that, where the Thing is Lawfully
Imposed and Required, and not Simply Evil, might e'n as well have said I will
not do it; for the Exception is not to the Thing Commanded, but to the
Commanding Power. If I yield in one Point, says the Boy, they will expect I should
yield in more. Grant One Prerogative, and grant All, says the Republican. But
then says the Sovereign on the Other Hand; Part with the Prerogative, and part
with All: So that the Contest is not matter of Scruple, but who shall be
Uppermost. In One Word, Stubborn Boys, and Stubborn Subjects, where they will
not Comply upon Fair Means, must be whipped into their Duties.

FAB. CCCCLV. Hercules and Pluto.
WHen Hercules was taken up to Heaven for his Glorious Actions, he made his
Reverence in Course to all the Gods, 'till he came to Pluto, upon whom he
turned his Back with Indignation and Contempt. Jupiter asked him what he meant
by that Dis-respect? Why, says Hercules, that Son of Fortune Corrupts the whole
World with Money, Encourages all manner of Wickedness, and is a common Enemy to
all Good Men.

The MORAL.
This is only to show the Opposition betwixt a Narrow, Sordid, Avaritious
Humor, and the Public Spirited Generosity of a Man of Honor, Industry, and
Virtue.

REFLECTION.
MONEY has its Use it is true; but generally speaking, the Benefit does not
Countervail the Cares that go along with it, and the Hazzards of the Temptation
to Abuse it. It is the Patron, and the Price of all Wickedness: It Blinds all
Eyes, and stops all Ears, from the Prince to the very Beggar. It Corrupts Faith
and Justice; and in one Word, it is the very Pick-Lock, that opens the way into
all Cabinets and Councils. It Debauches Children against their Parents; it
makes Subjects Rebel against their Governors; it turns Lawyers and Divines into
Advocates for Sacrilege and Sedition; and it Transports the very Professors of
the Gospel into a Spirit of Contradiction and Defiance, to the Practices and
Precepts of our Lord and Master. It is no wonder now that Hercules should so
Contemptuously turn his Back upon Pluto, or the God of Money; when the One's
Business is to Propagate and Encourage those Monsters, which the other came
into the World to Quell and to Subdue.

FAB. CCCCLVI. A Lion, Boar and Uultures.
THere happened a Desperate Quarrel betwixt a Lion and a Boar; they Fought
upon it, and the Vultures came Hovering over the Combatants to make a Prey of
him that should be left upon the Spot: But it so fell out, that there was no
Death in the Case, and the Vultures were not a little Troubled at the
Disappointment.

The MORAL.
When Fools Fall Out, it shall go Hard but Knaves will be the Better for it.

REFLECTION.
THERE are several sorts of Men in the World that live upon the Sins and the
Misfortunes of other People. This Fable may be Moralliz'd in almost all the
Controversies of Humane Life whether Public or Private. Plaintiff and
Defendant finds Business for the Lawyers: Questions of Religion for the
Divines: Disputes about Privileges and Liberties, Cut out Work for the
Soldiers. A General Peace, in fine, would be a General Disappointment; for the
wrangling of some, is the Livelihood of others; and wherever there are like to
be Carcasses, there will never fail to be Vultures.

FAB. CCCCLVII. A Man that would never Hear Ill News.
ONe came to a Country Grazier, and asked him if he should tell him a piece of
News. Is It Good or Bad? (says he.) Nay, says the other, it is not very Good. Pray,
says the Grazier keep it to your self then; and so he went his way. The Grazier
was telling the next day, that the Wolves had Killed one of his Bullocks:
That Is like enough says the same Man; for I saw him Wandering from the Herd,
and I was afraid ont. I would you had told me this in time, says the Grazier.
Why I came I know not how far Yesterday a-purpose to tell you the Story, and
you would not hear on it.

The MORAL.
The Man is too Delicate to be Happy, that makes it in his Bargain not to hear
any thing that may give him a Present Trouble.

REFLECTION.
THIS way of Consulting a Bodies Ease, makes a Man Accessory to his own Ruin.
There Is an Attempt designed for the purpose, upon the Person of a Man; and he
shuts his Ears against any Intelligence, or Notice of it, 'till the Dagger is
at his Heart. He that will not hear the worst of things Betimes, must expect
afterward to feel the Effect of the Bad News that he would not Hear. First, he
loses the Means of Preventing Mischiefs, by not suffering himself to be
Informed whereabouts the Danger lies. Secondly, He lives in a continual Dread
of all Accidents that may befall him in general, though of Nothing in
particular, and leaves himself no Place for the Exercise of Prudence and
Precaution. This sort of People Jog on in the World, (for I cannot call it
Living) without any Thought for to Morrow. Talk to them of Poverty,
Persecutions, Torments, Slavery, Sickness, nay of Death it self at a Distance,
they will put it off to the last Moment, and venture the Surprisal, when it comes
indeed, rather then abide but so much as the Hearing on it Beforehand.

FAB. CCCCLVIII. A Miser and Rotten-Apples.
THere was a Stingy Narrow-hearted Fellow, that had a Great deal of Choice
Fruit in his Ground, but had not the Heart to touch any of it 'till it began to
be Rotten. This Man's Son would every foot and anon be taking some of his
Companions into the Orchard with him. Look ye says he, that is an Excellent
Apple, and here is a Delicate sort of Plums, Gather and Eat what you will of
these, provided you don't Meddle with any of the Rotten Ones: For my Father
(you must know) keeps them for his own Eating.

The MORAL.
This is to set forth the Wicked and the Scandalous Wretchedness of Avarice,
that rather then make use of the Bounties of Providence in their Seasons,
suffers them to lie by and Perish.

REFLECTION.
HOW Miserable are those Cormudgeons that spend their Lives in Carking and
Pinching themselves for things they have not the Heart to make use of! And in
this Humor of Griping (which they call Saving) fall foul upon the very extreme
of Profusion another way. They either Lose or Spoil every thing by Keeping it,
'till it is fit only to be thrown away; and that is their way of Spending it.
Their Money lies as close in their Coffers, as ever it did in the Mine whence it
was drawn. They'^ rather venture the whole Stock, then be at one Penny Charge
for the Saving of the rest. They pervert the very Intent, as well as they
destroy the Bounties of Providence: Nay, they Envy the common Enjoyment of
those Blessings that were intended for the Relief, Comfort and Satisfaction of
Mankind.

FAB. CCCCLIX. The Devil Refused to Marry.
A Certain Devil had the hap to live for some time in a State of Wedlock, with
a Spiteful, Vexatious Gipsy, that in truth was too hard for him. She Died at
last of the Pip, and the Breath was no sooner out of her Body, but he fell to
blessing the Stars for his Deliverance; and so bound himself by a Desperate
Vow, that he would never Marry again. It fell out some time after, that a Poor
Man was Possessed with this very Devil, and that when an Exorcist had Tried all
the ways of Charm, Prayer and Menace, to Remove him, and found him Proof
against all manner of Exorcisms, he Bawled it out, once for all, Either come
forth, or Marry. The Devil immediately cried out for Mercy, I go Father, says
he; Any Hell but that of a Second Wife.

The MORAL.
Take this Droll by the Right Handle, and it gives to understand, that some
Women may as well Fright the Devil out of a Man, as others Conjure him up into
one.

REFLECTION.
THIS Fable is only a High-Flown Hyperbole upon the Miseries of Marriage, under
the Judgment of a Wayward, a Jealous, and a Brawling Wife: And the Moral of it
is Directed to all the Poor Husbands, that are Condemned to that purgatory.

FAB. CCCCLX. A Country man and Jupiter.
A Poor Plain Fellow was so Dazzled and Transported with the Pomp, the Splendour,
the Plenty, State and Luxury that Great Men live in, that it was the First
Petition of his Daily Litany to Jupiter, to make him a Lord. Jupiter found he
could not be Quiet for him, and bad Mercury carry him Two Curious Baskets, with
Honor and Money in them. They were both covered, the one with Purple, the other
with Gold, and Mercury was Ordered to let the Man Open and Examine them as
strictly as he pleased, but to bid him have a care not to meddle with them
Rashly, for fear of the worst. The Countryman was so Charmed with the Present
at First Sight, that he took it away with him by Content, without Asking any
Questions. But when he came afterward to consider at leisure the Cares,
Anxieties, Fears, Doubts, and all manner of Troubles and Diseases that were
Inseparably to go along with his Bags and Dignities; he found himself much more
Uneasy now then he was before; and that he had Sacrificed the Peace of his very
Soul, to the Vanity of his Eye and Appetite.

The MORAL.
It Is not for a Wise Man to set his Heart upon Gay and Glittering Appearances.
The Devil himself Baits all his Hooks with Pomp, Lusts and Pleasures; and the
very Glory of the Outside, makes the Contents the more Suspicious for it.

REFLECTION.
A Man may bear the want of Honors and Riches, before he has 'em, much better
then the Loss of them when he has obtained them. And they are in short, the
Plagues of an Inconsiderate Life. He that wishes them for the Common Good, and
applies them when he has them, to that Generous End, makes a Right Use of the
Divine Providence and Bounty: but he that seeks them for his own sake, and
Converts them wholly to his own Profit, Defrauds the Public. As if a Man
should apply an Estate that was made over to him in Trust, to the wrong Uses.

FAB. CCCCLXI. A Be that went over to the Drones.
TO what End (says a Be) should I Toil and Moyl my self out of my Life for a
Poor Subsistence, when the Drones that do nothing at all, Live in as much
Plenty every jot as I do? Upon this Thought, the Be Resolved after their
Example to work no longer. The Master it seems called her to Account for it; the
Be took Pett upon it, and without any more to do, went over to the Drones
Party, where she passed the Summer easily enough, and to her Satisfaction. But
upon the Winters coming on, when the Drones were all Dispersed into their
several Holes, the Be would fain have gone Home again; but the Cells of the
Combs were all Closed, so that there was no Entrance, and the Poor Be Starved
to Death betwixt Cold and Hunger.

The MORAL.
It is all the reason in the World, that every Man in what Station soever,
should Work in some sort or other for his Living. Nature her self is always at
Work; and a Prince has no more Prerogative to be Idle, then a Beggar.

REFLECTION.
Action is a Reasonable Duty, how variously soever it may be Exercised, whether
in the Functions of Power, or in the Offices of Subjection. A Reasonable Soul
can no more stand still, then the Sun can stop its course. This Fable branches
out into several Morals: First, It serves for a Reproof of Sloth. Secondly, In
the Bees being Corrupted by the Practice of the Drones, it shows us the Danger
and the Force of Ill Example; especially where there is Ease and Sensuality to
strengthen the Temptation, which must needs be wonderfully Powerful, where the
very Emblem of Industry on the one hand, comes to be wrought upon by the Emblem
of Laziness on the other. Thirdly, It leads us to a Consideration of the End of
an Unactive and an Unprofitable Life. The Bees Summer-Friends Forsake her;
those of her own Family shut the Doors against her; and so she is Abandoned to
the Wide World, as an Object of Detestation and Scorn.

FAB. CCCCLXII. A Crow and a Raven.
THe Ancients tell us, that the Crow was once Minerva's Favorite, and the
Raven Apollo's; but the One of them was found to be so full of Tongue, so
Over-officious and Inquisitive; and the Other so Desperately given to Croking
and Foreboding upon Evil things to come, that they fell both into Disgrace
for it.

The MORAL.
Great* Talkers, Medlers, and Busy-Bodies, are the very Pest of Human Society.

REFLECTION.
THERE is no Peace to be expected, either in a Government, or in a Family,
where Tale-bearers, and the Spreaders of Ill and of False News, are Encouraged.
Now the Curiosity of Heark'ning after Privacies that do not concern us, and of
Prying into Forbidden Secrets, does not arise so much from a Desire of knowing
the Truth of Things simply for our own Satisfaction, as from an Itch of
Screwing our selves into other Peoples Matters, that we may be Prating of them
again. And then the Tale is very seldom or never without Calumny and Detraction
at the End on it.

FAB. CCCCLXIII. The Bitches Bed maker.
YOu must needs make this Bitches Bed immediately, says the Master of the House
to his Maid, for she is just ready to lie down. It was not done it seems, and
the Man was very Angry with the Wench for not doing as she was bid. Alas, says
the Poor Girl, I Would have made her Bed with all my Heart, if I could but have
told which way she would lie with her Head, and which with her Backside.

The MORAL.
There Is no Pleasing those that cannot Please themselves.

REFLECTION.
A Steady Mind will admit Steady Methods and Councils; but there is no Measure
to be taken of a Changeable Humor. Tell me where I may find ye, and I shall
know where to fit ye: But otherwise, it is with us in the Levity of our Manners,
and of our Humors, as it was with Clark, the Famous Posture-Master, and his
Tailor. When the Workman took Measure of him, he was Crump-Shoulder'd, and the
Right Side Higher then the Left; when he brought home his Suit, the Left was
Higher then the Right; The Fellow was Mad at himself, and made him another
Suit; and that would not do neither, for his Body was then as Straight as an
Arrow.

FAB. CCCCLXIV. A Trusty Dog and his Master.
THe Master of a Family that had, as he thought, a very good Conditioned Dog;
coming home from his Business once, found a Cradle Overturned; the Dog's Mouth
all Bloody, and his only Child missing. He draws his Sword immediately and
Kills the Dog, upon a Presumption that he had Worryed the Child, without any
regard to his Tried Fidelity, and without Allowing himself One Moment of Time
for a Second Thought. Upon a further Enquiry, he found the Truth of the Matter
to be this: The Child being left alone in the Cradle, there was a Serpent
Winding it self up the Side on it, to Destroy the Child. The Dog leaps upon the
Serpent, and Tears it to Pieces; but in the Scuffle, the Cradle happened to be
Overturned: Upon the taking up of the Cradle, the Master found the Child Alive
under it, and the Serpent Dead, which, upon Reflection, Convinced him of the
Miserable Temerity of his Mistake.

The MORAL.
The Repentance of a whole Life, is not sufficient to Atone for the Miscarriage
of One Rash Action.

REFLECTION.
Anger without Consideration, is little better then a downright Madness; it
makes us take Benefits for Injuries; it Confounds Truth and Falsehood; and we
have but too many Instances of Outrages committed on the Persons of the best of
our Friends, upon a False Persuasion of their being our Mortal Enemies. Charity
bids us Hope and Believe the Best of Things. Prudence bids us Examine the Truth
of Things: Religion and Common Equity Preach to us upon the Text of Do as you
would be done by. So that it is Uncharitable, Unreasonable, Unchristian, and
Inhuman, to pass a Peremptory Sentence of Condemnation upon a Tried Friend,
where there is any Room left for a more Favorable Judgment.

FAB. CCCCLXV. A Fool and a Sieve.
AN Innocent found a Sieve, and presently fell to Stopping the Holes, which he
called Mending it. When he had been Puzzling a good while about it, he threw't
away in a Rage: I shall never make any thing on it, says he, for I don't know
which I am to Stop, and which to leave Open.

The MORAL.
It fare's with the Pragmatical sort of State-Menders, much as it did with this
Sieve-Mender: They do not like things as they are, neither do they Understand
how they should be. But they are for Change however at a Venture; and when they
have once put Matters out of Order, there is no setting them to Rights again.

REFLECTION.
THERE are none so Forward as Fools to mend Things that are Well already;
though they find upon Experiment that they Make and they Leave every thing
Worse then they found it. They are at first for Stopping of Holes, and when
that will not do, they are for Making of 'em again. We have abundance of Fools in
the Moral to answer this Fool in the Fable; that is to say, People that take
upon them to Correct what they do not Understand; and that when they have
Embroiled the Public, leave the Main Chance to Fortune, to Shuffle the Cards
Anew, and Play the Game over again. This is the Fate on it, when Pedants will be
Meddling with Politics, and Botchers setting up for the Reformers of Providence.

FAB. CCCCLXVI. A Fig Tree and a Thorn.
A Fig Tree and a Thorn were valuing themselves once upon the Advantage that
the One had over the other. Well, says the Thorn, what would you give for such
Flowers as These? Very Good, says the Fig Tree, and what would you give for
such Fruit as This? Why, says the other, 'twould be against Nature for a Thorn
to bring forth Figs. Well (says 'tother again,) and 'twould be against Nature
too, for a Fig Tree to bring forth Flowers: Beside that, I have Fruit you see,
that is much Better.

The MORAL.
Every Creature has a Share in the Common Blessings of Providence; and it is a
Virtue as well as a Duty for Every Creature to r^st well satisfied with its
Proportion in those Comforts; but when we come once to Boast of our selves, and
to Derog^te from others, it is no longer a Virtue (...) ^ Vanity; and especially
when we Mistake the Value of things, and prefer the Advantages of Beauty,
before those of Use and Service.

REFLECTION.
IT IS not Every Man that can distinguish betwixt the Excellencies of Beauty and
of Virtue: And how in Truth should they Distinguish, when Every Man that has
Eyes in his Head, (...) the One, and not One Man of ^orty Understands the
Other? Nay, the very Ostentation of the Thorn, is a Weakness, and I might have
said a Vice (...); for the Vanity Unhallows the very Virtue, especially where
it is Accompanied with Detraction.

FAB. CCCCLXVII. A Wolf and a For.
A Wolf had the Fortune to pass by, as the Thief-Leaders were Dragging a Proper
Goodly Fox to the Place of Execution. The Wolf took such a kindness for him,
that he Resolved to Employ his Interest with the Lion to save his Life; but by
the way, says he, what is the Malefactors Crime? So the Officers told him, that
he had not only Robbed several Hen-Roosts, but had the Impudence to Steal a Fat
^oose, that was Reserved for his Majesty's own Table. Say ye so? says the Wolf;
why then the Case is Altered, quoth (...); and so he left him to take his
Fortune.

The MORAL.
Interest is the very Test and Standard of Good and Evil. If I may gain by
doing a Thing, it is Honest; if it be against my (...); it is consequently
against my Conscience. This is the Pro and Con of Common Practice; and it is but
Casting some Grains of Allowance into the Scale, to Paelliate the Fo^lest
Iniquity.

REFLECTION.
THIS Fable hits the Humor of the World to a Hair, and it holds from him that
sits upon the Throne, to the poor Devil that has scarce a Tatter to his Breech.
Men are easy to Pardon Offenses committed against other People; but when they
come to be Touched once in their Own Copyhold, the Lions Fat-Goose Weighs down
all the Cocks and Hens in the Country: And in that Case the Wolf leaves his
Brother Fox at the Gallows. The Rogue has Stoll'n a Prerogative Goose, says he,
and the King will never Pardon him. This is according to Practice, how contrary
soever to the true Measures of Generosity, Honor and Justice. That Is the
veriest Villain in Nature, cries one, for I Will tell ye how he Used Me. As
Worthy a Man, says another, as ever trod upon a Shoe of Leather; for really I
have been much Beholden to him. In short, there is such an Affinity betwixt our
Prudentials and our Appetites, that they are like Two Unison Strings, if you
Touch the One, the Other Moves by Consent. There was a Certain Filacer (an
Officer of the Common Pleas,) that in Oliver's Days was mightily concerned upon
the Subject of the Government, and Dilating in a kind of Rhetorical Climax upon
the Iniquity of the Times: Well (says he,) here is the best Church upon the face
of the Earth Destroyed; the Nobility and Gentry Trampled under Foot, and
Beggered; the Commonalty Enslaved; the Laws Overturned; the Constitution of
Parliaments Dissolved; a most Pious, Gracious King Murdered: And now to
Consummate the Villainy, they say they are putting down the Filacers. When it
comes once to the Filacers, it Touches to the Quick.

FAB. CCCCLXVIII. A Rich Man and a Poor.
AS a Poor Fellow was Beating the Hoof upon the Highway, and Trudging on
Merrily in a Bitter Cold Morning, with never a Rag to his Tail: A Spark that
was Warm Clad, and Well Mounted, (but his Teeth Chattering in his Head yet,)
called to this Tatter-de-Mallion, and asked him how he was able to Endure this
Terrible Weather? Why says the other, how does your Face endure it? My Face is
used to it, says the Cavalier. And so is my Body says the other; so that I am
all Face. And then (says the Poor Cur) there is another thing yet besides; I
have all the Clothes I have in the World upon my Back, and that is enough to
keep me Warm: Do but you put on all yours too, and you shall be Warm as well as
I.

The MORAL.
By Custom, Practice and Patience, all Difficulties and Hardships, whether of
Body or of Fortune, are made Easy to us. Mankind is all of a Make, and if we
shrink in the Wetting, as we say, or in any Trial of Distress or Persecution,
it is our own Fault; for we are Consulting our Skins, and our Affections, when
we should rather be attending to the Motions of our Reason, which would give us
better Council.

REFLECTION.
IF Men would but Inure themselves to do those things by Choice, which it is
Forty to One they shall be some time or other forced to do by Necessity, it
would exceedingly Advance the Peace and Comfort of Human Life; for all those
Miseries are only Visionary and Fantastical, so far as we Govern our selves by
Opinion rather then by Reason. Our Bodies are not Naturally more Tender then
our Faces; but by being less Exposed to the Air, they become less able to
endure it. Exercise makes things Easy to us, that would be otherwise very
Hard; as in Labor, Watchings, Heats and Colds: And then there is something
Analogous in the Exercise of the Mind, to that of the Body. It Is Folly and
Infirmity that makes us Delicate and Froward. We are taught likewise in the
Differing Tempers and Conditions of the Rich Man and the Poor here, that a Man
may be Happy with a Little, and Miserable in Abundance.

FAB. CCCCLXIX. A Wolf and a Hog.
A Wolf that had lived many Years upon the Spoil, came at last to be Troubled
in Conscience for the Spilling of so much Innocent Blood, and so took up a
Christian Resolution to keep a long Lent for it; and not to Eat One Bit of Flesh
for a whole Twelvemonth: But Fasting it seems did not agree with his
Constitution, for upon the sight of a Hog Wallowing in a Muddy Puddle, he ran
presently to him, and asked him what he was? Why, says the Hog, I belong to a
Neighbor here in the Village, and the Ancient Romans call me Porcus. In Good
Time, says the Wolf; for I have read in Littleton's Dictionary, that Porcus is
a Fish, that being Taken, Grunteth like a Hog; and so he made a Supper of the
Hog, without breaking his Fast, and without any Offense to his Vow of
Mortification.

The MORAL.
In a long Practice of Wickedness, now and then a Faint Vow or Promise of
Amendment, goes for Nothing: And if a Body should have a Mind to break a
Commandment under such an Obligation, it will be hard if he cannot bring
himself off at last with some Salvo or Distinction, and be his own Confessor.

REFLECTION.
MEN that are Habitually Wicked, may now and then by Fits and Starts feel
certain Motions of Reflection that look toward Repentance; but those
Dispositions are commonly short Lived, and the same Meat shall be Fish or Flesh
as it may best serve their Turn. We find this Fable Moraliz'd in our Daily
Practice, not only among our False Converts, upon the Matter of Truth,
Steadiness and Justice, but among Politicians, Lawyers and Divines, that shall
make the most Established Principles of Law, Prudence and Religion, Felons of
themselves, and by the help of a little Sham and Paradox, Blow Hot and Cold,
with the Man and the Satyr, out of the same Mouth. This Wolf now was somewhat
of the Man's Humor that was Charged by his Confessarius, for Eating Flesh in
Lent: Father, says he, I have as Catholic a Faith as any Man in Christendom;
but a most Confounded Heretical Stomach. So the Wolves Heart was Right all this
while, and by turning Hog into Porcus, he kept his Fast in Latin still, though
he broke it in English.

FAB. CCCCLXX. A Farmer and his Servant.
A Country Farmer missed an Ox out of his Grounds, and sent his Man abroad one
Day to look after him. The Simpleton went Hunting up and down, 'till at last he
found him in a Wood; but upon Three Birds coming cross him, away goes he
Scampering after them. He stayed so long upon the Errand, that his Master
Wondered what was become of him; and so Abroad he goes to look for his Man; and
there was he in a Field hard by, running as hard as he could drive, and Staring
up into the Air. Well, says the Master, what News? Why Master, says the Tony, I
have found them. Ay, but says the Farmer again, where are they? And what have
ye found? Why look ye there they are, says the Fellow; I have found Three Birds
here, and I Am trying if I can Catch'em.

The MORAL.
We have this Fool Moraliz'd abundantly to us in Common Practice. We leave the
main End and Business of Life Unregarded, to run after Butter-flies.

REFLECTION.
A Man cannot look into himself without an Application of this Fable to his own
Soul and Conscience. He was much in the Right, that called Old Men, only Great
Blockheaded Boys with Beards, that Entertain themselves with Bigger
Play-things. There Is an Ox lost, and this Coxcomb runs a Gadding after
Wild-Fowl. Is it not our very Case now, that when our Souls, Good-Names, Bodies
and Fortunes are at Stake, we must be running out at Check, after every Crow,
Buzzard, or Jack-daw that comes in the way, and leave the main Chance at last
at Six and Seven? Nay, and here is this more in it too, that the Quarry would not
be worth the taking up neither, if we could Catch it; beside, that it flies
away still before us; and is never to be Overtaken,

FAB. CCCCLXXI. A Satyr and Fire.
THe Poets tell us, that Prometheus stole some of Jupiter's Fire, and brought
it down to us from Heaven, and that was our Original of it. A Satyr was so
Transported with the Glory and the Splendour of this Spirit, that down on his
Knees he falls, and would needs Kiss and Embrace it. Have a care of your Beard,
says Prometheus; nay, and of your Chin too; for 'twill both Singe and Burn ye.
And why, says the Satyr, would you bring down so Glorious a Temptation then to
Plague the World withal? Why, says Prometheus, there were no Living without it;
only the Mischief lies in the Abuse. It Burns, it is true, but then consider the
Heat and the Light that comes along with it, and you shall find it serves us to
all manner of Profitable, Delightful and Necessary Purposes, provided only that
we make a Right Use on it.

The MORAL.
There Is not One Grain in the whole Composition of the Universe, either too
Much, or too Little; Nothing to be Added, Nothing to be Spared; nor so much as
any One Particle of it that Mankind may not be either the Better or the Worse
for, according as it is Applied. The most Sovereign Antidotes have Poison in
them; the most necessary Means of Life may be Corrupted, or Perverted, and
rendered the most Destructive to us: As an Infected Air, for the purpose, a
Raging Sea, or a Consuming Fire: But let this Air continue as God made it; the
Waters be kept within their Bounds, and the Fire from breaking out into
Conflagrations, and there is no Living without them under this Regulation.

REFLECTION.
THE Best things in the World may be Misapplied, and the greatest Blessings
Abused, may become the Occasion to us of the most Judicial Maledictions. What Is
more necessary for the common Comfort and Benefit of Mankind, then
Understanding and Power; and nothing certainly is more Pernicious then those
Illustrious Qualifications Perverted. We are not to Quarrel with the Heavens
for Pestilential Influences, or Unkindly Seasons; nor with the Earth for
Poisonous Minerals and Exhalations; nor with the Water for Inundations, and
Shipwrecks; nor with the Fire for Conflagrations. We must not take upon us to
Dispute or to Correct the Wisdom of Providence, but sit down Contented and
Thankful, and with this Reflection upon the whole, that we are Indebted to the
Divine Bounty for all the Good we Enjoy, and that for the Evil we Suffer, we
may thank our Selves.

FAB. CCCCLXXII. A Generous Lion.
AS a Lion was Bestriding an Ox that he had newly Plucked down, a Robber
Passing by, Cried out to him, Half-Shares. You should go your Snip says the
Lion, if you were not so forward to be your own Carver. The Thief had but just
turned his Back, when up comes an Innocent Traveller, that so soon as ever he
saw the Lion, was going off again. The Lion bad him Fear Nothing, but take part
of the Prey with him in Reward of his Modesty: Whereupon the Lion went
immediately into the Woods to make way for the Traveller.

The MORAL.
If Great Men in the World would but follow the Example of the Lion in this
Fable, Sharpers should not Ride in Triumph any longer, while Honest Men go out
at the Elbows.

REFLECTION.
THIS is an Instance of a Great and a Laudable Example; but People are
forwarder to Commend such Presidents, then to Imitate them: for the Bold and
Rich Thrive in the World, when the Poor and the Bashful go a Begging: But
Virtue is never the less Venerable for being out of Fashion.

FAB. CCCCLXXIII. A Brother and a Sister.
THere was a Brother and a Sister that happened to look in a Glass both
together: The Brother a very Lovely Youth, and the Sister as hard favored as a
Girl could well be. Look ye (says the Boy,) and have not I a very Good Face
now? This the Lass took for a Reproach, as if hers were not so too. What does
this Envious Tit, but away to her Father, with a Tale of her Brother, how
Effeminately he Behaved himself, and that a Petticoat would become him better
then a Sword. The Good Man Kissed them both, and Reconciled the Controversy. My
Dear Children, says he, I lay my Command upon ye Both to look often in a Glass;
You Son, to keep a Guard upon your Self, not to Dishonor the Advantages that
Nature has given ye, with Ill Manners: And you Daughter, (says he) to Mind you
of Supplying the Defects of an External and a Transitory Beauty, with the more
substantial Ornaments of Piety and Virtue.

The MORAL.
There is not any Accident or Adventure in Nature, that does not yield Matter
and Occasion for Good Council: And the Excellency of that necessary Office lies
in the Address of Managing it Pertinently, and without Reproach.

REFLECTION.
THE Vanity of the Youth here in the Fable, is doubly to Blame; First, he
values himself upon a Trivial and an Uncertain Advantage. Secondly, It Is below
the Dignity of the Sex, for a Man to Glory in, and to Usurp upon the proper
Ornaments and Privileges of a Woman. The Sisters Envy may be better Reproved
then Reformed; for to say that a Woman is not Handsome, is a Sin never to be
Forgiven. The Father does excellently well Discharge the Part of a Wise Man,
and of a Tender Pa^ent both in One. And the Moral of his Part Resolves finally
into this, That Virtue attones for Bodily Defects, and that Beauty is nothing
worth, without a Mind Answerable to the Person.

FAB* CCCCLXXIV. The Bees and the Drones.
THere was a Controversy betwixt the Bees and the Drones about some Hony-Combs
that were found in a Hollow Oak. They both laid Claim to 'em, and a Wasp was to
be Judge, as one that well understood the Matter. Upon the Trial of the Cause,
they seemed both to stand fair for it, as being of the same Size, Make and
Color. Now, says the Wasp, I am upon my Oath, and therefore let me see them
work their Combs, and fill 'em here before me in the Court, and I shall be then
the better able to Understand the Merits of the Cause. The Drones would not
Agree to it, and so the Verdict went for the Bees.

The MORAL.
Pretenses go a great way in the World with Men that will take Fair Words and
Magisterial Looks for Current Payment: But the short and the certain way of
bringing the Cause to a Fair Issue, is to put the Pretenders to the Test of
Doing what they say.

REFLECTION.
ALL People that set up for a Reputation in the World upon the Credit of other
Men's Labors, fall under the Reproof of this Fable; and the Judges in those
Cases are not always so Tender, Circumspect and Conscientious as the Wasp was
in this; for they let False and Frivolous Pretenders run away many times, not
only with the Character, but with the Reward, both of Honester and (...) Men's
Virtues. There Is no Proof like Matter of Fact, and putting the Drones to the
Test of making Wax and Honey.

FAB. CCCCLXXV. A Fox and a Dragon.
AS a Fox was Earthing Himself, he Dug so Deep, 'till at last he came to a
Dragon's Den, where he found a Prodigious Mass of Hidden Treasure. He made his
Excuse for his Intrusion, and begged the Dragon's leave but to Ask him* One
Question. Pray (says he) where is the Pleasure or the Profit of Spending all
your Days in a Hole thus, without either Light or Sleep? Why it is my Fate, says
the Dragon, and there is no more to be said. Here Is a Monstrous Hord, says the
Fox, and I cannot find that you either give Give or Use One Penny out of all
this Store. It Is a Misery, says the other, that I am Doomed to, and there is no
Avoiding it. Why then says the Fox, He that is Born under Your Stars is
certainly the most Wretched of Creatures.

The MORAL.
We are apt to do Amiss, and to Persevere in so Doing, and then lay the Blame
upon our Stars, or our Fortune as we call it, which in truth, is neither Better
nor Worse then making Heaven the Author of Evil. The very sooth of it is, that
an Ill Habit has the Force of that which we call an Ill Fate; and we Tie up our
Selves, where Providence has left us at Liberty.

REFLECTION.
Your Covetous Churl is Undoubtedly the most Miserable of Beggars; the more he
Has, the more he Wants; Beside that he wants what he Has too; for it is lost to
all Intents and Purposes, when neither he Himself, nor any Body else is the
Better for it. He Pines and Watches himself to Death, for fear of losing that
which he only Fancies that he has; or which is the same thing, that which he
has not the Heart to Use. All this, says the Dragon, I suffer, because I Am
Doomed to it, which tells us most Emphatically, that an Anxiety of Mind is a
Just Judgment upon a Man for Delivering himself up to so Sordid an Appetite. We
must not Understand the Dragon here to be Condemned to this Misery by the
Fatality of any Inevitable Decree; but in these Cases, Custom and Corruption,
superinduce upon us a kind of Necessity of going on as we begun.

FAB. CCCCLXXVI. The Shipwreck of Simonides.
SImonides was a Learned Man, and an Excellent Poet, especially in the way of
Panegyric, or Encomium, to the Honor of the Great Men of his Age; insomuch
that he made his Fortune by it. After some time spent abroad, and a great deal
of Money got by his Encomia upon the Hero's of those Times, he put Himself and
his Treasure Aboard for his own Country again, in an Old Rotten Vessel. They
fell into Foul Weather, and the Ship Miscarried. In the Hurry of the Shipwreck,
while the Passengers were at their Wits end how to Save that which they took to
be of the most Value, Simonides was the only Man that appeared Unconcerned,
notwithstanding that his whole Fortune was at Stake in the Cargo. One Asked
him, why he did not look after his Goods. Why so I do, says he, for all the
Goods that I pretend to, I have now About me. In this Extremity, some made a
shift to Swim A shore; the greater Part sunk under the weight of what they
thought to Preserve; and in the mean time came in a Crew of Free-Booters, that
Rifled and Stripped those that Escaped. The Men that were Paddling for their
Lives, made a Port, where by great Providence there lived a Famous Philosopher
that was a Passionate Admirer, and a Diligent Reader of Simonides, and his
VVritings. This Philosopher upon the First Encounter, found out Simonides by
his very Discourse; took him into his House, Clothed him, Furnished him with
Money, Provided him Servants, and put him into a Condition in fine, to Live in
Honor and Plenty. As Simonides was walking the Streets a while after, he saw
several of his Shipwrecked Companions begging their Bread from Door to Door,
with a Certificate of their Misfortune. Well, says Simonides, and do you not
find it True now as I told ye, that a Man of Letters and of Integrity, carries
all his Goods about him?

The MORAL.
The Moral is no more then this, that Virtue shall never fail of a Reward in
the Conclusion.

REFLECTION.
A Wise and a Good Man carries his Happiness in his own Breast; and that is a
Happiness too, that the Uttermost Malice of Wicked Men, and of Cross Fortune
can never take away. Let all Men of Honor apply the Moral of this History to
their own Comfort and Support, and Assure themselves, that Providence either in
the Blessing of a good Conscience, or in that of a Happy Deliverance, will
never Forsake them.

FAB. CCCCLXXVII. Two Men and a Halter.
A Poor Rogue that had got the Devil into his Pocket, and not One Cross in the
World to drive him out again, found upon Mature Consideration, that he had no
Choice before him, but either to Hang or Starve; for, says he, I have neither
Cash; Credit, nor Friends, to keep Life and Soul together. He bethought himself
a while upon the Matter, and so Resolved rather of the Two to go to Heaven in a
String. Upon this, he immediately provides himself a Halter; fits the Noose,
and pitches upon the Place of Execution; but as he was driving a Hook into an
Old Wall to Fasten the Cord to, Down comes a Great Stone that was Loose, and a
Pot of Money along with it. The Fellow presently throws away the Halter; Takes
the Gold by Content, without either Weighing or Counting it, and so away he
Scours with the Purchase. He was no sooner gone, but in comes the Man that had
hid the Money, to give his Pot a Visit: He finds the Birds flown it seems, and
Marrying and Hanging, they say, go by Destiny. The last Comer, in fine,
succeeds to the Rope of his Predecessor, and very fairly Hangs himself, with
this Comfort in the Conclusion, That Providence had Saved him the Charge of a
Halter.

The MORAL.
Where there is Money in the Case, it is Forty to One but some Body or other goes
to the Devil for it.

REFLECTION.
Poverty and Avarice are near Akin, and the Rich Insatiable Miser that is
still Carking after More and More, is every jot as Miserable as he that has
just Nothing at all. What Is the Difference betwixt Gold in One Part of the
Earth, and Gold in Another? Betwixt the Minted Gold that the Sordid Churl
Buries in a Pot, and the Ore that Nature has Prepared and Tinctured in the
Mine? They are Both equally lost to the common Use of Mankind; Only the One
lies a little deeper then the Other. We may finish this Moral with a
Consideration of the Folly of those People that Starve themselves to Enrich
Others, and make their Own Lives Wretched for the Advantage perhaps of Thieves
or Strangers. The Halter, in fine, served both their Turns; as well His that
had no Money at first, as to others that Lost it.

FAB. CCCCLXXVIII. A Mountebank and a Bear.
AS a Quack was Exposing his Bills and his Medicines upon a Stage, in the
Quality both of a Doctor and a Iack-Pudding, Thousands and Thousands of People
Gaping and Staring at him with as much Reverence and Attention, as if every
Word that came out of his Mouth had dropped from the Lips of an Oracle: It
happened just in the Nick of this Interim, that an Officer of Paris-Garden was
Leading one of his Majesty's Bears, that way, with a Ring thorough the Nose of
him. The Rabble immediately upon the Novelty of this Adventure, quitted the
Mountebank, and Gathered in Multitudes about the Bear, Shouting and Huzzaing
along with him, as if it had been a Procession to a Pope-burning, or
peradventure some more Pompous Spectacle. The Bear upon this Noise and Bussle,
(though none of the Quickest-Witted Animals,) made a Speech to the Crowd after
the best manner. Hark ye my Friends, says he, I Am Glad to see you so Merry at
my being led like a Sot by the Nose thus; but pray let us Laugh at one another
by Turns, for you are every Jot as Ridiculous to Me, as I am to You, the Mobile
are led by the Ears just as the Bears are led by the Noses; and that is all the
Difference in the Case betwixt us.

The MORAL.
The Mobile are altogether for Noise and Novelty, and One New Thing drives out
another: Nay, we take Pleasure in the very Spectacle that Effectually Abuses
us; as a Bear with a Ring in his Nose, is no more then an Emblem of every Man
of us, for we are led as much as He, some by the Ear or Eye; others by our
Lusts and Affections: But in fine, every Soul of us some way or other.

REFLECTION.
No Man should make Sport with, or Condemn any thing in another, without first
Considering whether he be not Guilty of the very same thing Himself. The Bear
is led after One Manner; the Multitude are led after Another Manner; and in
some sort or other we are all led; only the Bearward in this Fable leads but
One Brute, and the Mountebank leads a Thousand: And what is the whole Business
at last, but Noise, Novelty and Example? And One Fool Staring and Hooting for
Company after Another; We take more Care to do as Others do, then to do as we
ought to do, or in truth to Understand the Sum and Substance of our Duties. The
Peoples leaving the Mountebank for the Bear, Imports as great a Readiness, even
to leave Him too for what comes next, and shows us that there is no Trusting to
the Mobile. It may serve also to Mind us, that the very Course of our Lives is
little better then a Series of Mistakes, and a Transition-from One Weakness to
Another. He that finds himself Uneasy in One Unreasonable Choice, has Recourse
naturally to Another, perchance as Unreasonable: And let him be never so Sick
of the Error, there is yet some Pleasure in the Variety; though it be but in the
Hope of Mending the Matter.

FAB. CCCCLXXIX. A Skittish Horse.
THere goes a Story of a Restiff, Skittish Jade, that had gotten such a Trick
of Rising, Starting, and Flying out at his own Shadow, that he was not to be
Endured; for the Discipline of the Spur and the Bit was wholly Lost upon him.
When his Rider found that there was no Reclaiming of him by the Ordinary
Methods of Horsemanship, he took him to task upon the Philosophy and Logic of
the Business. It Is only a Shadow, says he, that you Boggle at: And what is that
Shadow, but so much Air that the Light cannot come at? It has neither Teeth nor
Claws, you see, nor any thing else to Hurt ye: 'Twill neither Break your Shins,
nor Block up your Passage; and what are you afraid of then? Well says the
Horse, (who it seems had more Wit then his Master,) it is no new Thing in the
World, even for the greatest Heroes to shrink under the Impression of Panick
Terrors. What are all the Sprights, Ghosts and Goblins that you your Selves
Tremble at, but Phantomes and Chimera's, that are bred and shaped in your own
Brain?

The MORAL.
Nature and Reason have Fortified us, if we will but make use of our Strength,
against all Difficulties that can Befall u^ in this World. But if we will stand
Boggling at Imaginary Evils, let us never Blame a Horse, for starting at a
Shadow.

REFLECTION.
IT IS a Common Thing for People to Blame what they Practice, and to be spending
their Censures upon others, when they should be Examining Themselves: Whereas
in Justice, Charity and Prudence, we should make no other Use of our Neighbors
Faults, then we do of a Looking (...) to Mend our Own Manners by, and to set
Matters right at Home. When we see a Horse start at a Shadow, what have we more
to do then to Contemplate the Folly and Vanity of our own Surprises and
Mistakes in a Thousand Instances of the same Quality! For what are all the
Vexatious Transports of our Hopes and Fears, Extravagant Wishes, and Vain
Desires, but the Images of Things every jot as Whimsical, as the Vision of the
Shadow here in the Fable? And we can never hope for Better, so long as we
Govern our Selves by Fancy, without Reason. To say all in a Word, the whole
Business comes to no more then this; First, We form some Nonsensical Idea to
our selves, and then fall down to an Idol of our Own Making.

FAB. CCCCLXXX. No Laws against Flattery.
FLattery is Undoubtedly one of the most Unmanly, and Pernicious Vices under
the Sun, either Public or Private; and in One Word, the very Pest of all
Commonwealths and Families, wherever it is Entertained; and yet, to the
Scandal of Human Policy, even in the Best of Governments, the World was I know
not how many Thousand Years Old, before ever any Provision was thought of for
the Preventing or the Suppressing of this Epidemical Corruption. Apollo was the
First, that (out of his Own Wisdom and Goodness) Erected a Court of Justice
for the Trial of Parasites; appointing the Sharpest Satyrists of the Age for
their Judges; and Arming the Commissioners with full Power and Authority to
Hear and Determine all Causes of that Quality: The Offender to stand Convict
upon the Testimony of one single VVitness; and immediately upon Conviction, to
be carried away into the Marketplace, and there Chained to a Stake, and Flayed
Alive. It was Observed, that notwithstanding the Severity of this Inexorable
Law, Flattery was still as Bold, Busy, and Barefaced as Ever, from the very
Palace to the Cottage; and yet in a matter of Six Months time, not One
Complaint brought into the Court against it. Upon this Neglect, there were
Spies and Enformers set at work in all Coffee-Houses, and other Public Places,
to Watch the Company, and give Intelligence to the Tribunal of what was said or
done there, that might be laid hold of. The very next day there was a Courtier
taken up, and an Accusation Exhibited against him, for having given a Person of
Eminent Quality, the Character of a Man of Honor, Brains, Good Government, and
Virtue, when the whole World knew him to be no better then an Ignorant
Mercenary Sot, that without any regard to Honesty, Prudence, or Good Manners,
Abandoned himself Entirely to his Lusts and Pleasures. The Prisoner both
Confessed and Justified the Fact at the same time, appealing to the Person most
concerned, whether he had wronged him or not; who not only Acquitted the Man,
but Reflected most Desperately upon the Scandalous Practice of the Court it
self, in making that to be Flattery, which upon the whole Matter, was no other
then Truth and Justice. The Commission was hereupon Discharged, for they found
it utterly Impracticable to punish a Fault that no Body would either
Acknowledge or Complain of.

The MORAL.
It Is nothing but Self-Love at Home, that Provokes and Invites Flattery from
Abroad: And the Disposition of One Man to Receive it, Encourages Another to
Give it.

REFLECTION.
THIS Fiction may serve to show us, that what Influence soever Political Laws
and Provisions may have upon the External Regulation of our Practices and
Manners; it is a thing yet utterly Impossible for Human Wisdom to form such an
Act of State, as shall reach the Wickedness of the Heart: So that in despite of
all the Rules and Cautions of Government, the most Dangerous and Mortal of
Vices will still come off, without so much as a Public Censure. As who shall
pretend to inflict any Punishment upon Flattery, Hypocrisy, and other Sins of
the Heart, when there lies no Proof against them? One may be a very Honest Man
in the Eye of the Law, and yet a most Abominable Wretch in the Sight of God,
and of his Own Conscience. But it is still worth the while however, to consider
how we may Discountenance and prevent those Evils which the Law can take no
Cognizance of. And to gain this Point, the Effect must be Obviated in the
Cause. Flattery can never take Place upon any Man, (so as to Corrupt him) that
did not Flatter Himself First; for it is a Vain Opinion of our Selves, that
lays us Open to be Imposed upon by Others.

FAB. CCCCLXXXI. Three Dreaming Travelers.
THree Men were Traveling through a Wilderness; the Journey it seems was
longer then they thought for, and their Provisions fell short; but there was
enough left for any One of 'em yet, though too little for all; and how to
Dispose of the Remainder, was the Question. Come (says One of the Three,) Let Us
even lie Down and Sleep, and he that has the Strangest Dream, shall have That
that is Left. The Motion was Agreed to, and so they disposed themselves to their
Rest. About Midnight, Two of them VVak'd, and told one another their Dreams.
Lord, says one of 'em, What a Fancy have I had! I was taken up methought into
the Heavens, I know not how, and there set down just before Jupiter's Throne.
And I says The Other, was Hurried away by a Whirlwind, methought to the very Pit
of Hell. The Third all this while Slept Dog-Sleep, and heard every Word they
said. They fell then to Lugging and Pinching their Companion, to tell him the
Story. Nay, pray be Quiet, says he, What are ye? Why we are your Fellow
Travelers, they Cried. Are ye come back again then? says he. They told him
they had never stirred from the Place where they were. Nay then, says the other,
'twas but a Dream, for I Fancied that One of ye was Carried away with a
Whirlwind to Jupiter, and the other to Pluto: And then thought I to my Self, I
shall never see these Poor People again; so I e'n fell on, and Eat up all the
Victuals.

The MORAL.
There is a Fooling sort of Wit that has Nothing more in it then the Tricking up
of some Insipid Conceit to no manner of Purpose, but to Mortify Good Company,
and Tire out an Ingenious Conversation. The Jests of these People are only to
be Ordered as we do Cucumbers; Wash them, and Beat them, and then throw them
out at the Window. That is to say, they are Flat and Insipid, without either
Meaning or Morality to help them out.

REFLECTION.
WHERE Men will be Fooling and Bantering, a Trick for a Trick is but Common
Reason and Justice; and it comes closer yet too, when the Trick is Encountered
with Another of the same Kind; for it does not only spoil the Jest, but makes
the Aggressor Himself Ridiculous; especially when the Design is Forelay'd and
Concerted in Form, as here in the Fable. The Frolic of a Cleanly Banter, may
do well enough off-hand, and without Affectation; but a Deliberated Foolery is
most Abominably Fulsome.

FAB. CCCCLXXXII. Reason of State.
UPon the coming out of a Book Entitled Reason of State, there happened a warm
Dispute in the Cabinet of a Great Prince, upon that Subject. Some would have it
to be, The Skill of Erecting, Defending and Enlarging a Commonwealth. Others
were for changing the Title from Reason of State to Reason of Policy. And a
Third Party was for Correcting the former Definition, and rather running it
thus, [ Reason of State is a Rule Useful for Commonwealths, how contrary
soever to the Laws both of God and Man.] There was great Exception taken to the
Plain Dealing of this Latter Definition; but upon Consulting Presidents, it was
found very Agreeable to the Practical Truth of the matter.

The MORAL.
Honesty may do well enough betwixt Man and Man, but the Measures of Government
and Righteousness are quite Different Things. The Question in Reason of State
is not Virtue, but Prudence.

REFLECTION.
Reason of State, in the Simplicity of the Notion, is only the Force of
Political Wisdom, Abstracted from the Ordinary Rules and Methods of Conscience
and Religion. It consults only Civil Utility, and never Matters it, provided
the Public may be the better for it, though the Instruments and Managers go to
the Devil. It Is somewhat with Statesmen and their Disciples, as it was with the
Patient and his Physician that Advised him for his Healths sake to have the Use
of a Woman. The Good Man Scrupled the Remedy. Well, says the Doctor, I
Prescribe to your Body, not to your Soul, which are Two Distinct Provinces; and
when I have done my Duty to the One, let your Confessor look to the Other. It
is most certain, that Reason of State is a very Devilish Thing, under a
Specious Name, and a Cover for all Wickedness. What are Alliances and Ruptures,
but Temporary Expedients? And the Ordinary Reasons of War and Peace are very
little Better then Banter and Paradox. This is the very Truth of the Matter,
and may be seen at large in the History of all the Governments in the World:
But it is One of those Truths yet that is not at all times to be spoken; and
it is the part of a Wise Man in these Cases, to Hear, See, and Say Nothing.

FAB. CCCCLXXXIII. An Eagle and a Leveret.
AN Eagle that was Sharp set, and upon the Wing, looking about her for her
Prey, spied out a Leveret, made a Stoop like Lightning, and Trussed it; and as
she had it in the Foot, the Miserable Wretch Entered into an Idle Expostulation
upon the Conscience, and Justice of the Proceeding: With what Honesty, says the
Hare, Can you Invade the Right of another Body? Why, says the Eagle, To whom do
you belong then? I belong to him, (says the Other) whom Heaven has made the
Master of all Living Creatures under the Sun, and from whom That Propriety
cannot be taken without manifest Wrong and Usurpation. Man is My Master, and I
know no other. Well, says the Eagle again in Wrath, And what is the Title now,
that he pretends to this Propriety? Why it is the Excellency of his Reason, says
the Hare, that Entitles him to this Sovereignty; which is a Claim that from the
Creation of the World, to this Day, was never Subjected to the Question. In
Truth, says the Eagle, You have Advanced a very Pretty Invention here, in
setting up Reason against Force, where the Cause is not to be Decided by
Argument, but by Power: And to Convince ye now how much I am in the Right, You
shall find, in despite of all other Pretensions, since I have ye under my
Government and Law, that you were not Born for Him, but for Me.

The MORAL.
Laws with Penalties are made for the Government of the Simple, and the Weak,
like Cobwebs to Catch Flies; but Power is the Law of Laws, and there is no
Disputing with it, but upon the Swords Point.

REFLECTION.
Tyranny and Oppression never wanted either a Plea, or an Advocate for whatever
they did; for the Majority of the Lawyers, the Divines, and All Quaestuary
Professions, will be sure to run over to the Stronger Side, where Will passes
for Law, and Rapine for Providence. So that it is a Folly next to Madness, for
a Friendless, and an Unarmed Innocence to Expostulate with an Invincible Power.
The Case of the Hare and the Eagle is a Common Case in the World, where the
Weaker is a Prey to the Stronger; where a Forcible Possession gives a Title,
and where the Justice of the Cause is Determined by the Success. When the Hare
comes once to be in the gripe, it is too late to talk of Reason and Equity, when
contrary to all the Rules of Moral Justice, the Conqueror is both Judge and
Party.

FAB. CCCCLXXXIV. A Dog and his Master.
THere was an Excellent House-Dog, that spent his whole Night still in Bawling
and Snarling at all People Indifferently that passed within Hearing of him. His
Master took him to Task once for Barking and Yelling so at every Body that came
near him, without Distinction. Why what have you a Nose for, says he, but to
smell out a Thief from an Honest Man? I will not have ye so much as Open your
Mouth, I tell ye, at a Venture thus. Sir, says the Mastiff, it is out of the
Zeal I have for your Service; and yet, when all is done too, I would I had no
more to Answer for, then giving False Alarums, and Barking out of Season. You
may fancy perhaps, that there are No other Thieves then those that the Law
Exposes to the Pillory, or a Whipping Post; or to a Turn perchance at Tyburn
the next Sessions. You Will find your self Mistaken Sir, if you will take upon ye
to Judge of these Blades by their Garbs, Looks, and outward Appearance: But if
I get them in the VVind once, I Will tell ye which is which, to the very Hearts
and Souls of 'em, without the Ceremony of either Bench, Witnesses or Jury. Nay,
says the Master, if you should happen to Spy a Knight of the Post, a
Catch-pole, a Iayler, a Pawn-Broker, a High-way-man, a Crop-Ear'd Scriv'ner, a
Griping Usurer, a Corrupt Judge, or any of these Vermin, pray'e Cry out Thief,
and spare not: And I beseech ye Sir, says the Dog, what if it should be a
Pettifogging Splitter of Causes, a Turncoat, Ecclesiastical, Military or Civil;
a Trading Justice, a Mortal Enemy under the Mask of a Friend: A Glozing
Hypocrite: Or in One word, let it be in any other Case or Encounter whatsoever;
You will find it Twenty Thousand to One upon the whole Matter, that I Bark
Right.

The MORAL.
The History of Cheats and Sharpers truly Written, would be no other then the
History of Human Nature.

REFLECTION.
IT IS an Unhappy thing both for Master and Servant, when the Love, Loyalty and
Zeal of the One, shall be Ill Taken at the Hands of the Other; for he that will
not Believe and Depend upon the Faith of a Tried Friend and Servant, falls
under the Judgment commonly of giving too much heed to a Secret Enemy: Beside,
that it goes to the Heart of a Man of Honor and Address, when he has done his
Uttermost for his Masters Service, to fall under the Scandalous Character of
Officious, and Impertinent, for his Pains. The Master here was in another
Mistake too, in supposing that all House-Breakers and Sharpers had Thief
written in their Foreheads; whereas the most Dangerous sort of Cheats, are but
Masqueraders, under the Vizor of Friends and Honest Men. The Cardinal's Rule to
one of his Laquayes that had lost his Coat, comes very well to our present
Purpose. The Boy said that his Eminence told him they were all so Holy at Rome,
that he thought there had been no Thieves there. Well says the Cardinal, but
hereafter, when ever you come into a strange Place, you may take every Man you
see for a Thief, provided that you Call no Body so. The Dog went this way to
work, and he did Wisely in it; for he that keeps himself upon this Guard, shall
never be Cozened. The best will help it self, and therefore it is good to be
wary for fear of the Worst.

FAB. CCCCLXXXV. Two Doctors and a Sheep.
AS a Sheep was Grazing One Evening in a Pleasant Meadow, it had the hap to
Overhear Two Doctors of the Schools as they were taking a Walk there,
Philosophizing upon the Advantages of Mankind above all other Creatures; and
particularly, upon the Natural Disposition that Man has to live in Union and
Society. The Sheep gave One of them a Gentle Touch by the Cloak, and told him,
that under favor, he could not be of their Opinion. It Is true, says he, you
have your Cities, Towns Incorporate, and Large Communities; but then you have
your Magistrates too; your Laws, Oaths, and a Thousand Shackles upon ye; and
all little enough to keep the Peace among ye. You Dispute, Wrangle, Fight, make
a perpetual Bussle in the World, Break Friendships, Dissolve the very Ties of
Marriage, and Tear one Another to Pieces with all manner of Extravagant
Contests. Now this (...) never be, sure, if there were in ye that same
Implanted Inclination to Unity and Agreement, that you speak of. If you would
come to a clear Resolution of this Question, you must first set your Selves at
liberty from the Overruling Awe of Disgrace, Shame, and Punishment; and by the
Removal of that Force, leave your Selves to the full Scope of your Avarice and
Ambition. You will then find by the Event, whether Man be Naturally a Protector
and Preserver of Society, or a Destroyer of it. No, no, my Learned Sirs, it is
We that are the Sociable Creatures, We Troop together, Feed together, Live
together, follow the same Leader too, without any Constraint upon us, either of
Vows or Penalties; and the very Flies and Pismires upon this Topic, will Rise
up in Judgment against Mankind.

The MORAL.
The Philosophers will have Man in a Degree of Excellency to be a Sociable
Creature; but these Philosophers are Men themselves then, and Judges in their
Own Case: Now if we may Credit Matter of Fact and Experience, Men are the most
Disunited Creatures under the Heavens: It Is their Delight, Study, Practice and
Profession to lie Cutting One Another Throats, and Destroying their own Kind:
Insomuch that Birds, Beasts and Insects, to the very Flies and Pismires, will
rise up in Judgment against Mankind in this Point.

REFLECTION.
THE Sheep in this Fable was clearly too hard for the Two Doctors; and we find
all those Reasonings to be true in the World, which the Mutton Alleges in the
Fiction. For Man is certainly one of the most Perverse Pieces of the Creation;
and not only Cross to his Rational Brethren, but betwixt his Will and his
Understanding, he lives in a Perpetual Contradiction to Himself. His Practice
is directly contrary to his Knowledge, and he shuts his very Eyes against the
Light of his Nature. Now other Creatures that are only Guided by a Providential
Impulse, have the Grace to follow the Voice of their Director, and to keep
themselves within the Compass of their proper Business and Duty. Whereas Man,
that over and above the same common Instinct, is endu'd with the Talent of
Counsel and Knowledge, Improves those Advantages only to his Greater
Condemnation, by Abandoning the Offices and Functions of his Reasonable Being.
The Sum of the Moral, in fine, may be this, that it is not so much the
Excellency of our Human Nature, that Distinguishes us from Brutes, as the due
Exercise and Application of those Rational Faculties that Heaven has Bestowed
upon us: Which comes to the very case of the Sheep and the Doctors. Man knows
what he Ought to do, but (to his Greater Condemnation,) he does not Act
according to his Knowledge; whereas Animals that are Guided barely by Instinct,
live in Obedience to the Voice of Heaven in that of Nature.

FAB. CCCCLXXXVI. Few Friends.
ONe that had a Great Honor for Socrates, took Notice of a Pitiful Little
House that he was a Building: It Is a strange Thing (says he to the
Philosopher,) that so Great a Man as you are should ever think of Living in so
Wretched a Cabin. Well, says Socrates, And yet as Little as it is, he were a
Happy Man that had but True Friends enough to Fill it.

The MORAL.
A Friend in the World, is quite Another Thing then a Friend in the Schools:
And there is a Great Difference in the Speculation of a Friend, from what we
find in the Practice.

REFLECTION.
Friendship is a Divine Excellency, wrapped up in a Common Name, and nothing less
then the uttermost Perfection of Flesh and Blood, for Wisdom and Virtue, can
Entitle a Man to the Character of a True Friend; though Custom, I know, has so
far Prevailed for a Promiscuous Application of the Word to Common Acquaintances
and Relations, that it passes in the World, by a certain kind of Figure, for
Civility and Respect. But Socrates all this while did very well Understand what
he said, touching the Rarity and Paucity of Friends; and he might have added,
that it is as hard a matter how to Understand to Be a Friend, as to know where
to Find One.

FAB. CCCCLXXXVII. An Ass Carrying an Image.
AS an Ass was Carrying an Image in Procession, the People fell every where
down upon their Knees before him. This Silly Animal fancied that they Worshipped
Him all this while; 'till One Rounded him in the Ear; and told him, Friend,
says he, You are the very same Ass with this Burden upon your Back, that you
were before you took it up; and it is not the Brute they Bow to, but the Image.

The MORAL.
A Public Character is never the less to be Reverenced, because a Coxcomb
perhaps may Carry it; nor that Coxcomb one jot the more, save only for the sake
of his Office.

REFLECTION.
THE Simple Vanity of this Ass is a very Pertinent Reproof to those Men that
take the Honor and Respect that is done to the Character they Sustain, to be
paid to the Person; as if Mr. Constable should Assume to his Visage, the
Reverence that is paid to his Commission. There are that Interpret every Nod or
Glance of Civility, in their own Favor, though it was neither Due to them, nor
ever Intended them.

FAB. CCCCLXXXVIII. A Dog and a Cat.
THere was a Dog and a Cat brought up in the same House, from a Whelp and a
Kittling, and never were Two Creatures better together; so Kind, so Gamesome
and Diverting, that it was half the Entertainment of the Family to see the
Gamboles and Love-Tricks that passed betwixt them. Only it was Observed, that
still at Meal-times they would be Snarling and Spitting at One Another under
the Table: And what was the whole Sum of the Controversy at last, but a
Dog-and-Cat-Wrangle about the Picking of a Bone, or the Licking of a Trencher?

The MORAL.
Flesh and Blood does Naturally Consult its own Advantage; and when that comes
to be the Question, There Is the Bone that in some Degree or other sets all
Mortals together by the Ears.

REFLECTION.
Here Is a Perfect Emblem of the Practices and Friendships of the World; for Men
have their Toying Seasons, and their Pleasant Humors, as well as Dogs and
Cats. We Contract Little Likings (...) enter into Agreeable Conversations, and
pass away the time so Mer^ly and Kindly together, (at least while that Fit of
Dalliance and Diversion Lasts,) that one would think it impossible for any
thing under the Sun to Break the Intrigue; and yet upon the throwing in any
Cross Interest among 'em; (which is all One with the Bone under the Table,)
nay, upon a Jealous Thought, or a Mistaken Word or Look, all former Bonds are
Cancelled, the League Broken, and the Farce Concludes in Biting and Scratching
one another's Eyes out. The same Figure will serve for Princes and States,
Public Persons and Private, Married and Single; People in fine of all
Professions and Pretenses.

FAB. CCCCLXXXIX. Aristotle's Definition of a Tyrant.
THere was so great Offense taken at the Definition of a Tyrant in Aristotle's
Politics, that all the Governors under the Cope of Heaven, found themselves
Touched in the Reflection: Insomuch that they all Met in a General Council, to
take the Matter into Consideration. Those Princes (says Aristotle) are Tyrants,
that intend their own Good, more then that of their Subjects. The Princes were
so Nettled at the Scandal of this Affront, that every Man took it to Himself;
for according to that Doctrine, all the Governors upon the Face of the Earth
from Adam to this Day, have been no better then Downright Tyrants. The Council
was once Thinking to put Aristotle to Extremities; but imputing it rather to
the Natural Sawcyness of a Pedant, (for there is no Grammar for Politics,) then
to any Malice Prepense, they made him Eat his Words, and Expound Himself; that
what he said of Tyrants, was only meant of a sort of Persecutors of Old Time,
that have been now long since Extinct.

The MORAL.
In all General Characters of Bad Men, whether Princes, Public Ministers, or
Private Persons, Care should be taken not to Involve the Good under the same
Scandal and Condemnation. There are some Principles and Methods of Government,
wherein the Best and the Worst of Princes may Agree; but then there are certain
Perverse Notions of the Thing, and Corrupt Practices, that can hardly be
Touched upon, without Engaging all Crowned Heads in the Reproach: And it is
Dangerous Skewing upon the Errors of the Age a Man lives in.

REFLECTION.
THIS Fancy gives us to Understand, that Secrets of State are not properly the
Business of the Schools, and in truth it is a Topic too, that does as little
become the Pulpit; for Politics are matter of Practice rather then of Notion:
Beside, that the Rules of Government and those of Religion, Abstractedly
considered, have very little Affinity one with the other: For the Wisdom of
this World, or that which we call Civil Prudence, does not at all concern it
self in the Question of Virtue or of Conscience. From hence it may be Inferred,
that Ministers of State, Priests, and Philosophers, should do well to keep to
their Respective Professions, without Invading the Province one of another.
Here Is a Check put upon the Definition of a Tyrant; not so much for the False
Doctrine of the Position, as for the Scandal of Exposing Majesty, by the
Innuendo of so Irreverend a Truth; for the Character of a Crowned Head ought to
be kept Sacred, let the Person be what he will. Here is likewise an other Hint
of Caution to us, that in all Liberties of this Nature, we keep clear of the
present Times, and be still looking another way, whatever we mean.

As to the Definition of a Tyrant it self, let it be Heartily taken, and the
Drift of it is this; the common Safety of King and People is wrapped up in the
Well-being of each other. The Prince intends his Own Good in that of the
People; and at the same time, the Good of the People in that of Himself; for
they Stand or Fall together: But then there is One Tenderness of Care and Duty,
and another of Personal Inclination, or (if I may so Call it) Infirmity; and
That Is Aristotle's Tyrant, where a Ruler Indulges his Private Appetite, and
Sacrifices his People to his Passions or his Pleasures.

FAB. CCCCXC. A Countryman and a Panther.
A Panther had the Fortune to drop into a Pit-fall. The People came Flocking
about him; some Pelting and Battering him with Stones and Cudgels; others
Pitied him, and threw him somewhat to Eat. Toward Night, they went All Home
again, taking for granted that they should find him Dead next Morning: But in
that Interim he came to Himself again, and gave 'em the Slip: And upon getting
Loose, he made such Havoc both with Man and Beast, that the whole Country,
Friend and Foe, were all in Dread of him. The Panther finding the Fright so
General, called out to 'em, and told them; So many of ye (says he) as were Kind
to me in the Pit, set your Hearts at Rest, for I Will not Hurt a Creature of ye
now I Am at Liberty. I have not forgotten who they were that gave me Bread, and
who threw Stones at me; and I Am an Enemy only to those that were Enemies to me.

The MORAL.
There Is no Creature so Wild and Savage, but it may be wrought upon and
Reclaimed by Good Offices and Benefits; to the shame of that part of Mankind,
that returns Evil for Good, and is yet to Learn Humanity from the Beasts of the
Forests.

REFLECTION.
Here Is a Reproof to the Practices of Ungrateful Men, under the Figure of a
Grateful Beast: A Grateful, and I might have said a Generous Beast, in being
kind to those in their Distress, that had been so to Him in His. How much Worse
then Brutes are those Men then, that owe the Best Blood in their Veins to the
Bounty of their Friends and Patrons, and yet after Raising them from the very
Dunghill to Honors and Fortunes, are the forwardest to Insult upon their
Supporters and Masters, when they see 'em in any Calamity; and to add
Affliction to Affliction! Now to Pursue the Fable, Here Is a Common Enemy, in
Appearance, at the Mercy of the People about him; some Beat him, others take
Pity of him: He comes afterward to make his Escape, and Distinguishes his
Enemies from his Friends, by Destroying the One, and Sparing the Other. Shall
we call the One a Judgment now, and the other a Providence; as if the Outrage
had been a Fault, and the Pity a Meritorious Act of Good Nature? The Moral will
hold good in both Respects; for let the Judgment or the Execution of Death be
never so Just, it is yet Barbarons, Inhuman and Unwarrantable to Aggravate the
Suffering with Insolence, Contumely, Malice and Reproach: And so for the
Tenderness on the other hand, it is a softness Inseparable from the Genuine
Impulse of a Reasonable Being: For the Compassion is a Laudable Benignity of
Disposition, though Exercised upon a Beast.

FAB. CCCCXCI. A Mastiff and an Ass.
THere was a Huge Bear-Dog, and an Ass laden with Bread upon a Long Journey
together: They were Both very Hungry, and while the Ass was Grazing upon
Thistles by the Way-side, the Dog would fain have been Eating too for Company,
and Begged a Bit of Bread of him. The Ass made him Answer, that if he were
Hungry, he might even do as he did; for he had no Bread to spare. While this
passed, up comes a Wolf toward them. The Ass fell a Trembling, and told the
Dog, he hoped he would stand by him if the Wolf should set upon him. No, says
the Dog, they that will Eat Alone, shall even Fight Alone too, for me: And so
he left his Fellow-Traveller at the Mercy of the Wolf.

The MORAL.
Common-Defence and Preservation, is the Main End of Society, and the Great
Benefit we receive by Ioining in it: We Love One Another, because we are the
better for One Another; and it is the Interest that Supports us in the Duty;
when that Reciprocal Kindness sails, as we see here in the Dog and the Ass, the
League drops to Pieces.

REFLECTION.
ONE Good Turn we say, requires Another; and it may be added, that one Shrewd
Turn Deserves and Provokes Another. The Asses want of Charity in One Minute,
cost him his Life in the next; and he was paid in his Own Kind too, in the
return of One Scom for Another. It was an Offense against the very Laws of
Nature, and Society, and the Punishment Consequently was Providential and Just.
He that shows no Compassion, shall find None.

FAB. CCCCXCII. A Laconique Tried and Sentenced.
IT was the Ill hap of a Learned Laconique, to make use of Three Words, when
Two would have done his Business: The Matter was so Foul, and the Fact so
clearly Proved upon him, that being Cited before the Senate, he was Heard and
Condemned to Read over Guicciardines War of Pisa from End to End, without
either Eating or Drinking 'till he had gone through it. The Poor Man fell into
so Desperate an Agony before he could get over One Single Leaf on it, that he
threw himself upon his Face, Imploring the Mercy of the Court, though 'twere
but to change his Punishment: They might send him to the Galleys, he said, or
if it were to Flay him Alive, or Bury Him betwixt Four Walls, and he should
ever acknowledge it as an Act of Clemency; but for a Man of Brains and Thought,
to Trouble his Head with such a deal of Tedious Trash and Pedantry, the Torment
he said, of Perillus's Brazen Bull, was Nothing to it.

The MORAL.
Time is Life, and Life is Precious: It Is short enough at Best; but the more we
Contract our Talk and our Business, the more we have on it. Wherefore it is
Great Wisdom to Couch all we have to do, in as Narrow a Compass as possible.
The Killing of a Man with many Words, is only Another sort of Murder, out of
the Reach of the Law.

REFLECTION.
THIS Emblem bids us Husband our Time, and bring the Business of Life into as
Narrow a Compass as we can; for we have a great deal to do. It Is in effect, so
much Life Lost, as we squander away in more Words then needs, and in the
Exchange of Idle and Impertinent Discourses: Beside the Mortification of a
Tedious Talker. The Figure is carried to the Height, in the Representation,
both of the Crime and of the Punishment; over and above the Equity of
Tormenting the Tormentor of Others in his own kind, as Phalaris Sentenced
Perillus to be Burnt in his Own Bull.

FAB. CCCCXCIII. Matchiavel Condemned.
NO Man ever had a Worse Name in the World for a Promoter of Seditious and
Atheistical Politics, then Nicholas Matchiavel the Florentine: Insomuch, that
he was Banished, not only the Conversation, but the very Libraries of all
Learned Men, upon pain of being Burnt for his Pestilent Doctrins, wherever he
should be taken; and a Severe Punishment inflicted over and above upon any Man
that should presume to Comfort, Abet, or Receive him. It was his Fortune after
this, to be found upon a Search, in the Corner of a Friends Study, and to be
made a Prisoner; and then in course to Undergo a Sentence according to the
Decree. But all these Formalities notwithstanding, he was yet by the
Extraordinary Favor of his Judges, upon his Humble Petition for a Hearing,
admitted to his Defense, which was to this following Effect. He made no
Difficulty of Confessing the Fact, and of Acknowledging himself the Publisher
of Pernicious and Execrable Positions; but withal, says he, no Mortal upon the
Face of the Earth, has a Greater Abhorrence for those Desperate Maxims then my
self. As to the Inventing of those Tenets, he made Protestation, that he had no
Hand in it at all, and that the Political Part of his Discourses, was only
Copied out of the General Practices and Councils of Christian Princes; and that
if they pleased, he was ready to Instance in the very Presidents. After this,
he appealed to the Justice of the Bench, whether it were not very hard to make
it Mortal, for One Man to write the Naked History of a thing done; and at the
same time to allow the very Doing of it to be Praiseworthy in Another. This
Plea had brought him off, but for a Fresh Accusation that was Immediately
started against him; which was, that he was Taken in the Dark One Night among a
Flock of Sheep, putting Dogs Teeth into their Mouths, which must enevitably be
the Ruin of the Shepherds; for it could never be Expected that the whole Flock
would ever submit to the Government of One, if it had either Teeth, Wit or
Horns. Upon the Proof of this Charge, he was Delivered up immediately to
Justice, and the Law Executed upon him.

The MORAL.
The Secrets of Government ought not to be Touched with Unwash'd Hands, and
Exposed to the Multitude; for upon Granting the People a Privilege of Debating
the Prerogatives of Sovereign Power, they will Infer Naturally enough a Right,
and a Title to the Controlling and the Overruling of it.

REFLECTION.
HE that Exposes the Arts of Government to the People, does in Effect Appeal to
'em, and give the Multitude some sort of Right to Judge of, and to Censure the
Actions of their Superiors. For what is any thing Published for, but to be
Read, and to lve consequently at the Mercy of the Reader how to Understand it?
As if the Author should say, Gentlemen, here is a Scheme of Politics submitted
to your Grave Consideration, pray'e what is your Opinion on it? Can any Body
think, that in a Question of State Exhibited after this manner, the Mobile will
not determine in their Own Favor, and clap what Bias upon the Proposition they
themselves please? So that let the Matter be Handled never so Tenderly, it is a
main Point lost yet; the very Admittance of the Common People into the Council,
and Allowing them to be of the Quorum. Matchiavel Excuses himself well enough,
as to any thing of Malice in his Discourses, for (says he) these Maxims are
none of My Invention, neither has any Man living a Greater Abhorrence for those
Poisonous Doctrins then my Self; but my Writings are onl yHistorical Notes and
Abstracts drawn from the Life of an Universal Practice. Now the Hazard and the
Mischief is this, that in all these Cases, Men are apt to take Things by the
wrong Handle, and raise Arguments for their Own Advantage. And that is the Moral
of Matchiavel's putting Dogs Teeth by Night into the Mouths of the Sheep: That
is to say, it is a Sly way of Irritating Subjects to fall foul upon their
Rulers, which certainly is a Crime Unpardonable in any State.

FAB. CCCCXCIV. A Dispute betwixt a Doctor, a Uint'ner, and a Botcher.
THere was a Vint'ner and a Botcher Challenged a Doctor of Divinity to a Trial
of Skill in his own Trade. He Asked them by whom they would be Tried? They Would be
Tried by the Text they said. The Thing was Agreed, and the Time Set, and so
they brought their Geneva Bibles along with them. The Doctor told them by way
of Preface, that though St. Paul fought with Beasts at Ephesus, it was not the
Fashion for his Followers to Fight with Beasts in England; and therefore if
they could not prove themselves to be Men, he would have nothing to do with them.
They stood upon their Pantoufles, that Men they were, and that Men he should
find 'em to be; and they were ready to cast the Cause upon that Issue. That Is
well, says the Doctor to One of 'em, and pray'e what are you for a Man in the
First Place? I am a Vint'ner, says the other. Very Good, quoth the Doctor, and do
you ever put New Wine into Old Bottles? Yea, I do so, says the Vint'ner. Then,
says the Doctor, You are no Man; for the Text says, that No Man puts New
Wine into Old Bottles. I shall now come to your Companion; Pray'e will you tell
me Friend, what are you for a Man? I am says the other, a Tailor, alias a
Botcher. I suppose quoth the Doctor, Put the Case now that my Doublet were out
at the Elbows, and I have no more of the Old Cloth to Patch it up withal, could
you Mend it do you think? Ye, quoth the Botcher, I could get New Cloth to Mend
it. Why then, says the Doctor, You are no Man neither; for you shall find it in
Another Text, that No Man puts new Cloth into an Old Garment, so that you
are both Beaten here at your own Weapons; for here are Two Texts to Prove that
You Two are No Men; which is but according to your own Rule and Method of
Interpreting Scripture.

The MORAL.
This Fable strikes at the Ridiculous License of Profane Intermedlers in Holy
Matters; that is to say, a sort of Illiterate Enthusiasts, and Mechanics, that
without either Authority or Skill, will be Correcting Magnificat, and setting
up the Phantome of New Lights against the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles.

REFLECTION.
THE Wisdom of the Law will not suffer any Man to Exercise a Trade that he has
not served his Time to; and a Body would think that the Reason of this
Provision should hold as well in Divinity, as in Manual Crafts; for Revelations
at this time of the Day, are as much out of Date as Miracles. This Comical
Whimsy may serve in General for a Reproof to Bold and Ignorant Pretenders in
matters that they do not Understand; and so to those also that Confidently
Usurp upon other Men's Provinces, without any Right or Call to the Function.
What are the Freaks in fine, of these Religionaries, but Fits of the Spleen,
and the Fumes of a Dark Melancholy, Covered under the Name and Pretense of
Divine Gifts and Graces? They Will Cap ye Texts, as Schoolboys Cap Verses; and in
Defiance of all the Extraordinary Cases, the Figures, Types, Allegories, and
Parables that are so frequent in Holy Writ, every thing must be Understood too,
as the Doctor has Turned it here upon the Vint'ner and the Botcher, according
to the Letter. They Will draw ye a Warrant for the Murdering of Kings, from the
Example of Ahab and Benhadad. An Authority for Couzening their Neighbors, from
the Israelites Robbing the Egyptians. In One Word, they shall Overturn all the
Principles of Human Society, Morality, and Religion it self, and show ye a Text
for it: And upon the whole matter, what is the Conscience of these People more
at last, then Fancy and Illusion? They Contend for they know not what, like the
Two Fellows that went to Loggerheads about their Religion; the One was a
Martinist he said; the other said that all Martinists were Heretics, and for
his part he was a Lutheran: Now the Poor Wretches were both of a Side, and
Understood it not. As for the Business of Learning and Common Sense, they call
it the Wisdom of this World, and effectually make it a Heavenly Grace to be an
Egregious Coxcomb. There was an Honest Simple Tradesman, wonderfully Earnest
with the Parson of the Parish to know what the Forbidden Fruit was; as if there
had been no more in it, then whether 'twas a Kentish or a Kirton Pippin. The
Good Man told him, that it was an Apple, and that Adam's Eating of it, brought
all his Posterity under a Sentence of Condemnation. The Other said it was so hard
a Case, that in reverence to the Divine Mercy, he thought himself bound to
question the whole Story. This Liberty of Retailing Divinity by the Letter, is
the very Root of Infidelity and of all Heresies, nay of Atheism it self. For
when People have been Beating their Brains about a Difficulty, and find they
can make Nothing on it, they are apt to think there is Nothing in it; for the
Mystery's Lost to Him that stands Poring only upon the Letter.

FAB. CCCCXCV. There Is no To Morrow.
A Fellow had got a Wench in a Corner; and very Earnest they were upon the Text
of Increase and Multiply; but the Gipsy stood upon her Points forsooth; She d
not be Towz'd and Tumbled at that Rate, in faith not She. In fine, No Penny, No
Paternoster; and there was no Good to be done unless he would Marry her. The
Poor Devil was under a kind of Duresse; and for brevity sake, promised her,
with a Bloody Oath, that he would Marry her to Morrow. Upon this Assurance,
they Signed and Sealed. The next Day they met again, and the Next to that; and
so Every Next Day, for a matter of a Fortnight after; and the Love went on to
the Tune of To Morrow, and To Morrow still. But the Girl finding her Self
Fooled, and put off thus from One to Morrow to Another, fell in the Conclusion
to Expostulating with him upon the Matter. Did not yon Swear, Yesterday, says
she, and Yesterday, and I know not how many Yesterdays, that you would Marry me to
Morrow? Yes my Dear, says the Spark, I did Swear so; and I do now Swear it all
over again too, and thou shall find me as good as my Word. Ay, but hark ye,
says the Lass, is not to Day to Morrow? No my Heart, says the Gallant again,
that is thy Mistake; for there are No to Morrows; People are apt to Talk of 'em
indeed, but they never come, for Life it self is but the Time Present.

The MORAL
The Sparks Case here in the Fable, of to Morrow and to Morrow, is Every Man's,
and Every Days Case in the World; and we do the very same Thing with God
Almighty, that this Blade does with his Mistress, we Promise, and Put-off, and
Perform Nothing.

REFLECTION.
Whoever Reads and Considers this Emblem, will find it to be his own Case; we
promise, and we put-off, and we sin, and we go on Sinning: But still as our
Conscience Checks us for it, we take up Faint Purposes, and Half Resolutions to
do so no more, and to lead a New Life for the future. Thus with the Young
Fellow here, we Indulge our Selves in our Pleasures from Time time; and when we
have Whil'd away our Lives, Day after Day, from One to Morrow to Another, that
same to Morrow never comes. This is the Sluggard's Plea and Practice; the
Libertines; the Miser's; and in short, whose is it not? Now if Men would but
Consider the Vanity and the Vexation of a Lewd Course of Life; the Impiety
first of Entering into Vows, which they intend Beforehand not to Perform, and
afterward of Breaking them; the Folly and the Presumption of Undertaking for
any thing that is wholly out of our Power; the Necessity of Emproving every
Moment of our Lives; the Desperate and the Irreparable Hazard of Losing
Opportunities; People would not venture Body and Soul upon the necessity of a
Procrastinated Repentance; and Postpone the most uncertainty Duties of a Man,
and of Christian. For there is no to Morrow, nor any thing in truth, but the
Present Instant that we can call our Own.

FAB. CCCCXCVI. A Lady in Trouble for the Loss of a Set of Horses.
A Certain Lady, that was fallen under Great Tribulation for the Loss of a very
fine Set of Horses, went Raving up and down like a Mad Woman from Place to
Place, and Every Body must be Tired with the History of her Misfortune. Well,
says She, they were the best Natured Poor Wretches; they would look at Me so Kindly
still when I came to take Coach; to say Nothing of the Value of them, really I
cannot think my self safe with other Horses. And at this rate, she went on,
Amplifying upon the Affliction, while her Friends and Relations on the other
Hand, were not wanting to Ply her upon the Ordinary Topiques of the Transitory
State of Mortals. But when they had proceeded as far with her as their Religion
and Philosophy could Carry them, and found that she was not to be Comforted;
Why truly Madam, says One of her Confidents, this is a very great Trial, but
since they are gone, and that there is no Recalling of them, I hope your
Ladyship does not think 'em too Good for Him that Has 'em.

The MORAL.
We are more Sollicitous for our Horses and our Dogs, then we are for our
Souls, our Friends, or our Children; and therefore it was well enough turned
upon the Lady here toward the bringing of her to her self again, to Mind her,
that there was neither Heaven nor Hell in the Case of Losing a Set of Horses.

REFLECTION.
THIS Fancy looks at First Blush, as if it Bordered a little upon Profaneness;
but if it be Taken by the Right Handle, it will bear the Moral of a most
Christian, a Necessary, and a Seasonable Check to those People that deliver up
themselves to the Transports of Extravagant Passions for Trifles: As it was the
Case of a Lady that kept her Bed for the Loss of a Favourite-Puppy she had. Her
Friends came to Condole with her upon the Tidings of some Dismal Calamity that
had Befallen her, and asked her very tenderly what terrible Misfortune it might
be, that she laid so heavily to Heart? Only, says she, the Greatest Affliction
(I thank the Lord for it,) that ever befell Me since I was Born: My Pretty Pearl
is Dead. Alas, Madam (says One of the Condolers,) Why you have lost a very Good
Husband. That Is True, says The Other, but the Lord may send me such Another
Husband; I shall never have such Another Puppy. These Impetuous Violences, are
no News to any Man that has Observed and Studied the Infirmities of here and
there One perhaps of that Fair and Frail Sex. But we must not Imagine at last,
because the Moralist has made it a Woman's Case in the Story, that we our Selves
are not Guilty Every Man of us, in some sort or other, and in a Thousand
Instances, of the same Weaknesses and Mistakes, even in the Ordinary Course of
Human Life; for what is the Doctrine of all this upon the main, but a Rebuke to
those that set their Affections too much upon the things of this World, and
consequently too little upon Matters of Greater Moment; with him that upon the
Firing of his House, was so Overjoyed for the Saving of his Plate, Linne,
Paintings, Hangings, and other Rich Movables, that he never so much as thought
of his only Child all this while that was Burnt in the Cradle. Every Man has
his Feeble, as they call it; One Man's Weak side is Ambition; Another's
Avarice, Malice, Envy, Revenge, Pride, Vainglory; and some again are so wholly
taken up with the Pleasures of Wine, Women, Jolly Company and Good Cheer, as if
all the Faculties of their Reasonable Souls had been only given them to
Subminister to their Appetites. The very World it self, in One Word, is but a
Moor-Fields College of People that r^n Mad for Common Disappointments.

FAB. CCCCXCVII. The Hypocrite.
THere happened a Discourse in very Good Company, upon the Subject of Religion
and Hypocrisy; and how hard a Matter it was, in the Case of an Artificial
Disguise, to know the One from the other; though the Scripture Allows us, and
in truth Obliges us, to Judge of the Tree by its Fruits. Well, says One to his
Next Man, Do you know such a Person? Oh very well, says the other; he is one of
the Holiest Men to Heavenward that ever you met with, but the Arrantest Rascal
among his Neighbors in the whole Parish.

The MORAL.
It Is not the Name, the Semblance, or the Ostentation of Religion and Holiness
that will Atone for the Abuse on it: In making God the Author, the Director and
the Abettor of those Flagitious Villainies in Christians, that Pagans Themselves
would have an Abhorrence for. But when All comes to All, a Knave in his
Practice, is a Knave in his Heart too.

REFLECTION.
THE Hypocrite is but the Devil himself with a Glory about him, in the Shape of
an Angel of Light; and as it is no easy Matter to Distinguish the One from the
Other; so it is a thing of a most Desperate Consequence to Mistake them; and the
Question will be this at last, How to Reconcile the Offices of Charity and
Prudence. The One bids us believe and hope the Best; the Other bids us provide
against the Worst. Now it is not for Nothing that the Holy Ghost it self has
Denounced so many Woes against this sort of Impostors; and Inculcated over and
over so many Cautions how we have any thing to do with them; which is no other
then a Declaration of an Abhorrence of these People, and a plain Intimation of
the Danger of being Deluded and Imposed upon, under the Mask of Religion both
in One. There Is no Cruelty, no Fraud, no Violence, no Oppression, that is not
acted under a Color of Divine Authority, Impulse and Direction. Churches are
Robbed and Profaned; Princes Deposed and Murdered; Religion and Morality, with
all the Principles of Virtue and Common Honesty, are Overturned; and the Name
of God himself is made Use of, as a Principal and as a Witness to the Impiety,
in a Defyance to all the Dictates of Heaven and Right Reason: And all this is
but a Preachment upon the Text at last, of Fear God and Keep his Commandments.
When a Kings Head is to be struck off by his own Rebellious Subjects, it is
brought on commonly with the Prologue of a Fast, which in the Style of the Holy
Intrigue, is called a Seeking of the Lord. This Work and Judgment of God
(though it be Secret,) must be done with Great Gravity, (says James Melvil, by
way of Preface to the Murder of Cardinal Beaton.) Vive l' Evangile, was the
Word to several of the Massacres in France. 'Twas often in the Mouth of a Lady,
Zealous in her way, with Deep Protestations, that She had rather lie with Forty
Men, then go to One Mass: Nay, and I have heard of Tenants too, that Resus'd to
pay their Landlord his Rent, unless he could show a Text for it. Here Is enough
said to set forth the Character of an Hypocrite, so as to Answer the Morality
that is Couched under this Figure; but the great Difficulty will be the
Steering of a Middle Course, betwixt Believing too Much, and too Little: That
is to say, betwixt taking a Good Man for an Hypocrite, and an Hypocrite for a
Good Man. We are to have a Reverence for the very Appearances of Piety; but
whenever we find the Holy Man to Godward, to be no better then a Iuggling
Knave among his Neighbors, that is the very Hypocrite that we find Stigmatized
among the Scribes and Pharisees in the Holy Gospel.

FAB. CCCCXCVIII. The Conscientious Thieves.
THere was a Knot of Good Fellows that Borrowed a small Sum of Money of a
Gentleman upon the King's Highway: When they had taken All they could find;
Dam ye for a Dog, says One of the Gang, You have more Money about you Sirrah,
some where or other. Lord, Brother, says One of his Companions, cannot ye take
the Gentleman's Money Civilly, but you must Swear and call Names! As they were
about to Part, Pray by your favor Gentlemen, says the Traveller, I have so
many Miles to go, and not One Penny in my Pocket to bear my Charges; you seem to
be Men of some Honor, and I hope you will be so Good as only to let me have so
much of my Money back again, as will carry me to my Journeys End. Ay, Ay, the
Lord forbid else, they cried, and so they Opened One of the Bags, and bad him
Please Himself. He took them at their Word, and presently fetched out a
Handful, as much as ever he could Gripe. Why how now, says One of the Blades,
Ye Confounded Son of a Whore, Have ye no Conscience?

The MORAL.
It Is a Notable Trade that many People drive in the World, of pretending to
make a Conscience of One Sin, and taking out their Penn'orths in Another. Some
there are that Commute Swearing for Whoring, as if the Forbearance of the One,
were a Dispensation for the Committing of The Other. We have heard of Others too,
that have been strict Observers of the Lords Day, and yet made no Scruple at
all of Robbing the Lord's Altars. But a Good Christian and an Honest Man, must
be All of a Piece; and these Inequalities of Proceeding, will never hold Water.

REFLECTION.
IT IS just with Public Thieves, as it is with Private: A Pretended Necessity
sets them both at Work, and a Pretended Religion or Conscience brings them off
when they have done. This is no more then what we our selves have found within
the Memory of Man, to be Literally and Historically True; when that, which in
those Days past for the Law of the Land, was in Effect no other then the Law of
the Road; and the One had as Much and as Little to say for it self as the
Other. There are Political Bands of Robbers, as well as the Iacks and the Toms
that are Cried in Gazettes; and they fall both of them under the Regulation of
the same Mystery and Trade. The Poor Man here that was Robbed Himself, was
Charged Effectually with Robbing the Thieves, upon a Suspicion, that he had
Reserved some small Pittance of his own Money, to his own Use, which they
accounted a Defrauding of the Public. Now we have seen this to be the Sense
and Discipline of the State, as well as of the Pad; and it is as Broad as it is
Long at last, whether a Man be Undone by a Cabal of Sharpers in Committee of
Safety, or by a Troup of Canary Birds upon Newmarket Heath. Nay, and the
Parallel runs upon All Four, a little further too; Cannot you take the
Gentleman's Money Civilly? says the Spark: That is to say, Cannot you play the
Rogue Demurely, as if Butter would not melt in your Mouth, and pick an Honest
Gentleman's Pocket with a Paternoster betwixt your Teeth? Cannot you Plunder,
Sequester, Decimate, Draw, Hang and Quarter in the Fear of the Lord, but you
must Blaspheme and Call Names? Is it not enough that you are Discharged by the
very Privilege of your Profession, from the Bondage of Subjection and Obedience
to Parents Natural or Civil? Is it not enough that you may Kill, Whore, Steal,
Backbite, Covet, and make Bold in short, with all the Commands of the Second
Table, but you must be Breaking in upon the Former? Thus goes the World; the
Little Thieves Hang for it, while the Great Ones Set upon the Bench; and there is
a Cloak of Conscience still thrown over both Pretensions, to Cover, and to
Consecrate the Cheat.

FAB. CCCCXCIX. The Trepanning Wolf.
There Is a Story of a Man of Quality in Ireland, that a little before the
Troubles there, had Walled in a piece of ground for a Park, and left only One
Passage into it by a Gate with a Portcullis to it. The Rebellion brake out, and
put a stop to his Design. The Place was Horribly Pestered with Wolves; and his
People having taken one of 'em in a Pit-Fall, Chained him up to a Tree in the
Enclosure; and then planted themselves in a Lodge over the Gate, to see what
would come on it. The Wolf in a very short time fell a Howling, and was Answered
by All his Brethren thereabouts, that were within Hearing of it; insomuch that
the Hububb was Immediately put about from One Mountain to Another, till a whole
Herd of 'em were gotten together upon the (...); and so Troup'd away into the
Park. They were no sooner in the Pound, but down goes the Portcullis, and away
Scamper'd the Wolves to the Gate, upon the Noise of the Fall on it. When they
saw that there was no getting out again, where they ^ame in, and that upon
Hunting the whole Field over, there was no Possibility of making an Escape,
they fell by Consent upon the Wolf that drew them In, and Tore him all to
Pieces.

The MORAL.
Any Man that has but Eyes in his Head, and looks well about him, will find
this Exploit of the Wolves, to be no more then the common Practice of
Vindictive Flesh and Blood, on the One Hand, and the common Fate of Public
Incendiaries on the Other.

REFLECTION.
IT IS with Men, as it is with Beasts, in the Case of this Wolf. We do naturally
Hate the Instruments of our Ruin: And it matters not much neither, as to the
Event of the thing, whether it be by Chance or by Choice; for it seldom
succeeds better, where the Advice or the Instigation of One Man, draws on the
Destruction of Many. There Is a Great Difference it is true, betwixt the Works of
Malice, and those of Misadventure, but the Mischief is still the same; for he
that is Undone, is equally Undone, whether it be by a Spitefulness of
Forethought, or by the Folly of Oversight, or Evil Counsel. The Wolf at the
Staks, had no Design upon his Brethren in the Woods; and the Wolves in the Wood
had as little Design upon their Brother at the Stake; but One was in Distress,
and called out for Help, while the other Associated, and came in to his Relief.
But after they were once In, they were all Involved in the same Common Fate:
And when the Herd found themselves Hampered, and that they could not gain their
Ends, they came to a Resolution, One and All, in a Generous Indignation to take
their Revenge. The Freak of the French Farce comes as Pat as is possible to the
Earnest of this Moral: The Plot of it was a Grammar School; the Master setting
his Boys their Lessons, and their Exercises, and a Loobily Country Fellow
putting in for a part among the Scholars. Well, says the Master, I am just
going out of Town for Four or Five Days, wherefore Pray'e be sure ye be Good
Boys, till I come back again; and so he took Horse and away. He had no sooner
turned his Back, but there were they at it Helter Skelter, throwing Books at
one another Heads, and Playing such Reaks, as if Hell were broke Loose among
'em. In this very Interim, the Master Bolts in upon them, and Surprises them:
In short, he inquires into the Riot, and takes the whole School to Task One by
One, about the Occasion of this Uproar. I Would have been Quiet, says One, if it
had not been for Him; and I Would have been Quiet, says The Other, if he would have let me
Alone. So that in fine, (all Pointing at the same Person,) the Poor Country
Fellow was taken up and Lashed upon the Stage, and all the rest Forgiven.

FAB. CCCCC. A Miller and a Rat.
A Miller took a Huge Overgrown Rat in his Meal Tub; and there was He laying
the Law to him about the Lewdness of his Life and Conversation, and the
Abominable Sin of Stealing; but your Thieving says he, is now come Home to ye,
and I shall e'n leave Honest Puss here to reckon with ye for all your
Rogueries. Alas Sir, says the Poor Rat, I make no Trade on it; and the Miserable
Pittance that I take, is only from Hand to Mouth, and out of Pure Necessity to
keep Life and Soul together: As the Rat Pleaded Hunger on the One Hand, the
Miller threw the Matter of Conscience and Honesty in his Teeth on the Other,
and Preached to him upon the Topic of a Political Convenience, in making such
Pilfering Knaves Examples for the Public Good. Well, Sir, says the Rat once
again, but pray will you Consider for your own sake, that this is your own
Case; and that You and I are both Corn Merchants, and of the same Fraternity;
Nay, and that for One Grain that I take, you take a Thousand. This is not
Language, cries the Miller, in a Rage, for an Honest Man to Bear; but the best
on it is Sirrah, Your Tongue's no Slander: So he turned the Cat Loose upon him
to do that which we call in the World an Execution of Justice.

The MORAL.
It Is a piece of Market Policy, for People of a Trade to bear hard One upon
another, when it comes once to the Question betwixt a Couple of Knaves, which
is the Honester Man of the Two.

REFLECTION.
THERE are no Greater Atheists under the Sun, then that sort of People that
Distinguishes it self from other Men by the Name of the Godly, and the Ungodly
Party: No Arranter Hypocrites in Hell, then those that told the Sons of Levi
they took too much upon them, but that the Congregation was Holy Every Man of
'em, and the Lord was among them. Divine Vengeance cut them off we see,
Flagranti Crimine, for the Earth Opened her Mouth and Swallowed them up, Them
and their whole Party, and they went down Alive into the Pit. No People so
Unmerciful to Poor Little Whores, and Thieves, as Rich Great Ones. The Griping
Usurer Inveighs against Extortion; Church-Robbers against Sacrilege; the most
Insupportable of Tyrants, Exclaim against the Exercise of Arbitrary Power; and
none so Fierce against the Sin of Rebellion, as the most Execrable of Traitors
Themselves. Thus we find it in these Instances; and the same Pharisaical Spirit
runs through the whole Roll of our Darling Iniquities. The Miller is brought in
here Preaching against Stealing; and it is upon the whole Matter an
Unaccountable Truth, that we do all Naturally pretend the Greatest Aversion to
that Lewdness in Another, which we most Indulge in our Selves. This is it that
we call Crying Whore First; as if the Impudence of Out-facing the Wickedness,
were some sort of Atonement for the Scandal of it.

FINIS.

