COVNTERPOYSON CONSIDERATIONS touching the points in difference between the
godly ministers and people of the Church of England, and the seduced brethen of
the Separation.

ARGVMENTS That the best assemblies of the present Church of England, are true
visible Churches.

That the Preachers in the best assemblies of Engl. are true ministers of
Christ.

Mr BERNARDS book entitled The SEPARATISTS SCHISM

Mr CRASHAWES Questions propounded in his Sermon preached at the Cross.

Examined and Answered by HENRY AINSWORTH

Lord God the strength of my salvation; cover thou my head, in the Day of
battle, Psalm. 140.7. RIGHT RIGHT



Printed in the year 1642.

A fore-speech to the Christian reader.
THE truth and church of God, by multitude of enemies, has ever been d^sgraced
and trodden down in the world that many which have seemed to love and seek after
it, have stumbled at the reproach and oppotision of the same. Yet the godly wise
have understood and discerned things that differ. It is a great help unto the
weak and simple, when the deceits and snares wherewith the adversary seeks
to destroy the sowl, are o^enly discovered, by the light of Gods word and for
this cause have I endeavored according to the measure of knowledge and grace
given unto me, to make answer unto such reasons cauils and calumniations, as
are given out against that part of the truth, which this church witnesses unto
the world, touching our separation from the Church of Engl. the Considerations
and Arguments first answered, were written by Mr Spr a Minister of
Glocestershire; and in them (as I suppose) the sum and weight of that which
may be said for that church, is comprised. Mr Bernards book has rather show
then weight of reason, as the judicious reader may perceive; and seems to be
penned by him, rather for disgrace of others then defense of themselves. But no
better fruit can be exspected from such as rebel against the light which
themselves once seemed to regard. Mr Crashawes questions are rather to stumble
at, then to direct the ignorant as having neither weight of argument against us
nor for themselves. Yet as by all these means the truth is oppugned, so by all
contrary good means it should be defended; that wisdom may be justified of
all her children, and others left without excuse. How weak and insufficient the
adversaries reasons are in partiular, the answers unto them more par^icularly
will show. Here I will briefly observe, some general things whereby falsehood
endeavors to uphold it self; and how it may by the prudente be discried.
Untruth hat^ sought to preuayl.

1. By perse^uting such as have spoken against, or forsaken her iniquity.
iniquity. This the blood of Gods martyrs shed in all ages proclaims unto all
men. And thus have the chief Pastors of the Church of England dealt with
Christ's lambs, in these our days. For having gotten into their hands the sword
of the Magistrate, they there with have smitten such as with the word, (the
sword of the spirit) they could not convince. In which they fulfill the measure
of their Fathers; for so have the Papal Prelates used to feed their flocks

2. By blaspheming and preaching against the faith and witnesses thereof. For
they that hold forth the truth are exposed to the reproach and venim of the
tongue, and many unjust calumniations come forth against their persons,
especially the principal of them, whom evil minded men do most malign. Also
the cause it self is often wronged, whiles the truth thereof, and reasons that
uphold it, are sv^pressed; arguments feighned and confuted which were never
made, or otherwise made then the adversaries pretend; and sometimes such
articles and errors imputed, as from which it is altogether free. How others
heretofore have carried themselves this way, all records show: how men at this
day have dealt with us and the truth which we embrace; many pulpits in Engl.
can witness. besides private calumnies innumerable, and some public
pamphletes. The stinch of their reproachful mouths, has caused many to
distaste the sweet savor of the Gospel, and caused also for a while a dislike
in sundry of us, till God in mercy visited and saved us from the deceitful
tongue.

3. Yet is not this yenough, but men seek to bear down the truth by writing
against and to the defamation of the same, with all exquisite cunning and frawd
to disgrace it, and by plausible reasons to persuade unto error. If any would
see this, let the general arguments used at this day against us, consonant and
agreeable to the reasons of Papists and other ancient adversaries of the Gospel,
be observed.

1. The Papists have continually exclaimed against them for leaving their
mother the ch: of Rome that bare them; crying out the Church the Church, the
Catholic church; and saying that Kellisons Survey. 2. book 1. chapt^
Luther and all the pack of their first fathers, were children of their mother
the Catholic Church and are gone out from them. And when the Protestants
objected her sins, for which they left her, it was pleaded again, Mr Giffords
dialogue btewee^ a pap. and a pro^, f, 19. b,
will ye forsake your mother because she wants perfect bewty, or because
there is some deformity in her etc? Moreover they would allege (to prove them
schismatiks) how in that ch: Calui^^ opusc. Response. ad ve^s. quend Mediator.
they had been regenerated and made her citezens and members by baptism. etc
that from her they had their first faith and knowledge, yea even K^llisons Sur.
1 book 2. chap.
the Bible it self, which treasure their church ever had the custody of; and
many such like.

These are the mayn reasons objected to us at this day, they tell us the Church
of England is the Sea after in this treatise. page 49
mother of the faithful, that the ministry thereof page 13.
has begotten us, if ever we were truly begotten in the spirit; asking us
page 135.
where else we were regenerate, ^f not in the womb of that their church etc. And
if we tell them of their transgressions, for which we forsake them, they
answer, Mr Crashawes ser. page 27.
though there were in our church these wounds you speak of, yet do they not
come near the heart, they be not deadly, they may blemish the bewty but
endanger not the life of our church. etc. ibid. p. 28
therefore your separation from us, is scismaticall and unjust. and many such
like pleas they pretend.

2, For the church of Rome, it has by her Mediators been alleged, that Calvin.
Respons. ad versiple.
in her is retained the p^ofession of Christ authorety of scriptures and
Apostolic doctrine, as touching all the chief or capital articles of
religion; and that the church is to be esteemed by the foundation thereof which
is Chrst, on which foundation though they that came after, builded wood and hay
and stubble instead of silver and gold and precious stones; yet have they not
by and by departed from the foundation etc. Now who knows not, that this is
the bulwark of the church of Eng. now, against all batteries, and one of the
chiefest rea^ons whereby they reteyn many simple and well affected people among
them? and that may be also seen in this book following page 43.105 119. and
123. and in many other of their writings.

3. Universal consent agreement and applause of Churches in all nations, of
Synodes and Councels, of Fathers and learned men have been the continual boast
of Papists in all their books against the Protestants: now they in En^l to
bear out their estate, urge again and again the like against us; that when
Gods word will not uphold them, yet man's word at least may honor them before
the people. See after in this treatise. page 9. and 22. and 44, and 5. and 89,
91.92.128.

4. Whereas the truth has brought for her defense the evident scriptures.
Gregory Martin Campion^ Kelliso^. etc
papists have been wont to carp at the allegations and interpretations of them,
and challenge their adversaries for corrupting them; the formal protestants in
Engl. have done the like D. Whi^g defen. of ans to admon: in the genesis tab: S.
against the Reformists, and they now use the like color against us; but how
truly. let the particulars show after in this book, page 90.91.97.

5. To revile and calumniate such as forsook them has been the common
practice of Papists, calling them heretics, schismatikes, Lutherens, Calumists
etc. and matching them with wicked heretics heretofore, and now living: The
same way do our adversaries now walk in proclayming us to be Schismatiks,
Seduced, Brownists, Donatists etc. and to make us the more odious unto the
people, they enroll us sometime with the most vile blasphemers that they can
mention. For he was esteemed a Mr Ios. Nichols
forward ^reacher am^ng them, who to grace his own cause by disgracing the
truth, would needs plea of the innocent page, 33.34.
ioyn us with the blasphemer Hacket, (sometimes a brother of the reformists,
and hot mainteyner of their cause,) and to make his malice the more remarkable,
he puts in the margin of his book, The brownest and Hacket of an evil spirit;
and that which he writes besides, is so fraudulently set down, that the simple
reader who know^th not our cause, may think that this Hacket was one of us.
This abuse we su^fer, because (forsooth) we were thought to hinder their
cou^terfeyt reformation, which Hacket would have set up by force for which they
bear their reproach at his hands that wrote English Scottizing for discipline;
but this man most injuriously would turn it upon us.

These and the like arguments do evil men continually use against the truth
which presses them; and which they seek to suppress, but all in uayne: for it
will preuayl, mangre their opposition; and that which they think to hinder the
Gospel b^, God will turn to the furtherance of the same, and confusion of his
adversaries.

Against these and all other like colors wherewith false churches a^ adorned,
two means have been used for to discover the falsehood; the one manifesting the
fact or estate of a person or people; the other* the lawfulness of the same.
The commandment of God is a lantern; and the law a light to declare what is
good or evil: and evidences there are of every public estate and action. For
in all ages God has moved some to observe and speak against the abuses
reigning; and some have recorded things for their glory, which turn unto their
shame. ^y this mean^ the skirts of the whore of Rome have been discovered,
whiles some that loved, and othersome that loathed her, have painted out her
filthiness: which being compared with the chastity of Christ's spowse set
forth in holy writ, has caused righteous men, (as was Ezekiel. 23.45.
foretold to judge her children after the manner of harlots and of murderers;
and the very horns of that beast, to hate the Rev, 17, 16.
whore and burn her with fire. And we at this day that witness the truth
against the remainders of that whores cup, are driven to break silence and to
plead for Christ in publik, because the adversaries so importune us, by
continual preaching and writing against us, and seeking to bear out all with
the cloak ^f the gospel, and to hide the iniquities under a veil of professing
truths fundamental, they will hardly be a known of the manifold evils and
gross corruptions, that preuayl in their assemblies. Therefore also are we
forced to produce their own writers for to witness with us; who both heretofore
and to this day, complayn of the sins that reign among them And worthy it is
to be observed how the ministers of England are come to contradict and depart
from their own grounds, for to mainteyn their corrupt estate. For now they See
after in this book p 122.

anno 1562


utterly deney the visible church to be a company of faithful people that
truly worship Christ and readily obey him; co^tra^y both to all the scriptures
and to their own Articles d of religion. And Mr Bernarde in the name of all the
divines in their church, yea (if we ^ay bele^ue him) of all the reformed
Churches in Christendom, In the 123 page of his book.
tells us with a marginall note also to have it well observed, that the true
word of God preached. and true sacraments of Christ administered, are infallible
tokens of a true church. I say not (says he) the word truly preach^d, nor the
sacr^m^nts rightly administered: but thus; the true word preached, the true
sacr^m^n^^ administered. Now lay these things together and see what a holy
communion they will make the church of God to be: namely, if not a ro^t of
miscreants, yet at least a mesceline multitude of believers and infidel^, holy
and profane. Among whom it the true word be preached, though never so
curruptly falsely peruersly, by any Popeling, Baalist. or Balaamite; if the true
sacraments be administered, though never so superstitiausly profanely and
disorderly, to the open wicked etc. yet there must needs be a true church. Such
heavenly doctrine, or rather such hellish error is now taught by the
transformed ministers, for to make me^ keep communion with Belial.

Against these and other like impostures, have I endeavored to bring out the
truth, (though naked and destitute of all wordly ornaments,; and by it to
manifest the present aberations of my country from the primitive faith of
Christ; I have also produced their own testimonies aagainst them, that the
Saints on eart may say, Deuteronomy, 3^.31,
their rock is not as our Rock, even our enemies being judges. And if they will
yet resist, the world may see, they are condemned by themselves, But my hearts
desire and prayer for my brethren is, that they may be saved; turning from
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God that they may receive
forgiveness of sins, and inheretance among them which are sanctified by faith
in Christ.

H^n^y Ainsworth,

A Direction to some principal things contained in this book.
Administration of the Ministers of Engl, scanned; with the effects page, 14.
etc. 58. etc. 60. etc. 62. etc. 109. etc. 110. etc. Antichrists kingdom not
overthrown by the ministers of Engl. page 61. etc. Begetting of faith, how it
is page 5, 6: It is no essential note of a true church, p, 6. It should be
before the planting of a church p. 40, 41 146. Building of the church, and how
it is performed in England p. 33 34: etc Christ, not the head, Mediator,
Prophet, Priest, or King, of the church of England p, 74. etc. not the spowse
of the same, page, 42. etc Compulsion to the faith and church, used in Engl. but
unwarrantable. page 120.78.131. etc.. p 133, Constitution of a church. page,
98.99. K. Edwards reformation of religion, and how it was accepted. page
120.133 Foundation Christ; and Fundamental truth. pretended and discused, page
34.123, etc. 126.117. etc Gifts, prove not a true ministry. page, 13: etc.
Matter of the church of Engl. page, 106. Ministry of the church of Engl. page,
108 etc. A Papist argument against the church of Engl. page 111. Pattern of
planting a church. page 44. Popular* government, obie^ted and answered. page
101, etc. Popes authors of many ordinances now in Engl page 137, etc. Positions
concerneng a true church. page 65 etc. Profession in Engl. contrary to their
estate and pra^tise. page, 124, etc Reformation by the Kings of Judah. p. 134.
etc Reformed churches, alleged for approbation of the church of Engl. and
answered, page 9, 10.22 etc. 48, 51, ^2, etc. 128, 129. Repentance not truly
preached or practiced in the church of Engl. page 45. etc. 56. etc. Separation
proved necessary: p, 5, 22, granted by our adversaries, page 1: Synns suffered,
how they defile the church. page 101. etc. Spirits of the Prophets subject to
the Prophets scanned page 28.29. Testimonies of the ministers of Engl. against
the estate of that church, concerning The people page 2.107.108.59, 60,
62.122.125, 126.127. The ministry and ministers page 3.11.112.81, 114.119,
136, 142, 143. The worship, page, 3, The church governors. page, 4,
Worship of God in the church of England, polluted pleaded for and against,
page 137. etc,
CONSIDERATIONS, Touching the points in difference, betvveen the godly (...)
people of the Church of England; and the seduced brethren, of the separation.
A Separation we deny not, from the corruptions of the Church wherein we live;
1 in judgment, 2 profession, 3 practice: 1 of teaching eu^ry part of truth and
righteousness; 2 of performing the things we teach; 3 of reproving every part of
sin and error; 4 and absteyning from all corruptions of life and doctrine: for
which particulars, so many of both parts have suffered and do suffer so many
things. But the difference is, we suffer for separating in the Church: you, out
of the Church. And this to be true, you know: unless you will cavil, against
your own conscience and knowledge.

Answer.
WHO so examineth these your Considerations, and weighs them in the balance
of equity: may find them wanting in many points, touching the differences
between your Church, and us that separate from the same; and insufficient in
the points that are handled to persuade any wise heart to return unto you. You
ouerpasse 1 the hierarchy of your spiritual Lords the prelates with their
under officers which reign over you; 1 and the form of Gods worship by your
Leitourgie or service book set up and used in all your parishes. These are two
mayn exceptions that we make against you, though you dissemble them in this
your writing, and insist upon other two, 1 the people, and 2 inferior
ministry (as I conceive you;) as if these only were the points of difference
between us and you. Which whether you have done of ignorance, or of fraud
rather, to deceive your reader; I leave it upon your conscience to consider of.

Again, the two things that you take upon you to handle, you for down in these
terms, the godly Ministers and people of the Church of England; whereas our
separation is from your Church in general. wherein many ungodly ministers and
people are to be found, standing in commixture, or confusion rather, as one
body with those which are esteemed more godly and religeous: and therefore you
deal not syncerely, to make our separation to seem but from apart and those
the godly.

Again, whereas there is a scisme in your Church, by two contrary factions at
war with your selves, Conformitans and Puritans, (as you style one another.)
you deal not plainly, to tell us whither party you mean to defend, but lead
your reader into clouds and m^st, speaking of godly mi^isters and people; not
naming who or where they are. That though one may gue^se whom you mean, yet
you write so gener^lly and covertly that if danger or in conuenience come by
any thing you have said, yo^ may s^if^ it of to either side for your best
advantage.

A (...) you deny not from the corruptions of the Church wh^rein (...) live;
yet (...) not what those corruptions are, which behooued you to have done, if
you would have effe^ted o^r ret^rne unto you. For we are uerily persuaded, that
they are nothing b^t your corru^t^ons (...) we have separated from; and
therefore cannot reioyne our selves unto you till they be removed. And seeing
you may mind some things to be corru^tions in your Church, and we othersome:
it cannot be we should well accord, till particulars be related; which
therefore (if you write again,) we pray you in your next to set down

Yet for the present, it is well that the truth has wrung out such a testimony
from your own mouth and pen; whiles you grant and deny not such a separation in
general, as you mention: to the branches whereof if you will stand, and abide
also by which you have heretofore wr^tten; I doubt not but the discreet reader
will see, your bat ell is ^ot so much against us as against your selves; and
the sword which you have dra^ (...) slay svch as be upright of way, does enter
into the very heart of your own Church; and the b^wes which you have bent at
us, are broken.

For ^e forsake your Church for this mayn corruption, that all, sorts of
profane and wicked men have been and are, both they and their seed, received
into and nourished with^n the b^some of your Church contrary to the first
covenant of our redemption, wherein God with his own mouth proclaimed and
perpetvall emnity and war against the Serpent and his seed, which the women
and her seed should wage; though with the brusing of the heel thereof. Genesis 3.
Contrary also to the example of all Gods Churches since the world begann, who
always were separated from the ungodly, as the scriptures show.

Now that this is a corruption a^ong you, your selves have taught saying and
complaining that in the Church Sermon on Romans 12.6. page 65 66.
are swarms of Atheists, jdolaters, Papists erroneus and heretical s^ctaries,
wit^hes, charmers, sorcerers, murderers, thieves, adulter^rs, liers, etc Also
that Plain deccla of eccles desc, page, 72.
among you the holy Saccraments are communicated with the Papists, the holy
misteris of God profaned, the Gentiles enter into the Temple of God, the holy
things are indifferently communicated with clean and unclean, circumcised and
uncircumcised. Again that Di^l of the strife of your* Church page. 99
there be th^wsands which be men and women grown, which if a man ask them how
they ^halbe saved they cannot tell. As for wickedness in pride envy ha^red and
all sins that can be n^med almost. it death ouerflow; and yet you are not
ashamed to say are they not Christians? This Test^mony being tr^e, I hope your
selves now will be ashamed to plead that such a people ar Chritians and to be
communicated with; or deny that we may separate from them in things concerning
God.

An other weighty cause of our separation is, that you have a popish ministry
over this profane multitude; touching which, your selves also have thus written;
1 adm^ ^o the Par. in the preface.
either we ^vst have a right ministry of God, and a right government of the
Church according to the scriptures set up, both which we lack; or else there can
be no right relig^^n etc. Now for the present ministry that is among you, as
Parsons, Vicars. parish priests, Stipendaries, with the rest, you said, in the
sam admonition.
that come from the pope, as out of the Trojan horses belly, to the destr^ction
of Gods kingdom.

An other cause why we refuse communion with you, is for that you serve God not
as himself commands, but after your own devising, or by imitation rather of
the Roman Antichrist: which your selves have proclaimed though we should hold
our peace; for of your service book you say, it was 1 admon. page 16.
culled and picked out of the Popish dunhil the portuis and mass ^^^kfull of
all abominations: and that in the order of your service, ibid. 14.
there i^ ^o edification but confusion. Now this seems unto us no small
corruption, that you should offer unto God that filth which you have picked out
of the Popes dunghill. May we not say unto you, with the prophet, Mal. 1 8
Off^r such things unto your Prince; will he be content with you, or except
your person, says the Lord of hosts? You know that Christ has said Psa 16.4.
their, offerings of blood I will not offer; and yet will you take your drink
offerings out of the Reu 17.^
great where is cup, which the holy Ghost says is verse. 4.
full of abominations, and of the filthiness of her fernication? What more
loathsome thing could you have found under the sun?

Again we have forsaken your Church because the ecclesiastical government and
governors, the Lords spiritual, are not according to the ordinance of that
Lord who is 2 Cor. 3.17
the Spirit, but after the institution of his enemy Antichrist. And that this
is a foul corruption, we have also learned from your selves, which say, 1.
admon. page. 15.
The government now used by Archbishops and Rps. etc, is both Antichristian and
diuilish. That it Demonst. in the pref.
is that which gives leave to a man, to be any thing saving, a sound
Christian. Item that T^ble of Artic, by divine. Reader in Came.
that Ugly and ill-favored hierarchy, or Church princelines, which instituted
at the first by antichrists devise did afterward villy serve the Pope of Rome
to accomplish the ^isterie of iniquity, and to destroy the Church of Christ and
does yet still at this day serve him: must be abolished, that no remnants, ne
yet any show thereof remayn, if so be we will have Christ to reign over us.
Item that ibedem,
that profane jurisdiction of Lordly Lord Archbishobs, Bps, Archdeacons,
Chansellors, Officialls etc. as contrary to Gods government, and wholly
underpropped by the canon and Popish law, and with all joined with hypocrisy
vaynglorie lordlinesse and tyranny. even for these respects, (if there were no
more,) are to be utterly rooted out of the Church; except possibly we mean by
reconciliation to make Christ and Antichrist fr^inds: Thus have we been taught
by your selves, what corruptions there are in the Church, even so many and so
great, that you complained thus, 1. admon. page. 2.
as our lacks are, there can be no right religeon: and now you have added unto
all the former to teach us a separation from your corruptions and this not
only in 1 judgment, or 2 profession, but also in 3 practice and that we should
not only reprove (as you heretofore have done.) every part of sin and error,
but abstain also from a^l corruptions of life and doctrine. And now we would
pray you tell us, seeing corruption has so seized upon, and possessed (by your
own confe^sion (both Priest and people, both worship, and ecclesiastical
gouer^ent; that as your lacks are, there can be no right religion: and seeing
from all corruption we mus^ separate: What then rema^neth for us to commun^cate
with you in? For take away these corruptions out of your church, and you shall
se^ an utter d^ssolution and abolishing of the same. Though now it spread it
self like agreene bay tree: yet will it p^^se away and be gone, and though one
seek^ ^t, it cannot be found.

And is it not strange, that when your selves have taught us how esteem of
your people, ministry, divine service and church government; how also to walk
and carry our selves, where such corrupt^ons ar, and we have but departed from
these corruptions, (for, any truth that is among you, we have not forsaken:)
that yet you will say we are seduced? Are not you then the seducers? We do but
practice that which you have taught us, If you would have us to return unto
you, first justify by the word of God, that people, ministry, and worship,
that you have condemned: refute your own writings; and build again the things
which you have destroyed. So when you have made your selves trespassers, if we
be not able by Gods word to prove that the things we refreyn from, are as bad
as you have written; we will, by his grace, Exo. 14.5.9.
come again unto you. Til then, let the discreet reader m^nde, whither you deal
not with us as did the horsemen of Aegipt with the Isra^lite^; that after you
hau^ given us leav to depart, you thus pursue us with your writings, to bring
us back again to our a^cient bondage. Again, whether you that pretend a
separating in the church, and condemn our separating out of it though your
Church be so thoroughly corru^t, as before is showed and now call us seduced:
deserve not rather to be called your selves The seducing brethren of the
separation. But let us hear what it is you now say for your selves.

On our part, consider,
1. THis separation that we make, is grounded.

1. On Gods comm^ndements, Matt. 15.14. Romans 16.17. Ephesians. 5.7.11. 2. These.
3.^.14.15. Tim 6.5. Tit. 3.10. 1. Pet 4.4.

2. On the examples of all the prophets, Apostles, and Christ himself who
separated in the Church and not out of the Ch^. albeit in most corrupt estat,
and yet communicated in that which was good; reproving refusing and suffering
for abst^yning from evil. Luke 2.2^. 2 24 and 22.7.8.9. Mat. 22 3. and., 20,
and 6, 1 2 5.16 and 11.16.17 18.9.20. and. 12 31.34 39. and 23 totum. And
(note) those Churches were Antanosaicall as you say ours are Antichristian: yet
for as much (...) the (...) Christ, as ^ur Church does at least, Luk 1, 9 10,
Job. 1 2^ ^1. and 7 23.17 31 4^ 42. and 10, 24. Romans 3 2.3. and 9.4. with Gen
49.10 A.t. 2 39. they separated not from them.

Answer.
IF by the C^mm^ndements of God, by the examples of Christ, his (...) and
A^^stles, we may and m^st separate from all corruptions mayn te^^ed in a tr^e
Church: then ought we much more to separate from the^ being maynteyned in a
false; vnle^se; a false Church have more priv^lige, t^en ^ cr^e And we consider
that our separation is from the corr^^ptio^: of ^ false Church;

2. The scr^ptures also are plain, that we must separate and forsake all false
Churches, as well as corru^tions in a true, 2. Cor. 6 17. Come out from among
them, and separate your s^lues says the Lord, and touch no unclean thing, and
I will receive you. Revelation. 18 4 Go out of her my people, that ye receive
not of her plagues. Hosea. 4.15. Come not ye unto Gilgal, neither give up to
Beth^ven; and many the like How rightly then do you allege scriptures, as if
they taught us separation in a Church only, and not out of it also; when it is
false, and Idolatro^s?

3. Your selves are a president to us of like practice, in separating not in
but out of the Church of Rome: as yo^ have dealt with the mother, so do we
with the daughter; because like mother like daughter, according to the proverb;
Eze. 16.44.

4. You allege the examples of all the proph^ts; yet show you not any that
^al^ed by your r^le, to se^arate in the Church and not out of it. We are sure
they called the people out of the Church of Israel when it was idolatrous, and
forbad them to come at their a^semblies. Hos, 2.2.3.4. and 4 15.17 Amos. 5.5.
And how they co^ld themselves join with that Church from which they separated
others is strange unto us; especially co^si^erin^ that Israel in that estate,
is noted by the pro^het Azariah to be without the true God, without P^^ist to
teach, and wiht^ut law; 1, Chro. 15.3 and may we think, he separated not from
that Church; The Israelites th^n, sacr^^iced to Divils, not to G^^, Deuteronomy. 3^
17. Chron. 11.15 and will yo^ s^y the prophets separated not from them?

5. The like I Answer to the examples of Christ and his Apostles; who as they
absteyned from corruptions in the Ie^ish Church; so were they q^^re sep^r^te^
from all false Churches as the Sam^ritans and other like Mat 10 5. Ioh. 4.22.
Act. 2.40. and 199 so the^r examples also, do approve our practice.

6. W^ere as you would have noted that those Churches (which Christ and h^s
Ap^stles co^^unicated with) were Antianosaicall as yours we ^ay ar^ (...): I
(...) the compar^son, For ^ the Jewish Church consist^d it all, (...) the same,
Leuit, 20, 21.16.) of a people separated not only from heathens, but also from
f^lse professors, heretics, and idolaters; and were children of the prophets
and covenant of God; John. 4.9 Act 3.25. But your Church c^ns^steth ^f an
vnseparated people, children of Idolatrous Priests, and strangers from the
covenant of God.

2. The Jews then, had their sacrifices, services and solemn feasts,
according to Moses Law; Mat 8.4. Mar, 14.12. Luk 9.^O. and 2.21, 24 and Christ
himself j^st^f^ed the^r worship Ioh. 4.22. but your service, worship, and
f^stival^, are after Antichrists law, translated out of his masse-booke.

3. The^r Priests were according to Moses inst^tution, of Aarons line Luk, 1,
5. with 1 Chro. 2.1, 10 their Scribes and Pharisees, sat in Moses cha^re; Mat
23.2, your Priests after the Popes institution your prelates fit in Antichrist
chair. So they were not so much against Moses; as you are against Christ: and
that your Church reteyneth not the foundation Christ, shall through his grace
anon be proved.

The 2. Consideration.
2. OUR Church has the essential notes of a true church, able to beget a true
saving faith, to work the fruits of the spirit, to make a man a true and
perfect Christian, and last of all to save him. To the which also Christ has
tied his gracious promise and blessing to the end of the world Rom, 10, 13, 17,
Mat, 28 19.20. Act, 20.32. 2 Timothy 3.15.16. 1. Tim. 4.16 Iam. 1.21. Isa 55, 11.

Answer.
THese notes which you propound, 1 are not the essential notes of a true
Church: a neither (if they were,) are they ordinariely found in your Church

1. These are not essential notes, because; 1 One man may have all this you
speak of; and no one man, is or can be a Church, for that consists of a
multitude or number of persons it is an assembly or convocation; jointly
together it is a body, and every one severally is but a member. 1. Cor 12,
20.27, That one man may have all your es^entiall notes, may appear in Pavls
example, who was able to b^get a true saving faith, to work the fruits of the
spirit, and so the rest. 1. Cor. 4 ^5. Gal. 3, 2 5.

2. An Angel may have all the notes you mention; and no Angel is a Church. For
example, the Angel Gabriel, who was sent to give Daniel knowledge and
understanding, and preached liuly of Christ's death, and the benifits thereof.
Dan. 9.21.22, etc

3. A wicked man may do all that you speak of; but no wicked man is a true
church. Judas sent forth with the other Apostles to preach and work miracles,
might bring others to salvation by his doctrine, though h^mselfe were a
re^robate Mat. 10.5, 6. etc,

4. A true Church is the spowse and house of Christ, and brings him forth a
s^irituall seed. But, as God gave the blessing of multi^lying children, only
Gen 1 and 2
to lawful married estate, yet often it comes to pass, through h^s almighty
power and goodne^^e that harlots also are partakers of this ble^sing: and do
bring forth children: so the blessing of spiritual propagation, is peculiar to
the true Church; yet God, which brought light out of darkness, causes some
children to be borne and brought up unto him in false Churches For example; the
Church of Rome, (the mother Reu 17.^
of whordoms and abominations of the earth) has doubtless, since she was wedded
to Antichrist, borne and brought up, by the general true grounds of Chrstian
rel^geon taught in her, many children of God, and heirs of salvation, This I
s^ppose your selves will not deny, neither yet w^ll you say, that Rome is
Christ true Church. Your reason then is, as if Thamer should have pleaded, I am
able to bear c^ildren, to nourse and br^ng them up to man's estate, etc.
therefore I am my Father Iudah^ true and lawful wife, Genesis 38, 15.18. etc.

2. Now if these were essent^all notes, which you have set down: yet help they
you nothing, for I deny that they are ordinarily found in your Church. For,
though I doubt not but the doctrine of your Church has saved many: yet that is
Gods extraordinary blessing, not the ordinary effects of your Church. This is
the thin^ you should have proved, by comparing your Church and min^sterie with
the Laws and promises in Gods word: which because you have not done, but only
quoted some scriptures generally; which men of all religions may do
likeweise;) I will by one or two of the script^res that your self here ci^e,
show how unlike you are to a true Church and Ministry.

In Romans 10.3.17. the Apostle treats of two things, 1 of calling on the name
of the Lord, and 2 of faith, by hearing his word.

1. Whosoever call th upon the name of the Lord shall be saved. This we are to
understand according to David's exposition, whosoever calls upon him in truth.
Psa. 145 18. for God is a spirit, and must be worshipped in spirit and tr^th,
Ioh. 4.24. but the worship and calling upon God which your Church uses, in
reading the prayers letanie collects, and other like things of your Leiturgie,
translated out of AntiChr^st masse-booke, is carnal false Idolatrous; for such
a manner of divine service you have no commandment or warrant in the
scriptures. And this popish worship, begets not, but destroys faith and
the true caling on God^ name, and deceives men's sowles; for in vayn they
worship me (says Christ,) teaching f^r doctrine the precepts of men; Mat.
15.9, and, they that wayt vp^n ly^ng van^ties, forsake their own mercy. Jonah,
1, 8

2. For the other point, Faith is by bearing (or by one and the same word is by
figure of speech. (...) for hearing and r^porting. Rom 10.
report) says the Apostle; and proves it by Isa. 53.1. Lord who has believed
our be^ring; that is, our report, Now no man can truly and faithfully report
^nlesse God has first spoken unto ^^m; neither can a^y man fru^tfully hear
other report or doctrine then the Lords; and so hearing is by the word of God,
i^ the mouths of such as are sent, as he shows in the 15 verse. But you^
Ministers are not truly and lawfully sent, (for they cannot show either
calling, ordination, or office, according to Chr^sts Testament;) therefore they
cannot truly and lawfully preach his word and consequently, cannot beget
(ordinarily) a true saving faith.

The next scripture also Mat, 28 19, 20, plainly condemns the state of your
Church and minister^e: for,

1. There, is a lawful calling, authorizing and sending; of minister^ from him
that has all power in heaven and in earth, saying Go therefore and teach: but
such a sending your ministers have not; for (as your selves have 2 admon. to
the Parl, f. 16.
said,) they enter not in by Chrict but by a Popish and unlawful v^cation.

2. There, is a commandment to teach (or make disciples,) before they be
received into the Church by baptism, for o^ them that are taught, such only as
gladly receive and believe the word, are to be baptized and admitted into the
Church. as the practice of the Apostle shows, Act. ^, 40 41. but your Church
was not thu^ gathered or planted by the preaching of the Gospel: but by the
commandment of the Magistrate: neither we^ only the willing believers
received, and others refused; but the whole profane multitudes were admitted, or
rather compelled into your church where they and their seed are still ret^yned,

3. There, Gods Ministers are willed to teach Chr^stians so baptized to observe
all things whatsoever Christ commanded his Apostles verse. 20, and so they have
his gracious promise and blessing to the end of the world: but in your church,
many things are observed which Christ never commanded. Yea the Ministry and
go^erment appointed in his Testament, are held and confirmed by practice among
you, not to be perpetual, not necessary, nor fitting for your state: but an
other pompous min^stery, and Lordly ecclesiastical government; after the manner
of the court of Rome. And as for power and liber^y to observe Christ
commandments, that is far from your people, which al are in bondage to the
Bishops and their courts; having not chr^stian freedom to censure sin or
sinners or practice the ordinances of the Gospel, as the Apostles did unless
Princes and Parliaments will permit or command them.

The like may be said, and returned upon you, from the other scriptures by you
alleged; all which do^ concern the true church and ministry, as your selves
will not deny: and so will help you nothing until you prove your church and
ministry such, Boast not therefore of a true saving faith and fruits of the
spirit; when such bitter fruits and works of the flesh, do reign among you:
for faith without works (...) d^ad. Iam. 2.26.

Now then, if you will give us leave to consider the state of your Church
aright, we would mind it thus. your Church has the essential notes of a false
Church. namly a confuse profane worldly people, with an Antichr^stian
Prelacie, and preisthood over them; able to beget ordinarily, but a vain and
dead faith, through want of the true ministry of the word in Christ's
ordinance, and by means of the false worship and false doct^nes that are in
your Church; to work the fruits of the flesh, as the idolatries and other
sinful actions abounding in your Church do show; to make a man a very
Antichristian, by resisting persecuting and blaspheming, the true way of Christ
and practice of his Gospel; (which alas, too many do,) and last of all to
destroy him. if he repent not of his sinne^ and find mercy with the Lord.
which we desire you all may find, for the salvation of your souls.

The 3. Consideration.
Our Church and ministry, are approved of and rejoiced for, of all the pure
reformed Churches in the world. Our confession by them placed in the Harmony
of Confessions; gi^ing us the right hand of fellowship: as also by all the
godly learned, and most sound and excellent fathers and lights of the church,
that ever lived in or meddle with our church; Bucer Mar^yr, Fagius, Alasio,
Knoxe, who lived ^n our church; Calvin, Beza, Bullinger, Gualt^r, ^yml^r,
Zanchius, Iunius, Rolocus etc. with others very many, who have given their
testimony and approbation to our church and ministry. Wherein if our errors
were fundamental, damnable and Antichristian, (as you term them,) these
churches and persons had undoubtedly the spirit of discerning. and could not be
deceived all at once. 1. Cor. 11, 16. and 14.33. and ^.15. and. 10.15 and
14.32, 37, 2. These. 1.4.

Answer.
THough you come against us with horsemen and charrets, yet we Psa. 20.7
will ^emember the name of the Lord our God; by whose word alone all doctrines
must be tried all persons must judge and be judged. It is incident to the best
men and purest churches, to err and be deceived wherefore their sentences and
approbations, must be examined by Gods word. If you say otherweise you teach
corrupt and popish doctrine. With such weapons as these, have the Papists long
fo^ght against you, and where you can bring one, they can bring many to
witness for them and their Romish superstitions. Bellarmin de notu eccl
Antiquity, universality, and such l^ke popular reasons. they seek to uphold
their kingdom withal:

2. The word of God condemning your church and ministry, (as we have often
proved; and our proofs ly upon you yet unanswered;) though all churches in the
world, should a^proue of you, your case were ^o whit the better; for all men are
vanity. Psa. 62.9.


3. The Jews obie^ted as weighty a^ arg^m^n^ aga^^^t C^ri^t him self, when
they said, does any of the rulers or of the Pharise^s (...) in him, but this
people which know not the Law, are ^ursed. I^h 7, 1^.19.

4. If the reformed Church's ap^roue so well of you^ Church and minister^e,
they are n^^ only against us but against themselves: for their own C^^rches
consist of ^ separated and voluntary people, whereas yo^rs are co^fused and
compelled; they condemn and have re^e^ted the hierarchy and ministry of
Archbishop^, Lord bisho^s etc. Pr^ests, Parso^s, Vicars etc. which are yet
among you and have amon^ them another ministry. Now how they can ap^roue of
two sorts of Churches and m^n^ster^es, so contrary one to another, let them
look to ^t.

5. It seems to me, you are very lau^sh in your praise, which now vaunt so
of the a^probation and rejoicing of all the ^ure refor^ed Churches in the world:
whereas heretofore you complained that you had 1 Admon ^o the Parl.
all the b^st ref^rmed Ch^r^hes through^ut Ch^istendom against you. Again the
Harmony that you mention, was set forth but by the French and Belgic churches;
the things that they approve among you, are certain general heads of religeon
which a Bishop wrote in an Apology of your Church: most of all which heads, we
our selves also approve and rejoice for But the controversies between you and
us, touching the gathering and constituting of a Church; the manner of divine
seru^ce; the form of Church government, and the like; are either not at all, or
in very general terms set down in that bo^ke: and so uerie slenderly, if
ought at all, by them a^proued or rejoiced for. To give an instance or two; in
the tenth section of that H^rmony, treating of the Church, your English
confession is so shor^ and in general words, I doubt not b^t the Pope himself
will subscribe unto it, letting him have his own interpretation. In the 15
section of Eccl^sias^icall me^tings; you speak of prayer, in the tongue which
all your people understand. Now because the Reformed churches approve of thi^,
we must take it belike, that they approve of your Leiturgie and service book
also, and al your public worship, though it be not set down f^r any to judge
of. In the 16. section, of Holy day's, fasts etc. there yo^ wri^e against
purgatory; which being put into the Harmony, i^ enough (as seems) to prove
that other ch^rches approve of al your Pope holy days and festiuals. The l^ke
may be minded for other points, as in the 17. section for ceremonies and things
indifferent; which being approved of and rejoiced for by all the Reformed
churches in the world; the Prelat^s w^l have a shrewd hand against you that are
called Puritans, for standing so much against the ceremonies of your Church, as
you do^ And for your min^stery, I marveil you say not that, it is approved of
and r^i^yced for of the Pope also, for in the 11. section of that Harmony, you
believe these orders and degrees of ministers in the Church, 1 Deacons. 2
Priests, and 3 Bishops; which orders, wehther the Reformed Churches appro^e of
or no, I am sure the Counsel of Trent does, and has decreed, If any shall say,
that in the Catholic Church there is not a Hirarchie instituted by divine
ordination, which consists of Bishops. and Priests and Decco^s by
interpr^tation ar ministers 1 (...) 3.5.
ministers, let him be ^ccurs^d. Council. Trident. Sess 23. Can. 6. But now
seeing not only the Fathers of the Counsel of Trent, but all reformed Churches
in the world, (as you said, do approve of and rejoice for this your
ministry; I hope the Bishops and hirarchie of your Church shall no more be
preached and written against by your inferior Priests, (as many a day they have
been,) as being Antichr^st^an.

Thus may you see what a weak foundation, you bring for your church and
ministry; and if we lyfted to fight against you with your own weapons; we
could allege many things from the persons whom you cite; against your present
church and ministry: but the word of God yields us armor enough for this
battle against you, as in due t^me through his grace shall be seen.

6. In the mea^ while, it shall not be amiss to put the reader in mind, how
your selves heretofore have judged and written of your ministry, which you
say it is approved of and rei^yced for, of all the pure reformed churches in
the world. your ministers being (as before is noted, Deacons, Priests and
Bishops; Of the Deacenship you have written, that Defe^nc of eclesiastical
disci, p. 102.
it is a mere humane institution, a degree to the Priesthood, and nothing like
to the ordinance of God. Of Priests etc. that 1 admo to the Parlia.
they came from the Pope. as out of the Trojan horses belly to the destruction
of Gods kingdom. Of the Bishops etc. that defense of godly minis: against
bridges. p. 12 3.
you account them no natural members of the body of Christ church becauase they
are of humane addition, not borne with her, nor grown up with her from the
cradle, Again Sermon. on Romans 12 p 34.
that they be rather members of the strumpet of Rome, then of the spouse of the
Lamb etc. And have not you and the reformed Churches great cause now to rejoice
for this ministry.

7. Moreover consider you also, how we may allege, that now 10. years
sithence, we have published our Confession of faith, and causes of our
separation from your Church and ministry, to the learned Universities of the
Reformed churches; with desire if in our faith or practice we erred, that they
would show it us: but to this day, we know not any that have undertaken so to
do: wherefore we also may suppose by their silence, that they approve our case
or at least suspend their judgments and condemn, us not.

8. Finally, it is written in one of the scriptures that you quote, the
spiritual man judges all things, but he himself is judged of no man; 1 Cor.
^, 15. Now every true Christian is a spiritual man Gal. 6. 1. 1 Pet 2.5.
therefore he may judge and discern by Gods word and spirit, faith from here
sie, and the true church from the false; he may see with his eyes and live by
his own faith, and not depend upon other men, to live and walk in sin till
other churches condemn it. Let every man therefore retayn his liberty, and take
heed how he judges.

4. THe only wicked Pa^ists, Ath^ist, and most ungodly ones: are adversaries
to our godly ministers and people. The godly in all plac^s and times among us,
by them alone an^ ordinarily have been converted unto Christ, and by them
appro^ed, reu^renced, and obeyed always in the Lord.

Answer.
1. IF the only wicked be adversaries, to your Godly ministers and people; it
perteyneth not to us, who hate none of you, b^t wish well and pray for you al;
even for our persecutors we are adversaries only to the sins, and corruption^
that are among you; and whiles we repro^e you for ^inne, you should ^ud^e that
we love, and hate you not, as the Leu. 19, 17.
law te^cheth. We say therefore with the Apostle; are we become your enemies
because we ^ell ^ou the truth? Gal. 4 16.

2, The Atheists and wicked one^ that so hate your godly ministers and people;
are the^ not also m^^bers of your own Church? So then your church is divided
against it self, and you are aduers one to another. And why tell you us of
this, as a consideration to reduce us to your church, when we because such
Atheists and wicked ar (contrary to Gods will) suffered among you, do separate
from your Church?

3. Again, who be those godly ministers and people you mean? If such as are
called Puritans; they have (I suppose) more adversaries the^ friends in your
church; yea the public state, alwes and canons of your church are against
them, and all that know the truth of God, and the^r estate aright, have just
cause to blame them for the^r long halting and dissembling. If the Prelates be
those godly min^sters, they have in regard of their unlawful places and
proceedings; many good people for their adversaries, both within and without
the land, and your selves also which suffer for s^paration in your church. By
neither of these two contrary factions among you, ar men ordinarily converted
unto Christ, both sorts setting your selves against the true way of Christ for
gathering and gouernmen^ of the Church, and worship of God; and so do hinder
men's salvation, and deser^e to be not approved, but reproved in the name of the
Lord.

The 5. Consideration.
5. GOD has given witn^^ for the truth of our ministry, by the undoubted
t^stimony of his gracious presence and approbation of the same; by his gifts of
1. sanctifi^ation. 2 knowledge. 3 spirit of discerning. 4. of utterance. 5 of
power and authority in teaching, 6 effectual and ordinary ^alling and
begetting to the faith of God, and bringing them from darkn^s to light, from
the old man to the n^w, from the flesh unto the spirit; which ministry of
ours; begat you ^lso, if ever you were tru^y b^gotten in the spirit, and by
Gods m^rcie has begotten me, and other h^s unworthy servants.

Answer
1. THe Papists will say as much as all this and more too, (if words will
ser^e^ for the ministry of their church; they boast of the^r Friars, and
Iesu^ts holiness, knowledge, utterance and authority in teaching and their
marvelous effects in converting to Christianity, the Indians and other ^e^thens
all over the world Yea what religeon, glories not in the sanctity, gifts and
effects of their ministry? But Gods word must try all.

2. The ministry of ^our Church being Archbishops, L. Bishops, Deanes,
Archdeacons, etc Priests, and Deacons, as is to be seen in the books statutes,
and canons of your church: you br^ng not here any one word of God, or text of
scriptures (which are his testimonies,) to witness for the truth of your
ministry: and this is indeed worthy to be considered of us and of all that
shall read your Considerations

3. Your own brethren heretofore confessed and complained to the Parliament,
that you 1 admo 2.3.4.
lack in England a right ministry of God; that the ministers are neith^r
proved, elected, called, nor ordained, according to Gods word. This testimony
being true, how then does God give witness for the truth of your ministry.

4. The witnes^es that you bring, if they be examined, will say little ar
nothing to this purpose. For,

1. The gift of santification, is a common note of Christianity, 1. These. 4.3.
1 Pet. 2.9. and therefore no special note of a ministry. This was Korahs
argument when he would have usurped the Priesthood. All the congregation is
holy every one of them: why may they not therefore be Pr^ests? Number. 16.3.10.
But what says the scripture? No man takes th^^ honor to himself but he that
is called of God, as Aaron was. Heb. 5.4.

2.3. The second and third 2 knowledge, 3 of the spirit of discerning, are also
general for the whole church, and not special for the ministry; Romans 15.14.
Phil. 1.10. Yea some in the flock, may have a greater measure both of
sanctification and of knowledge; then the Pastor or teacher or any Officer

It cannot be denied but Barsabas had knowledge as well as Matthias; yet was he
not therefore an Apostle, Act. 1.23.26. and they whose genealogies could not be
found, had knowledge as well as the other Pr^ests yet were they not therefore
kept in the Priesthood, Ezra 2.62. Boast not you therefore of your knowledge,
but show us your genealogies in the script^res There be a great many in your
ministry called dumb Priest^ which are but bare readers, by whose means many
people perish for want of knowledge: these testimon^es will be dumb for them;
yet your ^^urch proclaymeth them to, be ^rue ministers.

Your best minister^, of whose knowledge you boast, show themselu^^ ignorant;
(or worse,) in the (...) or (...) ^lanting of a church wh^les; they will have
it (as their ^ractise proves) with commix^^re of al form without separation:
wherea^ they cannot show any true church since the beginning of the world, but
was of a separa^ed people. Genesis 61.2. and12 1. L^v, 20.23.24. Ezr. 6 21. Act.
2, 40.41. and. 19:9. etc.

4. 5. The fowrth and fifth, 4. vtt^rance, with 5 power and authority in
teaching, are needful in such as are ministers, but no nece^sarie proof of a
true ministry. For had not the false Apostles and Prophets. utterance and
power; that preached with eloquence and wisdom of words d^sgracing the Apostles
and Prophets of the Lord? 2 Cor. 10.10. and. 11.13.15. 1. Kin. 22.^4. Ier.
23.31. and. 28.1.2.10, 11. 2 Timothy 3.8.

Your ministers, many preach not at al many preach to mayntain the pompous
prelacie, and laudable ceremonies of your Church: and they that pr^ach best,
show little power or authority For how many years have they been preaching for
Discipline, and against some corruption^ of your church? yet nothing prevailed,
but are further now at last then they were at the first. Who knows not that
the prelates have closed up the mouths of many Ministers, that the prophecy
of Esaias is verified upon them; Isa. 56.10. and yet you boast of the^r
utterance and au^hority in teaching.

But lamentable ministers are they ^ll; and the best of them may be seen to be
but briers; and to have betrayed the authority of Christ; For when they took
the Order of Priesthood as they call it, they solemnly promised even before the
Lord, and by his help, that form and manner of consecrating Bishops, priests
and Deacons.
they would give their faithful diligence always so to minister the doctrine
and sacraments and the discipline of Christ as the Lord has commanded, and as
this realm has received the same. according to the commandments of God so
that they might teach the people committed to their care and charge with all
diligence to keep and obseru^ the same. They promised also, ibidem,
reverently to obey their ordinary and other chief ministers is to whom the
government and charg is committed ou^r them, following with a glad mind and will
their godly admoni^ion, and submitting the^selu^^ to their godly ju^gement. Yet
your forward preachers (as they are esteemed,) do not minister the doctrine
sacraments and discipline of Christ as the Lord has commanded; but sue and
wait for authority from the Mag^strate, to have that which they count the true
discipline of Christ erected in the^r parishes; which because the civil
Magistrate does not they practice not the discipline, nor teach their people
to keep and observe the same yea they blame us for pract^sing Christ's laws
without the Magistrates leave, as if Christ were not head of the church, and
Prince of all the Kings of the earth. Again they administer not their doctrine
sacraments and discipline, as this realm has received, neither reverently obey
their Ordinaries, but resist, preach and write against the Bishops, their
canons, rites and ceremonies. as much as they dare Thus halt they between two
opinions, and practice neither the discipline of Christ nor of the prel^tes
whiles; yet they would seem to pract^se both: being in this point like to the
Sa^aritans, which whiles they would both 2 Kin. 1^ 33.41.
fear the Lord and serve the^r images also, they ver. 34.
neither feared God, nor did after their or^inances, as the scriptures says.
What then may we esteem of your ministers power and authority in teaching

A^aine, c^nsider you if some Absalom, Adonia^, or other usurper, should say; I
have 1 sanctification, 2 knowledge, 3 spirit of d^scerning, 4 of ^ttera^ce, 5
of power and authority in judging, 6 effectual and ordin^rie decidind and
ending of controversies etc therefore I am a lawful King, Judge or Magistrate;
and God has given witness by these vnd^^bted test^monies, of the truth of my
Magistracy: whether this ^lea wo^ld serve him, or these testimonies approve
his office? yet are these most ^regnant proofs of your Min^stery.

6. The 6. and last testimonies is, their effectual and ordinary calling and
b^getting to the faith of God, etc. This I have before touched and showed that
ordinarily they beget not, but hinder the true faith: they keep the people in
bl^ndenes and idolatry, which is a work of darkness and of Gal. 5, 19 20.
the flesh; and if by their preaching any be brought to the true faith, I
account it Gods extraordinary work, which I doubt not but is also a^o^g the
Papist.

Again, if this were granted them, I would know what office they would claym
i^ the church hereby; whether Apostleship of some other function. For in the
Church of Corinth were many teachers and instructours yet begat they not their
people to the faith, for the Apostle Paul challenges to be their father only,
and to have begotten them in Christ through the gospel. 1. Cor, ^.15. So there
may be a lawful Pastor or Teacher in a church, which never begat any of them
to the faith, but only nourishes and increases faith in them, that were
begotten before He is chosen to feed the flock. 1. Pet. 5.^. not to begett the
same; the flock is a company of faithful people, begotten before they have a
Past^r.

The begetting of faith, was first and chiefly by the Apostles and Evang^l^sts,
that went about preach^ng the word, to them that had not heard it. Romans 15,
20.21. It ^s also by the ministers of churches, or prophets; (though not in
office of ministry,) when unbelievers come into their ass^mblies, 1 Cor.
14.24.25. It is also by all Christians privately me^ and women which preaching
and witnessing the truth of the Gospel, reading talking, conferring of the
script^res, do convert many unto God inform their children and families in
the faith, and save their souls, Act 8.4: and. 18 ^6 1 Cor. 7.16. Ephesians. 6 4.
Deuteronomy. 6.7.

S^ the begetting of faith, is no certain testimony of a true Min^sterie.
Whereas therefore you conclude, that your Ministry begat us also, if ever we
were tr^ly begotten in the spirit: we may answer you with Moses Number 16.7
^e take to much upon you. y^ sons of Levi. For know you not the wind blows
where it li^teth, and you hear the sound thereof, but cannot t^l whence it
comes or whether it goes; and Ioh. 3.8.
so is every man that is bor^ of the spirit? It seems you count nothing
preaching but that which is in the pulpit; nothing the word of God, but that
which comes out of your Ministers lips: but thanks be unto God that has
given us better to discern the work of his grace, and has breathed upon us
with his holy spirit; Reu. 7.1.
whiles your Ministers stood lik the 4. Angels in the corners of the earth,
holding the winds that they should not blow.

The 6 Consideration.
6. ALso our godly people have all the marks and tokens of Gods people and
elect, 1 which the scriptures set down, 2 which the people in the tim^ of
Christ and his Apostles had, 3 which the professors of any church that is now
in the world have, 4 yea which your selves in your supposed perfection can
boa^^ of: which is sealed unto them, 1 by the care, peace, and testimony of a
good conscience in all things. 2 by suffering for sundry parts both of
righteousness and (...) 3 by effectual comforts in such suf^rings, 4 ass^rance
of faith, of hope, of remission of sins; Gods dear love unto them; 5 by
spiritual love and the fruits thereof, 6. by the progress and daily growth in
knowledge strength and godliness^ etc.

Answer.
THAT many of your people are Gods elect, I undoubtedly acknowledge: and I
would to God such were the estate of you every one. Yet the constitution of
your people in your church, is not a Communion of Saints with which we may
participate: but a confuse mixture of all sorts of men from which the godly
must separate, as touching the worship of God.

In this your defense of them, you begin thus, Our Godly people, Bu^ who ar
they, can we tell? are not al your people godly? of the true church it is
written, If^^ 60.2^
thy people shall be al righteous if your people be not such? why make you not a
separation from the ungodly, that will not be reclaymed; or why cast you them
not out from among you? Thus ought you to do by the Testament of Christ. 2.
Cor. 6.14.17. 1. Cor. 5.13, If you do it not, you profane Gods everlasting
covenant.

I deny not but many hypocrites and reprobates will creep into the true church;
and much ungodliness will their break out, as in any assembli^ in the world:
but when it is seen, the sinner is presently to be reproved; and either must
purge himself by repentance, or be excommunicate. Luke 17.3. Mat, 18.15.16 17.
Thus still the church continues a com^union of Saints, an unleavened lump, a
holy nation. 1 Cor. 1, and. 5. ^. 1 Pet. 2 9.

Now for your works and t^k^ns; you say they have all 1 which the scriptures
set ^r^w. This is denied, and had you searched the scriptures* you might
easily have seen it otherweise. For;

They are not a separate^ people called out from the world: which is o^e
pr^ncipal ^ark, (as before I have showed,) urged often in the scriptures. 1.
King. 8 53. Isa. 52.1^. Ier, 15.19. Ioh. 17.14.16, Reu'18.4.

They are not the Lords free people, injoy^ng the liberty of the gospel: but
in thraldom to strange Lord and laws ecclesiastical. Contrary to L^uit.
^5.42.55. 1 Cor. 7.^3. Ioh, 8, 32 36 Gal. 5 1.

They walk not in the truth of the gospel; but in many things ar corrupted with
the remainders of po^ish s^perst^ons and idolatry. Contrary, to Psalm. 26.3. 3
Ioh 3, 4. Romans 6, 4. Ephe, 2, 10. 1 Cor, 10, 14.2^. Reu. 14, 9.12.

In these and many other particulars, your, people are contrary to the
scriptures: so the pr^ncipall marks are wanting.

2 Next you compare them with the profess^rs of any church new in the world
This is more bol^lie then wisely spoken of you: show if you can any reformed
church, whose people are like yours, for ^^rr mixt^re of al sorts or in l^ke
bondage to Antichr^stian ^relates; or that use like superstions and idolatries
in the worship of God, and daily conversation. Remember also what some of your
selves have written heretofore; how that Epistle before the De monst.
Of all the nations that, have rencunced that whore of Rome th^re is none in
the world so far out of square, as England, in reteyning the Popish
hierarchy.

Your last comprison is with ourselves, whom you twite with supposed
perfection: wherein you injury us, and yet help not your selves. For we
suppose no perfection at al to be in us, either in knowledge or practice but
are privy to our selves of our infirmities;; and are sure we have more also
then Psa. 19.12.
we can discern. Yet by the grace of God we are that we are and his grace is
not in vain in us, but as it has brought us out of confusion bondage and
Idolatry, wh^rein your people still remayn, so we trust it will keep us in the
truth of the gos^el, until we come to perfection in the kingdom of our father
which is in heaven.

3. Next you speak of the sealing hereof unto your people, 1. By the care,
peace and testi^^ny of a good conscience in all things. what care can be seen in
such confused careless walking of your people, commixt in one body, with the
profane and serpents seed? what peace of conscience can there be, when men do
walk in open transgression of Gods law except such as whereby a man falsely
bles^eth himself, saying I shall have peace, although I walk according to the
stubbornes of my own heart? Deuteronomy. 29, 19, There is no peace says the Lord, unto
the wicked, Isa. 48.22. The ways of your people being wicked, their spiritual
actions idolatrous it must needs be a blind or corrupt conscience that
testifies for the^ in this estate.

2.3. Their 2 sufferings, and 3 effectual comforts in them; we will beleeu when
we see them. For the present, we behold many of your people for avoiding the
cross of Christ to subm^t to the Idolatries of your Church against their own
conscience and confe^sion, Very few that will suffer for any part of the truth
but none at all that suffer for all, except such as forsake your confused
assemblies. And if one or two in a shire, do suffer a little trouble, for not
being buxome enough to the Prelates and their co^rts: what is that to j^stify
the profane multitudes and general state of your people, which are readier to
p^rsecute, then to suffer persec^tion for r^ghteousnes sake; as we have had
l^^entable experience these many yeires. W^^refore, as their sufferings, so I
think their Comforts are.

4, Their assur^nce of faith, of hope, of remission of sins* and of Gods dear
love unto th^^; may well be boaste^ of, but not soundly felt. For where so many
evil works do abound and reign, there is not true faith, and consequently no
^^re hope of remi^sion of sins. Show us therefore your faith by your works for
we c^nnot see your hearts. Bnt this we find in the scriptures, that your
for^fathers; when the Prophets re^ro^ed the^ for their sins, wo^ld vaunt as
you do an^ lean upon the Lord and ^ay, is not the Lord a^ong us; no evil can
come upon us. Mic. 3 11. This gl^rying of inward graces when outward
transgre^sions do prevail: is mere delusion; common with all sorts and sects
of religion. Even the h^rlot can boast of her peace offerings, Pro 7.14. and the
Ph^risee thanketh God, that he is not as other men Luke 18 11.

5 Their spritual love and fr^ites thereof, let them record that have tasted
of. It is well known in the land, how many of Gods children hau^ been
empouerished, afflicted, tormented, by long and lamentable imprisonment
vexation and spoil of goods, exile and other like means women left widows,
and children fatherless. How your godly people have visited comforted and
releiued them* is not so well known: it may be their charity has been in
secret, and their left hand knows not what their right has done. Wherefore
you needed not have offered this to our consideration, who are so u^aquainted
with their love: let them selus rather consider how they shall answer when they
com to that howr mentioned, Mat. 25.34 35.41, 42. etc. If you think they have
showed love to their friends and favorites; that will procure them but little
thank, even sinners and publicans do the same. Luke 6.32.33. etc.

6, Their progress and daily growth in knowledge strength* and godliness, is
ill seen in the estate they stand; there being at this day rather more gross
abominations urged and observed in your public assemblies, then have been
heretofore; and your church further from reformation now in the end, the^ was
at the begin^^^^: that unless you come to walk as your brethren of the
separation, and quite abandon the hope of reforming Babel; it will shortly
a^pear that all your labors be but s^iders webs; and your expectation vanity
and vexation of spirit

The 7. Consideration
Consider how God has witnessed his love and approbation to our church, 1 by
many victories and deliverances from the enemies of Christ, 2 long continuance
of the g^spel among us 3 strange judgments on the enemies and persec^t^rs of the
gospel. 4 the power and blessing in casting out Diuils. 5 prayer heard both in
spiritual and earthly things, 6 by throwing down the Chur^^ of (...), and
building of the Church of God, by preaching, disputing and printing of many
excellent works and volumes puplished of all sorts* which non^ of you in
anything have ever yet atteyned, but only to threw down Gods church to raise
^^ssention among brethren, to rent the church, to distract the ignorant, to
af^ord the weak* to hinder the cause of ref^rmation, to bear false witness
against your brethren, and belie the holy ordinances of God.

Answer.
1. IF many victories and deliverances, be an undoubted testimony of Gods love
and approbation of a people and their religeon; then (...) might well have
boasted of his religion, who conquered seventy Kings and made the^ gather bread
under his table. Judge. 1.7. Then Raisak hs reason was good, which he alleges
against the Israel t^, f^r that he had conquered so many nations 2 Kin 18,
33^34, 35^ If on the Turks at this day, may triumph over Christian religeon,
because they have warraye^ a great part of the world' and taken from Christians
^any k^ngd^mes and ^rouinces. Yea this very reason did heathen men her^tof^re
allege for d^fence of pagan ^me, as that Symma^^^ in Epist. pr^ sacr. patru^
by it Rome had been kept against (...), and ^ther ^ne^ies: and, that Caeciliu;
Ar^eb lib 8
therefore Rome had got the Emp^r^ of all provinces and parts of the world;
because, it worshipped and served. (...) ^o^s that were in the w^rld, even the
unknown Gods also. I would wish you therefore to mind better ground for the
truth of religion: and remember what is written of the ancient Babylonians:
after their victories; Th^n shall they take courage, and transgress and do
wickedly imputing this their power unto their Gods* Habak. 1.11.

2. The long continuance of the g^spel among you, will make the more against
you at the day of your accounts because you yield no better obedience to the
gospel as your present idolatrous estate shows. The gospel was among the
men of the Gen 6. 1 Pe 3.19.20. 2 Pet, 2.5.
old world; 120, years taught by Noah, a preacher of righteousness; yet at last
they perished by the stood for their disobedience: therefore though it has
been with you, about half that time, you also ^ay perish, if you repent not.
But (note) you take it for granted which is yet to be proved, that the gospel
is among you: whereas the true peach^ng and practice thereof, you cannot
endure. The sound of the Gos^el, by the f^et of them that puplish peace, is
this Thy God o Sion reignet^; ^ Judah keep thy solemn feasts perforrme thy
vows, for the wicked shall no more pass through thee (he is utterly out off.
Isa. 52, 7, Nahum. 1.15. with Romans 10 15. but Christ reigns not yet among you
by his own officers and law^s, (as has been confe^sed by the best of your
Ministers;) you keep the sol^mn feasts of Ant^christ, as your Christmas.
C^n^elinas, H^llo^^as Ea^^^r, and many the like; and the wicked at still in the
midds of you, and w^lk on every side; yea are exalted; which Da^id says is a
form for the sons of m^n. Psalm. 12.8.

3. The strange iudg^^nts on ^nimies and persecutors, are good warnings for you
that you persecute your brethren no longer: we have seen and minded some, upon
no mean men among you; but wish not to see more we rather desire the conversion
of our enim^es.

4. The power and blessing in casting out Diuils, (though it may be questioned
whether it be so or no in your Church,) is a thing that the Papists can boast
of more then you. See their late supplication 37. reason of religion. Secondly,
such Diuils as are said to dwell in Babylon, Reu. 18, 2. we plainly see you have
no power to cast out.

3 I would wish you to remember the words of Christ, Many will say to me in
that day; Lord Lord, have we not by thy name pro^hesied. and by thy name cast
out diuils etc. and then will I profess to them I never knew you depart from
me. ye that work iniquity. Mat. 7.22.23.

5 For your prayer heard both in spiritual and earthly things take heed you
deceiu not your selves; many years have you prayed and fasted for your
discipline and pretended reformation; but how you have been heard, your present
state shows. As for earthly things, if God give them unto you, it is no sound
proof that he approves your prayers, much less your church. Some evil men's
eyes Psalm. 73.7
stand out for fatnes, they have more then the heart desires; but Job 21.16
their wealth is not in their hand, there for^ the council of the wicked be
far from me. God heard the prayer of the King of the Philistims; Gen 20.4.6,
he answered at the sacrifices of the sooth sayer Balaam; Number, 23, 3, 4, 15, 16.
etc, shall we think God therefore allowed of their religion?

Again, what people in the world is not persuaded and will not say that God
hears their prayers? Eue^ the hethens would boast thus of their false Gods;
as Julian protested that Cyril. co^tra Iul. lib. 7 s.
Aes^ulapius had often healed him being sick: and Fast 5 aepe Ioue^ vids quum
iam sua mittere vellet fulins (...) susti^^isse (...)
Ovid, that he had often seen Jupiters anger appeased with incense. etc. See
you not then, that as the Saints when they walk upright before the Lord, have
assurance, and sound comfort thereby that be Psa 66.18 19 116.1 2.1. Job 5.1^.
hears their prayers which they make according to his will: so hipocrites and
ethniks have also their false persuasions that their prayers are heard and
vain comforts according? Vaunt not therefore of your prayers being ^eard, so
long as you do works which are to be abhorred but remember how it ^s written,
whoso^uer we ask, we receive. (of God, because w^ ke^p his (...), and do those
things that are pleasing in his sight. Heb. 3.21.

6. Your throwing down the church of Antichrist, and building the church of
God, by ^reaching, etc. is according to the proverb, Pro 25, 14
Clouds and wind without (...). Let your brethren be witnesses; Of the first
they say, 1 admon, to Parl, page 33
Antichrist reigns amongst you: Of the latter, that ibid. p 4.
as yet you are scarce come to (...) a church rightly reformed, and again;
that Supplication to the Parl. p, 67.
the walls of Sion he even with the ground. Yet now you vaunt of throwing down
Antich^^^^s ^hur^h and building Gods.

The Martyrs in Q Mary's days did indeed by their faithful testimonies and
patient sufferings, throw down a great part of Antichrist church but sithence
that time, what have you done, unless it has been to repayr Jericho? For many
gross abuses which those Martyrs abhorred, are now st^fly mainteyned and
practiced in your church: but farther the^ they went, have you not stepped a
foot and if some of your inferior ministry, have spoken or written against a
few foolish ceremonies; yet others of your chiefest ministers have written as
much for them, that what superstition your church pulls down with the left
hand, it sets up with the right. The Prelates and their side have written
against you that seek reformation of Babel: and they both have set against us
that make separation from Babel: and yet you here offer to our consideration,
how you have builded Sion. But the Lord will visit both you and your building;
then shall your reword be according to your works.

In the end you ease your stomach against us, as they that throw down Gods
church, raise dissension, with many more grievous calumniations, which in your
distempered affection you throw forth. More wisdom, and much more modesty had
it been, if you had spared these reproaches til you had convinced us of such
things. But I see how your zele did carry you Ezekiah threw down the
idolatrous places in Israel; and reduced the people unto Gods true worship 2
Chro 31.1.2, etc. and 30.1.2 etc. Rabsaketh reproched him for this, as having
done sacrilege against his own God. Isa. 36.7 We, by the word of our
testimony, throw down your idolatrous high places, superstitions, ceremonies,
false worship and m^nister^e you charge us with throwing down God^s church,
and lode us with many criminations. But it is your selves that trouble Israel;
for do we ^eproue you for any good thing in doctrine or practice; or have we
left any truth that is among you; And if by our testimony of the gospel,
diss^ntion be raised and your church rent, the ignorant distracted and weak
offended: blame not us which testify the truth, but your selves and such as
re^ist it. Think you that Christ came to give peace on the earth? he has told
you may but rather debate. For five in one house shall be, di^ided, three against
two and two against three, father against son mother against d^ughter: and Luk
12.51:52, Mat. 12.6
ble^sed is he that shall not be offended in Christ When the Temple of God is
opened in heaven, and the ark of his couen^^t seen therein there are
lightnings, and voices, and thundrings, and earthquak^, and much bayl. Think
it not strange then, Ren 11.19
if troubles do follow follow the preaching of the Gospel; neither impute
your own faults unto us: but submit your necks unto the yoke of Christ, least
he Psa 18.14.
send out his arrows and scatter you. and increase lightnings and destroy you.
How your churches ^state hat^ been justified by you, the reader may se by that
you have brought? and how far we are from your unchristian calumnies shall
further app^a^, by the help of God, in the answer to your other Considerations,
that now next follow.

On your part, consider,
1, YOur Separation is very strange, vnboard of in any age of the Church,
having no show of warrant from Gods word, either by commandment or example.

Answer.
YOU would not call our separation strange, if your self were not a stranger
from the common wealth of Israel. What age was there ever in the world, since
light was separated from darkness; that heard not of separation from the false
Church, the fast man Adam saw it. in the separation Gen 4.16 and 6.2.
of Seths poster^ty from Caines. Noah did the like Gen 9.25 26. and. cha, 11.
in Sems posterity from Chams. Abraham was Gen 19
called out of Chaldee: Genesis 12.
Lot out of Sodom: Israel, out of Ex, 4 etc
Aegipt and Isa 48.20
Babel; faithful Judah Hos. ^.15
from rebellious Israel; Christ's disciples, Act 2 40 41. 2 Cor, 6 14.17.
from faithle^^e Jews and Gentiles; and all the Lords people. Reu. 18:4
from your confused Babylon Yea God him self did first teach it when he made a
separation between the w^mans seed and the Serpents, Genesis 3.^5. And yet you
say, it has no show of warrant from Gods word Hereafter I supp^se you will say
so no more, but will see if you can prove your selves a tr^e Church, meet to be
communicated withal: which when you do, we by Gods grace will return unto you.

The 2. Consideration.
2, THE points in difference between us and you did arise at first from
persons, in whom God t^stified against your present causes, 1 Mr. Bolton
hanged himself; ^ Mr. Brown revolted and came back from you; 3 Mr. Pe^ry,
Barrow, and Greenwood were hanged; 4 Mr. I^hnsons and the rest banished: and
(note) not by heathen and Ant^christian tyrants, as were true Martyrs of
Christ, but by Christian Magistrat's prof^ssing and maynt^yning the Gospel of
Christ. Besides your principal pillars of greatest reckning gifts and
judgment, have returned from you unto the Church of England; as Harrison,
Smith, Crud, Slad, and sundry other mi^^sters and men of learning and account,
who also lived holily, and died most comfortably in the Lord notwithstanding.

Answer.
IT is a wonder, if you be a teacher in your church that your salt is so
vasauory. Shall men's persons now be brought against the case of Christ have you
no better learned him? Might not a Can^anite or Philistian have reasoned thus
against Israel? The wares against us and you did arise at first from persons in
whom God testified against your present cause. Some were Number 11.1
brunt with fire, some Number. 16 32 33.
sunk into the earth alive, some were destroyed by Number 21.6
serpents. some by Nu^ 25.9
pestilence, some by the Number. 14.45.
enemies sword. some by the sword of Ex 32, 27
their own brethren. even Moses and A^ron your ^rincipall pillars of greatest
reckning, dyed in the desert Nu^ 20.12
for their sin, and of Ex 12, 37
six hundred thousand men that came out of Aegipt to fight against us only
Number. 26 64, 65,
two men are left alive: and (note) these things have come upon you b^ the hand
of your God, whom you say, that he has sent you to war against us Thus might
a Paga^ have pleaded against Gods church then; with as much truth and more
color then you that are called a Christian, can do against us. But let us see
your particulars.

1. M^, Bolton (yo^ say) h^nged himself. And so did Judas, one of the first
and principal publisher^ of Christ's Gospel. Will you therefore call
Christ^a^ity into question for it? Besides this Bolton. (one of the Elders of
that separated Church whereof Mr. Fits. was Pastor in the beginning of Q.
Eliz. reign,) first revolted at Paul's Cross, was reproved and excom^unicate
for this by the church: and aft^r not having grace to return or ^epent, hanged
himself. This is testified to me by one yet living among us, who tho^ was
member of that church and well acquainted with the affairs th^reof: and with
this matter, and saw the man dead. Which being so Boltons Martyrdom is little
for the credit of your cause and church where of he died a member

2 Mr. Brown revolted etc. And to did 2 Timothy 4 10.
Demas, and diverse others in all ages, who loved this present world, more then
God. But consider you here the Apostles words: what though some have been
unfaithful, shall their unfaithfulness make the faith of God without effect? Far
be it. Romans 3.3 4. besides, how well Mr. Brown approves of your church, though
he live in it; if you ask him I suppose, will tell you.

3. Mr. Penry Barrow, and Greenwood were hanged. And so was Christ himself;
and (note) not by heathen tyranns, (for Pilate Mat. 27.24.
washed his hands of his blood;) but by Priests, Scribes, and Pharisees,
professing and mainteyning the religion of God, as your church now does. And
you that allege the hanging of these men to reproach our faith: it is probable
that if you had then lived, you would have reproached Christ him self; in the
fellowship of whose afflictions and reproaches, we now rejoice and are not
ashamed. But fulfill you the measure of your forefathers.

4. Mr. Iohnsens and the rest (...). And so was Reu. 1.9.
John, the Mar 3 17
son of^ thunder; and many other of Gods people many t^mes You and your church
shall have small cause to boast of your persecuting Christ's witnesses, when the
day of your (...) shall come.

Your captions note that these ^unishments are ne^ly heathen tyran^^ but by
profes^ed Christians* is indeed worthy to be noted and lamented: yet is it of
no note or force, to disprove the truth of our cause. For who ^ersecuted Christ
and his Apostles more then the Israelites Gods peculiar and profes^ed people?
who m^re then the Act 4.11.
builders, refused him the chief cornerstone? where were the Prophets killed,
but Luk ^3.33
in Jerusalem? Yea not only false Chr^st^ans and hypocrites, but Gods
elect-seruants may so be overtaken, as to persecute and kill the Lords people.
Did not the Genesis 37.
Patriarche^ sell Joseph into Aegipt, when some of them would have k^lled him?
was not Sol^m^n a good King? Yet sought he 1 Kin. 11 30.31 37.40.
to kill Ierob^am without cause; whom God had appointed to be King after him.
Was not Aja 2 Chro. 14 23 etc.
a godly King, and good reformer of the church (yet was he wroth with Hanani
the Seer, and 2, Chro 16 7.10.
put him into prison, only for speaking unto him the word of the Lord. What
weight is there then in thi^ your cavil, that our affliction are by Christian
magistrates, therefore out cause is evil? Good princes may be over carried
either by their own affections; or by the suggestions and prouocations of other
men. And if you will not yet see your folly, mind this for your selves; that
you which (...) called Puritans, are molested, imprisoned, persecuted: and
(note) not by hethen and Antichristian tyranns; but by your own Christian
magistrates and Bishops, professing and maynteyning the gospel of Christ. Ergo,
either your cause or your argument is naught.

Your last point is partly false, and partly frivolous: for Mr. Harrison*
returned not unto your church of England; but died at Middleburgh in this faith
that we profess. Mr. Smith, Crud, and some others, (which never were officers.
much less pillars, in our Church,) did indeed forsake their first faith, and
died soon after; with what comfort, themselves now know. But what if many more
had forsaken us, yet the truth of the gospel which we profess, shall stand.

Christian religion was at a low ebb, when so many went back, that Jesus said
to the twelve Ioh. 6.66.67.
will you also gee away? Yet Christianity still flourishes, and shall, so
long as the moon endures. And we with comfort do behold; that though many
bad ones have gone away* yet God brings better in their place daily.

The 3. Consideration
3. NOte your dissentions between 1 Brown and Harrison, 2 Brown (...) Barron, 3
Barro^ and Francis Johnson; 4 Francis and George Johnson; 5 ^r. Johnson and Mr.
Slade (that great scholar) 6 Chaph^n and others a^out Anahaptisme, nay none of
your great Rab^ines but have grossly disagr^^d disagreed among themselves. It
pi^ieth us to see your poor congregation, how lamentably it has been rent with
mutual dissentions bitings, and devouring of ech^ethers* which doubtless is
no (...) ^f the spirit of God. These are not lies but matters known; and they
are matters horrible and strange.

Answer.
IF you were an Atheist or Pagan* as you profess to be a Christian: you might
in this ma^^r repr^ch the church of God ^uer since the world began; saying.
Note the dissentions, ^etween Genesis 4.
Kain and Abel; Genesis 9.
Cham and Noah; Ge 27. etc
Esaw and Iaacob, Ge 37 etc,
Joseph and the Patriarchs, Exo, 32. Number, 20.
Moses and the Isralites; Number, 6
Moses and the Levites, Number 12
Moses and his ^wn sister and brother, Judge. 8.
Gedeen and the men of Ephraim, of Succ^th. and of Pennel, Judge, 9.
Ab^melech and his brethren Judge. 11
I^phteh and his brethren, Iud. 20 etc.
Benjamin and the other tri^es of Israel, 1 Samuel 18 etc.
Saul and David, 2 Samuel, 15 etc.
David and Absalom, 1 Kin 12 etc.
the ten tribes and the two, from Ieroboams times and after, Act 23.7 etc.
the Pharisees and Sadducees in the Jewish Church, Luk, 22.24.
the Apostles of Christ, the diss^ntions 1 Cor 1 and^ Galat. Philip. 3 John.
etc.
in Corenth and the other Apostolic Chur^hes: These are not lies, but matters
known, and r^corded in the scriptures: and they are matters horrible and
s^rangem. So then, if your proposed C^nsideration be of weight to turn us from
our present faith, because of the dissentions that have been among us: the like
consideration ^nought turn us also (which God forbid) from all faith and
religion, and make us as very Athe^sts, as a many of your church already are.
And indeed where unto leads this manner reasoning which you use, b^t unto
Atheism^? For if an Infidel should mind religion, might he not be kept back,
by consid^r^ng the dissentions, in faith, between Painims, Jews, Mahometists,
and Chr^stians, and a Jew or Turk be kept from Christianity, because of the
dis^entions between Protestants, Papists, Arians, Anabaptists and other sects
many? Yea are not the Papists at this day hindered from true religeon, by
Bellarm, de not, eccles^^ 10.
noting (as you do) the dissentions between Luther, Zwinglius, Calv^n etc? But
it seems all these were far from your cons^deration, or if you minded them
yet were they but motes in your ey: they be our dissentions, ours only that
trouble you It pittieth you to see our poor congregation. how lamentably it
has been rent etc. but you are hard-harted, and take no pity belike on your
own Church. which you so highly commend unto us, though dissentions for
discipline, (that I speak not of other matters) have been so great, that you
have not only preached and printed on against an other now many a year and
that in very bitter and hostile manner, but also, persecu^ede imprisoned and
fought the blood on of an other. Well, howsoever we have indeed just cause to
lament, that by our dissentions, you and others have taken occasion to
blaspheme the truth of God: yet herin have we comfort that such things must be
amongst us (as the Holy Ghost says,) 1 Cor. 11.18, 19.
that they which are approuued may be known. And you, if by no means you will
learn the estate of a Church here on earth, where it is in continual war
with the Serpent and his seed; but still you think these things horrible and
strange: take heed you stumble not at the stone Christ to your destruction and
have your abiding in that house, which the strongman armed keeps and the
things that he possesses are in peace. Luk 11.21.

The 4. Consideration.
4. YOur chiefest teachers cannot as yet determine, what the discipline i^ that
they would have as what the difference is between a Pastor and a Doctor,
whether Apostates ought to be admitted to office in the church etc.

Answer.
1, THere is no such dissension among us touching these matters as you would
here insinuate: though if there were, yet our imperfection and difference in
judgment shows that we are weak men; but no whit pre^ud^ceth the truth we
profess.

2, The heathen Philosophers, in the Ni^oean Synod. objected the like against
Christians, that they agreed not in opinion among themselus S^zomen. lib. 1,
cap. 18.

3. Your self heathen-like, may object against Paul and Barnaba^ (two of the
chiefest teachers of Christian religion,) one of the two things wherewith you
here do reproach us; because they not only could not determine whether John
Mark, (who had before departed from them) should accompany them in the work of
the Gospel; but were so stirred, that they departed asunder one from the other,
Act. 15.37.38.39.40.

4. You might much better blame your own Church and chiefest teachers, that
cannot as yet determine what the discipline is that they would have; witness
your long continued controversies in print; wherein what ado you make about
discipline, all the world knows. If your selves would walk better, in the
truth, peace and concord of the gospel, you might wi^h more equity find fault
with us: pull therefore the beam first out of your own eye.

The 5 Consideration.
5 THE Lord has also testified against you, by giving over very many people, 1
to Atheism. 2 carnal life, 3 Papisme, 4 Anabaptisme, 5 Ari^nijme, 6
Familisme, which are not slanders but matters known to all that are acquainted
with the course and state of your Church.

Answer.
ALl this being true, it shows the badnes of some men, not any badnes in the
faith we profess. An infidel might have objected unto Israel. as you do here:
The Lord has testified against you, by giving over over very many of your
people, to Carnal life, Sed^mitrie. Peorisme, Bautisme, Number. 2^.1 3. Judge 19
22. and. Psa. 106.14 28 36. Judge. 2 13.
and many other idolatries with strange Gods. The Papists may and do object
the like things to your selves at this day. much more justly then you do to us.
For when any such have appeared among us, we presently cast them out if they
repented not: whereas with you, such are still retained in the bosom of your
Church; yea such heretics and vicious persons, as we have excommunicate; you
do entertayn, as is known to all that are acquainted with your estate.
Wherefore the Lord has testified for us, not against us, whiles by the light
of his word, such hypocrites have been discovered and avoided: but you are
condemned by your own doctrine, whiles such miscreants, and flagitioius persons
are kept in your communion.

The 6. Consideration
6. THE churches and godly learned persons that ever heard of your separation,
did not approve of it, which was the quarrel that Fr Johnson had with Mr
Iunius, and he sharply replyeth on him. Nay Mr Barrow plainly rayseth at
Calvin and the Geneua church, and even at al churches in Christendom. in his
Discovery: and counsels not with other reformed churches about their
separation. but Answers (as Mr Johnson does) the word is near us, we need not
go over the seas to seek it as if the Spirit of the Prophets were not subject
to the Prophets, and himself (as the Pope) had infallible rule of
in^erpretation of the scriptures in his breast.

Answer,
THE strength of this reason, is quelled before, in the answer to the third of
your first Considerations: thither I refer the reader.

Further I answer, here that you teach such doctrine, as stands not with
Christian freedom or truth, whiles you would forbid us the profession and
practice of the Gospel, til we have consulted with, and be approved of other
persons and Churches. For though I grant there is a good use of aduising with
other Churches, (if conveniently we can,) either when cases are difficult. or
when in any respect it do concern them: yet that in all matters of religion
Christians should be bound thus to walk when the finne to them is evident,
which to other Churches (not well acquainted with their estate,) is not so
perspicuous; this were to abridge Christian liberty, and to bring our
consciences in bondage unto men; that though God forbid us 1 Cor 10.14 1 Ioh 4,
21.
al communion with idolatry, yet we may not separate unless they approve it.
It is contrary to the word of God, which teaches us that Gods commandment is
Deu 30, 11 12.13.14. Romans 10, 8
not hid from his people neither is far off, not alost in heaven, nor beyond
the sea, but in our mouths and ^^rts to do it. But you to deceive your
reader, allege this, as if it were Mr. B^rrows or Mr Iohnsons reason, and not
the doctrine of Moses and of the Apostl^.

The col^^r that you bring for your self, is that saying of the Apostle the
spirits of the proph^ts are s^biect to the proph^ts 1 Cor. 14.32 which
scripture considered by the words and circumstances of it, will in no we^se
prove your purpose. F^r. first it may be q^estioned. whether the meanin^ be,
that the spirits of the prophets are subject to other prophets or to
th^mselves. For the Prophets among the gentiles, (such as the Corinthians
naturally 1. Cor 12, 2
were, (were s^bject unto, and carried and ruled by their spirits, and not their
spirits subject to them: so that they could not choose but s^e^ke, (as Ora^,
Sibil l. 2 in princip.
S^bylla w^tne^seth of her self.) neither could they lin or cease speaking,
when they would themselves yea and in holy scripture we see how Number, 23 and. 24.
Balaam prophesied good to Israel, and ble^sed, when he would have cursed them*
Saul also and his messengers, 1 Samuel 19 20 ^4.
prophesied (as it were) by constreynt, being ouermastered by the spirit, so
as he could not co^teyn himself, bu^ stripping off his clothes, prophe^^e^ all
that day and all that night, when he had no pur^ose thus to do. Now therefore,
where as the Apostle here had ordained, that if any thing were 1 Cori ^, 30
re^eled to another that fare by the first prophet should hold his peace,
because ver. 32.
almight prophecy one by one: if any should allege, that they could not hold
their peace, but must speak, so long as their spirit moved the^ he tells
them, that ver. 34.
the spirits of the prophets are su^i^ct to the prophets; so intimating that
they may, if they will give others le^ue to speak showing also a reason hereof
because Rom 14.1
God is not (the author) q of confusion but of peace. And if thus we
understand the Apostle, his words make nothing for that you say. Unto this also
may be added, that he speaks this affirmat^uely, they are subject, and not by
way of ordinance, let them be subject, as ver. 22
else where he uses: and as other things in this place are spoken; as ver. 30,
Let the prophets speak; ver. 34.
Let the first hold his peace; Let women be silent.

But be it granted (which I will not deny) that he means their spirits were
subject to other Prophets; because when they had spoken ver. 29
others were to judge: yet those other, were the Prophets of ^he same church
and there present not in other churches. For Paul meant not, that the spirits
of the Prophets in Corinth, were subject to the prophets in Rome or Iudoea and
so must send to them for approbation; but appoynteth like order in this, as was
in ver, 30.
all (other) the Churches of the Saints. And if they were bound (as you would
have us) to send and submit to other churches, and others likeweise to them;
then no Church has no power in i^ self, to apr^^e of her prophets, or
Ministers or of their doctrine, without the good lik^ng of others,. Which how
far it is from the Apostles mind I leave it for the d^screet reader to judge:
neither think I but your own brethren will dista^t y^^r so collecting from
this place Howsoe^er they do, it is very like if you had lived in Ahabs days
and should have heard 1 Kin 22.6
400 prophets at once prophesying good unto the King, and Micaiah only ver
17.18
prophesying evil: you would with uerse. 24.
Zidkijah have smitte^ him on the cheek, (as now you do us in reproach,) and
told him that his spirit must be subject to the prophets, especially they being
so many, and he but alone.

But if it were further granted unto you, that we must be subject to the
prophets of other churches: yet I suppose you will not deny but al prophets and
churches must try and judge every thing by the 1 Pet 4.11 Act 18^11.
word of God according to which if any man speak not, his judgment is not to be
regarded. And we, have offered and do still offer our doctrine and practice to
the trial of al men by that word: if men either will not try nor give
sentence at all, or do judge amiss; we are not bound to wayt upon them; but
must live by Hab. 2.
our own faith. The reformed churches have been wr^^ten to by us; (for we know
and acknowledge them to be true churche^ and our brethren in the Lord:) they
give us no Answer. Shall we co^tinew still ^n bondage to Antichr^st, til they
bid us com out? What scripture teaches us so? If they or any, convince us of
error or evil, and we yield not; le^ us be esteemed accordingly: otherwise if
we walk in the truth, and they will not approve it, be it upon them, as they
shall answer before the Lord.

Mr. Iunius, whom you mention to reply so sharply, neither approves your
Church, nor condemns our practice. no not though he were instantly urged: the
writings between him and us are extant to the world, let the reader judge what
both sides have said.

Your censure of Mr, Barrow, (or scoffing rather at him,) neither hurts him
or us, nor helps you. His plain dealing in reproving the corruptions of these
times. you call railing; it is marvel you say not also the prophets Isa
1.4.10.21.23. and. 26.10.11. Mic, 3:9.10, 11 and^.
rayled on the people of Israel, when they used sharp rebukes; for I suppose
you can hardly show any hard speech that Mr. Barrow there writes; which the
Prophets and Apostles have not used before. But if he were overcaried with some
severe speeches in a good cause' neither we not himself ever justified that
infirmity, we know that we are frayl men let the sharpness therefore be his
but the truth (which he sharply teaches) Gods:

And why carp you at the manner of his writing. and meddle not with the matter?
That book with others have discovered the idolatries of your church; which
neither by you nor any, have ever yet been answered and refuted by the
scriptures. For your self, let the reader judge what you ^aue said.

The 7 Consideration.
7. THe great and gross disorder and partiallity in administering of your
disciplin^, which George Johnson shows cheerly; besides the wants of
sunctimony and common duties of godlynes, which (he says) are to be found in
far greater measure in the c^mm^n profess^rs of the church of England: and
says further, that the Dutch churches take you for a most unquiet,
con^entious, and disorderly people.

Answer.
THis article you object unto us, upon one man's report that was for lying, and
slandering, false accusation, and contention. himself cast out of our Church.
By what rule or word of God, can you admit of the testimony of an excommunicate
against a whole congregation? Reason also might teach you, that no man standing
against a church to excommunication, will ever speak well of that church, in
the cause wherein he stands.

But grant that this all were true which he reports what would you urge upon
it? that therefore Christianity which we profess, is evil? so perhaps a Turk
or Jew would do with as much reason as you can conclude, that our separation
from you is evil* Was there ever any truth, (think you,) that men did walk in
it as they ought? or any Church in the world, wherein the discipline (as you
call it) was administered as it should Julian the Apostata, (that wrote so much
against Christ,) reading the testimonies of Moses, the Prophets and Apostles,
Deuteronomy. 9.7.22.24, Isa. 59 3, 4, 5, etc. Mic. 3.9.11. 1. Cor. 5.1.2, and.
11.21.22, etc. 3 John. 9.10. had as good ground to blame the Israelites and
Christians for their manners and discipline, and consequently to dissuade them
from their faith as you do us: yea he might allege faithful and undeniable
witnesses: whereas you rely upon a slanderer.

Finally, what aim you at, in all this, but to draw us back unto your church;
and there it is like. we shall find discipline without disorder or partiallity
to weet, in your Bishops courts, for there the discipline of your church is to
be seen. Of which, we need say nothing; the voice almost of all the land cries
out of their abominations. Only we observe how pregnant your persuasions are,
to make us beleeu, that because there are sins in Sion, there be none in
Babylon.

The 8 Consideration
8. GOD never witnessed for you, nor gave testimony of his approving your
separation whether we consider your ministry or people. For hardly can you
show any one person converted by your ministry from papistry or atheism, or
other open wickedness; as by Gods blessing multitudes have been by ours: but
only have you seduced and wrought upon the tender consciences of such as by
our ministry were first begotten unto Christ, But (which is specially to be
observed) from your distracted and divided congregations, multitudes have
fallen away, to every kind of impiety and herisie reigning in the world.

Answer.
IF God approve our separation and our ministry by his word, (as we are sur^
he does) it is yeno^gh, though our ministry have not converted any. Your
reason is as if a C^inite should have said unto N^ah God never witne^sed for
thee nor gave testimony of his approving thy building of the Ark: Genesis ^.
for hardly can thou show any one person converted by thy precahing or Ark
building, these 120. years.

Our ministry belongs to our church; the assemblies whereof Papists,
Ath^ists and such like wicked ones use not to frequent: and how is it po^sible
^ur ministry should convert such as come not to hear it. If we w^^ld object
unto you, that few Turks and Saracens have been converred by your m^^isterie:
what would you answer? Yet where you say ^e can har^ly show my etc. we can (if
need were) show you many that were sometime prof^in and irreligious whiles they
were of your church but co^m^ng and he^r^ng by Gods providence the doctrine of
our church, have been recl^ymed from their lewd life and do walk holily in the
faith with us. It is true in ^eed that our cause has wrought most upon such as
being sometimes under your ministry, had tender consciences and pliable to the
truth others, of more corrupt consciences have set against and blasphemed it*
The ^^^^ideratio^ of this in any wise man's judgment will rather lead unto, ^hen
from our cause; when the better sort (by your own confession) do come unto us;
the worser and refuse remayn still with you.

Your last point which you would have specially to be observed that multitudes
have fallen from us, to every kind of heresy and impiety, is indeed worthy to
be observed. For first the scripture is fulfilled, which says, many shall
^leaue unto them faynedly, Dan. 11.34, Secondly being fallen if they had com to
a more holy faith and better walking when they were gone out from us, it might
have importe^ ours to be evil: but now that they have fallen to gross heresy
and impiety; it argues Gods hand so be heavy up on them because they
continued not in the truth with us. And this the scripture confirms saying of
such as 2 These, 2 10.11.12.
receive not the love of the truth, that they might be saved; that therefore
God will send them strong delusion, that they shall belee^ lies; and of such as
1 Timothy 4.1.2.
depart from the faith; that they shall give heed unto spirits of errors and
doctrines of Diuils. It is also to be observed that al such impious and
heretical persons as have departed from us; are interteyned with you in your
communion, (unless themselves refuse to commun^cate with you;) your church is
the receptacle of al such Apostataes, and there they are suffered in herisie and
impiety so as they w^l fr^q^e^t your assemblies. Better reasons therefore and
more weithty c^nsid^rations* have you need to allege; before you can persuade
us to retur^e unto your church; for these hitherto propounded and examined are
found too too l^ght. But it may be, better follow.

ARGVMENTS. That the best assemblies of the present church of ENGLAND, are true
visible CHVRCHES.
1. IN what churches soever are found in public practice, the things that
essentially constitute a true visible church; they are true visible churches of
Christ.

But in the best of our assemblies are found in public practice the things
that essentially constitute a true visible church:

Therefore the best of our assemblies, are true visible Churches.

Proof of the assumption
A visible church is the house of God, 1 Timothy 3.15. Now the means or things
that constitute it, are 1 Foundation Jesus Christ to build upon; 1 Cor 3.11 Mat
16.18. 2 Builders; that is, such preaching ministers of the word, as do build
in godlynes, convert and confirm. 1 Cor 3 10. 3 Instrument of building the
word of God. Ephesians. 2.20. 4 Matter to be built; people joined together in the
profesion of the Gospel. 1 Cor 3.9 Ephesians. 2, 20.

But all these are found in public practice in the best of our assemblies.
Therefore in the best of our assemblies, are found in public practice, the
things that constitute a true visible church.

Answer.
THE title of your arguments conteyneth 1 an error or absurdity; 2 and argues
some check in your own consciences for defense of your Church. 1 The error is,
that you divide the church of England into many Churches; making the first (as
I conjecture) a national Church; the other, parishionall. This is an error,
because it is an Ex, 20,
humane invention and differs from the scripture, which shows many churches
to be in a nation or country; as in Judea, Asia, Galatia etc, Gal, 1, 2, 21.
Reu. 1.4. but shows not any natio^al church. Now that yours is a national
church not only the name and title, but also the constitution shows; for it
has a Pastor over it, the Archbishop of Canterbury Primate and Metropolitan,
your most reverend father in God; who makes and consecrateth the Diocesan
Bishops. (whereupon there are Diocesan churches or Sees; (and they again make
the Parish Priests. To him and form of co^secrat. Bishops and Priests etc
to his successors, the inferior Bishops have sworn ( so help them god through
Jesus Christ.) all due reverence and obedience. If the mould of this Church
were not fetched from Rome; show where you learned it.

2. The check which the title argues to be in your conscience, app^areth
ap^eareth it that you plead but for the best assemblies of the present church
of England; for do you not hereby intimate, that there is a worser sort which
you will not plead for? yet both b^st, and worst are all one body, one church
and communion: If your Church of England be Christ's why maynteyn you not the
whole? is not every ^art and parcel of Christ's church to be defended? Think
you that the priests and people of Israel, would have mainteyned the Most holy
place of their Temple only, and have suffered the rest of the house to be
ruinate and trodden under foot. or if they did thus, should they have done well?
How persidiously then do you deal with your church, (if it be the true church
of Christ,) that you seek to uphold your Sanctum sanct^rum, your best
assemblies; and neglect the rest* Or, if you would make one piece of your
church Christ and another piece Antichrists, where both be in brotherhood and
unity together: it is as absurd as if you would make one part of your body
humane, an other bestiall one piece Gods another Diuils. It is contrary also
to the plain scriptures which say; 2 Cor. 6.14.15,
what communion has light with darknese that concerd has Christ with belial
meaning. none at all. Either therefore you must justify your whole Church; or
you must with us make a separation. How long will you halt between two opinions.

To your Argument I answer; the proofs of your assumption fayl you.

A visible church (you say) is 1 Timothy ^.15.
the house of God. True; but your Bethell, will be found Betha^en. the hou^e of
Idolatry.

You make the things constituting your house to be fowr 1 Foundation 2
Builders, 3 Instruments, 4 Matter, But the form or fashion of the building,
you leave quite out: perhaps you saw that it would not endure the trial* Heb.
8.5.
when it should be compared with the pattern that God showed in the Mount.

The Prophet Haggai Hag. 1.4 etc.
reproved the Jews for that Gods house was not builded among them. If you had
bee^ there. you would have disproued the Prophet by this sophistry. We have the
1 Foundation laid. Hag. 2.9, 2 Builders we have many both priests and people 3
Instruments also for to hew and square the timber and stone as axes etc. 4 and
matter wherewith to build, as wood from the mountain, and stone from the
qarrie. Therefore (though the stones be neither laid nor squared. nor the
timber hewn, fitted or framed: because with us are found the things that
essentially constitute a visible house,) we have the true house of God, But if
your own material houses were no otherwise builded, then your church is, by
this your argument. you would have but an uncouth dwelling. If you read Genesis
11. you shall find the towr of Babel, to be as well builded as your church; for
there was the 1 Foundation laid; 2 Builders many, 3 instruments also; and 4
matter both brick and slime.

Now let us examine the things which you say you have; and do bu^ barelie say
for you prove it not.

1. The Foundation is Jesus Christ to build upon. 1 Cor. 3.11 Mat. 16.18. But
this Foundation is not yet rightly laid in your assemblies you have it only
in name and show: Christ is near in your mouths, but far from your actions.
If you had showed by the scriptures how Christ is laid for the foundation of
the church: it would soon have been seen that your house is set upon the sands.
For you have not him for the mediator, prophet, priest, or king of your church,
as it is now established. Many truths I acknowledge are taught among you but
many untruths are also mixed with them, and the power of godliness is denied;
for the truths that are taught cannot be practiced. Your church has also
other spiritual Lords and laws then Christ and his testament; as your
Prelates, with their cannons, articles, and decrees imposed upon you to be
observed on pain of excommunication and, further penalties So Christ alone, is
not your foundation, but his servants also Ro^ 6.16
you ar to whom you obey.

2. Your builders are your preaching ministers, but I deny them to be Gods
builders, let them show when God designed them as he did Exodus 31
Bezaleel and Aholia'^, to make his sanctuary. let them show by the word their
office and calling as the Apostle Paul, of whom mention is made in the place
you allege, 1 Cor 3:10.) did ^n all his Epistles. Otherwise, not all that offer
themselves to build may be admitted; for you know how it is written; It is not
for you, and for us, to build the house unto our God. Ezra. 4.3.

In most of your parish assemblies, you have but one preaching minister; and so
but one builder, and he will be a good while in building the house; and if he
be taken away (as many are) then your church wants one of the 4 essent all
things In many parishes there be unpreaching ministers; your church makes them
builders also, (though you do not,) and unto such if we were among you, should
we be constreyned to submit our souls.

The Bishops are master builders in all your churches, they command and control
you their inferior Priests: if you build not by their line they throw down
quickly all your building, and thrust the builders out of doors. These are
like the horns that Zachary saw Zac 1.20 21.
which scattered Judah, so that a man dare not lift up his head; but your
preaching ministers are not like the carpenters that came to fray them away.
How great a jarr there is between your builders. we all do know; and long it
will be ere they agree together to build Gods house; or the work be finished for
Christ to dwell in, when the master workmen work all awry and when (as you
Supplication. page 67
complained to the Parliament) the walls of Sion, lie even with the ground.

3. The instrument of building is the word of God. (as you allege Ephesians. 2.20.
delivered by the Prophets and Apostles and Christ himself. But your builders
use not this instrument aright, in doctrine or practice, they new not here with
the rough stone, and knotty timber they reform not the profain and rebellious
people, neither have they power in their arms to cut off any one wicked man;
for the axe of excommunication is in the Bishops hand alone, and his
commissaries; he has the keys to open and shut the doors of your Church; the
parish priest has perhaps a weeding hook, and may suspend from the sacrament a
while, by virtue of his service book: but the greatest wound that he can make
herewith, the Bishop or his substitute will quickly heal. Again you have
besides the Bible, Apocripha books, commanded by law to be read in your
church: also that other instrument called the service book: and with this tool
your best min^sters build up your church, and the reading hereof does now much
edify, in all your parishes: though the days hauee been when you could say,
that 1 admo. p. 24.
in all the order of your service, there was no edification but confusion. And
who put this instrument into your ministers hands? Christ in his testament
appointed none such. Your church has also Homily books to build withal, and
many edifying canons and ceremonies, such tools the Prel^es have allowed for
your building. even the instruments of the foolish she^heard, Za. 11, 15.16.
and if you will not beleeu me beleeu your selus which heretofore have
complained and written thus, 2 admon to the. Parl page 6.7.
No preacher may without great danger of the law utter all the truth comprised
in the book of God It is so circumscribed and wrapped within the compass of such
statutes, such penalties, such injunctions, such advertisements, such articles,
such canons, such sober caueats and such manifold pamphlets that in manner it
does but peep out from behind the skreen. The laws of the land. the book of
common prayer, the Queens injunctions, the Commissioners aduertisements, the
Bishops canons, Linwoods provincials, every Bishops articles in his dioces, my
Lord of Canterburies sober ^aueats, his licenses to preachers, and his high
court of prerogative or grave fatherly faculties. these to-gither or the worst
of them, (as some of them be too bad) may not be broken or offended against,
but with more danger then to offend against the bible. To the subscribing and
subscribing again, and the third subscribing are requ^red: for these preachers
and others are indicted* are fined, ar prisoned, are excommunicated, are
banished, and have worse things threatened them. And the Bible that must have no
further scope, then by these it is assigned. Is this to profess Gods word Is
this a reformation? etc. Thus have we your own confession what manner of
instruments your church is builded with, and all men may, see, what small cause
you have to boast of the word of God, amongst you.

The matter of the building, is people joined together in the profession of the
Gospel. And what manner of people are joined together in your church? are
there not all sorts of profane, wicked and irreligious persons, as well as
religious and men of better life? and where find you in the scriptures such
matter for Gods house? The texts 1 Cor, 3, 9 Ephesians. 2.20.
by you alleged teach far otherweise: for the Church of Corinth, were saints
by calling, even called of God unto the fellowship of his son Jesus Christ. 1
Cor 1, 2, 9, and the Apostle never said to any profane or confused people ye
are Gods husbandry. Gods building, So for the other text if you had minded
either that which is before or after, it might have stayed you from applying it
to your church. For the Apostle writing to the Ephesians 1.1.
Saints, (not to the profane) which were at Ephesus, says, Now y^ are no more
strangers and forreners. but citizens with the saints and of the how should of
God; Ephesians 2.19
and after, he shows how in Christ verse, 21.
all the bulding coupled together, grows unto an holy temple in the Lord. But
neither are your people saints by calling. neither can you say of your church
of England, that all the bulding (of all the parishes) coupled together,
grows to an holy Temple in the Lord; for your self here defend not all, but
the best only. And we know well, that the m^ltitudes of profane wicked persons
and miscreants, mere strangers and forreners, are of the matter of your church;
and are bu^lded in and with the same (if the word and sacraments do bu^ld
among you) even the vilest of the^ when they go to the gibbet, as pleasantly
as 1 Samuel 15.32.
Agag did to his death Now mind with your sel^es, if God have commanded to
build his house with the fine Ceder and Ex. 26 15
Sittim trees: and you take the thorns and briars of the wilderness, or wild
figtrees of the plain: whether Christ (who Heb. 3.2.
is faithful to him that has appointed him, even as Moses was in all his
house,) when he shall take a view of all your work, will allow of your labors,
and bless you for them, as Moses blessed the builders of the tabernacle. Exodus
39.43. Your first argument therefore is to weak to uphold your church or best
assemblies, and the assumption of your profyllogisme is denied.

The 2 argument,
2. THose Churches whose true members are only espowsed to Christ, a true
visible Churches; Ephe. 5.30.32 2. Cor. 11.2.

But the true members of our best assemblies. are espowsed only to Christ.
Therefore etc.

Proof of the assumption,
They are espowsed only to Chrisi. which are endued with true saving faith.
Ephesians. 5 30.31.32. with John. 15.3 4.5.7. and. 17, 20.21.

But the true members of our best assemblies, are endued with a true saving
faith confessed by Mr. Johnson in Iakob. page 7^ Look also in the confirmation
of the 5. argument following here.

Therefore etc.

Answer.
HEre again you have got an other starting hole, whiles you plead but for the
true members of your best assemblies; yet neither tell you us which are your
best assemblies, nor who be the true members of them; that how to follow or
where to find you we cannot tell. As is Prove. 30.18, 19, 20.
the way of an eagle in the air, such is the way of an adultrous woman, it is
hid and cannot be known. But I will see if I can discover your falsehood though
I cannot find your footing.

First I deny that the true members of your best assemblies are espowsed only
to Christ. for (as the prophet said of Israel,) Ie, 3.2,
lift up your eyes unto the high placs and behold where you have not played the
harlot. Now whils a church does play the harlot, Christ wills us to plead
with her, Hos 2.2.
that she is not his wife, ney^her is he her husband. Idolatry is spiritual
whordome, as the Prophets testify, Psa. 106 39. Ier. 3.9. Deuteronomy. 31.16. but the
true members of your best assemblies, commit idolatry in their daily worship
according to their Romish leiturgy or book of common prayer, an idol of your
own invention. How are they the^ espowsed to Christ alone? Yes they are (say
you,) because they are endued with true saving faith I answer; Faith is in the
heart, as it is written, with the heart man believes, Romans 10.10. The heart no man
knows but God alone; as again it is written, thou (Lord) only know the
hearts of all the children of men 1 King, 8, 39, So then I ask you how you know
that your members have true faith; your answer must needs be, (unless you w^ll
make your self a God,) you know it not but by their words and works. Well the^
let us bring these to the trial; their confession and the^r practice; leaving
their faith to God that knows it The conf^ssion of the^r faith is set down in
their service book, the 12. articles of the Creed. But this Creed the Papists
also confess and read in their church; and if it will prove your people to
have true faith it will prove theirs to have likewise; and you say no more for
England, then for Rome. Again the Apostle says, there are some which Tit. 1.16
profess that they know God but in works do deny him, and are abominable and
disobedient and to every good work reprobate. So then words are not yenough, to
prove true faith But we must come to the Apostle James his trial, show me thy
faith out of thy works; for faith without works is dead. Iam. 2.18.26.
Now the works of your people are apparent to be evil; they standing in
communion or confusion rather with the unclean, profane and, wicked whereby al
Gods holy things are defiled; as it is written, Number. 19.22. Hag. 2.14.
submitting their souls to Antichristian prelates and priests, and hearing
their voice, contrari^ to John,) 10, 5. worshipping God in vayn, after their own
invented service book, which is a high transgression of the second
commandment; Exo 20 And these things are general and public; the particular
and more private in^q^ities, will not easily be numbered. Whereas therefore you
would persuade us your church is espowsed only to Christ, (although her
fornicat^ons are so manifest between her breasts, because she says. she
believes only in Christ; it is with no more color, then as if Ge^ 35.29
Bilhah (when she was known to lie with Reuben,) should have pleaded; yet am I
an honest woman, and espowsed to Iaacob only, for my love and hearty affection
is toward him alone. But the wise man teaches us, these be but the tricks of
an adultrous woman, she eats and wipeth her mouth and says I have done no
iniquity. Pro, 30, 20.

The scriptures which your self allege; do also make against your chvrch. Ephesians
5 30. We are members of (Christ's) body. of his flesh and of his bones. F^rst
your church can show no covenant that was made between Christ and her, at any
time: the gathering and planting of your church having been by the Magistrates
authority: not by the word of Christ, winning men's souls unto his faith,
separating them from the unbelievers, and taking them to communion with
himself. Secondly, in saying his body, the Apostle excludes al other bodies;
as more plainly appears in the other scripture, 2 Cor. 11.2. where he
prepared the church as a pure virgin for Christ, which cannot be whiles she
defiles her self with others; as does your church with the abominations of the
Papists; compa^ying also in the bed of love, with the Prelates, (whom the
better son of you have confessed to be Antichristian) and their infer^our
priests, who work upon men's consciences by their jurisdiction, ministry,
doctrines, canons etc. being as the bridegrooms of your church, not John 3.29
the friends of the bridegroom which stand and hear and rejoice for the
bridegrooms voice; for, that Christ should speak and rule, unless it be
according to their own canons; they cannot endure.

The other places in John. 15. and 17. will confirm also that the true members
of your best assemblies are not espowsed only to Christ For Christ shows,
John 15, 1
that his Father is the husbandman, who caleth and brings unto and planteth
in him the true vine; all the branches, that is the particular persons of the
Church. But the true members of your best assemblies: are as yet the branches
of that false Antichristian vine. your confused church of England: not
separated from, but living and growing in one stock, body and communion with
the idolatrous and profain. So that you cannot say, as did the Israel of God.
Psa, 80, 8.
Thou have brought a vine out of Egypt, thou have cast out the heathens and
planted it. Christ shows that his branches were ver 2.3.
purged of the Father, by the word spoken unto the^; your members are not yet
purged or cleansed by the word of Christ, from their idolatries, and profane
communion with the ympes of Satan,. The word of life the word of separation
from the serpent and his seed; has not yet sounded in the ears, or at least,
not sunk into the hearts of your people. Christ branches ver. 5,
bring forth much fruit, through their abiding in him, being able without him
to do nothing: your branches bear little fruit but unto themselves; and (as
Moses foretold) Deu 32^23
their grapes are grapes of gal their clusters bitter, for the public
idolatries used in your assemblies, after the manner of the mother of Rome. show
that your vine is of the vine of Reu, 11, 8
Sodom. Christ prayed only Ioh 17, 20 21.
for them that should beleeu in him through the word, that they all might be
one in the Father and the Son, as the Father in him, and he in the Father; but
the true members of your best assemblies, are one with the world, for whom
Christ would ver, 9,
not pray; being on spiritual body, and joined in communion with the whole
multitude of profane and wicked of the land; That strange it is you should read
the scriptures and not discern, how far you are from being united with
Christ, who as himself was not of the world, ve 14, 16,
so neither are his people, but chosen and separated out of the same.

Whereas you bring no proof that your people have true faith, but by Mr,
Iohnsons confession; it shows how distressed and helpless your estate is.
Yet do you great wrong to Mr. Io, (as the reader may see in the place that you
cite;) For although considering them apart from the constitution of your Church
he thinks by the appearance of the knowledge faith and fruits of diverse. that
they may well be thought in regard of Gods election in Christ, to be heirs of
salvation, and in that respect true Christians: yet in respect of the
constitution of your Church, he says, they can not be judged true Christian.
Now we deal against your church in regard of the constitution thereof; not
doubting but God has many elect heirs of sal^ation among you, which we leave
unto him that knows them. Your argument then from Mr Iohnsons confession, is
faulty, and agrees not with the rules of right reasoning; for whereas he
limiteth his judgment of them, showing in what respect it is and plainly
excepteth their church-constitution: you bear your reader in hand as if he
granted it without l^mitation? and that too, according to the Scriptures in
your first proposition, which evidently do concern the churches constitution.
You may much abuse any man's words, if what he speaks respectively you will
take and allege as spoken absol^telie. So your proof fails you.

In the end you referr us, to the confirmation of your 5, Argument following to
the Answer wh^reof I also refer the reader

Now though I have answered first to the assumption or second part of your
argument on proof whereof you do insist: yet the first part also shall be better
examined, ere I let it pass: Those churches (you say) whose true members are
only espowsed to Christ. are true visible churches. By true members I conceive
you do mean. (not as the truth is, all baptized and so retained in your
church, but) some few choice persons, or forward professors, among whom there
is an imaginary brotherhood, and separation from the other profane in your
parishes; though invery deed they stand all one body. If thus you intend (as
the proof of your assumption plainly intimates you do,) then offer you
violence to the similitud of marriage or espowsall which al me^ know is not with
some few members of a woman's body, as her fingers, or hands etc, but with the
whole woman, who gives her self by covenant unto her spowse or husband. And
as in civil marriage so it is in spiritual; for Israel of old. when the Lord
became a Ier 31.32
husband unto them, did not some of them, but Exo, 19. Deuteronomy, 5.3.22. and.
29.10.11.12,
all the multitude generally make covenant with their God: the scriptures also
which you alleg, Ephesians, 5.2 Cor 11 speak of the whole body of the church, not of
a few select members of the same. For though it be true of every visible
church, that some only are elect howsoever all be called; yet the discerning
of this belongs to God alone, and not to us; who esteem of persons according
to their outward covenant profession, and walking. Your reason then seems to
be like this; That woman's those true members,) as namely. her eye, and ear.
and some of her fingers) are espowsed only to such a man. She is his true and
lawful wife. But the true members of N, (howsoever her whole body in general
is coupled with an adulterer; and the most of her members ar affected and
wholly given over to that adulterer, and her pretended husband they hate, and
never made covenant with,) ar espowsed only to such a man Threfore. etc. If
this reason be not absurd. let him that reads judge; and if such absurdity be
not employed in your argument, show if you can in your next writing; for if you
strive to avoid this, you will fall into another evil as shall then be
manifested.

The 3. argument
IN what churches soever, is such an ordinance of God in public use and for^
by which there is ordinarily made an undoubted resurrection or quickening from
the death of sin unto the life of grace, and a new birth: they are true
visible churches of Christ. Iam, 1, 18, 1 Pet, 1 23.

But in the best of our assemblies is such an ordinance of God etc. Theref^^e
etc.

The assumption is manifest. because by that ordinance of preaching which is in
public use and force. there is ordinarily made an undoubted new birth; seeing
there do ordinarily appear in many. the undoubted fruits and testimonies of
Gods spirit, after the public and ordinary preaching of the word. in our best
assemblies.

Answer.
THE first part of this your argument seems to imply an error; as that a
church is first gathered and constituted of an unregenerate profane and worldly
people; over which are set Pastors and Teachers, who by preaching the Gospel
do beget them or some of them unto the faith and quicken them from the death
of sin etc which quickening or new birth, is a proof that they are a true
visible church. This course I find to be contrary unto the scriptures; which I
would thus manifest. When the Lord Jesus would show mercy to the world, and
call his elect out of the same, he sent Mar 16.25 Ep 4, 11
Apostles Prophets and Evangelists to preach his salvation to all peoples. The
people to whom they preached, were not (for the most part) churches of God. but
assemblies of heathens and idolaters; as for example, the men Act. 14 8 11.14.
etc
of Lystra of Act. 18, 6 10.1^ i 1 Co 12.2.
Corinth; of Athens where Paul preached Act. 17.2^.32.34
in Mars street; and other like places. By meane^ of this manner preaching many
people were regenerate or be^ne a new quickened from the death of s^^^e. and
tu^^ed from idols to the living God. And being thus begotten unto God, they
were A^t, 19.9
separated from others that bel^eued not. and joined together into a holy
com^union, not having other officers over them for a while till men were fitted
for such a work. Therefore often times the Apostles departed to other places and
left the Evangel^sts to Tit, 1, 5,
redress things that remained, and to ordein them Elders in every city, as
the Apostles appointed them These Elders, called generally Phil. 1.1
Bishops or Overseers, had charge Act. 20.17.28 1 Pe ^, 1.2.
of their particular flocks, and might not go from them as did the Apostles.
but attend and feed them: These now could not properly be said to beget their
people to the faith, (as the Apostle notes 1 Cor 4.15
to the Corinthians) but to feed and instruct them; and therefore are not
called Fathers, but (...)
Feeders, or Pasters. and Pedagogues. Child-leaders or Instructeurs. From which
I gather, that people must regenerate and borne again, before they may be
admitted into any particular church, or have officers over them; and that
ordinary ministers, which feed their flocks, cannot be said to beget them, as
is the common vawnt of you Ministers in England. which me thinks even reason it
self might show you: For you that are now over your parishes, how found you
your people at first, a church or no church? If you say a church then you begat
them not, but entered upon other men's labors that were before you if you say
they were not a church, then you condemn the state of your parishes as they
were planted, before you were their Ministers. Now then to come to your
^roposition; In whats^ever churches (that is assemblies. for so I understand
you to use the werd generally, Act. 19.32.39
as the (...),
Scripture sometime uses Ecclesia, (is such an ordinance of God in public use
and force, by which there is ordinarily made an undoubted new birth etc. they
are true visible churches of Christ: This I deny; for in the assemblies of the
heathens in the Apostles days (as before is proved) there was such an
ordinance of God sometimes in public use and force, as by it ordinarily there
was made an undoubted new birth; as the fruit of the Apostles preaching
sheweth^ yet were not those assemblies of heathens, true visible churches of
Christ. but such only as were converted to God and separated from the rest
that believed not; and joined in a holy communion together were true visible
churches.

Whereas you assume, that in the best of your assemblies is such an ordinanc^
of God etc this also I deny for your ministers are not Gods ordinance, he has
not called or sent them, they execute no lawful office in your assemblies. But
your assumption (you say) is manifest, because by that ordinance ^f preaching
which is in public use and force. there is ordinarily made an undoubted new
birth. I answer, first in very many of your assemblies there is no such
ordinance of preaching in public use, as you here b^ast of; but bare reading
only: yet those assemblies are by the Constitutions of your church, to be
reputed as true visible churches as the other. Secondly in those other other
where preaching is, I deny that there is ordinarily mad^ an vndoubed new birth;
Your proof is, because th^re do ordinarily appear in many, the undoubted
fruits and testimonis of Gods spirit etc. I answer, first if this be so, yet
what will these many, help the most and greatest ^umber, in whom such fruits
appear not? When many of the hethens believed the Apostles word, did their
belief bring the other that believed not, into the church did not the Apostles
separate the believers from the rest. and 2 Cor. 6, 14.7.
teach them to come from among them? Yet you for the faith of some, will unite
all the assembly unto Christ and his church, contrary to the Apostles
practice, and to all the scriptures. Secondly, I deny that there does
ordinarily appear in many such undoubted fruits of Gods spirit after your
ordinary preaching as for which we may esteem them true visible churches. Some
fruits I kn^w there do appear; so do there among the Papists: yea they take
occasion for such things to Pap. supto the K. reason of relig. 22.20.
reproach you. that there follow not so many good works after your preaching as
after their doctrine; but among neither of you: are those fruits seen, which by
the testimony of scriptures will prove you true visible churches. So we have
here but your bare affirmation to rest upon: and though I might thus end with
as bare a denial: t^l you bring further proof, yet for to help the reader. I
will show that ordinarily there appears not a new birth after your preaching.
Because of your public idolatrous estate, where^n you stand subject to
Antichristian Prelat^s and canons whiles you have your public worship after
the Romish idolatrous manner, and are still coming led in one body with the
profane, and ser^ents seed, with many other evils among you: which plainly show
you want the new birth and are still in your old mothers womb. This the
scriptures which you allege in your proposition will confirm; for the Apostles
show, Iam, 1, 18 1 Pet 1, 23. that Christ's church is a people begotten of God
with the word of truth; that is the Col, 1, 5,
Gospel: but your church was first begotten. gathered, constituted, ordered,
and is still continued, by the Magistrates word and authority; which if it did
not enforce the people. the estate wherein you now stand, would soon be
changed; your church dissolved, and either be better or Worse. And where you
learned so to enforce f^^th, and constrein men to be members of your church I
can not tell; unless you follow Mahomets doctrine who Alcoran, ^hap 18 and 19.
taught that men should be compelled to the faith, by war and sword.

Again, the Apostle adds this for a testimony and end of our new birth, that
we should be as the first fruit^ of Gods creatures This men are not, till they
be as was Israel, hallowed to the Lord; Ier, 2, 3, which was by separation from
the world Levit, 20.26, and a willing covenant with the Lord Exodus 19.5, 6.8;
D^ut, 26, 17, 18, 19, And that the like must be of us Christians, an other
scr^pture confirms, saying, Rui^ ^
These are they w^i^h are not defil^d with women, for they are virgins; (this
implies a se^ar^t^on from the world; ^h^s^ f^llow the Lamb whith^rsoeuer he
goes, (this argues a covenant and communion with Christ: and in the next
words. both points are repeted.) these are 1 bought from men. being the first
fruits 2 unto G^d and to the Lamb: after this follows the fruit, uer, 5.
and in their mouth (...) found no guile, for they are without spot before the
throne of God. Whereas therefore you have stood so long against us for
separation and would mainteyn a mere confusion of all sorts of people in a
C^^rch, upon an imaginary separation made in the clouds of your own fancies
whiles outwardly and indeed, you are one body with the wicked: you are
undoubtedly ^ot yet borne a new; your Church has not strength to bring forth:
your ministers are unskillful midwiues; and the saying of the Prophet
concerning the people of Ephraim, is verified also v^o^ your people be is an
unwise son. else would be not stand still such a time. even in the breaking
forth of the child^en. Hos 13, 13.

The 4. Argument.
IN what churches soever all things needful to salvation by public authory^y
and g^n^rall approbation, are ordinarily and publicly taught they are true
visible Churches.

But in the best of our assemblies are etc.

Therefore true visible churches.

Proof of the assumption,
In what churches soever ar ordinarily and publicly taught. the doctrines
wh^^by the people of God were converted and saved in the time of Christ and his
Apostles. in those churches are all things needful to salvation taught. But in
the b^st of our assemblies are etc, Ergo etc. Proof of this assumtion appears
out of Luke 1.77, 78. with Mar. 1, 4.15. Luke 24, 47. Act. 2.37, 38, 41. Act,
11, 17 18. Act 16.30.31, and 20.21.

If it be o^i^cted that the points in question between us. be needful to
salvation: it is thus disproued.

Al things needful to salvation are clearly set down in the scriptures to the
understanding of the spiritual 1 Cor 2.15. Dan 12.10. Pro. 8 9. and the things
that are not open to the spiritual, are not needful to salvation.

But the p^ynts in question between us, are not clearly s^t down in scripture
to the understanding of the spiritual; as appears both by thowsands of
^inist^rs and people of the church of England and other forr^yn churches among
^h^me are the cheifest lights of this age as Calvin, Beza, Iunius, Fiscat^r.
Gualter. Zanchius with others, which were undoubtedly spiritual; are of
c^ntrary judgment to the Separatists as also in that it is not agreed vp^n
among themselves. what is the discipline and order required by the word in
^ue^y p^ynt, nor in ^any other points of difference among them. namely touching
the diff^rences of the office of Doctor and Past^r etc.

Answer.
FIrst wishing the reader to remember what is answered to the first part of
your former Syllogism; I will with out further re^etition, proceed p^oceed in
answer of this; where the gro^nd and proposition of your first argument is
imperfect, so that which you build thereon is unsound. For whereas you speak
of all things n^^^full to s^lauation etc. to be publicly taught: you should
have added also, are obser^ed or done; according to Christ's saying Job. 15, 14
ye are my friends if ye do whatsoever I command you. If men hear truth
taught and obey it not, it avayles them nothing Therefore as the Apostle says,
(...) ^.22
be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only. d^ceiuing your selves.

Your assumption also is denied: for in your best assemblies all things
needful to salvation be not taught, much less done or practiced. To give an
instance; to be separated from the unbelievers, and to be joined together unto
a holy com^union and church; is needful to sal^ation; 2 Cor, 6, 17.18. Act, 1
47, Isa 65.9, Reu 21, 24. This is neither taught not practiced in your
a^semblies but oppugned by all the cauils you can. Your proof of the a^s^m^tion
is, a comp^rison of your church with those in Christ's time and the Apostles. I
answer you again, your church is not like those in d^^trine or in practice of
things needful to salvation.

Then you say, the proof of this assumption appears out of Luke 1.77. etc.
This is a strange proof of your assumption, which is this, But in the best of
our ass^mblies are taught etc. Does Luk 1, 77. show what is taught in your
a^semblies? and why does not Mat, 15, 9. and 23, 16 17, etc. show what is
taught there also? The places that you allege show what doctrine was taught in
the Jewish and Apostolic churche^; not what is taught in yours. It must be
therefore your own writings, sermons, doctrine, practice and estate. that must
prove your a^sumption. But you will say (perha^s) your doctrines and practices.
agree with those mentioned in these scriptures. That I deny; and would therefore
that you should have made application of the particulars: Which because you
have not done, I will do for you.

You allege Luk, 1, 77.78. with Mar, 1.4.15 where knowledge of salvation is
giu^n unto (Gods) people. by remission of their sins, through the tender mercy
of our God etc. and this was done, by preaching the baptisime of amendment of
life, for r^mission of sins. and belief in the Gospel. So in Luke 24, 47
repentance and remission of sins should be preached in Christ's name among all
nations. The same things are also taught in all the other places which you
cite, as the reader may see in the texts. Now these things (you will say) are
taught and observed among you. I show the contrary thus.

First you give knowledge of salvation, (though faslly) unto other then to his,
that is to Gods people; in as much as you give the sacraments, which are the
seals of our salvation unto the profane and wicked and their seed thus
prostituting the most holy things. even Christ h^mselfe, unto hat^rs and
bl^sphemers of God, (a^ you cann ^r deny but a number of your church are) and
such as make a mock of religion; and herein you ar^u^ty of high sacrilege
against God.

Secondly, the doctrine of repentance. is not truly taught nor obeyed in your
Church. For unto true repentance is required, 1 a knowledge or notice given and
taken of sins; Isa 58, 1, Lam, 2, 14 and 3 39, 40. 2 an acknowledgment or
confession made of sins, (as a testimony of true sorrow of heart,) with asking
mercy Leu 4, 13, 14. etc, and 5, 5.6, Psalm. 32, 3, 5, 3 and a for^aking of
sins, or amendment of life. Prou. 28, 13, Psalm, 28.21.2 Cor. 7, 11. Eze. 18,
21.

N^w the sins of your church have not by your Ministers been signifie^ to your
people; as namely their confuse estate and commixture with the wicked; though
it be a sin every where reproved in the scriptures. as before is showed.

The great transgressions which your people daily commit in Gods publ^ck
worship, whiles, you have your own wilworship, and stinted prayers with^^t
warrant from Chr^sts testament, read in place of Gods true spiritual service;
these are not preached against, reproved or cast out by your ministers
doctrine; but contrariwise, they have by word and writing so^ght to m^inteyn
the same. The seru^le subjection that both ministers and people, are in, under
your Lords the Bishops and their courts; is not disco^ere^ by your min^sters to
be a sin and bondage which you must depart from, if you will be subject to
that only Lord and master Christ though secretly they have sought to
undermine that jurisdict^on of Bishops which how ca^ they do, if it be of
Christ; or how may a^y stand under it, if it be of Antichrist?

This being the sinful state of your church, as we well know. (and you ar never
able to iust^fy your selves;) your ministers not teaching repenta^c for these
things, nor being suffered by your Church to speak against them, teach not
repentance truly. For, It is not yenough to cry out of Idolatry, or to preach
repentance from sins in general; for so they do among the Papists, but the
particular sins of every people and pers^n mu^t be reproved; yea every sin
that is seen and discerned, or else your preachers do not their duty. Gods
word teaches u^ that ^f a man walk in any one sin though he do not all he
shall not live. but die the death Ezekiel. 18, 11, 13. When Gibeah was given ove^
Judge. 19 ^2, and*
to the Sin of Sodom, if the Priests and prophets should have preached
against idolatry, swearing, breaking of the Sabbath, and such like evils. and
not against that particular filthynes which the people followed should they
have preached repentance truly? When Israel followed 1 Kin: 12 28, 29.30.
Iereboams calves at Dan and Bethel, if the ministers then had preached against
Sodo^ie, whordome, drunkenness, and the like, and not cried out against that
present idol worship, but pleaded rather for it: should they have t^u^ht
repenatnce truly? Even thus it is with your best min^ster^, they will th^^de^
out in their pulpits, against Popery, and idol^try in ^e^er^ll against theft,
whordome, pr^de, coueteousnes, and m^^y other i^q^^^ie^, but the sin which
cleaves so fast to the bones of ^o^r Church, the heinous enormities in Gods
worship amongst you* these they meddle not with, neither upon pain of
excommunicati^^ draw the people to repentance for them; as after I will further
show. Perhaps now and then they will glance at the Bps. or some other
corruptions, but bring the people from under these iniquities, they do not,
nay they plead for them rather, and cry o^t upon us, which have forsaken so
gross ab^minations.

Now there being no notice given by the ministers, or taken by the people of
the si^ns wherein they live: the other two parts of true re^entance do also
fail among you: for far you be from confessing your sins, which though you
offer the sacrifice of fools, Eccl. 4, 17,
yet will you not know that you do evil, and most far from amending them,
when with so high a hand you do maintain them: although the testimony and
s^ffrings of us your dis^ised and persecuted brethren, against them, have
sounded in your ears now man^e a day. Thus teach they not repentance aright.

As for faith it cannot be sound, and true, where it has not ground o^ the
covenant and promise of God: Gods covenant and ^romise of salvation, you have
not without repentance, as Christ said, Luke 13, 3 5,
Except ye repent. you shall all likewise p^rish for surely God will wound the
Psa, 68, 21,
hairie ^ate of him that walks in his sins. To preach faith therefore. and
a^ply justification by faith, to an unrepentant people, is to ^rofane that holy
doctrine, and turn the grace of God into licent^ousnes. But to give the seals
of the righteousness of faith, (baptism, and the Lords supper) to the wicked
blasphemers, irreligious, and to their seed, it is a sin of sin^ for which
your ministers shall give an heavy account to Christ at his appearing. as have
counted the ^recious blood of his testament an vnholi^ thing. and washed and
fed therewith even dogs and swine, as the scripture Man, 7.6
calls such ungodly ^ersons. And thus you have not truly taught among you
either rep^ntance from dead works or faith toward God, which are the doctrine
of the beginning of Christ and the very foundation, as the Heb. 6, 1
Apostle says.

I will now also compare the practice of the Apostles (in the plac^ which you
cite) with yours, that the reader may see how your right eye is blinded, to
bring scripture so plain against your selves. In Act. 2, 37, etc, the manner of
gathering and planting that church' is thus described. There was first the word
preached. by the Apostles, verse 14 etc which being heard, pricked the hearts of
the people, verse, 37. there was repentance taught (not for adultery, theft,
worshipping of Idols o^ the like, whereof it may be that people was not known
to be guilty. but) for their particular trespass in so after more plainly Act
1, 13 14.19, 26,
refusing of Jesus Christ, into whose name they must be baptized, if they would
be saved, verse 38, then followed a plain separation from such as frowardly
resisted the truth. verse. 40, and none were baptized or joined to the church
but such as gladly received the word verse^ 41. After this followed a
cont^newing (notwithstanding the imminent peril of trouble and persecution for
the truth sake,) in the Apostles doctr^ne, and fellowship, and breaking of
bread, and prayer^; verse 42, If you had walked in this primitive churches
steps you should before the constituting of your Church, have preached unto the
poor ignorant and idolatrous Papists, (which was the general face of the land
at Q Mary's death,) repentance for their sins in all their idolatries. w^ll
worships, and superstitions, subjection to Antichrist, his prelacie,
priesthood, and government. etc. To such as had their hearts pricked with your
doctrine, you should have showed the true way of the Gospel faith, and holy
walking therein You should have taugh^ them a separation from the profane and
obstinate; and have gathered into the Church, such only as gladly received the
word; and with them you should have walked in a holy communion and practice of
Christ's ordinances, th^ugh Princes and Parl^aments, though men and Angels,
should have forbidden, and threatened you for it. Thus had your church bee^ the
daughter of that mother church in Ier^salem, whereas now by neglecting this
pattern, and reteyning the Popish confuse multitude, and a great part of their
ministry and worship; you have imitated B^bylon ^e mother of fornications, and
^re as unlike Sion, as you are like your selves.

The objection which you feared, and therefore would prevent with answer.: is
yet of more weight then will be eased by your syllogism; the a^sumption
whereof I deny For the true constituting of a Church by the word perached,
call^ng men to a willing holy covenant with God sep^ratin^ them from the ways
of Satan and Antichrist. his false and idoatr^^s worship, priesthood and
government. uniting them together in the com^union of the true faith, and bond
of love and peace, (which are the controversies between you and us,) these
points are clearly set down in scriptures to the vnderstand^ng of the
spiritual, as the history of all the Bible, and the pract^se of the Apostles,
and primitive churhes already alleged do plainly show and I am sure you will
not deny, but they were spiritual.

Whereas you would ^roue, they are not clearly set down to the understand of
the spiritual, because thowsands of ministers and people of the church of
Engl^nd, are of contrary judgment to us: first we have many testimonies of your
own min^sters for the things that we defend against you as in page 2.3. answer,
to Mr Hild Mr, Iak.
this and other books we have manifested. Secondly, if we had no such
testimony, yet what do you but make your selves judges in your own cause, that
though we bring never so plain evidence against you from the word, yet if you
see it not, or will not see. it must not be needful for salvation. More unsound
and popish doctrine has seldom been taught But I leave upon you the saying of
Christ unto the Pharisees, If you ^ere blind ye should not have sin. but now
ye say, WE SEE therefore your sin remains, John, 9, 11.

And whereas you further bring aginst us, forreyn churches, and special
persons the chiefest lights of this age, first mind whither this be not ^lso ^
ground of Popery, so to press humane authority: and whether the Papists cannot
for many of the^r heresies, allege the ancient fathers, (the chiefests lights
of their ages) whom your selves I suppose will not deny but to be spiritual,
seeing their test^monies are often alleged by your church in pulpits and in
print.

Secondly, this your dealing is such, as both the better sort of the late
Fathers (as Augustine for example, August ce^tra Maxim l. 3 c. 14 Nec ego
nicena^ Sinodu^ tibi, nec tu mihi Arimi nemse^ debes ^bijcere scriptuarum
authoritatibus res etc.
who was of m^nde that counsels, Bishops etc. ought not to be objected, for
trial of controversies, but the holy scriptures only,) and the very
superstitious Popelings themselves have condemned: saying that Panormita^ de
electio et elect Potest.

^. signis:


we are rather to beleeu ^ne priuat^ faithful man then a whole Council. and the
Pope (himself) if a man have better a^thorety and reason on his side.

Thirdly your objection and pleading against us, is much like as if the Jews
should have objected against Christianity. thus: It is not needful to
salvation to beleeu that Jesus who was cruc^fied is the Christ: for then it
would be clearly set down in scripture to the understanding of the spiritual
Dan 12, 10, Prou, 8, 9, but that it is not for the thousands of priests and
people of Israel, Gods own people, among whom are the chiefest lights of this
age, the Rabbines, expounders of the law etc. which are undoubtedly spiritu^ll;
are of contrary judgment to you his disciples, Job 7 47, 48, 49.52.

Fourthly, (as I have before answered) forreyn churches, and the lights in
them, have clearly seen the things we stand for, and do asse^t with us,
touching separation from Antichristianisme, gathering into and walking in a
holy communion of Saints, and other points of greatest moment between you and
us. as their Harmony of Confessions, besides other particular books many. do
testify. If you object their particular judgment of your churches estate, I
answer, that is not needful to salvation therefore they may miss in it; and
yet be spiritual: for if men i^ their own churches profes^e and walk in the
truth so far as God gives them to see; and think better of other churches
then they do deserve, such errors even the most spiritual are subject unto.

It was clearly revealed in scriptures that the Gentiles should be called under
the Gospel, Deuteronomy 32.43 Genesis 12, 3 Psalm. 67. and, 117 Isa. 11.10 Christ himself
plainly confirmed and commanded it, Mat, 28.19, John, 10, 16, Act 1, 8. Yet the
Apostle Peter himself and many other spiritual men, perceived it not till in
more special and particular weise it was to them revealed Act. 10.14, 28, 34,
3^, and, 11, 2, ^, 18. As Peter and many other godly then, failed in esteeming
worse of the Gentiles then they should: so learned and godly men now may fayl,
in esteeming better of your est^t^ then it does deseru^.

The 5. Argument.
Whatsoever church is the mother of the faithful, is a true visible church,
but the best of our assemblies are etc. Ergo true visible churches.

The preposition is true. because that regeneration and new birth, is only
ordirarily wrought by the word preached, Rom, 10.8.17. Iam. 1.18. 1, Pet. 1,
23. which is only and ordinarily found in the visible Church. Gal, 5, 26. 1
John. ^. 5.

The assumption is true, because many are ordinarily newborn in our best
assemblies, by the ordinance of preaching in public use and force; as
appears by Mr Iohnsons foresaid confession, as also by the means of the
causes and means ordained by God to beget faith in the hearers, and efficacy,
thereof, Esa. 55, 11, Romans 10.17, and lastly, ^y the infallible effects of
faith, and fruits of the spirit, appearing in the true members of our best
assemblies, Gal. 5, 6, 22.

Answer.
HEre you seem to bring a new argument, though it be but the old in a new coat:
for take away this mantel wherewith your Major is clothed, The mother of the
faithful; and all the rest will be but regeneration and new birth. wrought as
(you say) by the preaching in your best assemblies. Which things we heard in
your third argument, and there refuted. As you here urge them again, I further
answer, first to your proposition. Whatsoever church (say you) is the mother of
the faithful, is a true visible church But Israel (say I) in her idolatrous
estate, was the mother of the faithful; yet was she not in that estate a true
visible church: therefore your proposition is not true

That Israel then was the mother of the faithful, appears by the words of
the Lord Plead with your mother Hos, 2, 2, That they which were willed thus to
plead, ver 1
were the faithful appears by the^r names Ammi and Ruhamah, that is, My
people and she that has obtained mercy. That yet notwithstanding this mother
was not a true visible church, appears by the Plea to be made against her,
ver, 2.
She is not my wife, neither am I her husband: her estate being (as elsewhere
is said) 2 Chr, 15 3,
without the true God; and her children that continewed in her idolatry,
should Hos. 2, 4.
obteyn no mercy, Thus you see a church may be said to be the mother of the
faithful, and yet not be a true Church of God.

You would confirm the proposition to be true. because regeneration and new
birth is ordinarily wrought by the word preached, which is one lie and
ordinarily, found in the visible church. I answer, the word preached is to be
found also in the false church; as among Papists, Anabaptists, Anabaptists etc.
as ordinary if not more ordinary then ^n many of you^ assemblies: and
although there be not such or so many truths ^aught among them as are among
you, yet the word that is taught, has effect for sanct^fication of life, in as
great measure, as ordinar^ly appears in your Church of Engl.; where so much
profannes reigns, as all men see and know.

The church of Rome. is as your selves pr^fe^^e, a fal^e church: yet doubt I
not, neither do I think you doubt but sundry children have been borne unto
God by that harlot. The church of En^land, it as we profess; a false church,
your Ministry also fal^e: yet God which brought light out of darkness, has
brought forth, (I do^bt not,) and saved many of his dear ch^ldren among you.
But let not thi^ embolden the rest to continue with you in your false est^te:
least they find no mercy with the Lord, because they be children of
fornications.

To your assumption then I answer, as you first set it down. I grant it; yet
will not your conclusion follow for it may be a mother of the faithful and yet
no true visible church; for the reason foreshewed, But as you afterward explain
your self saying; the assumption is true because many a^e ordinarily newborn, etc. I deny it thus to be true, because neither is a new birth
ordinarily to be had among you neither have you Gods ordinance of preaching in
public use and force. If your people were truel^e regenerate they would not
sin; m^stike me not, I know the remainders of sin dwell in the best men,
and draw them to that they neither Rom 7 15
would not ought, but as the Apostle says, 1 Ioh 3.9.
He that is borne of God sins not. And seeing so many and great sins reign
in your best assemblies. how can you say you are regenerate? for I have before
manifested, that ordinarily people are kept and continued among you, in an
unholy communion with the wicked and irreligious, and nourished with
s^perstition and idolatr^: these and the like things are no tokens of true
regeneration.

Mr Iohnsons confession, is page 39,
before treated of: and will not import that which you would infer.

The causes and means ordained by God to beget faith, are not by Esa, 55 11,
R^m, 10.17. proved to be among you For there is spoken of the word going out of
the Lords mouth: but your min^sters are not the Lords mouth, because they have
not from him their calling; Romans 10.15.
sending and authority to preach, b^t have it from his enemy Antichrist, and
(as the Apostle says) how shall they preach except they be sent? Neither are
they as the Lords mouth: because they separate not the precious from the vile.
Ier. 15 19.

Neither are the infallible effects of faith etc. proved by G^l. 5, 6, ^2. to
be in the true members of your best assemblies: For seeing faith is there ver, 6.
said to work by love, and there is no love of Christ, unless men Ioh 14.1^^
and 15.10
keep his commandments, and his command^ments are not kept in your idolatrou^
assemblies: it cannot be affirmed that you love the Lord, if so you contine^
continue in sin: or that you have true faith. But rather, seeing the contrary
works of the flesh; which the Apostle there mentions. Ga, 5, ^9 20.^1.
adultery. fornication, etc, idolatry, witchcraft, hatred etc. contentions.
seditions heresies, etc. are found in the true members of your church, (for all
among you are baptized, and all baptized are true members;) you are more
rightly to be reputed unregenerate and vnsanct^fied, in that your sinnfull and
confused estate. Neither have you Christ's 1 Cor. 5,
power in your best assemblies to cast out the wicked from among you: but they
are fostered. f^d, and blessed. with your word, prayers, sacraments, etc. and
such as absteyn from your idolatry and from communion with the wicked; you
hate, reproach, excommunicate and persecute: that your church, is indeed, a
mother to the profane. But a stepmother to the faithful.

The 6, argument,
THose Churches for whom the Churches of God rei^yce. are true Churche^ 2.
These. 1.4.

But our best assemblies are such, for whom the churches of God rejoice.

Ergo.
The reason of the proposition is, because the churches of God have the spirit
of discerning; a true church and ministry from a false; as Ioh 10.27, 5. Man
24, 24 1 Cor. 14 32. and 10.15^ 1 Ioh. 4 1^

The assumption is true; because all the churches of God, rejoice, in our best
assemblies; and have given us the right hand of fellowship and testimony of a
tru^ church; having joined our public confession with their Harmony.

Answer.
THIS argument is one and the same, with the third of your first
Constlerations, save that it has gotten the fashion of a syllogism. The in
s^fficiencie of this reason, I have there showed, and thither do referr the
reader. Further here I answer, that you turn the testimony of the reformed
churches, to your best advantage, yet neither with equity, nor good success
For they joy not for your best assemblies, more then for your worst. but for
your Church in general, and the confe^sion of the same. They rejoice for every
Bishop, Priest and Deacon, and for every Parish that makes such confession. as
Bishop Jewel in his Apology has set down: Part of which Apology they have
united with their Harm^nie. And why bring you them as approving your best
assemblies only. Your Lords the Prelates may truly say you do them wrong: to
apply unto your selves the applause which other churches give to their
Apology. They will tell you in your own words, the churches of God have the
spirit of discerning a true church and Ministry from a false. But the reformed
^hurches have discerned the national church of England, (whereof the
Archb^shop of Cant^ is Pastor^ to be a true church; they have discerned the
Di^cesan Bish^ps in England as well as the Parish Priests, to be true
Ministers; and rejoice as well for their Sees, as for your Parishes, having
joined these all alike in their Harmony And what will you ( that suffer s^ many
things for sep^rating in your church. as yo^ s^yd) answer to your right
reverend Fathers, against whom like unnatural children, yo^ hau^ striven so
long, and would have them with their j^risd^ct^on ^ut out of your church that
the P^r^sh priest or Deacon might Lord it alone.

More particularly I answer: your first propostion is unsound, and cannot be
pro^ed from the scripture you allege 2 Th^s. 1.4. from which text yo^ must
conclude on this fa^h^on. P^ul and Siluanus and Timotheu^ rejoiced of the
Thesalonians in other churches of G^d, because of their patience and faith in
all persecutions etc. Therefore the reformed churche^ rejoicing for the church
of England. it must needs be a true church. The conseq^ence is denied. True
churches may err in their judgment of an other church, especialy if the^ be not
rightly informed of the stat^ thereof? as the reformed churches are not by that
your Apology. Moreover he that minds the things recorded of that church, 1
These. 1, 3, 6, 7, 9 etc. and the different estate to be seen in your church:
may soon percei^e their is no l^ke cause of joy for you ^s for them; that if
there be a l^ke effe^t, it is in error.

The reason of the proposition, is no better confirmed by the scriptures you
allege: For when Chr^^t says John. 10, 27, 5. M^ sheep h^ar my voice and they
will not follow a stranger; does he send his sheep to other flocks, to try
their shepherds by; or if I see my shepherd to be a th^ef, a hireling, a
wolf? m^st I commit my sowl unto him, because other shepherds w^ll give him the
right hand o^ fellowship? In the other scriptures, say not the Apostles to the
particular churches. and persons, 1 Cor, 10, 15.
judge ye what I sa^? 1 Ioh 4 1.
try ye the spirit and believe not every spirit; But you would not have our
selves to iud^e or try, but to send over sea, and hear what other churches
judge; if they ap^roue we must not disalow. You may as well bid us. put out our
own eyes. that other men may lead us; and as soon will we foll^w you in that,
as in this your popish counsel. We have learned to live by Hab, 2.5
our own faith. and know that Gal. 6.5.
every man shall bear h^s own b^rden, and answer for himself to God.

But you will tell us, if we can judge and discern the true church: others can
do it also and better. I answer, I may err judgment, and so may others, even
whole churches, therefore let every man look how he judges, and how he
de^endeth on other men: and let evey man's ^udgment be tried by the scriptures.
For this cause we say unto you; seeing we have fought for the judgment of other
churches, but can get no answer. procure you some reasons from them, in defense
of your church, ministry, worship, and ecclesiastical gouer^ment: and if by
Gods word they can just^fy those things, and evince that we have done evil to
depart from you: we will return unto you. Otherwise if they rejoice neu^r so
much for your estate: we are ver^ly persuaded, that both they and you have more
caus^ to mourn, for the many abominations that are am^ng (...)

To conclude, consider in an example, the weight of your argument; for by the
like reason the envious ministers in Paul's time, might thus have just^fied
themselves

That m^nisterie and ministration for which the Apostles of Christ rejoice, is
true to be obeyed, and continued in. But our ministry and min^stration is such
as for it the Apostle Paul rejoices, yea and will r^ioyce Philip ^ 16.18.

If you Answer the Apostle rejoiced for the preaching of Christ, not forth
envious affection of the preachers, who might be damned themselves,
notwithstanding their true doctrine: it is true. And so mind I for the
reformed churches. They rejoice for the many truths you profes^e against
Popery, (as we also do the like,) yet may you nevertheless perish for your
false constitution, idolatrous worship, popish hierarchy and other
transgressions that are among you. Amend your lives therefore, and turn your
feet into the ways of peace, for if you rely upon man, an^ make ^lesh your
arm; and will not he^r the word of the Lord that condemns your iniquities.
you shall perish in your sins, and other ch^rches shall not be able to excuse
of s^ue you

ARGVMENTS That the PREACHERS of the best assemblies of the church of ENGLAND,
are true ministers of Christ. I
THE pr^achers after whose public and powerful doctrine, of the word do
ordinarily follow repe^^ance, conversion to God, saving faith in Christ, love
to the brethr^n, and o^he^ fruits of the spirit Gal. 5, 6, 22. in the hearers,
are true ministers of God and of the visible ch^rc^:

But after ^he doctrine of Gods word taught by the preachers of our best
asse^bli^s, do ord^narily appear the fruits of the spirit in the hearers.

Therefore the preachers of our best assemblies, are true ministers of Christ.

The ^roposition is proved, because only the word that God does send in the
(...) o^ his ministers, is ordinarily effectu^ll for these things Ier. 23, 22,
Esa. 55 11. Mat, 7, 20, Luk 1, 76 Ioh. 10.1, 2. 1 Cor, 9 1.^, and 4, 15.

The assumption is proved by the answer to the assumption of the 4 argume^^
(...) the churche^.

Answer.
OUR separation is from your Church consisting of many assemblie^ all compact
into ore bod^e, and from all your Ministry both prelacie and priesthood. We
cannot tell which assemblies or ministers be best; for they that seem best may
prove worst, because they most deceive the simple: the wolf that comes in a
sheeps coat, is no whit better than he that comes in his native hiew: but he
may do more harm, in that he is disguised. Reason would persuade us, that the
Bishops are the preachers of your best assemblies, for they have greatest
dignity, fatherhood and authority in your church: they preach in the highest
and most honorable assemblies of the land; they are most careful to observe
their oath of due obedience, to keep the canon^ orders laws and ceremonies of
your church and set themselves against such as secretly undermine the state of
the church and ministry of England, yet openly stand members and professed
friends of the same. They and their assemblies, are best ordered after the
constitution and laws of your church. So that to speak as I think, I know not
which assemblies be best, where the Leven has sow red the whole lump; though I
can guess which you do mean: but plain dealing about your ministers and
as^emblies would have beseemed you best. Tell us therefore (when you next write)
what ministers you mean; whether the Bishops, Deanes, Doctors etc. that are in
the cathedral churches; or the Doctors and Divines that are in your
universities; or the Parsons, Vicars, Lecturers that are in your Parishes?
Again what Ministers they be whither Apostles or Prophets or Evangelists or
Pastors or Teachers; for all these are ministers, Ephesians. 4. and meet it is to
know your meaning: for though Apostles and Pastors be both ministers ordained
of Christ, yet if one will say every Pastor is an Apostle, he is but a liar.
So you see it is needful that we ransack these your ambiguous and general
terms. Now for your argument; first I answer to the proposition, that though
these fruits you mention, do many times follow the doctrine of Christ's
ministers, yet not theirs only, nor always Not only because other men that
are not in office of Ministry may by exercise of their gifts work such
fruits, as appears 1 Cor. 14.1.31.3.24, 25. etc. I appeal also to your
selves, whether you think not that your best ministers, though silenced, or
degraded, from all ministerial office: may not* when they teach, work
repentance, fath and other fruits of the spirit.

Neither do these fruits always follow the doctrine of true ministers; for
Noah preached 120^ years yet followed there not faith, and repentance in the
old world: Christ himself preached to Chorazin and Bethsaida; yet left Ma
11.20 21,
the woe upon them; and complains (in Esaias that he had Isa, 49, 4.
labored in vayn among the Jews: and of Israel it is said, Rom 10.21
All the day long have I stretched out my hand a disobedient and g^ynsaying
people. To reason therefore from the effects, this man wrought faith by his
teaching therefore he is a true min^ster; or this man wrought not faith by his
teaching, therefore no true minister; is unsound, and vnconcludable by the
scriptures

The ^roofs of your proposition being examined, will be found to light for your
purpose; if you mean that the officers doctrine, only, or always, is
effectual for these thin^s, to weet, repentance, faith etc often I know it is;
and always it has effect, either to life or death in the hearers.

Your scriptures are, Ier, 23, 22. which shows what true prophets should
labor to do, namely to turn sinners from their evil way etc, (whereas the
false prophets did otherwise, Eze, 13, 22:) but proves not, that the prophets
only did this; for the Priests and Levites did it also Mal, 2, 6, yea private
men may often turn their neighbors from evil, Leu 4, 27.8. and 19.17. Prou.
31.26, Mal. 3, 16, Mat. 18.15. Iam. 5.19, 20. neither proves it, that the
prophets always did this; for Esaias cries, Lord who has believed our
report? Isa. 53.1 and it is written, that the Lord testified to Israel by all
the Prophets and by all the Seers, saying, turn from your evil ways etc.
nevertheless they would not obey but hardened their necks etc. 2 Ki^, 17, 13,
14

The next place Isa 55.11. shows the nature of Gods word, which is effect^^ll
to make better or worse as he will that sends it: not always t^ convert, for
Exo. 5, etc.
Pharaoh was hardened by it: not only by the officers, f^r ^^is hono^r is to
all the Saints, to have the high acts of God in their m^^thes, and a two edged
sword in their hands, to execute vengeance in the heathens, and corrections
among the people etc. Psalm, 149 6, 7.9.

The fruits whereby false prophets are known from true; Mat. 7.^0, are not
the effects of their doctrine by converting men only; for so many 2 Kin, 1.7
13, 14
true prophets heretofore should have been judged false: but the doctrine it
self, and the works of life and conversation, are the prophets fruits; which
also may both be good, in them that have no office at all.

The next place Luke 1.76. speaks in part^cular of John's extraordinary
office, and work wherein God employed him; and proves your purpose no more
then the other.

John, 1^, 1, 2. speaks of lawful enterers into the sheepfold by the door,
and of thieves that clime up an other way. What this will say for your
ministers I know not unless, to prove them thieves; for their entrance into
the ministry by the d^ore, that is, by Christ's ordinance i^ his church they
cannot show; no lawful office or calling have they to witn^sse for them Yea
they are ashamed of their office, calling, and entrance by the Bishops, and
secretly do disclaym that to their people, and pretend their gifts, graces and
effects, for proof of their ministry, (...) many of us that have dealt with
them; do know: But what say I, secr^^ly? nay openly and in print they have
yielded, that 2 adm^n to the Parlia^, ^ 16.
they enter not in by Christ, but by a popish and unlawful vocati^n. The like
seems ^o be closely implied in these your arguments, where you neither name
what office your preachers have, nor how lawfully they come by it, as the
reader may observe.

The words of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 9.1, 2, and 4.15. show two things, 1 ^
lawful office of Apostleship, 2 and Gods blessing upon his labors in that
office: neither of Which can be showed by your ministers; neither proves it
your proposition more then the other places. For I hold with you that Gods
lawful ministers, are the principal, and most excellent ordinary outward
means, for to work repentance, faith, etc. but not the only, as you would
have it.

The Assumption, namely, that such effects do follow your preachers doctrine
is denied. You refer us for the proof thereof, to that which you wrote before:
and I also refer the reader to that which is before answered And here I will add
a further demonstration, that true repentance can not follow your preachers
doctrine, in as much as they teach not true repentance, neither can teach it
because their mouths are mouzled by your church that they may not speak For
thus Constitut and Canons eccl^siast. 1603.
it has enacted.

Canon. 4,
Whosoever shall hereafter affi^me that the form of Gods worship in the Church
of England established by law, and contained in the book of Common prayer etc.
is a corrupt, superstitious or unlawful worship of God, or conteyneth any
thing in it, that is repugnant to the scriptures, let him be excommunicated
ipso facto; and not restored but by the Bishop of the place, or Archbishop
after his repentance and public revocation of such his wicked errors. Can. 6.


Whosoever shall hereafter affirm that the rites and ceremonies of the church
of England by law established, are wicked, Antichristian or superstitious, or
such as being commanded by lawful authority, men who are zealously and godly
affected, may not with any good conscience approve them, use them or as
occasion requires subscribe unto them; let him be excommunicated, ipso facto,
and not restored until he repent, and publicly revoke such his wicked errors.

Can. 7.
Whosoever shall hereafter aff^rm that the government of the Church of Eng.
under his Majesty by Archbishops, Bishops Deanes, Archdeacons and the rest
that do bear office in the same, is Antichristian or repugnant to the word of
God, let him be excommunicated ipso facto, and so continue until he repent and
publicly revoke such his wicked errors.

Can. 8,
Whosoever shall hereafter affirm or teach that the form and manner of making
and consecrating Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, conteyneth any thing in it that
is repugnant to the word of God etc; let him be excommunicated ipso facto; not
to be restored until he repent and publicly revoke such his wicked errors.

These and the like constitutions, has your representative church of England
made for maintenance of their worship, ministry, ecclesiastical government,
rites ceremonies. etc, against which your forward preachers heretofore so
earnestly inveighed, as being corrupt unlawful and antichristian: but now
behold their mouths are shut, they may not preach repentance for the many
abominations that are among you; if they do, they are excommunicated ipso
facto, and then are they neither officers nor members of your church. Wherefore
your ministers are either fain to hold their peace, and be such as the Prophet
Eze 13 4
complains of, that rise not up in the breaches, nor make up the hedge for
the house of Israel, to stand in the battle in the day of the Lord; or else they
preach for defense of your own invented worship, pompous clergy, and laudable
ceremonies; and are such as the prophet blames for Eze 13.7
having seen a vain vision, and spoken a lying divination, saying, the Lord
says it, albeit he has not spoken. What reward then can they exspect for
their preaching but as the Lord there threatens, that verse 8.
his hand shall be upon them, they shall not be in the assembly of his people,
nor written in the writing of the house of Israel. Wherefore if there be any
weight or soundnes in this your argument, it may be returned upon you thus. The
preachers after whose public doctrine do ordinarily follow impenitency, and
continuance in an evil and idolatrous estate of life in the hearers, are not
the true ministers of God. But after the doctrine of the preachers of your best
assemblies, do ordinarily follow and appear impenitency, idolatry and other
fruits of the flesh in the hearers: (as is proved by the answer to this and to
the assumption of your 4 argument for the churches.) Therefore the preachers of
your best assemblies, are not the true Ministers of God.

The 2 Argument
SVch Ministers as have promise of salvation in their present standing, ar true
Ministers of Christ.

But so have the ministers of our best assemblies; Ergo. etc.

Proof of the assumption,
Because the promise of salvation is given to such Ministers as 1, are
faithful and wise stewards, giving the household meat in due season Mat, 24,
45.46. 2. build gold silver or stubble on the foundation 1 Cor 3, 12, 15. 3.
continue in taking heed to themselves and unto learning 1 Timothy 4, 16. 4, feed
the flock willingly, of a ready mind, as ensamples, 1 Pet. 5.4. 5. turn many
souls to righteousness. Dan. 12, 3.6. Ez^ 1, 3. Thou shall save thine own
soul.

But these things do the ministers of our best assemblies: Ergo.

Answer.
THe assumption of this argument I deny; and will consider the 6. reasons that
you bring to prove it.

1. Are faithf^l and wise stewards etc.] but your ministers are your Lord
Bishops st^wards or bayliffes, not the Lord Chr^sts: by them the^r m^uthe; are
^^ened and shut a (...). For let them show when, where and how God gave the
st^war^shi^ and key of the house to them, as he did to Is, 22, 20 2^ 22,
E^akin, Th^s should be first cleared, before they presume to administer as
stewards. Did not the Bishop (after they had ^romised their reverend obedience
unto him) say unto each of them, Book of orders.
Rec^ive the holy Ghost whose sins thou do forgive they ar forgiven etc,
and be thou a faithful dispensour of the word of God, etc? Thus have they
their stewardship or ^ffice of dispens^tion, from their spiritual Lord, and
reverend Father the ^relate; who by his presuming to give the Holy Gh^st,
should seem to be Ioh 20.22 23,
Christ, or rather, as I think 2 The, 2.4,
Antichrist: but say you whether he be, when you next write. As is their
calling, such is their administration: for, they feed not Gods household, but
confuse assemblie^, wherein are many ^rofane, ^uch as Christ caleth Mat. 7:
dogs and swine, unworthy to be at his table; tho your stewards admit them to
the table of your church, to your most holy actions.

Neither give they them meat in due season; for such diet as is meet for them,
to rebuke them for their idolatrous estate, they give them not; false doctr^nes
See a catalogue of the^ in answ. to Mr Iac. pa 158, etc:
many they give them to feed on and such meats Christ never left for his
household. Finally, if the Bishops silence them, and set unpreaching priests in
their places, they feed their flocks no longer but leave them to the wolf. And
are these your faithful stewards? They are such as was the steward Shebna, to
whom the Lord said what have thou to do^ h^r^? I will drive the from thy
station. Isa, 22, 15, 19.

2, Build gol^ si^uer or stuble on th'fou^da^^o^ First there is not yet a good
foundation laid of your church; what then is your building? There is no good
foundat^on, because your church never yet stroke a holy and orderly covenant
with Christ, according to the rules of his testament.

S^condly they have not been called or sent of God to build, but either have
intruded themselves, or else by the Bishops, the Lords of your harvest, have
these your laborers been thrist forth.

Thirdly they bu^ld much stubble indeed, little gold or silver that will endure
the s^re; let the frame and constitution of your church, the worship, ministry
and government thereof, be brought to the trial of Gods word, and it w^ll burn
these thin^s to ashes. Yet if your min^sters will be content their works shall
burn; and will upon the true foundation build better* they ^ay through the
mercy of God be saved, which I heartily wish unto them al Otherwise, thus says
the Lord; E^e 13.10 etc:
Because they hau^ deceived my people, saying PEACE and there was no peace; and
one built up a wall, and behold the others daubed it with vptempered mortar,
say unto them which daub it with untempered mortar, that it shall fall ver^ 14.
I will destroy the wall that ye have daubed with untempered mortar, and bring
it down to the ground, so that the foundation thereof shall be discovered, and
it shall fall, and ye shall be consumed in the midds thereof; and ye shall know
that I am the Lord.

3. Continue in taking heed to themselves and unto learn^ng.] First, these
words were spoken to one, that had a lawful office, calling and entrance and so
serves nothing for your ministers, that want all these. Secondly by (...)
learning is meant teaching of the people, (as the words following also show;)
which he wills Timothee to continue in: but this your ministers do not; for
the doctrine that is most needful for the present state of the people, they
teach not; besides, if their Lords the Bishops forbid them, they continue not
with their flocks, nor their flocks with them; but another hirel^ng comes in
their place.

4. Feed the flock willingly) First Christ's flock is of Ioh. 18,
sheep, not of carnal worldlings, atheists, blasphemers, and other l^ke wild
beasts of the forest: Christ would not have his childrens bread to be cast
unto dogs; as your ministers apply their word and sacraments, to the most
profane and their seed.

Secondly to (...)
feed imports also, to Mat. 2, 6 Reu, 2.7.
rule and govern; but that your ministers do not, both they and their flocks
are subject to other Lords and gouerno^rs, the Prelates, which love
preeminence, and have authority over your church to suspend, silence, and
excommunicate priests and people. If the flocks of your Min^sters were Christ's
sheep, they would not hear the voice of strangers, John, 10.5^ But the people
of your parishes, if the Bishop depose their shepherd and set a wolf or a
blind guide over them they submit unto him, and take him for their priest; and
their former shepherd feeds no more, but gives place to the stranger. O idol
shepherd, that leaves the flock Zach, 11, 17.

5. Turn many souls to righteousness.) The contrary is true: they hinder many
sowles from righteousness, by preaching against the truth and witnesses thereof,
by pleading for Baal, and toleration of the evils that are among you

6. Eze 3. Thou shall save thine own soul.) This was conditional, if he warned
the wicked of the evil way wherein he walked; verse. 18.19. etc. which your
ministers do not, (as before is showed,) but strenthen the people in an evil
way. How then shall they save their souls? Again this was spoken to Ezekiel who
had a lawful office, calling and sending from God, verse. 1.4.11. etc. and you
should first have proved that your Ministers have these and then you might have
spoken of their administration. But seeing they have neither true office,
lawful calling, nor good administration: your conclusion is amysse, for the
premises do not prove it.

The 3. Argument.
THose ministers by whom the Saints are gathered, which do the work of the
ministry, which edify the body of Christ, are the ministers of Christ. But
such are the minist^rs of our best assemblies: Ergo

The prop^sition is made manifest by Ephesians. 4.11, 12, where it approues that
these works are proper effects of the public ministry given by Christ: also
none can ordinarily build up Gods church, but such as God gives to this end 1
Cor. 3.5, 6, 9, 10.

The assumption is proved, because the ministers of our best assemblies, do
gather the Saints from the reprobates, making a manifest separation, and being
gathered, do build the body of Christ in godlynes, by their ordinary preaching
in these assemblies.

Anwser.
THe assumption or 2, part of your argument that such are the Ministers of your
best assembli^s, is denied; for these reasons.

1 In Ephesians 4. it is said, He, (that is Christ,) gave but your ministers are
given by the Bishops: and for disobed^ence to them, are taken away again from
your parishes: Christ never gave such hirelings

2. The ministers mentioned in Ephesians. 4, are Apostl^s Propets Evangelists Pastors
and Teachers. Your min^sters are none of these, but Priests, Parsons Vicars,
etc. whose very names, besides their offices, calling etc.) show them to be
from Antichr^st.

3. Your ministers gather not the Saints, but persecute and scatter them as we
know by experience: they gather (or keep being gathered) a co^fused idolatrous
multitude, svch as is in their parishes: the right way of gathering a church by
separation from the world, they know not, or will not acknowledge.

4. They do not the work of Christ's ministry, which is aright to dispense the
word, seals, censures etc according to the scriptures: but the work of
Antichrists ministry, in reading the service book, marying, burying, churching
of women, and the like; as in your Leiturgie and other church books are set
down.

5. They edify not the body of Christ, but build and fortify the tower of Babel
their confused assemblies; which were constituted of ignorant idolatrous
papists, and other profane, the very body of Antichrist: but the way of truth
and such as walk therein, are evil spoken of by your Ministers, as their
books, sermons, conferences etc, daily show. For all which reasons, the right
conclusion of your argument should be this, that the ministers of your best
assemblies. are the ministers of Antichrist.

To prove, your assumption, you give us your bare word, saying they do gather
the Saints from the reprobats; making a manifest separation etc. This is to
prove the same by the same: they do so because they do so; whereas all the
world may may see, they do not so. For the church of Eng., and parish
assemblies thereof, from which we have departed, consist of all sorts of
persons; the ministers stand priests by law to the whole parishes, whereof all
are partakers of the holy things of God, every one baptized etc. and can you
say, they are not then builded in and with your church? And for separation, we
know your priests, nor the whole parish, cannot excommunicate any, be they
never so blasphemous, wicked or licentious: that power is in the Bishops courts
And how few are excommunicated for their heresies, blasphemies, atheism or
wicked life, who knows not: but for well doing, you have excommunicated many.
And further, if any of your ministers should go about to make a separation or
gather any other churches or assemblies, then are already by the laws of the
land established and allowed they are ipso facto excommunicated, by force of
the Canons of your church; made in Anno 1603. Can. 9, 11, 1^. So still the open
wicked remayn edified with the rest in your church, and there is no such
separation, as you against all men's knowledge do pretend. Your argument
therefore is no better, then as if Ieroboams priests should thus have pleaded.
Those priests that teach Jacob. Gods judgments, and Israel his law, that put
incense before the face of God, and and b^rnt offerings upon his alter, are the
true priests of God: Deuteronomy, 33.10 But these things do we: therefore we are true
priests. If you say their assum^tion is false; the like is said of yours; and
your works plainly prove your assumption most untrue.

The 4. Argument
THose ministers by whose ministry and preaching, the overthrow of the
kingdom of Antichrist is effected, are the ministers of Christ. But such are
the ministers of our best assemblies: Ergo the true ministers of Christ The
proposition is proved, 2 Cor, 10, 4 5.2 These 2.8. Reu, 14.6.7.8. and 18 12. and
11, 3, 11.

The assumption is manifest; for that the ministers of our best assemblies have
weakened and thrown down and do still f^ght and prevayl against the kingdom of
Antichrist, by the power of Christ; 2. These, 2, 8, and Satan cannot cast out
Satan. Mark. 3.23.

Answer
THere is no cause or person so bad, but many have store of such arguments as
you bring for your ministers wherein you assume and take for granted that which
is most needful to be proved: and if we will not beleeu your bold affirmation,
contrary to our knowledge and the truth of your estate, your ministry has
nothing to justify or confirm it.

The assumption of this argument I deny; for your ministers have not thrown
down Antichrists kingdom, but sought rather to hold it up. Here in sted of due
proof, you tell us it is manifest, for that the ministers of your best
assemblies have weakened etc, the kingdom of Antichrist. Thus again you prou
the sa^e by the sain; and say that is manifest which is most obscur and unknown
unto us: and to discover your falsehood, I will briefly show, how the scriptures
that you bring for your proposition; do disprou your assumptio^.

The weapons of our warfare (says the Apostle. 2 Cor, 10, 4, 5.) are not
carnal but mighty through God, to cast down holds, casting down the
imaginations and every high thing that is exalted against the knowledge of God.
etc. But the weapons of your ministers warfare, have been carnal, not mighty
through God. For against the remaynders of Antichrists kingdom among you, they
have sued to Parliaments, that the arm of fle^h might throw down the prelates,
their courts, and corruptions but when the state has not hearkened to them,
what have your ministers done but submitted themselves to their spiritual
Lords; or at least weise ceased their warfare against them; and in their
sermons and writings, have turned the edge of the^r sword against us that have
departed from Babylon And what have they thrown down by their preaching these
half hundred years? Is there any of their Romish abuses, that they have got
reformed? any one of the rabble of Antichristian officers, courts, canons etc.
cast out of the Church? Nay themselves now are ca^t out, if they speak or write
any more against them, as they did in times past. Do not all their people
stand still in subjection under that Leitourgie, prelacie, priesthood and
popish ecclesiastical government which were set over them at the first? They
have warred with the Antichristians, as did Israel with the Canaanites; when
they were Psalm 106.35.36,
mixed among them, and learned their works, and served their idols, which were
their ruin. Therefore are these enemies, become thorns to the sides, and
pricks to the eyes of your best ministers and people, vexing them in the land
wherein they dwell; as God did threaten Number. 33, 55.

So when the Apostle says 2 These, 2.8. that the Lord shall consume (Antichrist
with the spirit of his mouth, and abolish him with the brightness of his
coming; may we not hereby learn, that Gods spirit is not in your ministers
mouths, seeing they have not consumed or abolished, the Antichristian prelacie,
and other abominations of that man of sin? nay it is evident they maynten
Antichrist, for have they not al, received their ministry from the prelates
and promised obedience to their ordinaris, yet your preachers were wo^t to say
the prelates ar Antichristian. Again if your ministers had in them the spirit of
the Lords mouth, they would ere this time, have made a separation from the
wicked, popish, and sinful generation, for God said unto Jeremy, Isa 15.19
if thou take away the precious from the vile, thou shall be as my mouth. But
this doctrine of separation, your ministers will neither teach, nor suffer to be
taught; but lock up the kingdom of heaven as much as they can, that men may
not enter: they blame us for nothing so much, as for separation, when nothing
is more needful to be done, if we will keep the covenant of our God, and
maynteyn that war which his own Majesty first proclaimed, between the woman's
seed, and the ser^ents, Genesis 3, 15. so unlike your ministers be to the mouth of
God. As unlike they are also to those Angels and witnesses Reu. 18. and 14. and
11. which cried the downfall of Antichrists pompous church and ministry, and
called al Gods children out of it, saying Reu 18.4
Go cut of her my people; but your ministers cry that men should tarry within,
as the 1 Chr, 4.23.
potters, that contrary to Ier. 51, 6,
Gods commandment dwelt with the king (of Babel) for h^s work: and such as
are gone out, they labor to bring back again, saying that with them is the
true doctrine of salvation; their errors are not fundamental their corruptions
abolish not from Christ, all reformed churches ap^roue of the^r church and
ministry: and many such Babilonian songs, have we heard among them And whereas
in Re^, 14 there followed an Angel, that with a loud voice threatened all those
ver* 9, 10
that worshipped the beast and his image and received his mark in forehead or
in hand; your ministers themselves stand under that wrath, whiles the mark of
the beast is so open in the^r foreheads, by that false ministry of priesthood
which they have received from there is a character imprinted by the Bishops
ordination council trident Ses, 23 Can, 4.
the Bishops whose unlawful authority and jurisdiction they submit unto and
teach men to do the like in which respect they cannot excuse themselves from
worshipping the Beast, seeing that hierarchy and prelacy' is by the light of
Gods word and by the a^te^tation of the Christian reformed churches, and by
your own confession heretofore, found to be Antichr^stian; if the Pope be
Anti^hris^, and R^me be the throne of the Beast. Thus men may see that your
ministers are far from overthrowing Antichrist kingdom and your self have
showed a good reason why: Satan cannot cast out Satan.

The 5. argument.
THose ministers which are the savior of death to the wicked, and life to the
godly, are the true ministers of Christ, 1 Cor. 2.16.

Such are the ministers of our best ass^mblies. Ergo true ministers of Christ.

Answer.
THis naked argument, has not a ragg to help to cover the falsehood of the
a^^umption; wherefore ^t may soon be stripped and let go. I dispr^ue that which
you have as^umed th^s.

Your min^sters are not the savior of death to the wicked, because they suffer
them in the bosom of the^r church; by their sacraments and blessin^s, confirm
them in their sins, do not excommunicate the profane or vicious liver, but
let them remayn in mixture with the rest, and plead for such a people, to be
the true church of God.

They are not the savor of life to the godly because they preach not the way
of l^fe tr^ely, by separating from idolaters and idolatry, and gathering to a
h^ly communi^n in the faith and obedience of the gospel.

B^t while^ they persecute, preach, and write against Gods children, which
pr^ctise the or^inances of his covenant, and by fair pretexts and tolorable
reasons, seek to draw them back to their confused assembli^s they are l^ke
those whom the Lord reproved thus; And will ye pollute me among my people, for
hand^uls of barley, and f^r pieces of bread. and to stay the souls of them that
should not die, and to give life to the soule^ that should not live, in lying
to my people, that hear your lies? Ezekiel 13.19.

The 6. Argument.
THese ministers that are hated of all men for the sake of Christ, are the true
ministers of Christ; 1 Cor. 4, 9, 10.11..12.13.. 2. Cor. 6.4.5, 6.8.. Mat.
10:^2. Such are the ministers of our best assemblie^, Therefore true ministers
of Christ.

The MINOR is proved, for that they are hated of the most part, and of the most
evil of all sorts, as were the Apostles and desciples of Christ.

Consider what I say, and the Lord give thee understanding in all things, 2 Timothy, 2.7.

Answer.
THis your last reason comes al too late, and will help your ministry nothing,
For by the discussing of your former arguments We have seen that your ministers
c^nnot prove their office, calling or entrance into the sheepfold, by Christ
neither administer they according to his testament, but after their own
invented leit^rgie laws, and Cannons, So that if they be hated of all men in
respect of their ministry, they are not hated for Christ's sake; seeing they
have none of his ministry, hated it may be they are of many; so, are Fr^ars and
Monks, and the rest of Antichrists clergy, so it is written that the whore
shall be hated, made desolate and naked, her flesh eaten and she burned with
fire; but it is the cause, not the suffering which makes the martyr, Whereas
therefore your minor is proved by a bare affirmation only, that so it is; (as
is your manner of disputing; you must take a better course, and prove things
otherwise, ere we, will yield: for the Arrian, and Anabaptists, and all sorts
of religion, will Plead that both they and their ministers are hated for Christ's
sake: but every tree is known by its fruits.

Yet have yea no such cause to complayn of hatred; for the ministry of your
Church; is aproued and rejoiced for, (as your self while are said, (of all
the, forreyn reformed Churches in the world; and at home we know, how it is
reverenced, honored and obeyed. Your chiefest ministers being acknowledged for
spiritual Lords, and right reverend Fathers; the inferior priests, as sound
and excelent Divines, followed and flockked after by the people. And how they
are provided for by rich Bishoppricks. and fat benefices, al over the Land;
besides their daily intertainment, at great and rich men's tables; who is there
among you that knows not, These are not signs of hatred.

Therefore let him that reads consider indeed what you have said; and the
Lord give him understanding in all things.

O England

ISRAEL thy Prophets are like the foxes in the wast places, Ezekiel. 13.4.

Positions concerning a true Church
INtending to set down some arguments against the corrupt estate of the present
church of England; I thought it profitable to prefix some few positions, as a
ground, whereby thou may (good reader;) judge the better of that which shall be
said. Yet mean I not to handle this point at large, which in so many other
writings thou moist profitably read: but only to observe such principal
things as may give light unto the simple, who many of them mistake this
doctrine of the Church, and erring once, are ^y seducers further led astray The
Lord reduce all hi^ that err, and stablish his servants in the truth for ever.

THis our English word Church, through custom of speech is commonly used for
the Temple or place where people come together for the worship of God: but they
that are any thing excercised in religion, know, that it also signifies the
People, which gather together for divine service; and this is the first and
proper meaning of the word Church, as it is used to express the original
scripture terms, Kahal and Ecclesia.

2. This name Church, we English men (which come of the Saxons) have received
from the Saxon, German, and Duitch cames Cyri^, Kirch, Kerck; whereby those
nations now, do usually call their Temples or meeting-places: but the people
which come together in them, they call the Gemeine, and the Gemeinte, that is
to say, the Communialtie; and we in our first English Bibles called it, the
Congregation.

3. As all religion is learned out of holy scriptures, so the name and doctrine
of the church, is from thence to be deduced; and there the Church is called in
Hebrew D^ut. 5.22.
Kahal or Deuteronomy. 33.4.
Kehillab, which signifies a Convocation or Assembly of people, and Exodus
16.1. Psalm. 111.1.
Ghnedah, that is to say a Congregation: in Greek it is named Man 16, 18, Act.
7 38.
Ecclesia, that is in like manner, a Convocation or people called forth to an
assembly, and sometime Iam, 2, 2, and in the greek of the old Test. often,
Deuteronomy. 5.22, Exodus, 16 3, etc.
Synag^gee, that is a Congregation: which word is also used for the Luke 7.5.
Act, 18, 7.
place where^n the people assembled.

4 The Hebrew word Kahal is diversely used; sometimes more generally for a great
or universal multitude, as Genesis 35.11, Ier. 50.9.
of nations and Gen 48, 4, Ezekiel, 23, 24.
of pe^^les sometimes more particularly for an a^^embly of one nation: as of
Exodus 12.6.
the Israelites; sometimes for apart of them, as 1 Chro. 13.1, 2, ^; 5. and
29.1.6. 1: Chro, 1.2 3.
the Elders and Governors; or some 2. Chron 20.4.5.
of the tribes of Israel apart; or some 2. Chron. 30.10.13.25.
of all the tr^bes, even Ezra. 10.1.
men, women and children: and indifferently for Genesis 49.6.
any assembly, and this not only of Gods people, but of Ezekiel. 27.27. and
32.22. and 38 4.7. etc.
heathens also and infidels.

5. Likeweise the Greek word Ecclesia is of as large extent and signification;
used sometime for Ephesians. 5.23, etc. Heb 12.23,
the church ^enerally, sometime for a 1. Cor. 1, 2.
particular church or congregation in a city: someti^es more ^articula^ly in
Romans 16, 5, 1 Cor. 16.19, Colos, 4, 15,
a house or family, sometimes (in the Greek version of the old test^ment) for
an as^embly 2 Chronicles, 1, 3, etc,
of Governors, or company of 1, Sam, 19, 20,
Prophets, or congre^at^on Psalm, 107.32,
of the people: and finally for Eze. 32, 3. Act. 19, 32, 39, 41,
any as^embly lawful or unlawful, of good men or of Psalm. 26 5.
evil.

6. These words thus genreall, are in more special sort both by the
scriptures, and by use of speech among all religious people restreyned and
applied to such Assemblies and congregations as are called and gathered for
divine excercises: and so our English name of church is attributed peculiarly
to spiritual or religious assemblies, called ecclesiastica^^ and not to any
other assemblies civil or pol^t^call.

7. Of religious or ecclesiastical assemblies generally considered, there are
many s^rts in the world, all disalowed of god, save one sort only which he
acknowledges to be his, and has separated to himself from all the rest.

8. The many false sorts, may be reduced unto fowr; 1 The as^emblies of Pagans
or heathen people, which profes^e some God, Gods, or, Goddesses, whom they do
worship, ignorantly, having Romans 1.25
changed the truth of God into a lie, and so serving creatures, not (indeed)
the creator, which is blessed for ever. Amen. 2 The assemblies of Jews who
profess the true God (after a s^rt) and allow the writings of Moses and the
prophets, b^t abhor Christ Jesus our Savior, and reject the new testament, 3
The a^^emblies of Mahomis^s, as Persians, Turks, Moors, etc. which profess
also after their manner, that Alkoran; Azoar. 4.
one true God of whom Moses and the prophets wrote, and acknowledge Azoar. 2.
and. 4 and, 11.
Christ to be a Pro^het sent of God, yea and the breath or s^irit of God yet
beleeu ^hey not that he is Az^ar, 12. etc,
God, or the Azoar. 19:20.
son of God, or savior of the world, but follow the lies and fablies of
their false prophet Mahomet. 4. Finally the churches or assemblies of false
Christans, which profess God and ^i^ Son Christ, into whose name they are
baptized; but by the^r works do deny him, and by their erro^rs and heresies,
do overthrow the truth of rel^^ion.

9. The 1 thr^e sorts, P^gans, Jews, and Mahometists, beca^se of their so open
and manifest d^ny all of Christ and salvation by him, are generally generally
of Christians reputed as no Churches, the la^ter are re^uted no true but false
church^s, and so also do they esteem of true Christians, and one of another
Hereupon is continual controversy be^ween true and and false chr^stians,
which is the true church, and how it ^ay be known.

10. To help the weak and doubtful in this case, I will so truly and plainly
as by the grace of God I can, describe the tr^e Church, which in the holy
scr^^tures is called the Congregation and church N^he, 13.1 1 Timothy 3.5, 14,
of God, consisting of godly and holy people named 1 Cor, 1 2. Psalm, 89, 5. and
149.1,
Saints; opposed to the wicked or Psalm. 26.5
malignant church^s, the Re^, 2, 9.
Synagoues of Satan.

11. The true church is a people 1 Pet, 2, 9,
called of God by 2 Th^s, ^, 14,
the Gospel, Ioh, 17, 6, 9, 14. and. 15, 19,
from the world, unto the 1 Cor. 1, 9,
communion or fellowshi^ of his son Jesus Christ, in whom they are Ephesians,
^.21.22.
coupled and built together. to be the habitation of God by the spirit

12 The church is said to be a people, 1 Pet, 2 9.
nation or generation, because it consists of many persons, or of a m^ltitude
little or great: for though a particular Christian is called, and of the
church; yet no man is a church or congr^gation,

13. It is a people called; Ephesians, 4^1 Heb. 9.15,
because every concourse or assembly is not a true church: none of themselves
can come unto this estate, unless they be Rom: 9.11, 12, 24. S^ng. 1.3,
called or drawn thereunto: and they are said to be called of God, because he
Job. 6:44:
only calls and draws men unto Christ with a 2 Timothy 1:9
holy calling; and adds them Act. 2.47.
to his church, 2 Chro. 30.6 10.12. Romans 8 30.
no humane power or authority ^s able to do it,

14. The Gospel 2 These. 2 14.
noted to be the the means of our calling, he makes known unto his people
outwardly by his 2 Cor. 5.19.
word Act. 5.20
spoken and Job. 20.31.
written, and inwardly by Nehem. 9.20. 1 Cor. 2 10.1^.
his holy spirit: and thus the Church are all Job. 6 45.
the taught of God.

15. The state out of which the Church is caled, is said to be out of or from
the Job ^5.1. ^, and 17, 6, 9.
world, whereby is meant, first Satan the I^h. 12.31,
Prince of this world, from whose power they are Act. 26:18,
turned unto God; secondly, the wicked people of the world, called the 1 Ioh.
3.10.
children of the Diuill, from whose communion and fellowsh^p Exodus 34 15, Prou.
15.8. Psalm 16.4. E^h. 5, 11, 2 Cor. 6.17.
in their religion, and all other wicked actions, we must be separated,
thirdly, the corruption of nature in our selves, the lust of the flesh, the
lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, 1 Ioh 2.16.
all which are of the world. and which we must Rom 7.15. Jude. 23.
hate and Gal. 6, 14.
crucify, and so turn and become Mat. 18, 3.
like little children, even borne again, that we may see the kingdom of God
Ioh 3.3,


16. The estate whereunto God called his church in this life, is generally 1.
Cor. 1.9.
to the communion (or fellowhsip) of his son Jesus Christ, as being their
only mediator and Savior, the Prophet Priest and King of the church; which
they beleeu^ng and professing, are al^o made partakers (in a proportion and in
their measure) of these three offices with him

17. Jesus Christ is the Deuteronomy, 18.15, 18.
Prophet ra^sed up of God unto his people to teach them all that God commanded
him which also he did, both by Act. 3.22.26. Mat. 5, 2, and^,
himself, and by the M^nistery of his servants Ioh, 13, 20.
sent of him. And as Col, 2.3.
all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge are hid in him, so him the church
m^st Mat. 17, 5.
hear; for all John 3.13. and. 6.68 Reu 5.1, 5
heavenly wisdom and knowledge is to be learned of him; and every person which
shall not hear this Prophet, Act, 3 23.
shall be destroyed out of the people.

18, This Prophet call office of Christ, he has communicated with the church,
by giving Psalm, 147 19, 20 Isa. 59, 21. Rom 15.4.
to the same his word for their instruction and comfort, and Iam. 1.21.
graffing the same within them, his spirit also as an 1 Ioh, 2.20.27.
Anointing to teach them all things giving Ep 4.8.11. 1 Cor. 12, 28.
gifts also, or ministers, to open and apply the same unto their sowles,
likewise power and freedom by Isa. 43 10.
witness 2 Cor. 4, 13.
profession and Mat, 28, 20
practice, to Phil, 3.16,
hold forth that word of life as lights in the world: thereby to Act. 8.4,
preach unto others the faith of Christ, to 1 These. 5, 11.
ed^fy and build up one another daily therein, to Heb. 10.24.
provoke unto love and to good works. to Romans 15, 14,
admonish and Leu. 19, 17.
reprehend for evil and iniquity; to Luke 17, 3.
forgive and 1 These 4.18
comfort one another in the bowels of Christ, whose word therefore all ought to
labor that it may dwell plenteously in them, that if any man speak, it may be
1. Pet, 4.11.
as the words of G^d. Col. 3.16


19. Jesus the son of God, is also the Heb, 4, 14, 20,
great high priest or Sacrificer of the Church* by whose Romans ^, 19,
obedience, and sacrifice or oblation of Heb, 10.5, 10,
h^s own body and blood, the church is cleansed 1 Ioh, 1, 7.
from all sin, and Rom, 5.10,
reconciled to God: by whose intercession the church, with the holy actions and
oblations of the same, are Heb. ^, 25, and 9.24. (...) 13.15, Reu, 8.3 4.
accepted of God, and made heirs of blessing.

20. And this his Pr^estly office, is (...) imparted to his church, as they
have not only interest in his Isa 53 5. Romans 5.8.10
death and sufferings whereby they are reconciled to God, but also are
themselves made a 1 Pet. 2.5.
holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacri^ices acceptable to God by him:
giving up Romans 12.1.
their own bodies a living sacrifice; Col 3.5.
mortifying their members which are on earth and Gal 5.24,
crucify^ng the flesh with the affections and l^sts; offering up Psalm. 51, 17,
contrite and broken h^rts, with Heb. 13.15.
sacrifices of praise confe^sing to his name; and praying not o^^ly every man
for himself, but Ephesians. 6.18.
one for another, Heb. 13.16.
doing good and d^stributing to the nece^sities of the Saints, 2. Tim. 2.3.9,
suffering affl^ction for the Gospel and finally if they be called thereunto,
pouring out the r souls unto Heb. 12.4, 2. Tim 4.6.
death f^r the truths sake.

21. The Lord Jesus Christ, is also the Mat. 2, 6.
governor and Ioh 12 15.
king over Sion Gods h^ly mount, and sits at his Fathers right hand and 1
Cor. 15, 2.
reigns till all his enemies be made his footstool, being Isa 33, 22.
a King, judge, and lawgiu^r, to h^s people, Mat. 28, 20,
commanding and ruling them by his word and spirit, Psalm. 72.
j^dging them in justice and equ^ty, preserving and defend^ng them by his
almighty power, Ioh. 10, 28 and 1^.33, Reu. 19 11.21.
from all their enemies.

22. And this his kingly office he so communicates with h^s church; as they
are by him preser^ed and defended from all adversary Power, freed from the
dominion Rom 6 14,
of sin and tyranny of 1 Ioh, 5, 18. Romans 16, 20.
Satan from subjection to 1, I^h 5, 4
the world, and servitude 1. Cor. 7 23,
unto men: and restored to the joyful lib^rty of the Ch^ldren of God, 1, Cor.
3 2^.
the world and all things in it made theirs: that howsoever they have still to
1 Pet. 5, 8.9.
combat with the Diuill to Ephesians 6 12.
wra^tel against principallities and powers: to suffer Job. 11 19 and 16.33.
hatred and affliction of the world; an^ to war with the fleshly lusts, 1 Pet,
2.11.
which fight against the so^l: yet neither Romans 8, 38, 39,
death, nor life, nor Angels, nor principallities, nor power^, nor, things
present nor things to come nor, height nor depth, nor any other creat^re,
shall be able to separate them from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our
Lord; who has Reu. 1 6.
made them Kings and Pri^s^s unto God even his father, and they shall Reu 5, 10,
reign on the earth, till h^uin^ ser^ed here the^r time, they come to 2. Ti^. 2
12. I^h. 17.24 1, Th^s. 4.17
reign with him in glor^, in ^he heavens for ever

2^. Unto the participation of these promises and heavenly graces, are ^lat.
28.19. Rom, 16, 26.
all peo^les ^r^uoked by the Gospel ^reached; and such as obey the c^l^^ng of
G^d, an^ come unto Christ, are united unto him the^r head and ^ed^at^r, from
whom^ proceeds the Justification and sanctification of the Church.

24. Justification is the partaking of Christ's Phil, 3 9,
just^ce or righteousness, ^n his fulfilling and obeyin^ Rom, 5.19,
the law of God, and d^scharg^ng 1 I^h. 1, 7,
all ou^ depts and trespasses by his death; so freeing us Gal, 3, 13,
from the curse, and set^ing us in full favor Romans 5, 10,
with God and under his Gal. 3, 9.14,
bles^^ng: which righteousness of Christ's, is fully made ours, and imp^ted to
us Rom, 3.25, 30. and 4.4, 25.
by faith for our justification,

25. Sanctification is the partak^ng of Christ's holiness by being Romans 6, 5.
graffed with him to the simill^tude of his death and resurrection; whereby the
corruption of nature or verse, 6,
old man in us, becomes crucified and verse, 4.
buried with him; and the Ephesians. 4.22, 24. Col. 3.10.
new man or image of God is put on and renewed daily in a holy conversation.

26. H^th^rto of the Churches union and communion with Christ her head: now
follows the union of the churches member^, one with another: which is their^
Ephesians. 2, 21. Rom, 12, 4, 5.
cou^ling together as one body by the communion of one and the same 1 Cor.
12.4, 8, 9, 11, 12.13. Ephesians. 4.4 5, 15.16.
spirit, faith, and love,

27. The union of the members one with another is to be considered generally or
totally; and particularly. Generally as the church is called universal or
ca^holik, comprehending the Ephesians, 3, 15,
whole family of God in heaven and in earth, and the 1 Pet. 5, 9,
fraternity or brotherhood of all Christians which are ^n the world: in whom
there is but Ephesians, 4, 5.
one faith, in 1 Cor. 8, 6, and, 12.4, 5, etc. Ephesians, 2, ^8, and, 4.4, 5, 6,
one and the same God by that one Lord Ies^s Christ, throu^h one Spirit. Thus
have they all one Father which is God; one Gal. 4, 26,
mother, Jerusalem which is above, and by the mediation of Christ are all made
Ioh, 17, 21.
one, baptized by one spirit into Cor, 11, 13.
one body, and al made to drink into one spirit.

28 More Particularly, they that are called of God, and members o^ ^he Church
universal, are united and gathered into many 1 Cor. 14 33,
churches or congregatio^s, in Reu: 1.11
several cities and countr^es: every of which churches being Act. 2 41 4^:47.
and. 5.13. Heb, 10.25,
joined together in the profession and practice of the Gospel of Christ, have
his 1, Cor, 5, 4,
power and Mat. 18, 20,
presence with them, and is to conuene or come 1 Cor. 11, 2^, 33 and. 54
together in one for the worship of God, and performance of public duties

29. Whatsoever promise or blessing of God, is bestowed on the church on earth
generally considered: the same may be apprehended and enjoyed by every
particular church, (though not in like measure by all: as the Exo. 20, 24. Mat,
18, 20, Isa, 4.5,
promises general, and examples particular of the church, 1, Cor, 3.22, 23,
and ^.7, 30. etc, Reu, 2. and. 3.
in Corinth, and others mentioned in the scr^pture, do confirm.

30. The Testament of Christ shows us no Prouintiall, National, Em^erial, or
other l^ke Church, having several meetings or a^^emblies, and special Pastors
over the same: neither, since the Apostles Prophets and ^vangelists were taken
from this world, are there any other lawful Bishops or Church-gouernours, then
the Bishops or Overseers Act, 20, 17.28, Phil, 1,,, P^t. 5, 1, 3.
of the particular churches; neither ever was there other lawful Head, Lord, or
Lords spiritual, of the Church, then Col. ^, ^8. 1 Cor, 8, 6, and, 12, 5.
Jesus Christ alone.

31 Unto the church are to be admitted, all unto whom the covenant and promise
of God does apperteyn; and they are so many Act, 2, 3^
as the Lord our God shall call; and all those are called (in the judgment of
man,) which having Rom, 10, 17. Ephesians. 1, 13,
heard the word of God, do profess A^t, 2, 38.41, and, 8, 37,
repentance from dead works, and faith in God, by Jesus Christ the alone
Savior of ^he world, and promise Exodus, 19, 5, 8. 2, Chron, 34, 1, 12, Luke ^,
17, Ioh, 1, 26. Rom, 1, 5. Mic 4, 5.
obedience to the word, through the holy Ghost the sanctifier of the elect.
Such of Gal. 3, 2^,
all sorts and estates of people in the world, are with their Gen, 17, 7, 1
Cor, 7, 14,
seed to be received into, and nourished ^n the church; their ignorance being
helped by Colos. 1, 28. and, 3, 16,
instruction, their weakness Rom, 15. ^, etc. 1 Gal, 6, 1, Leuit, 19, 17,
borne by lenity, their faults corrected i with love and meeknes; and their
feeble consciences ^, These, 5, 14.
comforted with the promises of God.

3^. Out of the Church are Mar, ^, 7, 2 Cor, 6, 14 etc Reu, 2, 27. and 22, 15,
Isa. 31, 8, 9 Zach, 14, 21,
all such to be kept, as are profane, worldly and wicked, until they be called
of God unto repentance and faith in his promise: and out of it are to be cast
all such as Mat. 18.17, 1, Cor, 5, 5 12.13, Tit, 3 10, Number, 15, 30, 31.
sin against the law of Go^, by error or corruption, in doctrine or
conversation; and will not by pr^uate or public admonistion, be reclaymed and
amended

33; Every particular church or congregation throughout the world hau^ng equal
interest Ioh. 17.^0, etc.
in Christ, and in his 1, Cor, 14, 36,
word or covenant: consequently have equal power. and ought to have a l^ke
care; to practice Mat, 28.19.20,
all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord, standing fast in the l^berty
where with Gal, 5,
Christ has made them free.

34, Every one that would be saved, ought to join himself unto some particular
Song, 1, 6, Act, 2, 41, 47 Deuteronomy, ^^, 5, etc. Exodus, 20.24.
church, where Gods name is se^, and known, and called upon: that in and with
the same, he may grow up in the faith, and love of Christ unto salvation.

35. Although the church consists only of such as are called, yet these are
of two sorts, some outwardly only and for a time, which though they be in the
church yet are they not indeed (...), 19.1 Mat. ^2.14.
of the Church; othersome called also inwardly effectually and for ever. So
that the churches on earth, have Cor, 10.5, etc Act. 20.30.
many hypocrites and reprobates for members of them: whose secret sins, defile
Gal. 6.3 4.5
themselves alone. Howbeit the ^: Tim. ^.19.
Lord knows them that are his; and a true Christian may by the word (...)
spirit of the Lord, and fruits of his faith, have Romans 8.16. 2 Cor. 13.5 1.
Ioh. 3 14.19. etc.
assurance that himself is the Lords; of others, he is for their outward good
profession and conversation which he sees, to hope and judge Man. 22.39.1.
Cor. 13, 5.7.
as of himself, leauin^ the final doom and judgment, until the Lord come, 1.
Cor. 4, 5,
who will l^^hten things that are hid in darkness and make the counsels of the
hearts manifest; and will reward every man R^u, 22, 12.
according as his works shall be

36, The best churches on eart are always subject Act, 20, 30, 2 Pet, 2, ^, 2,
1 Cor, 11, 19,
to have open and grievous sinas of all sorts, break out in them: all which
^niquitie^ m^st speedily be redressed, and every church purged by Reu, 2, 16,
22,
repentance or 1 Cor, 5, 1, 2, 13.
casting out of the impenitent; least Josh, 22, 18.
wrath do come on all the congregation,

37. For churches by sinning and impenitencie therein, may forfeyt their Isa,
24.5, 6
covenant, and be Eze, 23.18.
forsaken of God; and for their adulteries by Ier. 3 8,
d^uorced from Christ, and so Reu. 18, 4,
left of his people, the Reu 2, 5.
candlestick being removed out of the place.

38, By this which has been said, may appear, that every people called of God
into covenant and communion, with Christ, and one with another, and, so
walking, though with much weakness, ignorance and daily syn; is to be esteemed a
true church of God: but they that are not so called and come into covenant with
the Lord, howsoever they may profess many excellent truths, yet want they the
main essential thing which, makes a true church.

39, A church thus having the essence or being: by ref^rence unto or
conjunction with Christ, which is Ephesians. ^^ 32. 1 Cor 6, 17,
a secret and spiritual thing; cannot now as it is a church, properly be seen
with carnal eye Whereas then the church is said to be visible, it is
figuratively spoken, and after a sort; to weet so far as by a peoples
profession and conversation seen or heard, men may discern and judge, by the
rules of Gods word

40. As Christ the head and savior of his body, cannot be found or known by
the wit or wisdom of man, Mat, 11, 25.27, Gal. 1, 15, 16, 1 Cor, 2.7, 8,
but by the revelation of God: so the Church which is his body kingdom and
spowse, ca^^ot be discerned by natural or humane skill, S^ng, 1.6, 1 Cor 2,
10, 11.
but by the manifestation of God alone through his word and spirit.

41, Hence it is that the true churches of God, are both contemned and
condemned of the world as Act, 24, 5, 14, and 28.22.
heretics, schismatiks, sedetious, etc. when the false antichr^stian assemblies
are highly honored and regarded. For they which understand not the word of
God, (which natural men 1 Cor 2, 14,
do not,) nor have the spirit of God, (which natural men have not) how should
they rightly judge of, or discern the Church of God? Jude, verse. 19.


42. And Satan to deceive the simple, does Reu, 17, 4 and, 18. Prou 7.14.16.
deck his synagogues with many ornaments of the church of Christ, as Ier.
18.18, 1. King. 22, 24, 2 King 12, 28, 33,
the preaching of the word, prayers, sacraments discipline etc; he procures
them also honor amplitude and prosperity: when from the true church oftimes he
takes not only outward peace and glory; but bereaueth the same of Christ's
Dan. 11, 31, Lam. 1.4 etc.
public ministry of the word and sacraments; by, persecuting, imprisoning,
banishing and killing Act: 12:2, 3:
the officers of the Church, and Act: 8:1: Heb: ^1:37:38.
scatteting the members.

43. Yet is not Satan's synagogue for all the pomp thereof, a church of God;
because it inioyeth and uses not his word and holy things aright according to
his John, 3, 27, Heb, 5 4.
heavenly ordinance, Neither can the true churches be spoiled or deprived 2,
Tim, 2:9,
of the word of God, which is Iam, 1:21:
graffed in them, and able to save their sowles, is 1 Pet, 1:23:25.
seed immortal and endures for ever: but in the mids of their many
afflictions, they both Phi. 2.16.
hold forth that word of life, as lights unto the world; and by the same do 1
The, 5.11:
edify and comfort one another, in the faith and fear of God; whose power and
Mat 18.20.
presence they have with them in all estates and places.

44 So to conclude, a true church is a sacred communiallty, consociate and knit
together into a mistical body, whose head Colos, 1.18.
is Christ; whose members, christians Gal. 3.28:
of any nation or condition; whose soul is the Deuteronomy. 32, 47. Ioh, 5.25,
word and whose spirit is Gal. 4.6.1. Cor, 2, 12,
the spirit of the living God: who gathers together Eze, 37, 1, 2, 6.10, etc.
dry desolate bones, lays synewes on them, makes flesh to grow, and covers
them with skin, and puts breath in them that they may live, and stand upon
their feet an exceeding great army Unto him for all his blessings, be praise in
his churches throughout all generations; Amen and Amen.

ARGVMENTS Disprouing the present estate and constitution of the CHVRCH of
ENGLAND
EVery true Church, is the body of Christ, and has him for the head thereof:
For ^t is wr^tten, (God) has appointed him over all ^h^ngs the head of the
church which is his body Ephesians, 1, 22, 23 and again, to the church of Corinth it
is said, y^ are the b^dy of Christ 1 Cor, 12, 27.

But the church of England, is not the body of Christ, neither has him for the
h^ad thereof. Because, it wa^ first constituted as now it stands, of the
members of Antichrist; namely the idolatrous Pap^sts, which openly professed
Antichristian sme in Q. Mary's days, ha^ing Reu 9, 11
Abadden the Pope for their head; and spilled much christian blood, that they
might mainteyn their Romish abominations. Who all (except some few that of
themselves refused,) were at the beginning of Q. Elisabeths reign, rece^ued
into the body of the church, and so have continued, they and their seed ever
since. Yet did they not then, enter in by repentance and faith in Christ,
(which two things Heb, 6, 1, Mar. 1.15,
are the beginning and foundation of the kingdom of God,) but by the
commandment of the Magistrate, were compelled unto the Church, sacraments,
ministry etc. which then were by law establ^shed and ever since continewed.
Now the Magistrates law, cannot work faith in any; seeing faith is the Ephesians. 2.8,
gift of God, and by Romans 10, 17.
his word only is wrought in man's heart So that the Magistrate though he ou^th
to abolish idolatr^e, and set up Gods true worship, to suppress all errors,
and cause the truth to be taught, yet cannot he constreyn men to join unto the
church, but they must do it Psa 110, 3 Act, 2, 41, Genesis 9, 27.
willi^gly and gladly, the Lord persuading them hereunto. And these, (of whom
we speak) not being persuaded by the Lord and his word, but (^s the worldly
multitude always is,) being ready to receive any religion the prince wo^ld
establish, rather then they would suffer persecution, wherein that their popish
estate, the body of Antichrist, yet then compelled and vn^ted unto this church.
Again, not only those that were popishly (...) and superstitious; but such
also as were profane and irrelig^ous, atheists, blasphemers, whoremongers,
thieves, drunkards, witches, and all other ungodly persons, of which then were
and still are too too many in the land these al, though by reason of their
wicked and miserable estate, ^hey w^rlimmes of Satan, and (as the scripture
calls such,) children 1 Ioh 3, 10 Ioh. 8, 44,
of the Diuill, were yet received, into the Church likeweise, they and their
seed and so continue; as the state of that Church plainly shows. For even to
this day, profane people, mockers and contemners of religion, tha^ blasphem God
and his holy name even in the streets as they walk; such as call themselves the
donned crew, Familists, Athe^sts, and all other sorts of miscreants and wicked
livers, are members of the Church of En^land, united with the body and
partakers of the sacraments, and other holy act^ons of the same.

Now these children of wrath, this sinnfull generation, cannot possibly be
members of the body of Christ, nor have him for their head, seeing they are not
partakers of his life and spirit, nor called to his faith, neither admits he
any such unto him until they repent; he has no concord 2 Cor, 6 15.
with Belial, therefore not with the children of Belial: the members of his
glorious body must not be the dead, st^nking, and abominable members of Satan
Light and darkness, heaven and hell, will as soon be united together. Neither
will it be yenough to say that some are affected to reli^ion, are of better
life, and conversation etc. and that for their sakes, the residew are
sanct^fied, and may be joined unto, and reputed Christ's body and Church: for
they that profess more sincerity, yet are not come to a true ^rofe^sion of the
Gospel, or reno^ncing of Idolatry; but after the^r false and popish manner,
worship God with the rest, remaining one body one Church with them. Now we are
taught of God that the religious are so far from sanctifying the wicked, as
contrariweise the wicked do pollute them, whatsoever the unclean person
touches says the Lord,) Number. 19.22.

2 Cor 6.17.18.


shall be unclean, and the person which touches him shall be unclean: ^ wherefore
come out from among them, and separate your selves, and touch no vncl^ane
thing, and I will receive you, and I will be a Father unto you and ye shall be my
sonns and daughters, says the Lord almighty. So then the religious and well
affected people must separate from the rest, if they would be acknowledged of
God for his and not think by their holiness, to sanctify the profane.

Again, it is as easy to make peace and agreement between Christ and the Diuil,
as between Christ and such open obstinate sinners, the 1 Ioh 3.10
children of the Diuill; yea it ouerturneth at once the first promise of
salvation made by God, and so the uery ground of Christian religion. For when
God first promised redemption to mankind; it was by Christ the Gen 3.15
seed of the woman that should crush the serpents head, who in due time
appeared for this purpose, that he might 1 I^h. 3, 8. Heb 2, 14.
loose the works of the Diuill; and destroy and abolish him And as then the
Lord put enmity between Christ and the serpent so did he also between him and
the serpents Genesis 3, 15
seed that is wicked men, which being Ioh, 8, 44
children of the Diuill would take the Diu^ls part to hate and kill Christ, and
root out his ch^ldren and reli^ion: acc^rding to which decree and word of his
Father, o^r Lord Jesus set himself not only against the Serpent. but against
such wicked men also, as would not be turned from their impiety; therefore he
says by his pro^hets Psa, 139; 21, 22.
D^e not I hate them that hate thee o Lord? etc, I hate them with an vnfeighned
hatred, as they were myn^ utter enemies. I hate the assembly of e^il doers, and
company not with the wicked; Psa 26, 5
Betim^s will I destroy all the wicked of the land, that I may cut off all the
workers of iniquity from the city of the Lord; Psa. 101 8 Zach, 11, 8.
Three shepherds I cut of in one month, and my sowl loathed loathed them, and
their sowl abhorred me: with many such like speeches, throughout the
scriptures; whereby Christ showed how far he was and would be, from being head
unto such wretches, or any way admitting them unto his body, or the communion
of h^s Church. And for his arch-enemy the Roman Antichrist and his adherents,
the Lord Jesus Faithful and true that judges and warreth righteously, Reu
19.11.14.
he with his heavenly warriors after him, fights with that Beast, and with
the kings of the earth that make battle against him; and is so far from peace
with them, as he gives unto all the fowls of heaven for to eat, ver. 18.
the flesh of the Kings and hie captayns, the flesh of mighty men, and of
horses and those that sit on them, the flesh of all freemen and bondmen, of
small and great; and casts ver, 20.
the beast into the lake of fire. By this may appear that Christ is no head of
such Antichristians, nor of any other profane wicked worldlings; seeing his
spirith gives them not life and motion, but they are carried by the spirit of
Satan that possesses them; and warred against with the sword that comes out
of Christ's mouth neither can they be knit unto him by joints or bands; as Col
2, 19.
al his body and members thereof ar: and consequently that the Popish and
profane multitude of the Realm of England, which at Q. Mary's death, were made
and esteemed a Church; and they and their seed ever since without separation so
continewing; and at this day all the notorious wicked st^ll commingled with the
rest; that this Church cannot be said to have Christ for the head, neither is
it his body.

Therefore the Church of England, is not the true Church of God.

EVery true Church of God, has Christ for the mediator and Advocate of the
same. For it is written 1 Timothy 2, 5
there is one God, and on mediator between God and man, which is the man Christ
Jesus; and 1 Ioh. 2, 1
if any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the just.
Neither is there salvation in any other; for among men there is given no other
name under heaven, whereby we must be saved, Act. 4.12.

But the Church of England has not Christ for the mediator and Advocate of the
same, Because, Christ is not Mediator of any other covenant or testament, then
that which God promised by his prophits to make with the house of Israel, nor
of any other people, then of such as are under that covenant promised, which
was g that he would put his law in their inward parts (or mind) and write it in
their hearts, and be would be their God, and they should be his people, and that
Ier 31, ^3 Heb. 8, 10.
he would forgive their iniquity, and remember their sins no more. Of this new
testament or covenant, established upon ver, 34.
better promises then was the old, is Christ the Mediator, (as the Apostle Heb,
8, 6.
teaches) and not of any other humane or profane covenant, Heb 9, 15.
made by or among the sonns of Adam. Now that the Church of England, (as it is
publicly and generally constituted,) is not as yet come under this covenant,
may appear by the ^articular conditions of the same. First, let the exceeding
profanenes and irreligion irreligion that is among them, the open contempt of
God, blaspheming of h^s name, despising of his word, and innumerable wicked
acts, without fear or shame committed, besides the idolatrous false worship
performed by all in their public assemblies, according to their stinted popish
leitoargie, learned and received from the Roman Antichrist: let these (I say)
and the like, speak to every christian conscience, whither Gods law be written
in the mind or inward parts of such, which is one Ier 31, 33
part of the co^enant, whereof Christ is Mediator; and which grace he promised
by his Eze. 36, 25, 26, 27, 28,
Prophets to bestow upon his Church and people, when he should be their God:
and when the grace of God, that brings salvation unto all men, did appear; it
Tit, 2, 11 12,
taught so much.

Secondly, that th^s church of England, has no promise that their sins and
iniq^ities are forgiven, which is Ier. 31, 3^
an other part of the covenant, appears by their impenitency in this evil
estate. For the profane, scoff at repentance, and scorn all admonition, they
despise wisdoms counsel, and such as reprove, they turn again and rent them.
And for the idolatries and false worship of the whole; the great iniquities in
the hierarchy ministry, orders, rites, ceremonies etc, they are far from
repentance which will here no reproof, nor suffer any to speak against their
corruptions, but have generally agreed and decreed such eanons in anno. 1603
See also before page 56
to be excommunicated, as shall affirm any of these things to be wicked or
id^latrous; and they that would call them to repentance for their sins, or
refuse to communicate with them in these evils, are persecuted, imprisoned,
banished, and have long suffered at their hands many calamities. And all people
are forced by fair and colorable pretenses or by threatening and punishments,
to walk still in these sins. Thus want they the foundation of Heb, 6, 1.
repentance from dead works, and consequently of faith toward God for without
repentance there is no promise of pardon; and without promise, there can be no
faith; and without faith; no covenant or test^ment confirme^ with them or their
seed, as all the scriptures show; and if no Couenan^, then also no Mediator.

Thirdly, that the sum of the Covenant, (namely Heb, 8, 10
I will be their God and they shall be my people;) is wantin^ also unto these,
may be seen by the^r estate compared with the Apostles doctrine, who upon 2
Cor, 6 16.
this prom^se, ^resently infers verse. 17.
a comm^ng out, and separation of themselves, from the world, if they would
have the Lord to receive them. Which separation from the ungodly, as it was not
at the As in the former argument is showed
first constituting of this Church observed, so unto this day it is resisted,
and pleaded against, and the holy scriptures insufferable abused to mayteyn a
confuse mixed multitude of all sorts of people to be a true church. But, Christ
is no Mediator for such a mixture, as himself said to his Father Ioh. 17, 9 16.
I pray not for the world, but for them which thou have given me for they are
thin^; and they are not of the world, as I am not of the world.

Fourthly the Church of England is not under this co^enan^, because every every
covenant is made upon conditions wllingly agreed and assented unto on both
parties, as was in that covenant Exo^. 19. Deuteronomy. 26, 1^, 18.
made between God and the Israel^tes of old. For God being a s^irit, must be
couenanted with and worshipped in 1 Cor 6, 17 Ioh. 4.24,
spirit, he requires the heart and mind, which if it be not freely given him,
all religion is in vayn. But this hearty and willing submission Psa 110.3
foretold to be, and Acts, 41,
seen in Gods people heretofore, was not seen in this Church, which was by law
of man compelled, not by love of Christ constreyned to enter into this
communion and religion, at the beginning of Q Elis reign, as in the former
argument is showed. Such complusion unto religion, where God persuades not the
heart, makes men hypocrites, not true christians: which not only Gods word,
but even l^ght of reason teaches, as Themistius a Philoso^her acknowledged,
when he said of state professors, that follow the Emperors religions, that Non
Deum sed, our puram coluisse Socrat hist. eccles l 3. c 1.
they worship not God, but the purple robe, that is the authority and persons
of Pr^nces.

Moreover the church of England has not Christ for their Mediator, because
they cannot come unto God by him, nor have assurance by faith that he makes
intercession for them; for that they offer unto God, a worship or service which
themselves have made and taken by im^tation out of Ant^christs Massebook; which
Leit^rgie or Divine seru^ce, having in it also many erroneous, superstitious
and idolatrous ordi^ances, rites, and ceremonies,) being not required of God,
nor warrantable by Christ's testament; they read out of their book daily in
the^r a^semblies, and offer or obtrude ^t upon God. By means whereof they also
extinguish the true way of calling upon God, by the help of his spirit, (as the
Apostle Rom, 8, 26.
teaches; and bring in a fleshly and dead kind of service, reading other men's
words instead of their own praying and calling on the name of the Lord. Which
humane devise, is contrary to the second commandment, that forbids us to
make or submit unto any similitude or likeness of any thing in heaven, Exodus 20,
earth or under the earth, in matters concerning the worship of God. And it,
being against the old covenant or testament, which Christ has confirmed unto
Mat, 5.17.18 19
every ^od and (...); against the new testament also, which calls us unto a
worship of God, Ioh. 4.24 Phil. 1.3,
in spirit and truth: has no promise to be sanctified by Christ's Med^ation,
who sanctifies no idols, nor idol service or false worshi^, but contrariweise
has testified, Psalm 16.4
their offerings of blood, will I not offer, nor by make mention of their names
with my lips. For as much then, as the people which worshippeth, is not the
called, justified, sanct^fied people of G^d; but an unlawful c^mmixture (...)
fall sorts of ^ers^ns, and forasmuch as the worship it self which they read
with and before ^he holy bible, and thrust upon God whither he like it or not,
is a false dead and vain invented worship of their own, not commanded of God
not justifiable by his word: it cannot be by the doctrine of the scripture or a
any prom^ses therein, that Christ should be Mediator for such worship or
worshipp^rs, or put any Rev. 8.3,
odours unto such prayers.

Therefore the church of England is not the true church of God.

EVery true church of God, has Christ for the Prophet of the same For of (...)
it is written, I will raise them up a Prophet from among their brethren 18.18.
Act, 3 23.

But the church of England has not Christ for the Prophet of the same. Because
it has neither himself in his own person, to teach them, (for he is now in
heaven, and there must be Act 3, 21.
until the time that all things be restored;) neither has it his appointed
ordinan^e of teaching by Rom 12.6 7
prophecy or office; which if it had, Christ were the Prophet of the same, as
himself said Ioh 13.20
if I send any, he that receives him receives me. The church of England h^th
not Christ's ordinance of prophecy without office; for it is unknown,
unpracticed, and insufferable among them, for private men to preach in their
a^^emblies, they must be ministers allowed by the Ordinary, else it is
punishable by the law of their church, though by the law of Christ, all men may
prophecy in his church, which is to speak to edifying, to exhortation and to
comfort, and all men are exhorted to covet this m^re then other spiritual
gifts. 1. Cor. 14 verse. 31.3.1.39, Neither has the church of England Christ's
appointed officers to teach, which are set down in scripture to be these,
Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists Pastors, and Teachers, Ephe 4.11. (Of which the
first three served for the first publishing of the g^spel throughout the world;
See for this point of the ministry of England, an other treatise purposely
handling this argument: intiled Reasons etc. showing that it is not lawful to
hear the Ministry of England.
the latter two continue st^ll unto the worlds end,) but in stead of these it
has the hierarchy and ministry of Antichrist to teach the same; namely
Metropolitan Archbishops, Lord Bish^ps, Deanes etc. Priests; and Deacons; which
is none of Christ's Ministry, either in name, office, calling, administration
or mayntenance, but the very ministry of the man of sin as he left it in the
land, and as is to be seen at this day in Rome and other his dominions, and in
the laws and canons of the popish church, where ar all the offices that now be
in England. Thus having not the ministry given of Christ, but a different
ministry given of Antichrist, it follows also by proportion from Christ's
words, saying he that receives him (that I send) Ioh 13, 20
receives me, and he that receives me, receives him that sent me: that the
church of England receiving such as Antichrist the Pope did send has received
Antichrist himself, and so has intertayned him for their Prophet and not
Christ.

Now where it is objected, that there are many excellent truths publikly
taught in this church and by this ministry of England; it is answered that is
not yenough unless it were taught in and according to the ordinance of God.
For false Prophets teach much truth, as is to be seen among Papists,
Anabaptists, Arians, and other like heretics. And as the moral good works
which heathens do, in honoring their parents and Magistrates, giving almose,
absteyning from and punishing murder, adultery, theft, etc. are not inded good
works, according to christian religion, because they are not done in obedience
to Gods word, by persons that are called justified and sanctified by that word,
and so not done in faith, and consequently Heb 11.6
cannot please God: even so the theological works which Antichristians do, in
preaching the truth, praying, ministering the sacraments, etc. are not indeed,
works pleasing unto God, because they are not done by persons that please him,
(for always the Gen 4, 4, 5

Heb, 11.4.


man must be accepted before his work can be;) and such persons please him not,
as without his Heb, 5, 4.
calling and Rom, 10, 15,
sending presume to administer his holy things. It is not therefore the work,
but the word of God that sanctifies the work, which we must look unto; for as
by this the virtuous heroik and religious acts of the Patr^archs and other holy
men, differ from the like acts of Pagans, and infidels: so also by this, the
difference i^ to be put between the works and administrations of tr^e and false
Christians. And seeing the ministers of England are not by Christ called and
sent, (as the better sort of themselves heretofore have confessed,) and so have
not his word to warrant their administration: whatsoever good doctrine they
teach, it proves them no more to be true ministers, then the excellent
doctrines and prophesies of the soothsayer Number. 23
Balaam, will prove him to be a true minister of God, or that the Moabites or
Madianites having him to sacrifice, prophecy and teach among them, had an
ordinance or prophet of God. See Deuteronomy. 18, 10.11.14.15. etc.

Again Christ is not the Prophet of this church, because a great part of his
word and scriptures, and of the graces of his spirit, are here never spoken nor
heard nor suffered to be uttered: and contrariweise much of man's word and
writing is brought in; as Aprocrypha books made of old the Service and homily
books made of late, in which also there be manifest Th^se things are more
particularly manifested in other treatises as Di^c^u, of the false Chapter Refut of
Mr Gifford. And by the Ministers themselves See among other The Abridgement of
the book which the Ministers of Lincolnsh delivered to his Majesty, printed.
1605
errour^, l^es contradictions to the holy scriptures, idolatrous and and
superst^tious doctrines, rites, ceremonses etc. taught unto and observed, by
the priests and people, an idle and soul-murthering ministry maynteyned,
Chr^sts spiritual graces given for teaching and building up his church,
quenched, with other like evils. The proof of this may be seen in their
communion book, whose Calendar alotteth what is to be read daily and yearly in
all their Assemblies: where many chapters of the Bible are wholly and
perpetually excluded, many Apocrypha chapters read as holy scriptures. And by
the written homilies, the graces and utterance of Gods spirit are extinguished
that man's erroneus writing may come in place. Besides this all preaching
Ministers so See their own confess. before page, 35,
limited and restreyned in their doctrine that they may not preach against any
sin by public authority establ^shed, and if they do, they are silenced See
before page, 56,
excommunicated etc. this indignity and dishonor Christ will not suffer at
man's hands, to have his word and man's word matched together, his spirit spirit
and truth restreyned: he will be Prophet alo^e or not at al. as they that with
the tr^e God and his true worship, had other Gods also, and other worships, are
said in scripture to Is^ 1, ^^, 1, 1^, ^* 13, etc.
forsake the true God, and to b^ 2 Chro. 15 3,
without him: so they that with the true Prophet and doctor Christ and his
doctrine, have other also; may rightly be said to have forsaken him and to be
without him. For when men set their thresholds by the Lords and their posts by
his; they Eze 43.8
defile his holy name with their abominations, and in Mat 15.9
vain they worship him, that teach such doctrines as be precepts of men

Moreover thi^ Church wants part and communion with Christ in that
prophetical office, which he has imparted to his people, namely power and
freedom Isa. 43, 10
to witness, 2 Cor 4.13
profess, Mat. 28.20.
practice, and Phil 2, 16
hold forth the word of life, and all that Christ has commanded; to Rom, 15,
14.
admonish and Leuit, 19 17. Luk, 7.3
reprove one another for sin and transgression, and either if they repent to
Mat, 18, 16.17.
forgive them, or if they repent not, to follow them further Ioh 17, 17
unto the church and even to excommunication for their obstinate violating Gods
law. That they have not power or freedom to profess and practice the truth of
the Gospel in these things, appears by their servile subjection to the
hierarchy, laws and canons which are amongst them, whereby they are
restreyned from professing and practicing any further truth then is by law
establ^shed among them, but must obey and follow all that their spiritual
Lords the Bishops do inioyne them, and may not speak against or reprove any
of the abominatio^s that are in their church worship, Ministry, ceremonies etc.
neither have power to deal according to that rule of Christ Mat. 18 15. etc,
for any sin, be it never so horrible and manifest, but must leave it to the
censure of the Prelate or hi^ Commissarie, who at his pleasure buyeth and
sells the sins and souls of men. This bondage the people should not be in if
they had and enjoined the word of God, which is Ioh 8, 32
the truth; for that truth would make them free, that they should not in this
sort be 1, Cor, 7 23,
servants of men. But now not ha^ing power to profess, much less to practice
the truth: nor to reprove the evils that reign among them; not having the free
use of Gods word in private, nor the right and lawful Ministry or use thereof
in public; they cannot be said to have Christ for their Prophet, and Therefore
the Church of England, is not the true Church of God.

EVery true Church of God has Christ for the Priest and Sacrificer of the for
he only is the high Priest of our profession, and to him it was sworn, thou
art a Priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedek. Heb, 3, 1, and, 5.5, 6,
10, and, 9, 11. etc.

But the Church of England has not Christ for the Priest or sacrificer of the
some. Because the gifts and sacrifices which it offreth unto God, are not
presented and offered unto him by Christ; neither is this church reconciled
reconciled unto God by him. And first the worship and service which they
perform unto God, their prayers, praises and confe^sions, (which now are
Christ^an men's Heb 13.5 Psalm. 69, 30.31.
sacrifices,) are not offered and sanctified by Christ, because they are false
and id^l^trous, wherewith Christ has no communion. For ^nstead of true
spir^tuall prayer and praises the fruits of Gods spirit in his ^eo^le; they
read a written leiturgie translated out of the Mass book: and according as
they are stinted in the same, they speak; obser^ing also the many Popish
ordinances, r^tes, and ceremonies commanded in the same, as their holy and
festival days, holy eues and fasting d^yes, absolutio^ of sins by their
priests, confirmation of Baptism by the^r Prelates, profanation of the
Sacraments by pri^ate administration and howsling with them, by gossips, by
idolatrous signs and gestures of cro^^e, kneeling etc. also marying by the
Priest with sign of the ring, churching of women, burial of the dead, read^ng
curses or comminations in stead of discipline, besides the sundry errors and
untruths in that book, vayn repet^tions in their prayers, and the like. All
which being commanded and used daily by law of their church, without ground
from Gods word, which approves none of these idolatries but condemns them;
are not sanctified by Christ nor presented unto God hi^ Father; For he will
Psa, 16.4
not offer the idol sacrifices, neither will God accept such things as by his
Exo. 20, 4 5. Lev. 18.3.4.
law he teaches all men to abhor.

Secondly; whereas the bodies and sowles of men are also spiritual Rom 12, 1
and li^ing sacrifices, and the persons offered in the Church by the Ministe^y
of the Gospel, should be as the Ezekiel 36 38.
holy fl^ck, as the flock of Jerusalem in their solemn feasts, that so the
oblation of them might be acceptable Rom, 15.16.
being sanctified by the holy Ghost: the people offered in this church are a
confuse unsanctified m^ltitude, not separated from the world, (as before in the
first argument Isa 66, 20.
is showed,) and many of them so wicked, (even by the confe^sion of their page,
74.
own ministers, and in every honest man's conscience, See before page, 2.
as they neither deseru to be laid on Gods alter, nor to be touched of any true
Israelite in such respect. Yet ar they by the Priests of this church offered
daily unto God, in their administration, and blessed in his name. Yea the
precious sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ (remembered and re^resented
by 1 Cor: 11, 24.26.
bread and wine at his supper,) is prostitut^^ as if it were an unholy thing)
to the profane and wicked in this church, which being unworthy receivers, are
verse, 27,
guilty of the body and blood of Christ as were the wretche^ that crucified
him. Also Baptism which should be an ingraffing into Christ Rom 6, 3.4.5,
his death burial and resurrection, and a s^gne Act 22, 16,

1 Ioh, 1.7.


of washing away men's sins in his blood; is given to the seed of the ungodly,
blasphemers, and enemies of Christ, unto whom by no right it does apperteyn.
Which sacrilegious profanation of the holy mysteries, shows a manifest
contempt of Christ represented in them: who as he communicates not himself
with such wicked persons so neither the signs and seals of himself and the
redemption that he wrought for his elect. For by his suffering he consecrated
them only that are H^b 10, 14
sanctified, that by Ioh 6, 53.35,
faith do eat his flesh and drink his blood, and the wicked which have no
portion in his death and oblation, when they participate in these seals of
grace, do but eat and drink judgment to themselves; the ministers which so
prostitute Christ unto the teeth of his enemies, and tread under foot the son
of God, if they repent not shall not escape his hand which said, Heb 10.29 30.
Vengeance is mine, I will repay: and the people which by an imaginary
separation are or seem to be sundred from those profane, and yet communicate
together in such things, do even by that action show that they are one body
with them; for so it is written, we that are many, are one bread and one body,
because we all are partakers of one bread. 1 Cor 10, 17.

This bringing of Satan's seed into the church, unto the alter of God, may
further be minded as a high degree of violating the second commandment,
whereby all images idols and simillitudes whatsoever, of the Diuils or men's
invention or forming, are severely forbidden to be brought into Gods house, or
used in his worship. Now such images or Idols, are these wicked persons. For as
children are the Gen, 5, 3.
images of their parents; and all fa^thfull people called the Deuteronomy 14.1
children of God, are Gods lively images in Christ, whose Ro^ 8.29,
image and simillitude they carry, himself being truly and properly the sole
Col, 1.15.
image of the invisible God his Father, and they all being borne a new of him,
are changed 2 Cor 3.18
into the same image from glory to glory, as by the spirit of the Lord, being
renewed in knowledge after Col. 3.10
the image of him that created them so Satan's children, (as wicked worldlings
be called in scripture,) are his lively images, having lost the first image of
God, Gen, 1, 27
wherein they were created; and into the image of the Serpent are changed daily
by his spirit that rules in them; and him they represent in his malycious
nature and actions. As it is sin, and so esteemed, to have images and
representations, of beasts, of fowls, of fishes, etc. brought into the church
and worship of God: so would and well might it be esteemed more horrible if in
any Christian congregation, there should be brought in pictures of the Diuill
or other like helish representations. Yet men will not see the horror of this
sin, that the living images and pictures of the Serpent, even wicked and
profane people, his seed and children, should be brought into the Church and
worship of God, to have part and interest in Christ and his covenant, whether
he will or not; to be offered unto God and laid upon his alter for spiriritual
sacrifices: though they be much more abominable then unclean beasts were under
the law, as the Act 10.11 12.28, Leuit. 11,
substance or figured thing, is more then the figure and shadow.

But doubtless God, who abhors all idols and religious images of humane
devise; and Christ, who would not Esa 16, 4
offer the bloody sacrifices of idolaters; abhors this confusion of Satan's
images within his church neither will the high priest after the order of
Melchisedek, offer such to his Father, or be priest unto them. Otherwise he
should not be so faithful in the house of God, as was Aaron, nor the
sacrifice; of the Gospel, be so holy as the shadows of the law, which Leu.
22.19, 20.
were unblemished.

Finally, all that have Christ for their Pr^est, are by him to bring their
sacrifices for their sins unto God, that so atto^eme^t may be made through his
intercession. For every high Pr^est is Heb. 5.1.
ordained for men in things perteyning to God, that he may offer gifts and
sacrifices for sins; and every man is appointed of God to present his
sacrifice Leu 17, 5
by the Priest, who is to Leu 4, 26
make atonement for him concerning his sin, that it may be forgiven him. But
the church of England, (in as much as it persisteth in sin, and will not
repent of the many transgressions daily committed in their public worship and
a^ministration of holy things, refuses reconciliation by him who is the Heb,
9, 11
high Pr^est of good things to come; and Heb 7.25
able perfectly to save them that come unto God by him. This their impenitency
appears not only by their perseverance in evil doin^, notwithstanding all
the a^monitions and reproofs that have sounded in their ears these many
years,) but above al, by their ungodly Canons and constitutions made by the
whole representative chuch of Engl: and submitted unto by the rest of the
people. Whereby they publish unto all the world, how they are hardened in their
evils, that excommunicate p^nish and persecute all that s^eak against or refuse
to communicate with their people, prelacie, priesthood, worship, ceremonies,
etc. wherein are so many sins and idolatries.

For as much then as the public service and sacrifice of this church is
idolatrous, the holy mysteries, of Christ profaned, the people unsanctified,
and their sins unrepented of; there is no word or promise in scripture that
Christ is the Priest or sacrificer of such worship or worshippers

Therefore the Church of England is not the true Church of God.

EVery true church of God, has Christ for the King thereof; For of him the
Father says Psalm, 2.6.
I have set my King upon Zion my holy, mountayn; and he must r^ign, till he
has put all his enemies under his feet, and shall sit upon the throne of David
and upon his kingdom, 1 Cor, 15 24.
to order it and to establish it with judgment and with justice, from
henceforth even for ever, Isa. 9.7.

But the church of England has not Christ for the King thereof. first, because
it has not these officers which he has appointed to govern his, church under
him, namely, Ephesians. 4, 11, 1^. 1 Timothy 5.17.
Pastors, Teachers, and Elders: but in stead of them it has the hierarchy or
Prelacye of Antichrist, Archbishops, Lord Bishops, Chane^llors, Archdeacons,
Commissaries, etc. who reign or tyrannize over the sowles of men by their
unlawful jurisdiction, ruling over many Churches making them constitutions and
canons prescribing them words, both for prayer and doctrine; summoning,
censuring censuring, excommunicating, absoluing, both priests and people,
making and deposing ministers, giving the holy Ghost excercising also civil
offices in the common wealth, and carrying the titles both of Christ, and of the
Gods, Psa, 82.6
the Magistrates, into whose places they intrude' having no warrant for their
spiritual Lordships in the Testament of Christ. Secondly, because this church
has not the Laws and statutes of Christ for to govern the same; for although
they have the holy Bible among them, yet are not the ordinances therein
written, practiced or suffered to be practiced in these assemblyes. As for an
instance, the way and means which Christ has appointed for repressing of sin
(that enemy which his scepter always Romans 6, 6 etc.
beats down) namely first Mat 18.15 16, etc.
private admon^tion. Secondly with witnesses, Thirdly by telling the Church,
and then if the sinner be not reclaymed, casting him out or delivering 1 Cor
5.4, 5.12.13
him to Satan by the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, given to every
congregation; this holy and orderly walking, is unknown, this power is wanting
in all these Parishes, who cannot excommunicate any person be he never so
profane wicked or blasphemous. But contrariweise ^ll must repayr to the Bishops
Chancellors or Commissaries courts, where things are handled and judged
according to their own laws and canons, and not by the rules of Christ.

Thirdly, because the people of this church were and are (even by the
confession of our aduersari^s) of all sorts of people, as well wicked as Godly,
and sins of al sorts do abound and reign among them that if the good laws of
the common wealth did not repre^se them, there would be no living in peace
among them. Such profane worldly people. are not the subjects of Christ, his
kingdom is Ioh 18.36
not of the world, neither is it Reu. 21.27.
for the open wicked, but for the Mar, 1, 15
repentant and believing, for the Mat, 5, 3 etc.
poor in spirit, the meek, the merciful, the persecuted for rightiousne^; sake
not for persecuters haters and co^temners of the truth. If thus it should be
then were Christ's kingdom divided in and against it self, and so could Luk
11, 17
not endure and be perpetual, as the scripture says Dan 7, 14
it shall be. For both by the oracle of God, Gen 3, and by experience we learn
and see there is continual war between the woman's seed and the serpents,
Christians and the Antichristians, the children of God and the children of
Belial or impiety so that the having of such sinful in the church, is the bane
and ruin of Christ's kingdom and religion. The covenant made with the house of
David (on whose throne Luk 1, 32 33.
Christ sits for ever) is an everlasting covenant 2 Samuel, 23, 5,
perfect in all points and sure, but the wicked shall be every one verse, 6,^
as thorns thrust away, because they cannot be taken with hands, but the man
that shall touch them must be defended with iron and with the shaft of a spear:
and they shall be burnt with fire in the same place.

Finally, this Church wants Christ's power against Syn, Satan, and ^ntichrist;
if any would deal against sin and sinners, he has no w^y, but by complaint
to the Antichristian spiritual courts. (for the civil magistrate punishes
civilly, and not with ecclesiastical censure, which is the power and scepter
whereof we speak,) and if those courts refuse to censure the sinner (as they
seldom cast out any except it be for well doing, or not appearing at their
Summons,) there is no redress of any evil among them As for ecclesiastical
matters, and the many abuses and abominations that are in the church,
ministry, worship, ceremonies etc. the Priests and people of the parishes are
in bondage to the Prelates, in servile subjection to their ungodly decrees,
censures and cursing Canons; no spiritual Christian power have they against
this tyranny, but are fayn to seek to the arm of flesh, the Prince and
Parliament, for redress; who if they refuse or neglect to help them; then
remayn they under the Prelates Antichristian yoke still, as has now appeared
by their practice these many years. But if they had Christ for their King, his
Ioh. 8.32
truth, his word, would make them free, he would make them also Reu. 1, 6.
Kings and Priests unto God his Father; that howsoever the supressing and
abolishing of this unruly hierarchy with their many abominations, is to be
left unto the Magistrate who only has power from God Romans 13.3, etc
to execute this vengeance, yet every man should deliver Ier. 51.6.
his own sowl, absteyning Deuteronomy. 5, 7 8.9, etc
from error, false worship, superstition, popish thraldom and all other evil
whatsoever, though with 2 Timothy 3, 12
affliction, bonds, banishment etc. and stand fast in the liberty Gal. 5, 1.
wherewith Christ has made him free, without yoke of thraldom. For he will
reign in the midds Psa 110.1
of his enemies; Satan and sin he has subdued, as for himself so for all
his people and subjects, whom he has redeemed out of all Satanean and
Balylonian bondage, that sin should reign Psa 110.1
no more over them. But if they forsak this fredom, and take upon them the yoke
of Antichrist, his servants they are Rom 6.14 22.
to whom they obey, Which this church doing to the Antichristian Prelates whom
they acknowledge for their spiritual Lords, receiving and obeying their hests
and canons, reteyning and nourishing such as be enemies and rebels against
Christ, Rom 6.16
and remaining in spiritual bondage: cannot be said to have Christ for their
King and Lawgiuer, Therefore the Church of England is not the true Church of
God.

THE sum of all that which has been said, is this, That Church which has
not Christ for the Head, Mediator, Prophet Priest and King of the same; has
not God his Father for God of the same: because the Father and the son are
one. Ioh. 10.^0, and whosoever has not the Son has not the Father, 1 Ioh. 2
23.3 Ioh, 9.

But the Church of England has not Christ for the head, Mediator, Prophet,
Priest or King of the same as by the former Arguments has been proved.

Wherefore it has not God the Father for God of the same, and consequently is
not his Church.

THat church which is not the true church of Christ and of God; ought not by
any true Christian to be continued or communicated with: but must be forsaken
and separated from; and a true church of God sought and joined unto, where
Christ and salvation by him, may undoubtedly be had. Because we are willed to
absteyn and separate from the false church, 2, Cor 6 1^, 17; Reu. 18, 4 Hos
4.15. Isa. 48, 20. Ier 51.45, Zach. 2.6, 7, 1 Cor 10.20, 1, etc. We are willed
also to seek and join unto a true church, Deuteronomy. 12, 5 Song. 1.6. Ier 50 4, 5.
Isa, 65, 9. Psalm. 26, 5.6, and 87, 2, 5 6, Act, 2, 47.

But the church of Engl. is before proved not to be the true church of Christ
and of God. Therefore it ought to be separated from; and a true church sought
for, and joined to, of such as would be saved.

THose Ministers which have and execute the ministry of a falls church are not
the true ministers of Christ, and consequently not to be heard or obeyed as
shepherds of our sowles. Because the ministry of a false church, must needs
be false also, seeing the church having no interest in Christ, can have no
interest in a Christian ministry. Besides Christ has given his ministry to
his own church only, Ephesians 4.11.12, 14.15, 16. 1 Cor. 12, 27, 28. See also Ioh,
10.1, 4.5, Act, 20, 28. Ioh. 21, 15, 16.

But all the ministers of the church of England, have and execute the ministry
of a falls church; for so by the former arguments that church is proved.

Therefore they are not the true ministers of Christ, and consequently not to
be heard or obeyed as shepherds of our souls.

For the further descrying of the false ministry of this church, I referr the
(good reader) to a treatise lately published entitled, Reasons and Arguments
proving that it is not lawful to hear the Ministry of Engl.

And to an other heretofore published, called A treatise of the Ministry of
the Church of England.

I will put enimitie between thee (o Serpent) and the woman, and between thy
seed and her seed: He, shall crush thy head; and thou, shall crush his heel.
Genesis 3.15.

Forasmuch as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also (Christ)
himself likew^ise took part of the same: that through death he might abolish
him that had the power of death, that is, the Diuil; and that he might deliver
them all which for fear of death all their life time were subject to bondage.
Heb. 2.14:15.

And there was war in heaven: Michael and his Angels warred against the
Dragon; the Dragon also warred, and his Angels; but prevailed not, neither was
their place found any more in heaven And cast was the great Dragon, that old
Serpent, called Diuill and Satan, that deceaueth the whole world: cast was he
into the earth, and his Angels were cast with him Reu, 12.7.8, 9.

A BRIEF ANSWER TO Mr BERNARDS BOOK; INTI^VLED, The Separati^ts Sc^isme.
WHen the former treatise was almost finished; among other adversaries Mr
Bernard comes forth to fight against the truth, which but a while since he
would needs seem to favor: but things not succeeding to his exspe^tation, he
has changed his love into hatred, And in the bitterness of his zele, he ha^h
sent out a treatise containing Disswasions from the practice of the Gospel,
which he pleases to call The separatists schism, or Brownisme. Though in his
book there be little weight of reason or truth to be seen, nor any thing which
may grealy trouble a discreet reader, who is but meanly acquainted without
cause: yet both for the stopping of the man's mouth, if it may be, who makes
huy and cry after some of us, as in his Prooeme to the reader he proclaymeth;
and for help of the simple who may be offended at the truth, not discerning his
frawd. I thought it needful to observe and answer briefly, the principal
things by him objected; many of which are before in this treatise, and in other
books more largely refuted; and all of them may, if need require, hereafter by
some other, be particularly refelled. Herein now the Lord give me wisdom, to
discover this adversaries falsehood; and thee (good reader) understanding to
discern it.

Of his PROBABILITIES,
THE first means whereby Mr BERNARD would dissuade from the truth, which he
calls Brownisme, are Probabilities or lik^lihoods that the way is not good:
and they are in number (as himself has cast them,) seven.

1. The Novelty of it. 2. The agreement thereof with ancient schismatiks. 3.
The ill means by which it is mayteyned, namely, by abuse of scripture and
deceauable reasonning. 4. The want of approbation of the reformed Churches. 5.
The comdemnation thereof by all their Divines, (vidz of the church of England.)
6. Gods judgment against it 7. The ^ll success^ it has had.
Such l^kelihoods as these, the Papists heretofore with as much color and
truth, have alleged against the church of England; heathens and enemies have in
former ages objected the l^ke things to the church of Christ, and Mr Ber.
speaks but that which has been spoken before him, fulfill^ng the meas^re of
his forefathers. But to the particulars.

The Nov^lty he makes to be in differing from all the best reformed churches
in Christendom But if a Papist had to deal with him, 1 Liklihood
See Kelli sons Survey of the new r^ligi^n 1 b^ok chap, 1 5, and 2, book c. 2.
he would bring those reformed churches also within the c^mpasse of Novel^y:
and then Mr Bern. would flee, (as his brethren before him have done) to the
scriptures for antiquity: as he would answer a Papist, so w^ll I answer him;
let the scriptures speak for the differences between other churches and us. But
here Mr Bern. is mute; and medleth not with th^s controversy he thought belike
the very name of Noveltie and of the reformed churches would fray the simple

If it be Nouelty to differ from the reformed churches, then may he blame his
own church ^f Engl. more then us, seeing it differs from those churches in m^e
and weightier points then we do: yea it hates persecuteth sile^ceth and
excommunicateth those ministers and people, that stand up and plead for such
things as the reformed churches have and practice. Again these churches have
rejected and written against many of the Antichr^stian enormities that are now
in England. So if it be likely, we are not in the truth because we d^ffer from
the churches in few things; it is more likely Mr Bern. and his brethren, are
not in the truth, because they differ from them in many Wherefore let him first
pull the beam out of his own eye. Again where he stands upon the hard words
which some of us have uttered of the Presbytery etc. if he had not an evil and
partial eye he might have seen many more hard and reproachful words used by his
right reverend Fathers, and fellow priests against the Presbytery and
discipline which the reformed churches have, and the reforming ministers of
Engl. would have. That still his weapon enters into his own bowels.

His 2 likelihood he makes to be our agreement with ancient schismatiks: yet
any points wherein we agree with them in evil, Likeliehood.
he names not much le^^e proves; but refers us to Mr Giffords pains
herein, who had long since his answer by Mr Greenwood to every particular of
that his pretended consimillitude between the Donatists and us; to which answer
I r^ferr the reader. Again, this objection is such as the Papists make against
the church of England for so The three co^u^rsio^s of Engl. part 2 c. 12 s. 19
etc.
N. D. compares Protes^^nts with Donatists; and let us see what answer the
Priests of England can make for themselves that will not as well, if not
better, clear us And to come a little near to this o^r adversary, we could p^t
Mr Ber. in mind of his own ways, wherein he might see himself more like a
schismatik then any of us: for we openly profess our departure from the church
of England, as from a false church, so proved by evident gro^nds out of G^ds
word; whereas Mr Bernard holding it to be a true church and ab^ding in it, yet
he and a hundred with him, made not long since a pretended co^enant together;
whereby they separated from the unpreaching ministers, and all that hate to be
reformed Yet are those rea^ing priests of as ^ood authority by the Laws and
Canons of that Church as himself, and the Conformists of far greater esteem in
this church, then the Reformists. Whether this be not a plain schism, and Mr
Bern a factious person thus to carry h^mselfe in a church, let himself say: as
also whether he be not f^r this, ipso ^acto excomm^nicated, by force of the^r
own Canon which says,

Constit, and Can. eccles. 1603. Can 9.
Whosoever shall hereafter separate themselves from the Communion of Saints as
it is approved by the Apostles rules in the Church of England, and combine
themselves together in a new brotherhood, accounting the Christi^ns who are
conformable to the doctrine, governments, rites and ceremonies of the church of
England to be profane and unmeet for them to join with in Christian
profession: let them be excommunicated ipso facto, and not restored but by the
Archbishop after their repentance and public reuocation of such their wicked
errors. Into like danger does he come by Canon. 11, and 12.

^ Likeliehood.
The il means, by which our cause is mainteyned, he make^h to be strange
expositi^n of scripture, etc.

First Mr Bern. here walks still in the Papists steps, who object the like
unto the Protestants. Let an indifferent reader ( Kellis, Survey, 1. book chap,
5
say they) peruse the learned book of these reformers, and he shall see in
them false allegations of Fathers, corruptions of scriptures, fathers, and
councels etc. Sec^^dly I answer our expositions may seem strange to such as
are themselves strangers from God: but the Godly wise can discern, to whom (if
they have read our books,) I lean the judging of this probability. Now th^s
old calumniatio^ which Satan laid upon the Saint, how truly Mr B^rn. has laid
upon us, let his proofs show, which are in these two particulars. First, that
one of us says, All the truth is not taught in the Church of E^gland, and to
prove this, Act. 20 21. is cited. Which one of us thus cites Act. 20 and
where; Mr Bern. names not. Good cause we have to suspect his faithfulness; for
in his book he charge us with some errors, which we hold not, as after shall
appear. And he that would so injury the whole, what may we think he w^ll do
for a part. I suppose therefore the party cited that scripture to prove the
whole truth ought to be taught which because it may be questioned whether it be
needful at all times, therefore the Apostles example is brought. As for the
Priests of England, (...) they preach not the whole truth, is proved by their
daily practice, who balk many truths, touching the church, ministry worship,
governmen^ etc. as all that observe their doctrines know very well. It is
proved ^lso by the laws and canons of their church, which excommunicate ^ll
such as shall by the truth reprove the falsehoods and abominations that are
among them, as before in page, 55.
this treatise is showed. And Mr Bern. is very silly, if he exspect any
scriptures to prove what is now taught in his church. Furthermore if it be
granted him, that Act. 20. were by some one of us alleged for the purpose he
pretend^th: yet it is no more l^kelihood that our cause is evil, then that his
brethrens cause and plea against us is evil, for they without all doubt do
allege scriptures for to prove things done in Engl: which it is not posible by
the scripturs for to show, See before in this book page 43. etc 44. But what
speak I of others Mr Bern, himsefe is fayn to use such colors, else would the
glory of his church soon fade: for in the 48, page of his book he allegeth God
for witness that they are his people, 1 by giving them his word, Psa, 147.19 20.
2 by his effectual working thereby, Ier, 22, 22, therefore there is the voice
of the son of God, Ioh. 5.25, etc. If these be found and sufficient proofs,
that England has Gods word, because Israel had it, and so in the rest; then
why may not men allege like Scriptures and proofs against them, saying, They
are stained with their own works, and go a whoring with their own inventions;
Psalm. 106, 39. from the Prophets of Jerusalem, is hyprocrisie gone forth into
all the Land, Ier. 23.15, I have not sent these Prophets says the Lord: yet
they ran etc. Ier. 23.21. and the like. So then Mr Bern. must either bring
better reasons for himself, or else he may blush to blame others for that
wherein himself is more faulty then they; if they be faulty at all.

The other particular which he specifieth is, that places setting forth the
invisible church etc. we bring to set forth the visible church by; as namely;
1. Pet. 2.9, 10. But Mr Bern. shows his reader no reason at all, why that
Scripture must be understood of the invisible church, as he Says; and it is an
easy matter for him to find faults without reason, in any ma^s writing. That
place of Peter, (as the wise reader may perceive,) Speaks of and to the
visible or Sensible church: for the Apostle wrote to the visible christians,
the 1 Pet, 1.1
strangers that then dwelt in Pontus Galatia, etc. and this which he speaks
to them in Chap^ 2, 9.10. is as Moses of old spoke to the visible church of
Israel, Exodus 19:6. Again, he mentions the end of their calling to this
dignity, vidz. to show forth the virtues of him that had called them out of
darkness into his marvelous light; which whether it appertaynes not to the
visible church, I leave it for every true member thereof to judge. And such as
these, 4 Likelihod.
are the exceptions that D. Allison (to whom he refers us,) took
heretofore: which because they are unworthy a Dr. of Divinity, we have though
best to pass by, as unworthy of reply, till further occasion.

The 4. likelihood is, that we have not the approbation of any reformed
churches Churches for our cause. This is much like his first probability,
before answered, and seems to be a mayn propp to uphold the church of
England, which love to make flesh their arm. The reader may see this point
Page 9. and ^7, and, 51. page 10 and 27, etc (...)7, and, 51. etc
thrice urged before in this book, and Apol part 6 ^. 18. (...). 1.
thrice answered. I referr him also to our Letters unto Mr Iunius whom Mr
Bern. mentions: and finally to the Apology of the church of England, where
themselves say, unto the like objections of the Papists, ^, Lik^lyhood
the truth of the Gospel of Jesus Christ depends not upon councels, (add
also, nor upon Churches;) nor as S. Paul says, upon the judgments of mortal
creatures.

The 5. is, the condemnation of this way by the Divines (of England) both
living and dead, etc. But this is no other likelihood then it is like Mr Bern.
(if he had then lived) would have alleged against Christ himself, when the
learned Priests, Rabbines, and Divines of Israel, condemned his way and
doctrine Ioh. 7.48.49. and 19, 7. etc. If these learned English Di^ines have
confuted us, let Mr Bern. or any show the scriptures and reasons by which they
have done it: if they were our adversaries without reason, (as some of them he
mentions, show little or none at all,) wise men will esteem them accordingly
But if such a Divine as Bredwel do but call our curse a by-path, this sentence
is authentik yenough, for Mr Bern to put in (...) 1. Likelie^ood.
his book.

The 6. is, the Lords judgment giving sentence with them (of England) and
against us. These things as they are before more prudently urged, both for the
good success of the English ministers, and bad ys^ue of many of us, so I leave
the reader unto the answers before made page, 13. etc, 23. etc. Only I would
advise Mr Bern. to look better to his words, when he next write, and not to set
down such positions, as may tend to Atheism or Iudaisme; as wherein his
brother Boltons case that hanged himself he page 34.
Says, which end the Lord lets not his special instruments to come unto,
etc. A Jew upon this grant, would trouble Mr Bernard to defend Christianity;
seeing Act. 1.17, ^.
Judas hanged himself, who was a far more special instrument of the Lord,
being an Apostle; then Bolton that was but a ruling Elder; and not the first
brocher of this way, as Mr Bern. very untruly (upon Mr Giffords report, if he
so reported) does allege. Besides that Judas after a sort repented and
acknowledged his sin, and was not (that we know of) excommunicate, yet came
to that woeful end; whereas Bolton for revolting from his faith at Paul's
cross, was dealt with, excommunicated, and so died (for ought that is known)
without repentance, a member of Mr Bernards church. See before, page 23.

^ ^ikelie^^^d.
The 7. is, the ill success it has had, these very many years, being no more
increased.

The natural man perceives not the things of God; but judging by the outward
appearance, gives unrighteous judgment. If M. Bernard had lived in Noah's
days, and seen his 120. years labors and preaching spent in vayn, how would
he have stumbled at the work of God, that gave his word no other effect in the
world? And lo it is written Luk, 17.26.
as it was in the days of Noe, so shall it be in the Days of the Son of man.
But had Mr Bern. been in the days following, when Israel very few in number
Psa, 105, 12.13.
walked from nation to nation, from one kingdom to an other people, and
notwithstanding the Ge^, 15.
promise of multiplication, yet in 200. years and mo^, had increased but unto
Deuteronomy, 10.22.
70. sowles, and as many more years were in Egyptian bondage: and had he in
the mean while seen the Gen, 17.20.
Princes of Israel, and Gen 36, 15. etc.
Dukes of Esau with the ver 3 c 1 and
Kings that reigned in his land, before any King in Israel. how would this man
(may we think) have gathered likelihoods, or rather have concluded out of doubt
against the poor afflicted church of God? But it is no new thing to hear this
pleading from such carnal gospellers. Well, not totell him of Gods gracious
work in bringing many to this truth and causing more to listen after it daily,
let Mr Bern. look to himself and his fellow Reformists, and if his right eye
be not blent, let him acknowledge Gods hand against themsel^es, who heretofore
had so many fautors, and that not of the meanest in the land: yet now are
repressed as troublers of the church, and their counterfeyt reformation further
from all likelihood of effecting then was at the first. And this much of his
unlikely likelihoods.

Of his REASONS.
HIS reasons now follow, of more force (as he page 44.
pretends) then his bare probabilities. These are three fold, taken 1 from the
evil of the entrance, in to this way; 2 from our persons so greueously sinning
in this way; 3 from our opinions which are altogether erroneous and false.

The first sort of reasons, have this foundation. 1. The evil of the entrance.


The entrance is very sinful and cursed. Because of these 2 great evils. 1 That
we do not only condemn corruptions and the notorius wicked, but also forsake
page, 44,
all former Christian profession amongst them. A man must cast off that word
there with them which made them alive; also the faithful messengers of God,
the Fathers which begat him: yea he must renounce all fellowship of the godly
there etc.

But we may with the Prophet truly complayn of this man, Answer.
that his mouth is Psa. 10.7^
full of cursing and deceit and frawd; for how often have we in our public
writings protested our consent in all the holy doctrines that themselves
profess: only because we cannot enjoy them without Antichristian
abominations; which the Prelates impose, and the Priests and people practice we
have separated from those assemblies, where idolatry is publicly set up and
maynteined from those blind guides that would seem to make concord between
light and darkness, Christ and Beliall, and under show of many truths, seduce
men's sowles unto destruction. Did the church of England forsake all former
christian profession among the Papists, when they left the Pope and some of his
Prelates, Mass, images etc. If not; then neither do we that have left but the
remnants of Popery yet retained; and do walk in the truth to our knowledge
and utmost power as God inableth us; not casting off any jote of his word, nor
any faithful messenger of his, or other godly person, as this adversary
calumniateth. His heart knows better, though it sends forth such bitter
waters.

2. Next this he says page, 46.
with such a renunciation of truth, must be retained, much untruth: the
particulars are 1 that men must beleeu our way to be the truth of God; 2 and
then condemn their church as a false church.

Answer.
Whether our way be not the truth of God, let the Godly judge by his word; by it
also let them try the estate of the church of England. But Mr Bern. begging the
question, will have things to be taken for untruthes, before trial or due
conviction. To help himself he seeks advantage by that we have published as
he says under our hand, that the differrences between us and them, are only
such corruptions as are by us set down. Though the word only be not ours, but
Mr Bern. own; yet to let this pass as ordinary with him, what gathers he from
it? Corruptions says he, do not mak^ a false church, but a corrupt church,
(make the worst of it that can be;) as corruptions in a man, makes but a
corrupt man, and not a false man. First let the reader observe that he speaks
not a word of those corruptions which we set down; neither indeed is he able
with our corruption to plead for them. Secondly it is very corrupt and gross
that he would persuade, no corruptions can make a church to be false: for then
rebellious Israel, though they Zeph. 3.7
corrupted al their works, was a true chuch still; but Moses foretold that for
Deuteronomy 32, 5
corrupting themselves, they should be none of Gods children but a froward and
crooked generation. Now let Mr Bern make the best of it he can. His simillitude
of a man is not fit in this case. A man is a substance, but a church consists
in relation or reference to Christ, as a wife to her husband. But if a man's
wife play the whore never so often and openly, she may be, by Mr Bern. doctrine
esteemed a corrupt but not a false wife. Such distinction he may carry to the
stews. Corruptions there may grow in churches and they yet be true churches as
at Reu 2.14 15.
Pergamus, ver. 20. etc.
Thyatira, etc. corruptions also there may be that will make true churches
false; as in Israel and Rome, where first wre assemblies of Saints; afterward
they became Eze 23, ^ Chro. 11.15. Reu 17 1, and, 18, 2
whores and habitations of Diuils. And there may be such corruptions in the
constituting of a church that embraces much truth, as will make it from the
first a false church, as in Samaria, 2. Kin. 1^, 27.28. etc

2 The persons grievously sinning etc. 1 Syn.
HIs second sort of reasons, is from the grievous sins that are among v^, by
reason whereof (from our own ground) we may not (says he) be joined with. The
sins he reckneth 6.

First, that woeful entrance before named. I answer, that Mr Bern. entered into
this reason with untruth, and continued in it with begging the question, as
before is showed. So that this his objection is very woeful and the man
deser^eth rather to be pitied then answered in his i^le (...) made without
proof.

THe second is a hie degree of unthankfulness both to God that begat vs^ly, ^is
word, and to our mother the church of Engl. that bar^ us. I answer, 2. Syn.
(...) thank God for that knowledge of him which we atteyned unto in the Church
of England, and are thankful also (as is meet) to all the instruments which
God has used to bring us unto knowledge: but now when God has showed us a
further truth, (as what ch^l^e of his, sees not more daily,) we should show
great vnthankf^lnes if we would not walk in it, much more if we should
blaspheme and persecute it, as Mr. Bern. and many of his fellow Priests do,
struggling against the light that shines upon them; A papist may have occasion
of thankfulness unto G^d and men, for the knowledge of God and Christ which he
has get in the Ro^ish church, far abo^e that which he could have had among
Pagans: yet if upon sight of the errors in Popery, he forsake that false church
and join to some other true, no man can without ungodliness, condemn him of
unthankfulness. The Papists heretofore have used such reasons as these against
the Protestants; now they, for want of better apply them a^^inst us.

The third sin imputed to us is, 3. Syn.
that we are full of spiritual vnchariblenes First toward them that will not
go our way, nor be inclinable to us whom (he says) we deeply censure and
deadly condemn.

First, this also is an old popish cavil, Answer.
used often against the Protestants. One Kellison, Suru^y 1 book 4 chap
tells them, they deserve the punishments of Parricides, for scoffing,
taunting, contemning and reviling their forefathers.

2. Our uncharitableness, (if such it be) is this, that we pray for and wish
unto all, as to our own sowles, even life and peace we seek to cover a
multitude of sins which then is done, when sinners Iam 5, 20
are converted from going astray. And for this cause we speak that which we
believe and know, though the world therefore hate us.

3 C^nsu^^ or condemn those that go not our way we do not, we know every man
shall stand or fall to his own master. It is the sin only which we condemn,
the sinner we seek to save, leaving him to the Lord who shall judge both him
and us at the last day.

4. But how charitable the ministers of England are unto us let their
continual reproaches and vituperies in pulpit and in print show: and how they
censure and condemn us and all that will not go their way; let Mr. Bernards
own book speak where by the sentence of his godly ministers, every one is
damned, as page, 263.
cutting himself off from Christ, whosoever wittingly and continually
separateth from the church of England, where yet so innumerable abominations
and idolatries do abound.

2. Secondly our uncharitableness (as page; 52,
he says) is a most ungodly desire as ever was heard of, to have the w^rd
utterly extinguished among them, Egyptian darkness to come over them, rather
then that it should be preachedly such as do not favor our course etc.

Answer.
Our desire is, that the Egyptian darkness which now covers the land by means
of the false Prophets that are therein, were done away; and that the true light
of the Gos^ell were risen unto them. We are sorry to see the prophets (which
have night for a vision and darkness for a divination, as Mic. 3.6,
was threatened of God,) ^o to deceive the people, by preaching lies in the name
of the Lord, when he never sent them Christ has no need of such falsers to
help up h^s k^ngdome he has ways and means yenough, by his own ordinance and
min^stery to build up his church, though Antichrists clergy be sent back to
the bottomless pit from whence Rev. 9.
they came. We know men gather not Mat 7, 16
grapes of thorns nor figs of thistles. Lamentable experience these many
years, shows what hurt and misery comes by this false hierarchy and
priesthood, which vpholds idolatry, profanenes, and humane traditions; pleads
for sin, and against the truth; to the destruction of men's sowles. We wish
people therefore to beware of false prophets, though they come in sheeps
clothing; and to seek the Lord by his own ministry, not by Ant christ's: for
the thief comes not Ioh 10, 10
but to steal, to kill and to d^stroy. Let them see by the lamps of God in his
own Sanctuary and Candlestick, and walk in the light of Jerusalem his church,
which Isa. 60.1, 2.3, Reu. 21, 24,
has the glory of God arisen upon it leaving Vr of the Chaldees, and walking
no long^r in the light of the fire and sparks that men have kindled to
themselves least Isa 50 11
they lie down in sorrow.

3. The last point of our vncharital lenes, which M. Bern. page 56.
says is the highest degree of all, is that we are sorry and en^ious that the
good things of God do prosper with them. etc.

Answer.
That the good things of God do prosper with them, and the truth preuail manger
all opposition; we have cause to rejoice for, and do rejoice, Yea and we doubt
not, but the envious writings and dealings of Mr. Bern and his fellows,
against the gospel, God will turn to the furtherance of the same; and the
generation Psa 112.2
of the righteous shall be blessed which the wicked verse. 10,
shall see and fret and gnash their teeth and pine away; when their desire shall
perish. But what are the good things Mr. Bern. means? Not the truth of God
indeed, for that he blasphemeth and writes against as Schism and Brownisme.
Nor the reformists cause, called Puritanisme; for that prospers not, as all
men see, but decreaseth daily. The Prelates are the men that prevayl, for a
wh^le; their canons are confirmed, their ceremonies flourish, and their horns
are exalted. Whether M, Bern, himself (who wrote not l^ng since a book against
them, which also he was willing a gentleman should have printed in his own
name, that M, Bern. might have slept in a wh^le (...) whither himself I say,
and his fellow Reformists who are disa^oynt^d of their hope, be not sorry for
this prosperity, let themselves say. As for vt we have learned ^sal. 37.
not to fret or en^y when we see the wicked flourish; for they shall so^n be
cut down as grass, and wither as the green herb. Sorry we are indeed for their
lamentable estate and desire that they may find mercy, at the hands of the Lord.

Our fo^rth kind of sin, he says is, our abusing of the werd, misaleging and
(...) it, etc. The 4 syn.
This was the third of his probabilities before page 90.
answered, and is here for a show mustred again among our sins; but nakedly
and without all proof: I leave it therefore to the reproof of God; and to the
godly judgments of all that shall read our writings and allegations of the
scriptures.

The 5. sin is our wilful persisting in our schism. The 5. syn
This is again to beg the question, first let it appear to be schism that we
are in, let the reasons and grounds of our separation be orderly dealt in, and
soundly convinced by Gods word: then if we yield not, let us be holden wilful.
Otherweise, to persist in well doing is good And as easily do the Papists call
Protestants schismatics, as they us. Whether M Bernard with all the helps that
he has had from other men, has convinced us of schism, let the godly judge.
If reproching of us, and idle excursions into by matters, be a conviction;
doubtle^^e he has done it better then any before him.

The 6. syn, is our railing and s^^ffing, The 6 syn
and (as he says) Henry Barrowes blasphemies, who has ^gr^giously abused all
their holiest exercises of religion, etc. I answer, if such sin be in any of
us, it is even by our selves condemned; and ^f by humane infirmity any have
been overtaken with unseasoned speeches, we desire the Christian reader to bear
with and pardon it in us, as himself would have pardon of God The like has
Mr. Barr^^ earnestly entreated in his Preface to his Discovery, as the reader
may see; so far was he from delighting in such ways.

Secondly I answer (howsoever I will not justify all the words of another man,
nor yet mine own, for in many things we sin all;) that many of the things
which this man counts raylings, scoffs and blasphemies, are no other speeches
them the hol^ Ghost has used before us in the scriptures, and appl^ed to like
persons; and seemed as harsh to men of those times, as these do to men now.

Thirdly it is l^kely that some be rather the printers fault (unless Mr.
Bernard has forged them himself), then Mr Barrowes.

Fourthly the Reformists themselus, amongst whom Mr Bern. sometimes seemed
one, have uttered as hard speeches against the Prelate^ and other corruptions
of their own church; though now like time seruers they gloze with their
reverend Fathers; as this man makes the first of Mr Barrowes raylings scoffs
and blasphemies to be his caling the Bishops It would be known what Mr B^rn,
counted and caled them in his book that of late he wrote against them.
Antichristian. But how many volum^s have themselves heretofore written of this
argument? And who amongst us has ever dealt as did Mar^in Marprelate among
themselves?

Finally Mr. Barrow did sharply in (...) against the reforming preachers, as
being the greatest deceivers of the people, under show of holiness. This makes
them a^ayn so ever against him; but whither he spoke not right of them, may in
part be seen already, and time will show more; they can no longer halt as
hitherto they have; but either they must rec^ncile them to their Fath^rs, or
quite forsake them: and a ble^sed work of God it is, that the most dangerous
seducers should thus first be discou^^^d.

THe third and last sort of reasons which M. Bern. ^ag., 78 etc. 1. Error.
uses against us, is, Our errors, and (as he says) the matter of our s^hisme.

The errors which he reckneth up, and undertakes to confute ar^ ten. The first
of them is that we hold the constitution of their church to be a false
constitution. To this he says,

1. That we cannot prove this simply by any plain doc^rine of scripture etc. 2.
That it is against the evidence of the scriptures, which makes the word, (Mat.
28.19. Mar 16 15. 2 Cor. 5.19. and. 11 2. Job, 23.23.24. Act. 2.14.37.38. and
16.32.33.) the external profe^sion Act. 8.12.37.38.) and Sacraments (Mat. 28,
19. 1 Cor. 10.16.) the visible and true constitution of a company so gathered
and kn^t together; and so was theirs constituted: as that book of (Mr. Ber.)
shows; and as in another ere long shall be plainly manifested etc. Answer.


First Mr Ber. sets down barely this as our position and doctrine, not
name^ng place or bo^k where it is written, nor the proofs that we make of it,
but perem^torily says we cannot prove it. Whereas it has in Discovery Resut
of Giff. Confession Apology. Answer to Mr. Jacob etc.
many books by many plain doctrines of scripture been evidently proved, so as
Mr Bern. and all his fellow priests could never yet, make a plain and direct
answer And if when book is written after book, no refutation be made, but a
bare deneyall, as here M. Bern. says we cannot prove it, I say the ministers
of Engl. may so turn away any thing; but with what credit or conscience, the
wise will judge.

Secondly, for M. Bernards reason, it self wants a good constitution, being
to confu^edly set down, as a man knows not what he makes the constitution of a
church; or how he would conclude that their church is constituted aright. He
pretends the word to be the Constitution of a church; whereas the scriptures
that he quoteth, and reason it self might teach him, that the word is the
instrument or means of Constituting, and conseruing the church constituted; so
also be the sacraments. But as the constitution of a common wealth or of a city
is a gathering and uniting of people together into a civil polity: so the
Constitution of the common wealth of Israel, (as the church is Ephesians. 2, 12
called) and of the city of God the new Jerusalem, is a gathering and uniting
of people into a diuiue polity: the form of which polity is Order, as the
heathens acknowledged, calling polity, (...) Arist, 3. Polit, c. 1.
an order of a city: which Order is requisite in all actions and
administrations of the church as the Apostle * shows, and specially specially
in the constitution thereof: so that next unto faith in God, it ^s to be
esteemed most necessary for all holy societies Wherefore Pa^l rejoiced for
these two things in the Church at Col^ss^, C^lo. 2.5
even their order, and their steadfast faith in Christ. Now whereas to the
constit^tio^ of a church there belong ^ a people, as the matt^r whereof, and 2
a calling, gathering and uniting together, as the form whereof the church
consists. in both these the Constitution of the Church of Engl. has (in
sundry treatises) been ^roued false. For with them all sorts of profane worldly
and wicked ^ersons, are received as the matter whereof the church is builded,
contrary to the ^layn and manifest doctrine of the scriptures. Leu. 20.24 1 Kin
8 53. Act. 2.40, and 19.8 ^ John. 17.16. 2 Cor. 6.14, ^7, 18. The form and
order of their v^iting is als^ strange; for these profane people, even all
persons in a fam^ly, an^ all families in a parish, are united into one parish
church, as it is called; not voluntarily, ^as ought to be Act 2.4^
in the true church, but by constreynt, not by any due profe^sion of repentance
from ^ead work^ and faith in God; but by the priests readin^ a Confession
absolution, and such like popish st^ff as is to be seen in their service book,
not under the guidance of Chr^sts officers, but of a Parson, Vicar, Curate or
other like creature of the Bishops, who in many places can but read English
unto them. And this with the other Par^shes of the Dioce^^e so gathered also,
are united into one See or D^oces^^^ church under a Lord Bishop and his
Co^rtiers, and all the Dioces into two Pro^inciall churches, the Provincial,
into one national church, called the Church of England, over all which there
is a most reverend Father and spiritual Lord, Archbushop, Primate, and
Metropolitan: under whom al Bishops and Priests of the land are subject; and
all people and parishes in the land bound to obey the dead canons and decrees,
which he the Ach Lord with his brethren of the governing clergy, agree of in
their repre^atiue church in the Convocation house, if once the Civil
Magistrate give life unto them. This form and order of a church is not to be
found in Chr^sts Testament; but received it is from the church of Rome by
heritage or succession; as the Papists boast of (to the dishonor of
Protestants) when they say; Supplic to the king anno 1604. Reason of religion.
6.
A religion etc. that distinguished the multitude into, p^rishes ^roportio^ed
^he tithes, ann^xed the Glebeland, fon^ded the Bishoprics, ^mitted the
Dioceses etc, So, as the mother is the daughter is, false in her c^stitutio^;
though in the doctrine which she profeseth she is far better and purer the^ that
whoremother of Rome. The discussing of these things. as Mr Bern. refereth to
other places and books, so also do I; seeing in thi^ place ^e has brought
nothing of weight to prove his co^stitutio^. For the script^re that he alegeth,
and the 3. things that he colecteth from the^; do make against his pur^ose. The
word is not by Christ's m^nistery ri^htly; reached and applied to the people,
but vnsufferabley abused to the maintenance or the confusion and idolatries
that are among them: the sacraments are highly profa^ed and prostituted to the
most ungodly and their seed, and popishly administered, and the external
profession which the people, make is by constreynt, and therefore naught worth:
besides it is corrupt and idolatrous, being a mixed profession, partly of the
truth of God, and partly of their own inventions, as appears by their
Communion book Canons, and the like.

2. Error
Our second error should be, that we hold their Constitution a real idol, and so
them idolaters. To confute this, Mr Ber. says that he h^th perused in any
scriptures, and can see none that take an idol or idolaters in any such s^nse;
aga^n, that Marlorat mentions 47. idols, and not one of them in ^he s^nse.

Answer.
Whether this article be of Mr Bernards own forgin^, or where he has had it, I
cannot tell; his reader must take all of his cred^, for he lets not down his
author. As for his confutation hereof, it is very slender, that beca^se he
sees it not, or Ma^lorat names it not, therefore it is no idol. For it is no
sure position that Mr Bernard sees all that ^he scriptures; teach; and both he
and Marlorat may as soon number the hayres of their heads, a^ all the idols
that are in the world. Well therefore yet may ^t be a real idol, for o^ght that
this man has said to save it. And if it be a false constit^tion (as before is
pro^ed) set up in stead of a true, what is it better then a very idol. In the
end he t^rneth and renteth us for making o^r own constitution (as he says) an
idol or goddess; and feighneth that we may say, Great is the Goddess
Constitution; great is Diana of the B^^^nists B^t seeing this is but a re^roch
of a scorner, and the reproach reaches unto Christ himself who has appointed
the frame order and constitution of h^s own church, which we have labored for
I leave him for this calumniation, unto his rebuke, who will teach him one day
no more to blaspheme.

And whether (may we think) tends the inuectiue of this vayn man, who thus
skoffeth at the Constitution of Christ's church, but to bring in a mere ataxie
or conf^sion, worse then was at Babels tower-building: for take away the
orderly framing and constituting of a church, and there will be but a Tohu, (as
the scripture (...) Ier. 4.23 Gen, 1.2.3. Error
speaks,) a rude indigest heap or confute Chaos, more beseeming the wild
beasts of the wood, then any humane, much les^e divine pol^ty.

That such as are not of a particular constituted church, (to weet such a one
as ours is,) are no subjects of Christ's kingdom.

Answer.
Neither is this position set down in our words; (to my knowledge;) neither
does Mr B^rnard take away, but confirm rather the thing that we hold; for he
page 81,
grants that they offend God, which may and do not ordinarily, (having (...)
canes offered) live in a church rightly constituted; and we grant that many of
Christ's subjects, for want of means, do not live in a true constituted
church, If therefore he were not a caviller, he would not have reckned this
among our errors.

That all nor in our way, are without: and we apply against them (in Engl.) 1
Cor. 5, 12, Ephesians. 2, 12. 4 Error


The first part of this position, you must impu^e to Mr Bernards charity, who
w^ll needs frame our assertions for us, (...)
because he thinks we cannot speak for our selves; we might leave it unto him
to frame an answer also. But if he would let us tell, what we hold, it is, that
all not in the way ^f Christ, are without: and if this be an error, let him
make the most of it.

The applying of those scriptures against them, he must be content to bear, til
he or his brethren can prove themselves a true church; for though there b^
great differences of peoples professing religion, some with more truth, ^ome
with less; yet all not w^thin Christ's church, are without, as the A^ostle
speaks. Mr Bernards exception, that those places are meant of such as never
professed Christ at all; is childish: why does he not except a^a^n^t the holy
Ghost himself, who Reu 18, and often in that book.
ap^lieth against the false Christ^ans of the R^mish Church, words and s^eaches
meant first of heathen Babylon, that profe^^ed not God or Christ at all.

His boasting of the word, sacraments, effects and deliverances; are before in
this traatise taken away. And Mr Bernards proofs, are but a begging of the
question, which he blames in other^, as before is obs^rued.

That only Sayncts, that is, a people forsaking all known sin, 5 Error.
of which they may be convinced, doing all the known will of God, increasing
and abiding ever thr^^, are the only matter of a visi^le church.

Th^s Position I de^ey, Answer.
and disclaym also the errors which he gathers from ^t: and therefore will
spend no time in answering it; but refer Mr Ben to them that have so spoken or
written, if any be. This we hold ((...) let us se what Mr Bernard can say
against it,) that 1 Cor 1.2. Romans 1, 7. Ephesians 1.1,
Saints by calling are the only matter of a true visible church. Yet withal
we hold, that ^any be calle^, Mat. 20.16. and 22, 14.
but few chosen.

That ^he power of Christ, that is, authority to preach, to administer the
sacram^^^s, and to exercise the censures of the Church, belongs to the whole
Church, yea to every one of them. And not the principal members thereof. 6
Error. Answe..


This opinion, he calls the A, b, c, of Brownisme: but he may put it if he
please in the Criss-crosse rue of Bernardisme; he himself being the first that
I ever heard to utter such a position. This point he much urges and ^relleth
us with; he mentoned it in his For^speech to the Reader, thus, The Pa^ist
says, Christ's ruling power is in the Pope; nay, says the Protestant. i^ is in
the ecclestasticall governors, Bishops, may says the Puritan, it is in the
Presbyterte; nay, says the Brownist, it is in the body of the Congregation,
the multitude, called the Church. And in this begins Brown^sme. etc.

Here first I require of Mr Bern. that he produce his autors, and show the
book, or writing, where we have avouched such things. He tells his reader of
all the errors that he ch^rgeth us with, that page 78.
we hold and cannot deny them, being already avouched under our hands: and that
he will not wrong us in setting them down, etc. Yet durst he not (as every
honest writer writer in such controversies use to do; an^ if he do not in his
next, the reader may est^em of his truth and honesty as it is.

Next, for the point it self, I answer, Christ's ruling power, which the
Papists say is in the Pope; we say not (as this man calumniateth us) that it is
in the body of the Congregation, the multitude, but in Christ himself; and
that the Pope is Antichrist, not for taking into his hands the power of the
mul^itude, but of Christ, to rule and govern the church as Head of the same.

Again, Christ's ruling power, which the Protestants say is in the Bishops the
Prelates, we do not say it is in the multitude; but in Christ himself: for he
only is 1 Cor 8, 6. and 12.5.
Lord of the Church, he only is (...).

1 Pet, 5, 4,


Archbishop or Chief pastor; he only walks among the seven gol^en
Candlesticks, as Ouerseer of the seven ch^rches; ruling them by his laws
can^ns and decrees. Whereas the Bishops of England are s^irituall Lords, and
one is Arch^ishop and Primate over all: they rule many ch^rches and min^sters,
mak^ new canons and decrees in their Conuocati^n house; Reu 1.13 and 2.1.
prescr^be forms and words of prayer, and of preaching, by their leiturgie and
homilies, and other like spiritual jurisdiction, apperteyn^ng to Christ alone,
thus are they very Antichr^sts; and to ^ther with their exorbitant usurped.
power, ought utterly to be abolished out of all Chri^t^an churches.

Neither, that ruling power of Christ, which the P^ritans (whereby I supp^se,
Mr Bern. means the Christian reforme^ churches in other countries,) say is in
the Presbitery; do we say, is in the multitude for we acknowledge Christ to
have ordained a 1 Timothy 4, 14
Presbit^ry; or Eldership, and that in Tit. 1.5. 2 Co, 12, 28. Act, 14 23.
every church, for 1 Timothy 5, 17
to teach and rule them by his own word and laws, unto whom all the
multitude, the members. the Sain^ts ought to Heb 13, 17 1 Pet. 5.5
obey and submit themsel^es, as the scriptures teach And for the particular
branches of this 6. Error that Mr Bernard charge us with, That the power of
Christ, that is, authority to pr^ach, belongs to the whole church, ye^ to
every one of them, etc. we deny it, a^ he setts it do^n, and for the help of
the reader whom he abuses, will distinctly set down our opinion.

The word of God, is given to all and every member of the Church to read, and
exercise privately: but publicly in the Church there is a double use, 1 in
prophecy, and 2 in office, as the Apostle Rom 12, 6 7^
distinguishes. The office of teaching is laid upon some few chosen and
ordained thereunto Into this office may no man intrude, or vsurp it, without a
lawful calling. This we have long since published, as a part of our faith
Confess, Art. 19.20.21. Teaching in way of prophecy, (which the Apostle
treats of 1 Cor, 14) is absolutely us lawful 1 Cor. 14 34.
for all women in the church, but men, so many as have the gift and ability
from God, may (...) 31, 24
all pro^hesie one by one, of which point see our Con^^ss Art 34. And this is
that we hold concerning preaching, which whether it be an error and Mr Bern.
has so proved it, let the indifferent reader judge.

For the second point, authority to administer the sacraments, that it should
belong to every one of the church; we utterly deney; and marvel at Mr Bernards
unconscionable dealing with us, for in o^r Confession he co^ld not but see,
(unless he winked,) this plainly expressed, Art. 34.
no sacraments to be administered until the Pastors or Teachers be chosen and
ordained into their office.

The third and last, that every one has authority to execute the censures of
the church we also deny; but hold, that every member has authority to Luk 17.3
reb^ke h^s brother for sin, and if he repent to forgive him, if not, to take
w^tne^^es; if yet he repent not, to tell it Mat. 18.15.16.17.
to the church, which church has Christ's 1 Cors. 4 12, 13.
power to judge all within the same, and cast out from among them all wicked
men: Now that every one has not this power, nor yet any member or members
apart, we have plainly signified in our Con^^ssi^n, Art. 24. If this be an
error in Mr Bernards account, let him by the scriptures confute it, not only
in us but in a principal minister of his own church D, F^lk, who has written
Treatise of Popes pard. part. 2. c 3,
that the keys of the kingdom of h^auen whatsoever they are; be committed to
the whole church, and not to one p^^so^ only, as C^^rian, Augustine,
Chrysostom, Jerome, and all the ancient Doctors agrea^ly only to the scriptures
do confess.

So then for popular government, (which Mr Bern. would traduce us by,) we hold
it not, we approve it not, for if the multitude govern, then who shall be
governed? Christian liberty (which 1 Cor. 7.23 Gal 5.1
all have) is one thing, the raynes of government (which 1 Cor. 12 28.
some have) is another thing. Now how far the peoples right and liberty and
benefit thereby eytendeth, would require a larged scourse to show, which is not
my purpose here. It is ye no^gh to mainfest the iniquity of this adversary who
would father such err^rs on us, dealing like his predecessors the Papists, who
in this weise re^roched the Protestants, as laboring Apolog of the church of
Engl. 1. part c, 2 divis. 7.
to bring all things under the rule of the rash unconstant people and unlearned
multitude; and to make the church Survey of the new relig, 1 book, 3 chap.
democraticall and popular, because every one of the people by his private
spirit, is supreme judge and head in matters of religion.

Our different judgment and practice from the church of Engl. where all ^y men
as they call them, are forbidden all speaking or expounding of the word in the
publik assemblies, and where a Bishop, Chancellor, or Commissary, has power to
excommunicate by a Latin writ etc. Our difference also and dislike of the
Presbyteries practice, whereby people are excluded, and deprived of a great
part of their Christian liberty and benefit thereby, is in other books See
mo^ng other. the Discovery of the false church; page 165. and forward. Apology
against the Oxford DD. page 60 etc.
largely treated of, with scriptures and reasons many, which M, Bern. neither
orderly handles, nor soundly confuteth, as the wise reader may see; but
ignorantly and confusedly shuffleth them over; running into by matters, and
unjust calumniations. I will end therefore with the words of one of his fellow
ministers, who touching this point of Church government writes much more
soundly then by Mr. Bern. in his blindenes, has done, Mr Jacob I mean, which
says, Necess. of re^orm, page 28.
It is childish, and without all wit, to cry out aganst us ^us our adue^saries
do* Popularity, Anarchie etc. for our so* well grounded and so approved an
assertion.

7 Error.
That the sin of one man publ^ckly and obstinately stood in, b^ing not
reformed nor the offender cast out, ^oth s^ p^llute the whole congregation,
that none may commu^^cate with h^ same in any of the holy things of God,
(though it be a church r^ghtly con^^ituted, till the party be excommun^cated.

Answer.
I deney again this to be either our judgment or practice Mr. Bern. says the
form^r position is the ground of this; and so it seems, he c^lumniating us in
the for^er, thou^ht he might do likeweise in this. We profess and have long
since publ^shed, that Confess. (...), 3^,
none is to separate for f^^lts and corru^tio^s, which may and so long as the
Church co^sist^th of m^rtall men will fall out and aris^ among them; but by due
order to s^^k r^dresse th^reof

Now that every Chr^stian not only may b^ tought to rebuke his neighbor for
sin, we have plain laws both ^n the old Testament and the new Leuit. 19.17.
Luke 17.3. That sinners not repenting, are after the second admonition to be
signified unto the church, is also Christ's ordinance, Mat. 18, 15.17.

But what ^f ^he church will not cast him out? I answer; Synns are either
con^rouertible or manifest. If controuertible and d^ubtf^ll; men ought Rom 15,
1 Phil, 3 15, 16.

Ephesians, 4, 2, 3


to bear one with another different judgment; if they do not, but, any for
this make a breach or separation, Heb 10, 25
they syn.

But if the sin be manifest, as for example a man is convict of adultery,
blasphemy, theft or the like: and the church will not rebuke him nor cast him
out, but suffer him obstinate and impenitent in his wickedness; and plead for
him against such us call upon them for iudgem^nt: then are all such abettors of
the wicked, sinners themselves; and that in a high degree, as the Apostle
notes Romans 1 31 the whole lump is leuened, 1 Cor. 5, 1, 6. etc. and now not
that one man's sin, but the sin of them all, is that which polluteth them:
for they favor and justify a wicked man more then God; therefore Isa. 5, 20 23,
woe is unto them, and Solomon says, He that says to the wicked, thou art
righteous him shall the people curse, and the multitude shall abhor him. Prou,
24 24

If M, Bern think the sin is the less, because a church maynteyns it; he is
much deceived; evil, the more common it is* the worse ^t is; because God is
more dishonored, and men's sowles more endangered.

If he think men should regard and reverence the church in this case* the law
teaches every man not to follow Exo. 2^, 2
the many (or, the mighty) to do evil, nor agree in a controversy to decline
after many, and overthrow (the right.) The ^round of all this is plain in Gods
law, if any one of the people sinned against any of the commandments of the
Lord, Leu 4 (27 28. etc,
and one showed him his sin which he had committed, he was to bring his
sacrifice, a testification of his repentance. If a ver 2^.23 etc,
ruler sinned, or the high verse. 3.
priest himself, they were to do likewise. If the whole uerse. 13. etc.
Congregation sinned, the like law was for them: God respected no persons; but
if they that sinned were greater or more in number, they were so far from being
sauoured, as they had the greater sacrifice enjoined them, a private man offered
verse. 28.
a shee-goat, a ruler a verse 24,
hee-goat, the high Priest, and the Congregation, a ve 3 and 14
young b^llock. These laws were given to all sorts of persons, for all manner
sinns' and the law was again repeated and stablished from that day forward
throughout their generations, Number. 15.22.23. etc. But if any man despised this
law, and sinned with a high hand, the same blasphemed the Lord, and was to be
cut off from among his people. Number. 15.30.31 Now further, that the whole
congregation taking Part with wicked men in syn, after due admonition, are all
defiled and subject to like judgment, we have a plain example in the whole
Tribe of Benjamin, Judge, 19,
where in Gibe^h one of their towns filthiness was committed, the Tribe was
called upon to deliver Judge. 20.13. etc.
th^se wicked men to death, that evil might be put away from Israel, ^^t when
they would not deliver them, all the other tribes warred against that tr^be,
and almost rooted out every man of the same. Likeweise the tr^bes of Israel in
an other case, said to some of their brethren, Josh. 22.18.20.
seeing ye rebel to day against the Lord; even tomorrow he will be wroth with all
the Congregation of Israel. Did not Achan sin, etc. and wrath fell on all the
congregation of Israel and this man alone perished not in his wickedness. What
Mr Bern. sees or how he reads the scriptures I cannot tell; but if he knew
the contagion of sin or guilt of the same, he would never have writien as he
has done Now where he pleads that men should not for the offender, refreyn
the holy things of God, abh^rr the sacrifices etc. We grant it. The holy things
are always to be reverenced, Gods house and sacrifices frequented, when we may
without sin But we deny such an assembly to be Gods church, as with a high
hand sins, and blasphemeth the Lord. The sacrifice of the wicked is Prou.
21.27.
an abomination. And it cannot be said that any holy thing is lawfully
administered in such a society where all agree together to mayntein open
iniquity, and do despise the word of the Lord, calling them to repentance If
they do not thus, we hold it not lawful to separate from them, nor in any
weise at any time, till all holy and orderly means be used for their
reclayming.

That every of their assemblies are false churches. 8 Error.


This we hold indeed, Answer.
being understood of the ordinary cathedral and parish assemblies of England,
which all are by one line. For defense of these churches Mr Bern. refers the
reader to an other treatise after, and so do I to the answer of the same,
following. Yet least he should seem ^o say nothing, Mr Ber excepteth 1 That
they have no false head, for, they hold Jesus Christ. I answer, so might
Jeroboam have pleaded for himself and his people, that they had no false head,
but 1 Kin. 12 28.
the true God which brought them out of the Land of Egypt. Yet were they a
false church The Papists Papists and Anabaptists at this day, hold and profess
Jesus Christ: yet such errors are among them, as Christ in deed is deneyed: the
parishes of England profess him also, but such is their estate otherweise,
that they have him not truly for a head, prophet, priest, or king unto them; as
before page 74.
is proved. But it is yenough for Mr Bernard to affirm without proof: and
correction with him is a page 111.
needfuller argument in this case t^e^ i^struction For when the Priests li^s
preserve not knowledge how should men be answered but by the jail or gallows?

2. The matter (says he) is not false: and to show this he notes a difference
between No matter, true matter, and false matter. No matter are they which make
no profession of Christ at all; as Jews, Turks, and Pagans, True (visible)
matter are all such as openly profess this mayn truth, that Jesus the son of
Mary is the son of God* Christ the Lord, by whom only and alone they shall be
saved. And page 116.
false matter is contrary to this true matter.

I answer; this false matter is very rawly set down, for being contrary to the
former true, it may imply Jews, and Turks, whom he made no matter: and then
it confounds his own distinction. But if he mean that they which profess not
Christ rightly and truly, as he sets down, are a false matter, then, say
I; ^t will euince the matter of their Churches to be false, seeing there is not
aright and true profession of Christ, made by their parishes* But Mr Ber.
leaving out this word rightly and truly, tells us page 113.
they all profess this faith, as is apparent 1 by the doctrine of their church
(vidz. that in the Harmony of Confessions,) 2 by the same publicly preached 3
by the same mainteyned by their laws, writings and blood of holy martyrs. I
answer, if all this were granted* yet will it not prove Mr Bernards purpose,
for some may write and preach the truth, the Magistrate may establish it by
law, and some may seal it with their blood; and yet not all the nation be a true
matter for Christ's church, except they also make l^ke profession Which that the
parishes of England do not, the profanenes of the multitudes show. But least I
be thought to speak of envy, let us hear the testimony of their own ministers
and such as were no favorers of us at all* as their malicious writings of us
shows Mr Nichols esteemed a forward preacher among them* says, Plea of the
inn^^e^t. p. 218. etc.
We find by great experience, (and I have now five and twenty years observed
it,) that in those places where there is not preaching and private conferring
of the Minister and the people; the most part have as little knowledge of God
and of Christ, as Turks and Pagans. To confirm this, he gives us an example in
his own flock For I have been in a parish says he) of fowr hundred
communicants, and maruelling that my preaching was so little regarded, I took
upon me to confer with every man and woman, before they received the
communion. and I asked them of Christ, what he was in his person; what his
office; how firm came into the world; what punishment for sin; what becomes
of our bodies being rotten in the grave and lastly whither it were possible for
a man to live so uprightly, that by well doing he might winn heaven. In all the
former questions, I scarce found ten in the hundred to have any knowledge, but
in the last question, scarce one, A sayer prof^ssion.
but did affirm, that page ^20.
man might be saved* by his own well doing, and that he trus^ed he did so live,
that by Gods grace he should obt^yn everlasting life by ser^ing of God and god
prayers etc. Now then, this being so, tell me I pr^y y^u (says Mr Ni^hols*
first for Ath^isme, whether these be any bettor then A^h^is^s, which know not
Christ? And tell me I pray you Mr Bernard whether th^^^ be a ^rue matter, such
as Christ's church consists of? But you would ^a^^ us believe the Bishops and
Priests of Engl. are wondrous men; for i^ ^hey write books, or preach sermons
to the people, their whole Dioceses and Parishes must needs be esteemed conuerts
and profelytes. Such effect and grace was never heard of before, since the
world began. More absurd it is to say, that the good laws of the Magistrate,
do make a profane idolatrous multitude, true professors: but most of all, that
because some few were martyrs, therefore they that killed the martyrs, profess
Christ truly. If these be not pregnant reasons, then M. Bernards book is little
worth. 3. But he proceeds and says, The visible form is not false; which is
the uniting of us unto God, and one to another uisibly. This he would prove by
3, reasons 1 because the word is preached and offered to the people; 2 Because
of the peoples open profession of their faith, unto the doctrine, God working
in them a will to receive it. 3 because the Lords supper is in use among them.
Sundry scriptures are alleged to show that thus the primitive churches were
planted and constituted; all which we grant; but when he comes to apply page
121.
these to themselves; he barely assumes, that thus is their case; neither
answering any reason of ours to the contrary, nor showing any reason of his
own, to confirm that which he says. And what cause in the world, what church
is so bad; but may thus be pleaded for? He knows well, that we except, (and the
visible estate of that church, their own monuments, records, complaints, etc.
do bear witness with us,) that they were planted in this religion and
profession by force of the Magistrates law; that multitudes are profane; that
many thowsands want the preaching of the word; that they are al compelled to
come to church, be baptized, receive the communion, and the like; and what
profession the poor ignorant people make, is before manifested. If he would
hear more of their profession, and subjection to the word and ministry, Mr.
Nichols shows it thus; Plea of the innocent page, 246^
How little have they esteemed the godly and learned ministers! How content
they be with simple and ignorant men! How hardly are they drawn to pay duties
which law has appointed! How many quarrels they pick against painful
ministers! And how little reverence they give to any that are faithful! How
they follow their covetousness and pleasures! How they fill al sorts of courts
with brawles, foolish and wilful strifes, and suits, and demurres in law with
murders, whordomes* dronkennes, and all disorder. Lo this is the
commendations of the professant people of the Church of Engl, whom Mr Bernard
pleads for.

As for their constitution and uniting together into parishes* dioceses,
pro^inces, and at last in to one national church with an Archbishop and his
high court over all it is page 99,
before showed to be a R^mis^ ^^t^o^, and antichristian, not justifiable by the
law or testament of Christ.

4. Lastly, the visi^le properties are (he says) not false ^ut true, namely
th^se, 1 Con^inuance in heari^g of the d^ct^ine of Christ received, and using
of the sacraments and prayer. 2 The hol^ing out of this truth an^ (...)
sacra^ents as (...) displ^^ed, against the ene^y* 3 A care for the welfare of
all, and every one for (...) and each for other.

But all this build^ng is on a s^ndy ground: for their esta^e (as before is
m^nif^sted* being evil: the long^r they continue in it, the worse it is f^r
them Cont^nuance to read ^he service book, and homilies, to ^rostitute the
Sacra^ents to the profane, to administer them after a ^opish m^nn^r, by a false
m^n^ster^; these are the banners and ensigns of Antichrist* dis^layed ^n al
his a^^emblies; that poor sowles have cause to complayn a^ in the Psalm, Ps.
4.4.
they have s^t up th^i^ banners for signs. As for the care of the wel^are of
all, etc. which Mr. B^rn. boasts of: let Mr. Nichols foresaid complaynt of
the people on the one hand* and the Bishops, and Priests open neglect and
contempt of the people on the other hand, show what care they have one of
another. For how many sowles are miserably famished by dum, negligent, and non
resident priests evil beasts and slow bellies. How many preachers are put out
for not subscrib^ng and using the ceremonies, etc. These, that I g^ue no other
instances, show what care there is of men's sowless am^^^ them; which he that
commends, shows himself careless what he speaks or writes.

9 Error.
Our 9. error is, that we say, Al th^^r minist^rs are false ministers. Against
this Mr Bernard allegeth for the truth of their ministry, that they are sent
of Christ according to his ordinance in his church, as is manifested by the,
that they are quall^fi^d with good gifts, they are called by the church, and
such also as d^e diligently, and faithfully preach, and so preach Christ as
many th^reby does ar and bel^eue, even confirming their calling by the blessed
success and effect of th^i^ lab^urs. Romans 10.14.15. 1 Cor. 9.2.

Answer,
First, if Mr Bernard would indeed have refuted our error, if such it be he
should have answered the reasons which in many writings we have br^ught a^^inst
the^r min^stery B^t he found that, all too heavy.

The^ for the reasons that ^^ms^lfe alleg^th, they are naked and without all
co^firm^ti^n; such as Pa^ist^, Anabaptists or any other Antichristians might
^llege for the^sel^es F^r, a Papist will ^oast as well as he, that their Priests
are qu^lifi^^ wi^h go^d gifts, called, by the church, do deligently an^
faithfully pre^ch, so as (...) h^^r an^ believe. B^t I will answer each of ^is
part^c^l^r^ Their q^alificatio^ is wi^h Good g^fts, is no proffe of a lawful
minist^ry; seeing ^ many private men have as good gifts as they; ^vsurpers and
intr^der^ may al^o have as excellent gifts, as lawful officers: ^ Jesuits,
S^mm^ries and there instuments of Satan, are known to be as learned and well
furnished with gifts, as Mr Bern. and his brethren. 4 Moreover I deny that the
principal ministers of England are qualified or able to execute their office;
the Archbishops, Bishops Arch dea^ons, etc. that have whole Dioceses and
Provinces under their charge cannot possibly perform the duty* of true
ministers unto them. 5 And fi^^lly a number of ignorant Sir John's can read
their Leiturgie unto their paris^es; and have no other good ministerial
quallity.

The second thing, their calling by the church; which afterward he expl^yneth
th^s; page 141.
being examined, found fi^, and so are elect and ordained; this (...) upon the
sands; for the church of England not being a true church of G^d, as is before
manifested, has no power from God to call and ^rdeyn mi^isters* But besi^es
this, I would fayn learn of Mr Bern. what Ch^^ch it is that examined, elected,
and ordained his Lords grace of Canterb^^y, for Ar^hb^shop^ then whether the
same or some other church examined elected and ordained the Diocesan Bishops,
the Deans the Archdeacons, and the rest of that Lordly priesthood, then what
church ordained the parish Priests, and Deacons. These things if he dare
undertake to deal in, and bring to the trial: will be found more agreeable to
the Canons of the Pope, then to the testament of Christ.

Their office it self, Mr Bern. balketh quite, and tells us not what functions
this pompous clergy have to execute, yet is it most needful to be known, for
how else shall men discern their administration? To begin^ therefore with his
Arch Lord of Cant. the Angel of the church of Engl. what office ^ath ^e to
execute, of a Pastor; or of a Pope? If he be Pastor of this ^^^rch, what be the
inferior Bishops; pety Pastors, or Pety popes? what offices (...) the
Suffragans, Chancell^rs, deanes, Archdeacons Commiss^^^s, ^ffi^ials, D^ctors
Proctors, and the residew of that army? what offices have the Preb^ndaries,
Canons, P^ti^anons, Chanters, Subchanters, and other like b^rds of the
cloister? what offices have the Bishops bay lifts the Priests, the half priests
or Deacons, the Parsons, and Vicars, the Churchwardens, Clerks, and Sextius? Mr
Bern. affirms that page 131*
the Lord only ordeyneth offi^^s in his church 1 Cor. 12. and that the church
it self cannot do this, but Jesus Christ both Lord and King. Now seeing he
has ouerskipped in this book, all the stately offices that are in his church:
let him in his next show (if he can) the offices that Christ in his testament
has appointed this troup of horsemen and charrets unto.

Now for their administration, he tells page 142.
us, they preach the true doctrine or Christ, administer the sacraments,
perform their office faithfully, and live c^ns^i^nably, and Christ does assist
such graciously in converting souls, and ^h^ people do approve of them.

Fair words, and such as it seems Mr Bern. uses to feeed his flock with: but
if one deny that thus it is, he must tarry for proof, till an other treatise
come forth; it was yenough in this, to affirm it so to be; and for his Lords
grace to confirm it. Well, to let pass the multitude of compl^ints and
testimonies to the contrary in their own books, let him show how it is possible
for the Archbishop of the church of Engl. or the inferior Bishops, to preach
and perform their office faithfully, unto so many hundreds of parishes, and
thowsands of people, as are under their charge. Let the infinite number of
souls that are famished under them speak, how often their Chief-shepheard of
Cant have fed them with the word and sacraments, (unless perhaps he has
blessed some of their youths with the Sacrament of Confirmation;) how many of
their souls he has converted, yea let them say whether ever he saw their
face^? As for the Bishops Deputies the paris^h priests, many of them are dumb
by nature, and cannot preach; many are made dumb by their spiritual Lords
power, and silenced for disobed^ence; so preaching wexeth geazon, and people
perish for want of Instruction. In the mean time, this painful Clergy feeds
the Lay weekly, with their mattings, Euensong, and Homilies; and sometimes in a
year with sermon, and reading the Bishops canons. They discipline their
notorious sinners, with reading curses and Comminations out of the pulpit, till
the Lent penance (which is much to be wished) be restored again: they solemnize
the holy days of Angels and of Saints; they give each man the sacrament at
Easter devoutly upon his knees, they baptize with water, and a sign of the
cross in the a^er; they wed their parishioners with a ring, and teach the man
to worship his wife, in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the holy
Ghost: they church the women after childbirth: they visi^ the sick, and absolve
him from all his sins, and howsel him with a Communion: and last of all, they
bury the dead, in sure and certain hope of resurrection to eternal life. And
this is yenough for priests to do in the country parishes; but in the
Cathedral churches, where Bishops, Deanes; and other great Doctors do reside;
there the Queriste^s and Organ-pipes, make sweeter melody. Mr. Bern. confesses
page, 121.
that the Lord only prescribes the duties to be done in every distinct ^ffice:
now he that knows not these dutiess to belong to Christ's ministers, or these
works to be a faithful performance of ministerial office, let him read Mr
Bernards book, for there page, 139.140.
he has quoted many scriptures, the end of all which is to raise page, 141,
an evident proof of the truth of their ministry and administration; as if one
should cite the second commandment, for to uphold idolatry.

The effects of their administration, in converting sowles, is but a vain
boast, as their idolatrous estate, with the lamentable ignorance and profanenes
of the people every where shows The reasons brought by others (for Mr Bern
brings none,) to persuade such effects, are before in this page 54. etc.
treatise answered.. It makes also against the estate of this church and
ministry; for if these preachers have converted and wrought faith in some of
their hearers, then it follows that before that conversion they were
infidels, yet were they of the church and had this ministry set over them, as
all men know. Which how it can stand with the r^les of Gods word, has never
yet been showed. The example which Mr Bern. allegeth of the Apostle 1 Cor,
9.1.2. helps him nothing: For Apostles were sent Man 28.19,
to convert heathens, but Pastors are set for to 1 P^t ^, 1 Act. ^0.28
feed converted Christians. And the Priests of England challenge to be Pastors,
I ween, and not Apostles. Again the work and seal of Paul's Apostleship was seen
in Corinth, by 2 Cor, 6, 4 etc.
separating the believers from infidels; and g^ther^ng the 1 Cor 1.2
Saints only into the communion of the church, under the officers ^ Cor. 12
gi^en of Christ but in England the vnb^leeuers and wicked, were received and
are retained in the church. So that Mr. Bern. is but a ^alse Apostle (as his
work shows) if he be any at all. But in the end he tells us page 144.
we forget to justify the lawfulnes of our own ministers, who are made
^i^ist^rs ^y such as are no ministers, contrary to the constant practice of the
church of God, from the days of Adam hitherto. etc. In which dispute, Mr.
Bern. teaches plain apostasy from the Gospel unto Popery, from which he
deriueth the min^stery of his church of Engl. For seeing all the examples that
he allegeth from scriptures, are of Divine persons and approved ministers of
the true church; and coming page 145.
to his church of England, he fetches her ministry out of the Popish church
and from the Prelates thereof, it cannot be (if his last words agree with his
first) but the po^ish church is a true church, and their prelates true
ministers. Otherweise h^s reasoning is absurd, to say, God ordained Adam, Moses
odeyned Aaron; Christ ordained the Apostles; the Apostles ordained orther
m^nisters in churches: therefore Antichrist of Rome, his synago^ue of Satan,
and h^s eldest son^es the Prelates, must or may ordeyn mini^ters in the church
of Christ. If this be a good consequence let al men judge: if ^^^s it be not,
then Mr. Bern. holds the popish church, and the ^opish ministers true
ministers; and so himself and his church of England must needs be schismatiks
for leaving that church of Rome. When he has cleared himself of this his
absurd doctrine, then (if he cannot see that the church of Christ has power to
ordeyn her own ministers) it shall be showed him by the scriptures, T^ll then,
what should we do following of a wavering reed, whom we cannot tell by his
writing, whether he be Papist or Protestant. And that the reader may see into
what an intricate Labyr^nth the ministers of England have brought themselves,
about this matter of their ministry, by writing as they have do^ both of the
Papists and of us: I will set down a Papist argument against them: from which
how handsomely they can defend themselves, I would fayn see. There came out, in
anno 1602 a book called A detection of diverse notable untruths etc. wherein
the author having to deal wit Mr S^^cliff, who as (he says) had reasoned thus,
In his challenge, p: 85.
The true church is a society of faithful people under lawful Pastors etc
But the Church of Rome has long wanted true Pastors and Bishops; for the
Romish Bishops have no authority ^r missio^ but from the Pope, to whom also
they swear feally: but he has no authority to send them or ordeyn them, ^eing
himself no Bishop, etc. This argument of Mr Sutcliffs the Papist detestion,
etc. p. 100.
retorteth v^o^ the^ thus. The true church of Christ has always true Pastors
and Bishops: but the English Congregation wants true Priests and Bishops:
Therefore the English congreagation (...) not the true church of Christ. The
first proposition (says the Papist) he must not deny, being of his own making,
etc. The 2, proposition is apparent according to Mr Sutcliffs divinity. For
most certain it is, that their first Bishops received their orders and
consecration from our catholic Bishops, as his brother Bell confesses, Survey.
page 201. And the thing it self speaks: seeing when L^ther begun, there was
not any protestant Bishop or Priest etc. And if Mr Sut^liffe dare deny that
their Bishops were c^ns^cratedl^ ours, then let him name who they were that did
lay hands upon Mr Parker the first of Cant. that derived not their mission
authority and consecration from the Bishop of Rome. Certain it is, that ^yther
none at all can be named, or else none besides: therefore if our Bishops be no
Bishops, then does it follow most evidently, that all the English Bishops, be
no Bishops at al, as having no other co^secratio^ then from them: And if our
English Prelates be no true Bishops, then surely n^yther be they Pri^sts or
Minis^ers or Deacons, that be ordained by them, and so consequently the
congregation of E^g^, by Mr Sutcliffs argument, not the true church of Christ.
This is the Catholi^s argument and plea: which how Mr Bern. or his brethren
will well answer, and stand also to that which they have written against us; I
cannot tell.

Finally, against that often boasting of the work and effect of the ministry
of Engl, I will oppose a testimony of one of their chief mi^isters, yet our
professed adversary, that it cannot be thought he was partial for us at all. Mr
Gifford is the man that thus has Dialogue between a Papist and a protestant:
in the Epistle dedicatory:
written. Some d^e wonder how it should come to pass; that among us there
should be so many which being borne since the gospel was restored in this land
are so zealously addicted unto Popery, which they never did know. and so utter
enemies to the Gospel which they hear. But if they weigh the causes of this
deadly mischeef, they will cease wondering at that, and rather wonder that there
be no more. For how can it b^ so long as there be so many abuses in the
ministry, but that many shall stumble and loath the Gospel. For from thence
as it is manifest, the chief cause of this evil does spring. True it is that
our ministry does fight against them but yet in such sort, that it does
greatly increase them. Seeming and pretending to tread upon those cockatrise
eggs, for to break them, and so ^o destroy utterly the viperous generation:
when as indeed they sit upon them, and so hatch the bro^ds of this evil kind,
and bring them forth in great plenty. For behold a number cry out against
popery, and proclaym utter defiance in speech: but their doings are such, that
for every one which they convert to the g^spel, they cause an hundred to
revolt, to be hardened in their errors, or to fall into flat Atheism. While
many contrary to the profession which they made when they entered, setting aside
the care of sowles, not esteeming nor regarding what become of them, study
most how to clime high, and to satisfy their ambitious desire of honor: taking
together livings couetously and greedily: not caring who feed the flock, so
they may ^^me by the fleese, Moreover the door has been opened also ^o let
into the church (...) and swarm of such, as are more like the priests of
Jeroboam, then minister^ of the gospel: not only unlearned idols, which have
mouths and speak not; which being weary of their occupations, and covet to
live easily, and to that end are entered; but also riotous, dicers, gamesters,
quaffers, quarrellers, adulterers and such like. If the matter were secret I
should do amiss to make it manifest; but when it is open in the sight and
view of all men, who can complayn justly when it is spoken of? Let this record
of Mr G^ffords, for the effect of their administration and their good
quallities besides, together with Mr Bernards former doctrine for their first
calling and ordination by the popish prelates; show whether it be not like,
that this ministry will ere long make accord with the mother church of Rome
that hatched it, and for whom it again hatcheth cockatrices eggs.

The tenth error that we should hold is, 10 Error
that their worship ( in Engl.) is a false worship. To prove this to be an
error, Mr Bern. brings these reasons.

1. That they worship no false God.

I answer. Answer.
Neither did Jeroboam the son of Neba^ who made Israel to syn: yet used he a
false worship 1 King. 12.

2. That they worship the true God with no false worship; for they have the
true word preached, the true sacraments, and their prayers are such as man be
warranted by the word. etc.

I answer, this is but taking for granted, that which he should prove; for he
knows well that we deney th^se things, and by many reasons in sundry books
(none of which Mr Bern. answers) have disproued their preaching, ministering
of Sacraments, book prayer etc. Seeing he will answer nothing before written by
us, let him in his next book, prove that the Apocrypha scriptures and homily
books, which they read in Gods worship are his true word; that the sacraments
which the unpreaching priests minister to their profane parishioners by their
popish leitourgie, are true sacraments; let him approve by Gods word the
observation of all their holy days, fasting days, with their prescript
peculiar service; briefly, let him show warrant for his service book, the
making and use thereof with all the popish contents therein. These are strange
incense, new forgeries of their own, never appointed by Christ or his Apostles:
wherefore we doubt not to affirm their worship to be false, even an humane
invention. With these things Mr Bern. medle^h not, but brings proof for other
matters, which we never denied; and refers us to an after treatise. which
now next follows to be answered. Yet ere he leaves us, he will utter all his
heart, and from his inner store powers out against us 12. errors more, which he
will not spend time (he says) in con^ut^tion of, they are so absurd and false;
being also (as he thinks) con^ured by the former. Though nothing need be
answered where no show of proof is made: yet to satisfy the reader and show him
the vanity of this adversary, I will briefly touch them all; and they be these.

That their congregations, as they stand, are all and every of them incapable
before God to choose them ministers, though they desire the means of salvation.

Al such as desire the means of salvation in what congregations soever, have,
Aswner.
ower and liberty from God to separate from all evil, and join together in
good, and so to enjoy Gods blessings in his ministry, or any other part of the
Gos^el But, we hold that no false church, has power from God to choose
ministers: which he has ordained only for true churches. 1 Cor. 12.28. E^h.
4, 12 R^m. 12.4, 5 etc. and we wonder with what face any Christian can say
otherweise. If Mr Bern. make the error to be in holding them false churches;
then is it the same with the 8. error before answered, and is here b^t idly of
him repeated.

That God in their best assembli^s, is worshipped after a false manner.

Answer.
An other idle repetition of that which before he made our Tenth error, which
there was answered.

That baptism is not administered into the faith of Christ simply, but into the
faith of Bishops, and Church of Engl.

Answer.
This I think is Mr Bernards uncharitable collection, not our Position. Though
we hold baptism among them to be administered neither by a true minister nor
after a lawful manner, but according to their own prescript Leitourgie and to
the seed of the wicked, with great dishonor of the precious blood of Christ;
and therefore to be no true seal of Gods covenant unto them.

That their faith and repentance is a false faith, and a false repentance.

Answer.
Faithfulness and repentance is desired in Mr Bernard himself, who cares not to
calumniate us We profess to judge no secret things such as true faith and
repentance are. We are persuaded many in true churches may have a false faith
and a false repentance, because there are many hypocrite^ also that many in
false churches may have true faith and repentance, for there are Gods elect But
who these are on both sides, we leave unto God that knows them. Of Mr Bernards
church this is that we say, they walk not in the true faith, they bring not
forth fruits of tr^e repentance, in the public estate wherein they stand.

That their Ministers converting men to God there, do it not as Pastors but as
Teachers. Answer.


This distinction which Mr Bern. skoffeth at* must rest, skoff and all, in his
own bosom, till he bring out another father. I know not who begat it.

That their church stands in an adultrous estate. A strange assertion (says
Mr Bern.) what idol worship we?

Answer.
False worship is spiritual adultery Ier. 3. If Mr Bern. were not a stranger in
Christ fold, he would so acknowledge it, and not count it our error. If he say
the error is in holding their worship to be false; then say I, he repeteth now
the third time, that which before he made our 10. and again our second Errors,
and if he go forward thus, he may multiply it to a thousand, and teach us new
Arithmetik. If he would know what idol he worships! let him take his Ordinary
for one among many, who stands for a spiritual Lord over many churches,
vsur^ing Christ's place: to him does Mr Bern. with his flock, bow and stoup. An
other idol he may ^^nde in his pue.

7. That we cannot say certainly by any warrant of Gods word, that any of

A hard speech, If that man whom he mentions in the margin, Answ.
so said; let not one man's word be imputed to our common cause He may see it
otherwise minded by others of us, before in this treatise page 39 and our
Apolog. page 91.92.

8. That n^ne of their ministers may be heard.

Not heard in the execution of their ministry, for it is of Antichrist. Answ.
Christ's sheep hear his voice, not a strangers Ioh, 10 All Antichrists
ministers are strangers. So are all ministers of every false Church. Such their
church and ministry has been proved to be in many treatises.

9, That it is not lawful to join in prayer with any of them,

As a false church generally, so the members thereof particularly, Answ.
may not be communicated with in spiritual actions. Such we hold, and have
proved their church to be. Til Mr Bern. take away this foundation, he fighte^h
but with shadows; and shows his ignorance in the communion of the Saints.

10. That ministers may not celebrate marriage nor bury the dead.

There wants a third thing to make up the error, Answ.
Churching of women These and the l^ke ministerial functions, we know the
Romish Antichrist lays on his priests, and the Prelates of England on theirs:
But in Christ's testament we find no such duties imposed upon his ministry Let
Mr. Ber therefore bury his dead still; for he will quicken but a few by his
popish doctrine.

11, That ministers should only live of voluntary contribution, and not either

Against this Mr Bern. allegeth Gods wisdom who allowed a settled maintenance
under the law: and there is nothing against it in the Gospel,

God in wisdom appointed tithes, first fruits and other particulars for his
Prirsts liuelihod under the law: Answ.
Christ in wisdom appoynt^th no^e such for his ministers under the gospel; but
Pope Paschalis about 827 years after Christ Qu 19. ca. 1. Decima^ a populo.
decreed that tithes should be given to the priests. This Popes wisdom Mr Ber.
prefers before Christ's. It cannot be deneyed but tithes were a part of the
Law, and that Christ abolished the legal Priesthood; whereupon it follows by
the plain doctrine of the Gospel, if the priesthood be changed, then of
necessity must there be a change of the law. Heb. 7.12. But Mr Bern, had rather
any shadow should be done away then this of Tithes, for it has much substance
with it. and there be more siluersmithes of Demetrius mind which said, Act 19.15
Siroye know, that by this craft we have our goods. But what says one of their
own ancient Martyrs against Mr Bernards predecessors. Acts and Momuments,
Wilia^ Thor in his testament.
This Priesthood is blown so high and borne up in pride and vain glory of
their estate and dignity, and so blinded with worldly covetousness, that they
disdain to follow Christ in uery meeknes and wilful poverty, living holily,
and preaching Gods word truly freely and continually, taking their liuelihood
at the freewil of the People; of their pure almose, where and when they suffice
not for their true and busy preaching to get their sustenance with their hands
To this true sentence grounded on Christ's own l^uing, and teaching of his
Apostles, these foresaid worldly and fleshly priests, will not consent effect
ally, etc. If this martyr were now alive, the Clerg^e of England would sooner
condemn him for a Brownist then appro^e of his doctrine; albeit now that he is
dead, they garnish his toomb.

That their churches ought to be raced down, and not to be jmployed to the true
worship of God.

Answ.
To repayr this ruin, M. Bernard tells us; there is great difference between
Antichristianisme and Paganism. He might tell us also there is great difference
between Paganism and Paganism, some Pagans worshipp^ng the true Act 17.23
God ignorantly; some the Sun and Moon and host of heaven, some the Diuil
himself. But what were this to the purpose? The thing he should show is that
God more estemeth favors aloweth or tolerateth antichrists idol howses, then
of the Pagans. Till he do this, we know that by Gods word and in his account,
as Pagans 1 Cor, 10 20.
worship Diuils, so Antichristians Reu 9 20, and 16, 14. and 18.2.
worship diu^ls Let men feign to themselves what difference they l^st. But it
must be proved (says Mr Bern.) that our churches were built by Antichrist.
First God in his law required no such proof, when he commanded utterly to
destroy all the places wherein the nations which Israel should possess served
their Gods; Deuteronomy. 12.2.3.
whether it were in the grove which Abraham himself had Gen, 21, 33,
planted, or on the altars which he had Gen 12, 7 8. and, 13, 4 etc,
builded; the law of God made no inquiry Secondly, If M, Bern. will seek the
records of his temples, he may find many to have been builded by Papists, if he
will grant that they be Antichristians: or if he will go f^rther, he may find
some of them builded by heathens, and dedicated to Diuils. But though the
Records said nothing, yet the form and shape of these mass howses, proclayme
them to be the uery shrines of idols, and liable to the Curse.

Thus are we come to an end with M, Bernard; passing by his impertinent
discourses, which in his rouing he ran into: leaving him also for his
unchristian reproaches, and injurious calumniations, to the mercy or judgment of
the Lord, who Jude verse. 14.15.
behold comes with ten thows^nds of his Saints to give judgment against all
men, and to rebuke all the ungodly among them, of all their wicked deeds which
they have wickedly committed, and of all their cru^l speakings, which wicked
sinners have spoken against him.

THE MINISTERS POSITIONS SHAKEN.
THere is added to Mr Bernards book, an other work entitled; CERTAIN POSITIONS
held and maynteined by some godly ministers of the gospel, against those of the
separation, and namely against Barrow and Greenwood. The groundwork whereof is
thus laid;

That the Church of England is a true Church of Christ and such a one as from
which whosoever wittingly and continually separateth himself, cutteth himself
^ff from Christ

I will not stand upon the consequences that may be made of this position,
whereby all that abhorr^ng the abominations in that church, and so separating
from it, are quite cut off from Christ, whatsoever truth they profe^^e and
walk in, or whats^euer other church they join unto: but I will insist in a
brie^ answer to that which these Ministers bring to prove this their peremtory
sentence, and they be 4. reasons.

1, For that they enjoy and join together in the use of those outward means
which God in his word has ord^yned for the gathering of an invisible Church:
that is, preaching of the gospel, and administration of the sacraments.

2. For that their whole church makes profession of the true faith.

3. For that they hold and teach etc. all truths fundamental.

4. For that all known churches in the world acknowledge that church for the^r
sister, and give unto her the right hand of fellowship.

These things have been before handled in this treatise, and the weakne^^e of
them discovered: yet because it may be thought new men will make new arguments,
and many heads together bring forth deep counsels, let us weigh what these
godly ministers have here said.

For proof of the first point, 1 Reason,
they do allege that the means which they use and enjoy have been effectual
to the unfeigned conversion of many: as may appear both by the other fruits of
faith that may be found amongst them, and by the martyrdom which sundry have
endu^ed etc: yea even we our selves are able to witness with them, that if there
be any true faith and sanctification in us, it was begun and bred in their
assemblies,

Secondly, that if Mat. ^8.18.20 Ephesians. 4, 11.12.14 be well examined, it wil^e
found that the means which Christ ordained for the gathering of an invisible
church are the very same which they enjoy even the preaching of the word and
administration of the sacraments.

I answer; All this that they say will not prove their, Position, Answ.
namely that the church of England which consists of the whole nation,
divided in to many dioceses and parishes, under one or two Archbishops etc. is
a true church of Christ. For the Papists boast of all these things, as
colorable and as truly as these ministers Their priests have converted many
from Pagenisme, Iudaisme, and profanenes of life; their church has had many
martyrs; Luther and others that first left them, had their faith begun in their
assemblies; etc. and whatsoever Ministry is in England, from the Archprelate
to the half priest, the Papists, have amongst them yea Engl. had it from them.
And it is to be admired that these godly ministers can allege nothing for their
church, but such old popish stales.

How vainly they assume these things unto themselves, has been showed before:
See before p. 37.42.43.
fruits of faith appear no^ in their confuse assemblies wh^re God is publ^ckly
dishonored by false worship; his enemies (profane and wicked people) fostered
and ble^sed with his most holy things, and Antichristian prelates, and Canons
obeyed:

Were it as they say, that many have been converted, is that ^enough to make
all the church? We have testimonies from their See before p. 2.107.
own mouths that there be swarms and thowsands of profane, irreligeous,
atheists, blasphemers and open wicked livers Mr Gifford a champion of their own
has confessed and printed it that Country divinity: in the Epis^ de dic.
through want and absence of ^ sincere ministry, there is a flood of ignorance
and darkness ouerflowing the most part of the land: the fear of God is
banished from the greatest part: the wonderful heaps and piles of sin, which
should be washed and cleansed away by the word, do undoubtedly with one voice
cry alowd in the ears of the Lord for vengeance upon the whole realm etc Shall
now a few supposed conuerts, mak^ all this rowt a Christian church? It is
impiety, and an overthrow of the Gospel. Genesis 3.15. 2 Cor. 6.14, 18, Mat,
15.13. Reu. 21..2:3.27. and 28.15.

What mean these Ministers to boast so much of their martyrs whose blood cries
against them, in the ears of the Lord of hosts. For did not their church kill
them? Let one of themselves speak in this case, least we be thought partial.
Ios, Nich. Plea. of the innocent. p. 236.
Who knows not (says Mr Nichols,) how much blood of Gods Saints. was spilt
in former ages, and how many howses were guilty of blood? And when did this
land serio^sly and sincerely humble it self. and by ^pen repentance make
reconciliation for the same? Nay rather how many thowsands repined at the happy
reign of her majesty, for the casting out of the idolatrous and superstitious
worship of God, and for the establishing of his holy nam^ and the liberty in
preaching of the G^spell? This testimony is known to b^ true; the greater is
their sin that now plead for such a people to be a true Church of God. Shall
the Cainites be honored for Abels martyrdom; or the Jews for crucifying
Christ? then also may the bloody gen^tion of Papists be canonized for Saints,
and made members without r^pentance) of a christian church. And for these
ministers, let them heart and make use of Christ's words to their predecessors.
Luke 11.47.48.
Woe unto you, for ye build the sepulchers of the prophets, and your fathers
killed them Truly y^ bear witness and allow the deeds of your fathers, for they
killed them, and y^ build their sepulchers. Mat. 23.3^,
Fulfill ye also the measure of your Fathers.

It is a slight and simple kind of reasoning, to tell us if those scripture^
Mat. 28. Ephesians. 4. be well examined; it will be found that the means which
Christ ordained for the gathering of an invisible church, ar the uery same
which they enjoy. First, what doting Friar will not say this much, for his
popish Synagogue? Then, why do not these ministers bring the means they boast
of to the examination by these scriptures: is it yenough (think they to the
examination by these scriptures: is it yenough (think they) to cite a text or
two, and then ran away; The scriptures they allege have been Page, 13 and 102,
103.
before examined and the ministers of Engl. being put into the other balance,
are found all too leight. But if it were true that they had the mean^; yet
their argument is false if they conclude of the effect. Israel had far better
means; then England I am sure: for the Prophets, and Apostles and Christ
himself preached among them Yet lo he complayneth Isa. 49, 4.
that he had labored in vain; for Jerusalem Mat. 23.37.
killed the Prophets, and stoned those that were sent unto them, and the Lord
by his Apostles Rom, 10.31.
stretched forth his hand to a disobedient and gainsaying people. And shall we
think that the Pr^ests of Engl. have such power and grace tied to their lips,
that because they have ^reached, therefore the whole nation is a true church?
Or dot^ there such virtue proceed from these ministers, as can make the
multitu^e of swaggering professors, atheists, blasphemers, and all sorts of
profane which swarm in the land, to be turned Christians. worthy to be washed
and fed with the body and blood of, Christ. and yet continue atheists and
profane as before? what wondrous effect shall we next hear of, but that their
preaching has converted the Diuils also.

But let us hear what testimony M. Gifford has left beh^nde him, of the gra^
and learned pr^achers of the church of Engl: among whom himself was one,) and
of the people in their parishes, The Diull ( Country divinity fol. 48.
says he) is content those preachers should ride upon his back because he is
sure they will not spurg all him: they be very gentle riders. Do ye not
think, that if they should set forth Gods word as they ought, and spread the
light: that all wicked, (of which their parish is full,) would storm and fret
against them? the Diuill himself would fi^k about, if they should spur him but
a little. But they can tell a smooth tale in the pulpit garnished with some
merry story, for to make the people merry or else some old rotten allegory; or
some far fetched matter out of some great writers, that their people may be at
their wits end and admire,
admit them. A man would think to see the people come out of the church
blowing, that they were fed as full as tikes: when they go home with emty
bellies. This I dare warrant, if it be not so let me loose both mine ears,
that g^e through the parishes of these gra^e and learned Divines and except
such as run to fetch their victuals otherwhere, ye shall not find fi^e among
five skore, which are able to understand the necessary grounds and principles
of religion: and yet the People will say, they be excellent deep men. But I
love not those wells which are so deep, that a man can draw no water out of
them. Lo here the means which the, parishes of England do enjoy, and worthy
effects that follow. If Mr Barrow. or any of us, should I have written this, it
would have been counted s^^ffing, r^yling, and blasphemy: but now that Mr
Gifford, (so worthy a patron of the church) has thus recorded, I hope the
witness will be thought irrefragable And now let these godly ministers examine Mat
28. and Ephesians. 4 and see if there they can find these means which they enjoy,
justified.

But they proceed and tell us in their second reason that page 116.
their whole church makes profession of the true faith. 2. Reason.
For the Confession of their church tegither together with the Apology
thereof, and those articles of religion agreed upon in the Convocation house,
anno 1562, do prove this evidently. But herein they would deceive the simple
evidently: for first profession of the true says, when men in practice do
deny it, makes them not a true church, but they are as the Apostle says, Tit.
1.16^
abominable.

Then for profession it self, if it be by constreynt, for fear of punishment,
by m^n that otherweise are profan^, lewd, and dissolute and enemies to the
gospel this is no true profession, such as will make men a true church, for
they ought to receive and profess the truth willingly and gladly Psalm, 110.3.
Act. 2 41. Now we know that with them, men were and are forced to the
profession they make, and if it were at their own choice, many thowsands would
profess otherwise. Their own acts and Monuments, (besides manifest experience)
do witness this. For Mr Fox reports, that when K. Edward had established this
church and religion many people Act and monu. edi. 5. page 11^7, 1190
in Cornwall. Deuenshire and other places, not only misliked it, but openly
rebelled for their old idolatry. The Priests, though some allowed, yet others
ibidem pa 1184.
dissembled, and many carelessly con^emned all, and still excercised their old
mon^ed Popery. The Justices etc were not only page 1185
slack in furthering of religion, but hindered so much as lay in them the Kings
proceedings etc. So that civil force, not Christian zelo made men Protestants
in that Kings days: wherefore at his death, having gotten Q. Mary, they so^ up
again their Romish superstition, and persecuted the other unto the death. Til
Q. Elisah came, and enforced them the second time to put away the^r Latin Mass
and images, and receive that English service and ceremonies, which since have
prevailed to this day, Which how willingly the people ye^lded unto, Mr Nichols
testimony (to omit all others) before alleged, shows.

And How well this religion is liked of now after so many years* let the
multitude of church papists in England show: together with the whole row^ of
rebels in Ireland, all which are of the communion of the church of Engl, having
the same Bishops, Priests, service and^ the English and Irish that dwell in the
country, being joined together in one body and brotherhood: Then add to these
papists, the profane time-seruers, such as M. Gifford deseribeth thus, Country
divinity. fol. 2^
I know there be many which care not for the Pope, but yet believe much of his
doctrine: they be those which we call Atheists of no religion: but look
whatsoever any prince does set forth that they will profess and add unto them
those other firarmes in the church of England that Mr Chaderton complayneth of;
eronius and heretical sectaries, witches, charmers sorcerers, murderers,
thieves, adulterers, liars, etc and all these together being compelled by law
into one church and brotherhood, can any man doubt now of that which these
ministers, Sermon. on Romans 12. p. 65.66.
say, that their whole church makes profession of the true faith?

The Confession, Apology. and Conuocation-howse articles, are strange proofs
of the peoples profession. If a few men in their Studies or Consistories, write
books or articles of religion. and send them a broad; must all people that see
or hear them, will they nil they, needs be counted professors of that religion?
yea such also as never heard of them in their lives nor cannot tell what they
mea^e? Surly these ministers ar either very ignorant, or careless what they
say, when they call this an evident proof. The churches in France and Belgia
have published Confessions and Articles also, better then those in England: yet
are there thowsands and ten thowsands dwelling among them, that neither so
profess, nor are members of their churches.

But if it were granted that the public writings, articles canons etc. are to
be esteemed the faith and profession of all Engl. yet we deny them to make
profession of the true faith; for their Service book, homilies. book of
Ordination, with the impious canons confirming all the Romish idolatries,
Antichristian clergy and ceremonies that are among them, excommunicating, See
before p. 56.
ipso facto, all that speak against them; this is no true Christian
profession, whatsoever other truths are mixed with them. For as the Papists
holding many good grounds of religion in general, yet by other additions and
contradictions, do overthrow the truth: so is it in England, as before in this
treatise, and in many others, has been proved and after shall further appear.

Whereas these Ministers confidently deny that their church accounts any one
for her child or member, that does not profess the faith of Christ in some
measure: it is nothing but a vayn flourish. For was there ever such grossnes in
the deepest gulf of Popery as to deney Christ utterly, and not to profess him
in some measure? Nay it could not be the throne of Antichrist unless he did
profess Christ. It is well known, none are baptized among the Papists, but they
profess the very same faith that is now professed at the baptism in Engl.
namely that which they call the Apostles Creed So then what have these godly
ministers said more then the simplest papist in the world could have said for
his church? Now in that they make this a color, as if the profane and wicked
were not accounted children of the church: they show themselves to be Hos. 9.8
the snare of a fowler in all their ways: yet set they a snare so slight, that
every man may break it. For who knows not that there be multitudes of profane
and wicked persons in the land? Who knows not that the whole land generally is
baptized? Yea the baptisiing of the seed of the most wicked, is not only
practiced but befended in print, by their late Archbishop D. Whitg. who pleaded
Answer to the admon. page 111.
what if it be the child of a dronkard, or of an harl^t? what if the Parents be
papists? what if they be heretics? etc. shall not their children be baptized?
Yes, he will have it to be a common passage for all uile persons, Good and evil
(says Defense of the answer to the adm, page 621.
he) clean and unclean, holy and profane, must needs pass by it. And at
baptism their service book teaches the priest to say of every one, we receive
this child into the congregation of Christ's flock. Being thus received, not one
of a thousand wicked persons, are ever excommunicated: but are fostered in the
church until their death; and then the priest is taught again to say that
Service a^ burial.
it has pleased God to take unto himself the soul of their dear brother
there departed, and so he commits his body to the ground in sure and certain
hope of resurrection to eternal life. This being the general state of the
land, as all men know; what dissemblers are these Ministers to intimate. as if
their church acknowledged not the open wicked for her children and members? Mr
Gifford, when time was, yielded far otherweise. I confess Dialog, betwee^ a
Pap and a protes. fol 38.
(says he) that our church, if ye understand the whole assembly, is full of al
wicked vices. There are a number among us which are of your brood, speaking to
a ^apist,) whose evil life is seen well yenough, there ar^ a very great number
of mere worldlings which do not greatly esteem any religion although they seem
now because of laws, to allow and favor our side. etc.

Now having said somewhat for themselves, such as it is, they cauil page 167.
at our description of a church, when we say, that it is a company of faithful
people that truly worship Christ and rea^^ly obey him. This say these
Ministers, is utterly untrue if it be understood of the visible church. This is
strange. What would they have us describe the Church to be a company of
infidels; or a company of faithful and of infidels together: when Paul
teaches that there is no communion between such, 2 Cor 6.14.15 or should we
say, a people that falsely worship Christ? Indeed if so we held, we might well
return to their Church of England; for there is false worship more then
yenough. The Apostle writing to the visible church of Ephesus, calls them
Ephesians, 1, 1.
Saints, and the faithful in Christ Jesus. Will they say that this also was
utterly untrue? Their own Articles of religion in England Ano 1562 art. 19.
say thus; the visible church of Christ, is a congregation of faithful people
etc. and is this also vtt^rly untrue? But let us hear their reason why this
should be untruth. For (say they) if every one that the church may account a
visible member, be truly faithful, how is our Savior to be understood when
he compares the church or ministry thereof to a draw net gathering as well that
which must be cast away as good fish etc. Me thinks these godly ministers f
should be ashamed so to deprave not only our meaning, but our very words, that
when we say of faithful people, that truly worship, they will turn and trans^
lace them to truly faithful, and then gather (as afterward they do,) as if
men may not account any to be members of the church, by their outward
profession, unless they know them to have true faith, which the Lord only is
able to dis^^rne. Could any reasonable man thus construe our words, or gather
from them, unless he purposely would deprave? especially knowing (as these men
know well) our constant witness otherweise, who esteem of all men, by their
outward profession and walking; and have long since published in our
Confussion, Art, 17^
that many hypocrites will lurk in the church whiles it is on earth. But thus
it pleased these men to abuse us, before the simple reader.

Their third reason for their church is, that page, 168
they hold teach and maynteyn every part and article of Gods holy truth which
is fundamental. The proof of this, 3. Reason,
they would have to be seen in their Confessions, Catechisnes and Articles of
religion published and approved of in their church.

This reason is like (if not the very same with) the former, which s^ake also
of professing the true faith, as was to be seen in their Conf^s^^^n, Answer,
Apology, and Articles. What mean these ministers to cloy their reader so
often with one dish of meat, a little diuertly dressed? It is doubtless for
want of better store. Yet this which they bring is very unsavory, for it is
not seasoned with the salt of Gods covenant. First for that point of
f^ndamentall truth, which they so long have stood upon, and co^ld neu^r be
gotten distinctly to show what truth is fundamental, and what not: we have now
these ministers resolute judgment of it thus, page 174.
The only fundamental truth in religion is this; That Jesus Christ the Son of
God, who took our nature of the Virgin Mary, is our only and alsufficient
Savior For proof of this, they first allege, that they receive this truth are
the people of God, and in the state of salvation: they that receive it not
cannot possibly be saved. Mat. 16.18 Mark. 16.16 1 I^h. 4.2. Col 2.7.

But first, none of these scriptures do say, that this one article, which
these ministers have set down in this form of words, is the only
fundamental truth in religion. Neither does any other scripture, that I know
of, so speak; for though Christ 1 Cor. 3.11.
only is the foundation of the Christian church; and though (as they secondly
allege) no other point of religion is necessary otherwise then as it tends
necessarily to teach or confirm this one truth: yet follows it not, but other
points also are fundamental truths the denial of which will abolish from
Christ.

Secondly they have altered, added to, and omitted some of the words of these
scriptures, for their own advantage: For fearing that we would (as indeed we
mean to do) press them with the profession of the Anabaptists Papists and
other heretics; they think to prevent us. And first against the Anabaptists
which deny that Christ took our flesh, these men have added, who took our
nature of the Virgin Mary. Then against the papists which hold merit of works,
they adioyne these words, our only and alsufficient Savior. And this because
the church of England mainteyneth the truth in these points, against those fore
said heretics. On the other hand to help themselves in their corrupt
Antichristian walking, and false constitution; they omit and mention not the
Apostles words Col. 2. where he says, verse. 6.7.
As ye have received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk in him, rooted and built
in him, and stablished in the faith, as ye have been taught etc The discreet
reader may soon espy their purpose in this cunning carriage. Mat 16.16.
For let the position be set down in the scripture terms, and we shall see,
how weak their plea will be. The only fundamental truth in religion is this:
That Jesus is 1 Ioh 4.2.
the Christ, the son of the living God, Mark. 16 16.
comen in the flesh in whom we must Col. 2.6.7.
believe and h walk, being rooted and build in him, and stablished in the
faith as we are taught in the new testament.

If now these ministers will insist upon the three first scriptures only, and
general terms that are in them; it is apparent that the Papists, Anabaptists
and many other miscreants, do hold and profess them absolutely: absolutely:
But if they join with them, Colos. 2. and compare the walking rooting,
building, and stablishing in the faith taught by the Apostles, with the Popish
church, or with their own; it will be found that neither of them hold the
fo^ndation Christ aright. Themselves w^ll grant it of the Pap^sts and other
heretics. and for their own church, it is before in this page, 74. etc.
treatise proved*

So then to come again unto their reason, that they hold, ^e^ch and mainteyn
every part of Gods holy truth which is fundam^ntall; whereby they would
concl^de themselves to be a true chr^ch the ar^ument is deneyed. F^r first if
^t were granted that they h^ld, ^aught and mai^teyn^d every part of fund^^ental
truth, which yet with them is but one article only as we have heard,) it w^ll
not follow necessaryly that therefore they are a true church, or that they
truly profess the Christ an faith. There wan^ two things; 1 obedience to the
truth professed; (witho^t which men Ioh. 3, 36 Mat, 7.21 23 Romans 2, 6.8.
shall be damned, whatsoever they profess,) 2 and a right profession of the true
faith only, without err^urs adjoined that overthrow the same faith, and
obedience thereto For if a people profe^sing that only fundamental truth
which these ministers page 174.
speak of; should withal profess Mahomet the prophet of the Turks; or H. N.
the God of the Familists; or any other like abomination: were this misceline
profession of Christ and Belial together. a true and sound profe^sion? I trow
not. So then these ministers must alter their plea thus; that they hold teach
mainteyn and obey every part of the fundamental truth, and nothing else with
it, that overthrows the same. If now they say this they do, I have before in
this treatise page, 74. etc.
disproued it; and here again will briefly disprove it, thus. They profess to
beleeu In the Creed,
the Communion of Saints; and that the visible church is Art. 19, anno. 1562
a congregation of faithful people. Yet contrariweise they hold teach and
mainteyne, that their own church is a true church of Christ; though it consists
as well of unholy as holy, infidels as believers and innumerable wicked persons
openly seen and known. That this they hold and mainteyn, is pro^ed by their
continual clamors and reprochful writings against us, that call upon them for a
separation of light from darkness. It is proved by Dr W^itgifts plea before
mentioned, that the children of Papists, heretics, and other wicked persons are
and ought to be baptized among the^ It is further proved by the visible estate
of their church known unto all among them, and test^fied by her dearest
friends and favorers. M^ Gifford speaking to his brethren ^f the Communion of
Saints in Engl. says, Country, divinity, fol. 19.
Ye would even power out your stin^ing and r^t^en p^yson, like blaspemous and
venomous beasts: ye would speak after this manner, you that are so full of the
spirit; you that are Saints, and such like. What are you Di^ils; are ye of the
flesh? No do^ut ye are, until God convert ye. But we may se how diui^ishly men
ar become wicked: when a man cannot make any appearance to be godly and holy,
but it is reproched as though it were a shameful thing to be lead by the
spirit etc. These and the like records, with the continuance continuance in
this confused estate, plainly prove an overthrow of that article of the true
church; which is the body of Christ: and the body being disanulled, Christ the
head cannot soundly be retained.

Again, they profess in Engl. that Art. 19. anno 1562
the pu^e word of God is to be preached, the sacraments duly administered etc.
also, that ibid, art. 17,
in our doings, that will of God is to be followed which we have expressly
decleared unto us in the word of God. Yet withal, they profess and practice
in that church, to Book of common prayer
read the Apocrypha ^criptures (in which are found untruths and errors, when
many parts of the authentik scripture, are never read among them.) they have
also written Art. 35. anno, 1562
homilies, in sted of preaching; a written Le^tourg^e, Letany, collects etc. in
sted of praying; which Consti. and canons, 1603
Leitoargie with all the popish contents therein. must be approved and used by
all the Priests and people, and God served by it every day. They have also an
antichristian clergy, called and ordained according to their pontifical, or
book of ordination, which ^n their belief, Art. 36, ano. 1562
has not any thing that of it self is s^perstitious and ungodly etc. Finally
all the Romish relics yet in England to be seen in the hierarch^e, worship,
ceremonies, ordinances church constitution etc. (which things can never be
approved by the word of God,) are yet Canons, anno 1603. and their practice
according.
held and vpheld, taught and mainteyned in the church to the excommunicating
and persecuting of all such, as speak against them, or refuse to communicate
with them. This sinful mixture, and maintenance of so much ant^christian
error, with the christian truths that they profe^^e; is no true Christian
profession and practice of our obedience unto the fundamental truth of the
gospel: neither can the ministers prove, that these contraries will stand
together, when account shall be given before the judgment seat of Christ.

Secondly I answer (as to their former reason that although some Bishops and
Priests have written Articles, Catechismes etc. yet are not these approu^d,
much less walked in, by the church of Engl. neither are the people rooted,
b^ilded, and stablished in the faith according to Colos. 2. but are di^^olute
and profane in their conversation, rooted in uices, and stablished in iniquitis
as lamentable experience teaches all men; as the test^mon^es of their own
ministers before alleged prove, and many other we might allege, and must; if
these men still continue to urge that, which is known to be far otherweise.
For how well their people do walk in the faith of the foundation Christ, and
approve of all fundamental truths in the scriptures; let these testimonies of
their own friends show. The most part of your honest men (says Mr Gifford
Country Devinity fol. 73
to and of his brethren) now a days, delight so much in the word of God, and
meditate so much in it, that they care not a button though they never hear it.
they love it: and set as much by it as they do by an old s^^e. Every man
(says Preface to Mr, D. Fenners Cou^terpoys
an other) follows the pride covetousness, whordome, dronkennes, of his own
heart, and no man remembers Joseph. The bars are filled with pleadings, and
the streets are full of cries of the poor, fulness of meat, and contempt is
among us, and who considers! Yet if this our sin were only against men,
and not against God there ^ight be some hope. But when the mouth of the
bl^spemous swearer is not ti^d up, and the hands of the idolatrous generation
of Atheists and profane persons be not chained, when the most holy and precious
word of God is manifestly contemned, the joyful and heavenly tidings of
salvation so negligently and ungratefully trodden under foot, the true and
faithful messengers pursued, arraygnned and diverse ways ^fflicted: then if
the old world for malicious imaginations Sodom and Gomora for pride fulness of
meat and unmercifulness: if Jerusalem for abusing Gods Prophets and wilfulness
were woefully destroyed: what may we poor careless People look for it we do
not repent, but (as it is almost universally feared sp^edy ruin and utter
desolation,

The exceptions which these Godly ministers take against Mr Barrowes writings,
and yet profess page, 169.
not to answer them; need not now to be stood upon, till the particulars
whereby he has discovered their errors and evil dealings, be by them taken
away. They further tax and note it in him as page 173.
a strange opinion and an error full gross, mainteyned in page 156.157. of his
Discovery, vidz that every truth contained in the scripture is fundamental.
But the grossnes or crossnes will be found in themselus for that which Mr Barrow
there inueigheth against, was this, Discover. Page 156.
that though transgressions and errors be obstinately continued in, and openly
taught. after they be reproved and convinced by the word of God, yea and the
parties dye in that estate without repentance of these transgressions or
errors: yet may they hold the foundation and be vadoubtedly saved. Of this
mind were, and still continue (says he) five of the very principal and best
esteemed ministers of Engl. both for learning and conscience: although there
were alleged against the same these express scriptures, Number. 15.30 31. Exodus
23.21. 1 Samuel 15.22.23. Ezekiel. 18.26 Mat. 5, 18, 19 Iam. 2 10. etc.

This was the thing that M, Bar. there bet down, showing further, that if the
whole scripture was given by inspiration of God, and is profitable to teach, to
convince, 2 Timothy 3, 16 Prove. 30.5 Psalm. 19.8. and 12.6. Psa. 119 entyre. Ephesians, 2
20.
to correct, to instruct in righteousness; if it be the groundwork and
foundation of the church, of our faith: if it be the law and rule of our life,
the light of our eyes etc. If every word of God be holy, pure, perpetual; then
is this deep learning of theyrs, diuilish and blasphemous, that thus to color
and cover their wickedness. make some part of gods word fundamental.
substantial, necessary, other accidental, superficial, needless, especially
where it shows reproves and condemns their doings etc

Now what say these ministers against this plea? they plainly yield in effect
to th'truth, which they could with no color gainsay; we beleeu (say Page 174
they) and teach, that there is no Part of holy scripture, which every
Christian is not necessarily bound to seek, and desire knowledge of so far
sorth as in him lies. Very well said and; had they added also this word obeyed,
(which I suppose they would be thought to intimate,) there would be no
difference between M, Barrow and them, though thus they would traduce him. But
least they should seem to condemn themselves, they except. yet dare ibid^m.
we not call every truth fundamental; that is, such as if it be not known and
obeyed, the whole religion and faith of the church must needs fall to the
ground; and again; page, 173,
we doubt not that some parts are of more use, and more necessary for men to
know, then othersome. In these things (excepting the word fundamental which
seems to be but strife about a word,) We agree with them; neither does Mr
Barrow, that I can perceive disagree for it is one thing not to know and obey
every truth, as they speak, and another thing to know, as hau^ng reproof and
conviction by the word of God, and yet to disobey and rebel against the truth,
and continue obstinately in transgre^sion* which was the point in hand. And for
the world fundamental, seeing all Gods testimonies are true; and David says
that the Lord has Psalm. 119 152.
founded them for ever; I see no cause why we need be afraid to call every
tr^th fundamental that is such as is firm and stable. and on which we should
ground and build our faith and actions up on always. Yet seeing now what these
ministers understand by the word, I will not strive. Also M, Barrow himself in
his Observations upon Mr Giff^rds last reply tells him that he Answe to Artic
5
denies not in use of speech such distinction, so much as withstand such
eronius abuse of that distinction, which M. Gifford and other deuines of these
times would infer thereof. And in deed the simple are much beguiled by this
subtle distinction. For when the sins and idolatr^es of these Priests are
blamed: answer is made, though they be sins, yet are they not fundamental,
they cut us not off from Christ we hold him the foundation, and believe to be
saved by him alone and by this color, men continue in transgression and
idolatry still. which is as if a thief, dronkard, whormaister, blasphemer, or
other vicious, liver, being blamed by the laws of God which condemn these
sins, should say; These are petty faults I confess, but they are not
fundamental: for the only fundamental truth and ground of all Gods law is
Love, and that is the fulfilling of the law. Romans 13.8 9.10. Gal. 5.14. 1 Timothy
1.5. Now this foundation I hold, for I profess to love God above al, and my
neighbor as my self, on which ground as Christ says Mat. 22.40.
the law and prophets do depend; and this I do, howsoever I cannot keep my
tongue from swearing, lying and ^i^auldrie, nor my hands from picking and
stealing, nor my body chaste, etc. yet my heart is good, I love God and my
neighbor, and hope to he saved as well as the precis^st puritan of them all,
And now what will these ministers say to the^r profane parishioners, if thus
they pleaded? for do not themselves thus plead for the trans^reossins of the
first table, and violating of the testament of Christ, in their own false
ministry, idolatrous rites, ceremonies, and forged worship. But as every true
Christian heart knows that such profane ruffians, howsoever they say they love
god, yet in deed they hate him, and howsoever the s^mme and end of all the Law
is Love only, yet that love implies obedience to every particular precept,
and he which breaks the least commandment and teaches men so, shall be called
the least in the kingdom of heaven; as Christ Mat 5.12
says: so know they likeweise, or should know, that such superstitious
idolaters, false and Antichristian Prelates and priests, howsoever they boast
of true faith, yet by their works they deney it; and although Faith in Christ
be the foundation of Christian religion, yet in im^lieth necessarily Ioh 3.36.
Romans 1.5.
obedience unto the ordinances of his Testament, even Ioh 13.14 Mat 28.20
whatsoever is commanded them therein; and as the curse is denounced against
all the transgressors of Moses law Gal 3.10
in any part thereof; so they shall not escape vengeance Heb 2.2.3 and 3.7.8
and 10.26 etc. and. 12, 25.
that wilfully despise the law of Christ or any part of his testament,
confirmed with his precious blood. And if thus we understand not and interpret
those scriptures which sum up al christianity in Christ; we must needs confess
that many false churches, even Rome it self is a true church; seeing they do
profess such general grounds of Christ, as by plain evidence of scripture
seem sufficient unto salvation, as appears by Council Trident. Se^s, 3.
compared with Romans 10.9. Act. 8.37, 38. 1 Ioh. 4.2. Mark. 16.16. also Rhemes
testam annot. on 1 Timothy 2.5. where they profess, Christ by nature to be truly
both God and man, to be that on eternal priest and redeemer, which by his
sacrifice and death upon the cross, has reconciled us to God, and paid his
blood as a full and sufficient ransom for all our sins, etc.

How beit, that these ministers stumble no more at that we profess, let them
know, we hold every general head and ground of doctrine more necessary to be
known, then each particular branch of the same? and an error overthrowing a
whole ground of religion, to be much more wicked then that which ouerturneth
but a part thereof. Also that many of Gods church, are ignorant of sundry
particular doctrines of the Gospel yea Psa^ 9.12
all of us in some, for none is perfect; yet that in some general grounds,
ignorance is damnable; and further that the wilful and obstinate refusal or
contempt of the least evident truth of the Gospel, is Ian. 3.2.
deadly and damnable of it own nature. Neither see we, how we should believe
otherweise, unless with the Papists we think some sins venial some mortal
As for Mr Barrowes words from Ioh. 16.13. which also, these ministers mistaking
do Rom 6.23 1. Ioh 2.4.6 and 3.6.8.9 ^ page 171,
mislike; it is evident by his own writings See co^fer. in the Fleet with Mr.
Hutch and D'Andrews 4 Reason,
to the contrary otherwhere, that he meant not so erroniously as they collect.
But that promise made to the Apostles, he applies unto all the members of
Christ by proportion, though not in like measure. Which that it may be done, we
learn of the Apostles themselves in other like cases. 2 Cor. 4.13. from Psalm.
116. Heb. 13.5.6. from Ios. 1 and Psalm. 118. etc.

Their last reason is from the approbation of all the known churches in the
world, which acknowledge this church (of Engl.) for their sister, and give unto
them the right hand of fellowship. This point is handled before in this
treatise, page 9. etc. and 48 and 51. etc. unto which places I refer the
reader. Many scriptures and reasons these ministers allege from the primitive
churches examples, that rejoiced for. and saluted one another; and of and of
the comfort that a church may have in the communion and approbation of other
churches. All which we grant; and d^e observe, how fast ^hey can cite
scriptures for things that we deny not. But they say nothing for the
controversy between them and us. which consists of these 3. points; 1
whither a people may not separate from evil and profess and walk in the
truth unless or until other churches allow them 2. whether it be a necessary
and undeniable argument, that whomsoever other churches approve, they are true
churches, and so must be esteemed of all men; 3 and whither the reformed
churches at this day, do approve of the church of England, in all or any of
the differences for which we s^parate from them. The first of these is proved
by all Gods commandments, which require every man particularly to refrayn all
evil, and do that which is good: Exodus 20. The second is disproued by
themselves in their writings against the Papists; who pressed them with such
reasons. Let councels (says In the answer to Mr Raynolds preface.
Mr Whitaker) be esteemed as they deserve: let their decrees be examined by
Gods word; and if they agree let them be received for that agreement: if not,
let them be rejected for the contrary. To this agrees their own Bishops
Articles, ano 1562. Art. 21. and also their Apoligie; before alleged in page 92.
this trea^ise; and finally Mr Bernards own counsel. (though perhaps he knew no
more then Caiaphas what he said.) saying; page 8.
See into the glass of the word by thine own sight, without other men's
spectacles etc. For the latter point, we know the reformed churches (as their
constitution and writings show) are for us and against them; of which see
before page 10, etc. and it shall hereafter be further confirmed, if these
ministers will deny it.

Hitherto of the reasons alleged by the godly ministers wherein how they have
proved and settled their first position; let the godly wise judge. Next follow
their answers to the objections made by us. And these they make two.

First, that their church of Engl. was not gathered by such means as God in
his word has ordained and sanctified for the gathering of his Church. page 18^
Secondly, page 191.
that they communicate together in a false and idolatrous outward worship of
God, which is polluted with the writings of men, vidz. with read slinted
prayers, homilies, catechismes, etc.

Here let it first be observed, that whereas Mr Barrow (whose books they would
seem to answer,) has Refut. of Giff page, 1.
given 4. causes of our separation, namely the 1. false worship, 2. profane
people, 3 false ministry, and 4. Antichristian hierarchy; these godly
ministers like the unjust steward Luk 16, 6
that set down fifty for five skore, have contracted the 4. causes into 2. for
what cause let him that reads consider.

Secondly in the two which they profess to answer, they keep not the words by
Mr Barrow there set down; as to begin with the first; he says For that the
profane ungodly multitudes without exception of any one person are with them
received into and retained in the bosom of the church These Refut page 1
ministers set down the point to be about the not gathering by due means.
Whereas if it were granted that they had due means of gathering, yet the
exception made is of force against them, rather more then less for they that
have the true means of gathering a church, and yet gather it amiss; the
greater is their sin.

Now to the particulars, whereas Mr Barrow had first Dis, p, 8.
showed by many scriptures and reasons what manner persons were to be the
matter of Gods church; and then compared here with the people of the church of
Engl. where all sorts of wicked persons are admitted and kept in communion: to
this the ministers answer, page 182.183, Ioh 20.19.
First that they might lawfully be accounted a true church, though it could not
appear that they were at the first rightly gathered. For even as the Disciples
might be well assured of Christ's bodily presence amongst them when they saw and
felt him, though they could not have discerned which way or how he could
possibly come in. so may we esteem them a true church, of whose present
profession and faith we are well assured, though we cannot see by what means
they were first gathered. This answer of theirs is full of error and frawd;
for, (not to speak how they corrupt Mr Barrowes words in the places which they
quote; by leaving out things of special importance,) first they blamed because
all profane and wicked persons ar of the matter their church; they tell us, they
may esteem them a true church of whose present profession and faith, they are
well assured. If this answer be direct and to the purpose then we must believe
that the godly ministers are well assured of the present profession and faith of
all the lewd, profane. irreligious and wicked persons in the realm, which are
members of the church of Engl. Against these was the exception made; for these
the answer is given, unless they answer their own fancies. and now what
assurance the ministers have of such men's faith, let the faithful judge.

Secondly the similitude which they bring, is a great abuse of the reader,
whom they would blind with a false comparison; which if it were duly made,
would make against them thus. As the disciples might be well a^^ured of Christ's
bodily presence when they saw and felt him etc. so men may he well assured of
the wickeds bodily presence in the church of Engl: when they see and feel them,
as who do not? But now as these men have made the parable, what likelihood of
truth is there in it, for justifying the ungodly? If a man seeing a Priest in
bed with one of the Popes courtizans, should blame him for this fornication,
and an other to defend him should plead thus; As we are sure that Sarah was
Abraham's wife, though we cannot tell when or how they were married. so may we
esteem these two (of whose present chascity we are well assured,) to be lawful
man and wife, though we cannot tell how they came together; would this be a
sufficient defense? Yet lo when Mr Barrow blamed Dis. p. 10.
the Priests of England for linking themselves in the bed of spiritual love,
with the idolatrous Papists and all other wicked of the land, at the beginning
of Q. Eliz. and continuing in like sinful commixtur unto this day: these
Ministers now, to save their credit, tell us an example of Christ presence, etc.
as before is seen. Yea the indignity of it stays not here; for as the Apostle
by the Ministry of the gospel prepared the church of Corinth, as a pure
virgin for her husband Christ, so these men pretending to be true Ministers, 2
Cor 11.24
will have Papists, Atheists, profane and wicked persons, to be Hephzi-bah I^a.
62, 4.
people in whom God delights; they will bring this sinful and adulterous
generation, even all the ungodly in the land, unto the bed of Christ in his
church, whether he will or no Which high transgression, is the overthrow of the
mayn ground of the gospel; which ever since it began to be sounded in the
world, has proclaimed a separation of the children of God from the children of
Belial, as before has been proved. This being thus observed, how these
ministers have missed at first o^ the question; the further they go, the
further they stray, and run themselves out of breath in vayn. For neither the
examples of Melchisedek, Job, Cornelius etc. nor their reasons following of 2
other means of gathering the church then by the preaching of the Gospel; 3 of
the preaching of Mr. Wickliff. etc 4 and 5 of the course that Q Elizab. took
for bringing the Gospel in again etc. none of these (I say) will prove either
that open profane and wicked persons, may be received and kept in the bozome of
the church; or that there be not multitudes of open profane and wicked, members
of the church of England. Their present lamentable estate proclaymeth this
latter to all men that have conscience; their own writings also heretofore do
strongly confirm it: and all the scriptures cry out against the former and
teach a separation as before in this treatise, and in sundry other books is
manifested.

As these ministers have thus passed by the mayn controversy; so have they in
their pretended answers, inserted some things corruptly and fraudulently: which
I will briefly touch First, for to bolster out the constreyned profession of
faith, and joining to the church which their people are compelled unto, they
plead; page 185.
that Since Kings became noursing fathers etc. to the church; their laws have
been means to bring men to the outward society of the church; and the parable
proves, that men may be compelled to come; Luke 14, 23.

This doctrine opens a door in the church to all the profane in the world,
contrary to the scriptures; Isa 25.2 and 35.8, 9.2 Chron. 23.19. Reu. 21.27.
Leuit. 10.14. Zac. 14.21, 2 Cor. 6.14, 17. Act. 2.41. and 19.9. For if a prince
may compel some of his subjects to be members of the church, he may compel al;
and if one prince may do it, all may. So if there were such an Emperor as
Augustus that commanded Luke 2.1,
all the world to be taxed, he might also command and compel all the world to
be joined unto the church. And thus the world and the church, between whom
there has been perpetual war, might soon be reconciled. If this be a
lawful and orderly course, it is strange that Christ sent forth poor fishermen
to convert sowles by preaching, and set not the princes, (which he could as
easily have done, seeing he had Ma 28, 18
al power in heaven, and in earth) to make disciples by compulsion and penalty.

Now for the parable they allege, it is apparent, that the same servant was
sent to verse 17.21.22, 23.
compel, that was before sent to call the invited: and if this be meant of the
Magistrate then, kings must leave governing and go to preaching. We find in
the scripture, that compulsion is not always by the civil sword, but sometime
by instant and earnest urging of the word and doctrine; as they that Gal 6, 12
compelled the Galatians to be circumcised; and he that Gal 2, 14
compelled the Gentiles to Iudaize. And from this word compel, to urge or
gather a civil forced compulsion, is with no more reason or color, then as if
some factious rebels should take up arms for to stablish religion; and allege
how it is written Ma 11, 12
the kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force For
as force and violence here, is not civil but spiritual; so is compulsion to be
taken in the parable. But a throne (says Solomon) gets up in a dronkards hand;
and a parable in the mouth of fools. Prou. 26.9.

They allege page 185.
that the first conversion of our land to the faith of Christ, was by preaching
of the gospel. Whether this were so or not, remains for them to prove in
their next book for in this they do it not. They must ( I suppose) take the
preaching of the gospel in a large sense, if they will prove it. For as it is
uncertain what was the faith of the ancient Britains, or how they were
converted; so for the English Saxons which were conuerred from Paganism, Mr
Bale one of their own writers) says John Bale Cent. 1. scri Brit, fol. 35
that Austen the Roman was sent as an Apostle from Gregory 1. to convert them
to a popish faith. And by an other Chronicler we learn Chr. Ranulph, Ci^^er.
that Pope Gregory 1. sent this Austen the monk into Engl. with forty monks
more, which entered the i will of Thennet on the east side of Kent, with a cross
and with banners displayed, having a crucifix painted upon every one of them
singing the Letany, with Orate pro nobis. to al Angels, Archangels,
Patriarchs, Prophets, Priests, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, Virgins, Monks
Nunns, Heremites, and finally to all he Saints and she Saints, that they
might have good luck, and well to fare, in setting forth their Romish religion.
But howsoever the conversion of English men was then (which is not now to be
stood upon till we hear the testimony of the best approved histories, which
these men page, 186. Rom, 1. 1 Cor 1 etc.
say they have for their assertion) it is sure by the scripures, that the
churches in Rome. Corinth, and many other places were converted by the gospel:
yet remayn they not true churches still. But (say these ministers) since that
time many have from age to age been called by the same means, And so say I,
has there been in Rome: yet is she a Reu, 17,
harlot and not Christ's spowse. Great numbers (say they) were effuectally
called in K. Edwards days. I answer, the whole land was compelled by civil
force to change their form of service in part; and sundry true doctrines were
taught in some places, which some believed: but many disobeyed and rebelled. as
before page, 120.
is showed. Neither was that confuse popish multitude with a few conuers
therein, a true visible church. Mr Fox describes the estate thereof by a
similitude; a Act. and monu^, edit, 5, p. 1180.
a new face of things began now (says he) to appear, as it were in a stage,
new players coming in, and the old being thrust out. Thus upon that old stage
of the popish church, came new players, to weet, new Bishops and Priests; and
the ibid. page 1181.
mass was then (at first) still by law retained, but the gospel and Epistle
read in English; yet were not all new players for (as is there noted) the
priests and clergy that yielded to the kings laws, were suffered to keep their
places, livings etc. After this the king appointed the c Archbishop of Cant,
with other Bishops etc. to make one convenient and meet order, rite and fashion
of common prayer and administration of Sacraments etc. who did so. Then in the
Parliament following, it was agreed that all ministers in the realm should be
bound to say and use the mattins, euensong celebrating of the Lords supper etc.
in such order and form as was mentioned in the said book and none other or
otherweise. But the players, it seems, played not their parts well. for after
complaint is made, how ibidem. page 1186.
by the cloked contempt, will full winking, and stubborn disobedience of
Bishops and old Popish curates; the book of common prayer was long after the
publishing thereof either not known at all, or else very irreverently used
through many places of the realm. Yet was there no great cause why the people
should so despise it; for (as the K. answered to the rebels of Deuonsh.)
ibidem, page 1189.
if the service in the church was good in Latin, it remains good in English;
for nothing is altered, but to speak with knowledge, that which was spoken in
ignorance. Now let the reader mind what was the estate of the church in those
days; and see if the word of God will approve it.

But there were say page, 186,
these men) great numbers by preaching so effectually called, that in Q Mary's
reign, many sealed the truth with their blood: I acknowledge it; and say also
that as there have many martyrs died heretofore in the Popish church, so I
doubt not, but great numbers at this day are by preaching so effectually
called, in Rome, Spayn etc. that if Turks or Pagans should preuayl over them,
they would mainteyn and seal Christian religion with their blood, rather then
submit to Mahomet. For (as one of your best ministers has truly said) M
Dering 23, Lectur on Epistle to the Hebrews, page, 186.187
God of his infinite goodness who c^lleth things that are not as though they
were, even in that ministry, has given grace unto his Saints; and, it was
impossible that the man of sin should so much adulterat the word of God, but
that it should be to the faithful a gospel of salvation. It is further
alleged, h there were sundry secret congregations all Q Mary's days which
gladly received the gospel offered by Q. Eliz. and (say these ministers) if it
be said that they ceased to be the true churchs of Christ, because they joined
and became one body, with such as were newly come (and that not of conscience
but for fear only) from idolatry: we answer, that they rather that-had fallen
from the Gospel in Q. Mary's days were moved by Q Eliz: proclamation, to join
themselves unto them, that had stood faithfully all that while,

Here is still building upon the sands, for the profane and popish multitude
had not received the gospel before, but (as has been showed) were constreyned
by K. Edw. against their wills to hear English Mattins in their churches, where
they were wont to hear Lati^ Latin mass; and were glad with all their hearts
when their old blind devotion did again take place, and they might suck the
blood of such as spoke against it. So they cannot rightly be said to fall from
the gospel, which they never received. And what secret congregations there were
in Q. Mary's days, I know not: but if they were so secret, as only they met
now and then in private, and ordinarily went to church openly with Papists,
they were not a true church of Christ. And that constreyned, union of Papists
and of Protestants at the beginning of Q Eliz reign, under Archbishops,
Bishops, Priests etc. with most of the same mattins, evensongs, rites,
ceremonies etc. that before had been imposed; this order can never be warranted
by the testament of Christ, nor such a commixture proved to be a true church.

And whereas it is noted for page 187.
an other untruth that Mr. Barrow and Greenu^. should say, that in one day by
the blast of her Majesty's, trompet at the Beginning of her reign, all sorts of
men were drawn to a prof^ssion of the gospel, without any further means used:
these ministers may be seen to be mere cauillers, and bent to deprave. For the
words even as themselves have set page 182.
them down, (whereby the reader may espy their falshoode) were these, where
such profane multitudes were all immediately from public idolatry at one
instant received or rather compelled to be members of this church, in some
parish or other, without any due calling to the faith, by the preaching of the
Gospel going before, or orderly joining together in the faith, there being no
voluntary or particular confession of their own faith etc.

Now these men to reign an untruth, yea an other untruth when non^ was before,
have among other things, changed without any due calling to the faith into
without any further means used; and then to convince this their own fictio^,
they tell us of sundry preachers sent betwee^ November and Midsommer that
called many. But his neither clears them of corrupt dealing, nor proves that
the whole realm which at Midsommer was compelled to this church, worship,
ministry, etc. was duly called unto the faith: much less that they orderly
joined together in the same. So that the untruth must rest in their own bosom.

page 188.
This being proved (say these ministers) that there was a true Church in thi^
land, before her Majesty's reign; the question must not be whether the means
she used were the right means for the first calling and converting a people in
the faith; but wether she took not a lawful course for the recalling and
reuniting of her subjects unto those true professors, whose fellowship they had
forsaken.

Lo how these men run on, as if they had proved that, whereof we have yet
heard scarce any show of proof. And altering closely the question, they say
there was a true church in the land; whereas they must prou^ a true church of
the land, as now it is and long has been esteemed the Church of England,
having an Archbishop and other officers over it, which ^re in their Convocation
house, the Representative Church of England. So it no^ not being a true church
the examples, they allege of reformation by the Kings of Judah, fit not their
turns; for Judah was a true church, though some corruptions had crept in, as
will easily do into the best.) Abijah the predecessor of Asa, mainteyned Gods
true religion, and worship against idolatrous Israel both 2 Cro 14.8 9.10. etc.
by word and sword. So Asa found not his kingdom a false church, as K. Edw:
and Q Elizab. found England: yet used he that great care for reformation,
mentioned, 2 Chro. 14. and 15. and his son Iehoshaphat after him greater care
both to reform and teach the people. 2 Chronicles. 17. Afterward when abominations
had ouerspread the land, H^zekiah labored a godly reformation, and opening the
doors of the Lords house, he 2 Chr. 13 2.3.
brought in the Priests and Levites, not the Chemarins or Baals Priests, as the
popish clergy (which their own notes on Reu. 9.3. acknowledge to be the
Locusts of the bottomless pit) were brought in or rather retained still in
this church, as Mr Fox shows, Hezekiah sent 2 Chr. 30 6.
over all the land to convert the people from idolatry; who verse. 10
laughed the messengers to scorn and mocked them howbeit verse. 11.
diverse submitted themselves and came to Jerusalem; and it was God that gave
verse. 11.
Judah a heart to obey the King and rulers according to his word Neither were
any admitted to the Passover but such as had voluntarily yielded, repented,
and either sanctified themselves, or else (being prevented through want of time)
were verse. 12.
healed (or cleansed) of the Lord, at the Kings prayer. The other disobedient.
Israelites God punished verse. 18 19.20.
by the sword and slavery of Asshur, because they would not obey the voice of
the Lord their God. Finally Iosijah 2 Kin. 18 10.11.12: 2 Chr. 34.
purged the land of idols and false worship, reduced his people unto the true
service of God; which they with himself had verse. 30.31.32.
couenanted to walk in.

These examples we acknowledge al Christian princes should follow, having equal
power with these Kings of Judah, to abolish all idolatry within their
dominions; yea and to punish obstinate idolaters, and not suffer any
superstitious worship among their. subjects, Fides suade^da est non imperanda.
Bern. in Cantic.
but to procure their conversion by the word, yet not to compel them to be
members of the church, because they cannot give them faith and repentance,
which is the only door into verse. 30.31.32.
Christ's kingdom, and cannot be opened to any but by Mar 1.15 and 16.15.^6
Act, 2.37.38 and 8.36.377. Act 11.18. E^h. 2.8
God alone. Which doctrine and practice these ministers (if they would not
learn out of holy writ) might have seen set forth in their own book of
Martyrs; where when Ethelbert King of Kent was converted and Christened, and
after him innumerable other daily came and were adjoined to the church yet the
King ( Act and monum. edi 5 page 105.
says Mr Fox) compelled none; for he had learned that the faith and service of
Christ, ought to be voluntary and not coacted.

I acknowledge the Godly and gracious disposition and care of K. Ed. and Q
Eliz. at the first for restoring of the Gospel; to be worthy of purpetuall
praise and memory: and the error that was, in reteyning the popish profane
multitudes, the Antichristian clergy, the Romish worship worship turned into
English, (some few gross things left out;) and the other evils yet to be seen
in the ecclesiastical estate; these I judge are rather to be im^uted unto the
false clergy men, which were trusted too much in these matters and dealt not
according to the trust reposed in them but sought to enrich themselves with the
spoils of Babble and of Jericho the Bishoprics benefices, and other like
Romish revenues, rather the^ for the build the house of God, upon the
foundations of Sion. And this sin cleaves fast unto these priests, even to
this day; who cannot endure to have their portion spoken against, but think
all As appears by D Downams. Sermon. on 1. Tim. 3.1. 2 page 80.81.86.87.
too little that they enjoy; when as for discharge of their functions in
teaching the people, the most conscionable among themselves have complained to
the Parliament 2 Admon fol. 43.
that the word of God is negligently, fantastically, profanely and ^^thenishly
preached; and all the land knows, that many ministers preach not at all.

Whereas these ministers tell us page 190,
of diverse congregations, that have publikly professed their repentance for
their former idolatry; it is well if so it be; and God give them grace to go
forward in well doing. But they tell us not of any congregation that professes
repentance for their present idolatry, or that renounceth the communion of the
other impenitent and profane parishes: which they should also do if they would
be 2 Cor, 6, 1^, 18.
the sonns and daughters of the Lord almighty. Nay we know that if any among
them do this, they are excommunicated ipso facto out of the church of England,
by force of their canons, anno 160^.

Finally, whereas these Ministers doubt not to affirm, that the whole land in
the parliament held in the first year of her Majesty's reign, did enter into a
solemn covenant with the Lord for renouncing of Popery, and receiving the
Gospel. First they set not down what covenant the Parliament then made nor how
they renounced Popery; and therefore that is to be judged of, when it shall
more particularly be produced Secondly if then the Parliament house so did it
is commendable in them but that the whole communialtie of the realm can be said
to do it with them, I utterly deny. For howsoever all subjects are and ought
to submit to the good civil laws there enacted: and obedience may be enforced
by Romans 13
the sword, if any man resist: yet in cases of conscience every man must live
by Hab. 2.4
his own faith; men must Act 2.4.
gladly receive the word out of which all religion must be gathered all Kings
and kingdoms Psalm. 2.
submitting unto the laws and ordinances in Chr^sts Testament if they would
have blessing and salvation by him. And as the honorable in the Parliament,
could not be baptized for the commons; so neither could they repent or covenant
with God for them: but the people must yield their own willing consent, which
they never did; but were and still are compelled by law and penalty to be of
the church and religion established. Which how well they have brooked, let the
testimonies of the ministers before alleged, and the irreligious walking of
many thowsands ever since manifest. For now our land is a reprouch to the
idolatrous Papists Ke^. Sur 8, book in the preface 2 Obi^^tio^
for the multitude of Atheists and Machevillians that are therein.

The second thing (which these Ministers say) we object against the whole body
of their assemblies is, That they communicate together in a false and
idolatrous outward worship of God, which is polluted with the writings of men,
vid. with read stinted prayers, homilies, Catechismes and such like. To which
they give this answer.

First it is evident by the word, Answer.
that the church has used and might lawfully use in prayer, and Gods worship,
a stinted and set form, of words. And here ^hey allege Number. 6 23.24. Deuteronomy
26.3.15. Psalm. 22. and 92.1 Chro. 16.8.36. Luke 11.2.

Very strange it is, that after so much time and consideration; Reply.
men that profess to be ministers of the Gospel, should give such an answer.
The thing objected against their worship made of the invention of the man of
sin, was in the first answer to Mr Gifford (who shut his eyes, and would not
see the abominations of the same). Refut. p. 8.
showed in sundry particulars; as the Romish fasts; feasts and holy days,
Comminations, Rogations, Purifications, etc. blasphemous and heretical
collects etc. which Refut. page 29. etc. Discover, p. 62. etc.
after were more plainly refuted These and the like evils contained in their
Leitourgie translated out of the Massebook, and imposed upon their parishesr
being by Mr Barrow blamed: now come these ministers and tell us of Psalms that
David made, of forms of blessing and prayer, that God and our Lord Christ
prescribes to his church; and these must countenance and bear our all the
popish trash that is in their service book.

But it would far better have fitted their estate and worship, Platima ^ vitis
pootie Damasus 1 f
if they had cited the Popes in sted of the Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles,
who were altogether unacquainted with this Rom^sh service. For howsoever David
made many Psalms, yet not he but Pope Damasus (as writers say) Blat. Vtalimus.
1. i
ordained Glory be to the Father etc. to be added unto them, and they to be
sung by tournes, (as the church of Engl. yet uses;) and Pope Vitalian Guil
Durammus.
to make up the music, brought in the Organs, Yea the foresaid Damasus Act.
and monu^. edi, 5 page, 1184.
enjoined Hierom to make an order of service for churches, and appoint what
prayers should be said on every day, and how many Psalms etc. which being
done, the Pope commanded al churches should use that order and none other And a
much like exploit was performed by the Archbishop of Cant. and his brethren in
K. Edwards days (as Mr Fox Guil Durandus Ifidorus.
reports) for the service now used still in Engl. Again, for the
particulars, who framed the Anthemes, Responds, Collects, Joan. Laziasdus,
and Kyries, that are said at mattins? neither Prophet nor Apostle, but as
Platiua de vit. Marcus 1,
some say pope Gregory I. and Pope Gelasius. And the same Pope Gregory put k
the Pater noster into the mass. and commanded it to be sung; and Pope Mar^us I
would have the Nicene Creed sung after; the Gospel. Pope Anacletus thought it
fit the priest and people should salute one another another in service time,
and therefore (...)
appointed the one to say. T^^ Lord hear^th (...), and the other to answer, And
with thy spirit. Pope (...) (...)
put i^ at the Sacrament O lamb of God that take away the sins of the w^rl^,
(...)
h^u^ mercy on us; Pope Symmachus^d added the hymme Glory be to G^d on high;
and the other Popes b^ought in their parts, and patched together the^r Letani^,
and Leitourgie out of which the English seruicebook is taken, Likewise for the
fasting days and holy festiu^ties, though the Apostles appointed them not, yet
the Popes did: Telesohorus Pla^ina. Tel^sphorus and Celistus 1.
would have the Lent to be fasted; and Pope Calistus the fowr times in the
year, or Imbring days. Pope Syluester 1. Bergomen sis.
added the Wednesdayes, Frydaye^ and Satur^ayes weekly; and Pope Innocen^ 3.
Lyb 3 decretal. Grego.
put unto the former almost all the Apostles eues. The Saints and Angels were
also beholding to these Reverend fathers for hallowing their days. For
generally all the Saints found such favor with Pope Boniface, Volator,
Platina. Bonif. 4.
that they had not only a catholic holy day given them, called All-hallomes,
but a famous Temple in Rome once ded^cated to all the D^uils and called
Pantheon, was turned by this holy Father into the name of Maria rotunda. and
consecrated to the hono^r of the B Virgin' and all martyrs Pope Felix 3, Fasci,
tem
mad holy the day of the archangel Michael, Lib Con
Boniface the 8. Pap, suppl anno 1604 Reason of religion, 13.
showed like honor to the 4, Evangelists, and many other memorable gests are
recorded of the Fathers of the Sea of Rome, whereof there is not a word in the
Testament of Christ, that he or his disciples did ever the like. For they
appointed not priests apparall, long gowns, tippers 4. horned capps, as did
Pope Zachary; nor a white linen surplice at service time, as did Pope
Syluester 1. They hallowed no Temples or Churches as did P. Hyginus, nor
Churchyards, as did P. Calistus 1, Neither ordained ringing of bells to call
the people to divine service, as did P. Sabinian. They appointed no Rood-loft
to part the Chancel from the church, as did P. B^niface 2, nor hallowed Font to
Christen in; or Godfathers and Godmothers at baptism, as did P, Pius 1. and
Hyginus. They commanded not the people to go procession as did Pope Agapetus
1. nor appointed any Bishoping or Confirmation of children, as did P, Clement.
1. with a great number more of like pranks used in the Romish service. which
Christ's Apostles knew not, as their writings show. But the church of Engl. (as
next heir of Romes constitutions,) reteyneth these relics, observes these
rites and a many more; for which the Papists do insult and say that from their
treasure house, the religion now established has learned the form of
christening, Marrying, Churching of women, Visiting the sick, Burying: and
sundry other lik^ as the books translated out of theirs, do declare. And now
what says Gods law for all such things unto his people? I am (says he) Leu
18, 2 3, etc,
the Lord your God. After the doing of the land of Egypt wherein ye dwell,
shall ye not do: and after the doing of the land of Canaan whether I will
bring you; shall ye not do; neither walk in their ordinances. My judgments
shall ye do; and my ordinances shall ye keep, to walk in them: I am the Lord
your God, Thus he forbad them not only the worship of false Gods: but even the
imitation of idolatrous worship rites and ordinances in his service: wherefore
he charged them again, that they should not so much as inquire or Deuteronomy, 12,
30, 31,
ask how the nations served their Gods, that they might do so to the Lord
their God. But whatsoever he commanded them, verse. 32,
they should make heed to do it; putting nothing thereto, nor taking ought
therfrom. Yet the Bishops and Priests of Engl. have almost all things in their
Lei^ourgie, according to the doings of that spiritual Revelation 11, 8,
Egypt the Romish church wherein they dwelt, and have imitated her worships'
orders, ceremonies etc. retained her ministry, prelacy, courts, and canons:
the Latin being turned into English, and some gross superfluities left ou^.
And in defense of this worship, have these godly ministers written, and Mr
Bernard published their work: wherein if the reader see not a so^nd proof of
the things that Mr Barrow (whose errors they pretend to confute) reproved; he
must impute it to the badnes of their cause, which will scars admit of any
color from the book of God. For (besides the abuse of holy scriptures alleged
to justify these popish stratagems,) how sound and divine, (or rather how fond
and corrupt) is the reasoning of these men, from Gods example and authority,
unto their own practice and power that because the Lord God gave forms of
blessing, prayer and psalms to his people, (as the scriptures which they cite
do show) therefore their Lords the Prelates may give them also prescript words
for blessing, prayer, and Psalms etc. as is to be seen in their service book.
Can we think that Jeroboam had so slender a reason for his golden calves? Why
do not these men also plead, that God gave a law by Moses? therefore there may
a law be given likewise by the Bishops: or, the Apostles wrote a new Testament,
therefore the Convocation house may also write a Testament or Gospel; and bring
it into the church? If the Prophets practice will bear them ovt in the one: I
see no cause why it may not uphold them in the other. Well, seeing neither Mr
Gifford heretofore, nor these ministers now, can bring better defense for the
work of their own hands wherewith they worship or rather provoke the Lords I
leave them to consider of those laws that every where cry Deu 5, 8, 9, 32, 33
and 6 14, 15, 25 and 7, 25 26, and 12, 2 3.30 etc Isa 1.12.13 and 29, 13.14.
Ier, 1, 16. Reu. 17.2. and 18.3, 11 12, 20,
ovt against and show the punishment of idolatry. Neither is it needful to
keep the Reader with longer answer, seeing Mr Barrow in the fornamed books, and
Mr Greenwood in a peculiar treatise against these stinted prayers, and se^
worship have proved the unlawfulness of them by many reasons, which neither
these ministers nor any other have yet taken away. And when they write again,
let them not bring proofs for things that we deney not; as that Daunds Psalms
may be sung in the church; and that in our prayers we may use or apply, the
words that other holy men before used in their prayers, upon like occasions;
both these we grant and practice: but let them prove, (if they be able and
their right hand can help them, that their own writetnn prayers, psalms etc.
may be read and sung in churches, church^^, as Gods true worship and then also
they may command the clouds to rayn no more, and may cause to cease the
bottels of heaven.

Like to their former plea, and maintenance of their service book, is also
their answer for Catechismes; as for Homilies it seems they leave the the
defense of them to the simple priests that read them, but Catechismes are used
even by the learned preachers, therefore somewhat they say for them, as page
196.
that the principles of religion were taught in the churches of old, Ro^ 2.20,
and 6 17.2 Tim, 1 13, Heb. 5.12.13, 14 and 6, 1.2. But these ministers are
either simple or very deceitful, so to turn away from the question For we
never deneyed that the grounds and heads of Christian religion should be taught
to the people; far be it from us: but this we say, the Prophets and Apostles
are not found to prescribe set words for the minister to teach, or the people
to answer being examined. And that therefore these Bishops and Priests are very
presumptuous, that will take upon them to do that which Christ's Apostles never
did in the churches. Again, that if those men of God had to done; yet seeing the
writings of Prophets and Apostles are canonical scriptures, and so are no men's
writings now: it will by no means follow, that if they wrote catechismes to be
used in the Church, therefore men may writ some for like use now. Yea rather
why are they not content with that which is already written in the scriptures,
but run to erroneous catechismes of humane writers, such as is that authorized
catechism in the book of common prayer, commanded to be used in the church of
England?

Having heard what these godly ministers say for their people, and service
book; I exspected somewhat also, for defense of their own minister, and the
ecclesiastical government of their Lords the Prelates; which were the other
two ^eads of error excepted against, in the forenamed books. But in both these
they are silent; and reason there may be for it: for the inferior ministry
hangs upon the superior, the hierarchy, and now the godly ministers are in a
great strayt, for either they must loose their ministry, and then what boots
it to plead for the same, or else they must, (though they be loath) be buxome and
submit to their Fathers the Bishops; and when this is done, it may be we shall
see some such defense of two later, as we have already of the former. Mr
Bernard himself has begun fayrly; for whereas a while since he was hot against
the Bishops. he now cannot endure they should be page 71,
called Antichristian proud prelates or the like; and thinks page, 142.
it can never be proved, that the entrance into the ministry by the Prelates,
is a false entrance. So it is not to be thought but his Ordinary and he will
agree well yenough. Well howsoever it be, God (I doubt not) will turn all things
to his own glory and furtherance of his truth; yea even the writings of these
adversaries, shall be a means to stir men up unto a consideration of their
ways, which God give them grace for to do, and to turn their feet into the
paths of life and peace that they may find rest unto their sowles.

AN ANSWER TO Mr. Crashawes 4. questions propounded in his sermon preached at
the Cross Febr: 14, 1607, and printed 1608.
Mr. Crashawe preaching upon Ier. 51, 11. We would have cured Babel but she
would not be healed etc. took occasion page, 26. etc.
to inueigh against such as have separated from the Church of Engl. as from
Babel, in to a covenant and communion (as he says) of their own devising. To
convince this bitter (as he calls it) and schismatic separation, he asks
but 4. questions; whereunto if they can give him satisfaction, he promises he
will be one of them. Now though this promise be not in his own power to perform,
(for Ro^. 9.16
it is not in him that wills, nor in him that runs, but in God that
shows mercy;) yet shall it not be amysse to labor for his satisfaction
herein; for who can tell, but there may be given him an understanding ear, and
tender heart, for to convert that God may heal him if not, that his own writing
may be a witness, himself is one of those whom we would have cured in Babel,
but he would not be healed. I will not stand upon his interpretation of the
scripture treated of whether it be the direct and proper meaning of that place:
but will come unto the demands by him propounded.

HIs first question consisting of many branches is summed up by himself in
this one: Wherein are we deadly and incurably wounded? 1 Questions.


Your demand being, as the particulars show of the wounds of sin and
corruption. I answer. First we deny not, but all your sins are curable, Answer.
as we trust in the mercy of God, if you repent of them, and beleeu his
promises: neither have we ever thought your wounds in this sense, to be 1 John.
5, 16.
deadly or incurable. Secondly, the sins that your church lies in, and which
if they be not repented of, and pardoned in the mercy of Christ, are Ro^ 6, 23.
deadly and will destroy the sowl for ever; have heretofore by such as would
have cured you, been set before your eyes, in Refut, of Gifford. Discovery
Apolog. etc
large and ample treatises, showing these capital transgressions, 1 Your
confuse people, 2 false worship, 3 antichristian hierarchy or
church-gouernment, 4 and false ministry therefrom derived: that strange it is,
you should yet ask what deadly wounds you have; and it makes us fear, your
state is like his that sleeps in the midds of the sea, in the top of the
mast, and Prou. 22, 34, 33.
says, they have stricken me, but I was not sick, they have beaten me but I
knew it not. You have also here supra, page 74. etc.
in this treatise arguments to prove that Christ is not the head, Mediator,
Prophet, Priest and King of your church: which if it be so, no Christian can
doubt, but your wounds in then selves are Ioh. 8, 24 Act 4.12
deadly.

Though this were yenough for Answer to your question in general; yet because
the particulars which you further demand, are stembling blocks unto the weak;
I also will labor to remove them away.

Q. What fundamental wound is in our doctrine.

A. This among others, that you teach and mainteyn both by word and practice,
that all sorts of people, though profane and wicked are to be received into and
retained in the church; which is contrary to the foundation of the Gospel laid
by God himself Genesis 3 15. That such is your doctrine, both your sermoris and
printed books, and the estate of your church since the planting thereof, to
this time: do confirm.

Q. What deadly corruption is in our discipline, such as e^^s out the heart, and
life and being of a church.

A. First, they which execute it, as the Prelates Commissaries, etc. are
antichristian; so judged and proved long since by the reformed churchs by the
better son of your own ministers hertofore and now living and by others.
Seconly; in the execution of it, the good ar consured and excommunicated: the
wicked favored and tolerated. That the good are censured, appears by the
late Canons of your church: for in them it is enacted Canons ano 1603 Can 4, 6,
7.8. etc.
against such, as blame or resist any of your ungodly ceremonies, ordinances,
will worship, etc. in your Communion book; book of ordering, Bishops Priests and
Deacons, etc. that they shall be excommunicated ipso facto, and not be
restored, until they repent and publicly revoke such (as you call them) their
wicked errors That the wicked are favored, and tolerated; though experience
may teach every man, yet your own testimonies will be most pregnant. Mr Bradshawe
one of your fellow Ministers in his 11. Argument against the ceremonies of your
church complayneth that the (...) missions of your ceremonies make a minister
by your law more subject to depriuatio^ and suspension, then the commission of
the sowlest crimes, even dr^nke^^^s, blasphemy, gross ignorance, and
uncleanness. Which he proves. by (...) such ^i^e persons (as he says that are
ministry. Some that have been (...) to be carried home in a wheel barrow. Some
that coming home drunke^ from the market town, have been found sleeping under
a hedge in their own filth. Some that knowing and consenting to their wives
filthiness, that he might swear he knew no such matter by her since he married
her, married her again the morning before he was to answer it upon his oath.
Delivering the sacrament to a filthy woman, instead of Take, eat, said Turn
thee, turn thee etc. To another that would take it in her hand, he put it in
her mouth, and said Cob, Cob, or Daw, Daw, he knows not whether. Dr Henry
Parry, tells us In his pre before Vrsinus Catechism.
of a (...) of ^aterpillars, the very trash and riff raff of our nation etc.
that have like (...) of idle and dissolute quallity, only moved, thereto in a
lazy speculation, laid wicked and sacrilegious hands on the Lords ark, taken
his undefiled testimonies in their defiled mouths, disgraced, defaced and
defamed the glory and Majesty of di^ine rites and mysteries etc. they run like
hungry companions with an eye only to the flesh pots; and so sell both
themselves and their people for ibidem
morsel of bread and mess of pottage to the Diuill. He mentions also
accursed and simonical patrons who have sodered and simoned the walls of their
houses with the very blood of sowl^s. some others among you speaking of that a
miserable vulgus that wo^ful^ crew that racked regiment of dunsticall and
unlettered Sir John's, which have even covered the land like the froggs of
Egypt, leading many thou sands with themselves into the ditch; and ^he same
not still graced and countenanced by the Prelat^s as being their creatures. And
others complayn that Remoual of imput laid on the ministers of Deuo. and Corn.
p. 27
whole swarms of idle. scandalous, popish and, non-resident Ministers are
tolerated every where amongst you. Your self (Mr Crashawe) in this very sermon
tell in of page, 169
little petty Babylons, namely incurable sins among you 1. That great
sacrilege and church robbing as you call it committed by Impropriations, in
which case (you affirm) at this day almost half of the kingdom is, whereby it
comes to pass that an ignorant and unpreaching ministry is set over a great
part of your people which is the sourse and fountayn of all other evils in your
church. 2. The ungodly players enterludes. so rise in the nations; which you
call a bellish devise, the Diuils own recreation to mock at holy things, by him
delivered to the heathen, from them to the Papists, and from them to you, And
these (you say) bring religion and holy things upon the stage And hypocrisy a
child of hell must bear the names of two churches of God Nicholas S. Antlings,
Simon, S. Mary^veries: which churches by these miscrean^s are thus dishonored
(you say) not on the stage only, but even in print. To this you add, their
continual profannesse on their phrases, and sometime Atheism and blasphemy;
their continual profanening of the Sabbath, which generally in the country is
their play day, and oftentimes Gods divine service hindered, or cut shorter, to
make room and give time for the Diuils service. Many other like testimonies
might I allege from your own mouths of exceeding impiety openly practiced, not
by the people only, but by the Priests and Clergy and how does your
discipline heal these corruptions; when by your own grant, such caitiffs are
graced and countenanced by the prelates, when your law punishes the
conscionable ministers, more then such; as your self page, 169:
say of your petty Babylon of Impropriations. this deep wound was once curable
yenough etc. but now (alas) how incurable it is, he observes but little that
sees not. And unless the K. Majesty vouchsafe to take the matter into his
hands, otherweise it is incurable. Again you say page, 172^
of that horible abuse of the Sabbath etc. that est is has been complained of,
and some have endeavored to heal it, but it is (...) of Babylon that will not
be healed, but rather it creps (...) a (...) though the whole state from the
foot to the head. and if you would yet have more add hereunto Mr Jacobs
testimony, (who has so manfully stood for your church,) The right and true
discipline ecclesiastical (says he) in ^ch proper visible church, is one mayn
part of the ordinary means of salvation appointed by God for every sowl, and
this we in England utterly want.

Now let the reader judge, whether there be not deadly corruption in your
discipline, which even in a true church, would soon eat out (if it were not
healed) the heart and life and being of a church, according to your demand. But
you proceed and ask us.

Q. What book of Canonical scripture receive we not? what hold* we for
Canonical: that is not.

A. What book of Canonical scripture received not the idolatrous Is^elites?
what held they for Canonical that was not? The like I ask for the Arians,
Anabaptists and sundry other heretics of these times and shall these, or any
of them be therefore true churches? Again in your own church, there is read for
holy scripture, erroneous books and lying stories, as Tobie, Judith and other
Apocrypha. Your Homilies (...), 2 page 325.
citing th^^, call them holy scripture, and say the holy Ghost speaks so in
the scriptures: and the chiefest ministers of your church, sometimes preach and
take texts out of them. If this be not to hold them canonical, I know not what
you count canonical.

Q. What sacrament that Christ ordained do we want? and what have we more then
Christ ordained?

A. What sacrament wanted Jeroboam the son of Nebat? what had he more then God
ordained? Or the Anabaptists at this day? Yet if one would stand with you he
might by your Communion book prove Confirmation to be a sacrament: but who
ordained it, I cannot tell, unless Pope Clement. Again, Mr Bradshaw a man of
your own church and profession, 9 Argum against the ceremonies.
has proved against you in print that your Cross in baptism, ring in
marriage, surplice etc. are sacraments in your church, and not of divine
institution.

Q. What article of faith deny we? or what hold we for an article of faith this
is not?

A. Suppose that the Papists, should ask you such a question, what would you
answer? For all the Creeds that are in your communion book; are they not with
every article, neither more nor less in the mass book and other popish
pamphlets? The Papists and you both confess Christ in words, both deny him in
practice

Q. What fundamental heresy does our doctrine maintayn?

A. The unlawful commixture of the children of God and children of the Devil,
in one church and communion, is a fundamental heresy being stiffly mainteyned.
All the scritures condemn it; all well reformed churches avoid it, nature it
self teaches to abhor it: yet in such profane communion your church abiderh;
and you will not endure to b^^r of a separation.

Q. What have we in our church that overthrows the being of a church?

A. A popish* Clergy, and Laity.

Q. What is necessarily required to make a church that we do want?

A. You want both matter and form of a true church, namely a people called of
God, separated from the world, and united with Christ and one with another,
according to the rules of his eternal Testament.

Q. I will end as I began, wherein are we deadly and incurably wounded?

A. The sins before mentioned, are deadly wounds of Satan; the only cure is
by repentance and faith in Christ Jesus. ^ut as yet you be far from cure, for
lo you make questions of your diseases; and will not believe that you are
sick, Hereupon you refus^ all salues and medicines; and will neither have
physician nor chirurgian to meddle with your sores. If any Leech come with a
curing Pro 15, 4
tong^e. and words that be leaves of the tree of life, which serve Rev 22.2
to heal the nations with, if he offer to touch the Egyptian ulcers that
appear in your worship, church government, ministry, ceremonies, etc. he is
presently thrust out of doors; and if he dare but affirm these or any of these
to be disceases and botches in your body, sins against God, or repugnant to
his word; he is Canons. 1603.
excommunicated ipso facto, by the decrees of the whole representative church
of England. And are you willing now to be healed? Nay if any among you, not
meddling with the public estate of your church, but feeling or fearing his own
particular sowl sickness, do resort to a physician (whose receipts are not
after the common sort,) for advise about his health, or of friendship and
acquaintance to see him: he is subject to the censure and thunderbolt of your
church. Witness the late practice in Norwich; where certain citizens were
excommunicated for resorting unto and praying with Mr Robinson a man worthily
reverenced of all the city for the graces of God in him as your self also I
suppose will acknowledge,) and to whom the cure and charge of their sowles,
was ere while committed. Would any unmerciful man have dealt so with his
bondslaue in a case of bodily sickness? But hereby all may see what small hope
there is of Curing the Kanker of your church.

THe second question is, Are they (themselves) healed? 2 Question
then where were they healed? where were they called? where were they
regenerate and begotten to Christ? was it not in the womb of this our church,
and by means of the immortal seed of Gods word that is daily sown in our
church, a holy church, a church of God, where in ordinarily men are called and
brought to God. Answer


The wind blows where it will, and we hear the sound thereof but know not
whence it comes and whether it goes: Job. 3.8.
so is every one that is b^rne of the spirit. To your demand then I answer; we
were c^ll^^ being in B^^ylon, your Church I mean, which restreyneth the (...)
by vnri^hteousnes; there was our regeneration begun Where we fa^ in darkness and
in the shadow of death; the light of God appeared* and (...) us l^fe. If you
yet inquire how this was, I refer you to (...) brou^ht light out of darkness,
and daily (...) 5^, 16
brings forth the (...) treas^re; and his ways are past finding out: for as
I (...), 11 5
kn^w (...) the way of the wind, nor how the bones do grow in the womb of her
that is with child, so know I not the work of God, that works all. If you
dema^nd of the means; it was doubtless the word and spirit of the Lord,
without which there is no calling, no regeneration. Now where you ask, how then
we can deny that to be a true church, wher^in (...) men are called and brough
to God? I answer; first, you take up more th^n we lay down when you say
^rdinarily: for the ordinary and common fruit of the word among you, is through
your own corrupt handling and hearing of it, evil and not good, the many walk
the broad way, and Gods calling is like, to that which the Prophet says Ier,
3, 14,
one of a city and two of a tribe, in res^ect of the worldly multitudes.

Secondly, all the Saints are not begotten unto Christ in the womb of a true
particular church for when the Apostle preached among Act. 17.22.33.34.
Pagans and converted many, I would know in the womb of what church they were
begotten? they were first converted unto Christ, before ever they were in any
other church, then that Jerusalem which is above, and Gal. 4, 26
the mother of all the elect. Let us come to later times; your selves when you
began to be a church of protestants, in what particular womb were your people
begotten? I suppose if in any, it was in the womb of your mother church of
Rome, where they had both received Baptism the seal of regeneration, and been
catechized in Christian religion: and then look how your selves can deny that
to be a true church, or be free of unthankfulness toward her that bare you.

But you prosecute your cause against us, and would drive us either to say,
there is indeed a true ministry of the word among you. but it is not powrfull
to any but our selves; or else that we were not called in your church, but since
we left you. To the first I answer; there is no necessity that we must grant a
true ministry; for first we hold that the true word may be put in Number, 23 5,
26. etc.
Balaamites mouths, and a false ministry may through Gods wondrous grace,
beget faith in his elect: if you say otherweise you will shake the foundation
of your English church, laid by Aust^^ the monk Pope Gregory's Apostle; and
damn all your late fathers under the Roman Clergy. Secondly, we ^ie not the
grace of God in the true church to the ministers lips: knowing that men by
other means are often converted to the Lord. And if your ministers in England
hold that men cannot be begotten to Christ among them, but by their preaching;
you may take up your Letanie (which causlesse you use for us) and say from this
horible and bellish pride, good Lord deliver them. As they cannot restreyn the
wind from blowing: so much less the spirit of God from breathing, out of
other places then ministers mouths.

To the second also I answer; that it is one thing to be called in your church,
as you speak; and another thing to be called by your church or ministry, as I
think you mean. It is written Reu. 18.4. Go out of her my people. you see
here Gods people were in Babylon, and are called ovt of the same, not by Babel
it self, or any minister of it, buy by a voice from heaven. So we might be
called in your church. though not by the same. And thus we have not bard our
selves from pleading against you, as you would bear men in hand: neither yet
show you of whom or where you had that which you say we all stoutly answer and
stiffly stand to it, namely that we leau your church merely and only out of
conscience etc. We have a better ground if you would receive it, even the Law
of the Lord that so commands both us and our consciences.

Conscience is the blind Papists common plea: but we know that man's conscience
is as much Tit 1, 15,
defiled as any other part or power of his sowl or body; and therefore it may
be no rule of our actions, but the law of God only, which is Psalm. 19.
pure, perfect, and undefiled. Yet you will needs proceed and say, then we had
conscience before we left you. I answer yea, or else we would not have left you.
Think you that your predecessors had no conscience when they left the Popish
church? Then where (say you of us, and mind whether the Papists will not say
as much of you where) came they to that conscience and care of their salvation
but in our church? You are answered before, we had it in your church, as Gods
people had in Babylon. But that (I suppose) will not satisfy you, but it was
you will say, by your church and ministry. Therefore I distinguish and
consider of conscience in general and in particular General lie, when men so
far as they are taught and see, do walk carefully: and this I confess we
had through Gods grace and by means of your church: this also I acknowledge
many among you have, walking conscionably so far as they see and know. The
same I am persuaded also of many Papists and other misbeleeuers. But as a
conscionable Papist or Anabaptist, when a further light of the Gospel arises
unto him, must leave that church, wherein his conscience was so far informed,
because it is not the true church of God: so must a conscionable Protestant do
with your church, when God gives him to see the false estate wherein you stand
although you work many good effects in a man's heart and conscience.

Particularly a good conscience is to be considered in this or that particular
action, as for example in this particular of our separation; and so we had not
this good conscience from or by your church or ministenistery; for you thought
to corrupt our consciences, and keep us still in Babylon; we had not, I say,
this good conscien^e by your means, vnles^e it be by accident and against your
wills, and so no thank unto you, as he that would have killed his enemy, and
unawares cured him of an impostume: thus indeed many of us have been brought to
this good conscience of separation. For whereas heretofore many of your
ministers unawares have discovered the unlawfulness of the prelacie, priesthood,
leitourgie and other enormities of your church: we have hereupon thought, how
it could be the church of Christ, which thus lay under Antichrist. and pressing
you with your own doctrines we have found that you cannot but either go from
that which before you taught: or el^ yield us our separation, which you so
earnestly condemn. Of which thing there is page 2.3 etc.
before spoken in this treatise.

3 Q^estion
THe third question is; How have they sought and sufficiently endeavored our
healing? and til they have done all that possible can be done for our healing,
Answer.
how dare they forsake us?

I answer, we have sought your healing, even as by your own doctrine the
faithful Jews sought the cure of Babel; and as you selves have so^ght the
healing of R^me. The means which the Jews and your selves have used to cure
Babel, you show in page 12 and 42.
your sermon to be three Instruction, example, pr^yer. By instruction, you say,
laying op^n their errors, discovering their impieties, and l^ying before them
the excellency of true religion. Thus (say I,) have we done with you witness
(besides our speeches and conferences) the many books of this argument, which
are publised in print. 2 By example (you say) practicing their own religion
^uen before their very faces, nor fearing their scorns and rebukes etc. And to
(say I) have we practiced our religion amongst you and before your faces not
fearing your scorns and rebukes. And for proof hereof, not one man (as Daniel
in Babel) has been taken in prayer, but very many ^f us have been apprehended
sundry times, when we were praying and excercising in the word of God; and from
our public meetings have been carried to your loathsome gaoles and prisons, and
there deteyned many a day, till some were car^ed out upon the Bear unto their
graves, some carried to the tree and executed. Which (to use your own words) had
been sufficient to have driven you into deeper and better considerations, had
you not been incurable; and it is to be hoped that the sight hereof, has done
good on some of you.

3. Thirdly they endeavored (you, say) to heal them by their prayers, praying
continually and desiring God to heal them. Thus also have we endeavored to
heal you always mentioning you in our prayers, that God would vouchsafe yo^
mercy: and this we profess and promise to do for you still, (howsoever you
reward us for it,) so long as we live on earth.

Thus have we dealt with you, according to all the duties that your self have
showed both from the Jews practice. and from your own. For whereas you allege
page 44.
a fourth thing that your selves have done, namely, by devising and enacting
good and wholesome laws against their errors, superstitions, impieties etc.
seeing this cannot be done by subjects or private men, but only where a common
weal and magistracy is established; and so neither was nor could be done by
the Jews in Babel, nor by us in Engl: I suppose you will not impute this as
want to Duty unto us, which if we had attempted to do, might justly have been
esteemed rebellion in us, and so our sufferings should have been as malefactors.

Whereas then we have used all lawful means to cure you that we could, as
your self have laid them down before us- I hope you will be satisfied, or if
not, yet any indifferent reader will think you are sufficiently answered.

THe 4. and last demand is, 4. Questions
If they Will needs leave our church whether will they go? To leave one thing
for another no better, is seely: but for a ^orse ^s folly and madness. etc.

I answer, We have left Babylon, for to come unto Sion: we forsook your
confused assemblies which consist of all sorts of people and an unlawful
mixture with the profane and wicked that we might have communion with the
people of the Lord, Answer.
that willingly and gladly profess to believe the gospel and walk in it.

Now where you urge us to join to some other church in other countries. first
you pass the bounds of your text, from whence you can gath^r no such doctrine;
for the Jews forsaking Babel, joined not to any other nation or church then
their own. Secondly, it is also contrary to your own practice, who when you
first left Popery in K. Edwards daie^ and Q. Eliz. joined not your selves to
any forreyn church; but one to another among your selves. And where you tell us
of the approbation of other churches, and page 3^,
quote their Harmony of Confessions; I answer, that book was set out long after
your separation from Rome, and communion among your selves: besides also how
far they approve of you, is before in this treatise considered of Page 10.

Thirdly we could not join to any of those forreyn churches, because We
understood not their languages nor they ours, and therefore unless we would
have builded a new Babel, with strange tongues, we must join into communion
among our selves.

Thus have I answered your 4. demands: and for your further satisfaction, if
it may be, will yet give you a view of your own dealings with us, and the
Babylonians dealing with the Jews of old, as they are collected by your self
in you sermoon. They of Babel objected (as you in you sermon, p. 17.
say) that their own religion was general and universal over the world, and
the Jews, but in a corner: and again page 18.
they say Look into the world at this day, and see if any nation of all that
came from all the ^ sonns of N^ah be of your religion: all that came of Cham
are of ours: all that came of Iaphet are of ours, and all that came of Sem, but
only your selves. Your self page, 32,
say unto us, in these like words, Look over all Christendom, and you shall
not find a Church that condemns ours, or any that is not of our religion
etc. the churches of the Low countries, are of o^r confession, the Ch: of
France, the church of Geneua, the church of Scotland, the Cantons of
Switzerland. the stats and Princes of Germany, they are all of our confession.
Whither then will you go but unto your corners and conventicles etc. The like
things are objected to us also by other of your ministers, as before in this
trea^ise may be seen page 9. The Babylonians Sermon, p 17.
are by you feigned to have said unto Israel, Does not our religion prosper and
flourish, and is not yours condemned by the consent of all the world? Your
ministerse say for England against us, supra. p. 19. Consider. 7.
God has witnessed his love and approbation to our church by many vectories
and deliverances, long continuance of the Gospel, prayers, heard etc. And the
Churches and godly learned persons that ever heard of your separation did not
approve of it. supra. page 19. Consid. 6.
See also Mr Bernards book page 33.

You ( Your Ser. page 17,
said the babylonians to Israel) for holding your religion are justly
ouerthrown and conqu^red by u^' Mr Penry, Barrow and Greenwood Supra, p. 23
Consid. 2.
say your ministers to us) were hanged, Mr Iohnsons and the rest banished, by
Christian magistrates professing and mainteyning the Gospel of Christ. Alas poor
men ( said the Babylonians) for one learned Rabbine that your have, have not we
twenty? are not the Caldeans the famoust learned men in the world? Of us your
ministers say, Your ser. p. 18.
setting aside one or two at most, there is never a minister amongst them that
understands the sum of religion and grounds of the Catechism: and further
they understand not any tongue save only English and where the^ is their
knowledge. again an Mr Sions. sermon on Psa. 120. Supra, page 19. Consid. 7.
other up braydeth us by the preaching disputing and printing of many excellent
works and volumes published of all sorts (by the ministers of England): which
none of us is any thing have ever yet atteyned.

The Babylonians k said to Israel, During the time that you have had your Kings
and Priests, show one nation by you converted, or one that came and joined with
you of all that time.

Hardly (say your ministers to us) can you show any one person converted by
your ministry, from papistry athisme or other open wickedness; as by Gods
blessing multitudes have been by ours.

Thus we see how you and your ministers imitate Bab^l, as if they had been set
to scool by Nebuchadnezar, Dan. 1.4
to get Your ser. page 19. Supra. page 30. Consid. 8.
the learning and tongue of the Chaldeans; page 20.
wherein how they have profited, let the reader judge; as also whither we may
not apply against you, your own words, that you please your selves in such like
carnal arguments and fleshly conceyts, a^ papist in their popery, and other
p^^fane men in their carnallity, did heretofore, and do at this day.

Of these things as I have labored to give you notice; so I desire God to give
you repentance, and to heal all your deadly wounds: least that come upon you
which is foretold by the Prophet, Ier 51:2^
I will render unto Babel, and to all the inhabitants of the Chaldeans, all
their evil that they have done in Sion; in your sight, says the Lord.

My people go out of the midds of her; and deliver ye every man his sowl from
the feirce wrath of the Lord.

Ier. 51.45.
Go out of her my people, that ye be not partakers in her sins, and that ye
receive not of her plagues,

Reu. 18.4.
FINIS.

